Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
What All Good
Dogs Should Know
The Sensible Way
to Train
Second Edition
Jack Volhard and Melissa Bartlett
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
www.Ebook777.com

What All Good 
Dogs Should Know

To our teachers:
all the dogs who have taught us how to train

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
What All Good
Dogs Should Know
The Sensible Way
to Train
Second Edition
Jack Volhard and Melissa Bartlett
www.Ebook777.com

This book is printed on acid-free paper. ∞
Copyright © 2008 by Jack Volhard and Melissa Bartlett. All rights reserved.
Howell Book House
Published by Wiley Publishing, Inc., Hoboken, New Jersey
No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system or transmitted in any form
or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, scanning or otherwise, except as per-
mitted under Sections 107 or 108 of the 1976 United States Copyright Act, without either the prior
written permission of the Publisher, or authorization through payment of the appropriate per-copy fee
to the Copyright Clearance Center, 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, (978) 750-8400, fax
(978) 646-8600, or on the web at www.copyright.com. Requests to the Publisher for permission should
be addressed to the Legal Department, Wiley Publishing, Inc., 10475 Crosspoint Blvd., Indianapolis,
IN 46256, (317) 572-3447, fax (317) 572-4355, or online at http://www.wiley.com/go/permissions.
Wiley, the Wiley Publishing logo, Howell Book House, and related trademarks are trademarks or
registered trademarks of John Wiley & Sons, Inc. and/or its affiliates. All other trademarks are the
property of their respective owners. Wiley Publishing, Inc. is not associated with any product or ven-
dor mentioned in this book.
The publisher and the authors make no representations or warranties with respect to the accuracy
or completeness of the contents of this work and specifically disclaim all warranties, including with-
out limitation warranties of fitness for a particular purpose. No warranty may be created or extended
by sales or promotional materials. The advice and strategies contained herein may not be suitable
for every situation. This work is sold with the understanding that the publisher is not engaged in
rendering legal, accounting, or other professional services. If professional assistance is required, the
services of a competent professional person should be sought. Neither the publisher nor the authors
shall be liable for damages arising here from. The fact that an organization or Web site is referred to
in this work as a citation and/or a potential source of further information does not mean that the
authors or the publisher endorses the information the organization or Web site may provide or rec-
ommendations it may make. Further, readers should be aware that Internet Web sites listed in this
work may have changed or disappeared between when this work was written and when it is read.
For general information on our other products and services or to obtain technical support please
contact our Customer Care Department within the U.S. at (800) 762-2974, outside the U.S. at
(317) 572-3993, or fax (317) 572-4002.
Wiley also publishes its books in a variety of electronic formats. Some content that appears in print
may not be available in electronic books. For more information about Wiley products, please visit
our Web site at www.wiley.com.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data: 
Volhard, Joachim.
What all good dogs should know : the sensible way to train / 
Jack Volhard and Melissa Bartlett. —2nd ed.
p. cm.
Includes bibliographical references.
ISBN 978-0-470-14679-8
1.  Dogs—Training. 2.  Dogs—Behavior.  I. Bartlett, Melissa. II. Title. 
SF431.V65 2008
636.7'0887—dc22
2007028199
CIP
Printed in the United States of America
10
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
Second Edition
Book design by Erin Zeltner
Cover design by José Almaguer
Book production by Wiley Publishing, Inc. Composition Services

Contents
About the Authors
ix
1
Why Train Your Dog and When to Start
1
WHAT IS A GOOD DOG?
2
WHAT IS INVOLVED IN TRAINING?
3
WHEN TO BEGIN TRAINING
6
BUILDING TRUST
9
CONSISTENCY IS KEY
11
TAKING CHARGE
12
WHERE TO TRAIN
14
2
A Personality Profile for Your Dog
15
BEHAVIORS IN EACH DRIVE
15
YOUR DOG’S PERSONALITY
17
NOW WHAT?
20
BRINGING OUT DRIVES
20
PRACTICAL APPLICATION
22
3
How Your Dog Thinks
25
CAN YOUR DOG READ YOUR MIND?
25
“READING” YOUR DOG
25
INTERPRETING YOUR DOG’S BODY POSTURES
29
HOW YOUR DOG LEARNS
33
WHO IS TRAINING WHOM?
33
4
A “Baby-sitter” for Your Dog
39
ADVANTAGES OF A CRATE
39
SELECTING A CRATE
41
INTRODUCING YOUR DOG TO THE CRATE
41
GETTING YOUR DOG USED TO THE CRATE
42
A WORD OF CAUTION
44
v

5
Housetraining
45
HOUSETRAINING YOUR PUPPY
45
DEALING WITH ACCIDENTS
51
6
Sit and Stay
53
JUMPING ON PEOPLE
53
SAFETY
55
COMMANDS TO BE TAUGHT
56
7
Go Lie Down
67
TEACHING YOUR DOG TO LIE DOWN ON COMMAND
67
TEACHING YOUR DOG TO REMAIN IN PLACE
71
TEACHING THE GO LIE DOWN COMMAND
72
8
Walking Your Dog
75
LEASH-TRAINING YOUR DOG
76
TEACHING YOUR DOG NOT TO PULL
76
STILL NOT GETTING IT?
80
9
Coming When Called
83
RULE 1: EXERCISE, EXERCISE, EXERCISE
83
RULE 2: BE NICE TO YOUR DOG WHEN HE COMES TO YOU
83
RULE 3: TEACH YOUR DOG TO COME WHEN CALLED 
AS SOON AS YOU BRING HIM HOME
84
RULE 4: WHEN IN DOUBT, KEEP YOUR DOG ON LEASH
84
RULE 5: ALWAYS TOUCH HIS COLLAR BEFORE YOU 
REWARD WITH A TREAT OR PRAISE
85
THE GAME OF COMING WHEN CALLED
85
GOING OUTSIDE
87
ADDING DISTRACTIONS
88
10
Leave It
93
STEP 1
95
STEP 2
95
STEP 3
96
STEP 4
97
STEP 5
98
vi
Contents

11
The Rescued Dog
101
THE SHY DOG
101
SEPARATION ANXIETY
106
OVERPROTECTIVENESS
108
RESOURCE GUARDING
109
12
Objectionable Behavior
113
YOUR OPTIONS
113
WHY DOES YOUR DOG DO IT?
116
WHAT TO DO ABOUT UNACCEPTABLE BEHAVIOR
122
Epilogue
127
Bibliography
128
Index
129
Contents
vii

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
PHOTO COURTESY OF MARY ANN ZEIGENFUSE
www.Ebook777.com

ix
About the Authors
Jack Volhard, internationally known as a “trainer of trainers,” is the recipient of
six awards from the Dog Writers Association of America (DWAA). He is senior
author of Training Your Dog: The Step-by-Step Manual (Howell Book House,
1983), named Best Care and Training Book for 1983 by the DWAA; The Canine
Good Citizen: Every Dog Can Be One (Howell Book House, 1994), named Best
Care and Training Book for 1994 by the DWAA; Puppy Aptitude Testing, named
Best Film on Dogs in 1981; and, among other books, Dog Training For Dummies
(Wiley Publishing, 2005). His books have been translated into four languages. He
has also written numerous articles for various dog publications, and together with
his wife, Wendy, produced four training videos.
For forty years he has taught obedience classes and given lectures, weekend sem-
inars, and five-day training camps, teaching dog owners how to communicate
with their pets and how to make training fun for both owners and their dogs,
thereby achieving a mutually rewarding relationship.
Jack was an American Kennel Club Obedience Trial Judge for thirty-three years
and is now an Obedience Judge Emeritus. He is also a member of the Hall of
Fame of the International Association of Canine Professionals.
Melissa Bartlett’s animal artwork has won top prizes nationally and has been fea-
tured in magazines such as Sporting Classics and Just Labs. She has also been named
Dog Cartoonist of the Year by the Dog Writers Association of America, and her first
article, “A Novice Looks at Puppy Aptitude Testing,” published by the AKC Gazette,
appeared in 1979. Since then her numerous articles and delightful illustrations have
been included in various publications. In addition to co-authoring What All Good
Dogs Should Know, she has illustrated three other books on dog training.
Years ago, she trained her first obedience dog with Jack and Wendy Volhard.
Since then she has gone on to successfully compete with her own dogs in confor-
mation, obedience, and carting events, as well as instruct dog-training classes for
the family pet. Melissa and her Bernese Mountain Dog are a familiar sight at local
schools, nursing homes, and retirement centers doing dog-therapy work. She is
also an active advocate for shelter dogs and rescue groups and owns a rescued Aus-
tralian Shepherd.


1
A trained dog spends more time with his family than an untrained dog.
Chapter
1
Why Train Your Dog and
When to Start
T
rained dogs are “free” dogs. They are welcome almost anywhere because
they behave themselves around people and other dogs, they stay when told,
and they come when called. They are a pleasure to take for a walk and can
be let loose for a romp in the park. They can be taken on trips and family outings.
They are members of the family in every sense of the word.

On the other hand, untrained dogs have few, if any, privileges. When guests come,
they are locked away because they are too unruly. When the family sits down to
eat, they are locked up or put outside because of begging at the table. They are
never allowed off leash because they don’t come when called. Nobody wants to
take them for a walk because they pull, and family outings with such a nuisance
are unimaginable.
Your dog—for simplicity, we call him Felix throughout this book—has a life
expectancy of 8 to 16 years. Now is the time to ensure that these years are going
to be mutually rewarding. For your sanity and his safety, train your dog. Teach
him what every good dog should know.
WHAT IS A GOOD DOG?
Many dog books tell you that dogs are loyal, obedient, trustworthy, good with chil-
dren, born protectors, and wonderful companions. Most dogs have the potential to
2
What All Good Dogs Should Know
The perfect pet.

be great pets, but few are born that way. Almost all require some training to bring
out the best in them.
A good dog should:
• Be housetrained.
• Come when called.
• Have no bad habits.
• Stay when told.
• Not pull when taken for a walk.
Depending on your dog and what you expect from him, he may need training
in just a few of these areas or in all five.
WHAT IS INVOLVED IN TRAINING?
It may come as a surprise to you, but your dog’s ancestors were bred for their abil-
ity to do a particular job well. Looks were considered coincidental. How readily
you can train your dog to fit into your lifestyle depends on the job for which he
was bred. For example, a dog bred for guarding is easier to train to stay on the
property than a dog bred for hunting.
Today, most owners—and we suspect you did, too—choose their pets on the
basis of appearance—“What a cute puppy!” But when you selected your dog, did
you consider how the instincts for which he was selectively bred over the course
of countless generations would affect his behavior as an adult?
Fortunately, some of these instincts are the very ones that endear the dog to you
and make him such a good pet—the legendary protectiveness of children, the
warning bark when a stranger comes on the property, the friendly greeting when
you come home, and the comfort he provides in times of sorrow. Characteristics
of specific breeds, such as the Newfoundland’s rescue instincts, the Bernese Moun-
tain Dog’s willingness to pull a cart, the terrier’s untiring playfulness, and the
Labrador’s eagerness to retrieve for his master, are equally appealing.
However, other instinctive behaviors
get the dog into trouble. A dog bred for
guarding who does his job too well may
be accused of being vicious; one bred
for herding may be chastised for chas-
ing children, joggers, bicycles, and cars;
and the hunting dog may be repri-
manded for pulling on the leash when
following a scent. Only the lap dog can
get away with almost anything.
Why Train Your Dog and When to Start
3
If what you are trying to
teach your dog is in harmony
with his instincts, training him will
be easy; if it goes against the dog’s
instincts, your task will be more dif-
ficult. For example, it will be easier
to teach a Labrador to retrieve than
to teach a herding dog not to
chase joggers.

For Barbara and Ed, it was love at first sight with Bentley, a Mastiff puppy. On
impulse, they brought Bentley home from the pet store. When he grew into a
huge dog and took to knocking down the mailman, Barbara and Ed were horri-
fied. “He was such a cuddly puppy,” they recalled, “just like a teddy bear.” They
did not realize that Bentley was just doing his job—Mastiffs were bred in England
to guard estates. With a little training, plus keeping an eye on Bentley when the
mailman was expected, the problem was resolved.
4
What All Good Dogs Should Know
Remember that a cute puppy can be a handful as an adult.

5
Newfoundlands were bred for rescue.
Sometimes instincts get a dog into trouble.

WHEN TO BEGIN TRAINING
Whether your dog is a puppy, an adolescent, or an adult dog, start training him
now. There is no truth in the saying “Old dogs can’t learn new tricks”—it just takes
longer. For a puppy, the ideal time to begin training is at 7 weeks of age. Your
puppy is most receptive to training during an 8-week window from 7 to 16 weeks.
You will be amazed at the ease and speed with which a puppy learns. The longer
you wait, the harder the job will become. Make the most of the available time now!
During this period your puppy is capable of learning far more than you will
teach him. What the puppy learns now he will remember for the rest of his life.
His brain is the same size as that of an adult dog; he lacks only the experience and
motor coordination of an adult dog.
We know what you’re thinking: “I have plenty of time. I can wait until he’s 6
months to a year old. Let him enjoy his puppyhood.” While you may have the
best of intentions, your thinking is flawed. Why? There are three reasons:
1. Your puppy is going to learn many things while he is growing up, with or
without your involvement. Some of the behaviors he will probably learn
are the very ones you don’t want him to do as an adult dog; for example,
dashing outside, pulling on the leash, not coming when called, and jump-
ing on people. The more ingrained these behaviors become, the greater the
difficulty in eliminating them.
2. Learning at this stage is perhaps even more important than any specific
commands you want to teach Felix. Future lessons you want your dog to
learn are easier to teach to a dog who had some training as a puppy.
Besides, puppies like to learn, and your puppy will look forward to his
training sessions.
6
What All Good Dogs Should Know
Begin training as soon as you get your dog.

3. Puppies are physically easier to manipulate than grown dogs. Again, you
don’t have much time—at 7 months of age dogs reach about 70 percent of
their full size.
Developmental periods
As your puppy grows up, he will go through various developmental periods. These
periods, in turn, influence how he responds to training.
The first major period that influences training occurs sometime between the
fourth and eighth months, when your puppy realizes there is a big, wide world out
there. Up to now, chances are the puppy followed your every footstep and perhaps
even willingly came to you every time you called him. But now he wants to do his
own thing—investigate a scent, follow a trail, chase a butterfly, whatever. He is
maturing and cutting the apron strings. This is normal behavior. Your puppy is
not being spiteful or disobedient, he’s just becoming an adolescent.
While Felix is going through this phase, it is best to keep him on leash or in a
confined area until you have taught him to come when called. Otherwise, not
coming when called will become an annoying and potentially dangerous habit.
Once it becomes an established behavior, it will be difficult to change, so preven-
tion is the best cure. Chapter 9 explains how to teach your dog to come when
called.
Why Train Your Dog and When to Start
7
Puppies develop into adolescents between 4 and 8 months of age.

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Under no circumstances should you chase after your dog, as he will think you
are playing his game. Instead, run the other way and try to get him to chase you.
If that does not work, kneel down and pretend you have found something
extremely interesting on the ground, hoping your dog’s curiosity will make him
come to you. If you do have to go to your dog, approach slowly until you can
calmly take him by the collar.
The need to socialize
Your dog is a social animal. To become an acceptable pet, he needs to interact with
you, your family, and other humans, as well as dogs. If denied that chance, his
behavior around other people or dogs may be unpredictable, either fearful or
aggressive. For example, unless he regularly meets children during this period, he
may not be trustworthy around them, especially when he feels cornered.
Your puppy needs the opportunity to meet and to have positive experiences
with those people who will play a role in his life. If you are a grandparent whose
grandchildren occasionally visit, have your puppy meet children as often as possi-
ble. If you live by yourself, make an effort to let your puppy meet other people,
especially friends and members of the opposite sex. Interacting with other dogs on
a regular basis as he is growing up is equally important.
If you plan to take Felix on family outings or vacations, get him used to riding
in a car. Time spent on socializing now is worth the effort in making your puppy
a well-adjusted companion. Puppyhood is short and goes by quickly, so use this
time wisely.
8
What All Good Dogs Should Know
Make sure to socialize your puppy.
www.Ebook777.com

BUILDING TRUST
Picture your dog getting loose and chasing a cat across the road. Your heart is in your
mouth because you are afraid a car might hit him. When he finally returns, you are
angry and soundly scold him for chasing the cat and giving you such a scare.
Why Train Your Dog and When to Start
9
How your dog perceives coming to you.

Here is how your dog looks at this situation. First, he chased the cat, which was
a lot of fun. Then he came back to you and was reprimanded, which was no fun
at all. What you wanted to teach him was not to chase the cat. What you actually
taught him was that coming to you is unpleasant.
One of the commands you will want to teach Felix is to come when called. To
be successful, remember this principle: Whenever your dog comes to you, be nice to
him. Reward this behavior. No matter what your dog might have done, be pleas-
ant and greet him with a kind word, a pat on the head, and a smile. Teach your
dog to trust you by being a safe place for him. When he is with you, follows you,
or comes to you, make him feel wanted.
When you call your dog to you and then punish him, you undermine his trust
in you. When your dog comes to you voluntarily and gets punished, he associates
being punished with coming to you.
You might ask “How can I be nice to my dog when he brings me the remains
of one of my brand new shoes, or when he wants to jump on me with muddy
paws, or when I just discovered an unwanted present on the carpet?” For the
answers, you will have to read this book; it will show you how to deal with all
these situations without undermining his trust in you.
10
What All Good Dogs Should Know
Always make your dog feel wanted when he comes to you.

CONSISTENCY IS KEY
If there is any magic to training, it is consistency. Your dog cannot understand
sometimes, maybe, or only on Sundays. He can understand what is acceptable behav-
ior and what is not.
For example, it is confusing for Felix
if you permit him to jump on you
when you are wearing old clothes, but
then get angry with him when he joy-
fully plants muddy paws on your best
suit.
Tom loved to wrestle with Tyson, his
Boxer. Then one day, when Grandma
came to visit, Tyson flattened her. Tom
was angry, and Tyson was confused—
he thought roughhousing was a won-
derful way to show affection. After all,
that’s what Tom taught him.
Does this mean you can never permit your puppy to jump up on you? Not at
all, but you have to train him that he may only do so when you tell him it’s “OK.”
But beware: Training a dog to make this distinction is more difficult than train-
ing him not to jump up at all. The more “black and white” you can make it, the
easier it is for your dog to understand what you want.
Why Train Your Dog and When to Start
11
Don’t encourage your dog to roughhouse.
Training your dog is a ques-
tion of who is more persist-
ent—you or your dog. Some
commands he will learn
quickly, others will take more time.
If several attempts don’t bring suc-
cess, be patient, remain calm, and
try again. It sometimes takes many
repetitions before a dog under-
stands a command and responds
to it each and every time.

TAKING CHARGE
Taking charge is not a matter of choice. Dogs are pack animals and you and your
family are now his pack. As far as he is concerned, no pack can exist without a
leader, and it’s either you or him. That’s the way it has to be.
Few dogs actively seek leadership and most are perfectly content, and actually
prefer, for you to assume the role of pack leader. But you must do so, or even the
meekest of dogs will take over. Remember, it’s not a matter of choice. If you expect
your dog to listen to you and obey your commands, he has to accept you as his
pack leader.
If your dog takes over your favorite armchair, constantly demands attention,
ignores you when you want him to move, or shoots outside ahead of you when
you open the door, he is in charge instead of you. Part of his behavior may be due
to a lack of education, so the first order of business is to begin training him. Start
by teaching him to sit on command (see chapter 6) and to lie down on command
(see chapter 7). Both of these exercises not only help you to control your dog,
which is an important part of dog ownership, but they also teach your dog that
you are in charge.
12
What All Good Dogs Should Know
Even the meekest dog will take over if you don’t assume the role of pack leader.

After you have trained your dog, use the commands you have taught him on a
regular basis. For example, have him sit before doing any of the following:
• Giving him a treat
• Putting down his food bowl
• Petting him
• Letting him go through a door
Toshiba, Richard’s Akita, constantly crashed through doors ahead of her owner,
ignored commands, and growled when Richard wanted her off the sofa. Richard
realized he had to train Toshiba. He trained her to sit and behave before she was
petted or got any treats, and to stay off the furniture and lie on the rug instead.
What most impressed Richard was the change in Toshiba’s attitude: She seemed
calmer, more relaxed, and happier. “I guess she really wanted me to be in charge
all along,” Richard commented.
Why Train Your Dog and When to Start
13
Dogs are calmer when their owner is in charge.

WHERE TO TRAIN
When you begin your training, do it in an area familiar to your dog and one that
is relatively free of distractions so that you are his center of attention. Such an area
can be a room in your house where the two of you can be alone or your backyard.
Avoiding distractions in the beginning will speed up the learning process.
After Felix has learned to respond to a particular command in this setting, take
him to a new location without too many distractions, such as a quiet park or an
empty parking lot, to practice. Finally, practice in the presence of distractions,
such as other people and children.
Felix will not be fully reliable until you practice the commands you have taught
him under conditions when you need him to respond. For example, to prevent
Felix from jumping up on guests to your home, you need to teach him to sit and
stay, and you need to practice by having a friend or neighbor come to the door,
ring the bell, and have Felix sit and stay as you open the door. (See chapter 6 for
more on the Sit and Stay commands.)
14
What All Good Dogs Should Know
Facts from Felix
 
1) 
A trained dog is a free dog.
 
2) 
Start training your dog as soon as you get him.
 
3) 
Whenever your dog comes to you, be nice to him.
 
4) 
If there is any magic to training, it is consistency.
 
5) 
As far as your dog is concerned, no pack can exist
 
 
without a leader.
 
6) 
For your sanity and his safety, you have to be 
 
 
the one in charge.

15
Chapter
2
A Personality Profile
for Your Dog
Y
our dog was born with a set of instinctive behaviors that he inherited from
his parents. These behaviors, which can be grouped into three broad cate-
gories—prey, pack, and defense—are collectively called drives. The num-
ber of behaviors a dog has in each drive determines his temperament, his
personality, and how he perceives the world.
BEHAVIORS IN EACH DRIVE
A dog’s prey drive includes those innate behaviors associated with hunting, killing
prey, and eating. This drive is activated by motion, sound, and smell. Behaviors
associated with the prey drive are seeing; hearing; scenting; tracking; stalking;
chasing anything that moves; pouncing; high-pitched barking; jumping up;
pulling down; shaking, tearing, and ripping apart; carrying; eating; digging; and
burying.
You see these behaviors when your dog is chasing a cat or when he gets excited
and barks in a high-pitched tone of voice as the cat climbs up a tree. Your dog may
also shake and rip apart soft toys and bury dog biscuits in the couch.
The pack drive includes behaviors associated with social interaction with other
dogs; playing; and reproductive behaviors such as licking, mounting, washing
ears, and all courting gestures. In the case of a dog, the ability to be part of a group
translates itself into a willingness to work with you as part of a team.
A dog who exhibits many of these behaviors is the one who follows you around
the house, is happiest when he’s with you, loves to be petted and groomed,
and likes to work with you. Such a dog may be unhappy when left alone for long
periods.

Finally, the defense drive consists of the instincts for survival and self-preservation,
and includes both fight and flight behaviors. The defense drive is more complex
than prey and pack drives, because the same situation that can make some dogs
aggressive (fight) can also elicit avoidance (flight) behaviors in others, especially in
young dogs.
Fight behaviors tend not to fully develop until the dog is over 2 years of age,
although tendencies toward these behaviors will be seen at an earlier age. Exam-
ples of fight behaviors are a dog who “stands tall,” stares at other dogs, or likes to
strut his stuff. He stands his ground with his ears and whiskers pointed forward
and his tail held up. He goes toward unfamiliar objects or situations, and his hack-
les go up from his shoulders to his neck. He may guard his food, toys, or territory
from other dogs or people, and he may dislike being petted or groomed. Such a
dog refuses to move when lying in front of doorways or cupboards, making his
owner walk around him.
Flight behaviors demonstrate that the dog is unsure about something. Exam-
ples are hackles that go up the full length of the body, not just at the neck; hiding
or running away from new situations; a dislike of being touched by strangers; or
a general lack of confidence. Young dogs tend to exhibit more flight behaviors
than older dogs. Freezing (not going forward or backward) is generally considered
inhibited flight behavior.
16
What All Good Dogs Should Know
The three drives, or instinctive behaviors, of a dog.

YOUR DOG’S PERSONALITY
To help you understand your dog’s behaviors, Jack and Wendy Volhard cataloged
ten behaviors exhibited in each drive and created the Canine Personality Profile
(see below). The ten behaviors chosen
are the most representative for each
drive and are easily recognized by most
dog owners.
When completing the following Pro-
file, keep in mind that it was devised
for a house dog with an enriched envi-
ronment and not a dog tied out back or
kept solely in a kennel; such dogs have
fewer opportunities to express as many
behaviors as a house dog. Your answers
should indicate the behaviors your dog would exhibit if he had not already been
trained to do otherwise. For example, did he jump up on the counter to steal food
before he was trained not to do so?
When completing the Profile, assign the following point values to your answers:
Almost always—10
Sometimes—5
Hardly ever—0
If you have not had the chance to observe all of these behaviors, then leave the
answer blank.
Canine Personality Profile
When presented with the opportunity, does your dog . . . 
1. Sniff the ground or air?
_____
2. Get along with other dogs?
_____
3. Stand his ground or show curiosity toward 
strange objects or sounds?
_____
4. Run away from new situations?
_____
5. Get excited by moving objects, such as bikes or squirrels?
_____
6. Get along with people?
_____
7. Like to play tug-of-war games to win?
_____
8. Hide behind you when he feels he can’t cope?
_____
9. Stalk cats, other dogs, or things in the grass?
_____
A Personality Profile for Your Dog
17
The results of the Profile
will give you a good start-
ing point for understand-
ing why your dog does
what he does. This understanding
will help you make his training a
positive and enjoyable experience
for both of you.

10. Bark when he’s left alone?
_____
11. Bark or growl in a deep tone of voice?
_____
12. Act fearfully in unfamiliar situations?
_____
13. Bark in a high-pitched voice when excited?
_____
14. Solicit petting, or like to snuggle with you?
_____
15. Guard his territory?
_____
16. Tremble or whine when unsure?
_____
17. Pounce on his toys?
_____
18. Like to be groomed?
_____
19. Guard his food or toys?
_____
20. Cower or lie on his back when reprimanded?
_____
21. Shake and “kill” his toys?
_____
22. Seek eye contact with you?
_____
23. Dislike being petted?
_____
24. Act reluctant to come close to you when called?
_____
25. Steal food or garbage?
_____
26. Follow you around like a shadow?
_____
27. Guard his owner(s)?
_____
28. Have difficulty standing still when groomed?
_____
29. Like to carry things in his mouth?
_____
30. Play a lot with other dogs?
_____
31. Dislike being groomed?
_____
32. Cower or cringe when a stranger bends over him?
_____
33. Wolf down his food?
_____
34. Jump up to greet people?
_____
35. Like to fight other dogs?
_____
36. Urinate during greeting behavior?
_____
37. Like to dig and/or bury things?
_____
38. Show reproductive behaviors, such as mounting other dogs?
_____
39. Get picked on by older dogs when he was a young dog?
_____
40. Tend to bite when cornered?
_____
18
What All Good Dogs Should Know

Scoring the profile
Next to each number in the following table, enter the point value you have given
that question, and then total each column in the space provided.
Prey
Pack
Fight
Flight
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
21.
22.
23.
24.
25.
26.
27.
28.
29.
30.
31.
32.
33.
34.
35.
36.
37.
38.
39.
40.
Total Prey:
Total Pack:
Total Fight:
Total Flight:
________
_________
_________
_________
What the scores mean
Not surprisingly, the results of the Profile tend to be breed-specific:
• If your dog was bred to hunt or herd—think Labrador and Border Col-
lie—he probably scored highest in prey drive, followed by pack, with fight
somewhere below 50 points, and a few flight behaviors.
• If he was bred to guard or protect—think German Shepherd—his score for
fight behaviors will likely be well above 50 points, with perhaps a few flight
behaviors, but still many prey and pack behaviors.
• A dog bred for drafting—think Bernese Mountain Dog—should score high
in pack, low in fight, and have few prey behaviors. (You would not want
him to chase after a cat with his little cart bouncing behind.)
• If you have a “designer dog” (Pugle, Labradoodle, Schnoodle, etc.) or a
mixed breed, his drive numbers will not be as predictable.
Most dogs are high in prey drive, which makes sense in light of the majority of
the tasks they were bred to perform. Unfortunately, it is also the drive that is the
most irritating to you, his owner, and the one that can get the dog into trouble.
When you take him for a walk, chances are good that he pulls you here, there, and
everywhere, with his nose on the ground following various scents. When he spots
a squirrel, he sets off in hot pursuit and ignores your calls. When left in the yard,
he digs holes and barks at passing cars.
A Personality Profile for Your Dog
19

NOW WHAT?
Before you can use the results of the Profile, first take a look at what you are try-
ing to teach Felix (our name for your dog) and which drive he has to be in to
respond to a given command.
Felix needs to be in pack drive for most of the commands you want him to
know, such as walking on leash without pulling, being able to sit and stay, being
able to go lie down, and being able to come when called. Responding to these
commands requires him to be in pack drive, which means being with you or doing
something for you. You certainly don’t want him to be in prey (chase) or defense
drive (guard or flee). All else being equal, a dog with many pack behaviors (more
than 60 points) will have no difficulty learning these commands.
BRINGING OUT DRIVES
Here are the basic rules for bringing out specific drives in your dog:
• Prey drive is brought out in your dog by the use of motion: hand move-
ments; using a high-pitched tone of voice or an object of attraction
(defined as anything the dog will actively work for, such as a stick, toy, or
food); chasing or being chased; and leaning backward with your body.
• Pack drive is brought out by physical affection, verbal praise, and smiling
at your dog. Grooming and playing also bring out pack-drive behaviors.
• Defense drive is brought out by leaning over the dog, either from the front
or the side; checking (a sharp tug on the leash); and using a harsh tone of
voice.
20
What All Good Dogs Should Know
A high prey drive often gets a dog into trouble.

21
Changing the dog’s behavior from prey drive to pack drive.

As an example, let’s take a look at a fairly common situation. You are trying to
teach Felix to walk on a loose leash in the yard when a squirrel scampers up a
nearby tree. Felix spots it and immediately gives chase, straining at the end of the
leash and barking his head off. You call him and try to get his attention back on
you, but he is totally focused on the squirrel. Felix is in full-blown prey drive.
What can you do to get his mind off the squirrel? Or, in technical terms, get
him out of prey drive and into pack drive, where he is supposed to be? As you’ve
already discovered, calling Felix does not work. You could try bribing him with a
tasty treat or toy, but that would probably not do the trick. Even a nice piece
of meat would probably not work. If you had a bigger squirrel—not a likely
occurrence!—that might get his attention back on you.
The simplest way to get his attention back on you is a firm check on the leash,
followed by praise when he looks at you and gives up on the squirrel. And you
may have to do that several times before he will obey a voice command.
PRACTICAL APPLICATION
By looking at your dog’s Profile, you will know what type of training will work
best for him and where you need to concentrate your training efforts. Following
are a few of the more common Profiles we see in our training classes:
• Defense (fight)—more than 60 points. Your dog will not be bothered too
much by a firm hand. Body posture is not critical, although inconsistencies
on your part will slow down the training. Tone of voice should be firm, but
pleasant and nonthreatening.
22
What All Good Dogs Should Know
With the high-defense (fight) dog, establish your leadership through training 
exercises.

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
• Defense (flight)—30 or more points. Correct body posture, gentle han-
dling, and quiet, pleasant tone of voice are critical. Avoid using a harsh
tone of voice and any hovering—leaning over or toward your dog.
• Prey—more than 60 points. Your dog will respond well to the use of
treats or a toy during teaching. He may need a firm hand, depending on
the strength of his defense drive (fight), to suppress the prey drive when in
high gear, such as when chasing a cat or spotting a squirrel. He’s easily
motivated, but also easily distracted by motion or moving objects. Signals
mean more to this dog than verbal commands. You will need to use your
body, hands, and leash correctly so as not to confuse him.
• Prey—less than 60 points. Your dog is probably not easily motivated by
food or other objects, but is also not easily distracted by moving objects.
• Pack—more than 60 points. Your dog likes to be with you and will
respond with little guidance. He responds readily to praise and touch.
• Pack—less than 40 points; prey—more than 50 points. Your dog may
not care whether he is with you or not. He likes to do his own thing, but if
he has sufficient prey behaviors, he can be trained with the use of treats or
toys. Often breed specific for dogs bred to work independently of humans,
like Huskies and sight hounds.
A Personality Profile for Your Dog
23
Facts from Felix
 
1) 
Motion, sounds, and odors put your dog into prey drive.
 
2) 
Touching and a friendly voice put your dog into pack drive.
 
3) 
Physical discomfort and an unfriendly voice put your dog  
 
 
into defense drive.
 
4) 
A dog with many prey behaviors needs lots of training
 
 
around distractions.
 
5) 
A dog with more pack behaviors than prey behaviors is  
 
 
easy to train.
 
6) 
Your dog ’ s Profile tells you the correct way to
 
 
train him.
www.Ebook777.com

Yes, dogs can think. The problem is, they think like dogs.

Chapter
3
How Your Dog Thinks
O
f course, dogs think. They can also problem solve. Unlike people, how-
ever, they are unable to reason. And just like people, some are smarter
than others. In this chapter, you’ll explore how your dog thinks and how
you can tell what he is thinking about.
CAN YOUR DOG READ YOUR MIND?
Dogs often give the appearance of being able to read your mind. What happens
in actuality is that by observing you, and studying your habits and movements,
they learn to anticipate your actions. Since dogs communicate with each other
through body language, they quickly become experts at reading yours.
For example, before leaving for work, Marcia always put Bella in her crate. It
wasn’t long before Bella went into her crate on her own when Marcia was about
to leave. “What a clever puppy,” thought Marcia. “She knows I’m going to work.”
What Bella observed was that just before leaving for work, Marcia put on her
makeup and then crated her. Bella’s cue to go into her crate was Marcia’s putting
on her makeup. Then one evening, before dinner guests were to arrive, Marcia
started putting on makeup. When Bella immediately went into her crate, Marcia
realized her dog had not been reading her mind, but had learned her routine
through observation.
“READING” YOUR DOG
Just as your dog Felix takes his cues from watching you, so can you learn to inter-
pret what he is thinking by watching him. The more time you spend observing
your dog, the better you get at interpreting what’s on his mind.
25

26
Interrupt, then give the command.

From prior observation, you know Felix has the habit of counter surfing—putting
his front feet on the counter to see whether there is anything edible up there he can
steal. Since he has done this a number of times before, you recognize his intentions
by the look on his face—head and ears are up, whiskers pointed forward, intent
stare—and the way he moves in the direction of the counter—deliberately, with his
tail wagging in happy anticipation.
At that precise point you should interrupt Felix’s thoughts. When he is think-
ing about something you don’t want him to do is the ideal time to intervene.
In a stern voice say, “Not so fast young man,” or “Stop,” or “Ah, ah,” or sharply
clap your hands. Then give him a command incompatible with “counter surfing,”
such as “Sit” (see chapter 6) or “Down” (see chapter 7).
How Your Dog Thinks
27
Second choice—catch him in the act.

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
If you catch Felix in the act of trying to steal food—he already has his front
paws planted on the counter—firmly tell him to stop, take him by his collar, and
physically remove his paws from the counter.
Oops—too late!
Visualize yourself preparing a piece of meat for dinner. You leave the counter to
answer the phone and upon your return, the meat is gone. You know Felix ate it.
Your first reaction is anger. Immediately Felix looks guilty, and you assume it is
because he knows he has done wrong.
In fact, Felix knows no such thing. He is reacting to your anger and wonders
why you are angry, and, perhaps based on prior experience, expects to be the tar-
get of your wrath.
Do not attempt any discipline after the offending deed has been accomplished.
Your dog cannot make the connection between the discipline and what he just
did. Your dog may look guilty, but not because he understands what he has done;
he looks guilty only because he understands you are upset. 
Unless you can catch him in the act, or, ideally, while he is thinking about steal-
ing the meat, reprimands are too late. If he has the meat in his mouth, take it away
from him. If he has already eaten the meat, it’s too late to do anything on your
part—the meat is gone, and you should do nothing after the fait accompli. (Moral
of the story: Don’t leave meat unattended on the counter!)
Communicating with your dog
We do not recommend using the word “no” in training your dog. Just yelling
“No!” at the poor dog for everything and anything will only confuse him and
make him neurotic. There is no exercise called “No.” Instead, be specific when
training your dog. Tell him what you want him to do rather than what you don’t
want him to do. If you don’t want him to jump on you, for example, tell him
to “Sit.”
Similarly, avoid (get out of the habit of) using your dog’s name as a reprimand
or as a substitute for a command, because this just leaves the poor dog to try and
figure out what you want. Use the name of your dog to get his attention and then
follow with a command, such as “Felix, sit.” When you call your dog’s name, he
should consider it a pleasant experience.
Communicate with your dog in a positive manner. Listen to yourself when you
interact with your dog. Do you sound pleasant and positive, or unpleasant and
negative?
28
What All Good Dogs Should Know
www.Ebook777.com

Instead of telling your dog what you
don’t want him to do, train him to
respond to specific commands so that
you can tell him what you want him to
do. Put him in a position where you
can praise him and tell him how good
he is.
Your dog is a dog
Your efforts to train your dog are
doomed to failure if you think he has human standards and reasoning abilities. He
certainly does not experience guilt. Blaming the dog because “he ought to know
better” or “he shouldn’t have done it” or “how could he do this to me” will not
improve his behavior. He also does not “understand every word you say”—if he
did, he would not need training.
INTERPRETING YOUR DOG’S 
BODY POSTURES
The following six body postures will help you interpret what’s on Felix’s mind.
How Your Dog Thinks
29
Do not attempt any discipline after the fact.
The most difficult part of
training a dog involves elimi-
nating two bad habits: using the
word “no” as a way to communicate
and using his name as a reprimand
or a substitute for a specific com-
mand. Focus on teaching your dog
what you want him to do and ignore
what you don’t want him to do.

Relaxed
A relaxed dog is calm and ready to be trained. You can easily get his attention
focused on you.
Alert
An alert dog has sensed something. It could be the family car approaching, a cat,
another dog, or the mail carrier. What comes next depends on your dog’s tem-
perament. For example, if it is a cat, Felix may be thinking about giving chase.
Now is the right time to tell him to forget about the cat. Remove him from the
location or tell him to “Sit” and “Stay.”
30
What All Good Dogs Should Know
Head up, ears neither back nor forward
Tail down
Lips
relaxed
Relaxed: “I’m calm and ready to learn.”
Ears up
Tail out straight
Mouth
shut
Standing tall
Alert: “What’s going on?”

How Your Dog Thinks
31
Aggressive
This position warns that the dog may bite. If this is not your dog, stay away from
him. If it is your dog, you need help from a professional dog trainer.
Appeasing
This stance signals “I want to be friends.” Felix is pleased to be in the presence of
someone he considers superior. He is not feeling guilty, but is doing everything
possible to let you know that he is going along with whatever you say. If this is a
puppy, or a submissive adult, he may urinate. Do not discipline him for urinating
because it will only make it worse. Avoid a harsh tone of voice, eye contact, and
hovering over the dog. Just ignore him for a while.
Ears forward
Hackles up
Wrinkled
nose
Corner of
lips forward
Standing tall,
leans forward
Aggressive: ”Watch out! I’m ready to bite!”
Forehead smooth, ears low and back
Licking
Corner of
lips back
Pawing
Tail down
Urination, especially in puppies
Appeasing: ”I just want to be friends.”

Submissive
This posture says “I give up. Don’t hurt me. You’ve won.” Ignore the dog. When
he comes to you, do something he perceives as pleasant—throw a ball or give him
a treat.
Stressed
This dog is overloaded. Whatever the situation, it is too much for him. Stop what-
ever you are doing and remove the dog from the situation.
The more time you spend observing your dog, the better you get at interpret-
ing what’s on his mind. Your dog is already an expert, and you can become
one, too.
32
What All Good Dogs Should Know
Pupils dilated
Rapid
panting
Lips pulled
way back
Body low
Sweating
feet
Stressed: “I’m just so overwhelmed.”
Urination, especially in puppies
Tail tucked
Rolls over onto back
Looking
away
Submissive: “I give up. Don’t hurt me. You win.”

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
How Your Dog Thinks
33
HOW YOUR DOG LEARNS
Your dog learns from his everyday experiences, some of which are pleasant, others
are not. He also learns to make positive or negative associations with specific
behaviors. For example, while pawing at the gate one day, Laddie the Collie acci-
dentally opened it and took himself for a nice long walk in the neighborhood.
From then on, whenever he wanted to go for a walk, he would paw at the gate
until it opened.
Max the Dachshund did not fare as well. One winter day he was walking near
the garage when a huge pile of snow slid off the roof and buried him. He now
makes a big arc whenever he walks around the garage.
WHO IS TRAINING WHOM?
Training is a two-way street—Felix is just as involved in training you as you are in
training him. Every time you interact with your dog, some form of training takes
place. You may not be aware of it at the time, but it will shape his behavior.
Laddie learned to open the gate.
www.Ebook777.com

Your dog has you well trained.
Max remembers being buried by the snow.
34

How Your Dog Thinks
35
Take the following quiz to find out if your dog is, in fact, training you.
What do you do when your dog:
1. Drops a ball in your lap while you are watching television?
2. Nudges or paws your elbow when you are sitting on the couch?
3. Rattles the food dish?
4. Sits at the door?
If your answers are:
1. Throw it.
2. Pet the dog.
3. Fill the dish.
4. Open the door.
. . . then your dog has you well trained!
You are responsible for shaping your dog’s behavior.

When Deacon was a puppy, nobody thought anything about slipping him
something from the dinner table. Now he is 6 months old, almost fully grown,
and he is begging at the table. What happened? He was systematically trained to
beg by being given food from the table.
Since his begging has become a nuisance, everyone wants to put a stop to it.
The family resolves not to feed him from the table anymore. At first, Deacon does
not believe this is happening, and he digs a little deeper into his repertoire of beg-
ging routines. Sure enough, someone takes pity on him and slips him a treat.
As this scenario repeats itself, often with longer and longer intervals before
someone gives in, Deacon is systematically being trained not to take “no” for an
answer and that persistence pays! Looking at it from Deacon’s point of view, the
family is rewarding, even encouraging, the very behavior it finds objectionable. As
soon as they stop giving in to Deacon his efforts will decrease, and over time (and
provided they don’t have a relapse), he will stop begging altogether. In technical
jargon, you have extinguished the undesired behavior by refusing to reward it.
36
What All Good Dogs Should Know
Do not give in!

How Your Dog Thinks
37
Good training rewards the desired
behavior and discourages or ignores the
undesired behavior. Start good training
by paying attention to what you are
rewarding and ask yourself: Do I really
want my dog to do this? Is this some-
thing I want to live with as long as I
have this dog? If the answers are “no,”
then stop rewarding these behaviors.
Facts from Felix
 
1) 
Dogs are experts at reading body language.
 
2) 
The best time to stop undesirable behavior is when
 
 
your dog is thinking about it.
 
3) 
Discipline after the offending deed is ineffective.
 
4) 
Dogs learn through pleasant and unpleasant experiences.
 
5) 
Become aware of who is training whom.
 
6) 
Good training rewards the desired behavior and discourages  
 
 
or ignores the undesired behavior.
Don’t underestimate your
dog’s ability to train you.
Many dogs have done a
much better job of training
their owners than the other way
around.

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
A crate is like having a baby-sitter for your dog.
www.Ebook777.com

Chapter
4
A “Baby-sitter” for Your Dog
W
hen Rita and Ted went to pick up their puppy, the breeder asked them
what they thought was a peculiar question. “When you were raising
your children, did you use a playpen?”
“Of course,” said Rita. “I don’t know what I would have done without it.”
“Fine,” said the breeder. “A crate for a puppy is like a playpen for a child.”
Whatever your views on playpens, dogs like crates. It reminds them of a den—
a place of safety, security, and warmth. Puppies, and many adult dogs, sleep most
of the day, and many prefer the comfort of their den.
ADVANTAGES OF A CRATE
For everyone’s peace of mind, get a crate for your dog. Here are just a few of the
many advantages of crate training your dog:
• When you’re busy and can’t keep
an eye on your puppy Felix, but
want to make sure he will not get
into trouble, put him in a crate.
You can relax, and so can he.
• Crates are ideal for establishing a
schedule for housetraining.
• Few dogs are fortunate enough to
go through life without ever hav-
ing to be hospitalized. Your dog’s
private room at the veterinary
hospital will consist of a crate. Felix’s first experience with a crate should
not come at a time when he is sick, as the added stress from being crated
for the first time will slow his recovery. There may also be times when you
have to keep your dog confined, such as after an injury or being altered.
39
Crating a dog in a vehicle
is equally important when
you leave him in the car
while 
you 
run 
some
errands. Fred learned this lesson
the hard way. He left Gretchen, his
6-month-old Dachshund, loose in
the car for about two hours. By the
time he returned, she had done
major damage to the upholstery!

• Driving any distance, even around the block, with your dog loose in the
car is tempting fate. Imagine what can happen if you have to slam on the
brakes for some reason. Having the dog in a crate protects you and your
dog. For some vehicles, crates are too large or cumbersome, but it is still
just as important to protect your dog while riding in the car. Patty found
the answer for her Lab, Bailey—she purchased a harness especially designed
for dogs that is attached to a seat belt, not unlike a car seat for a child. In a
40
What All Good Dogs Should Know
Crate training has many advantages.

station wagon or an SUV, another alternative is a dog barrier that separates
the cargo area from the main cabin.
• When you go on vacation, you may want to take your dog. A crate is a
home away from home, and you can leave Felix in a hotel room knowing
that he won’t be unhappy or stressed, or try to tear up the room.
• Most important for your dog, the crate is a place where he can get away
from the hustle and bustle of family life and hide out when the kids
become too much for him.
Your dog will like the crate because it will remind him of the security of a den.
He will use it voluntarily, so he should always have access to it. Depending on
where it is, your dog will spend a lot of time sleeping in his crate.
SELECTING A CRATE
Select a crate that is large enough so your dog can turn around, stand, or lie down
comfortably. Even if the dog is still a puppy, get a crate for the adult-size dog. You
will need a divider at first (some crates come with one).
Buy a good-quality crate that collapses easily and is portable so you can take it
with you when traveling with your dog. If you frequently take your dog with you
in the car, consider getting two crates, one for the house and one for the car, so
you don’t have to lug one back and forth.
INTRODUCING YOUR DOG TO THE CRATE
Set up the crate and let the puppy investigate it. Choose a command, such as
“Crate” or “Go to Bed.” Physically place your puppy in the crate using the com-
mand you have chosen. Tell him what a great little guy he is, give him a bite-sized
treat, and then let him out.
A “Baby-sitter” for Your Dog
41
Collapsible wire crate
Plastic airline crate
Types of crates.

Next, use a treat to coax him into the crate. If he does not follow the treat, phys-
ically place him into the crate and then give him the treat.
Repeat until the puppy goes into the crate with almost no help from you, each
time using the command and giving a treat after he is in the crate.
If the puppy is afraid of the crate, use his meals to overcome this fear. First, let
him eat the meal in front of the crate, and then place the next meal just inside the
crate. Put each successive meal a little farther into the crate until he is completely
inside and no longer reluctant to go in.
The same procedure is used for introducing an adolescent or adult dog to a
crate.
GETTING YOUR DOG USED TO THE CRATE
Follow these steps to get your dog adjusted to the crate. Tell your dog to go into
the crate, give him a treat, close the door, and tell him what a good boy he is, and
then let him out again. Each time you do this, leave Felix in the crate a little longer
with the door closed, still giving a treat and telling him how great he is.
42
What All Good Dogs Should Know
Introduction to the crate.

What you see…
What he sees…
Your dog’s perception of a crate.
43

Finally, put him in the crate, give a treat, and then leave the room, first for five
minutes, then ten minutes, then fifteen minutes, and so on. Each time you return
to let him out, tell Felix how good he is before you open the door.
How long can you ultimately leave your adult dog in a crate unattended? That
depends on your dog and your schedule, but ideally it should not be more than
three to four hours during the day. Although many dogs seem content to stay in
a crate for most of the day while their owners are at work, shorter periods are
preferable. Some dog owners who need to crate their pets for long periods are for-
tunate enough to have a neighbor come in during the day to let the dog out for
awhile and give him a chance to stretch his legs and relieve himself (see chapter 5
for specifics on housetraining).
A WORD OF CAUTION
A crate should never be used as a form of punishment. If it is, your dog will begin
to dislike the crate, and it will lose its usefulness to you. The old “go to your room
without supper” approach does not work any better with dogs than it does with
children.
44
What All Good Dogs Should Know
Facts from Felix
 
1) 
For everyone ’ s peace of mind, crate-train your dog.
 
2) 
A crate reminds your dog of a den.
 
3) 
Dogs like the safety and security of a crate.
 
4) 
Among its many advantages, a crate is ideal
 
 
for housetraining.
 
5) 
When traveling with your dog in the car, for his safety and  
 
 
yours, put Felix in a crate, or a harness that attaches to  
 
 
the seat belt.
 
6) 
A crate is never used as a form of punishment.

Chapter
5
Housetraining
I
f you plan to keep your dog in the backyard and never let him inside the house,
there is no need to housetrain him. But if your dog is going to be a house dog,
you need to housetrain him. As with any training, the best time to start is as
soon as you get him.
The keys to successful housetraining are:
1. Crate train your puppy or adult dog (see chapter 4).
2. Set a schedule for feeding and exercising your dog.
3. Stick to that schedule, even on weekends, at least until your dog is house-
trained and mature.
4. Be vigilant, vigilant, and vigilant until your dog is trained.
Using a crate is the most humane and effective way to housetrain your puppy.
It is also the easiest because of the dog’s natural desire to keep his den clean.
HOUSETRAINING YOUR PUPPY
Puppies have to eliminate two to three times more frequently than adult dogs in
a 24-hour period. A puppy’s ability to control elimination increases with age, from
not at all to up to eight hours or more. During the day, when active, the puppy
can last for only short periods. Until he is 6 months of age, it is unrealistic to
expect him to last for more than four hours during the day without having to
eliminate. When sleeping, most puppies can last through the night.
45

46
Necessary items for housetraining.

Housetraining
47
Stick to the schedule.
If your puppy needs to urinate frequently and has repeated accidents in the
house, she may have cystitis, an infection that requires a visit to the veterinarian.
Cystitis is more common in female puppies than male puppies.
Setting a schedule
Dogs and puppies thrive on a regular routine. By feeding and exercising your dog
at about the same time every day, your pup will also relieve himself at about the
same time every day.
Set a time to feed the puppy that is convenient for you. Always feed at the same
time. Until 4 months of age, a puppy needs four meals a day; from 5 to 7 months,
three meals. From then on feed twice a day—it is healthier than feeding only once
a day and helps with housetraining.

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
48
What All Good Dogs Should Know
Feed the right amount—loose stools are a sign of overfeeding; straining or dry
stools are a sign of underfeeding. After ten minutes, pick up the food dish and put
it away. Do not have food available at other times. Keep the diet constant—abrupt
diet changes can cause digestive upsets that will hinder your housetraining efforts.
Fresh water must be available to your dog during the day. You can put away the
water dish after 8:00 P.M. so the pup can last through the night.
Establishing a toilet area
Start by selecting a toilet area and always go to that spot when you want your dog
to eliminate. If possible, pick a place in a straight line from the house. Carry your
puppy or put him on leash. Stand still so the dog can concentrate on eliminating.
Teach a command, such as “Hurry Up.” The command, which he will learn in
time, is used to encourage the pup to eliminate quickly. Still, you need to be
patient and let the pup sniff around. After he is done, lavishly praise your puppy
and go back inside.
First thing in the morning, Mary
takes her 12-week-old Poodle puppy,
Colette, out of the crate and straight
outside to the toilet area. Fifteen min-
utes after Colette’s morning meal, she is
let out again. Mary then crates Colette
and leaves for work.
On her lunch break, Mary goes
home to let Colette out to relieve her-
self, feeds her, and then, just to make
sure, takes her out once more. For the
afternoon, Colette is crated again until
Mary returns. Colette is then walked and fed, after which she spends the rest
of the evening in the house where Mary can keep an eye on her. Before bed-
time, Mary takes Colette to the toilet area once more and then crates her for the
night.
There are three rules dog
lovers and non-dog lovers
agree on: One, you need to pick up
after your dog on public or some-
one else’s property; two, don’t per-
mit your dog to jump on other
people; and three, don’t let your
dog bark incessantly. Be a good
dog neighbor and follow these
rules.
FEEDING SCHEDULE
Age
Feed
7 through 16 weeks
four times a day
17 through 28 weeks
three times a day
29 weeks and over
two times a day
www.Ebook777.com

Housetraining
49
When Colette turns 7 months old, Mary will drop the noontime feeding
and walk. From then on, most dogs only need to go out immediately or soon
after waking up in the morning, in the late afternoon, and once again before
bedtime.
Being vigilant
Take your puppy to his toilet area after eating or drinking, after waking up, and
after playing. A sign that your dog has to go out is sniffing the ground and cir-
cling in a small area.
Sample schedule.

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
50
What All Good Dogs Should Know
Special vigilance is required when it is raining because many dogs, particularly
those with short hair, do not like to go out in the wet any more than you do. Make
sure the puppy actually eliminates before you bring him back into the house.
Circling
Eating or drinking
Sleeping
Playing
Take your puppy out after . . . 
www.Ebook777.com

Housetraining
51
DEALING WITH ACCIDENTS
When your dog has had an accident in the house, do not call him to you to pun-
ish him. It is too late. If you do punish your dog under these circumstances, it will
not help your housetraining efforts and you will make the dog wary of wanting to
come to you.
There is a popular misconception that Felix “knows” what he did because he
looks “guilty.” Absolutely not so. He has that look because he knows from prior
experience that when you come across a mess, you get angry. Your dog has learned
to associate a mess with your angry response. He cannot make the connection
between making the mess in the first place and your anger.
Swatting your dog with a rolled-up newspaper is cruel and only creates fear of
you and rolled-up newspapers. Rubbing the dog’s nose in the mess is unsanitary
and disgusting. Dogs become housetrained in spite of such tactics, not because of
them.
When you come upon an accident, always keep calm. Put Felix out of sight so
he cannot watch you clean up—observing you cleaning up stimulates some dogs
to eliminate at that same spot again. Use white vinegar as a cleaner or you can buy
a special cleaner designed to remove the smell of urine. Do not use ammonia-
based cleaners because the ammonia does not neutralize the odor, so the puppy
will still be attracted to the same place.
Catching your dog in the act
If you catch your dog in the act, sharply clap your hands. If the dog stops, take
him to his toilet area. If he doesn’t, try to stay calm. Whatever you do, do not
attempt to drag him outside; that will make your cleanup job that much more
difficult.
Regression
Regression will occur, especially during teething. Regression well after 6 months of
age may be a sign that your dog is ill. If accidents persist, visit your veterinarian.
Until your puppy is reliable, keep an eye on him and watch for signs that
he may have to go out, especially sniffing in a circling motion. When you
are not able to supervise him, put him in his crate.

Facts from Felix
 
1) 
Using a crate to housetrain your puppy is the most humane  
 
 
and effective way.
 
2) 
When active, puppies can last only short periods before  
 
 
they have to eliminate.
 
3) 
Dogs thrive on a regular routine of feeding and exercising  
 
 
at the same time every day.
 
4) 
It is healthier for an adult dog to be fed twice a day  
 
 
rather than once a day.
 
5) 
Take your puppy to his toilet area after waking 
 
 
 
up, after eating or drinking, and after playing 
 
 
or chewing.
 
6) 
When your dog has had an accident in the house, 
 
 
do not call him to you and then punish him.
52
What All Good Dogs Should Know

Chapter
6
Sit and Stay
D
ogs have perfected different styles of greetings. Bart the Lab would launch
himself about 6 feet toward his owner, who did not appreciate having to
catch this missile at every greeting. Other dogs jump on people to greet
them, which most people find annoying, even people who have dogs. And don’t
believe the line “It’s okay—I don’t mind.” Nor does the size of the dog matter—
a Yorkshire Terrier can ruin a pair of nylons just as quickly as a larger dog. For
these antics, the Sit and Stay is the answer.
JUMPING ON PEOPLE
The question almost every dog owner asks is “How do I keep my dog from jump-
ing on people?”
Dogs jump on people as a form of greeting, like saying “Hello, nice to meet
you!” Even the briefest of separations from the owner, as little as five minutes, can
set off this behavior.
As annoying as it may be at times, please remember that this greeting is a ges-
ture of affection and goodwill. We certainly do not recommend any form of pun-
ishment to deal with it.
So how do you get your dog to stop jumping on people without dampening his
enthusiasm? By teaching him to Sit and Stay on command. Your dog can’t jump
on you when he is sitting—the two behaviors are mutually exclusive.
53

54
In polite company, the Sit and Stay commands are essential.

Sit and Stay
55
Greeting behavior when untrained.
SAFETY
Equally annoying, but far more dangerous, is the dog’s habit of dashing through
doors just because they are open. It is dangerous because he may find himself in
the middle of the road and get hit by a car, or, if you are in the process of open-
ing a door, he may knock you down as he rushes through.
Teaching your dog to Sit and Stay while you open the door and to wait until
you indicate that he can go out can prevent such potential accidents.
Sit and Stay also applies to getting in and out of the car as well as going up and
down stairs. Having both arms full while going down a staircase with a dog dash-
ing by is not a good idea.
When the doorbell rings, you can tell your dog to “Sit” and “Stay” while you
answer it instead of having him frantically charge toward the door.
All these maneuvers can be performed smoothly and without worry, once you
have taught your dog to Sit and Stay.
Use Sit and Stay when you want
your dog to remain quietly in one spot
for a short time. For example, Keno, a
German Shepherd, would become so
excited when Sally was about to feed
him that he would send the dish flying
out of her hands. Once taught the Sit
and Stay, he sat like a perfect gentleman
while she put his dish down and he
calmly waited until she released him.
The Sit and Stay is one of
the simplest and most
useful exercises you can
teach your dog. It gives
you a wonderfully easy way to con-
trol your pet when you need it
most.

56
What All Good Dogs Should Know
COMMANDS TO BE TAUGHT
You are going to teach your dog three commands:
1. Sit
2. Stay
3. OK
“OK” is the release command. It means Felix can move now and do whatever
he wants (almost). Make sure you give the release command every time after you
have told Felix to stay to indicate that he is now allowed to move again. Should
you get lax about it and forget, Felix will get into the habit of releasing himself
and learn that he can decide when to move, the opposite of what you want.
Unless impaired, a dog’s sense of hearing is extremely acute, so when giving a
command there is no need to shout. Give commands such as “Sit!” in a normal
tone of voice. Note that “Sit!” is a command, not a question. The release word
“OK” is given in a more excited tone of voice, to convey, “That’s it, you’re all done
for now.”
The Sit and Stay commands are important for safety.

Sit and Stay
57
When teaching a new command, you may have to repeat it several times before
your dog catches on. When you are past that initial stage, teach Felix to respond
to the first command. Give the command, and if nothing happens, show your 
dog exactly what you want by physically helping him. Consistency is the key to
success.
Teaching your dog the Sit command
Your dog already knows how to sit. But he has to learn what you expect from him
when you say “Sit” and to obey every time you give him the command.
Begin by showing Felix a small, bite-sized treat, holding it just a little in front
of his eyes and slightly over his head. (By using a small, bite-sized treat of some-
thing very tasty, the dog will remain interested in his reward and will work hard
to get it. If your dog seems bored with the treat, try another type of goodie or
make the treats smaller so he doesn’t get full so quickly.) Say “Sit” as you bring
your hand above his eyes. Looking up at the treat will ease your dog into a sitting
position. When he does, give him the treat and tell him what a good puppy he is.
Tell him without petting him. If you pet as you praise him, he will probably get
up when you really want him to sit.
Study the illustration on the next page for the position of your hand in relation
to your dog’s head. If you hold your hand too high, your dog will jump up; if it
is too low, he will not sit.
If after several attempts Felix does not respond, physically show him what you
want him to do by placing him into a sit as follows: With your dog standing at
your left side, both of you facing in the same direction, kneel on your right knee,
put the thumb of your right hand through his collar under his chin, fingers on his
chest, pointing down. Place your left hand on top of his shoulder, then slide it
down his back, all the way under the tail to the back of his legs, apply equal pres-
sure with the right hand against his chest and the left hand against his back legs
and gently tuck him into a sit, saying “Sit” as you do so. Verbally praise, keep your
hands in position to the count of five, and then release your dog.
Practice having your dog sit five times in a row for five days. Some dogs catch
on to this idea so quickly that whenever they want a treat they sit in front of their
owner.
When Felix understands what “Sit” means, you can start to teach him to obey
your command. Put your hand through his collar at the top of the neck, palm fac-
ing up, and tell him to “Sit.” If he does, give him a treat and tell him how good
he is; if he does not, pull up on the collar, wait until he sits, and praise and reward
with a treat.

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
58
Teaching the Sit command.
www.Ebook777.com

Sit and Stay
59
Practice until he sits on command—that is, without you having to pull up on
or touch the collar. Give a treat and praise with “Good puppy” for every correct
response.
When he sits on command only, reward the desired response every other time.
Finally, reward on a random basis—every now and then give a treat after he sits
Placing your dog into a sit.

60
What All Good Dogs Should Know
Teaching your pup to obey the Sit command.
on command. A random reward is the most powerful reinforcement of what your
dog has learned. It is based on the simple premise that hope springs eternal. To
make it work, all you have to do is use it and keep using it!
Sit, don’t jump
Now, when Felix wants to greet you by jumping up, tell him to “Sit.” Bend down,
briefly pet him and tell him what a good puppy he is, and then release him by say-
ing “OK.” By following this simple method consistently, you will change your
dog’s greeting behavior from trying to jump on you to sitting to be petted.
A dog’s habit of jumping on visitors is handled in a similar way, although it
requires a helper. All the initial training is done on leash until Felix can be trusted
off leash. Ask a friend or neighbor to visit and have Felix sit at your left side.
Should he get up as your helper comes inside, reinforce the Sit. Instruct your
helper to avoid eye contact with Felix and to ignore him.
Have your helper sit on a chair and tell him to ignore Felix. Then let Felix off
leash and see what he does. Should he try to climb up on your helper, take Felix
by the collar, and say, “Sit,” followed by “Stay.” Then tell your helper to leave.
After he has left, release Felix with “OK.”

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Sit and Stay
61
Repeat this procedure several times, preferably with different helpers, until
Felix understands he is not to jump on guests. The important part is that the
helper ignores the dog—any interaction, such as eye contact between your helper
and Felix, will cause Felix to want to go to your helper.
Can the helper ever say “Hello” to the dog and pet him? Of course he can, once
Felix has been trained to ignore the helper, and as long as Felix remains in a Sit
and Stay when your helper says “Hello” and pets him.
Sitting for supper
An easy way to teach your dog to understand the Stay command is to make him
sit and stay for his meals. As you are getting ready to feed him, bowl in hand, say,
“Sit,” followed by “Stay,” and lower the bowl to the ground. As your pup starts
for it, pick up the bowl before he gets even a mouthful. Put him back where he
was supposed to sit and stay. Start all
over. Repeat until you can put the bowl
down and count to five before saying
“OK.” Then let him eat in peace.
If your dog is very bouncy or
excitable, you may want to put him on
leash for better control. (For leash
training, see chapter 9.) Fold the leash
into your left hand short enough so you
Use helpers to practice the Sit and Stay at the door.
The closer to your dog’s col-
lar you hold the leash, the
more control you have of the dog.
Hold the leash in such a way that
the part that goes to the dog
comes out at the bottom (below
your pinky) part of your hand.
www.Ebook777.com

62
What All Good Dogs Should Know
can control your dog. Tell him to “Sit” and “Stay” and start to put his bowl across
the floor. If he moves, pull up on the leash and wait until he sits. You may have
to try this a few times until he gets the message.
After several days of following this regimen, your dog will sit on his own when
he sees you approaching with his dish and wait until you say “OK.” This is a much
more pleasant way to feed your dog than having him jump up and down, trying
to knock the dish out of your hands.
Door manners
Once he will sit and stay for food, you are ready for the next important lesson:
Wait until you tell him “OK” before he dashes through that door. Start by sitting
your dog in front of a closed door. You know that if you open the door, Felix will
Before and after learning the Sit command.

Sit and Stay
63
want to go through. Tell him to “Stay” and start opening the door. When he starts
to get up, close the door, put him back in the exact spot where you said “Stay,”
and start over.
If your dog is particularly fast or very strong, use a leash the same way you used
it to teach him to sit for supper. With your dog on a Stay, practice until you can
open the door all the way before closing it again.
Praise is verbal, such as “Good dog” when Felix obeys a command, but it is not
an invitation to move. The release means “OK, you are done with that particular
exercise and can now move.”
Teaching the Stay command.

64
What All Good Dogs Should Know
You will find that after three or four repetitions, Felix gets the message and will
stay. Since he wants to go out, he learns it is to his advantage to stay until you say
the magic word. From now on, every time you let Felix out, make him sit first,
open the door, and then release with “OK.” Get into the habit of having your dog
sit and stay before you open any door.
Some people prefer to go through the doorway before the dog, whereas others
want the dog to go through first. It makes no difference, so long as Felix stays until
you release him. Practice with the doors your dog uses regularly, including the car
doors. Teach Felix to stay in the car as you open the door, put on his leash, and
then let him out with “OK.” Every time you make him sit and stay, it reinforces
your position as pack leader and that you are the one in charge.
Staying for stairs
If you have stairs, start teaching your dog to stay at the bottom while you go up.
First sit him, and then give the Stay command. When he tries to follow, put him
back and start again. Practice until you can go all the way up the stairs with him
waiting at the bottom before you release him to follow. Repeat the same proce-
dure going down the stairs.
Practical applications of the Sit command.

Sit and Stay
65
Once your dog has been trained to wait at one end of the stairs, you will dis-
cover that he will anticipate the release. He will jump the gun and get up just as
you are thinking of releasing him. Before long, he will stay only briefly and release
when he chooses. It may happen almost as soon as he has grasped the idea, or it
may take a few weeks or even months, but it will happen.
When it does, stop whatever you are doing and put him back, count to ten, and
then release. Do not let him get into the habit of releasing himself. Consistency is just
as important here as in any other exercise.
Facts from Felix
 
1) 
Sit and Stay is used when you want your dog to remain  
 
 
quietly in one spot for a short time.
 
2) 
When your dog sits on command, he cannot jump on you.
 
3) 
Sit and Stay applies to going through doors, up and 
 
 
down stairs, and in and out of the car.
 
4) 
A random reward is the most powerful reinforcement 
 
 
of what your dog has learned.
 
5) 
After you have given the Stay command, remember 
 
 
to release — make it a strict rule.
 
6) 
Unless you periodically reinforce the Stay, 
 
 
your dog will begin to release himself.

This dog needs to learn the Go Lie Down command.

Chapter
7
Go Lie Down
N
ow that your dog responds to “Sit,” he is ready for the next lesson: to lie
down on command.
You are going to teach Felix two new commands:
1. Down.
2. Go Lie Down.
You use “Down” when you want Felix to lie down in place right now and stay
there until you give the release command.
You use “Go Lie Down” when you want him to remain quietly in one place for
a long time, from five minutes up to one hour. The command is most commonly
used when you are eating or when friends visit and you don’t want your dog mak-
ing a pest of himself. When you give the command, he is expected to go to a
favorite spot and get comfortable. Release him when you are ready for him to get
up again.
TEACHING YOUR DOG TO LIE DOWN
ON COMMAND
Of course, your dog already knows how to lie down. What you are going to teach
him is to do it when you tell him.
First, sit your dog at your left side. Put two fingers of your left hand, palm fac-
ing you, through the collar at the side of his neck. Have a treat in your right hand.
Show him the treat directly in front of his nose, say “Down,” and lower the treat
67

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
68
Teaching the Down command.
www.Ebook777.com

Go Lie Down
69
straight down and in front of your dog as you apply a little downward pressure on
the collar. When he lies down, give him the treat and praise by telling him quietly
what a good puppy he is. Keep your left hand in the collar and your right hand
off your puppy while telling him how clever he is so he learns to be praised for
lying down. Petting your dog as a form of praise will get him all excited and he
will forget what you wanted him to do.
Reverse the process by showing Felix a treat in front of his nose and bringing it
up slightly above his head with a little upward tension on the collar as you tell him
to “Sit.”
In the following illustration, study
the way the right hand moves down
and in front of your dog in an L shape,
and the position of the left hand. Place
the treat between the dog’s front legs so
he learns to lie down in place and with-
out moving forward.
Some dogs don’t respond to a treat.
This seeming lack of interest happens
when the treat is vaguely waived somewhere in the vicinity of the dog’s head,
instead of directly in front of his nose. Another reason could be that the dog is not
interested in that particular treat. You need to experiment with what works best
for your dog. (Stay away from treats containing a lot of sugar or salt, which are
unhealthy for your dog.)
Other dogs are just not sufficiently interested in food. If your dog won’t lie
down for a treat or other object of attraction, such as a toy, you can physically
place him into the down position and then praise or reward him with a treat. (An
object of attraction is anything your dog will actively work for.)
To place Felix in the down position, place him into a sit at your left side. Kneel
next to him, with both of you facing the same direction. With your left hand reach
over his back and pick up his left foreleg with the palm of your hand, keeping your
thumb pointing straight up. Place your right hand behind his right foreleg with
your thumb pointing up. Say “Down” as you lift and lower your dog down. Praise
and keep your hands still to a count of five. If you apply pressure on your dog’s
forelegs with your thumbs, he will try to pull away from you and you will find
yourself in a wrestling match with your dog. Not a good idea!
For the particularly squirmy dog, place your left forearm firmly against his left
side as you place him into the down position.
Practice having your dog lie down at your side five times in a row for five days,
or until he does it on command and without you having to touch his collar. Ver-
bally praise him and reward with a treat every time.
With a small dog, it is easier
to teach the Down on a table
than on the floor. You’ll need
a sturdy table and a nonslip
surface such as a bathtub mat so
your dog does not slip on the
table.

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
70
What All Good Dogs Should Know
Placing the dog into the down position.
When he understands what the Down command means, you can move on to
the next step. Sit your dog at your left side and put two fingers of your left hand,
palm facing you, through the collar at the side of his neck. Say “Down” and apply
slight downward pressure on the collar. When your dog lies down, slowly take your
hand out of the collar, praise, and give him a treat every other time. Practice over
the course of several days until he will lie down on command without you having
to touch his collar.
After that, when he lies down on command, randomly reward as explained in
chapter 6.
www.Ebook777.com

Practice the response to the Down command.
TEACHING YOUR DOG TO REMAIN IN PLACE
You can now teach your dog to lie down in one place for several minutes. Sit in a
chair and have your dog sit at your left side. Say “Down” and apply a little pres-
sure on the collar. Keep an eye on him, and when he tries to get up, place him
down again. Teach him to stay in the down position for five minutes, and then
praise and release with “OK.”
If your dog is very bouncy, you may want to put him on a leash and then sit on
the leash so your hands are free to put him back into the down position.
As he learns to stay in the down position, gradually and over the course of sev-
eral sessions increase the time he will stay to thirty minutes before you release.
This sounds boring and time-consuming, but you can read or watch TV while he
is doing his down.
There is no need to tell your dog to stay since “Down” or “Go Lie Down”
includes “stay until released.” But you do have to remember to release your dog
with an “OK” so he does not just get up at will, which would defeat the object of
the exercise.
Go Lie Down
71

Be persistent when teaching a dog to remain in the down position.
TEACHING THE GO LIE DOWN COMMAND
“Go Lie Down” is a useful command when you want Felix to go to a specific spot
and remain there for an extended period until you release him. Use this command
whenever you don’t want Felix underfoot, such as at mealtimes or when you have
visitors and don’t want him making a pest of himself.
Select the spot where you want Felix to hang out—his crate, bed, favorite chair,
whatever. You can also select an object that is easily moved to different locations,
such as a blanket, crate pad, or a slightly raised dog bed. Assume you’re going to
use a dog bed. Start by taking your dog to the bed and telling him “Go Lie
Down.” You may have to coax him with a treat. When he lies down on the bed,
verbally praise, give him the treat, count to five, and release him. Repeat until he
readily lies down on the bed.
Next, stand three feet from the bed, give the command “Go Lie Down,” and
lure him onto the bed with a treat. Praise him when he lies down, give him the
treat, count to ten, and release him. Repeat several times, gradually increasing the
time between the praise and the giving of the treat, from a count of ten to a count
of thirty. Stop for now—you’re getting bored and so is Felix—and come back to
it at another time.
72
What All Good Dogs Should Know

Teaching the Go Lie Down command.
For your next session, review the last progression two or three times and send
Felix from three feet away. Stand still, toss a treat onto the bed, say “Go Lie
Down,” and motion him to go to his bed. He may surprise you and actually go
to his bed and lie down. If he does, praise him enthusiastically. If he just stands
there with a befuddled look on his face, put one finger through his collar, gently
guide him to his bed, and have him lie down. You may have to repeat this process
several times until he responds to the command.
Repeat until Felix responds reliably from three feet, with you still tossing the
treat onto the bed. Now try sending him without tossing the treat first. When he
responds correctly, praise, go to him, and give him a treat. If he stands there like
a bump on a log, take him by the collar, calmly guide him to the bed, have him
lie down, and verbally praise.
When he reliably goes to his bed from three feet, gradually over the course of
several sessions, increase the distance from the bed, as well as the length of time—
up to thirty minutes—you want him to stay there. If he gets up without being
released, just put him back (put your finger through the collar and lead him back).
Reward him with a treat on a random basis.
The Go Lie Down command, although practical, isn’t the most exciting exer-
cise. Use common sense and don’t make it drudgery. Maintain an upbeat attitude
and keep the actual training sessions (the number of times you send him to his
place) short. Several short sessions during the course of a day are better than one
long session.
Once he understands what is expected, make sure he responds to the first com-
mand of “Go Lie Down” that you give. If he doesn’t, stop what you are doing and
place him on his bed.
Go Lie Down
73

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
74
What All Good Dogs Should Know
Facts from Felix
 
1) 
Down is another exercise that teaches your dog that you  
 
 
are in charge.
 
2) 
Down is used when you want him to lie down in place, right now.
 
3) 
Go Lie Down is used when you want your dog to remain  
 
 
quietly in one place for long periods of time.
 
4) 
Remember to keep your thumbs up when placing the dog  
 
 
into the Down position.
 
5) 
Be sure you release the dog so that he doesn ’ t get into  
 
 
the habit of releasing himself at will.
 
6) 
Reward correct responses on a
 
 
random basis.
www.Ebook777.com

75
Walking on leash is necessary at the vet.
Chapter
8
Walking Your Dog
T
aking your dog for a nice long walk is a balm for the soul and good exer-
cise for both of you, provided your dog does not drag you down the street.
Even if you and your dog don’t ordinarily go for walks, teaching your pet some
manners while on leash is still a good idea. For example, at least once a year you

will have to go to the veterinarian. If
your dog has been trained to walk on
leash, the visit will go much more
smoothly than if Felix bounces off the
end of the leash like a kangaroo. (Of
course, if the dog is small, you can
always carry him, but you should still
get a small dog used to walking on
leash.)
Most people want to be able to take
their dog for a walk within the length of the leash without pulling. A leisurely
stroll is an important daily routine, and for many dogs the only opportunity to
get some fresh air.
LEASH-TRAINING YOUR DOG
Before you can start the section on teaching Felix not to pull, you need to get him
accustomed to wearing a collar and walking on a leash.
From your local pet-supply store, purchase an adjustable buckle collar of fabric
or leather. Take your puppy’s neck measurement before you go. The collar should
be snug, about as snug as a turtleneck sweater, high on the neck and just behind
the ears, so that he cannot back out of it or catch it on anything. As Felix grows,
you may have to buy a larger collar.
For your leash choose five-eighths-inch-wide cotton web or leather, six feet in
length. Either one will hold even the largest of dogs. The least desirable leash is
one made of chain—it is extremely uncomfortable on your hands.
Fasten the collar around Felix’s neck and see what he does. Most puppies show
little reaction to a collar. Some will scratch their neck at first, but as they become
accustomed to wearing the collar, they ignore it.
When he is used to his collar, attach the leash and let him drag it around. You
will need to supervise him so that he does not get tangled. Once he ignores the
leash, pick up the other end and follow him around. He will happily wander off
wherever his fancy takes him.
You are now ready to show him where you want to go. First use a treat to make
him follow you and then gently guide him with the leash, telling him what a good
puppy he is. If you are teaching outside, use the treat to coax him away from the
house and the leash to guide him back toward the house.
TEACHING YOUR DOG NOT TO PULL
The ultimate goal of training your dog not to pull is to teach him to pay atten-
tion to you. To accomplish this goal, you need to train yourself to pay attention
to your dog.
76
What All Good Dogs Should Know
Some puppies balk at
going away from the
house, in which case you
just pick him up, carry him
some way from the house, and let
him walk back. Before you know it,
he will not only walk on the leash in
your direction, but actually pull you
along.

Walking Your Dog
77
To teach Felix not to pull, you need his collar, your leash, and a few treats.
Decide where you want him to walk in relation to you—the traditional position
is at your left side.
How seriously you approach training will depend on how often you plan tak-
ing Felix for a walk and for what purpose. If you like to take him along while you
jog or go for a brisk walk, then he has to learn to stay at your side so you don’t
trip over him. If you walk only so that he can relieve himself, it matters little where
he is in relation to you, so long as he does not pull.
Go to an area without too many distractions (such as other people and dogs,
especially loose dogs) and where you can walk in a straight line for about fifty feet
or a circle about thirty feet in diameter.
Put the loop of the leash over the thumb of your right hand and make a fist
around the leash. Place your left hand on the leash directly under your right hand
Holding the leash.

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
78
What All Good Dogs Should Know
Dogs need to pay attention to where the owner is going.
as though you are holding a baseball bat. Place both hands against your belt
buckle and firmly hold them there.
Say “Let’s go” and start walking. When Felix gets ahead of you and begins to
pull on the leash, stop! When he stops pulling and looks back at you to see what
the holdup is, say “Good dog,” and if he actually comes to you to check in with
you, give him a treat, then continue walking.
For your next training session, practice the “stop and go” procedure several
times. After this review, start to walk again, except this time just before Felix gets
www.Ebook777.com

Walking Your Dog
79
to the end of the leash, say “Let’s go,” make a right about-face in the opposite
direction and continue walking, keeping your hands firmly locked in place. When
Felix catches up with you and looks at you, tell him what a good boy he is and give
him a treat.
When you make your about-face, Felix experiences a tug on the leash, telling
him he has to pay attention to you. Anticipate when Felix is going to pull and
1.
2.
Leash
3.
4.
Stationary ring
Loose ring
Putting on the snap-around collar.

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
80
What All Good Dogs Should Know
make your turn before the leash tightens. Once the leash tightens, you are in a
pulling match with your dog—and guess who is going to win.
When Felix turns toward you without any tension on the leash after you say
“Let’s go,” praise him enthusiastically and give him a treat.
The two of you are now ready for the next step—to teach Felix to pay atten-
tion to where you are going. Begin as before, only this time start making turns
without giving Felix a command. You are teaching him it is his responsibility to
pay attention to you and not the other way around. The first few times he will
experience a tug on the leash, but he will quickly catch on—dogs have amazing
peripheral vision. Dogs can also multitask—just because Felix is feverishly sniff-
ing the ground detecting who was there and when, does not mean he is not aware
of what you are doing.
You are now ready to take Felix to a new location, one with some distractions. Of
course, for your dog, any new area is a distraction. At first, you may find that you
have to remind Felix occasionally to pay attention to you by making an about-face.
STILL NOT GETTING IT?
If your dog appears to be particularly dense about the concept of walking on a
loose leash, there are several factors to consider. The most obvious one is the area
where you are training and the kind of distractions your dog encounters. For
example, for most dogs a grass or natural surface is far more distracting than a
man-made surface such as asphalt or cement. Moving objects, such as joggers or
bicycles, are also more of a distraction to some dogs than others.
Many dogs do not respond to a
buckle collar and need a training collar
(also known as a “choke” collar). Tradi-
tionally, training collars are made of
metal chain and need to be large
enough to go over the dog’s head. The
collar we use is made of nylon and has
a snap on one end so that it can be
placed around the dog’s neck for a proper fit instead of having to go over his head.
It is available only by mail order from www.handcraftcollars.com.
Any kind of training collar is
to be used only when walk-
ing or training your dog. It should
be removed from the dog at all
other times.
www.Ebook777.com

Walking Your Dog
81
Facts from Felix
 
1) 
If you want your dog to pay attention to you, you need to  
 
 
pay attention to your dog.
 
2) 
How seriously you approach training will depend on how  
 
 
often you plan on taking the dog for a walk.
 
3) 
Use a treat and verbal praise when the dog does
 
 
something correctly.
 
4) 
Be patient and maintain a friendly and positive attitude  
 
 
toward your dog.
 
5) 
Teach your dog it is his responsibility to pay
 
 
attention to you.
 
6) 
If you can ’ t seem to get anywhere, consider a
 
 
training collar.

The joy of owning a dog who comes when called.

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Chapter
9
Coming When Called
O
ne of the greatest joys of owning a dog is to go for a walk in the park or
the woods and let him run, knowing he will come when called. A dog
who does not come when called is a prisoner of the leash and, if loose, a
danger to himself and others.
If your dog does not come when called, you don’t have a good dog!
RULE 1: EXERCISE, EXERCISE, EXERCISE
Many dogs do not come when called because they do not get enough exercise. At
every chance, they run off and make the most of it by staying out for hours at a
time.
Consider what your dog was bred to do, and that will tell you how much
exercise he needs. Just putting Felix out in the backyard will not do. You have to
participate. Think of it this way: Exercise is as good for you as it is for your dog.
RULE 2: BE NICE TO YOUR DOG WHEN HE
COMES TO YOU
One of the quickest ways to teach your dog not to come to you is to call him for
punishment or to do something the dog perceives as unpleasant. Most dogs con-
sider being given a bath or a pill unpleasant. When Felix needs either, go and get
him instead of calling him to you.
Another example of teaching your dog not to come is to take him for a run in
the park and then call him to you when it’s time to go home. Repeating this
sequence several times teaches the dog “The party’s over!” Soon, Felix may become
reluctant to return to you when called because he is not ready to end the fun.
83
www.Ebook777.com

Exercise needs vary.
You can prevent this kind of unintentional training by calling your dog to you
several times during the outing, sometimes giving a treat, sometimes just a pat on
the head. Then let him romp again.
RULE 3: TEACH YOUR DOG TO COME WHEN
CALLED AS SOON AS YOU BRING HIM HOME
Ideally, you acquired your dog as a puppy, and that is the best time to teach him
to come when called. Start right away.
Sometime between 4 and 8 months of age, your puppy will begin to realize that
there is a big, wide world out there, so it may take him longer to come when
called. While going through this stage, keep the pup on leash so that he does not
learn to ignore you when you call.
RULE 4: WHEN IN DOUBT, KEEP YOUR DOG
ON LEASH
Learn to anticipate when your dog is likely not to come. You may be tempting fate
trying to call once he has spotted a cat, another dog, or a jogger. Of course, there
will be times when you goof and let him off leash just as another dog appears out
of nowhere.
84
What All Good Dogs Should Know

Resist the urge to make a complete fool of yourself by bellowing “Come” a mil-
lion times. The more often you holler “Come,” the quicker he learns to ignore you
when he is off leash. Instead, patiently go to him and put him on leash. Do not
get angry once you have caught him or you will make him afraid; then he will run
away when you try to catch him the next time.
RULE 5: ALWAYS TOUCH HIS COLLAR
BEFORE YOU REWARD WITH A TREAT
OR PRAISE
Touching the collar prevents the dog from developing the annoying habit of play-
ing the game of keep away—coming toward you and then dancing around you,
just out of reach.
THE GAME OF COMING WHEN CALLED
The purpose of the Recall Game is to teach your dog the Come command and to
train him to respond reliably to the command. Needed: two people, one hungry
dog, one six-foot leash, and plenty of small treats. Here are the steps:
1. Inside the house, with your dog on a six-foot leash, you and your training
partner sit on the floor six feet apart and facing each other. Your partner
gently hangs on to the dog and you hold the end of the leash. Call your
Coming When Called
85
If your dog dislikes baths, go and get him, but don’t call him to you.

dog by saying “Felix, Come,” and use the leash to guide the pup to you.
Put one hand through the collar under his chin, palm facing up, give a
treat, and pet and praise him enthusiastically. (For coming to you, petting
is recommended.) To get his attention, the dog’s name is always used first
before the command is given.
Now you hold the dog and pass the leash to your partner, who says
“Felix, Come,” guides the dog in, puts a hand through the collar, gives a
treat, and pets and praises the dog.
Goal: Repeat until your dog responds voluntarily to being called and no
longer needs to be guided with the leash.
2. Repeat step 1 with your dog off leash.
Goal: Gradually increase the distance between you and your partner to
twelve feet.
3. Have your partner hold your dog (off leash) while you hide from Felix
(go into another room), then call him. When he finds you, put your
hand through the collar, give a treat, and pet and praise. If he can’t find
you, go to him, take him by his collar, and bring him to the spot where
you called. Reward and praise. Now have your partner hide and then call
the dog.
Goal: Repeat until the dog doesn’t hesitate in finding you or your partner
in any room of the house.
86
What All Good Dogs Should Know
When in doubt, keep your dog on leash.

GOING OUTSIDE
Take your dog outside to a confined area, such as a fenced yard, tennis court, park,
or schoolyard, and repeat steps 1, 2, and 3 of the Recall Game.
You are now ready to practice by yourself. Let Felix loose in a confined area and
ignore him. When he is not paying any attention to you, call. When he gets to
you, give a treat and make a big fuss. If he does not come, go to him, take his col-
lar, and bring him to the spot where you called and then reward and praise him.
Repeat until Felix comes to you every time you call.
Coming When Called
87
Coming to you doesn’t have to be the end of the fun.

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Once your dog is trained, you don’t have to reward with a treat every time, but
keep doing so on a random basis.
ADDING DISTRACTIONS
Some dogs need to be trained to come in the face of distractions such as other dogs,
children, joggers, food, or friendly strangers. Think about the most irresistible sit-
uations for your dog and then practice under those circumstances. Keep in mind
that there is no point in increasing the level of difficulty until your dog understands
what he is supposed to do in an environment relatively free of distractions.
Increasing the level of difficulty
Now that Felix knows what the Come command means, he needs to learn that he
has to respond to it reliably. Knowing a command and obeying it are not the same.
1. Put your dog on a twelve-foot leash (this can be two six-foot leashes tied
together or just a piece of rope) and go to an area where you are likely to
encounter his favorite distraction (jogger, bicyclist, other dog, whatever).
Once he’s distracted, let him become thoroughly engrossed, either by
watching or straining at the leash, and give the command “Felix, Come.”
More than likely, he will ignore you. Give a sharp tug on the leash and
guide him back to you. Praise him enthusiastically.
Goal: Repeat three times per session until the dog turns and comes to you
immediately when you call. If he does not, you may have to get a snap-
around training collar (see chapter 8).
2. Repeat step 1 in different locations with as many different distractions as
you can find. Try it with someone offering your dog a tidbit as a distraction
88
What All Good Dogs Should Know
The Recall Game—step1.
www.Ebook777.com

(the dog should not get the
treat), someone petting the dog,
and anything else that may dis-
tract him. Use your imagination.
Goal: A dog who comes immedi-
ately when called, even when dis-
tracted.
The final test
Take your dog to an area where you are not likely to encounter distractions in the
form of other dogs or people. Remove the leash and let Felix become involved in
smelling the grass or a tree. Keep the distance between you and him about ten feet.
Call him. If he responds, pet and praise enthusiastically. If not, avoid the tempta-
tion to call him again. Don’t worry; he heard you, but chose to ignore you.
Instead, slowly walk up behind him, firmly take the collar under his chin, palm
up, and trot backward to the spot from where you called. Then praise.
Coming When Called
89
The Recall Game—step 2.
Some dogs quickly learn to
avoid the distraction by stay-
ing close to you, which is
fine. Tell Felix what a clever
fellow he is and then try with a dif-
ferent distraction at another time.

Once Felix is reliable at this point, try an area with other distractions. If he does
not respond, practice for the correct response with the twelve-foot leash before
you try off leash again.
Can you now trust him to come in an unconfined area? That will depend on
how well you have done your homework and what your dog may encounter in the
90
What All Good Dogs Should Know
On-leash distractions.

real world. Understanding your dog and what interests him will help you know
when he is not likely to respond to being called.
Let common sense be your guide. For example, when you are traveling and
have to let your dog out at a busy interstate rest stop, it is foolhardy to do so off
leash. Remember the rule: When in doubt, keep the leash on.
Coming When Called
91
Off-leash distractions.

92
What All Good Dogs Should Know
Use common sense; keep your dog on leash when near the highway.
Facts from Felix
 
1) 
If your dog does not come when called, you don ’ t have a  
 
 
good dog.
 
2) 
Whenever your dog comes to you, be nice to him.
 
3) 
When in doubt, keep the leash on.
 
4) 
Always put one hand through the collar after your dog  
 
 
comes to you and before you give a reward.
 
5) 
Start now to teach your dog to come when called.
 
6) 
“Come” is the most important command you will teach 
 
 
your dog.

93
Owners prefer their dogs not pick up anything unknown from the ground.
Chapter 10
Leave It
W
hen we take our dogs for their daily walk, we are not too thrilled when
one of them finds something disgusting he or she perceives to be edi-
ble. Nor are we fond of having to extricate such delicacies from a dog’s
mouth. To tell you the truth, we would prefer if they did not pick up anything
unknown, potentially edible or not, from the ground. The Leave It command is a
good start for controlling such situations.

94
What All Good Dogs Should Know
Teaching the Leave It command.
Aside from its obvious usefulness, we like teaching this command because it is
a wonderful opportunity to learn more about how your dog’s thought processes
work. As you are teaching him the command your dog will also show you how
clever he is at training you. Depending on how quickly Felix catches on, you may
want to practice this exercise over the course of several sessions. Keep the sessions
short—no more than five minutes at a time.

Leave It
95
You’ll need a good supply of training treats—something not much bigger than
one quarter of an inch and preferably dry. We like to sit on a chair for the first two
sequences of teaching this command.
STEP 1
Start by holding a treat between your thumb and index finger. With your palm
facing up, show the treat to your dog, but don’t let him have it. When Felix tries
to pry the treat loose say, “Leave it,” close your hand around the treat into a fist,
and turn your hand so that the back of your hand now faces up. Then observe
your dog’s reaction. He may stare fixedly at the back of your hand, he may try to
get to the treat by nuzzling or nibbling your hand, or he may sit, lie down, or start
barking.
Ignore all these behaviors. What you are looking for is the first break in his
attention away from your hand. He may make eye contact with you or look away.
The instant he does, say “Good” and give him the treat.
Repeat several times until your dog looks at you or away from your hand when
you give the command “Leave It” and turn your fist over. What you are teaching
Felix is that looking at you and not at your hand is rewarded with a treat.
You now have to be careful that Felix is not starting to train you. What is likely
to happen is that your dog will look away for an instant and then look right back
at your hand, a response you cannot reward. Felix thinks you are trying to train
him to briefly look away, which is only partially correct. He needs to learn that he
has to look away or at you until you say “Good.” By not rewarding the incorrect
response you can gradually extend the length of time you expect him to look away
before you praise and reward.
STEP 2
At this point, you don’t know if Felix is responding to the command or the turn-
ing of your hand. Since dogs are more sensitive to motion than commands, he
likely responded to the turning of your hand rather than the command. To find
Although there is a serious purpose to the Leave It command, we like
to approach it like it’s a game—it should be fun. We keep the sessions
short, lively, and positive. We want to put the dog in a position where
he figures out on his own what behavior is advantageous to him. At the
same time, this is an ideal exercise for you to discover how quickly your dog can
train you, if you let him.

Hold the leash to prevent the dog from getting the treat on his own.
96
What All Good Dogs Should Know
out, repeat step 1 without turning your hand. If he responds by looking away or
at you, then praise and reward. If he does not look away from your hand, then
close your hand into a fist and wait for Felix to look away or at you. Repeat until
he responds to only the command.
STEP 3
The next step is to teach your dog not to pick up something from the floor. Make
yourself comfortable sitting on the floor. Show your dog a treat, put it on the
floor, and cover it with your hand. When his attention is on your hand or he tries

Leave It
97
to get to the treat, say “Leave it.” Wait for the break in attention and then praise
and reward. Now cover the treat with just your index finger. Then place the treat
between your index and middle finger. When Felix responds correctly to the Leave
It command each time, place the treat one inch in front of your hand. Here you
need to be watchful: He may be faster at getting to the treat than you can cover it.
STEP 4
Does Felix now understand the command? Probably, but knowing a command
and reliably obeying it are not the same. Put Felix on leash and stand next to him
on his right. Neatly fold the leash into your left hand, accordion-style, with the
If the dog successfully ignores the treat, praise him and hand it to him.

98
What All Good Dogs Should Know
part that goes to the dog coming out at the bottom of your hand. Hold your hand
as close to his collar as is comfortable without any tension on the leash. (The fur-
ther away the left hand is held from the collar, the less control you have over the
dog.) You need to make sure that the slack in the leash does not allow his mouth
to reach the floor.
Hold the treat in your right hand and show it to Felix, then casually drop the
treat. When he tries to get the treat say, “Leave it.” If he responds, praise him, then
pick up the treat and give it to him. If you let him pick up the treat from the floor,
you are defeating the purpose of the exercise.
If he ignores the command and goes
for the treat, pull straight up on the
leash and try again. Repeat until he
obeys the command. Test his response
by taking the leash off and dropping a
treat. If he makes a dive for it, don’t
attempt to beat him to it or yell “no” or
whatever. He is just showing you he
needs more work on leash.
STEP 5
Now it’s time to go outside, but you need to do some preparation first. Select a
food item that is readily visible to you in the grass or on the ground, such as some
crackers or a few pieces of popcorn. Drop four or five pieces of food in the area
where you will take Felix for the big test. Put some of his regular treats in your
pocket and take Felix for a walk, on leash, in the area where you left the food.
Remember to hold the leash short enough so that his head can’t reach the ground.
As soon as his nose goes for the food say, “Leave it.” If he responds correctly,
praise enthusiastically and give him a treat. If he does not obey the command, pull
straight up on his leash. If he manages to snag a cracker or kernel of popcorn any-
way, you were too slow on the uptake. Since it was your mistake, you can’t say or
do anything to Felix. Try again, but be a little more alert and prepared to pull up
on the leash before he has a chance to grab a cracker. His last response to the com-
mand has already told you that he will try again. Practice walking around the
food-contaminated area until he ignores the food on command.
Felix should now know and obey the Leave It command. Test him off leash and
his response will tell you whether or not he needs more work. Still, like any other
command, you need to review it with him periodically on leash.
The Leave It command is not
limited to only those objects
you don’t want Felix to pick up. It is
equally useful in situations where
you just want Felix to “Leave It”—
think of jumping up on the side of
a car, lunging at another dog, and
similar situations.

Leave It
99
Facts from Felix
 
1) 
Teaching the Leave It command is a wonderful opportunity  
 
 
to observe how your dog ’ s mind works.
 
2) 
The command is useful to prevent the dog from putting  
 
 
anything in his mouth you don ’ t want him to have.
 
3) 
Become aware of how and when your dog is training you.
 
4) 
Make this a fun exercise for you and your dog.
 
5) 
Don ’ t let your dog pick up treats from the ground.
 
6) 
Teach him that you are the dispenser of all that is 
 
 
pleasurable.

Most rescued dogs make wonderful pets.

Chapter 11
The Rescued Dog
E
ach year, almost four million dogs nationwide wind up in animal shelters
and breed-specific rescue organizations; one half never make it out again.
The reasons dogs end up in these situations range from the lame—he
sheds—to the legitimate—his owner died. Twenty-five percent are purebred, and
not the proverbial mutt. The largest percentage of these dogs is abandoned because
of so-called “behavior problems,” most of which could be avoided by accepting the
responsibilities that come with dog ownership—providing a nurturing environ-
ment with proper care, housing, and exercise.
Although the majority of rescues make wonderful pets, many come with bag-
gage. Based on our experience, the four most common problems are:
1. Shyness 
2. Separation anxiety 
3. Overprotectiveness of the new owner
4. Resource guarding
Of course, even a dog purchased as a puppy may develop these problems.
THE SHY DOG
When Helene and her Border Collie, Sparky, arrived at their first obedience class,
it was immediately clear to the instructor that Sparky was painfully shy. Sparky
came into the room trying to hide behind Helene with his tail between his legs,
ears back, and lowered body posture.
101

102
What All Good Dogs Should Know
As the class progressed, it also became clear to the instructor that Helene was
feeding into Sparky’s shyness. In her misguided effort to help Sparky, Helene
would continuously pet him and verbally assure him that everything was all right,
and that he had nothing to worry about. What she was actually doing, and quite
unintentionally, was rewarding Sparky for his shy behavior.
For the shy dog, promote confidence rather than rewarding shy behavior.

The Rescued Dog
103
A change in attitude
After the class, the instructor made it a point to talk to Helene about Sparky.
Helene told her that Sparky was 8 months old and had been adopted from the local
shelter just four weeks ago. She did not know much about his past, but felt that he
Cuddle, but don’t coddle.

104
What All Good Dogs Should Know
must have been abused, a common assumption about shelter dogs. Of course,
many dogs in a shelter have come from an abusive situation. More frequently, how-
ever, shelter dogs are not so much the victims of abuse, but are undersocialized.
Based on her observation of Sparky during the class, the instructor felt that he
was shy not because of past trauma or
abuse, but because he had not been suf-
ficiently exposed to other people and
dogs when he was a youngster (see
chapter 1). She advised Helene to take
a neutral attitude toward Sparky when-
ever he showed signs of shyness. Specif-
ically, she was to ignore these signs and
under no circumstances try to console
him by praising or petting him. Basi-
cally, Helene was to follow the “get a
life” approach with Sparky. One of our favorite lines from a well-known author
and breeder of Yorkshire Terriers is “You can cuddle him, but don’t coddle him.”
Helene was to praise Sparky only when he showed signs of confidence, such as
holding his ground and not backing up when a stranger approached, and walking
down the street with ears and tail erect.
After following the instructor’s advice, over the course of several weeks Sparky’s
demeanor changed. He was more confident in class and in new situations. Of
course, participating in the class also helped. At the end of the eight-week pro-
gram, Sparky behaved just like any other typical Border Collie.
Sitting politely for petting
In addition to making owners aware of how their attitude can increase or decrease
a dog’s shyness, we like to teach them a specific exercise to build the dog’s confi-
dence. The exercise we use is taken from the American Kennel Club’s Canine
Good Citizen examination. The purpose of this particular test, called “sitting
politely for petting,” is to demonstrate that the dog will allow the approach of a
stranger and permit light petting by the stranger. It is ideally suited to overcome
a dog’s shyness, and the only prerequisite is that the dog knows the Sit and Stay
(see chapter 6). You’ll also need a helper.
With your dog Felix sitting at your left side and both of you facing the same
direction, begin as you did for the Sit and Stay. Put the leash, neatly folded, into
your left hand. The part that goes to the dog should come out under your pinky.
Slide the collar around Felix’s neck so that the rings are on top and attach the
leash. Hold your hand directly above his head, leaving no more than one inch of
slack in the leash. Say “Stay.” Have your helper—let’s call her Mary—stand about
Dogs live in the present and
not the past. Being overly
solicitous of a dog’s past
experiences, if known at all,
hinders rather than helps the reha-
bilitation process. Forget about the
past and focus on making the pres-
ent pleasant for the dog.

The Rescued Dog
105
ten feet in front of and facing you. Tell Mary to casually walk past Felix’s left side,
keeping a distance of about four feet between herself and Felix, without looking at
or making eye contact with the dog. When Felix stays, praise him enthusiastically;
Stranger walks by, no eye contact
Stranger walks by, offers treat,
no eye contact
Stranger walks by, pets dog,
makes eye contact
Stranger walks by, briefly pets
dog’s head, no eye contact
Teaching the “sitting politely for petting” exercise.

106
What All Good Dogs Should Know
if he tries to get up or move away, give him a little tug on the leash, say “Stay,”
and try again.
When just beginning with this exercise, Felix’s response determines how close
the helper can get. If after three tries Felix is still apprehensive about Mary’s
approach, increase the distance at which the helper passes the dog. Find the dis-
tance at which Felix holds the Stay and then gradually decrease it to the point
where Mary can pass directly by Felix’s side. Keep these sessions short—no more
than five minutes at a time.
You are ready for the next step when Felix stays without showing any signs of
apprehension as the helper goes past. Repeat the previous sequence, except this
time the helper offers Felix a treat without making eye contact.
When Felix passes this part of the test, have your helper approach without mak-
ing eye contact—again in a casual, non-threatening manner—and briefly touch
Felix’s head as she passes.
Finally, have your helper approach Felix with eye contact and then gently touch
him on top of the head as she passes. When you have gotten to that point, it is
unlikely that Felix will show any signs of apprehension.
The complete sequence looks something like this:
1. Helper/stranger walks by, no eye contact.
2. Helper/stranger walks by, offers treat, no eye contact.
3. Helper/stranger walks by, briefly pets dog’s head, no eye contact.
4. Helper/stranger walks by, pets dog, makes eye contact.
The purpose of this exercise is to increase your dog’s confidence, so use plenty
of patience and praise. The ultimate goal is that your dog, when you tell him to
stay, will allow the approach of a stranger and permit the stranger to lightly pet
him on the head.
SEPARATION ANXIETY
Separation anxiety (SA) can occur when you leave your dog alone at home—per-
haps he is worried of being abandoned again. The most typical and obvious signs
of SA are destructive behaviors (chewing or scratching), vocalizations (whining,
barking, or howling), house soiling, pacing, and excessive drooling. He is emo-
tionally responding to being physically separated from the person to whom he is
attached. Dogs who experience SA are usually high in pack drive and low in
defense (fight) drive (see chapter 2), and live in single-dog households. The behav-
ior is rarely seen when there is more than one pet.
In some cases, SA is caused, or at least made worse, by an overly solicitous
owner. As the owner prepares to leave the house, he or she makes a big fuss over
the dog: “Now don’t worry, mommy/daddy will be back soon, but I have to go 
to work. You be a good boy while I’m gone and I’ll bring you a nice treat.” Such

reassurances only serve to increase the dog’s anxiety at the expectation of being left
alone. The owner then makes an equally big fuss upon his or her return: “Poor
boy. Did you miss me while I was gone? I missed you, too. Were you a good boy?”
These utterances actually increase the dog’s excitement in anticipation of the owner’s
return. Small wonder the dog becomes anxious!
The “routine” approach
People are just as much creatures of habit as dogs are and tend to follow a specific
pattern before leaving the house. This pattern becomes the dog’s cue that you are
about to depart. Make a list of your customary routine before you leave; for exam-
ple, putting on makeup, picking up your bag or briefcase, picking up the car keys,
putting on your coat, turning off the lights, and reassuring and petting the dog.
To desensitize your dog to this routine, pick a weekend when you don’t have to
be anywhere specific. At random intervals, several times during the day, go
through your routine exactly as you would prior to leaving. Then sit in a chair and
read the paper or watch TV, or just putter around the house. By following this
procedure, you begin to desensitize the dog to the cues that you are about to leave.
When your dog ignores the cues, leave the house for about five minutes, with-
out paying any attention to the dog. Return without paying any attention to him.
Repeat this process, staying out for progressively longer periods. Turning on the
radio or TV and providing suitable toys for your dog may also help. Whatever you
do, make sure to ignore the dog for five minutes after your return. What you want
to accomplish is to take the emotional element out of your comings and goings so
your dog will view your arrival and departure as a normal part of a day, with no
reason to get excited.
The Rescued Dog
107
Doggie
Excitement
Units
(DXUs)
Ozone
Wowff! I’m leaving!
Be good!
SLAM!
Chomp!
Chomp!
Chomp!
Yippee!
I’m home!
You missed me!
You ate the
garbage, you
stupid dog!
Hyper
Big fuss = high excitement = destructive behavior
1 hr.
2 hrs. 3 hrs. 4 hrs. 5 hrs. 6 hrs. 7 hrs. 8 hrs.
Doggie excitement level
Bonkers
Active
Alert
Eyes open
Comatose
Dead
Asleep
Making separation anxiety worse.

108
What All Good Dogs Should Know
The D.A.P. approach
Another way to cope with separation anxiety is to use D.A.P. (Dog Appeasing
Pheromone), a product developed by veterinarians that mimics the properties of
the natural pheromones of the lactating female. After giving birth, a mother dog
generates pheromones that give her puppies a sense of well-being and reassurance.
D.A.P. is marketed in an electrical plug-in diffuser that dispenses the
pheromone, which the dog’s sense of smell detects. (D.A.P. is odorless to people.)
The pheromone reminds the dog of the well-being he felt as a puppy. In clinical
trials, D.A.P. was effective in about 75 percent of cases in improving separation-
related behaviors. To be effective, the diffuser must be left plugged in 24 hours a
day. D.A.P. is available at pet stores and from pet-product catalogs.
OVERPROTECTIVENESS
Having literally been saved by his new owner, the dog may take his duties of pro-
tecting him or her a little too seriously. When taken for a walk, he may growl and
lunge at strangers when they approach. Perhaps the dog is right, but generally the
stranger is harmless and might even be friendly.
Most of the time, the behavior is more of a nuisance than a real threat. The eas-
iest way to deal with it is to make an about-face and go in the opposite direction
or cross the street (see chapter 8). If you can’t do either, stop, hold your dog on a
short leash, and let the stranger pass. Under no circumstances should you reassur-
ingly pet the dog while murmuring, “There, there, it’s okay.” Felix will perceive
Doggie
Excitement
Units
(DXUs)
Ozone
Bye
I’m
back
Hyper
No fuss = low excitement = calm behavior
1 hr.
2 hrs. 3 hrs.
4 hrs. 5 hrs. 6 hrs.
7 hrs.
8 hrs.
Bonkers
Active
Alert
Eyes open
Comatose
Dead
Asleep
Making separation anxiety better.

that as, “Good dog, keep up the good work,” presumably the very opposite of
what you want.
When someone comes to the house and is invited in, this overprotective 
behavior becomes unacceptable. If you don’t want to deal with it, put Felix in
another room or in his crate. On the other hand, if you want to solve it with train-
ing, see chapter 6. Your goal is to have Felix sit quietly while someone is invited
into your home. If you are unsuccessful, you may need help from a professional
dog trainer.
RESOURCE GUARDING
“Resource guarding” is a term used to describe the behavior of a dog who guards
objects of value to him, such as bones, toys, food, or even the couch. Attempts to
remove the object, or him from the couch, will be met with growls and possibly
biting. In the case of a rescue dog it may be the result of deprivations he has expe-
rienced (such as food deprivation). Although the behavior is not unusual, espe-
cially for dogs high in prey drive, it is unacceptable and dangerous in a family pet.
The Rescued Dog
109
Don’t inadvertently reward unwanted growling.

110
What All Good Dogs Should Know
We believe in the basic premise that as pack leaders everything belongs to us.
The dog is allowed to have only those objects we permit him to have and is
required to give up any when asked to do so. For the dog, this is perfectly normal
and acceptable pack behavior.
You also need to become aware of your interactions with your dog. Do you give
him a treat just because he stands in front of you with a doleful look, or do you
first expect him to respond to a command, such as “Sit”? Put another way, is he
rewarded just for being cute or for having done something to earn a reward? If you
are handing over food to your dog whenever he looks at you, he may interpret this
as the submissive behavior of a pack follower and that he is actually in charge.
Dogs are happy to have a strong pack leader.

The Rescued Dog
111
Introducing the Give command
If your dog engages in resource guarding, make sure you have previously estab-
lished a clear line of communication. Look at the big picture and not a particular
behavior in isolation. Review with him
exercises like the Sit and Stay—espe-
cially when you feed him (see chapter
6)—going through doors (see chapter
6), the Go Lie Down (see chapter 7),
and the Leave It (see chapter 10).
When Felix clearly understands those
commands, he will quickly learn the
“Give” command.
The Give command is an extension
of “Leave It” and is used when the dog
already has something in his mouth that you want him to put in the palm of your
hand. “Drop It” is used when you just want him to spit it out. The teaching
process is the same. The commands differentiate only between whether you want
the dead fish placed into your hand or dropped to the ground where it may rest
in peace.
Teaching the Give command.
What happens when Felix
will not give up the object?
You need to up the ante.
Maybe your offer to trade
was a stale dog biscuit when it
needed to be a more tantalizing
piece of cheese or chicken. Find the
object that will make him trade and
you will succeed.

112
What All Good Dogs Should Know
Teaching the Give command
You need to know what your dog’s favorite treats are because teaching the Give
command involves a trade: Felix has something in his mouth that you want.
When you are teaching the command, start with trading a treat for one of his toys.
To get Felix to give up the toy, you offer him something that he would prefer. The
key word here is prefer. Usually, that something is a one-half-inch cube of food,
such as a piece of steak, fish, cheese, etc. (if he has just snagged the steak you were
going to prepare for dinner, you are in trouble). Say “Give,” offer him the tidbit
with your left hand, and hold your right hand, palm up, under his chin. When he
puts the object into your hand, verbally praise with “Good dog,” and give him the
treat. The verbal praise is important and must be sincere—the ultimate object
being to use treats randomly and rely mainly on praise. (Remember to change the
command to “Drop It” when you want him to spit the object on the ground.)
As Felix catches on, begin to minimize the treat, then only randomly reward
with a treat, but verbally and warmly praise him every time he gives up his object.
After you have gotten to the point where he looks at you expectantly as you
approach, begin calling him to you and ask him to give up the object. Since you
now have changed the rules, the first few times you call him to you, reward him
with a treat.
From then on, verbally praise for every correct response and randomly reward
correct responses with a treat. If resource guarding continues to be a problem,
even after your training efforts, it’s time to consult a professional dog trainer.
Facts from Felix
 
1) 
A rescue dog can make a wonderful companion.
 
2) 
Dogs live in the present and not the past.
 
3) 
For the shy dog, teach Sitting Politely for Petting.
 
4) 
Use the “routine” approach to stop separation anxiety.
 
5) 
Resource guarding is another training opportunity.
 
6) 
Learn to trade with the Give command.
 
7) 
Do not reassure the dog when he is growling at strangers.  
 
 
The dog will misinterpret this as being praised.

Chapter 12
Objectionable Behavior
I
f you have followed our advice in the previous chapters, you may never need 
to read this one! If you skipped the first part of this book and turned immedi-
ately to this chapter, go back and start at the beginning. Most dogs respond 
well to basic training, and many objectionable behaviors can be resolved by estab-
lishing a line of communication with your dog, which is the main purpose of
training.
YOUR OPTIONS
In the event some unacceptable behavior persists, you have four options:
1. Tolerate it.
2. Train.
3. Find a new home for your dog.
4. Give up.
Tolerate it
At first blush, this may not seem like much of an option. Then you begin to con-
sider the amount of time and energy that would be involved in dealing with your
dog’s annoying antics and you may decide that you can live with them after all.
You tolerate the way the dog is because you are not prepared to put in the required
effort to train him.
113

Tolerate
Train
Find new home
Give up
Four options for dealing with objectionable behavior.
114

Objectionable Behavior
115
Train!
You have decided that you cannot live with such a dog and that you are going to
train him to be the pet you expected and always wanted. You understand this will
require an initial investment of time and effort, perhaps even expert help. But you
are willing to work to achieve your goal—a long-lasting, mutually rewarding rela-
tionship. Good for you!
For most people, dog ownership is a
compromise between toleration and
training. Jack’s Standard Wirehaired
Dachshund, Cece, is housebroken and
crate trained, comes when called
(mostly), and stays when told. How-
ever, all this training has not shaken
Cece’s conviction that her purpose on
this Earth is to practice her landscaping
skills, which she does with enthusiasm
and determination. Jack, in turn, has
learned to tolerate her efforts.
Find a new home for your dog
Your dog’s temperament may be unsuitable to your lifestyle. A shy dog or a dog
with physical limitations may never develop into a great playmate for active chil-
dren. A dog who does not like to be left alone too long is not suitable for someone
who is away from home all day. While most behaviors can be modified with train-
ing, others cannot, or the effort required to do so would make the dog neurotic.
In some instances the dog and the owner are mismatched and need to divorce.
The dog may need a great deal more exercise than the owner is able to give, and
as a result the dog is developing behavior problems. Whatever the reason, under
some circumstances placement in a new home where the dog’s needs can be met
is in the best interest of both the dog and owner.
Give up
If all else has failed and you find you just can’t live with this dog, the remaining
option is to deliver him to a shelter. It is not something to be taken lightly and
should be considered only when you have really tried to work it out and there are
simply no other alternatives. Although animal shelters work hard to place dogs
and other animals, due to the large volume of unwanted and stray animals in this
country he faces a 50 percent chance of being euthanized. A no-kill shelter may
be an option if you are lucky enough to live near one, but there is often a long
waiting list because of their no-kill policy.
After all is said and done, the
best route for you is to take
an active part in training your dog.
There is no substitute for creating
that special relationship with your
dog than through spending time
with him to train him. If you want
your dog to look up to you as his
“hero,” then train him!

116
What All Good Dogs Should Know
If you have a purebred dog, your best option may be a breed-specific rescue
organization. Such groups are usually not shelters in the traditional sense, but they
go to great lengths to save a dog of the breed they love. Breed-specific rescue
organizations can be found on the Internet or local kennel clubs may have infor-
mation about them.
If your dog is truly dangerous toward people and cannot be rehabilitated, it is
unethical to try to pass him off to an unsuspecting stranger. Euthanasia may be
the only option that is left. Consult your veterinarian for guidance.
WHY DOES YOUR DOG DO IT?
Many owners believe their dogs misbehave out of spite. They are indignant at what
they perceive to be the dog’s lack of gratitude. After all, “I house you, I feed you, I
take care of all your veterinary expenses, the least you can do is not chew up my
shoes!” Unfortunately, dogs are not grateful and don’t know what the word means.
The objectionable activity—barking, chewing, digging, or whatever—is
rewarding in and of itself. Your dog does not lie awake at night thinking of ways
to aggravate you, but acts to satisfy a need. For example, barking, chewing, and
digging are associated with boredom and tension. The dog engages in the partic-
ular behavior because the activity relieves the boredom or tension. It can also be
attention-getting behavior. For a dog who wants attention, almost anything, even
being scolded, is better than no attention at all.
The easiest way to stop a behavior is by dealing with the need that brought it about
in the first place, rather than trying to correct the behavior itself. Punitive approaches
cause your dog to be afraid of you and undermine the very relationship you are
trying to build. Moreover, as we’ve mentioned, punishment after the fact is point-
less since the dog does not associate it with his “bad” behavior.
So-called behavior problems are often the effect of some cause and not a cause
in and of itself. Find the cause and you can cure the problem. Lack of sufficient
exercise, isolation and mental stagnation, health and nutrition problems, and
unintentional training are the main causes for a variety of objectionable behaviors.
Lack of sufficient exercise
The most common reason for objectionable behavior is lack of sufficient exercise.
A Labrador Retriever is a hunting dog with a high energy level. Cooped up in a
house all day, the dog may take to shredding the couch to get rid of that energy.
Determining what is a sufficient amount of exercise for your dog depends on his
age, size, breed, and energy level, but it is usually much more than you think.
Isolation and mental stagnation
Your dog does not need you to be his full-time entertainment center, but extended
periods of being left alone may make your pet a neurotic. Problems associated with
isolation are excessive barking, chewing,  digging, and sometimes self-mutilation.

Objectionable Behavior
117
Dogs don’t lie awake nights thinking up mischief. There is always a reason 
for problem behavior!
The unfortunate result of lack of sufficient exercise.

118
What All Good Dogs Should Know
Dogs are pack animals and need interaction with the “pack” members—that is,
you and your family. Just being together is often enough, but training is even bet-
ter. Doing something for you on a regular basis makes your dog feel useful and
provides the mental stimulation he needs.
Physical or health problems
The leading causes for a sudden change in behavior are physical or health prob-
lems. A normally obedient dog suddenly refusing to sit, for example, may have
developed arthritis, a spinal disorder, or infected or impacted anal glands.
Physical problems are often the cause of aggression and biting. If biting is a
problem, you must do something about it because it is only a matter of time before
you face legal difficulties.
A recent study shows that a lengthy list of behavior problems, including aggres-
sion, can be attributed to hypothyroidism, which is an underactive thyroid. This
condition affects almost 50 percent of the entire dog population. Fortunately, it is
easily treated with inexpensive medication, but it must be treated. When you
notice a sudden behavior change, such as a lack of interest in activities that he nor-
mally enjoys, your first course of action should be to take your dog to your vet-
erinarian for a thorough checkup. Request a blood test that includes a complete
thyroid panel. Even if the results show that his thyroid is functioning in the low
end of the normal range, the dog may benefit from medication.
For pack animals like dogs, isolation results in mental stagnation.

Objectionable Behavior
119
Improper diet
Diet can be responsible for a variety of behavior problems, including hyperactiv-
ity, difficulty in housetraining, and slow learning. Not all dogs can tolerate corn,
soy, wheat, etc., or beef, chicken, or lamb. You also need to consult your veteri-
narian to find out whether your dog has allergies to substances contained in his
Health problems can be a source of objectionable behavior.
Read the labels to see what your dog is eating!

120
What All Good Dogs Should Know
Roughhousing can result in unintentional training.
food. Allergies can range from chemical additives and food coloring to one or
more of the main ingredients in the food. Your dog may also have nutritional defi-
ciencies that require special supplementation.
It’s wise to be an informed consumer, so read the label on the dog food bag or
can. Two of the first three ingredients listed on the label should be animal protein
sources such as chicken or beef, not just by-products. Your vet can recommend
some high-quality dog foods.
Unintentional training
Biting behavior can be triggered by roughhousing with your dog, teasing by chil-
dren, mistreatment, tension or violence in the household, or fear.
Roughhousing is a particularly problematic form of “play.” Brandy started out
as a sweet puppy. The children delighted in playing with her and she never caused
any difficulties. Dad even took her to obedience class, where she graduated at the
top of her class.
Several months later, problems developed. While being taken for a walk by
Mom, Brandy started a tug-of-war with the leash. When Mom tried to get her to
stop, Brandy growled. She also became too rough for the children, who did not
want to play with her anymore.

Objectionable Behavior
121
When Dad called us with this sad tale asking for advice, it did not take too long
to learn that he liked to roughhouse with Brandy. He saw nothing wrong with it
since he was able to keep Brandy under control when things got too rough. We
explained to him that he had taught
Brandy to become rougher and
rougher, but that Mom and the chil-
dren could not control her. He was to
stop all the rough play and review the
obedience exercises.
Fortunately for Brandy, the story has
a happy ending. Once Dad quit the
fooling around and spent more con-
structive time with her, Brandy became
her sweet old self again.
In a nutshell, good behavior
requires the following:
• Good exercise
• Good company
• Good health
• Good nutrition
• Good training
Good company, exercise, health, nutrition, and training are all part of good 
behavior.

122
What All Good Dogs Should Know
In-house training is an option.
WHAT TO DO ABOUT UNACCEPTABLE 
BEHAVIOR
If you find a particular behavior unacceptable, look for its cause and deal with it
accordingly. Once you have ruled out the physical or dietary aspect, tackle the
problem with exercise and training—spend more time with your dog. If the prob-
lem persists despite your best efforts, consult an expert.
In-house help
In-house help is an option, if you don’t mind paying the price—it tends to be
expensive. It works something like this: A consultant or trainer comes to your
house, talks to you about your dog, and then recommends a course of action that
is expected to solve the problem.

Objectionable Behavior
123
Theoretically, it is the ideal solution to an owner’s problem with the dog
because the consultant or trainer can see firsthand what the dog is doing and make
the appropriate recommendations.
If you are interested in the services of an in-house consultant or trainer, ask
your veterinarian to refer you to such an individual. As with all trainers, be sure
to check the individual’s training credentials thoroughly and ask for references.
Boarding your dog to be trained
Another option, which is also expensive, is to send your dog to a boarding facil-
ity that specializes in training. Three weeks is the customary minimum.
Training tends to focus on general obedience, which may or may not address
your particular problem. For example, if Felix soils or shreds your drapes, that
behavior needs to be dealt with in the environment where the drapes are.
Boarding your dog to be trained can be useful.

124
What All Good Dogs Should Know
Since your dog will stay at this facility, you have to be especially careful in its
selection. Where will your dog be housed? What will be the daily schedule? How
often will he be exercised? When and what will he be fed? What methods will be
used in training?
Finding the right place may not be easy. Whatever you do, inspect the facility
and observe some of the training before you leave your dog, and ask for references.
Your veterinarian or a local boarding kennel may be able to recommend a facility.
Going to school with your dog
A good option is to enroll in an obedience class. Although classes tend to be
geared to teaching traditional obedience commands, such as Heel, Come, and
Stay, most obedience instructors are able to advise you on a wide range of topics.
We are in favor of classes because they are economical and get you involved in
the training process. Your dog also learns to behave around other dogs—a big
advantage.
Before you commit yourself to a class, attend one or two sessions and watch.
Following are a few pointers to help you select a class:
• Is the atmosphere friendly?
• Do the dogs seem to enjoy the training?
• Is the instructor pleasant and courteous to the human students in the class?
• Does the instructor appear knowledgeable?
• Do you like the way the dogs are being treated?
Going to class with your dog trains both of you!

Objectionable Behavior
125
• Would you want to treat your dog that way?
• Do the dogs visibly progress in the training?
If you are not satisfied with what you see, visit another class. There are usually
more than one and sometimes quite a few dog-obedience groups that train in any
given area. Not all use the same approach to training; if you don’t like the way one
operates, try another. You are looking for a club or a school that trains in accor-
dance with your own personal values. Presumably you have your dog because you
like him—so train that way! Consult your yellow pages and look for an obedience
club or training school in your area.
Doggie day care
Over the past ten years there has been an explosion of doggie day-care facilities.
For many dog owners the availability of doggie day care is a godsend. Busy
lifestyles often leave little time for the family pooch and fitting “together time”
into the schedule is hard. For most of his day, the dog is pretty much left to his
own devices. And when you return in the evening from a hard day at work and
perhaps an even harder commute, there is little energy left for Felix who is now
raring to go.
Enter the doggie day-care facility. You can drop off Felix before going to work
and pick him up again on the way home. During the day, Felix spends much of
his time playing with other dogs, taking an afternoon nap, and playing some
more. Many facilities also offer training. Whatever the situation, Felix comes
home after a hard day of horsing around with his canine pals feeling just as tired
as you. Tired dogs have happy owners!
Doggie day care works well for those on a tight schedule.

Facts from Felix
 
1) 
In dealing with your dog ’ s behavior you have a variety of  
 
 
options, the most important one being training.
 
2) 
Dogs do not behave badly out of spite.
 
3) 
To stop behavior, address the need that brought it on in the  
 
 
first place.
 
4) 
Lack of sufficient exercise is the most common reason for  
 
 
objectionable behavior.
 
5) 
Good behavior requires good exercise, good company, good  
 
 
health, good nutrition, and good training.
 
6) 
If you don ’ t have the time or inclination to train your dog  
 
 
yourself, have someone do it for you.
126
What All Good Dogs Should Know

Epilogue
U
sing the approach to training described in this book, we have found that
most dogs are quite content to go along with the program. More than
that, they enjoy it and look forward to their regular training sessions.
If you believe your dog will not love you anymore when you train him, you are
in for a surprise. Quite the opposite is the case; training will make your dog more
affectionate toward you. Through training comes respect, and through respect
comes love.
With training, you give your pet a job that makes him feel needed and wanted,
which is important for mental well-being. You also give your dog some exercise,
which is important for physical well-being.
When you experience what you perceive as a problem, ask yourself, “What is
my responsibility toward its solution?” We start with the basic premise that it is
rarely the dog’s fault. If you truly do the same, the solution will come to you. On
the other hand, if you always blame your dog, your relationship is doomed to fail.
Dogs demonstrate daily that they are our best friends. Now it’s your turn to
demonstrate that you deserve that friend.
127

Bibliography
Bergman, Goran. Why Does Your Dog Do That? New York: Howell Book
House, 1971.
Campbell, William E. Behavior Problems in Dogs. Wenatchee, WA: Dogwise
Publishing, 1999.
Evans, Job Michael. The Evans Guide for Civilized City Canines. New York:
Howell Book House, 1988.
Lorenz, Konrad. Man Meets Dog. New York: Penguin Books, 1964.
Most, Konrad. Training Dogs: A Manual. Wenatchee, WA: Dogwise 
Publishing, 2000.
Pfaffenberger, Clarence J. The New Knowledge of Dog Behavior. New York:
Howell Book House, 1963.
Pryor, Karen. Don’t Shoot the Dog! New York: Simon & Schuster, 1984.
Volhard, Jack, and Gail T. Fisher. Training Your Dog: The Step-by-Step 
Manual. New York: Howell Book House, 1983.
_______. Teaching Dog Obedience Classes: The Manual for Instructors.
New York: Howell Book House, 1986.
Volhard, Jack, and Wendy Volhard. Open and Utility Training: The 
Motivational Method. New York: Howell Book House, 1992.
_______. The Canine Good Citizen: Every Dog Can Be One. New York:
Howell Book House, 1997.
_______. The Complete Idiot’s Guide to a Well-Trained Dog. Indianapolis:
Alpha Books, 1999.
_______. Dog Training For Dummies. Indianapolis: Wiley Publishing, 2005.
Volhard, Wendy, and Kerry Brown, DVM. Holistic Guide for a Healthy
Dog. New York: Howell Book House, 2000.
128

Index
129
abandonment, 100–101, 115–116
abuse, 101
accidents, housetraining, 47, 51
adolescent dogs, 7
aggression, 118
aggressive body posture, 31
alert body posture, 30
allergy, food, 119–120
American Kennel Club Canine Good Cit-
izen examination, 104
ammonia, 51
animal shelter, 100, 115
appeasing body posture, 31
associations, with specific behaviors, 33
barking, 48, 116
barrier, dog, 41
begging behavior
rewarding, 36
untrained dog, 2
behavior
bringing out specific drives, 20
defense drive, 16, 20, 22–23
extinguishing undesired, 36
fight, 16, 19
flight, 16, 19
freezing, 16
innate, 15
pack drive, 15, 19–23
personality profile, 17–19
prey drive, 15, 19–23
requirements for good, 121
behavior problems
aggression, 118
barking, 48, 116
begging, 2, 36
biting, 118, 120
chewing, 116
dealing with, 113–116, 122–125
digging, 116
growling, 13, 108
ingrained, 6
jumping on people, 53, 60–61
overprotectiveness, 108–109
reasons for, 116–121
resource guarding, 109–112
rushing out doors, 55–56, 62–64
self-mutilation, 116
separation anxiety, 106–108
shyness, 101–106
Bernese Mountain Dog
instincts of, 3
Personality Profile, 19
biting, 118, 120
boarding, for training, 123–124
body language
dog’s reading of owner’s, 25
reading dog’s, 25, 27

body posture
aggressive, 31
alert, 30
appeasing, 31
relaxed, 30
stressed, 32
submissive, 32
Border Collie, 19
Canine Good Citizen examination, 104
Canine Personality Profile, 17–19
car, crates for travel in, 39, 40–41
chasing
cats, 9–10
of dog by owner, 8
by herding dog, 3
prey drive and, 19, 20, 22
checking, 20
chewing, 116
choke collar, 80
collar
selecting, 76
training, 80
Come command, 85, 88
coming when called
distractions, 88–90
importance of, 83
keeping dog on leash, 84–85, 86
as pleasant experience for dog, 83
Recall Game, 85–86, 87
rewarding, 10
rules for training, 83–85
teaching puppy, 84
testing, 89–90
touching collar before rewarding, 85
training inside, 85–86
training outside, 87–88
trusting dog, 90–91
commands
Come, 85, 88
Crate, 41
Down, 66–71
Drop It, 110, 111
Give, 109–112
Go Lie Down, 66, 72–74
Go to Bed, 41
Hurry Up, 48
Leave It, 93–99
Let’s Go, 78, 79, 80
No, 28
OK, 56, 71
release, 56, 71
repeating, 57
Sit and Stay, 53–65, 104–106
tone of voice for, 56
communication
body posture, 29–32
positive, 28–29
confidence
building, 104–106
signs of, 102
consistency, in training, 11
counter surfing, 27
crate
adjustment of dog to, 42–44
advantages of, 39–41
dividers in, 41
dog’s perception of, 43
feeding meals in, 42
housetraining use, 39, 45
introducing dog to, 41–42
length of time in, 44
selecting, 41
types, 41
use as punishment, 44
Crate command, 41
cystitis, 47
D.A.P. (dog appeasing pheromone), 108
day care, doggie, 125
defecation. See housetraining
defense drive, 16, 20, 22–23
den, crate as, 39
desensitization, for separation anxiety, 107
designer dog, 19
developmental periods, 7–8
diet
as cause of behavior problems,
119–120
changes in, 48
130
Index

Index
131
digging, 116
discipline, late, 28, 29
distractions
choosing where to train, 14
while leash training, 80
while training to come when called,
88–90
dog appeasing pheromone (D.A.P.), 108
doggie day care, 125
door manners, 55, 62–64
Down command
placing dog in down position, 69
practicing, 69–71
small dogs, teaching to, 69
staying in place with, 71
teaching, 67–71
use of, 67
drive
bringing out specific, 20
defense, 16, 20, 22–23
pack, 15, 19–23
prey, 15, 19–23
training implications, 22–23
Drop It command, 110, 111
euthanasia, 116
exercise
importance of, 83
lack of sufficient, 116, 117
scheduled, 47
experience, learning from, 33
feeding
in crate, 42
schedule, 47–48
Sit and Stay command use, 61–62
fight behavior, 16, 19
flight behavior, 16, 19
food
allergy, 119–120
deprivation, 109
improper diet as cause of behavior
problems, 119–120
label, 120
stealing, 27–28
free dogs, trained dogs as, 1
freezing, 16
German Shepherd, 19
Give command
introducing, 109–110
teaching, 110–112
Go Lie Down command
staying in place with, 71
teaching, 72–73
use of, 67
good dog, traits of, 2–3
Go to Bed command, 41
greeting, by jumping on people, 53,
60–61
grooming, pack drive and, 20
growling, 13, 108
guarding, resource, 109–112
guilt, 28, 51
harness, for car travel, 40
health problems, as source of objection-
able behavior, 118–119
herding, 3
housetraining
accidents, 47, 51
age effect on, 45
cleaning up, 51
crate use, 39, 45
Hurry Up command, 48
puppy, 45–52
regression, 51
schedule, setting, 47–48, 49
signs to watch for, 49, 51
toilet area, establishing, 48–49
vigilance, importance of, 49–50
water availability, 48
Hurry Up command, 48
Husky, 23
hypothyroidism, 118
in-house help, 122–123
instincts
breed-specific, 3
defense drive, 16, 20, 22–23

instincts (continued)
pack drive, 15, 19–23
prey drive, 15, 19–23
training implications of, 3–5, 22–23
interrupting dog’s actions, 27
isolation, as cause of objectionable behav-
ior, 116, 118
jumping on people, 53, 60–61
keep away game, 85
Labrador Retriever
instincts of, 3
Personality Profile, 19
leadership, 12–13
learning, method of, 33
leash
checking to get dog’s attention, 20,
22
holding, 61, 77–78
keeping dog on, 84–85, 86
selecting, 76
walking on, 75–80
Leave It command
teaching step 1, 95
teaching step 2, 95–96
teaching step 3, 96–97
teaching step 4, 97–98
teaching step 5, 98
usefulness of, 93–94, 98
Let’s Go command, 78, 79, 80
lie down, teaching dog to, 66, 72–74
location, for training, 14
Mastiff, 4
mental stagnation, 116, 118
mixed breed dog, 19
multitasking, 80
name, use of dog’s, 28, 29
Newfoundland, instincts of, 3, 5
new home for dog, finding, 115
No! command, 28
obedience class, 124–125
objectionable behavior
boarding for training, 123–124
dealing with, 113–116, 122–125
giving dog up to shelter, 115–116
in-house help for, 122–123
obedience classes and, 124–125
placement of dog in new home, 113
reasons for, 116–121
tolerating, 113
OK command, 56, 71
overprotectiveness, 108
pack drive, 15, 19–23
pack leader, your role as, 12
Personality Profile, Canine
questions, 17–18
scoring, 19
training, applying to, 22–23
petting, sitting politely for, 104–106
pheromone, 108
physical problems, as source of objection-
able behavior, 118–119
playing, pack drive and, 20
posture
aggressive, 31
alert, 30
appeasing, 31
relaxed, 30
stressed, 32
submissive, 32
prey drive, 15, 19–23
protectiveness, 108
pulling, 76–80
punishment
building trust, 9–10
crate use as, 44
of dog coming when called, 83
housetraining and, 51
puppy
adolescent, 7
beginning training, 6–7
collar, 76
developmental periods, 7–8
132
Index

Index
133
feeding schedule, 47–48
flight behavior, 16
housetraining, 45–52
socialization, 8
teaching to come when called, 84
walking, 76
Recall Game, 85–86, 87
relaxed body posture, 30
release command, 56, 71
reprimands
late, 28
use of dog’s name with, 28, 29
rescued dog
overprotectiveness by, 108–109
reasons for abandonment, 100–101
resource guarding by, 109–112
separation anxiety in, 106–108
shyness in, 101–106
rescue organization, 100, 116
resource guarding, 109–112
retrieving, 3
reward, of undesired behavior, 36–37
roughhousing, 11, 120–121
routine, establishing for separation 
anxiety, 107
safety, teaching Sit and Stay commands
for, 55–56
self-mutilation, 116
separation anxiety
causes of, 106
D.A.P. (dog appeasing pheromone),
108
desensitization, 107
signs of, 106
worsening, 106–107
shelter, animal, 100, 115
shyness
changing attitude in, 101–103
sitting politely for petting exercise,
104–106
sight hounds, 23
Sit and Stay
for shy dog, 104–106
teaching Sit command, 57–60
use for door manners, 55, 62–64
use for feeding manners, 61–62
use for greeting behavior, 53, 60–61
use for safety, 55–56
Sit command
for feeding manners, 61–62
preventing jumping with, 60–61
teaching, 57–60
sitting politely for petting (exercise),
104–106
socialization, 8
stairs, staying for, 64–65
Stay command
door manners and, 62–64
stairs and, 64–65
stealing food, 27–28
stressed body posture, 32
submissive body posture, 32
temperament, 15
thyroid disease, 118
toilet area, establishing, 48–49
toleration, of objectionable behavior, 113
tone of voice, 20, 56
trainer
in-house, 122–123
references, 124
training
advantages of, 1–2
boarding for, 123–124
building trust, 9–10
consistency, 11
at day-care facility, 125
dealing with objectionable 
behavior, 115
distractions, 14, 80, 88–90
dog’s enjoyment of, 127
for good dog, 3
influence of developmental periods
on, 7–8

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
training (continued)
influence of instincts on, 3–5
in-house help, 122–123
leash, 75–80
Leave It command, 93–99
obedience class, 124–125
persistence, 11
personality profile, implications of,
22–23
rewarding good behavior, 36–37
Sit and Stay commands, 53–65
taking charge, 12–13
as two-way street, 33–37
unintentional, 84, 120–121
using helpers, 60–61
to walk on leash, 75–81
when to begin, 6–7
where to train, 14
treats, for introducing dog to crate,
41–42, 44
trust, building, 9–10
unintentional training, 84, 120–121
urination. See housetraining
vinegar, white, 51
voice tone, 20, 56
Volhard, Jack and Wendy, 17
walking your dog
collar selection, 76, 80
distractions, 80
importance of training, 75–76
leash selection, 76
teaching not to pull, 76–80
water availability, housetraining and, 48
134
Index
www.Ebook777.com

