
D4267
theaiconf.com
Early adopters of applied AI have a unique opportunity to invent new 
business models, reshape industries, and build the impossible.
Put AI to work — right now.
AI is moving fast.  
Don’t fall behind.

Mike Loukides and Ben Lorica
What Is Artificial
Intelligence?
Boston
Farnham
Sebastopol
Tokyo
Beijing
Boston
Farnham
Sebastopol
Tokyo
Beijing

978-1-491-96540-5
[LSI]
What Is Artificial Intelligence?
by Ben Lorica and Mike Loukides
Copyright © 2016 O’Reilly Media, Inc. All rights reserved.
Printed in the United States of America.
Published by O’Reilly Media, Inc., 1005 Gravenstein Highway North, Sebastopol, CA
95472.
O’Reilly books may be purchased for educational, business, or sales promotional use.
Online editions are also available for most titles (http://safaribooksonline.com). For
more 
information, 
contact 
our 
corporate/institutional 
sales 
department:
800-998-9938 or corporate@oreilly.com.
Editor: Nicole Tache
Production Editor: Melanie Yarbrough
Interior Designer: David Futato
Cover Designer: Randy Comer
June 2016:
 First Edition
Revision History for the First Edition
2016-06-15: First Release
The O’Reilly logo is a registered trademark of O’Reilly Media, Inc. What Is Artificial
Intelligence?, the cover image, and related trade dress are trademarks of O’Reilly
Media, Inc.
While the publisher and the authors have used good faith efforts to ensure that the
information and instructions contained in this work are accurate, the publisher and
the authors disclaim all responsibility for errors or omissions, including without
limitation responsibility for damages resulting from the use of or reliance on this
work. Use of the information and instructions contained in this work is at your own
risk. If any code samples or other technology this work contains or describes is sub‐
ject to open source licenses or the intellectual property rights of others, it is your
responsibility to ensure that your use thereof complies with such licenses and/or
rights.

Table of Contents
What Is Artificial Intelligence?. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  1
Capabilities and Limitations Today                                                        1
Toward General Intelligence                                                                   2
To Train or Not to Train                                                                           4
The Meaning of Intelligence                                                                    6
Assistants or Actors?                                                                                7
Why the Surge of Interest?                                                                      9
Building Knowledge Databases                                                            10
Producing Results                                                                                   11
Ethics and Futures                                                                                  13
Always in the Future                                                                               15
iii


What Is Artificial Intelligence?
Defining artificial intelligence isn’t just difficult; it’s impossible, not
the least because we don’t really understand human intelligence.
Paradoxically, advances in AI will help more to define what human
intelligence isn’t than what artificial intelligence is.
But whatever AI is, we’ve clearly made a lot of progress in the past
few years, in areas ranging from computer vision to game playing.
AI is making the transition from a research topic to the early stages
of enterprise adoption. Companies such as Google and Facebook
have placed huge bets on AI and are already using it in their prod‐
ucts. But Google and Facebook are only the beginning: over the next
decade, we’ll see AI steadily creep into one product after another.
We’ll be communicating with bots, rather than scripted robo-dialers,
and not realizing that they aren’t human. We’ll be relying on cars to
plan routes and respond to road hazards. It’s a good bet that in the
next decades, some features of AI will be incorporated into every
application that we touch and that we won’t be able to do anything
without touching an application.
Given that our future will inevitably be tied up with AI, it’s impera‐
tive that we ask: Where are we now? What is the state of AI? And
where are we heading?
Capabilities and Limitations Today
Descriptions of AI span several axes: strength (how intelligent is it?),
breadth (does it solve a narrowly defined problem, or is it general?),
training (how does it learn?), capabilities (what kinds of problems
are we asking it to solve?), and autonomy (are AIs assistive technol‐
1

ogies, or do they act on their own?). Each of these axes is a spec‐
trum, and each point in this many-dimensional space represents a
different way of understanding the goals and capabilities of an AI
system.
On the strength axis, it’s very easy to look at the results of the last 20
years and realize that we’ve made some extremely powerful pro‐
grams. Deep Blue beat Garry Kasparov in chess; Watson beat the
best Jeopardy champions of all time; AlphaGo beat Lee Sedol, argua‐
bly the world’s best Go player. But all of these successes are limited.
Deep Blue, Watson, and AlphaGo were all highly specialized, single-
purpose machines that did one thing extremely well. Deep Blue and
Watson can’t play Go, and AlphaGo can’t play chess or Jeopardy,
even on a basic level. Their intelligence is very narrow, and can’t be
generalized. A lot of work has gone into using Watson for applica‐
tions such as medical diagnosis, but it’s still fundamentally a
question-and-answer machine that must be tuned for a specific
domain. Deep Blue has a lot of specialized knowledge about chess
strategy and an encyclopedic knowledge of openings. AlphaGo was
built with a more general architecture, but a lot of hand-crafted
knowledge still made its way into the code. I don’t mean to trivialize
or undervalue their accomplishments, but it’s important to realize
what they haven’t done.
We haven’t yet created an artificial general intelligence that can solve
a multiplicity of different kinds of problems. We still don’t have a
machine that can listen to recordings of humans for a year or two,
and start speaking. While AlphaGo “learned” to play Go by analyz‐
ing thousands of games, and then playing thousands more against
itself, the same software couldn’t be used to master chess. The same
general approach? Probably. But our best current efforts are far from
a general intelligence that is flexible enough to learn without super‐
vision, or flexible enough to choose what it wants to learn, whether
that’s playing board games or designing PC boards.
Toward General Intelligence
How do we get from narrow, domain-specific intelligence to more
general intelligence? By “general intelligence,” we don’t necessarily
mean human intelligence; but we do want machines that can solve
different kinds of problems without being programmed with
domain-specific knowledge. We want machines that can make
2 
| 
What Is Artificial Intelligence?

human judgments and decisions. That doesn’t necessarily mean that
AI systems will implement concepts like creativity, intuition, or
instinct, which may have no digital analogs. A general intelligence
would have the ability to follow multiple pursuits and to adapt to
unexpected situations. And a general AI would undoubtedly imple‐
ment concepts like “justice” and “fairness”: we’re already talking
about the impact of AI on the legal system.
A self-driving car demonstrates the problems we’re facing. To be
self-driving, a car needs to integrate pattern recognition with other
capabilities, including reasoning, planning, and memory. It needs to
recognize patterns, so it can react to obstacles and street signs; it
needs to reason, both to understand driving regulations and to solve
problems like avoiding obstacles; it needs to plan a route from its
current location to its destination, taking into account traffic and
other patterns. It needs to do all of these repeatedly, updating its sol‐
utions constantly. However, even though a self-driving car incorpo‐
rates just about all of AI, it doesn’t have the flexibility we’d expect
from a general intelligence system. You wouldn’t expect a self-
driving car to have a conversation or lay out your garden. Transfer
learning, or taking results from one area and applying them to
another, is very difficult. You could probably re-engineer many of
the software components, but that only points out what’s missing:
our current AIs provide narrow solutions to specific problems; they
aren’t general problem solvers. You can add narrow AIs ad infinitum
(a car could have a bot that talks about where to go; that makes res‐
taurant recommendations; that plays chess with you so you don’t get
bored), but a pile of narrow intelligences will never add up to a gen‐
eral intelligence. General intelligence isn’t about the number of abili‐
ties, but about integration between those abilities.
While approaches like neural networks were originally developed to
mimic the human brain’s processes, many AI initiatives have given
up on the notion of imitating a biological brain. We don’t know how
brains work; neural networks are computationally useful, but they’re
not imitating human thought. In Artificial Intelligence: A Modern
Approach, Peter Norvig and Stuart Russell write that “The quest for
‘artificial flight’ succeeded when the Wright brothers and others
stopped imitating birds and started … learning about aerodynam‐
ics.” Similarly, to make progress, AI need not focus on imitating the
brain’s biological processes, and instead try to understand the prob‐
lems that the brain solves. It’s a safe bet that humans use any number
Toward General Intelligence 
| 
3

of techniques to learn, regardless of what may be happening on the
biological level. The same will probably be true of a general artificial
intelligence: it will use pattern matching (like AlphaGo), it will use
rule-based systems (like Watson), it will use exhaustive search trees
(like Deep Blue). None of these techniques map directly onto
human intelligence. What humans appear to do better than any
computer is to build models of their world, and act on those models.
The next step past general intelligence is super-intelligence or hyper-
intelligence. It’s not clear how to distinguish super-intelligence from
general intelligence. Would we expect a super-intelligence system to
possess qualities like creativity and initiative? Given that we have
trouble understanding human creativity, it’s hard to think of
machine creativity as a useful concept. Go experts described some of
AlphaGo’s moves as “creative”; however, they came out of exactly the
same processes and patterns as all the other moves, not from look‐
ing at the game in a different way. Repeated application of the same
algorithms can produce results that humans find surprising or
unexpected, but merely being surprising isn’t what we call “creativ‐
ity.”
It’s easier to think of super-intelligence as a matter of scale. If we can
create “general intelligence,” it’s easy to assume that it could quickly
become thousands of times more powerful than human intelligence.
Or, more precisely: either general intelligence will be significantly
slower than human thought, and it will be difficult to speed it up
either through hardware or software; or it will speed up quickly,
through massive parallelism and hardware improvements. We’ll go
from thousand-core GPUs to trillions of cores on thousands of
chips, with data streaming in from billions of sensors. In the first
case, when speedups are slow, general intelligence might not be all
that interesting (though it will have been a great ride for the
researchers). In the second case, the ramp-up will be very steep and
very fast.
To Train or Not to Train
AlphaGo’s developers claimed to use a much more general approach
to AI than Deep Blue: they produced a system that had minimal
knowledge of Go strategy, but instead learned by observing Go
games. That points toward the next big direction: can we get from
supervised learning, where a machine is trained on labeled data, to
4 
| 
What Is Artificial Intelligence?

unsupervised learning, where a machine learns for itself how to
group and structure data?
In a post on Facebook, Yann LeCun says, “We need to solve the
unsupervised learning problem before we can even think of getting
to true AI.” To classify photos, an AI system is given millions of pho‐
tos that have already been classified correctly; after learning from
these classifications, it’s given another set of tagged photos, to deter‐
mine whether it can tag the test set correctly. What can a machine
do without tagging? Can it discover what’s important in a photo
without metadata telling it “This is a bird, this is a plane, this is a
flower”? Can a machine discover structure by observation with
much less data, something that both humans and animals can do?
Both humans and animals can form models and abstractions from
relatively little data: it doesn’t take millions of images for us to rec‐
ognize a new kind of bird, for example, or to find our way around a
new city. Predicting future frames of a video, a problem researchers
are now working on, would require an AI system to build an under‐
standing of how the world works. Is it possible to develop a system
that can respond to completely new situations, such as a car sliding
unpredictably on ice? Is it possible to build a car that can drive
without the benefit of a map? Humans can solve these problems,
though they’re not necessarily good at it. Unsupervised learning
points to problems that can’t just be solved by better, faster hard‐
ware, or by developers working with the current libraries.
There are approaches to learning that represent a point between
supervised and unsupervised learning. In reinforcement learning,
the system is given some value that represents a reward. Can a robot
run across a field without falling? Can a car drive across town
without a map? Rewards can be fed back into the system and used to
maximize the probability of success. (OpenAI Gym is a promising
framework for reinforcement learning.)
At one extreme, supervised learning means reproducing a set of
tags, which is essentially pattern recognition, and prone to overfit‐
ting. At the other extreme, completely unsupervised learning means
learning to reason inductively about a situation, and requires algo‐
rithmic breakthroughs. Semi-supervised learning (with minimal
tags), or reinforcement learning (by sequential decision making)
represent approaches between these extremes. We’ll see how far they
can take us.
To Train or Not to Train 
| 
5

The Meaning of Intelligence
What we mean by “intelligence” is a fundamental question. In a
Radar post from 2014, Beau Cronin did an excellent job of summa‐
rizing the many definitions of AI. What we expect from artificial
intelligence depends critically on what we want the AI to do. Discus‐
sions of AI almost always start with the Turing Test. Turing assumed
that people would interact with a computer through a chat-like
model: he assumed a conversation with the computer. This assump‐
tion places limitations on what we expect the computer to do: we
don’t expect it to drive cars or assemble circuits, for example. It’s also
an intentionally ambiguous test. The computer’s answers might be
evasive or just plain incorrect; being unerringly correct isn’t the
point. Human intelligences are also evasive and incorrect. We’d be
unlikely to mistake an AI that was unerringly correct for a human.
If we assume that AI must be embodied in hardware that’s capable of
motion, such as a robot or an autonomous vehicle, we get a different
set of criteria. We’re asking the computer to perform a poorly
defined task (like driving to the store) under its own control. We can
already build AI systems that can do a better job of planning a route
and driving than most humans. The one accident in which one of
Google’s autonomous vehicles was at fault occurred because the
algorithms were modified to drive more like a human, and to take
risks that the AI system would not normally have taken.
There are plenty of difficult driving problems that self-driving cars
haven’t solved: driving on a mountain road in a blizzard, for exam‐
ple. Whether the AI system is embodied in a car, a drone aircraft, or
a humanoid robot, the problems it will face will be essentially simi‐
lar: how to perform in safe, comfortable circumstances will be easy;
how to perform in high-risk, dangerous situations will be much
harder. Humans aren’t good at those tasks, either; but while Turing
would expect an AI in conversation to be evasive, or even answer
questions incorrectly, vague or incorrect solutions while driving
down a highway aren’t acceptable.
AIs that can take physical action force us to think about robotic
behavior. What sort of ethics govern autonomous robots? Asimov’s
laws of robotics? If we think a robot should never kill or injure a
human, weaponized drones have already thrown that out the win‐
dow. While the stereotypical question “if an accident is unavoidable,
should an autonomous car crash into the baby or the grand‐
6 
| 
What Is Artificial Intelligence?

mother?” is fake ethics, there are versions of the question that are
more serious. Should a self-driving car plunge into a crowd to avoid
an accident that might kill its passenger? It’s easy to answer the ques‐
tion in the abstract, but it’s hard to imagine humans buying a vehicle
that will sacrifice them rather than injure bystanders. I doubt the
robots will be expected to answer this question, but it will certainly
be discussed in the board rooms of Ford, GM, Toyota, and Tesla.
We can define AI more simply by dispensing with the intricacies of
conversational systems or autonomous robotic systems, and saying
that AI is solely about building systems that answer questions and
solve problems. Systems that can answer questions and reason about
complex logic are the “expert systems” that we’ve been building for
some years now, most recently embodied in Watson. (AlphaGo sol‐
ves a different kind of problem.) However, as Beau Cronin points
out, solving problems that humans find intellectually challenging is
relatively easy; what’s much more difficult is solving the problems
that humans find easy. Few three year olds can play Go. All three
year olds can recognize their parents—and without a substantial set
of tagged images.
What we mean by “intelligence” depends strongly on what we want
that intelligence to do. There is no single definition that’s adequate
for all of our goals. Without well-defined goals that tell us what we’re
trying to achieve, and let us measure whether we’ve achieved it, the
transition from narrow AI to general AI is not going to be easy.
Assistants or Actors?
Press coverage of AI focuses on autonomous systems, machines that
act on their own. With good reason: that’s the fun, sexy, and some‐
what scary face of AI. It’s easy to watch AlphaGo, with a human
servant to make its moves, and fantasize about a future dominated
by machines. But there’s something more to AI than autonomous
devices that make humans obsolete. Where is the real value, artifi‐
cial intelligence or intelligence augmentation? AI or IA? That ques‐
tion has been asked since the first attempts at AI and is explored in
depth by John Markoff in Machines of Loving Grace. We may not
want an AI system to make decisions; we may want to reserve deci‐
sion making for ourselves. We may want AI that augments our intel‐
ligence by providing us with information, predicting the
consequences of any course of action, and making recommenda‐
Assistants or Actors? 
| 
7

tions, but leaving decisions to the humans. The Matrix notwith‐
standing, a future in which artificial intelligence is at our service,
augmenting our intelligence rather than overruling it, is much more
likely than a future in which we’re the servants of an overreaching
AI.
A GPS navigation system is an excellent example of an AI system
that augments human intelligence. Given a good map, most humans
can navigate from point A to point B, though our abilities leave a lot
to be desired, particularly if we’re in unfamiliar territory. Plotting
the best route between two locations is a difficult problem, particu‐
larly when you account for problems like bad traffic and road condi‐
tions. But, with the exception of autonomous vehicles, we’ve never
connected the navigation engine to the steering wheel. A GPS is
strictly an assistive technology: it gives recommendations, not com‐
mands. Whenever you hear the GPS saying “recalculating route,” a
human has made a decision (or a mistake) that ignored the GPS rec‐
ommendation, and the GPS is adapting.
Over the past few years, we’ve seen many applications that qualify as
AI, in one sense or another. Almost anything that falls under the
rubric of “machine learning” qualifies as artificial intelligence:
indeed, “machine learning” was the name given to the more success‐
ful parts of AI back when the discipline fell into disrepute. You don’t
have to build something with a human voice, like Amazon’s Alexa,
to be AI. Amazon’s recommendation engine is certainly AI. So is a
web application like Stitchfix, which augments choices made by
fashion experts with choices made by a recommendation engine.
We’ve become accustomed to (and are frequently annoyed by) chat
bots that handle customer service calls, more or less accurately.
You’ll probably end up talking to a human, but the secret is using
the chat bot to get all the routine questions out of the way. There’s
no point in requiring a human to transcribe your address, your pol‐
icy number, and other standard information: a computer can do it at
least as accurately, if not more.
The next generation of assistants will be (and already is) semi-
autonomous. Several years ago, Larry Page said the Star Trek com‐
puter was the ideal search engine: it was a computer that understood
humans, had already digested all the information available, and
could answer questions before they were even asked. If you have
used Google Now, you were probably surprised the first time it told
you to leave early for an appointment because the traffic was bad.
8 
| 
What Is Artificial Intelligence?

That requires looking across several different data sets: your current
location, the location of your appointment (probably in your calen‐
dar or in your contacts list), Google’s mapping data, current traffic
conditions, and even chronological data about expected traffic pat‐
terns. The goal isn’t answering a question; it’s providing assistance
before users even know they need it.
Why the Surge of Interest?
Why is AI currently such a hot topic, after having being in disrepute
for a few decades of “AI winter”? Of course, AI was in the news
briefly after Deep Blue, and again after Watson; but these fads didn’t
last. It’s tempting to see the current rise of AI as another fad. That
would ignore the changes of the past decade.
The rise of AI has depended on tremendous advances in computer
hardware. It’s tedious to recite the huge advances in performance
and storage technology in the 30+ years since the start of the AI
winter (which Wikipedia traces to 1984). But that’s an unavoidable
part of the story, particularly if you’ve seen the racks of machines
that made up IBM’s Watson. AlphaGo reportedly ran on 1,920 CPUs
and 280 GPUs; the machine that beat Lee Sedol may have been even
larger, and used custom hardware Google has developed for build‐
ing neural networks. Even if AI algorithms are too slow to be pro‐
ductive on a typical laptop, it’s easy and relatively inexpensive to
allocate some serious computing horsepower on cloud platforms
like AWS, GCE, and Azure. And machine learning was enabled, in
part, by the ability to store vast amounts of data. In 1985, gigabytes
were rare, and weighed hundreds of pounds; now gigabytes are
commonplace, inexpensive, and tiny.
In addition to the ability to store and process data, we now have the
ability to generate data. In the 80s, most photography was analog.
Now it’s all digital, and a lot of it is stored online, in services like
Flickr, Google Photos, Apple Photos, Facebook, and more. Many
online photos are already tagged with some descriptive text, making
them a great dataset for training AI systems. Many of our conversa‐
tions are also online, through Facebook, Twitter, and many chat
services. As are our shopping histories. So we (or more precisely,
Google, Apple, Yahoo, Facebook, Amazon, and others) have the data
needed to train AI systems.
Why the Surge of Interest? 
| 
9

We’ve also made significant advances in algorithms. Neural net‐
works aren’t particularly new, but “deep learning” stacks up a series
of networks, with feedback so the network automatically trains
itself. Deep learning thus tries to solve one of the hardest human
problems in machine learning: learning optimal representations and
features from data. Processing a lot of data is easy, but feature learn‐
ing is more of an art than a science. Deep learning automates some
of that art.
Not only have we made progress in algorithms, the algorithms are
implemented in widely available libraries, such as Caffe, Tensor‐
Flow, Theano, Scikit-Learn, MXNet, CNTK, and others. AI isn’t
limited to CS researchers in academic settings; increasingly, anyone
can take part, as Pete Warden has shown. You don’t need to know
how to implement a complex algorithm and make it run reasonably
well on your hardware. You just need to know how to install a
library and tag training data. Just as the PC revolution itself took
place when computers moved out of machine rooms and became
accessible to the general public, the same process of democratization
is producing a revolution in AI. As people from many backgrounds
and environments experiment with AI, we’ll see new kinds of appli‐
cations. Some will seem like science fiction (though self-driving cars
seemed like science fiction only a few years ago); there will certainly
be new applications that we can’t even imagine.
Building Knowledge Databases
The world is full of “dark data”: unstructured information that
doesn’t live in nice, orderly databases. It’s on websites, buried in
tables, enshrined in photographs and movies; but it’s not easily
accessible to machine intelligence, or to any other intelligence.
Projects like diffbot and deepdive use semi-supervised learning to
find the structure in unstructured data—whether masses of scien‐
tific papers or the scrapings of many websites. Once they’ve created
a database, that database can be accessed by more-conventional
tools, whether APIs, SQL statements, or desktop applications.
Knowledge databases and graphs are already in use in many intelli‐
gent applications, including Google’s Knowledge Graph. As we
move toward conversational applications, the ability to unearth dark
data and find structure in it will become even more critical. Using
dark data effectively will be the key to moving from scripted and
10 
| 
What Is Artificial Intelligence?

narrowly purposed chat applications to applications that can take an
arbitrary question and return an answer to the user. We might not
see such an application as “understanding” the question, but appli‐
cations like this will be at the heart of future assistive technologies.
And they will rely on knowledge databases that have been scraped
and structured by machine: the sheer volume of data involved will
be beyond humans’ tagging abilities.
Producing Results
Unlike the dark times of the AI winter, when data was limited and
computers were slow, we’re seeing successful AI systems every‐
where. Google Translate is nowhere near as good as a human trans‐
lator, but it frequently gives you a usable translation. While it hasn’t
been on the radar anywhere near as much, speech recognition sys‐
tems are also commonplace, and surprisingly accurate; a year ago,
Google claimed that an Android phone could correctly understand
92% of the questions it was asked. Given that a computer can cor‐
rectly turn a question into text, the next step is to turn that question
into an answer.
Similarly, image recognition and image processing have become
commonplace. Despite some highly publicized and embarrassing
mistakes, computer vision systems can identify faces with an accu‐
racy that was unthinkable a few years ago. Granted, constraining the
problem properly plays a huge role in this success: Facebook can
identify faces in your photos because it’s assuming that the people in
your photos are likely to be your friends. Computer vision is (or will
be) central to many applications of AI, from the mundane to the
scary. Vision is obviously critical to autonomous vehicles; it’s also
critical to surveillance, auto-targeting drones, and other uncomfort‐
able applications.
Deep learning and neural networks have attracted a lot of attention
in the past year: they have enabled progress in computer vision, nat‐
ural language, and other fields. However, almost anything that falls
under the rubric of machine learning is artificial intelligence: classi‐
fication and clustering algorithms, various kinds of decision trees,
genetic algorithms, support vector machines, hierarchical temporal
memory, and many others. These techniques can be used by them‐
selves, or in combination with others. IBM’s Watson is a good exam‐
ple of ensemble learning: it is a rule-based system that incorporates
Producing Results 
| 
11

many other algorithms, depending on the problem it is solving. The
rules are largely hand-crafted, and the other algorithms need to be
painstakingly tuned to get good results.
Impressive as Watson is, systems that require huge amounts of hand
tuning are at best a stepping stone toward intelligence. Any general
AI, and most narrow AIs, will probably combine many algorithms,
rather than using a single, yet-to-be-discovered master algorithm.
But the tuning required to get good results is a major limitation:
Demis Hassabis, leader of the AlphaGo team, says that tuning is
“almost like an art form.” Is it really “artificial intelligence” if getting
good results requires years of work, and only a few specialists (Has‐
sabis says a few hundred) are capable of doing that work? The cre‐
ation of an engine like Watson is science, but it also requires a lot of
art. In addition, the need for manual optimization suggests that AIs
built this way are inherently narrow, designed to solve a single prob‐
lem. It’s very difficult to imagine optimizing a “general intelligence”
engine that can work on any problem. If you’re optimizing, you’re
almost certainly optimizing for something, for some specific appli‐
cation.
Do advances in AI depend on better algorithms, or better hardware?
The answer to that question is “both,” if the question is even mean‐
ingful. Even though clock speeds have stalled, our ability to put
more and more on a chip hasn’t stalled: AlphaGo’s 280 GPUs could
easily mean 200,000 cores. More important, though, we’ve seen a lot
of improvement in mathematical libraries and tools for using GPUs.
We may also see the use of ASICs and FPGAs (application-specific
integrated circuit and field-programmable gate arrays) in future AI
engines. In turn, ASICs and FPGAs will be critical to embedding AI
in hardware systems, many of which (think autonomous vehicles)
will need to run in hard real-time.
But even if the hardware is better, we will still need algorithms that
can be distributed across thousands or millions of nodes; we will
need algorithms that can reprogram FPGAs on the fly, to adapt the
hardware to the problems they are solving. MapReduce became
popular for data analysis because it suggested a way to parallelize a
large class of problems. Parallelism obviously works for AI; but what
are its limits? The hard fact of parallelism is that the part of the pro‐
gram that can’t be parallelized kills you. And the hallmark of most
parallel algorithms is that you need a phase that collects partial
results and generates a single result. AlphaGo may look at thousands
12 
| 
What Is Artificial Intelligence?

of alternatives when computing its next move; but at some point, it
needs to look at all the alternatives, evaluate which is best, and
present a single result. AlphaGo can take advantage of 280 GPUs;
what about a machine with 280,000? After all, the largest AI systems
we’ve built so far are a small fraction of the size of a rat brain, let
alone a human brain. What about algorithms that don’t lend them‐
selves to parallelism as well as neural networks?  How do you apply
feedback in systems where each element of the pipeline is taking a
different approach to the problem? Questions like these are likely to
drive AI research in the near future.
Throwing more (and faster) hardware at AI algorithms is likely to
get us better Go, chess, and Jeopardy players. We’ll be able to classify
images better and faster. But that’s an improvement in the problems
we can currently solve. Will more computing power get us from
supervised to unsupervised learning? Will it lead us from narrow
intelligence to general intelligence? That remains to be seen. Unsu‐
pervised learning is a hard problem, and it’s not clear that it can be
solved just by throwing more hardware at it. We’re still looking for a
“master algorithm” that may not exist.
Ethics and Futures
It is easy to get scared by talk of superhuman intelligence. And,
according to some, it is time to decide what we want our machines
to do, before it’s too late. While this position may be oversimplified,
it is very difficult to think about limiting devices that we can’t build,
and whose capabilities we can’t imagine now, and may never under‐
stand in the future. It is also difficult to say “no,” because I’m not
aware of any technology that hasn’t been invented because people
thought better of it beforehand. At different times in history, people
were afraid of many technologies that are now commonplace: at one
point, many thought that traveling over 60 miles per hour would be
fatal. Socrates was opposed to writing because he thought it would
lead to forgetfulness: imagine what he would have thought of our
technology!
But we can think about the future of AI, and how we will develop
machines that assist us. Here are a few suggestions:
Most fears of a super-intelligent AI aren’t really fears of a machine
we neither know or understand; they are fears about human nature
at its worst, coupled with unlimited power. We don’t imagine a
Ethics and Futures 
| 
13

machine that thinks thoughts we can’t comprehend; we imagine an
unbeatable Hitler or Stalin, whose thoughts we do comprehend. Our
fears are essentially human fears: fears of omnipotent machines act‐
ing like humans.
That isn’t to denigrate our fears, because we’ve seen that machine
learning does learn from us. Microsoft’s unfortunate Tay was a too-
perfect example of a conversational AI bot that “learned” racism and
bigotry from the people it talked to online. Google’s image classifica‐
tion that identified a black couple as “gorillas” was the result of poor
testing and a training set that didn’t have enough properly tagged
pictures of black people. Machines learn to be racist much the same
way that humans do: because we teach them to be that way, whether
intentionally or accidentally. That’s a human problem, and it’s one
that’s solvable. We can be more careful about what, and how, our
artificial intelligences learn. We can be more careful about what’s in
our training sets, how those sets are tagged; and we can filter what
kinds of answers we consider acceptable. None of this is terribly dif‐
ficult; it just has to be done. What’s more difficult in the current cli‐
mate is reaching a consensus that racism and hatred are not OK.
That’s a problem of human values, not machine intelligence. We can
build machines that reflect our values: we do that already. Are they
the values that we want to reflect? The White House’s Report on
Data Science, Big Risks, Big Opportunities: the Intersection of Big
Data and Civil Rights, concludes with a section on the need for
research on how to audit algorithms to “ensure that people are being
treated fairly.” As we move from “big data” to AI, the need to audit
our algorithms and make sure they reflect values we support will
only increase.
It is extremely important that research into artificial intelligence be
open and visible to the public. Not because we believe the public will
be less “afraid” of research that happens in the open (that may or
may not be true), or because the public will somehow become “used
to” the idea of super-intelligence; but because there is greater con‐
cern about research that goes on behind closed doors versus
research that goes on in public. Indeed, Unethical Research suggests
that the best way to create a healthy AI ecosystem is to publish ideas
for creating malevolent machines. Research will continue to go on
behind closed doors; it would be naive to think that military
research and intelligence services aren’t working on artificial intelli‐
gence. But we will be at the mercy of that research if there isn’t also
14 
| 
What Is Artificial Intelligence?

AI research happening in the public sphere. (Whether an organiza‐
tion such as Google or Facebook constitutes “behind closed doors”
or “in public view” is a debate worth having.) That’s the point of
OpenAI: “to advance digital intelligence in the way that is most
likely to benefit humanity as a whole, unconstrained by a need to
generate financial return.” OpenAI is a dramatic and surprising
answer to the fear of AI: push AI research forward as far as possible,
but in public, make sure that the public sphere remains ahead of
closed-door AI.
It is also important for research to be open and in the public sphere
because research’s origins often determine its application. Nuclear
energy is a good example. It’s possible to build safe, efficient nuclear
reactors that are fueled by Thorium. But Thorium reactors were
never built because they don’t help you build bombs, and research
into nuclear power was under the control of the defense department.
A reactor that doesn’t generate plutonium in usable quantities? Why
would anyone want that? Again, it’s naive to think that military and
national intelligence services won’t do excellent AI research. But if
AI research becomes the sole province of the military, we will have
excellent auto-targeting drones; if AI research becomes the sole
province of national intelligence, we will have excellent systems for
surreptitiously listening to and understanding conversations. Our
imaginations will be limited about what else AI might do for us, and
we will have trouble imagining AI applications other than murder‐
ous drones and the watchful ear of Big Brother. We may never
develop intelligent medical systems or robotic nurses’ aides.
If we want AI to serve humanity, it must be developed in public: as
part of the larger community of AI researchers, and as part of a
wider public discourse about our goals and aims. We must be careful
not to build our own worst nightmare; but we need to realize that
the nightmare is really just a more powerful version of ourselves.
Always in the Future
Mark Zuckerberg recently said that AI will be better than humans at
most basic tasks in 5 to 10 years. He may be correct, but it’s also
clear that he’s talking about narrow intelligence: specific tasks like
speech recognition, image classification, and of course, game play‐
ing. He continues to say “That doesn’t mean that the computers will
be thinking...” Depending on who you talk to, a real general intelli‐
Always in the Future 
| 
15

gence is 10 to 50 years out. Given the difficulty of predicting the
future of technology, the best answer is “more than 10 years,” and
possibly much more. When will human-level, machine intelligence
(HLMI) be achieved? A recent survey of experts suggests that HLMI
will occur (with 50% probability) sometime between 2040-2050.” As
Yann LeCun says, “Human-level general AI is several decades away.”
So, when will we get there, if ever? A few years ago, Jason Huggins
(@hugs) made a prescient remark about robots. Robots, he said, are
always in the future. From time to time, bits of robotics break off
and become part of the present; but when that happens, they’re no
longer considered robotics. In the 1920s, we would have considered
a modern dishwasher a super-intelligent robot; now, it’s just a dish‐
washer.
The same will inevitably happen for artificial intelligence. Indeed, it
is already happening. I have avoided making a distinction between
machine learning and AI; “machine learning” is a term that was
applied to ideas from AI research back when AI was disreputable.
Now, many of those ideas are commonplace. We don’t think twice
about Amazon recommendations or GPS navigation systems; we
take those for granted. We may find Facebook and Google’s ability to
tag photos creepy, but we don’t think AI when we see it. All serious
chess players practice against chess programs; so do beginning Go
players, and after AlphaGo’s success, practicing against a computer
will certainly extend to experts. These are artificial intelligences that
have already broken off and become parts of our world. In doing so,
AI morphed into IA (intelligence augmentation): autonomous tech‐
nology that trumped human abilities became assistive.
Will we ever be able to point to something and say “Yes, that’s artifi‐
cial intelligence”? Yes, certainly; we can do that now. What’s more
important is that we will inevitably be surrounded by AI, bathed in
it, even before we know it. We take plumbing for granted; we take
electricity for granted; our children take streaming music for gran‐
ted. We will take AI for granted, even as it becomes a larger part of
our lives.
16 
| 
What Is Artificial Intelligence?

About the Authors
Mike Loukides is vice president of content strategy for O’Reilly
Media, Inc. He has edited many highly regarded books on technical
subjects that don’t involve Windows programming. He’s particularly
interested in programming languages, Unix and what passes for
Unix these days, and system and network administration. Mike is
the author of System Performance Tuning and a coauthor of Unix
Power Tools. Most recently, he’s been fooling around with data and
data analysis, languages like R, Mathematica, and Octave, and think‐
ing about how to make books social.
Ben Lorica is the Chief Data Scientist of O’Reilly Media, and Pro‐
gram Director of Strata+Hadoop World and the O’Reilly Artificial
Intelligence conference. He has applied business intelligence, data
mining, machine learning, and statistical analysis in a variety of set‐
tings, including direct marketing, consumer and market research,
targeted advertising, text mining, and financial engineering.

