
D4267
theaiconf.com
Early adopters of applied AI have a unique opportunity to invent new 
business models, reshape industries, and build the impossible.
Put AI to work — right now.
AI is moving fast.  
Don’t fall behind.

Jon Bruner and Mike Barlow
What Are
Conversational Bots?
An Introduction to
and Overview of AI-Driven Chatbots
Boston
Farnham
Sebastopol
Tokyo
Beijing
Boston
Farnham
Sebastopol
Tokyo
Beijing

978-1-491-97263-2
[LSI]
What Are Conversational Bots?
by Jon Bruner and Mike Barlow.
Copyright © 2016 O’Reilly Media, Inc. All rights reserved.
Printed in the United States of America.
Published by O’Reilly Media, Inc., 1005 Gravenstein Highway North, Sebastopol, CA
95472.
O’Reilly books may be purchased for educational, business, or sales promotional use.
Online editions are also available for most titles (http://safaribooksonline.com). For
more 
information, 
contact 
our 
corporate/institutional 
sales 
department:
800-998-9938 or corporate@oreilly.com.
Editor: Marie Beaugureau
Production Editor: Dan Fauxsmith
Interior Designer: David Futato
Cover Designer: Randy Comer
Illustrator: Rebecca Demarest
September 2016:
 First Edition
Revision History for the First Edition
2016-09-13: First Release
The O’Reilly logo is a registered trademark of O’Reilly Media, Inc. What Are Conver‐
sational Bots?, the cover image, and related trade dress are trademarks of O’Reilly
Media, Inc.
While the publisher and the authors have used good faith efforts to ensure that the
information and instructions contained in this work are accurate, the publisher and
the authors disclaim all responsibility for errors or omissions, including without
limitation responsibility for damages resulting from the use of or reliance on this
work. Use of the information and instructions contained in this work is at your own
risk. If any code samples or other technology this work contains or describes is sub‐
ject to open source licenses or the intellectual property rights of others, it is your
responsibility to ensure that your use thereof complies with such licenses and/or
rights.

Table of Contents
1. What Are Conversational Bots?. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  1
Introduction to Bots                                                                            1
Making the Business Case for Bots                                                   2
Why Bots Loom Large                                                                        3
Bots as the Ultimate Source of Cheap Labor                                   4
Challenges to Consider                                                                       5
2. Industry Overview: The Ecosystem at a Glance. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
Platforms and Frameworks for Messaging and Agent
Communication                                                                               7
AI Platforms                                                                                       12
Roll Your Own AI                                                                              13
Bot Platforms and Toolkits                                                               14
Real-World Examples                                                                        15
v


CHAPTER 1
What Are Conversational Bots?
Introduction to Bots
In March, Microsoft CEO Satya Nadella declared that “bots are the
new apps.” Venture capitalist Benedict Evans writes that bots might
become the “third runtime, after the Web and native apps.”
Artificial intelligence (AI) has evolved to the stage where it can
parse intentions and churn out useful responses to practical quer‐
ies. And after a decade of texting and messaging on smartphones,
we’ve become comfortable with conversational interfaces. Will 2016
be remembered as “The Year of the Bot”?
Bots promise to inject information, intelligence, and online services
into just about any scenario. Bots could give workers superpowers,
make networks more accessible, reorder user experiences, and build
new ecosystems. They offer developers a faster way into users’ pock‐
ets as the app economy matures.
What exactly are bots? Here’s a good working definition: bots are
AI-driven pieces of software that converse in human terms. They’re
not quite ready to pass the Turing test, but ready enough for many
forms of commerce and messaging.
Bots are able to automate human tasks for which APIs don’t exist,
translating fluidly between unstructured language and structured
data. They promise to bring a new level of sophistication and conve‐
nience to interactions between humans and computers. Let’s break
that idea into two key elements:
1

1. Artificial Intelligence makes it possible for bots to parse human
language, understand intent, and compose replies. AI of some
sort is a key component of most bots, but many bots also have
humans underneath them—this is called “human in the loop.”
Bots may rely on humans to train them, or bots may act as fil‐
ters and qualifiers, gathering information to help humans work
more effectively.
2. Bots communicate in human language through a variety of
interfaces—IM, email, and voice are the platforms of greatest
interest now. This is a crucial aspect because bots can reach
their users anywhere, and they’re easy to install; instead of
downloading a new app, you just add a new contact in your IM
client. And unlike apps, which are almost all subject to the con‐
trol of Apple and Google, the field for bots is much more open
(for now, at least).
Making the Business Case for Bots
Bots can revolutionize the way we interact with computers by blend‐
ing artificial intelligence into human conversations, adding an ele‐
ment of computation to many scenarios that don’t involve
computation now.
Customer Relationship Management
Consumer-facing bots can assist customers with difficult transac‐
tions, make recommendations, and gather data. For instance, a bot
incorporated into an airline’s website could answer questions about
fees, rebook flights, and suggest add-ons like hotel and car reserva‐
tions. Even if the bot isn’t able to finish these exchanges, it could still
gather preliminary information (customer’s name, reservation num‐
ber, etc.) and pass it on to a customer service representative, saving
considerable time for the company’s call center. Matched to a
sophisticated data-mining backend, the bot builds up data profiles
that the airline can use to market vacations, travel deals, and addi‐
tional services.
Productivity
Specialized bots can make professional tasks easier. For instance, a
bot connected to an electronic medical record system could retrieve
2 
| 
Chapter 1: What Are Conversational Bots?

information faster than a conventional lookup; just ask “what was
the patient’s blood pressure during his January visit?”
Productivity bots like x.ai are already able to schedule meetings
through email, posing as a human assistant. The bot thus interjects
automatic scheduling into a scenario where automation might
otherwise be awkward.
Entertainment and Wellness Coaching
Bots can take advantage of the intimate, low-friction environment of
messaging to provide coaching, healthy reminders, or entertain‐
ment. For instance, a wellness bot, popping up inside the IM client
that you’re accustomed to using all day, could encourage you to
exercise or meditate. Game bots are already widespread.
Why Bots Loom Large
Bots have become an area of intense focus in the technology com‐
munity for three primary reasons:
Reason #1: Artificial intelligence has progressed enormously in the
last couple of years. At the high end, very sophisticated AI—like that
in Amazon’s Alexa, Apple’s Siri, Google’s Now, and Microsoft’s
Cortana—is now becoming available to developers through APIs.
At the moment, only Alexa and Cortana are completely open to
developers, but Google and Apple have signaled that they’re plan‐
ning to make their conversational platforms and AI engines avail‐
able as services.
At the lower end, accessible tools and libraries are democratizing AI,
putting very basic AI within reach of reasonably advanced generalist
developers. An individual can’t create something as sophisticated as
Siri, but he or she can use a library like TensorFlow or scikit-learn to
train and deploy a basic neural network.
Human in the loop is still a huge part of most well-funded bot
efforts. Humans train the bot, act as a fallback, or help in both areas.
In many cases, bots aren’t intended to replace humans; they’re
intended to augment humans, taking care of dull preliminaries and
sending the matter onward to a human, who can then be more effec‐
tive.
Why Bots Loom Large 
| 
3

Reason #2: People enjoy conversational interfaces, and companies
want to use the interface that will capture the attention of their cus‐
tomers. Messaging applications are ubiquitous. Facebook Messenger
is the most popular free app in the Google Play store; it and
WhatsApp, also owned by Facebook, have each been installed more
than a billion times on Android alone. Consumers spend more than
4 hours per week in communication apps, according to Nielsen.
More than half of WhatsApp users use the app more than once a
day; over 80% use it at least once daily. Line is similarly dominant in
Japan, as is WeChat in China.
Reason #3: The conventional app economy is stagnating. It’s getting
harder to break through with new apps, and even once they’re
installed it’s hard to get users to return to them. As recently noted in
The Economist:
The 20 most successful developers grab nearly half of all revenues
on Apple’s App Store. Building apps and promoting them is getting
more costly. Meanwhile, users’ enthusiasm is waning, as they find
downloading apps and navigating between them a hassle. A quarter
of all downloaded apps are abandoned after a single use.
The majority of smartphone users have 20 or fewer apps on their
phones, and, according to the Pew Research Center, “almost half of
app downloaders report that they use five or fewer apps at least once
per week.” Five apps account for 88% of the time that the average US
smartphone owner spends on his or her phone. Most apps aren’t
kept longer than a day after users download them. Just over 3% of
apps are still active 30 days after being downloaded.
In light of those stats, the outlook for apps doesn’t look especially
promising. Now that our collective love affair with apps has appa‐
rently cooled, bots present an appealing way to reach users.
Bots as the Ultimate Source of Cheap Labor
If you’re running a customer contact center, you’re probably already
considering the idea of using bots to replace or augment human
workers. In a sense, bots represent the final step in a downward spi‐
ral of cost reduction.
The good news is that industry experts believe that using bots to
replace or help humans working in call centers will actually improve
customer service. Companies with call centers now work to discour‐
age their customers from contacting them because the cost of servic‐
4 
| 
Chapter 1: What Are Conversational Bots?

ing customers with humans is high. Lower-cost customer service
could mean more customer service. And since the bots will have
access to much more information than any human worker could
possibly have, ideally, the bot will “know” the answer to your ques‐
tion before you even ask it.
But bots aren’t just about replacing workers. They promise to make
workers more productive by taking care of time-consuming repeti‐
tive tasks like scheduling meetings, coordinating team discussions,
and updating databases. Nearly any simple, well-defined human
office task could be addressed by a bot, freeing humans for more
complex work.
Challenges to Consider
Despite its promise, the rise of the bots is by no means a done deal.
There are plenty of open questions.
• Can generalist AI become sophisticated enough to support
legions of bots operating across multiple industries and various
markets? Many bot developers working now report that AI-as-
a-service offerings aren’t sufficient beyond very early proto‐
types.
• From the perspective of user experience, what are bots good
for? That question is driving lots of experimentation. Some of
the most commonly discussed bots (such as bots for ordering
pizzas) are actually quite difficult to implement in ways that are
useful and appealing to users.
• How will user expectations and interaction models change? Bots
are in a very early stage of development now, and most users see
bots as experimental. Two decades ago, users were uncomforta‐
ble formulating search queries—hence Ask.com, which allowed
Internet neophytes to search using well-formed questions. Now,
of course, we’ve adjusted our behavior to use Google search.
How much will users be willing to change their behavior in
order to accommodate bots?
• How will bots blend human and artificial intelligence? Most
complex bot applications currently involve humans in the loop.
Will these humans remain core components of bots?
• How will bot discovery work? One problem with mobile apps
that’s driving developers to bots is that users don’t browse app
Challenges to Consider 
| 
5

stores very much to discover new apps. So we can’t expect them
to browse bot stores to discover new bots. Platforms like Face‐
book Messenger and Slack might eventually be able to suggest
bots based on context, but that needs to be handled very care‐
fully to avoid irritating users.
• Finally, what does the commercial model look like? The current
generation of consumer bots includes many that make money
on affiliate fees: when the bot recommends, say, an air travel
itinerary, it gets a kickback from the issuing airline. Is that sus‐
tainable? How will the bot platforms cash in? And can they cash
in without compromising their neutrality?
In the next section, we’ll look at some of the players and platforms in
the emerging bot landscape.
6 
| 
Chapter 1: What Are Conversational Bots?

CHAPTER 2
Industry Overview:
The Ecosystem at a Glance
The bot ecosystem is developing quickly, but its contours have
begun to emerge in the abundant platforms and frameworks avail‐
able to bot developers. Here are brief descriptions of the most nota‐
ble.
Platforms and Frameworks for Messaging and
Agent Communication
Bots live on these platforms.
Amazon Alexa
Alexa is the voice service behind Amazon’s Echo, a voice-controlled
speaker. Developers can write plug-ins (Amazon calls them “skills”)
that enable users to interact with services using voice commands.
Skills use the Alexa Skills Kit, a bundle of tools provided by Ama‐
zon.
The Alexa Skills Kit includes a step-by-step checklist for getting
started, designing voice user interfaces, building, hosting, and
reviewing code, and submitting skills for certification. It also
includes the Smart Home Skill API, which allows developers to
teach Alexa how to control lighting and thermostat devices. All of
the code runs in the cloud.
7

Apple Siri
In a move that would have been unimaginable a few years ago,
Apple announced in June 2016 that it would open Siri to developers.
The move makes it possible to integrate Siri deeply into iOS apps.
SiriKit enables iOS 10 apps to work with Siri. Developers can build
extensions that communicate with Siri and register with specific
domains that define the tasks that the app can perform. Siri handles
voice and natural language recognition and can work with your
extension to get information and handle user requests.
In addition, SiriKit enables messaging, photo search, phone calls to
other apps, ride booking, and personal payments. 
Facebook Messenger
Facebook, which owns WhatsApp as well as Messenger, is by far the
world’s largest messaging platform, available on nearly any mobile
or desktop device (outside of China, that is, where WhatsApp works
but Messenger is usually blocked).
The Facebook Messenger Platform enables developers to build bots
with three main capabilities:
1. An API for sending and receiving text, images, and rich bubbles
with CTA (call-to-action) buttons;
2. The ability to create generic structured message templates with
CTAs, horizontal scroll, URLs, and postbacks, and;
3. The tools to create a welcome screen and null state CTAs.
Facebook also offers natural language assistance through its wit.ai
bot engine. This enables ongoing training of bots using sample con‐
versations that effectively turns natural language into structured
data. See the wit.ai entry in the AI Platforms section.
With Facebook Messenger you can use web plugins, Messenger
Codes, Messenger Links, and Messenger Usernames.
The platform additionally provides access to various Messenger
tools, including Shopify, Twilio, and Zendesk. Facebook also enables
businesses (such as restaurants or ride services) that use SMS for
real-time communication (“Your food has arrived” or “Your ride is
here”) to transfer those conversations to Messenger.
8 
| 
Chapter 2: Industry Overview: The Ecosystem at a Glance

Facebook provides some basic information about users to bot devel‐
opers, but notably does not give Facebook profile information to
Messenger bots.
Google Now and Google Assistant
There has been much speculation about when and how Google will
formally unveil developer tools for bot builders, but so far nothing
has been released. However, it seems likely that Google will follow in
the footsteps of Microsoft and Apple, both of which provide support
for bot developers.
Google Now is the search giant’s answer to Siri: a voice-controlled,
context-aware assistant available on Android. Now uses a natural
language user interface “to answer questions, make recommenda‐
tions, and perform actions by delegating requests to a set of web
services.” In addition to answering user-initiated queries, it delivers
information that predicts what users might want, based on their
search habits.
Now can handle basic tasks like setting timers and alarms, and it has
made some of this functionality available to app developers through
a handful of pre-defined triggers. Plus, it can draw other search-
based insights from the pervasive intelligence layer called Google
Assistant.
At Google I/O 2016, Google clarified the structure of its intelligent
conversational services: Google Assistant is an overarching intelli‐
gence layer accessible through the forthcoming voice-enabled wire‐
less speaker Google Home (a device similar to Amazon’s Echo); the
new Android Wear watches, and the Allo and Duo apps, which
allow text chatting and video chatting, respectively.
Microsoft
Microsoft is making perhaps the most comprehensive bid to com‐
pete seriously in the bot ecosystem, with two important bot plat‐
forms of its own as well as tools that connect bots to any other major
platform.
Cortana, Microsoft’s voice assistant, is available to developers
through an SDK, and Skype acts as a messaging platform for bots.
Microsoft has also published Bot Framework, an open-source
library for developing bots on SMS, email, Skype, Slack, Messenger,
Platforms and Frameworks for Messaging and Agent Communication 
| 
9

GroupMe, Telegram, Kik, and any other platform through a direct
API.
Slack
Slack is uniquely positioned as a workplace messaging platform,
which has made it attractive for a wide variety of productivity-
oriented bots. These bots act as “bot users,” a term that Slack uses to
differentiate them from human users. There are custom bots and
app bots, each serving a different purpose and offering different
functionality.
Unlike some other major platforms that restrict bots to one-on-one
conversations, Slack bots are able to participate in the group conver‐
sations that are the basis of Slack collaboration.
“Bot users have many of the same qualities as their human counter‐
parts…with profile photos, names, bios…and can connect to Slack
to allow users to converse with them in real-time via websockets,”
Slack explains.
Slack has two different kinds of bot users: custom bots and app bots.
Each serves a different purpose and offers different functionality.
For more details, read Slack’s bot user documentation.
Kik
What Slack is to the workplace, Kik is to teenagers: a specialized
platform with a relatively focused demographic. Kik’s bot platform
offers a clear value proposition: “On Kik’s chat platform, developers
can build, grow, and (soon) monetize for a highly engaged teen
audience…There’s nothing to download, no icons to add to the
homescreen, and no memory hogging…About 40 percent of U.S.
teens use Kik…Your bot could have direct access to more than 300
million registered users.”
Kik appeals directly to marketers, noting that people spend more of
their mobile time in chat and that 1.4 billion people—many of them
teens—used a chat app in 2015.
Line
Line dominates messaging in Japan, where it’s installed on 80% of
Android devices and has become a cultural phenomenon, and is also
popular in Indonesia and Singapore.
10 
| 
Chapter 2: Industry Overview: The Ecosystem at a Glance

Line’s BOT API allows you to send and receive messages with Line
users through either a Line official account or a Line@ account.
Snapchat
The ephemeral-messaging service Snapchat has become spectacu‐
larly popular despite a user interface that’s impenetrable to anyone
over 25. It’s never offered an official API for bot developers, though
a handful of efforts to reverse-engineer an unofficial API, like Cas‐
per, have briefly gained traction at points. Snapchat does offer an
API for advertisers called Snapchat Partners.
Telegram
Berlin-based Telegram emphasizes security, offering “secret chats”
with end-to-end encryption and completely public source code.
Telegram presents itself as a nonprofit dedicated to security and pri‐
vacy, though, as the Washington Post wrote in 2015, its origins are
murkier than that.
Telegram’s Bot API provides access to the platform for third-party
developers. “Bots are simply Telegram accounts operated by soft‐
ware—not people—and they’ll often have AI features. They can do
anything—teach, play, search, broadcast, remind, connect, integrate
with other services, or even pass commands to the Internet of
Things,” says Telegram.
See bots built by the platform’s beta testers at Telegram’s Bot Store.  
Twilio
SMS was the messaging platform that started it all. Until Twilio
came along in 2008, developers had to rely on messy, inconsistent
integrations to send text messages; now sending a text (or placing a
voice call) is as simple as writing a couple of API calls.
WeChat
WeChat is dominant in China—not only in messaging, but also as a
payments, voice, file sharing, and location platform. It’s home to a
robust bot and conversational-application ecosystem, including
Microsoft’s immensely popular Xiaoice bot.
Platforms and Frameworks for Messaging and Agent Communication 
| 
11

Businesses usually establish “official accounts,” which offer user-
management tools and can send updates to subscribers. A compre‐
hensive API offers access to official account functions.
WeChat’s popularity in China has led many observers to wonder
whether it’s a glimpse of the future of bots and messaging in North
America and Europe. Others, like Sarah Guo on our Bots Podcast,
point out that WeChat arose in a computing environment that’s very
different from the computing environment in the West.
AI Platforms
Bots are interfaces to artificial intelligence, and the sophistication of
a bot is directly linked to the sophistication of its AI model. Fortu‐
nately for bot developers, several companies provide “artificial intel‐
ligence as a service,” making it easy to implement very basic AI.
Api.ai
Api.ai is a platform for conversational voice interfaces aimed at
mobile devices, web interfaces, and embedded systems. It’s the com‐
pany behind Assistant, a popular conversational assistant app with
more than 20 million users.
The platform provides SDKs and helper libraries for Android, iOS/
Watch  OS/Mac OS X, Ruby, Webkit HTML5, JavaScript, Node.js,
Cordova, Unity, .NET (WP8, W10), C++, Xamarin, Python, and
PHP (community supported).
IBM Watson Conversation
Developers can now tap into the resources of Watson—IBM’s large-
scale cognitive system for understanding, reasoning and learning—
for developing bots and virtual agents.
Using Conversation requires signing up for a Bluemix account. (To
encourage interest, IBM offers a free 30-day trial.)
IBM’s Watson Developer Cloud (WDC) offers “one-stop shopping”
for developers, providing basic but essential cognitive capabilities
such as Speech to Text, Text to Speech, Natural Language Classi‐
fier, Dialog, and Visual Recognition.
12 
| 
Chapter 2: Industry Overview: The Ecosystem at a Glance

Wit.ai
Wit.ai is a natural language platform for developers. In addition to
using it as a platform for building chatbots, developers can also use
it to build apps for mobile devices, home-automation systems, wear‐
able devices, and robots. Wit.ai says it’s currently used by 45,000
developers.
The free platform was acquired last year by Facebook, which puts it
front and center in the emerging bot development ecosystem. The
platform’s value proposition is straightforward: “Your users give us
voice or text, you get back structured data.”
For newcomers, the platform offers a “quickstart” process consisting
of eight relatively simple steps. Wit.ai’s FAQ is worth reading even if
you don’t plan to build your own bots.
Roll Your Own AI
AI as a service may be enough to get started with bots, but many bot
developers find that they need to build their own artificial intelli‐
gence engines to make sense of specialized use cases. Fortunately,
open source machine-learning libraries, often supported by big
technology companies, have improved immensely in the last couple
of years, becoming more powerful and easier to implement. Never‐
theless, using any of these libraries to build bots requires a funda‐
mental understanding of machine-learning techniques.
Among the most popular deep learning frameworks are TensorFlow
(developed and open sourced by Google), scikit-learn, Theano (pop‐
ular in academic AI research), and Torch (supported by Facebook,
Twitter, and Google, among others).
Roll Your Own AI 
| 
13

1 Disclosure: Automat is a portfolio company of O’Reilly AlphaTech Ventures, a venture
capital firm affiliated with O’Reilly Media.
Bot Platforms and Toolkits
Tools, platforms, and resources that make it easy to deploy chatbots.
Automat
Automat1 offers a platform and a set of approachable WYSIWYG
tools for building bots that learn over time. Its AI goes beyond tradi‐
tional tree-building tools: it incorporates understanding of entire
conversations, not just single inputs, and can improve through use
with minimal intervention from a bot’s creators. Automat also
includes mechanisms for bringing humans into the loop.
Automat initially supports Messenger, Kik, and Slack.
BotKit
Developed by Austin-based Howdy.ai, BotKit is an open-source
framework for messaging. It offers built-in calls for Slack, Facebook
Messenger, and Twilio, with a particular emphasis on Slack.
Chatfuel
Chatfuel is an easy-to-use toolkit that promises “a full-featured chat‐
bot in 7 minutes.” It’s the platform behind several news-media bots,
including those from Forbes and TechCrunch. Among Chatfuel’s
features: the ability to import data through plugins, turning static
information like RSS feeds into interactive bots.
Pandorabots
Pandorabots was co-founded by Richard Wallace, the computer sci‐
entist who created AIML. The company offers chatbot development
tools through its Playground development environment, an
artificial-intelligence-as-a-service API, and bot hosting services.
Pandorabots supports integrations with Twilio, Hubot, Slack, Twit‐
ter, Telegram, and Firebase.
14 
| 
Chapter 2: Industry Overview: The Ecosystem at a Glance

Sequel
Sequel offers “write once, publish everywhere” tools for building
bots, with particular emphasis on games and entertainment and on
bots that convey personality. An example: the Sequel Stories bot
publishes interactive fiction through messaging.
Real-World Examples
Bots are already in use in a variety of applications—from internal
productivity boosters to outward-facing automated customer-
service assistants.
Personal Finance
Fidelity
Fidelity Investments enables Echo users to get market updates and
quotes through Alexa. While it’s not quite a bot, it’s certainly a major
step in the direction of providing voice-enabled interactivity with
Fidelity’s automated systems. Fidelity is reportedly working on
extending the service to add more functionality, including authenti‐
cation for Fidelity account holders.  
Trim
Trim is a bot that analyzes your online subscriptions and helps you
cancel the ones you’re paying for but don’t really want. It scans
through huge amounts of credit and debit card data to identify
recurring charges, then offers to initiate the cancellation process.
Travel
KLM Royal Dutch Airlines
KLM offers a Messenger bot that provides automatic flight remind‐
ers, updates, and access to boarding passes. Passengers can register
for the Messenger service during booking. For questions that go
beyond the bot’s automated capabilities, passengers are seamlessly
connected with a human agent through the chat interface.
Real-World Examples 
| 
15

Lola
Lola is a travel app that blends artificial intelligence and human
agents, using software to manage logistics and build customer pro‐
files, and people to make decisions that have to do with taste. Lola
was co-founded by Paul English, who started Kayak in 2004.
Alterra.ai
Alterra is a completely automated messenger bot that can serve as a
virtual AI travel agent, making recommendations on where to go
and what to see and booking flights and hotels. It is currently live on
Facebook and Telegram.
Productivity
Amy (x.ai)
Amy, currently in pre-release, is an AI-powered personal assistant
designed to help you schedule meetings. Users can add amy@x.ai or
andrew@x.ai to any email thread about scheduling, and the service
takes over as a human assistant would.
Clara
Clara is also an AI-powered personal assistant and virtual schedul‐
ing agent. It is a hybrid system combining human and machine
capabilities. Clara’s human component is “ a global distributed work‐
force of remote assistants”  that provides “reliability, contextual
awareness, and empathy,” writes Olga Narvskaya, who runs Product
Operations and Growth at Claralabs.
Cobalt
Cobalt’s CRM Bot, which is currently in its preview stage, promises
to provide “All the CRM, with none of the clicks.” Instead of search‐
ing for a record in a conventional UI, an account manager might
simply say “Find Sarah Connor.” You wouldn’t have to create a new
item manually, you would just say, “Create lead Sarah Connor.”
Rather than going through the steps of attaching a file, you would
say, “Attach to lead Sarah Connor as PowerPoint presentation.“
16 
| 
Chapter 2: Industry Overview: The Ecosystem at a Glance

Viv
Built by much of the same team that created Siri, Viv is a unified
personal assistant that can look up information and make transac‐
tions. It will accessible to developers to build additional functional‐
ity on top of the assistant-as-platform.
Viv’s breakthrough is what its creators call dynamic program gener‐
ation—a type of sophisticated artificial intelligence that trains itself
on new functions.
Viv has been demonstrated in public, but is not yet available to
download.
Retail
Macy’s
Macy’s On Call, currently in pilot testing, can answer the kinds of basic
questions that customers inside a Macy’s store might have, like where to
find specific products, in English or Spanish. It can also provide fast
access to live Macy’s salespeople, who, in theory, should have more time
to help customers now that a bot can take care of simple ques‐
tions. Macy’s On Call is built on top of IBM’s Watson AI engine.
Whole Foods Market
As Nichele Lindstrom, director of digital marketing at Whole Foods,
points out, “over 50% of recipe searches happen in an aisle, in a
store.” Customers want to know what they can make with an ingre‐
dient they’re thinking of buying.
The Whole Foods Messenger bot makes recipe search fast and natu‐
ral for people who might be standing in a grocery aisle, using both
free-text input and Messenger buttons to narrow options.
Burger King
The fast-food chain Burger King has introduced a Facebook Mes‐
senger chatbot that shows nearby locations, displays menu choices,
takes orders, suggests upgrades (“Make it a meal?”), confirms
orders, estimates when your order will be ready, and lets you pay—
all through your mobile device. (If you don’t want a burger,
try TacoBell’s TacoBot, which is accessed through Slack.)
Real-World Examples 
| 
17

Burger King’s app is only available at limited locations, but it repre‐
sents an important step in the evolution of the QSR (quick service
restaurant) industry. Retailers will be watching closely to see how
smoothly the mobile payment component works when the bot is
rolled out to the larger market.
18 
| 
Chapter 2: Industry Overview: The Ecosystem at a Glance

About the Authors
Jon Bruner, director of IoT, hardware, and now bots at O’Reilly
Media, is a data journalist who approaches questions that interest
him by writing and coding. He previously served as data editor at
Forbes Magazine.
Mike Barlow is an award-winning journalist, author, and commen‐
tator. He is the author of Learning to Love Data Science (O’Reilly
Media, 2015), and the coauthor of The Executive’s Guide to Enter‐
prise Social Media Strategy (Wiley, 2011), and Partnering with the
CIO: The Future of IT Sales Seen Through the Eyes of Key Decision
Makers (Wiley, 2007). He is also the writer of many articles, reports,
and white papers on numerous topics such as smart cities, social
networking, cloud computing, IT infrastructure, predictive mainte‐
nance, data analytics, and data visualization.
Over the course of a long career, Barlow was a reporter and editor at
several respected suburban daily newspapers, including The Journal
News and the Stamford Advocate. His feature stories and columns
appeared regularly in The Los Angeles Times, Chicago Tribune, Miami
Herald, Newsday, and other major US dailies. He has also written
extensively for O’Reilly Media.
A graduate of Hamilton College, he is a licensed private pilot, avid
reader, and enthusiastic ice hockey fan.

