v2.0
October 2006
The Wolfen
Whitley Strieber
 
 
IT HAPPENS IN THE DEAD OF NIGHT
A series of killings with bizarre characteristics that  have  the  police  baffled.  When  the
news becomes public, people in the city begin living in terror.
 
THE WOLFEN
There is no defense…
contents
contents
contents
contents
Chapter 1
Chapter 2
Chapter 3
Chapter 4
Chapter 5
Chapter 6
Chapter 7
Chapter 8
Chapter 9
Chapter 10
Chapter 11
Chapter 12
Epilogue
This low-priced Bantam Book has been completely reset in a type face designed for easy reading, and was
printed from new plates. It contains the complete text of the original hardcover edition.
NOT ONE WORD HAS BEEN OMITTED.
 
THE WOLFEN
A Bantam Book / published by arrangement with
William Morrow and Company, Inc.

 
PRINTING HISTORY
Morrow edition published August 1978
Bantam edition / July 1979
2nd printing… July 1979 4th printing… July 1979
3rd printing… July 1979 5th printing…December 1979
6th printing…August 1981
 
All rights reserved.
 
Copyright © 1978 by Whitley Strieber.
 
This book may not be reproduced in whole or in part, by
mimeograph or any other means, without permission.
For information address: William Morrow and Company, Inc.,
103 Madison Avenue, New York, N.Y. 10016.
 
ISBN 0-553-20268-5
 
Published simultaneously in the United States and Canada Bantam Books are published by Bantam Books,
Inc. Its trademark, consisting of the words “Bantam Books” and the portrayal of a bantam, is Registered in
U.S. Patent and Trademark Office and In other countries. Marca Registrada. Bantam Books, Inc., 666 Fifth
Avenue, New York, New York 10103.
For Anne
 
Since all is well, keep it so: 
Wake not the sleeping wolf.
—Shakespeare 
   Henry IV, Part 2
Chapter 1
Chapter 1
Chapter 1
Chapter 1
^ »
In  Brooklyn  they  take  abandoned  cars  to  the  Fountain  Avenue  Automobile  Pound
adjacent to the Fountain Avenue Dump. The pound and the dump occupy land shown on
maps as “Spring Creek Park (Proposed).” There is no spring, no creek, and no park.
Normally the pound is silent, its peace disturbed only by an occasional fight among the
packs of wild dogs that roam there, or perhaps the cries of the sea gulls  that  hover  over
the stinking, smoldering dump nearby.
The members of the Police Auto Squad who visit the pound to  mark  derelicts  for  the
crusher do not  consider  the  place  dangerous.  Once  in a  while  the  foot-long  rats  will  get
aggressive and become the victims of target practice. The scruffy little wild dogs will also
attack  every  so  often,  but  they  can  usually  be  dealt  with  by  a  shot  into  the  ground.
Auto-pound  duty  consists  of  marking  big  white  X’s  on  the  worst  of  the  derelicts  and
taking Polaroids of them to prove that they were beyond salvage in case any owners turn
up.

It isn’t the kind of job that the men associate with danger, much less getting killed, so
Hugo DiFalco and Dennis Houlihan would have laughed in your face if you told them they
had only three minutes to live when they heard the first sound behind them.
“What was that?” Houlihan asked. He was bored and wouldn’t have minded  getting  a
couple of shots off at a rat.
“A noise.”
“Brilliant. That’s what I thought it was too.”
They both laughed. Then there was another  sound,  a  staccato  growl  that  ended  on a
murmuring high note. The two men looked at one another. “That sounds like my brother
singing in the shower,” DiFalco said.
From ahead of them came further sounds—rustlings and more of  the  unusual  growls.
DiFalco and Houlihan stopped. They weren’t joking anymore, but they also weren’t afraid,
only curious. The  wet,  ruined  cars  just  didn’t  seem  to  hold  any  danger  on this  dripping
autumn afternoon. But there was something out there.
They were now in the center of a circle of half-heard rustling movement. As both men
realized  that  something  had  surrounded  them,  they  had  their  first  twinge  of  concern.
They now had less than one minute of life remaining. Both of them lived with the central
truth of police work—it could happen anytime. But what the hell was happening now?
Then  something  stepped  gingerly  from  between  two  derelicts  and  stood  facing  the
victims.
The men were not frightened, but they sensed danger. As it had before in moments of
peril, Hugo DiFalco’s mind turned to  a  brief  thought  of  his  wife,  of  how  she  liked  to  say
“We’re an us.” Dennis Houlihan felt  a  shiver  of  prickles  come  over  him  as  if  the  hair  all
over his body was standing up.
“Don’t move, man,” DiFalco said.
It snarled at the voice. “There’s more  of   ’em  behind  us,  buddy.”  Their  voices  were
low and controlled, the tone of professionals in trouble. They moved closer together; their
shoulders touched. Both men knew that one of them had to turn around, the  other  keep
facing this way. But they didn’t need to talk about it; they had worked together too  long
to have to plan their moves.
DiFalco started to make the turn and draw his pistol. That was the mistake.
Ten seconds later their throats were being torn out. Twenty seconds later the last life
was  pulsing  out  of  their  bodies.  Thirty  seconds  later  they  were  being  systematically
consumed.
Neither man had made a sound. Houlihan had seen the one in front of them twitch its
eyes, but before he could follow the movement there was a searing pain in his throat and
he was suddenly, desperately struggling  for  air  through  the  bubbling  torrent  of  his  own
blood.
DiFalco’s  hand  had  just  gripped  the  familiar  checkered  wooden  butt  of  his  service
revolver when  it  was  yanked  violently  aside.  The  impression  of  impossibly  fast-moving
shapes entered his astonished  mind,  then  something  slammed  into  his  chest  and  he  too
was bleeding, in his imagination protecting his throat as in reality his body slumped to the
ground and his mind sank into darkness.
The attackers moved almost too quickly, their speed born of nervousness at the youth
of their victims. The shirts were torn open, the white chests exposed, the entrails tugged
out and taken away, the precious organs swallowed. The rest was left behind.

In less than five more minutes it  was  over.  The  hollow,  ravaged  corpses  lay  there  in
the mud, two ended lives now food for the wild scavengers of the area.
For a long time nothing more moved at the Fountain Avenue Automobile Pound.  The
cries of gulls echoed among the rustling hulks  of  the  cars.  Around  the  corpses  the  blood
coagulated  and  blackened.  As  the  afternoon  drew  on,  the  autumn  mist  became  rain,
covering the dead policemen with droplets of water end making the blood run again.
Night fell.
Rats worried the corpses until dawn.
The two men had been listed AWOL for fourteen hours. Most unusual for these guys.
They were both family types, steady and reliable. AWOL wasn’t their style. But still, what
could  happen  to  two  experienced  policemen  on marking  duty  at  the  auto  pound?  That
was a question nobody would even try to answer until a search was made for the men.
Police  work  might  be  dangerous,  but  nobody  seriously  believed  that  DiFalco  and
Houlihan were in any real trouble. Maybe there had been a family emergency and the two
had failed to check in. Maybe a lot of things. And maybe there was some trouble. Nobody
realized that the world had just become a much more dangerous place, and they wouldn’t
understand  that  for  quite  some  time.  Right  now  they  were  just  looking  for  a  couple  of
missing  policemen.  Right  now  the  mystery  began  and  ended  with  four  cops  poking
through the auto pound for signs of their buddies.
“They better not be sleeping in some damn car.” Secretly all four men hoped that the
two  AWOL  officers  were  off  on a  bender  or  something.  You’d  rather  see  that  than  the
other possibility.
A cop screamed. The sound stunned the other three to silence because it was one they
rarely heard.
“Over here,” the rookie called in a choking voice.
“Hold on, man.” The other three converged on the spot  as  the  rookie’s  cries  sounded
again and again. When the older men got there he slumped against a car.
The three older cops cursed.
“Call the hell in. Get Homicide out here. Seal the area. Jesus Christ!”
They covered the remains with their rainslickers. They put their hats where the faces
had been.
The police communications network responded fast; fellow officers were dead, nobody
wasted time. Ten minutes after the initial alarms, had gone out the phone was ringing in
the  half-empty  ready-room  of  the  Brooklyn  Homicide  Division.  Detective  Becky  Neff
picked it up. “Neff,” the gruff voice of the Inspector said, “you and Wilson’re assigned to a
case in the Seventy-fifth Precinct.”
“The what?”
“It’s  the  Fountain  Avenue  Dump.  Got  a  double  cop  killing,  mutilation,  probable  sex
assault, cannibalism. Get the hell out there fast.” The line clicked.
“Wake up,  George,  we’ve  got  a  case,”  Neff  growled.  “We’ve  got  a  bad  one.”  She  had
hardly absorbed what the  Inspector  had  said—mutilation  and  cannibalism?  What  in the
name  of  God  had  happened  out  there?  “Somebody  killed  two  cops  and  cannibalized
them.”
Wilson,  who  had  been  resting  in  a  tilted-back  chair  after  a  grueling  four-hour
paperwork session, leaned forward and got to his feet.

“Let’s go. Where’s the scene?”
“Fountain Avenue Dump. Seventy-fifth Precinct.”
“Goddamn  out-of-the-way  place.”  He  shook  his  head.  “Guys  must  have  gotten
themselves jumped.”
They  went  down  to  Becky  Neff’s  old  blue  Pontiac  and  set  the  flasher  up  on  the
dashboard. She pulled the car out of its parking place and edged into the dense  traffic  of
downtown Brooklyn. Wilson flipped on the radio and reported to the dispatcher.  “Siren’s
working,” Wilson commented as he flipped the toggle switch. The siren responded with an
electronic  warble,  and  he  grunted  with  satisfaction;  it  had  been  on the  blink  for  over  a
month, and  there  had  been  no response  from  the  repair  unit.  Budget  cuts  had  reduced
this  once-efficient  team  to  exactly  twelve  men  for  the  entire  fleet  of  police  vehicles.
Unmarked cars were low on the list of precedence for flasher and siren repairs.
“I  fixed  it,”  Becky  Neff  said,  “and  I’m  damn  glad  now.”  The  ride  to  the  car  pound
would be made much easier by the siren, and time could not be wasted.
Wilson raised his eyebrows. “You fixed it?”
“I  borrowed  the  manual  and  fixed  it.  Nothing  to  it.”  Actually  she  had  gotten  a
neighborhood electronics freak to do the job, a guy with a computer in his living room. But
there was no reason to let Wilson know that.
“You fixed it,” Wilson said again.
“You’re repeating yourself.”
He shook his head.
As  the  car  swung  onto  the  Brooklyn-Queens  Expressway  he  used  the  siren,  flipping
the  toggle  to  generate  a  series  of  startling  whoops  that  cleared  something  of  a  path  for
them.  But  traffic  was  even  worse  as  they  approached  the  Battery  Tunnel  interchange,
and the siren did little good in the confusion of trucks and buses. “Step on it, Becky.”
“I’m stepping. You’re working the siren.”
“I don’t care what you do, but move!”
His outburst made her want to snap back at him, but she understood how he felt. She
shared his emotions and knew his anger was directed at the road. Cop killings made  you
hate the world, and the damn city in particular.
Wilson leaned  out  of  his  window  and  shouted  at  the  driver  of  a  truck  stuck  in  the
middle of the lane. “Police! Get that damn thing moving or you’re under arrest!”
The driver shot the finger but moved the vehicle. Becky Neff jammed her accelerator
to the floor, skidding around more slowly moving traffic, at times breaking into the clear,
at times stuck again.
As  the  dashboard  clock  moved  through  the  better  part  of  an  hour  they  approached
their destination. They got off the B-Q-E and went straight out Flatbush Avenue, into the
sometimes seedy, sometimes neat residential areas beyond. The precincts  rolled  by,  the
78th, the 77th, the 73rd. Finally they entered the 75th and turned onto Flatlands Avenue,
a street of nondescript shops in a racially mixed lower- and middle-income neighborhood.
The 75th was as average a precinct as there was in New York. About a hundred thousand
people lived there, not many poor and not many rich, and about evenly divided between
black, white, and Hispanic.
The 75th was the kind of precinct you never read about in the papers, the kind of place
where policemen lived out good solid careers without ever shooting a man—not  the  kind

of place where they got killed, much less mutilated and cannibalized.
Finally  they  turned  onto  Fountain  Avenue.  In  the  distance  a  little  clutch  of  flashers
could be seen in the dismal autumn light—that must mark the official vehicles pulled up to
the entrance of the Automobile Pound. The scene of the crime. And judging from the news
cars  careening  down  the  street,  the  75th  Precinct  wasn’t  going  to  be  an  obscure  place
much longer.
“Who’s Precinct Captain?” Neff asked her superior  officer.  Wilson  was  senior  man  on
the team, a fact which he was careful to make sure she never forgot. He also had a terrific
memory for details.
“Gerardi,  I  think,  something  Gerardi.  Good  enough  cop.  The  place  is  tight  s’far  as  I
know. Nothin’ much going on. It’s not Midtown South, if you know what I mean.”
“Yeah.”  What  Wilson  meant  was  that  this  precinct  was  clean—no  bad  cops,  no  mob
connections, no serious graft. Unlike Midtown South there wasn’t even the opportunity.
“Sounds like it’s  a  psycho  case  to  me,”  Neff  said.  She  was  always  careful  to  pick  her
words when she theorized around Wilson. He was scathing when he heard poorly thought
out ideas and had no tolerance for people with less skill than he himself possessed. Which
was to say, he was intolerant of almost the entire police force. He was probably  the  best
detective  in  Homicide,  maybe  the  best  on  the  force.  He  was  also  lazy,  venal,  inclined
toward a Victorian view of women,  and  a  profound  slob.  Except  for  their  abilities  in the
craft of police detection, Becky liked to think they had nothing in common. Where Wilson
was  a  slob,  Becky  tended  to  be  orderly.  She  was  always  the  one  who  kept  at  the
paperwork when Wilson gave up, and who kept the dreary minutiae of their professional
lives organized.
She and Wilson didn’t exactly dislike one another —it was more than that, it was pure
hate  laced  with  grudging  respect.  Neff  thought  that  Wilson  was  a  Stone  Age  chauvinist
and was revolted by the clerical role he often forced her to play—and he considered her a
female upstart in a profession where women were at best a mistake.
But they were both exceptional detectives, and that kept them together. Neff couldn’t
help but admire her partner’s work, and he had been forced to admit that she was one of
the few officers he had encountered who could keep up with him.
The  fact  that  Becky  Neff  was  also  not  a  bad-looking  thirty-four  had  helped  as  well.
Wilson was a bachelor, over fifty and not much more appealing  physically  than  a  busted
refrigerator (which he resembled in shape and height). Becky saw from the first that she
was  attractive  to  him,  and  she  played  it  up  a  little,  believing  that  her  progress  in  her
career was more important than whether or not she let Wilson flirt with her. But it went
no further than that. Becky’s husband Dick was also on the force, a  captain  in Narcotics,
and Wilson wouldn’t mess around with another cop’s wife.
The  idea  of  Wilson  messing  around  with  anybody  was  ridiculous  anyway;  he  had
remained a bachelor partly out of choice and partly because few women would tolerate his
arrogance  and  his  sloppy  indifference  to  even  the  most  fundamental  social  graces,  like
taking the meat out of a hamburger and eating it  separately,  which  was  one  of  his  nicer
table manners.
“Let’s just go blank  on this  one,  sweetheart,”  Wilson  rumbled.  “We  don’t  know  what
the hell happened out there.”
“Cannibalism would indicate—”
“We don’t know. Guys are excited, maybe it was something  else.  Let’s  just  find  what
we find.”

Becky pulled the  car  in among  the  official  vehicles  and  snapped  her  folding  umbrella
out  of  her  purse.  She  opened  it  against  the  rain  and  was  annoyed  to  see  Wilson  go
trudging  off  into  the  mud,  pointedly  ignoring  his  own  comfort.  “Let  the  bastard  catch
pneumonia,”  she  thought  as  she  huddled  forward  beneath  the  umbrella.  Wilson  was  a
great  one  for  appearances  —he  gets  to  the  scene  wet,  indifferent  to  his  own  comfort,
concerned  only  with  the  problem  at  hand,  while  his  dainty  little  partner  follows  along
behind with her umbrella,  carefully  mincing  over  the  puddles.  Ignoring  him  as  best  she
could, she set off toward the kliegs that now lit the scene of the murders some fifty yards
into the area.
As soon as she saw the mess she knew that this  was  no normal  case.  Something  that
made  you  break  out  in a  sweat  even  in this  weather  had  happened  to  these  men.  She
glanced at Wilson, surprised to see that even old super-pro’s eyes were opened wide with
surprise. “Jesus,” he said, “I mean… what?”
The  Precinct  Captain  came  forward.  “We  don’t  know,  sir,”  he  said  to  Wilson,
acknowledging the other man’s seniority and fame on the force. And he  also  eyed  Becky
Neff, well-known enough in her own right as one of the most visible female officers in New
York.  Her  picture  had  appeared  in the  Daily News  more  than  once  in  connection  with
some  of  her  and  Wilson’s  more  spectacular  cases.  Wilson  shunned  the  photographers
himself—or  they  shunned  him,  it  was  hard  to  say  which.  But  Becky  welcomed  them,
highly conscious of her role as living and visible proof that female officers could work the
front lines as well as their male counterparts.
Taking  a  deep  breath  she  knelt  down  beside  the  corpses  while  Wilson  was  still
registering  his  shock.  Every  fiber  of  her  body  wanted  to  run,  to  get  away  from  the
unspeakable  horror  before  her—but  instead  she  looked  closely,  peering  at  the  broken,
gristle-covered bones and the dark lumps of flesh that seemed almost to glow beneath the
lights that had been set up by the Forensics officers.
“Where the hell’s the Medical Examiner?” Wilson said  behind  her.  A  voice  answered.
Wilson did  not  come  any  closer;  she  knew  that  he  wasn’t  going  to  because  he  couldn’t
stomach this sort of thing. Clenching her teeth against her own disgust, she stared at the
bodies, noting the most unusual thing about them —the long scrape marks on the exposed
bones and the general evidence of gnawing. She stood up and looked around the desolate
spot. About a quarter of a mile away the dump could be seen with huge flocks of sea gulls
hovering over the mounds of garbage. Even over the hubbub of voices you could hear the
gulls  screaming.  From  here  to  the  dump  was  an  ocean  of  old  cars  and  trucks  of  every
imaginable description, most of them worthless, stripped hulks. A  few  nearby  had  white
X’s  on the  windshields  or  hoods,  evidence  of  the  work  DiFalco  and  Houlihan  had  been
doing when the attack occurred.
“They were gnawed by rats,” Becky said in as level a tone as she  could  manage,  “but
those larger marks indicate something else—dogs?”
“The wild dogs around here are just scrawny little mutts,” the Precinct Captain said.
“How  long  were  these  men  missing  before  you  instituted  a  search,  Captain?”  Wilson
asked.
The  Captain  glanced  sharply  at  him.  Neff  was  amazed;  nobody  below  the  rank  of
Inspector had the right to ask a captain a question like that, and even then not outside of
a Board of Inquiry. It was a question that belonged in a dereliction of duty hearing, not at
the scene of a crime.
“We need to know,” Wilson added a little too loudly.
“Then  ask  the  M.  E.  how  long  they’ve  been  dead.  We  found  them  two  hours  ago.
Figure the rest out for yourself.” The Captain turned away,  and  Becky  Neff  followed  his

gaze  out  over  the  distant  Atlantic,  where  a  helicopter  could  be  seen  growing  rapidly
larger. It was a police chopper and it was soon above them, its rotor clattering as it swung
around looking for a likely spot to land.
“That’s  the  Commissioner  and  the  Chief,”  Wilson  said.  “They  must  have  smelled
newsmen.”  In  January  a  new  mayor  would  take  office,  and  senior  city  officials  were  all
scrambling  to  keep  their  jobs.  So  these  normally  anonymous  men  now  jumped  at  the
possibility of getting their faces on the eleven o’clock  news.  But  this  time  they  would  be
disappointed—because of the unusually hideous nature of the crime, the press was being
kept as far away as possible. No pictures allowed until the scene was cleared of the bodies.
At the same time that the Chief of Detectives and the Commissioner were getting out
of their helicopter, the Medical Examiner was hurrying across the muddy  ground  with  a
newspaper folded up and held over his head against the rain. “It’s Evans himself,” Wilson
said. “I haven’t seen that man outdoors in twenty years.”
“I’m glad he’s here.”
Evans was the city’s Chief Medical Examiner, a man renowned for his  ingenious  feats
of  forensic  detection.  He  rolled  along,  shabby,  tiny,  looking  very  old  behind  his  thick
glasses.
He had worked with Wilson and Neff often and greeted them both with a nod. “What’s
your idea?” he said even before examining the bodies. Most policemen he treated politely
enough; these two he respected.
“We’re going to have a  problem  finding  the  cause  of  death,”  Wilson  said,  “because  of
the shape they’re in.”
Evans  nodded.  “Is  Forensics  finished  with  the  bodies?”  The  Forensics  team  was
finished,  which  meant  that  the  corpses  could  be  touched.  Dr.  Evans  rolled  on  his  black
rubber  gloves  and  bent  down.  So  absorbed  did  he  become  that  he  didn’t  even
acknowledge the approach of the brass.
The  group  watched  Evans  as  he  probed  gingerly  at  the  bodies.  Later  he  would  do  a
much more thorough autopsy in his lab, but these  first  impressions  were  important  and
would be his only on-site inspection of the victims.
When  he  backed  away  from  the  bodies,  his  face  was  registering  confusion.  “I  don’t
understand this at all,” he said slowly. “These men have been killed by… something with
claws,  teeth.  Animals  of  some  kind.  But  what  doesn’t  make  sense  is—why  didn’t  they
defend themselves?”
“Their guns aren’t even drawn,” Becky said through dry lips. It was the first thing she
had noticed.
“Maybe  that  wasn’t  the  mode  of  death,  Doctor,”  Wilson  said.  “I  mean,  maybe  they
were killed first and then eaten by the animals around here. There’s rats, gulls, also some
wild dogs, the precinct boys say.”
The doctor pursed his lips. He nodded. “We’ll find out when we do the autopsy. Maybe
you’re right, but on the surface I’d say we’re looking at the fatal wounds.”
The  Forensics  team  was  photographing  and  marking  the  site,  picking  up  scattered
remains and vacuuming the area as well as possible considering the mud. They also took
impressions of the multitude of pawprints that surrounded the bodies.
The  Precinct  Captain  finally  broke  the  silence.  “You’re  saying  that  these  guys  were
killed by wild dogs, and they didn’t even draw their guns? That can’t be right. Those dogs
are  just  little  things—  they’re  not  even  a  nuisance.”  He  looked  around.  “Anybody  ever
hear of a death from wild dogs in the city? Anybody?”

The Chief and the Commissioner  were  now  standing  nearby  swathed  in heavy  coats,
shrouded  by  their  umbrellas.  Nobody  spoke  or  shook  hands.  “We’ll  give  you  whatever
you need to solve this case,” the Commissioner said to nobody in particular. Up close  his
face  was  almost  lifeless,  the  skin  hanging  loosely  on the  bones.  He  had  a  reputation  for
long hours and honest work; unlike many of his predecessors he had attained the respect
of the department by his interest in police affairs and his  disinterest  in politics.  For  that
reason  his  job  was  now  on  the  line.  He  was  under  criticism  for  allegedly  allowing
corruption, for taking cops off the street, for ignoring  black  and  Hispanic  neighborhoods,
for  all  the  things  that  usually  get  police  commissioners  in  trouble.  By  contrast  Chief  of
Detectives Underwood was pink, fat and rather merry. He was a born politician and was
ready to redecorate the Commissioner’s office to his own taste. His eyes were watery and
he  had  a  nervous  cough.  He  stamped  his  feet  and  glanced  quickly  around,  barely  even
seeing  the  bodies;  it  was  obvious  that  he  wanted  to  get  back  to  the  comfort  of
headquarters as soon as he could. “Any leads?” he said, looking at Wilson.
“Nothing.”
“Right now it looks like their throats were torn out,” the Medical Examiner said,  “but
we’ll reserve judgment until the autopsy.”
“A dog theory won’t make it,” Wilson muttered.
“I  never  said  that,”  the  M.  E.  flared.  “All  I  said  was  the  probable  cause  of  death  is
massive  insult  to  the  throat  caused  by  teeth  and  claws.  I  don’t  know  about  dogs  and  I
don’t care to speculate about dogs.”
“Thank you, Doctor Evans,” Wilson said in a staccato voice. Evans was  not  numbered
among Wilson’s few friends despite the professional respect.
The Commissioner stared a long time at the corpses. “Cover  ’em up,” he  said  at  last,
“get ’em out of here. Come on, Herb, let’s let these men do their jobs.”
The two officials trudged back to their helicopter.
“Morale,” the Precinct Captain said as the chopper began to start  “A  visit  from  those
two sure charges you up.”
The Medical Examiner was still fuming over his run-in with Wilson. “If it was dogs,” he
said carefully, “they’d have to be seventy, eighty pounds or more. And fast,  they’d  have
to be fast.”
“Why so fast?” Becky asked.
“Look at DiFalco’s right wrist. Torn. He was going for his  pistol  when  something  with
teeth hit his arm hard. That means whatever it was, it was damn fast.”
Becky Neff thought immediately of  the  dogs  her  husband  Dick  often  worked  with  on
the Narcotics Squad. “Attack dogs,” she said, “you’re describing the work of attack dogs.”
The Medical Examiner shrugged. “I’m describing the condition of the bodies. How they
got that way is your business, Becky—yours and His Excellency’s.”
“Screw you too, Evans.”
Becky tried to ignore Wilson—she was used  to  his  sour  disposition.  As  long  as  people
like Evans kept working with him it didn’t really matter. Sometimes, though, it  was  nice
to see that others disliked him as much as she did.
“If  we  can  establish  that  attack  dogs  did  this,”  she  said,  “then  we  can  narrow  our
search considerably. Most attack dogs don’t kill.”
“If the good doctor says they were able to do… that, then you might have a point. Let’s

talk to Tom Rilker, get ourselves a little education on the subject.” Rilker trained dogs for
the department.
Becky nodded. As usual when they got going, she and Wilson started thinking together.
They headed back toward their car. The first step was now clear— they had to find out if
attack dogs were involved. If they were, then this was a first—policemen had never been
murdered with dogs before. In fact, dogs were an uncommon weapon because it took the
work of a skilled professional to train them to kill human beings. And skilled professionals
didn’t train up dogs for just anybody. If you had gotten a dog trained into a killer, the man
who did it would remember you for sure. Most so-called “attack dogs” are nothing  more
than a loud bark and maybe a bite. The ones that actually go for the throat are not very
common.  A  dog  like  that  is  never  completely  controllable,  always  a  liability  unless  it  is
absolutely and essentially needed.
Back  in the  car,  Wilson  began  to  recite  what  he  remembered  about  cases  involving
killer dogs.  “October,  1966,  a  pedestrian  killed  by  a  dog  in Queens.  Dog was  untrained,
believed to have been an accident. I worked that case, I always thought it was fishy but I
never  got  a  decent  lead.  July,  1970,  an  attack  dog  escaped  from  the  Willerton  Drug
Company  warehouse  in Long  Island  City  and  killed  a  seventeen-year-old  boy.  Another
accident.  April,  1973—our  only  proved  murder  by  dog.  A  hood  named  Big  Roy  Gurner
was  torn  apart  by  three  dogs,  later  traced  to  the  Thomas  Shoe  Company,  which  was  a
front  for  the  Carlo  Midi  family.  I  got  close  to  netting  Midi  in  that  one,  but  the  brass
removed  me  from  the  case.  Corrupt  bastards.  That’s  my  inventory  on  dogs.  You  got
anything?”
“Well, I don’t remember any dog  cases  since  I’ve  been  a  detective.  I’ve  heard  about
the  Gurner  thing  of  course.  But  the  scuttlebutt  was  you  got  paid  off  the  case.”  She
watched him pull his chin into his neck at that—it was his characteristic gesture of anger.
And she realized that she shouldn’t have goaded him; Wilson was one honest cop, that
much was certain. He hated corruption in others and certainly would never bend himself.
It  was  a  nasty  crack,  and  she  was  sorry  for  it.  She  tried  to  apologize,  but  he  wouldn’t
acknowledge. She had made her mistake; there was no point in continuing to talk about it.
“My husband works with dogs all the time,” she said to change the subject. “Some attack
dogs, but mostly just sniffers. They’re his best weapon, so he says.”
“I hear about his dogs. All of them are supposedly trained to kill  despite  that  ‘sniffer’
bullshit. I’ve heard the stories about those dogs.”
She frowned. “What stories?”
“Oh,  nothing  much  really.  Just  that  those  dogs  sometimes  get  so  excited  when  they
sniff out a little dope that they just happen to kill the jerk they find it on… sometimes. But
I guess you husband’s told you all about that.”
“Let’s drop it, Wilson. We don’t need to go at each other like this. My husband  hasn’t
told me anything about dogs that kill suspects. It sounds pretty outlandish if you ask me.”
Wilson snorted, said nothing more. But Becky had heard the rumors he was  referring
to, that Dick’s team sometimes used dogs on difficult  suspects.  “At  least  he’s  not  on the
take,” Becky  thought.  “I  hope  to  God  he’s  not.”  Then  she  thought  of  a  certain  problem
they used to have paying for his father’s  nursing  home,  a  problem  that  seemed  to  have
disappeared—but she refused to think about it
Corruption was the  one  thing  about  police  work  she  hated.  Many  officers  considered
the money part of the job, rationalizing it with the idea that their victims  were  criminals
anyway  and  the  payoffs  were  nothing  more  than  a  richly  deserved  fine.  But  as  far  as
Becky Neff was concerned, that was crap. You did your job and got your pay, that ought
to be enough. She forced herself not to rise to Wilson’s bait  about  her  husband,  it  would

probably start a shouting argument.
“Stories aside, I’ve heard a lot about Tom Rilker. Dick thinks damn highly of him. Says
he could train a dog to walk a tightrope if he wanted to.” Thomas D. Rilker was a civilian
who worked closely  with  the  NYPD,  the  FBI,  and  U.  S.  Customs  training  the  dogs  they
used in their work. He also did private contract work. He was good, probably the best in
the city, maybe the best in the world. His specialty was training dogs to sniff. He had dope
dogs,  fire  dogs,  tobacco  dogs,  booze  dogs,  you  name  it.  They  worked  mostly  for  the
Narcotics  Squad  and  the  customs  agents.  They  had  revolutionized  the  technique  of
investigation in these areas and greatly reduced the amount of drugs moving through the
port of New York. Becky knew that Dick thought the world of Tom Rilker.
“Keep this damn car moving, sweetheart. You ain’t in a parade!”
“You drive, Wilson.”
“Me? I’m the damn boss. Oughta sit in back.”
She pulled over to the curb. “You don’t like my driving, you do it yourself.”
“I can’t, dearest—my license lapsed last year.”
“When you teamed up with me, dip.”
“Thank you, I’ll make a note of that.”
Becky  swung  the  car  out  into  traffic  and  jammed  the  accelerator  to  the  floor.  She
wasn’t going to let him get to her. Part of the reason he was like this was because she had
forced  herself  on  him.  Between  her  husband  Dick  and  her  uncle  Bob  she  had  exerted
plenty of pull to get herself into Homicide and to land a partner once she got there. It took
the pull of her husband’s captaincy and her uncle’s inspectorship to move  her  out  of  the
secretary  syndrome  and  onto  the  street.  She  had  done  well  as  a  patrolman  and  gotten
herself  promoted  to  Detective  Sergeant  when  she  deserved  it.  Most  of  the  women  she
knew on the force got their promotions at least two or three years late,  and  then  had  to
fight to avoid ending up on some rotten squad like Missing Persons, where the only action
you ever saw was an occasional flat tire on an unmaintained squad car.
So here came Becky Neff just when George Wilson’s most recent partner had punched
him in the face and transferred to Safes and Locks. Wilson had to take what he could get,
and in this situation it was a rookie detective and, worse, a woman.
He had looked at her as if she had contagious leprosy. For the first six weeks together
he  had  said  no  more  than  a  word  a  week  to  her—six  words  in  six  weeks,  all  of  them
four-letter.  He  had  schemed  to  get  her  out  of  the  division,  even  started  dark  rumors
about a Board of Inquiry when she missed an important lead in what should have been an
easy case.
But  gradually  she  had  become  better  at  the  work,  until  even  he  had  been  forced  to
acknowledge it. Soon they were making collars  pretty  often.  In  fact  they  were  getting  a
reputation.
“Women  are  mostly  awful  cops,”  were  his  final  words  on  the  subject,  “but  you’re
unique. Instead of being awful, you’re just bad.”
Coming from Wilson that  was  a  compliment,  perhaps  the  highest  he  had  ever  paid  a
fellow officer. After that his grumbling became inarticulate and he let the partnership roll
along under its own considerable steam.
They  worked  like  two  parts  of  the  same  person,  constantly  completing  each  other’s
thoughts.  People  like  the  Chief  Medical  Examiner  started  requesting  their  help  on
troublesome cases. But when their work started to reach the papers, it was invariably the

attractive,  unusual  lady  cop  Becky  Neff  who  ended  up  in  the  Daily  News  centerfold.
Wilson was only another skilled policeman; Becky was interesting news. Wilson, of course,
claimed to hate  publicity.  But  she  knew  he  hated  even  more  the  fact  that  he  didn’t  get
any.
“You’re  making  a  wrong  turn,  Becky.  We’re  supposed  to  be  stopping  at  the
Seventy-fifth to get pictures. of the bodies and pawprints for Rilker. Give him something
to work with.”
She wheeled the car around and turned up Flatlands Avenue toward the station house.
“Also we ought to call ahead,” she said, “let him know we’re coming.”
“You’re sure we trust him? I mean, what if he’s doing a little work on the side, like for
somebody bad. Calling ahead’ll give him time to think.”
“Rilker’s not working for the Mafia. I don’t think that’s even worthy of consideration.”
“Then I won’t consider it.” He slumped down in the seat, pushing his knees up against
the glove compartment and letting his head lean forward against his chest. It looked like
agony,  but  he  closed  his  eyes.  Becky  lit  a  cigarette  and  drove  on  in  silence,  mentally
reviewing the case. Despite the fact that it looked like they were on a good lead she could
not dismiss the feeling that something was wrong with it. Some element  didn’t  fit.  Again
and again she reviewed the facts but she couldn’t come up with the answer. The one thing
that  worried  her  was  the  lack  of  resistance.  It  had  happened  so  fast  that  they  hadn’t
appeared dangerous until the very last moment.
Did  attack  dogs  lay  ambushes?  Could  they  move  fast  enough  to  kill  two  healthy
policemen before they even had time to unholster their pistols?
She double-parked the car in front of the 75th Precinct.
Leaving  Wilson  snoring  lightly  she  hurried  up  the  worn  concrete  steps  of  the  dingy
red-brick building and introduced herself to the desk sergeant. He called Lieutenant Ruiz,
who was responsible for the material she needed.  He  was  a  six-footer  with  a  trim  black
mustache and a subdued smile. “Pleased to make your acquaintance, Detective Neff,” he
said with great f formality.
“We need pictures and copies of the prints you took.”
“No problem, we’ve got everything you could want. It’s a rotten mess.”
A  leading  statement,  but  Becky  didn’t  pick  up  on  it  That  part  of  the  investigation
would  come  later.  Before  they  identified  a  motive  for  the  murders  they  had  to  have  a
mode of death.
Sergeant  Ruiz  produced  eleven  glossies  of  the  scene,  plus  a  box  of  plasticasts  of  the
pawprints that had been found surrounding the bodies. “There isn’t a single clear print in
that box,” he said, “just a jumble. If you ask me those prints haven’t got a thing to do with
it. Just the wild dogs doing a little  scavenging.  They  sure  as  hell  couldn’t  be  responsible
for killing those guys, they just came and got their share after the real work was done.”
“Why do you say that?” She was examining the  photographs  as  she  talked.  Why  had
he handed her one of the less grisly shots?
“The dogs—I’ve seen them. They’re little, like cockers or  something,  and  they’re  shy
as hell. And by the way, I wonder if you could autograph that picture  for  my  daughter.”
He paused, then added shyly, “She thinks the world of you.”
Becky was so pleased by his admiration that she didn’t notice Wilson standing  behind
her.
“I thought we weren’t going to give out any more autographs,” he said curtly.

“When did we decide not to? I don’t remember that.”
“Right now. I just decided.  This  isn’t  some  kind  of  a  game.”  His hand  moved  toward
the picture but Ruiz’s was quicker.
“Thanks, Miss Neff,” he said, still smiling. “My daughter’ll be thrilled.”
Becky gathered the rest of the photographs and picked up the  box  of  prints  to  lug  to
the car. She knew without asking that Wilson wouldn’t touch it, and she  wasn’t  sure  she
wanted him to.
“By  the  way,  it’s  Sergeant  Neff,”  she  said  over  her  shoulder  to  Ruiz,  who  was  still
standing there staring.
“Let me help you,” he said.
Becky  was  already  out  the  door  and  putting  the  box  into  the  back  seat  of  the  car.
Wilson followed, got in, and slammed his door. Becky settled herself into the driver’s seat
and turned on the ignition.
“I just don’t want this to be a circus,” he said as they headed toward Manhattan. “This
case is going to be the most sensational thing we’ve ever worked on. Reporters are gonna
be crawling out of your nightgown in the morning.”
“I don’t wear a nightgown.”
“Whatever, we’re gonna have   ’em  all over us. The point is, it’s a serious case and we
want to treat it serious.”
Wilson could be sententious, but this was ridiculous. She forced herself not to  say  she
knew how serious the case was. If she did he would then launch into a  tirade  about  lady
cops, probably ending with a question about her competence or some new criticism of her
work. She decided to ignore him and make him shut up as well. To do this she drove like a
madwoman, careening down the streets, making hairpin turns, weaving in and out of the
traffic at fifty miles an hour. Wilson at first sat with his shoulders hunched and his hands
twisted together in his lap, then started using the siren.
“Rilker give you some kind of deadline?”
“No.” She had forgotten to call Rilker, dammit. If he wasn’t there she’d have to suffer
more flak from Wilson.
She lit another cigarette. Smoking was one pleasure that she had really begun to enjoy
since the doctor had made Wilson stop.
His response was prompt. “You’re polluting.”
“Draw an oxygen mask if you don’t like it I’ve told you that before.”
“Thanks for the reminder.”
She wished that she smoked cigars.
Chapter 2
Chapter 2
Chapter 2
Chapter 2
« ^ »
Tom  Rilker  stared  at  the  pictures  the  two  detectives  showed  him.  His  face  registered

disbelief and what looked to Becky Neff like fear. She had never met him before and was
surprised  to  discover  that  he  was  old,  maybe  seventy-five.  From  her  husband’s
description  she  had  assumed  he  was  a  young  man.  Rilker’s  hair  was  white  and  springy
like frayed wool; his right hand shook a little  and  made  the  pictures  rustle  together;  his
brows  knit,  the  salt-and-pepper  eyebrows  coming  close  together,  heightening  the
expression  now  on his  face.  “This  is  impossible,”  he  finally  said.  The  moment  he  spoke
Becky knew why Dick always portrayed him as young—he sounded like a much younger
man. “It’s completely incredible.”
“Why is that?” Wilson asked.
“Well, a dog wouldn’t do this. You’d have to train it. These men have been gutted, for
God’s sake. You can train a dog to kill, but if you wanted it to do this to its victims, you’d
have to train it very, very well.”
“But it could be done.”
“Maybe, with the right breed and the right dog. But it wouldn’t be easy. You’d need…
human models for the dog to work on if you wanted it to be reliable.”
“What if you just starved the dog?”
“A dog would eat muscle tissue—ma’am, if this bothers you—”
“No,” Becky snapped. “You were saying, a dog would eat muscle tissue?”
“Yes, but it wouldn’t actually—gut somebody. That isn’t the way they feed, not even in
the wild state.” He picked up the pawprints and shook his head. “These all the prints?”
“How big a dog would it have taken?” Wilson asked. Becky  noticed  that  his  questions
were becoming gentle but insistent; he must sense that the sight of the pictures had  put
Rilker under a considerable strain. The man’s face was indeed getting flushed, and a band
of sweat was appearing on his forehead. He kept giving his head a little toss as if to knock
a wisp of hair back. The hand was shaking harder.
“A monster. Something big and fast and mean  enough  to  accept  this  kind  of  training.
Not all breeds would.”
“What breeds?”
“Close to the wild, huskies, German shepherds. Not many. And I’ve got to tell you,  in
all my years I’ve never seen anything like this done by dogs. I think its—
He grabbed a cast of  some  of  the  pawprints  and  peered  at  it,  then  fumbled  with  the
lamp on his desk and looked closely in the light. “These are not dog prints.”
“What are they then?”
“I don’t know. Something very strange.”
“Why so?”
Tom  Rilker  paused,  then  spoke  with  exaggerated  calm.  “These  prints  have  circules,
like human hands and feet. But they are clearly pawprints.”
“Some kind of animal, other than a dog?”
“I’m sorry to tell you that no animal has prints like this. In fact nothing does. Nothing
that I have ever heard of, that is, in fifty years of working with animals.”
Becky had to say it: “Werewolves?” She resigned herself to the inevitable scoffing that
would come from Wilson later.
Surprisingly, Rilker took some time to dismiss the question. “I don’t think such things
are possible,” he said carefully.

“Well—are they or aren’t they?”
Rilker smiled sheepishly. Becky realized that he was being kind. She could see the glee
in Wilson’s eyes. It was all her partner could do not to whoop with laughter, damn him.
“I don’t believe in werewolves either,  Mr.  Rilker,”  Becky  said.  “Frankly,  I  wanted  to
know if you did.”
“Why?”
“Because if you had, we wouldn’t have to trust the rest of what you’re saying. As it is,
you look like a creditable expert who’s just given us a very nasty problem.”
“A nasty problem in what way?”
Now Wilson did scoff—but at Rilker. “Well, for one thing, we  must  proceed  under  the
assumption that these two fully armed  police  officers  were  killed  by  animals.  OK,  that’s
not  so  good.  But  we’ve  also  got  to  assume  that  the  animals  are  of  an  unknown  species.
That’s  pretty  bad.  And  now,  to  cap  it  all  off,  we’ve  got  to  believe  that  this  unknown
species  of  man-killing  animals  is  running  free  in  Brooklyn  and  nobody  knows  about  it.
That I cannot accept.”
Becky’s mind was racing—this new theory plugged holes but it also had some great big
ones of its own. “If it’s true, we’ve got to move fast. Brooklyn’s a crowded place.”
“Come on, Becky, stop it. Let’s get out of here. We’ve got real work to do.”
“Wait a minute, Detective, I’m not sure I like  your  tone.”  Rilker  stood  up  and  thrust
one of the casts in Wilson’s face. “Those pawprints were not made by anything that I have
ever  heard  of.  By  nothing  whatsoever.  Not  even  by  a  species  of  monkey—I  already
thought of that.” He fumbled for his phone. “I’ll call a friend up at the Museum of Natural
History.  He’ll  tell  you  these  prints  weren’t  made  by  any  known  animal.  You’re  dealing
with something highly unusual, that’s for damn sure.”
Becky felt her heart sink. Wilson had angered Rilker. Rilker’s voice rose as his fingers
fumbled at the telephone. “Maybe my word isn’t good enough for you  sharpie  cops—but
this guy up at the museum’s a real expert. He’ll tell you bastards I’m right!”
Wilson jerked  his  head  in the  direction  of  the  door.  ‘We  don’t  need  any  help  from  a
museum,“  he  muttered.  Becky  followed  him  out,  carrying  the  pictures  but  leaving  the
pawprints behind because Rilker seemed to have taken possession of the box. The door to
his office slammed behind them with an ear-shattering jolt. His voice rose to a frustrated
screech and abruptly ended.
“I hope we didn’t give him a coronary,” Becky said as they returned to the street.
“You did  good,  kid,”  Wilson  said.  “If  you  hadn’t  asked  him  about  the  werewolves  he
would have pulled it off.”
“I can hardly believe that was the Tom Rilker I’ve heard Dick talk about. But I guess
he must be a little senile.”
“I guess so. Where are the casts?”
“Still in his office. You want them?” Becky dropped her purse in through the window of
the car.
“Yeah. We might need them.”
“Fine, you go up and get them.”
Wilson  snorted.  “We’ll  get  more  from  the  Seventy-fifth  Precinct.  You  know
something?”

“What?”
“You’re losing your mascara. You’re sweating.”
She laughed as she started the car. “I’ve got to hand it to you, George, you really know
how to set a girl up. That’s the nicest thing you’ve said to me in a year.”
“Well… you’re… you know, when your stuff gets messed up I notice.”
“Good  for  you.  That’s  the  first  sign  you’re  becoming  human.”  She  pulled  out  into
traffic, heading automatically for what she knew would be their next stop, the office of the
Chief Medical Examiner. The autopsies were due to start in half an hour and  it  was  now
all the more important to be there. Unless a cause of death came out in autopsy they were
going to  be  forced  to  conclude  the  impossible—that  the  killings  had  been  done  by  dogs.
And that is a very unlikely way for a policeman to die.
Becky could not dispel the growing feeling of sick fear that this case was giving her. She
kept imagining the two cops out there in the drizzle, facing whatever in the name of God
they had faced . . and dying with  the  secret.  At  times  like  this  she  wished  she  and  Dick
worked  more  closely  together.  He  would  understand  the  source  of  her  feeling  in a  way
Wilson never could. She took  her  cases  very  personally,  it  was  one  of  her  worst  failings
(and  also  the  reason  she  was  often  so  successful,  she  felt),  and  each  case  affected  her
differently. This one, with its overtones of horror, was going to be unusually hard on her.
What had happened to those two cops was the stuff of nightmares…
“You’re muttering.”
“I am not.”
“You’re muttering, you’re getting crazy.”
“I am not! You better keep your mouth shut.”
“All right, but I’m telling you that this case is going to eat away at you.”  He  suddenly
turned to face her. The movement made her swerve the car— she had the absurd notion
that  he  was  going  to  kiss  her.  But  his  face  was  twisted  into  a  look  almost  of  pain.  “It’s
eating at me is the reason I say that. I mean, I don’t know what happened out there but
it’s really getting to me.”
“You mean you’re pissed off about it, scared of it—what?”
He considered for a moment, then said very  quietly, “It scares me.” Never before had
Wilson said such a thing. Becky kept her eyes on the traffic, her face without expression.
“Me too,” she said, “if you want to know. It’s a weird case.” Extreme caution was called
for in this  conversation—Wilson  could  be  telling  the  truth  or  he  could  be  egging  her  on,
trying  to  get  her  to  reveal  her  inner  emotions,  to  force  her  to  admit  that  she  was
overinvolved  in her  work  in an  unprofessional  way.  Although  she  felt  secure  enough  in
their partnership she could never be certain that Wilson hadn’t concocted some plot to get
rid of her. Not that it mattered  —nowadays  they  were  waiting  in line  to  work  with  her,
but somehow she wanted to keep the partnership going. Wilson was hard to take but the
two of them were so good together it was worth preserving. “It’s hard but  it’s  good,”  he
said suddenly. “What’re you talking about?”
“Us. You’re  thinking  about  us,  aren’t  you?”  The  way  he  sounded  they  might  as  well
have been lovers. “Yes, I am.”
“See, that’s why it’s good. If it wasn’t so good, I never would have known.”
She  took  a  deep  breath.  “We’re  here.  Maybe  we’ll  find  out  they  were  poisoned  and
this’ll turn into a normal case again.”

“We won’t.”
“Why  not?  I  don’t  think  we  can  assume—oh,  of  course,  the  dogs  ate  the  organs  and
there are no dead dogs, therefore there was no poison in the organs, therefore et cetera.”
“You got  it,  sweetheart.  Let’s  go  up  and  watch  old  prickface  pretend  to  be  a  master
sleuth.”
“Oh, Wilson, why don’t you let the poor man alone. He’s just as good at what he does as
we are at what we do. Your whole thing with him is personalities.”
“Can’t  be.  He  hasn’t  got  one.”  The  Chief  Medical  Examiner’s  office  was  housed  in  a
gleaming  modern  building  across  the  street  from  Bellevue  Hospital.  This  “office”  was
really a factory of forensic pathology, equipped with every conceivable piece of equipment
and chemical that could be of use in an autopsy. Literally  everything  there  was  to  know
about a corpse could be discovered in this building. And the Medical Examiner  had  been
responsible for solving many a murder with his equipment and his most considerable skill.
Bits  of  hair,  flecks  of  saliva,  fingernail-polish  fragments—all  had  figured  prominently  in
murder trials. A conviction had once been obtained on the basis of shoe polish left on the
lethal bruises of a woman who had been kicked to death.
The  Chief  M.  E.  excelled  at  making  such  findings.  And  if  there  was  anything  to  be
found in this case, he would surely uncover it. He and his men would  go  over  the  bodies
inch by inch, leaving nothing to chance. Still, there was that fear…
“They’d better come up with something or this case is going to drive me crazy,” Becky
said on the way up in the elevator. It was new and rose silently with no sense of motion.
“I hate this elevator. Every time I ride in it it scares the hell out of me.”
“Imagine how it would be to be trapped in this elevator, Wilson, no way out—”
“Shut up! That’s unkind.” Wilson was mildly claustrophobic, to add to his list  of  petty
neuroses. 
“Sorry, just trying to amuse you.”
“You  tell  me  I’m  such  an  s.o.b.,  but  you’re  really  the  nasty  side  of  this  partnership.
That was a rotten thing to do to me.”
The doors opened and they stepped into the odor of disinfectant that pervaded the M. 
E.’s office. The receptionist knew  them,  and  waved  them  past  her  desk.  Doctor  Evans’s
incredibly cluttered office was open but he wasn’t inside. House rules were that you didn’t
go any farther into the complex without an escort, but as usual there wasn’t a soul to be
seen  or  heard.  They  started  toward  the  operating  room  when  the  receptionist  yelled
Wilson’s name. “Yeah?”
“You got a message,” she hollered. “Call Underwood.”
“OK!”  He  stared  at  Becky.  “Underwood  wants  me?  Why  the  hell  does  Underwood
want me? I don’t remember trying to get you fired recently.”
“Maybe you did and forgot.”
“Better call, better call.” He picked up the phone in Evans’s office and dialed the Chief
of Detectives. The conversation lasted about a minute and consisted on Wilson’s part of a
series  of  yessirs  and  thankyous.  “Just  wanted  to  tell  us  we’re  a  special  detail  now,
reporting directly to him, and we have the facilities of the department at our disposal. We
move to an office at Police Headquarters in Manhattan.”
“That’s very nice. We get carte blanche as long as some of the credit rubs off on him,
and the Commissioner gets left in his ivory tower.”

Wilson snorted. “Listen, as long as it looks like this case is solvable every parasite from
here to the Bulgarian Secret Service is going to try to horn in on the credit. But  you  just
wait. If we don’t get it together, we’ll be all alone.”
“Let’s go to the autopsy. I can hardly wait.” Her voice was bitter; what Wilson had said
could not have been more true.
“Come on, ghoul.”
On the way to the operating room  Becky  wished  to  hell  that  Wilson  would  pull  out  a
bottle of something alcoholic. Unfortunately he rarely drank, and certainly never while he
was working—unless events called for it, which they often did  about  six  p.m.  But  now  it
was after six.
“I thought you people didn’t come back here unless you were invited,” Evans growled.
He was on his way into  the  surgery.  He  stank  of  chemical  soap;  his  rubber  gloves  were
dripping. “Or don’t those rules count where you two are concerned?”
“This is the man who invites us on his cases. How sweet.”
“I only give you cases that are too easy for me to bother with. Now come on in if  you
want to, but it won’t do a bit of good. And I warn you, they’re fragrant.”
Becky  thought  immediately  of  the  families.  When  she  was  a  child  she  had  been  at  a
funeral where you could smell the corpse—but nowadays they had things for that, didn’t
they? And anyway, the coffins wouldn’t be opened. But still… oh, God.
The  two  bodies  lay  on surgical  tables  under  merciless  lights.  There  was  none  of  the
haphazardness  and  confusion  of  the  scene  out  at  the  auto  pound;  here  everything  was
neat and orderly except  the  bodies  themselves,  which  carried  their  violence  and  horror
with them.
Becky was struck by the sheer damage—this attack had been so unbelievably savage.
And somehow she found that reassuring; nothing from nature would do this. It had to be
the work of human beings, it was too terrible to be anything else.
“The Forensics lab hasn’t found a single thing except dog hairs, rat hairs and feathers,”
Doctor Evans said mildly. He was referring to the results of  the  examination  of  the  area
where the deaths had occurred at the auto pound. “No human detritus that didn’t belong
to the victims.”
“OK,” Wilson said, but he took the information like a blow. It was not good news.
Evans turned to Becky. “Look, we’re about to start. What do you think it’ll take to get
Wilson out of here?”
“You can’t. There might be something,” she replied.
“Something I’d miss?”
“Something we’d see.”
“But not him. He won’t be able to take it.”
“I’ll be fine. Just do your job, Doctor.”
“There  will  be  no  repeat  of  the  Custin  mess,  Detective  Wilson.”  During  the  Maude
Custin  autopsy  Wilson  had  lost  his  lunch.  The  reference  to  his  embarrassment  hurt  his
feelings, but he was too proud to acknowledge it before Evans.
“I’ll leave if it gets to me,” he said, “but not unless it does. We’ve gotta be here and you
know it.”
“Just trying to help you, trying to be accommodating.”

“Thank you. Why don’t you get going?”
“That’s what I am doing.”
Evans  picked  up  a  scalpel  and  commenced  taking  a  series  of  tissue  samples.  An
assistant  prepared  slides  of  them  at  a  side  table,  and  sent  the  slides  to  the  lab.  The
autopsy  proceeded  swiftly—there  was  pitifully  little  to  examine.  “The  main  thing  we’re
hunting  for  is  signs  of  poison,  suffocation,  anything  that  would  give  us  a  more  plausible
cause of death,” Evans said as he worked. “That good for you two?”
“That’s good for us.”
“Well, we’ll find out all about it from the lab. Look at  this.”  He  held  up  a  sharp  white
tooth.  “Embedded  in  that  busted  wrist.  You  know  what  it  means  —really  what  it
confirms?”
“The  man  was  alive  when  his  wrist  was  bitten.  Otherwise  the  tooth  wouldn’t  have
been wrenched loose.”
“That’s right, which confirms that this one was definitely alive when the dogs attacked
him.”
There  was  a  long  silence  in the  room.  Wilson  seemed  to  sink  into  himself,  becoming
smaller  and  more  square  than  he  already  was.  Becky  felt  a  dull  powerlessness.  As  the
vague  outlines  of  what  they  were  confronting  began  to  take  shape  Becky  could  see  all
lands of nasty problems, not the least of  which  would  be  simple  crowd  control.  What  do
people do when they discover a thing like this in their midst? Their placid, workaday lives
are suddenly disrupted by a new terror of the most dangerous type—the unknown. And if
it can  kill  two  healthy,  alert,  armed  policemen,  the  run-of-the-mill  citizen  isn’t  going  to
have a prayer.
“I think we’d better get downtown as soon as the lab results are in,” Becky said. “Why
bother to wait?”
“Confirming,  just  so  we  won’t  have  any  loose  ends.”  Convincing  Underwood  of  this
wasn’t  going  to  be  especially  easy.  She  didn’t  want  there  to  be  any  stray  questions
unanswered that might allow him to put off the inevitable decision—admit what killed the
cops, seal the area, and kill everything in it that looked faintly like a dog—wild or trained.
The two detectives returned to the M.  E.’s office before the autopsies were completed;
they didn’t spend any more time observing than they had to. Wilson was visibly grateful
to leave; Becky was glad to follow.
Wilson seemed unusually quiet, almost chastened. “What do you think Underwood will
do?” she asked just to break the silence.
Wilson shrugged. “Two cops got killed by some kind of dogs. It’s a pretty flimsy story,
you  ask  me.  No  matter  what’s  been  confirmed,  I  think  we’ve  got  to  keep  digging.
Somehow or other we’ll uncover a real motive and a real crime.”
Becky felt a twinge of concern—didn’t Wilson believe the evidence? “But if it was dogs
and we don’t act pretty fast there could be more deaths. I think we’ve got  to  make  that
assumption. That’s certainly where the facts are leading us.”
Wilson  nodded.  If  she  wasn’t  sure  that  it  couldn’t  be  true,  she  almost  would  have
suspected Wilson of knowing something about the case that she didn’t. But they  had  not
been apart since it had happened, not for a minute. Whatever information he had, she also
had.
“You know,” he said in a low, angry tone, “you damn well  never  get  over  smoking.  If
you weren’t armed I’d mug you for your cigarettes right now.”

She didn’t reply; she was staring past him, toward the door of the office. Evans walked
in  carrying  a  clipboard.  “Lab  says  we  might  have  carbon  monoxide  poisoning  as  a
secondary factor,” he said,  “but  the  basic  cause  of  death  was  the  injuries.  Primarily  the
throats in both cases.”
“Carbon monoxide? Could those men have been impaired by it?”
“Normally  I  wouldn’t  say  so.  The  levels  are  very  low,  just  residual.  You’ve  both
probably got higher  levels  right  now  just  from  your  drive  over  here.  But  it’s  absolutely
the only abnormal thing we found about these men.”
“Could it have been higher when they were killed and then dissipated?”
“Not  likely.  These  guys  were  functioning  normally  when  they  were  hit.  It’s  just  the
only other thing.”
Wilson  seemed  greatly  relieved;  at  the  moment  Becky  couldn’t  understand  exactly
why this was so.
The Chief Medical Examiner put down his clipboard. “It’s as strange as they come,” he
said, “the strangest case I have worked on in my entire career.”
“Why so?” Wilson tried and failed to sound unconcerned.
“Well, they were supposedly killed by dogs, right?”
The detectives nodded like twins; Becky was secretly amused by the similarity of the
gesture. She wondered what it was that brought the two of them so close to one another.
God knows you couldn’t call it love.
“The  dogs  had  to  be  very  unusual.  Their  mode  of  attack  was  extremely  clever.  It
wasn’t until DiFalco went for his gun that they attacked.”
“So what?”
“So when did you ever hear about a dog smart enough to grab a man’s wrist to prevent
him from  unholstering  his  gun?  Never,  is  the  answer.  Dogs  don’t  think  like  that.  They
don’t know what the hell guns are.”
“Maybe and maybe not.”
“Oh, come on, they don’t know. Point a pistol at a dog’s head and not a damn thing will
happen.  He  certainly  won’t  try  to  defend  himself.  Whoever  heard  of  dogs  working  like
that?”
“It  was  a  lucky  coincidence.  The  dog  went  for  the  movement  of  the  hand,  not  to
prevent  it  from  reaching  the  gun.  I  think  we  can  assume  that.”  Wilson  picked  up  the
phone. “I’m calling Underwood to tell him we’re on the way. His nibs is awaiting us.”
“Now don’t go running him down, Wilson. Word is he’s got the  inside  track  to  the  big
job. Your next Commissioner.”
Wilson dialed. “A lot of difference it makes to me. I’ve been on the promotion list for at
least ten years.”
Becky  was  surprised  to  hear  her  partner  admit  this.  His  own  complete  inability  to
handle  department  politics  had  assured  that  he  would  never  move  beyond  Detective
Lieutenant.  No  matter  the  level  of  his  achievement;  while  good  work  counted  in  the
scramble for top jobs, pull and ass-kissing counted more. And with Wilson not only did he
not try to ass-kiss, people were afraid even to let him try. You don’t let a guy like that get
into the delicate politics  of  the  Police  Department.  Next  thing,  he’d  unwittingly  uncover
some scandal and embarrass everybody.
That made him a less than ideal senior partner. The brass would hesitate  to  promote

Becky  around  Wilson.  It  just  wasn’t  done  unless  the  senior  was  completely
incompetent—which  was  far  from  the  case  here.  So  she’d  have  to  sit  around  as  a
Detective Sergeant until either  she  or  Wilson  rotted,  or  she  was  transferred  away  from
him and that was one thing  the  department  would  never  do.  Only  Wilson  himself  in his
wisdom would ever consider  such  a  thing.  She  hated  the  thought  of  it  right  now,  too;  it
could easily mean being moved away from the action,  back  into  the  obscurity  of  a  more
typical policewoman job.
Wilson  muttered  into  the  phone,  using  no  more  than  a  few  monosyllables.  He  had
informed the Chief of Detectives that they were coming with just about as much grace as
he would inform his building superintendent of a stopped-up toilet.
A wet, shuddering north wind hit them  as  they  left  the  building;  the  drizzling  cold  of
the  past  few  days  had  finally  given  way  to  the  first  real  touch  of  winter.  It  was
seven-thirty and already dark. Thirtieth Street was quiet, with the wind clattering in the
skeletons of scrawny trees up  and  down  the  block.  A  few  pedestrians  hurried  past,  and
out  on Fifth  Avenue  many  more  figures  could  be  seen  amid  the  flashing  lights  and  the
shapes of cars moving slowly downtown. Becky watched the people they passed on their
way to her  car,  looking  at  the  gray,  blank  faces,  thinking  about  the  lives  hidden  behind
those faces, and of how what she and Wilson would soon be telling the Chief of Detectives
would affect those lives.
In  police  work  you  gradually  acquire  a  distance  from  nonpolicemen.  People  on  the
outside have such a limited concept of what  you  really  do  that  they  might  as  well  know
nothing at all. They see only the headlines, the endless propagandizing of the newspapers.
Crimes are reported, their solution is not. As a result the people you meet outside of the
force  see  you  as  incompetent.  “You’re  a  cop?  Why  don’t  you  get  the  muggers  off  the
street? I never see a cop on the street. I thought that’s what we paid you for.” Then you
might see that same  person  dead  somewhere,  the  victim  of  the  very  crime  he  said  you
wouldn’t protect him  from.  It  does  something  to  you  to  realize  that  you  aren’t  going  to
protect everybody, you aren’t going to make the world a hell of a lot safer by your work.
You  are  there  to  hold  life  together,  not  to  bring  on  the  millennium.  When  you  see  the
incredible suffering and degradation, you begin to realize the truth of that. Sooner or later
crooks and victims all merge together into one miserable, bloody mass of whining, twisted
bodies and fear-glazed eyes. Murder after murder comes before you, each with its sordid
tale of failed lives…
And then you get a thing like this. It doesn’t make sense, it scares you. There’s a chilly
feeling  that  something  wrong  has  happened  but  you  don’t  quite  know  what  it  is.  You
want like hell to solve the crime because the victims were your people. The twisted bodies
were  from  the  inside,  from  the  real  world  of  the  department,  not  from  that  chaos  that
swirls around outside.
Usually there is no mystery to a cop’s death. He knocks on a door and a  junkie  blows
him away. He hollers freeze at some kid running out of a liquor store and gets a bullet in
the face. That’s the way cops get killed, suddenly and without mystery. Death in the line
of duty—rare, but it happens.
“Here’s the car,” Wilson said. Becky had walked right past it; she had been too deeply
engrossed  in her  thoughts.  But  she  got  in,  drove  mechanically  through  the  increasingly
heavy rain, listening to it drum on the roof, listening to the wind soughing past the closed
windows, feeling the pervasive dirty damp of the afternoon.
Headquarters  was  dark  and  gray,  standing  like  some  black  monument  in the  storm.
They  pulled  into  the  garage  beneath  the  building,  into  the  sudden  flood  of  fluorescent
lights, the squeal of brakes and tires as they maneuvered through the garage and found a
parking space in the area marked off for the Homicide Division.

Underwood was not alone in his office. With him was a young man  in a  polyester  suit
and round rimless glasses. For an instant Becky was reminded of John Dean, then the face
looked up and  the  impression  of  boyishness  disappeared:  the  man’s  eyes  were  cold,  his
face thinner than it should be, his lips set in a terse line.
“Good  afternoon,”  Underwood  said  stiffly,  half  rising  from  behind  his  deck,  “this  is
Assistant  District  Attorney  Kupferman.”  He  then  introduced  Neff  and  Wilson.  The  two
detectives pulled up chairs; this was going to be a work session and there was no time to
stand on formality.
Becky relaxed into the comfortable leather wing chair Wilson had gotten  for  her.  The
Chief’s  office  was  all  leather  and  paneling;  it  looked  like  an  expensive  private  library
without  books.  Hunting  scenes  were  hung  on  the  wall  a  pewter  chandelier  from  the
ceiling.  The  whole  impression  was  one  of  subdued  bad  taste—a  sort  of  subtle  and
completely unintentional self-mockery.
“Let’s go,” Underwood said. “I told the papers  we’d  have  a  statement  tonight.  Was  I
right?”
“Yeah,” Wilson said. He looked at  the  assistant  DA.  “You’re  chewing.  Got  any  gum?”
The man held out a pack of sugar-free gum. “Thanks. I’m not supposed to smoke.”
“I want to know  if  you’ve  found  out  anything  about  those  guys  that  might  justify  us
getting into the act,” the assistant DA said.
So that was what he was here for. He was the District Attorney’s little watchdog, sent
here to sniff out any departmental wrongdoing. Maybe the two dead cops were bent, the
thinking would go, maybe that’s why they were dead.
“There’s nothing like that,” Wilson said. “These guys were Auto Squad, not Narcotics.
They weren’t into anything.”
Becky’s mind flashed to her husband Dick, to the Narcotics Squad. Just as quickly she
pulled her thoughts away, returning them to this conversation. What was it that made her
worry so about Dick, especially lately? She couldn’t allow herself to think about it now. As
firmly as she could, she returned her thoughts to the question at hand.
“You’re sure?”
“We  haven’t  investigated  that  aspect,”  Becky  put  in.  “We’ve  just  now  established  a
cause of death.”
This was obviously the part Underwood wanted to hear about. He leaned forward and
made a little pulling motion with his hands. “It was the dogs,” Wilson said tonelessly.
“Oh, no, you can’t tell me that! I can’t have that!”
“It’s the truth as far as we know. They were killed by dogs.”
“Hell no. That’s  completely  unacceptable.  I’m  not  putting  that  in any  press  releases.
Let the damn Commissioner do it, it’s his responsibility.”
The way he began to back off would have been funny if it wasn’t so sad. He had called
them down here hoping to get  some  glory  thrown  his  way  when  they  solved  the  crime;
but  now  that  it  looked  like  this  he  wasn’t  so  eager  to  be  associated  with  it.  Let  the
Commissioner tell  the  world  that  two  fully  armed  policemen  got  themselves  killed  by  a
bunch of dogs; Underwood sure as hell wasn’t going to do it.
“We didn’t believe it ourselves,” Becky said, “but Evans is sure. The only thing out  of
the ordinary was some residual carbon monoxide—”
“Carbon  monoxide!  That’s  incapacitating!  Then  it  makes  some  sense,  the  guys  were

out cold. Now that’s better, why didn’t you start off telling me that?” He glared an instant
at Wilson. “That’s the crucial piece of change, as far as I’m concerned. Did the  M.  E.  say
where they got it?”
“Background  atmosphere,”  Wilson  cut  in.  “It’s  not  important.  There  are  probably
higher levels in your blood right now.”
“Did anybody check their car, find out if the exhaust system was defective?”
Wilson laughed, a sneering little noise in the back of his throat. Becky wished to God he
had never made that sound. “The CO count wasn’t high enough.”
“It’s  an  angle,  man!  If  I  can  use  that,  I  don’t  have  to  put  this  case  down  to  The
Unexplained.  Think  about  what  we’re  confronting  here!  Cops  were  killed  by  dogs.  It’s
stupid. It’s bad for the department, it makes the men look like a bunch of jerkoffs, getting
themselves killed by a pack of mutts. You don’t tell the papers, yeah, here are a couple of
dopes  who  got  themselves  done  in  by  a  bunch  of  dogs,  didn’t  even  have  the  sense  to
defend themselves. I can’t make a statement like that.”
“Which is  why  you’ll  try  to  get  the  Commissioner  to  make  the  statement.  You  don’t
want to be associated with it.”
“It’s his responsibility, Detective. And I don’t think I like your attitude!”
“Thank you.”
The Chief’s eyes bored into Wilson’s impassive face. “What’s that supposed to mean?”
“Thank you. Nothing more or less. I’ve told you all I know about this case. Give me a
few  more  days  and  a  little  luck  and  I’ll  know  more.  As  far  as  the  cause  of  death  is
concerned, it appears to have been the dogs. I don’t like it any more than you do, I’ve got
to tell you. But those are the facts. If you want a statement for the press, that’s got to be
it.”
“The hell. The carbon monoxide did it. Had to. And that’s damn well what I’m going to
say.”
“Have you  considered  the  consequences,  sir?”  Becky  said.  She  had,  and  a  statement
like the one Underwood planned to make was a serious mistake, even a dangerous one.
“Like?”
“Well, if the men were conscious—and we all know they probably were—it means that
we’ve got something very  dangerous  out  there.  Something  the  public  ought  to  be  made
aware of, and the police ought to take steps to eliminate.”
“Yeah,  but  that’s  no problem  because  I  intend  to  order  that  damn  dump  cleared  of
wild dogs. I’ll send in the Tactical Patrol Force and  clean  it  out.  There  won’t  be  another
problem  no matter  how  those  dogs  got  to  DiFalco  and  Houlihan.  Even  if  the  men  were
conscious  it  doesn’t  make  any  difference  because  by  this  time  tomorrow  the  dogs  are
going to be dead. I’m going to say that the officers were suffering from carbon monoxide
poisoning and were attacked by the dogs while they were unconscious or semiconscious.”
He cleared his throat. “All right with you?”
“It’s your statement, Chief,” Wilson said.
“OK,  don’t  you  do  or  say  anything  to  contradict  it,  you  understand.  Just  keep  your
problems to yourself. And as of right now you’re off the case.”
Becky was astonished. This had never happened to them before; people always put up
with Wilson, endured him. Being pulled off this case was a blow to his prestige and to hers.
She could have kicked him for his Goddamn bullheadedness.

“It won’t last, Underwood,” Wilson said quietly. “You can kick us around and you  can
make any damn statement you want, but in the end you’re going to be embarrassed. This
thing isn’t going to go away.”
“The hell it isn’t. You wait and see.”
“Something damn strange happened out there.”
“Nothing the TPF  can’t  deal  with.”  His face  was  getting  blotchy;  this  was  almost  too
much for his temper. “Nothing we can’t deal with! Unlike you! You two can’t seem to put
this case together! Dogs indeed —that’s ludicrous. It isn’t even a good excuse, much less a
solution. Here I’ve got this whole  town  screaming  at  me  for  a  solution  and  you  give  me
bullshit!”  Suddenly  he  glared  at  Becky.  “And  another  thing,  sweetheart.  I’ve  heard  the
rumors about your  sweet  husband.  This  DA  ought  to  be  doing  a  little  investigating  into
the Neff family instead of trying  to  dig  up  some  kind  of  organized  crime  links  to  supply
motive for the killers of DiFalco and Houlihan. We’ve got a bent cop’s wife right here—or
is it a family affair, dear?”
The Assistant DA remained  tight-lipped,  staring  like  a  statue  at  the  Oriental  rug.  At
the  Chief’s  words  the  whole  room  seemed  to  sway;  Becky  felt  her  head  tightening,  the
blood rushing, her heart thundering. What in the name of God was he implying! Was Dick
in trouble? She knew that she herself was an honest cop. And Dick had to be too. Had to
be. Like Wilson. He had to be as honest as Wilson.
“You  think  we’re  incompetent,”  Wilson  said  mildly,  “why  not  convene  a  Board  of
Inquiry? Present your facts.”
“Shut up and get out. Your superior officers will handle this from now on.”
“Which means there’s going to be a Board?”
“Shut up and get out!”
They left, even Wilson perceiving that the meeting was terminated. “I’m going home,”
Becky said to her boss as the elevator dropped toward the garage. “Want a lift?”
“Nah. I’m gonna go over to Chinatown, get some supper. I’ll see you in the morning.”
“See you.”
That was that for today. Another charming day in the life of a lady cop.
Traffic was heavy and she had missed the evening news by the time she got home. No
matter, the Chief’s statement wouldn’t make it on the air until eleven o’clock.
When she arrived at their small upper  East  Side  apartment,  Becky  was  disappointed
that Dick wasn’t there. Mechanically she ran the Phone-Mate. Dick’s voice said he’d be in
about three a.m. Great. A lonely night just when you need it the most.
At eleven the Chief  appeared  with  his  terse  statement—carbon  monoxide,  wild  dogs,
TPF roundup of dogs, case closed in one day.
The hell it is, she thought, the hell it is.
Chapter 3
Chapter 3
Chapter 3
Chapter 3
« ^ »

Mike O’Donnell hated this part of his daily journey. The streets around here were sullen,
dangerous and empty. Openings in the  ruined  buildings  exhaled  the  stench  of  damp  rot
and  urine.  O’Donnell  liked  the  bustling  crowds  a  few  blocks  away,  but  on  the  money  a
blind man made you couldn’t take cabs  through  these  areas,  you  had  to  walk.  Over  the
years the deadly stillness had grown like a cancer, replacing the noisy, kindly clamor that
Mike  remembered  from  his  childhood.  Now  it  was  almost  all  like  this  except  the  block
where  Mike  lived  with  his  daughter  and  the  block  near  the  subway  station  a
twenty-minute walk away.
Those twenty minutes were always bad, always getting worse. Along this route he had
encountered  addicts,  muggers,  perverts—every  kind  of  human  garbage.  And  he  had
survived. He let them shake him down. What could he lose, a few dollars? Only once had
he  been  struck,  that  by  some  teenagers,  children  really.  He  had  appealed  to  their
manhood, shamed them out of their plan to torture him in one of the empty buildings.
Mike  was  tough  and  resilient.  Sixty  sightless  years  in  the  Bronx  left  him  no  other
choice. He and his beloved daughter were on welfare, home relief. She was a good girl with
bad taste in husbands. God knows, the kind of men… smelling of cologne and hair grease,
moving around like cats through the apartment, voices that sneered every word… actors,
she said. And she was an actress, she said… he groped his way along with his cane trying
to put trouble out of his mind, not wanting to bring his feelings home, start an argument.
Then  he  heard  a  little  sound  that  made  the  hairs  rise  along  the  back  of  his  neck.  It
didn’t quite seem human, yet what else could it be? Not an animal— too much like a voice,
too little like a growl.
“Is somebody there?”
The  sound  came  again,  right  in  front  of  him  and  down  low.  He  sensed  a  presence.
Somebody was there, apparently crouching close to the ground. “Can I help you? Are you
hurt?”
Something  slid  along  the  pavement.  At  once  the  strange  sound  was  taken  up  from
other points—behind him, in the abandoned buildings beside him, in the street. There was
a sense of slow, circling movement.
Mike O’Donnell raised his cane, started to swing it back and forth in front of him. The
reaction was immediate; Mike O’Donnell’s death came so suddenly that all he  registered
was astonishment.
They  worked  with  practiced  efficiency,  pulling  the  body  back  into  the  abandoned
building while blood was still pumping out of the throat. It was a heavy, old body, but they
were  determined  and  there  were  six  of  them.  They  worked  against  time,  against  the
ever-present danger of being discovered at a vulnerable moment.
Mike  O’Donnell  hadn’t  understood  how  completely  this  neighborhood  had  been
abandoned in recent years, left by all except junkies and other derelicts, and the ones who
were  attracted  to  them  for  their  weakness.  And  now  Mike  O’Donnell  had  joined  the
unnumbered  corpses  rotting  in  the  abandoned  basements  and  rubble  of  the  empty
neighborhood.
But in his case there was one small difference. He had a home and was missed. Mike’s
daughter was frantic. She dialed the Lighthouse for the Blind again. No, they hadn’t seen
Mike, he had never appeared for his assigned duties. Now it was six hours and she wasn’t
going to waste any more time. Her next call was to the police.
Because  missing  persons  usually  turn  up  on  their  own  or  don’t  turn  up  at  all,  and
because  there  are  so  many  of  them,  the  Police  Department  doesn’t  react  instantly  to
another such report. At least, not unless it concerns a child or a young woman who had no

reason  to  leave  home,  or,  as  in  the  case  of  Mike  O’Donnell,  somebody  who  wouldn’t
voluntarily  abandon  the  little  security  and  comfort  he  had  in  the  world.  So  Mike
O’Donnell’s case was special and it got some attention. Not an overwhelming amount, but
enough to cause a detective to  be  assigned  to  the  case.  A  description  of  Mike  O’Donnell
was circulated, given a little more than routine attention. Somebody even questioned the
daughter long enough to draw a map of Mike’s probable route from his apartment to the
subway station. But the case went no farther than that; no body turned up, the police told
the daughter to wait, not to give up hope. A week later they told her to give up hope, he
wasn’t  going  to  be  found.  Somewhere  in  the  city  his  body  probably  lay  moldering,
effectively and completely hidden by whoever had killed him. Mike O’Donnell’s daughter
learned in time to accept the idea of his death, to try to replace the awful uncertain  void
with  the  comfort  of  certainty.  She  did  the  best  she  could,  but  all  she  really  came  to
understand was that her father had somehow been swallowed by the city.
During  these  weeks  Neff  and  Wilson  worked  on  other  assignments.  They  heard
nothing about the O’Donnell case; they were investigating another murder, locked in the
endless,  sordid  routine  of  Homicide.  Most  crimes  are  no  less  commonplace  than  the
people who commit them, and Wilson and Neff weren’t being assigned  to  the  interesting
or dramatic cases these days. It wasn’t that they were being muscled aside, but word was
out  that  the  Chief  of  Detectives  wasn’t  exactly  in  love  with  them.  He  knew  that  they
didn’t  like  his  handling  of  the  DiFalco/Houlihan  murders  and  he  didn’t  want  to  be
reminded of it, primarily because he didn’t like it any more than they did. He was a more
literal man than they were and much more concerned with his own potential appointment
to  the  job  of  Police  Commissioner  than  with  following  up  bizarre  theories  about  what
genuinely looked to him like an even  more  bizarre  accident.  So  the  two  detectives  were
kept away from big cases, effectively buried in the sheer size of the New York City Police
Department.
The  first  words  Becky  Neff  heard  about  Mike  O’Donnell  came  from  the  Medical
Examiner.  “I  thought  you  two  had  retired,”  he  said  over  the  phone.  “You  got  a  heavy
case?”
“The usual. Not a lot of action.” Beside her Wilson raised his eyebrows. The phone  on
her desk hadn’t been ringing too often; an extended conversation like this was of interest.
“I’ve got a problem up here I’d like you two to take a look at.”
“The Chief—‘”
“So  take  a  coffee  break.  Just  come  up  here.  I  think  this  might  be  what  you’ve  been
waiting for.”
“What’s he got?” Wilson asked as soon as she put down the phone.
“He’s got a problem. He thinks it might interest us.”
“The Chief—”
“So he said take a coffee break and come up to see him. I think it’s a good idea.”
They pulled on their coats; outside it was a  bright,  blustery  December  afternoon  and
the  cold  wind  coming  around  the  buildings  carried  a  fierce  chill.  The  cold  had  been  so
intense for the past three days, in fact, that there weren’t even many cars on the street.
The  usual  afternoon  jams  were  gone,  replaced  by  a  smattering  of  taxis  and  buses  with
great plumes of condensing exhaust behind them. The M. E. had been circumspect on the
phone, no doubt savoring what little bit of drama might be in this for him.
They didn’t speak as the car raced up Third Avenue. In the past few weeks Wilson had
become more than usually taciturn; that was fine with Becky, she had problems enough of
her own without listening to him complain about his. The last month with Dick had  been

stormy,  full  of  pain  and  unexpected  realizations.  She  knew  now  that  Dick  was  taking
money  under  the  table.  Strangely  enough  the  money  wasn’t  from  narcotics  but  from
gambling.  He  had  tracked  a  heroin  network  into  an  illicit  gambling  casino  about  a  year
ago.  Dick’s  father  was  in  a  nursing  home,  he  was  sick  of  the  bills,  he  was  sick  of  the
treadmill;  he  collared  the  junkies  but  left  the  gambling  establishment  alone—for  a  few
thousand  dollars.  “It’s  gambling,”  he  had  argued;  “what  the  hell,  it  shouldn’t  even  be  a
crime.” But since it was, he might as well let it pay the six hundred a month his father was
costing. God knows, they might even be able to put enough aside for a decent apartment
one of these days.
It hurt her to see this happening to Dick. The truth was, she had sniped  at  him  for  it
but she hadn’t tried to stop him and she hadn’t  turned  him  in.  Nor  would  she.  But  Dick
was a corrupt cop, the one thing she had sworn she would never be, the one thing she had
sworn she would never allow him to be. Well, he hadn’t asked permission.
She had always assumed that she would never give in to the temptations that were so
common on the police force—and he had sworn it too. But he had and by not stopping him
she had too. Now they bickered, each unwilling to confront the real reason for their anger.
They should have had the courage to stop; instead they had let things happen. They had
disappointed one another and were bitter about it.
Bitter enough to spend more and more time apart. Often it was days between shared
evenings or monosyllabic breakfasts. They used to work their schedules to  fit;  now  they
worked  them  to  be  apart.  Or  at  least  as  far  as  Becky  was  concerned  she  just  stopped
making an effort with her schedule. She drew what she drew, and overtime was just fine.
Eventually  there  would  be  a  confrontation,  but  not  now,  not  today  —today  she  was
heading  up  to  the  M.  E.’s  office  to  be  let  in  on  a  new  case,  maybe  something  really
interesting for the first time in too damn long.
Evans was waiting for them in the reception area. “Don’t take off your coats,” he said,
“we’re  going  to  the  freezer.”  That  meant  the  remains  were  in  an  advanced  state  of
deterioration. The  Medical  Examiner’s  office  had  a  claustrophobic  freezer  compartment
with room enough for three  surgical  tables  and  a  few  people  squeezed  in tight.  Wilson’s
eyes  roved  as  they  went  down  the  disinfectant-scented  hall  toward  the  freezer;  his
claustrophobia had a field day in the thing. More than once he had commented  to  Becky
that the freezer had figured in his nightmares.
“It’s rough stuff again,” the M. E. said conversationally. “I only call you  folks  in when
I’ve got some real gore. Hope you don’t mind.” It could  be  that  Evans  lacked  taste  or  it
could  just  possibly  be  an  attempt  at  banter.  Becky  didn’t  bother  to  laugh;  instead  she
asked a question.
“What are we going to see?”
“Three  DOA’s,  very  decomposed.”  He  ushered  them  into  the  starkly  lit  freezer  and
pulled  the  door  shut  behind  them.  He  didn’t  need  to  say  more;  the  bodies  had  clearly
been attacked the same way DiFalco and Houlihan were attacked.  There  was  something
chilling about seeing the same type of scrape marks  on the  bones,  the  same  evidence  of
gnawing. Becky was  frightened,  too  deeply  frightened  to  really  understand  her  feelings.
But she knew the moment she saw these corpses that the  Chief  of  Detectives  had  made
exactly  the  mistake  they  had  feared  he  was  making—this  was  not  an  ordinary  murder
case and it was not a fluke.
“Goddamn,” Wilson said.
The Medical Examiner smiled, but this time it was without mirth. “I don’t know how to
explain these bodies. The condition makes no sense.”
“It  makes  sense,”  Becky  said,  “as  soon  as  you  assume  that  they  weren’t  killed  by

human beings.”
“What then?”
“That’s what’s to be found out. But you’re wasting your time with us, Underwood took
us off the case.”
“Well, he’ll put you back on.”
“There are a lot of detectives  in this  department,”  Wilson  put  in.  “I’m  sure  he’ll  find
others. And it’s likely he’ll want more. This is going to be a big embarrassment for him.”
Wilson shook his head. “A hell of  an  embarrassment.  Let’s  get  out  of  this  icebox.  We’ve
seen all we need to see.”
Evans opened the door. “You’ll get back on,” he said, “I’ll make sure of that. So start to
work. You need a solution.”
They didn’t bother to ask the M.  E.  how  the  bodies  had  come  in;  instead  they  called
headquarters and got referred to the right  precinct.  As  soon  as  he  was  off  the  phone  to
headquarters Wilson called  the  41st  Precinct  in the  South  Bronx  and  asked  to  speak  to
the  Captain.  Sure  they  could  come  up,  but  there  were  already  detectives  on  the  case.
“Might be a tie-in to another case, one of ours.” He put down the phone. “Let’s move.”
They  battled  their  way  across  town  to  the  FDR  Drive.  Despite  the  fact  that  the
weather  had  reduced  the  amount  of  traffic  in  the  city,  getting  across  town  was  still
difficult. “I read somewhere that it takes longer to cross town in a car today than it used
to in a carriage.”
“And longer than that when I’m driving, right?”
“Yeah, if you say so.”
“Goddamn brass,” Becky growled.
“Hey, getting our dander up, my dear.”
“Damn right I am. Here we’ve got two cops buried and forgotten and  we  knew  damn
well something wasn’t right—damn these politicking bastards. It’s  a  black  day  when  the
NYPD won’t even mount a proper investigation when officers are killed.  Seedman  never
would have done this.”
Wilson sighed,  expressing  in that  single  sound  all  the  feelings  he  could  or  would  not
express about the Police Department he so loved to hate. The department had hurt  him
as  well  as  helped  him;  in the  past  few  years  he  had  seen  its  emphasis  shift  away  from
solving crimes toward preventing them. Citizens demanded protection in the streets; the
once-proud Detectives diminished and foot patrol became the thing. The old-timers were
fewer  and  fewer;  Wilson  was  one,  sharp-eyed  and  careful.  And  the  fact  that  his  young
partner was  a  woman  was  just  another  sign  of  the  deterioration  of  the  department.  He
stared  out  the  window.  Becky  couldn’t  see  his  face  but  she  knew  what  the  expression
contained. She knew also that there was no sense in talking  to  him  now;  he  was  beyond
communication.
They  made  their  way  through  the  devastated  streets  of  the  41st  Precinct,  past  the
vacant brick-strewn lots, the empty buildings, the burned, abandoned ruins, the stripped
cars,  the  dismal,  blowing  garbage  in  the  streets.  And  Becky  thought,  “Somewhere,
something is here. It is here.” She knew it. And by the way Wilson changed, the stiffening
of his posture, the darkening of his face, the little turning-down of the edges of his mouth,
she saw that he also had the same feeling.
“Every time I’m up here this place looks worse.”
“What street was it again, George?”

“East One Hundred and Forty-fourth Street. Old One Forty-four. Sure is a mess now.”
Wilson was in the neighborhood of his childhood, looking at the ruins of where he had been
a boy.  “It  was  a  pretty  good  place  then,  not  the  greatest,  but  it  sure  wasn’t  like  this.
Jesus.”
“Yeah.”  Becky  tried  to  leave  him  alone  with  his  thoughts.  Considering  that  the  little
upstate town where she had grown up was still exactly as it had been, still and seemingly
forever, she couldn’t imagine what seeing this place must do to Wilson.
“God, I can’t believe I’m fifty-four,” he said. “I’d swear I was sitting on that stoop last
night.” He sighed. “We’re there,” he said, “the old Forty-first.” The precinct house was a
dismal  fortress,  an  unlikely  bastion  of  reasonable  decay  in  the  surrounding  ruins.  A
neighborhood  of  unabandoned  houses  clustered  around  it.  The  danger  and  destruction
were beyond. In fact, with the strange fecundity of the Bronx, this immediate two blocks
showed signs of mild prosperity. There was traffic in the streets, neatly swept sidewalks,
curtains  in  windows,  and  a  well-kept  Catholic  church  on  the  corner.  People  were  few
because of the  cold,  but  Becky  could  imagine  what  the  area  was  like  when  the  weather
was  good—filled  with  kids  on  the  sidewalks  and  their  parents  on  the  stoops,  full  of
liveliness and noise and the sheer exuberance that can infect city neighborhoods.
The Captain of the 41st Precinct looked up from his desk when Neff and  Wilson  were
shown  in.  It  was  clear  at  once  that  he  still  didn’t  know  exactly  why  they  were  there.
Normally detectives from another borough would have nothing to do with this case— and
as  far  as  the  Captain  was  concerned  it  probably  wasn’t  much  of  a  case.  Just  another
couple of rotting junkie corpses and a poor old man. About the score for the South Bronx
these  days.  Becky  knew  instinctively  to  let  Wilson  handle  the  Captain.  He  was  the
infighter, the resident expert on departmental politics.  Look  where  his  political  skill  had
gotten him. The best detective in New York City at dead end. First Grade, true, but never
a division, never a district of his own.
“We got a suggestion from Evans,” Wilson said by way of explaining their presence to
the Captain.
“Evans pulled rank  on the  Bronx  Medical  Examiner  and  got  those  cadavers  down  to
Manhattan. We don’t know why he did that.” There was acid in the man’s voice. He didn’t
like a case being  taken  from  him  without  a  good  reason.  And  it  was  obvious  that  so  far
nobody had given him one.
“He  did  that  because  the  marks  on  them  were  similar  to  the  marks  on  the
DiFalco-Houlihan remains.”
The Precinct Captain stared. “That case still open?”
“It is now. We’ve got a new lead.”
“Jesus. No wonder you guys are all over us.” He stood up from his desk.  “We  got  the
scene in good shape,” he said. “You want to go over there?”
Wilson nodded. As they followed the Captain out of his office, Becky was exultant. The
man had never thought to call downtown to check on Neff and Wilson. If he had he would
have found out that they weren’t even on the case anymore. But why should he? It would
never even occur to him.
The  area  where  the  bodies  had  been  found  was  roped  off  and  plastered  with  Crime
Scene stickers. It was guarded by two patrolmen. “The bodies were found by a gypsy cab
driver who stopped  to  fix  a  flat  and  smelled  something.  He  came  to  us,  we  were  lucky.
Usually those guys don’t even bother.”
The bodies had been found in the basement of an abandoned apartment house. Becky
took her flashlight out of her bag and went in under the decaying stoop. Lights had been

set up in the  dirty  room,  but  the  rest  of  the  building  was  in boarded-up  darkness.  The
flashlight  played  along  the  floor,  in the  unlit  corners,  up  the  stairs  that  led  to  the  first
floor. “Door locked?” Wilson asked as Becky shone her light on its blackened surface.
“Haven’t been up there,” the  Captain  said.  “Remember,  we  thought  this  was  routine
until this morning when the Bronx M. E. told us that Evans had snatched his bodies.”
“Ha ha, that was  funny,”  Wilson  said  tonelessly.  The  Captain  glowered.  “Let’s  go  up,
partner. We might as well make the search.”
  
They all heard it; a footstep on the stair. They looked to their leader. His hair rose and
theirs  did  too.  They  functioned  with  one  emotion,  one  will,  one  heart.  What  did  the
footsteps mean? Obviously, the ones in the basement had decided to come upstairs. And
they  were  familiar.  The  sound  of  their  tread,  their  rising  smell,  their  voices  were
remembered from the dump. As the elders had feared, the killings of young humans had
caused  an  investigation.  And  these  two  had  been  at  that  investigation.  Now  they  were
here, obviously following the pack.
Their  scent  became  more  powerful  as  they  drew  nearer:  an  old  man  and  a  young
woman. No danger, they would be an easy kill.
The leader made a sound that sent the pack into motion.
They were hungry, the children were cold and hungry. Food was needed. Today a new
hunt  would  have  begun.  Maybe  it  would  be  unnecessary,  this  kill  would  both  remove
danger and provide meat But the strong young woman would have to be separated from
the  weak  old  man.  How  to  do  that?  Their  scents  revealed  the  fact  that  they  were
partners, and the way their voices sounded as they talked to one another  said  that  they
had worked together a long time. How do you separate such  people  even  for  a  moment,
especially when both recognize danger? The scents became sharp with the smell of fear as
the two humans  groped  through  the  darkness.  It  made  digestive  juices  flow  and  hearts
beat  faster  with  lust  for  the  hunt.  The  leader  warned,  hold  back,  hold  back.  In  this
situation he sensed hidden dangers. Suddenly he hated the place. He loathed it, despised
it.  It  was  thick  with  humanity.  There  were  strong,  young  ones  outside  and  these  two
inside  and  another  old  one  in  the  basement  Before  there  had  been  many  more  in  the
basement. “Our young must not kill  their  young,”  he  thought  fiercely.  He  found  himself
moving slowly toward the door of the room they inhabited, moving against his judgment,
attracted by the need to kill the two who knew enough of the pack to follow it here. Now
the others moved behind him, stealthy, efficient, padding quickly down the darkened hall,
down the black stairway toward the wonderful scents, moving too close to humanity and
yet only close enough to get what they needed.  “Must  find  a  way  to  split  them  up,”  the
leader thought. Then he stopped. His whole body  seethed  with  desire  to  go  on,  to  finish
the attack, to feel the death of the prey in his mouth. But he thought  carefully,  his  mind
turning over the problem and coming to the solution.
Certain sounds attracted humans. This fact was often used in hunting. A little cry, like
one of their children, would bring even  the  most  fearful  within  range  of  attack.  And  the
child’s cry was most easily heard by the women.
“Sh!”
“What?”
“Listen.” It came again, the unmistakable groan of a child. “You hear that?”
“No.”
Becky  went  to  the  stairwell.  She  heard  it  more  clearly,  coming  from  above.  “Wilson,

there’s  a  kid  up  there.”  She  shone  her  light  into  the  dimness.  “I’m  telling  you  I  hear  a
child.”
“So go investigate. I’m not going up there.”
The sound came again, full of imperative need.
She found  herself  standing  on the  first  step,  moving  upward  almost  against  her  own
will.  Above  her  the  decoy  put  his  heart  into  the  sounds,  making  them  as  plaintive  and
compelling as he could. He imagined himself a helpless little human child lying on the cold
floor weeping, and the sound that came out of him was like such a child.
The others moved swiftly to the opposite stairwell and started down. They sensed the
positions of the prey. The strong young woman starting up the stairs, the  weak  old  man
standing in the dark hallway behind her. “Come up, come up,” the decoy pleaded to her in
his mind, and made the little sound. It had to be right, to be perfect, just enough to attract
her,  not  enough  to  let  her  decide  what  she  wanted  to  decide—that  it  was  the  wind,  a
creaking board, or something dangerous.
As she reached one landing the hunters reached its twin at the opposite end of the hall.
As  she  rose  toward  the  decoy  they  descended  toward  Wilson.  As  they  got  closer  they
became more  careful.  Hidden  strength  under  the  smells  of  fear  and  decay.  They  would
have to hit this man with devastating force to get him, hit as hard as they had hit the two
young  ones  at  the  dump.  But  their  prize  would  be  great;  he  was  heavy  and  well-fed,
unlike the ones they had found among these empty buildings. There was no starvation in
him and  no sickness  to  make  him  dangerous  to  consume.  They  loved  him,  lusted  after
him, moved closer to him. And they saw his dim shadow, his heavy slow body standing in
the dark.
Then standing in a flickering blaze of light.
“What are you doing, George?”
“Lighting a Goddamn cigarette.”
Becky  came  down  toward  him  flashing  her  light  in  his  face.  “You  are  lighting  a
cigarette. I’ll be damned. Where did you get a cigarette?”
“I’ve been saving it for a special occasion.”
“And now is a special occasion?”
He nodded, his face like stone. “I’ll be frank with you, Becky, I’ve got the  creeps.  I’m
scared to death. I won’t get out of here without you but I think we ought to leave—now.”
“But there’s a child—”
“Now! Come on.” He grabbed her wrist, pulled her toward the basement door.
“There’s something upstairs,” he said to the Precinct Captain, who was standing in the
middle of the basement as if he  had  been  undecided  about  whether  or  not  to  follow  the
two detectives upstairs.
“I’m not surprised. The building is probably full of junkies.”
“It sounded like a child,” Becky said. “I’m sure that’s what it was.”
“That’s possible too,” the Captain said mildly. “I’ll order up a search party if you think
I should. But don’t do it with just two people. It’ll take ten men with carbines, I think that
ought to do it”
Becky  acknowledged  the  wisdom  of  this  plan.  No  doubt  there  had  been  a  pack  of
junkies at the top of the stairs waiting to jump her. Or perhaps there was actually a child.
If that was  so  the  ten  minutes  it  would  take  to  assemble  the  search  party  would  make

little difference.
They  went  outside  and  got  into  the  Captain’s  car.  As  soon  as  they  left,  the  two
patrolmen who had been guarding the scene moved swiftly to their own car and got in to
shield themselves from the cold. They turned on their radio so that they would again have
advance warning of visits from the precinct and settled back in the warmth.
For this reason they did not hear the howl of rage and  frustration  that  rose  from  the
upper reaches of the tenement. Nor did they see the exodus that took place, a line of gray
shadows jumping one by one across the six feet of space that separated this building from
the next one.
  
It didn’t take long to assemble the search party. It was now four o’clock and the night
men were coming on duty. Three patrol cars returned to the building. With the two men
on duty there plus Wilson and Neff there would be exactly ten officers for the search. Of
course as soon as the cars drew up to the front of the building you could assume that any
junkies in it slipped out the back. But murder had been done here and the precinct so far
hadn’t  mounted  a  proper  search.  Pictures  had  been  taken  of  the  victims  and  a  cursory
dusting of the area for fingerprints, but that was all. In this part of the city  a  committed
crime was just another statistic. Nobody bothered to find out the  circumstances  that  led
to  the  deaths  of  a  few  derelicts.  And  nobody  doubted  that  the  blind  man  had  gotten
mugged  and  then  dragged  off  the  street  to  die.  And  nobody  was  right  about  what
happened.
During  the  search  Wilson  and  Neff  were  silent.  The  rooms  of  the  old  tenement  still
bore  the  marks  of  the  last  residents—graffiti  on  the  walls,  shreds  of  curtains  in  the
windows, yellowing wallpaper here and there. Even, in one room, the remains of a carpet.
But there was no child, and there were no traces of recent human habitation.
Wilson and Neff made the reluctant patrolmen scoop up some of the fecal matter that
was found. They put it in a plastic bag.
“Empty upstairs,” a voice called as a group of five came from searching up to the roof.
“Nothing suspicious.”
What  the  hell  did  that  mean?  These  men  wouldn’t  know  evidence  from  cauliflower.
“Take us through,” Wilson growled. “We’ve gotta see for ourselves.”
The patrolmen  went  with  them,  the  whole  crowd  going  floor  to  floor.  Becky  saw  the
empty  rooms  in  better  light,  but  her  mind  could  not  blot  out  those  plaintive  cries.
Something was up here just a few minutes ago, something that had left without a trace.
They looked carefully in all the rooms but found nothing.
When they got back to the basement Wilson was shaking his head. “I don’t get it,” he
said, “I know you heard something.”
“You do?”
“I heard it too, you think I’m deaf?”
Becky  was  surprised,  she  hadn’t  realized  that  he  also  had  heard  the  sound.  “Why
didn’t you go up with me then?”
“It wasn’t a child.”
She looked at him, at the cold fear in his face. “OK,” she said, swallowing her intended
challenge, “it wasn’t a child. What was it?”
He  shook  his  head  and  pulled  out  his  cigarettes.  “Let’s  get  the  shit  to  the  lab  for

analysis. That’s all we can do now.”
They left the house with the clomping horde of patrolmen. With their meager evidence
tightly enclosed in plastic bags they headed back to Manhattan.
“You think this will reopen the DiFalco case?” Becky asked.
“Probably.”
“Good, then we won’t be moonlighting on it anymore.”
“As I recall we got taken off that case. Or do you recall something else?”
“Well, yeah, but in view of—”
“In view of nothing. We’re going to be  the  scapegoats  now.  Neff  and  Wilson  get  case.
Carbon monoxide and wild dogs. Neff and Wilson close case. New evidence comes in. Case
reopened. Neff and Wilson scapegoats for closing it in the first place.” His throat rumbled
in a  suppressed  cough.  “Goddamn  Luckies,”  he  said.  “Goddamn,  you  know  I  could  be
resigning soon.”
“You won’t resign.”
“No, not voluntarily. But it depends on how  hard  Underwood  wants  to  stick  me  with
blame for misunderstanding the case.”
“But it’s only one damn case.”
“It’s  police  officers  killed  in  the  line  of  duty.  If  it  gets  out  that  Underwood  himself
closed  the  case  he’ll  lose  his  shot  at  Commissioner.  Therefore  you  and  yours  truly  are
going to  be  blamed.  Might  as  well  relax  and  enjoy  the  fun.”  His  shoulders  shook  with
mirthless laughter.
“Maybe there’s something more  conclusive.  If  there  is  it’ll  help  a  little.”  She  paused.
The silence grew. “Who do you think is doing it?” she asked.
“Not who—what. It’s not human.”
Now  he  had  said  the  words,  words  they  had  previously  been  unwilling  to  face.  Not
human. Could not be human. “What makes you so sure?” Becky asked, half-knowing the
answer.
Wilson looked at her in surprise. “Why, the noise, of course. It wasn’t human.”
“What’s that supposed to mean? It sounded perfectly human to me.” Or had it? Becky
remembered it now like something that had  taken  place  in a  dream,  a  child’s  voice  or…
something else. Every few seconds it was as if she woke up and heard it again— horrible,
inhuman parody full of snarling menace… then child again, soft, wounded, dying.
“Look out!”
She slammed on the brakes. She had been about to  glide  broadside  into  the  traffic  of
Third Avenue. “Sorry. Sorry, George, I—”
“Pull over. You’re not in good shape.”
She obeyed him. Despite the. fact that she felt fine, there was no denying what she had
almost done. Like the little cries were still taking place, but in a dream. “I feel OK, I don’t
know what came over me.”
“You acted hypnotized,” he said.
She heard the noises again, feral, snarling, monstrous. Sweat popped out all  over  her.
She felt cold, her flesh crawling. Her mind turned back to the stair, to the terrible danger
that had been waiting for  her,  the  same  as  the  torn,  bloodied  corpses,  the  jagged  bones

and skulls.
With her hands over her mouth she fought not to scream, to give up completely to the
terror.
Wilson came across the seat as if he had been waiting for this. He took her in his arms;
her body rattled against his thick shoulders; she pressed her face into the warm,  scruffy
smell of his ancient white shirt, distantly she felt him kissing her hair, her ear,  her  neck,
and  felt  waves  of  comfort  and  surprise  overcoming  and  pushing  back  the  panic.  She
wanted to pull away from him but she also wanted to do what she did, which was lift her
face. He kissed her hard and she accepted it, passively at first, then giving in to the relief
of it, and kissed him back.
Then they separated, propelled apart by the fact that they were in a car recognizable
to any policeman. Becky put her hands on the steering wheel. She felt sick and sad,  as  if
something had just been lost.
“I’ve been  wanting  to  get  that  out  of  my  system,”  Wilson  said  gruffly.  “I’ve  been—”
Then his voice died away. He clutched the dashboard and laid his head  on his  arm.  “Oh,
hell, I love you, dammit.” She started to talk. “No, don’t say it. I know what you’ll say. But
just let it be known and leave it like that. We go on like we were.  Unrequited  love  won’t
kill me.”
She looked at him, amazed that he could bring up something so… extraneous. She had
always wondered if he loved her.  She  loved  him  in a  way.  But  that  wasn’t  important,  it
had  been  accepted  a  long  time  ago.  And  their  relationship  was  established.  Certainly  it
shouldn’t intrude now. When he turned his face toward her he registered shock. She knew
her mascara must be running with the tears, she knew her face must be twisted  in fear.
“What happened to me?” she asked. Her voice was not her own, so distorted was it by the
rush of emotions. “What was going on back there?”
“Becky, I don’t know. But I think we’d better find out.”
She laughed. “Oh, that’s for sure! I just don’t know if I can handle it. We’ve really got
some problems here.”
“Yeah. One of them is you. I don’t mean that harshly, but I’m going to have to  break
my cardinal rule at this time. Let’s change sides, I’m going to drive.”
She  hid  her  amazement.  In  all  the  years  they  had  worked  together,  this  was  an
absolute first. “I must be falling apart,” she said as she sank into Wilson’s usual seat. “This
is really a big deal.”
“It’s no big deal. You’re rattled. But you know you shouldn’t be. I  mean,  you  weren’t
the one in danger. It was me.”
“You! I was being lured upstairs.”
“To get you away from me.”
“Why  do  you  even  say  that?  You’re  a  man,  a  lot  heavier  than  me,  not  an  obvious
target.”
“I  heard  noises  on  the  stairs  at  the  other  end  of  the  hall.  Breathing  noises,  like
something  hungry  slavering  over  its  food.”  The  tone  of  his  voice  frightened  her.  She
laughed  nervously  in  self  defense,  the  sound  pealing  out  so  suddenly  that  it  startled
Wilson visibly. He looked at her out of the corner of his eye but kept the car moving.
“I’m sorry. It’s just that you’re the last person I’d think of as one of their victims.”
“Why?”

“Well, they eat them, don’t they? Isn’t that what it’s all about? Everybody they’ve hit
has been eaten.”
“Old  men,  junkies,  two  cops  in a  hell  of  a  lonely  place.  The  weak  and  the  isolated.  I
fitted two key criteria in that  house—older  man,  isolated  from  all  except  you.  And  they
damn near lured you away upstairs. You ever go hunting?”
“I don’t like it. I’ve never been.”
“When I was a kid I hunted with my father. We went after moose up north. We used to
track for days sometimes. One summer we tracked for a week. And  finally  we  got  on to
our moose, a big old bull that moved with a slanty track. A wounded bull. Weak, ready for
the slaughter. I’ll never forget it. There we were just  getting  ready  to  take  a  shot  when
wolves stole out of the shadows all around us.  They  went  right  past  us  into  the  clearing
where the moose was grazing. My dad cursed under his breath—those wolves were going
to  scare  our  trophy  away.  But  they  didn’t.  That  big  bull  moose  looked  down  at  those
scrawny  wolves  and  just  snorted.  They  moved  in  closer  and  he  stopped  grazing  and
stared  at  them.  You’d  never  believe  it.  The  damn  wolves  wagged  their  tails!  And  the
moose let out a great roar and they jumped him. They tore at him, bled him to death. We
were fascinated, we were rooted to the spot. But it was like they agreed together that the
killing  be  done.  The  wolves  and  the  moose  agreed.  He  couldn’t  make  it  anymore,  they
needed  meat.  So  he  let  them  take  him.  And  those  timber  wolves  are  scrawny.  They’re
like German shepherds. They look like they’d  never  be  able  to  bring  down  a  full-grown
bull moose. And they wouldn’t, unless  he  agreed  to  let  them  try.”  He  was  watching  her
again, barely keeping an eye on traffic. He was no better a driver today than she was.
“What’s that supposed to mean?”
“I’m the bull moose in this version of the story. I wasn’t scared, but I knew they were
coming down those stairs. If they had gotten any closer to me, I think I would have been
a goner.”
“But you didn’t want them to kill you! We’re not like animals, we want to survive.”
“I don’t know what was going on in my mind,” he said. By the choked gruffness of his
voice she knew that if he hadn’t been Wilson he would be sobbing. “All I know is, if  they
had come any closer I’m not so sure I could have even tried to stop them.”
Chapter 4
Chapter 4
Chapter 4
Chapter 4
« ^ »
Becky Neff awoke suddenly out of a restless sleep. She  felt  that  there  had  been  a  noise,
yet  now  there  was  no  sound  except  the  wind,  and  a  little  snow  whispering  on  the
windowpane.  The  glow  from  the  streetlights  far  below  shone  on  the  ceiling.  In  the
distance a truck clattered its way down  Second  Avenue.  The  hands  of  the  clock  showed
three  forty-five.  She  had  been  asleep  four  hours.  She  remembered  a  hint  of  dream—a
flash of blood, a sickly feeling of menace.  Perhaps  that  had  awakened  her.  Dick’s  steady
breathing in the bed beside her was a reassurance. If there had been an unusual noise he
would be awake too. Gently she touched him, thinking as she did of how things had been
between  them  such  a  short  time  ago,  and  of  how  change  seeps  into  even  the  strongest
love. She became sad and afraid. The apartment was cold, the  morning  heat  not  yet  up.

“Dick,” she said softly.
There was no response. She hadn’t really said it loud enough to wake  him;  she  didn’t
say it  again.  Then  she  leaned  over  to  get  her  cigarettes  from  the  night  table  and  froze.
There  was  a  shadow  on the  ceiling.  She  watched  it  move  slowly  along,  a  low  lump  like
something crawling on its belly across the bedroom terrace. Her mind raced to the sliding
doors— locked? She had no idea.
Then the shadow was gone and she found she was still lying on her back, not reaching
across the bed at all. In the manner of bad nightmares this one had continued even after
she seemed to be awake. With the thought her heart stopped pounding. Of course it had
been a dream. Nothing could climb sixteen stories to an apartment terrace.  And  nothing
could have followed her. Yet she couldn’t quite overcome the feeling that something was
out  there.  Something,  after  all,  must  have  sparked  the  dream.  Something  must  have
waked her up.
The mutilated faces of DiFalco and Houlihan flickered in her mind’s eye. She thought of
them  staring  up  from  the  muddy  ground.  And  she  thought  of  Mike  O’Donnell,  the  old
blind man dying in his own darkness.
How  did  the  killers  look?  She  had  assumed  that  they  would  look  like  wolves,  but
maybe not. Wolves, she knew, have never been  implicated  in a  human  killing.  They  are
generally no more dangerous to man than are dogs. Wolves were interested in moose and
deer. Man probably frightened them more than they did him.
A little  sound  from  the  terrace  made  her  mind  go  blank,  a  shivering  coldness  pass
through  her  body.  It  was  a  growl,  very  low  and  indistinct.  They  were  here!  Somehow
they had done the impossible, had followed her here. They must have scented her at the
house in the Bronx and followed the trail. They were hunting her, down! She  felt  frozen,
as if she could neither speak nor move. This was fear, she knew, so intense that it left her
mind floating in a strange, precise world of its own, looking from  a  distance  at  her  body.
Her  hand  moved  across  the  bed  and  began  shaking  her  husband’s  shoulder.  She  heard
her voice saying his name again and again with urgent, whispered intensity.
“What—”
“Don’t make a sound. Something’s outside.”
He slipped his service revolver out of his night-table drawer. Only then did it occur to
her to do the same. Her own gun felt good in her hand. “On the terrace,” she said.
Very  quietly  he  got  up  and  went  to  the  door.  He  moved  fast  then,  pulling  back  the
curtains and stepping outside. The terrace was empty. He turned toward her, his shadow
shrugging. “Nothing’s here.”
“There was something.” The conviction grew in her when she said it. A  few  moments
ago she had seen the shadow, heard the growl—and they were certainly real.
“What?”
“I don’t know. Some kind of an animal.”
“A cat?”
“I don’t think so.”
He came  back  to  bed,  crawling  in  beside  her.  “You’re  really  wound  up  in  this  case,
aren’t you, honey?” The gentleness in his voice cut into her, making her feel more lonely
than ever. Despite the urge she felt to embrace him, she stayed on her side of the bed.
“It’s a strange case, Dick.”

“Don’t get overinvolved, honey. It’s just another case.”
That  statement  caused  anger  to  replace  fear.  “Don’t  criticize  me,  Dick.  If  you  were
working on murders like these you’d feel exactly the same way— if you were honest with
yourself.”
“I wouldn’t get worked up.”
“I’m not worked up!”
He laughed, a condescending chuckle. The great stone policeman with his tender bride.
“You take it easy kid,” he said, pulling the quilt up over his head. “Take a Valium if you’re
upset.”
The man was infuriating.
  
“I’m telling you, George, I know what the hell I saw!”
He stared across the room toward the bleary window.  They  had  been  given  an  office
belonging to the Manhattan South Detective Division despite the fact that they were still
not officially assigned to it. “It’s pretty hard to believe,” Wilson said. “Sixteen stories is a
long way up.” His eyes were pleading when he looked at her—she had to be wrong or else
they would be dealing with a force of completely unmanageable proportions.
“All I can say is, it happened. And even if you don’t believe me it wouldn’t hurt to take
precautions.”
“Maybe and maybe not. We’ll know better what we’re up against when we talk to the
guy we’re supposed to see.”
“What guy?”
“A  guy  that  Tom  Rilker  gave  some  of  those  pawprint  casts  to.  You  remember  Tom
Rilker?”
“Sure, the kook with the dogs.”
“Well, he gave the prints we left behind in his office to another kook who wants us to go
interview him. So maybe he’ll tell us what you saw.”
“Goddamn it, you  have  the  sneakiest  way  of  slipping  things  in.  When  do  we  see  this
genius?”
“Ten-thirty,  up  at  the  Museum  of  Natural  History.  He’s  an  animal  stuffer  or
something.”
They drove  up  in silence.  The  fact  that  they  were  even  trying  this  angle  testified  to
their increasing desperation. But at least it meant doing something on the case instead of
letting more time slip by. And time seemed to be terribly important.
“At  least  they  aren’t  throwing  other  assignments  at  us  these  days,”  Becky  said  to
break the silence. Since  this  case  has  been  “closed”  she  and  Wilson  hadn’t  exactly  been
getting  more  big  jobs.  Sooner  or  later  they  would  be  transferred  somewhere  definite
instead of remaining in the limbo of reporting directly to the Chief of Detectives. Probably
go back  to  Brooklyn  for  all  the  difference  it  made.  At  least  out  there  they  wouldn’t  be
victimized by high-level departmental politics.
“Underwood knows what we’re doing.”
“You think so?”
“Of course. Why do you think we’re not getting other cases? Underwood’s playing it by
ear.  If  we  turn  up  something  he  can  use,  OK.  If  we  foul  things  up,  we  can  always  be

reprimanded for insubordination.” He laughed. “He knows exactly what we’re doing.”
“Evans told him, I suppose.”
Wilson smiled. “Sure. He probably called up and told Underwood he’d better leave  us
alone if he knew what was good for him. Underwood might not like it since he closed the
DiFalco  case  himself  but  he’s  afraid  of  Evans,  so  the  result  is  we  end  up  in  a  vacuum.
Damned if we do and et cetera.”
“Here’s the Goddamn museum.”
They went up  the  wide  stone  steps  past  the  statue  of  Teddy  Roosevelt  and  into  the
immense dim hall that formed the lobby.
“We’re here to  see  a  Doctor  Ferguson,”  Wilson  said  to  the  woman  sitting  behind  the
information  counter.  She  picked  up  a  telephone  and  spoke  into  it  for  a  moment,  then
smiled up at them.
The  workrooms  of  the  museum  were  a  shock.  There  were  stacks  of  bones,  boxes  of
feathers, beaks, skulls, animals and birds in various states of reconstruction on tables and
in cases. The chaos was total, a welter of glue and paint and equipment and bones. A tall
young man in a dirty gray smock appeared from behind a box of  stuffed  owls.  “I’m  Carl
Ferguson,”  he  said  in  a  powerful,  cheery  voice.  “We’re  preparing  the  Birds  of  North
America, but that’s obviously not why I called you.” For an instant Becky saw something
chill cross his face, then it was replaced again by the smile. “Let’s go into my office,  such
as it is. I’ve got something to show you.”
It sat on the desk in the office on a piece of plastic. “Ever seen anything like it?”
“What the hell is it?”
“A composite I  constructed  from  the  pawprint  casts  Tom  Rilker  gave  me.  Whatever
made those prints has paws very much like this one.”
“My God. It looks so—”
“Lethal. And that’s exactly what it  is.  An  efficient  weapon.  One  of  the  best  I’ve  ever
seen in nature, as a matter of fact.” He picked it up. “These long, jointed toes can grasp, I
think, quite well. And the claw retracts. Very beautifully and very  strange.” He shook his
head. “Only one thing wrong with it.”
“Which is?”
“It can’t exist. Too perfect a mutation. No defects  at  all.  Plus  it’s  at  least  three  steps
ahead of its canine ancestors. Maybe if it was a single mutation it would be acceptable, but
there are the prints of five or six different animals in here. There must be a pack of these
things.”  He  turned  the  plaster  model  in  his  hand.  “The  odds  against  this  are
billions—trillions— to one.”
“But not impossible?”
He held the model out to Wilson, who stared but didn’t touch. “We have the evidence
right here. And I want to know more about the creatures that made these prints.  Rilker
couldn’t give me a damn bit of information. That’s why I called you. I didn’t want  to  get
involved, but frankly I’m curious.”
Wilson put  on a  sickly  smile.  “You’re  curious,”  he  said.  “That’s  very  nice.  We’re  all
curious. But we can’t help you. You’ve just told us a  lot  more  than  we  knew.  You’re  the
one who can answer questions.”
The scientist looked puzzled and a little sad. He took his glasses off, then dropped into
his chair and put the plaster model back on the desk. “I’m sorry to hear that. I had hoped

you’d  have  more  information  for  me.  But  I  don’t  think  you  realize  how  little  I  know.
Where did the prints come from—can you tell me that?”
“The scene of a crime.”
“Oh  come  on,  George,  don’t  be  so  close-mouthed.  They  came  from  the  scene  of  the
DiFalco-Houlihan murders out in Brooklyn.”
“The two policemen?”
“Right. They were found all around the bodies.”
“What’s being done about this?”
“Exactly nothing,” Wilson snapped. “At the moment the case is officially closed.”
“But what about these prints? I mean, here’s clear evidence that something out of the
ordinary is at work. This is no dog or wolf paw, you realize that? Surely somebody  must
be doing something about it.”
Wilson  shot  Becky  a  glance  and  kept  staring  as  if  surprised.  The  feeling  that  she
experienced confused and pleased her—not because of  what  the  look  communicated  but
because of the way his eyes lingered. “Nobody’s doing anything about it, Doctor,” she said.
“That’s why we’re here. We are the only two police officers in New York on this case and
we’re about to be reassigned.”
“You understand that this  claw  belongs  to  a  fearsome  killer.”  He  said  it  like  it  was  a
revelation.
“We know,” Becky replied patiently. In her mind’s eye she once again saw the faces of
the dead.
Doctor Ferguson seemed to withdraw into himself. His hands hung  down  at  his  sides,
his head bowed. Becky had seen this kind of reaction to stress before, usually in those who
have been unexpectedly close to murderers. “How many have died?” he asked.
“Five so far that we know about,” Wilson replied.
“There’ve probably been more,” Ferguson said faintly, “maybe many  more,  if  what  I
suspect is right.”
“Which is?”
He frowned. “I can’t say right now. I’m not sure about it. If  I’m  wrong  it  could  harm
my career. We could be  dealing  with  some  kind  of  murderers  hoax.  I  don’t  want  to  get
taken in by a hoax.”
Wilson sighed. “You got any cigarettes?” he asked. Ferguson produced a pack.  Wilson
took one, tore off the filter and lit up. He did this all very  quickly so that Becky wouldn’t
have a chance to stop him. “You know, you shouldn’t clam  up  on us.  If  you  don’t  tell  us
what you think we aren’t going to be able to help you.”
The scientist stared at them. “Look, if I get tripped up by a hoax—if I go out on a limb
about this thing and it turns out to be a fake—I would  lose  my  reputation.  I  don’t  know
what  would  become  of  me.  Or  I  guess  I  do.  Teaching  at  some  backwoods  college  and
never quite reaching tenure.” He shook his head. “It’s not much of a career.”
“You’re  not  presenting  a  paper  here.  You’re  talking  confidentially  to  two  New  York
City policemen. There’s a difference.”
“True enough. Maybe I’m exaggerating.”
“So tell us your theory. For God’s sake help us!” The words came out of Wilson like a
bark, causing a sudden pause in the bustle of the workroom beyond the little office. “I’m

sorry,” he said more softly, “I guess I’m a little upset. Me and my partner here, we’re the
only  ones  who  even  suspect  what  we’re  up  against.  And  we’ve  had  some  bad
experiences.”
Becky broke in. “These things don’t just kill. They hunt. They nearly got us in a house
up in the Bronx a few days ago. They hid on an upper floor. One of them tried to lure me
with the cries of a baby while the others—”
“Stalked me. They tried to separate us.”
“And I think they might have been outside my apartment last night.”
The  words  had  come  in a  rush  out  of  both  of  them,  driven  by  their  rising  sense  of
isolation.  Now  Ferguson  was  looking  at  them  with  unabashed  horror,  almost  as  if  they
themselves bore some loathsome mark.
“You must be mistaken. They can’t be as intelligent as all that.”
Becky blinked with surprise—she had never realized that. Not only were they deadly,
they were smart! They had to be damn smart to lure her and Wilson into that  stairway,
and to seek out her apartment. They had to understand who  the  enemy  was,  and  know
the importance of destroying him before he revealed their presence to the world.
Wilson moved like a man in a dream, his hand gliding up to touch his cheek, the fingers
running down the rough line of the throat, down to the seedy brown necktie and back to
his lap.  As  the  realization  grew  also  in him  his  eyes  hooded  in a  deep  frown,  his  mouth
opened  almost  sensually,  as  if  he  had  fallen  asleep  and  was  dreaming  of  love.  “I  was
beginning  to  suspect  that  they  were  intelligent,  too.  No  matter  what  you  say,  Doctor
Ferguson,  what  happened  is  what  happened.  You  know  something—I’ll  bet  they  didn’t
pop out of the ground yesterday either. If they’re that smart, they know how to stay well
hidden—and they know how important that is, too. That’s my thought.”
“Well, that’s pretty much the theory I didn’t want to tell you, too. You’ve got to get me
a cranium  or  a  head,  though.  Then  I  can  give  you  an  idea  of  the  intelligence.  But  don’t
worry about it, I’m sure we’re much smarter.”
“Doctor, what would a chimp be like if it had the senses of a dog?”
“Lethal—oh  God,  I  see  what  you  mean.  If  their  senses  are  highly  developed  enough
they don’t need our intelligence to best us. I suppose that’s right. It’s very  disturbing, the
idea of canine senses and a primate brain.”
“And it’s more than that.”
“What do you mean?”
“Jesus Christ, I thought she just told you she was  hunted!”  His vehemence  surprised
her.  The  layers  of  calm  professionalism  were  stripped  away,  revealing  a  Wilson
underneath  that  she  had  never  seen  before.  Here  was  a  man  of  intensity  and  great
feeling, protective, angry, full of violence. The cynical surface was gone. What ran beneath
was burning with pain.
“Please keep your voice down. I can’t have a disturbance in here. So I’ll agree that she
was hunted. You do something about the problem, you’re the police.”
“Crap. We don’t know what the hell we’re confronting.”
“And I can’t help you unless  I’ve  got  more  information.  I’m  not  going  to  go  spouting
out suppositions that could get quoted in the papers. Anyway it’s your problem to protect
the community, so protect it. My interest is strictly scientific. So bring me a head. If I’m
going to give you your answers, I’ve got to have a head.”

Wilson’s chin  was  pulled  in,  his  shoulders  were  hunched.  “Hell,  you  can  count  on us!
Bring  you  a  head—we  can’t  possibly  bring  you  a  head  and  you  know  it.  Nobody’s  ever
caught one of these things. Even if they’ve evolved at absolute top speed, how long have
they been around?”
“At the very least—and this seems next to impossible—give them ten thousand years.”
“Longer than recorded history and you want us to  bring  you  a  head!  Let’s  get  out  of
here, Detective Neff, we’ve got work to do.” He got up and left.
“Just one more  thing,”  Becky  said  as  she  was  leaving,  “just  one  thing  I’d  like  you  to
think about. If they are following us, they probably know we came to see you.” She went
out behind Wilson, leaving the scientist staring at the door.
Wilson  didn’t  speak  again  until  they  had  passed  back  through  the  nearly  empty
museum  and  were  in the  car.  “That  was  bullshit  you  fed  that  schmuck,”  he  said.  “He
won’t believe us no matter how close to home you try to take it.”
“Maybe  not.  It  sure  would  help  us  though,  to  get  a  Ph.D.  behind  us.  Think  of  what
would  happen  if  that  guy  went  to  Underwood  and  said  these  two  cops  might  have  a
point.”
“Don’t,  Becky.  It  isn’t  going  to  happen  that  way.”  They  rode  on in  silence  for  a  few
minutes.  “Maybe  we’re  spooked,”  Wilson  said.  “Maybe  it  was  just  our  imagination  last
night.”
“Our?”
“I saw something too.” He said it as if he didn’t want to. “Something watched me from
a fire escape when I was on my way to my rooming house. It was a damn strange-looking
dog.  I  only  got  a  glimpse  and  then  it  was  gone.  I’ve  never  seen  a  face  like  that  on  a
dog—so  intense.  In  fact  I’ve  never  seen  a  face  like  that  before  except  once,  when  I
collared a maniac. He looked at me like that. It was because the bastard was about to pull
a hidden shiv on me.”
“Why didn’t you say something about this earlier?”
“I  was  wishing  it  was  my  imagination.  I  guess  we’re  in trouble,  Becky.”  This  last  he
said softly,  almost  in awe  of  the  words.  They  both  knew  exactly  what  the  stakes  were.
Becky felt sick. Wilson, sitting beside her as solid as a statue, had  never  seemed  so  frail.
She  found  herself  wanting  to  protect  him.  She  could  imagine  the  thing  on  the  fire
escape—she could picture the eager, intent  eyes,  sense  the  frustration  at  the  crowds  on
the  sidewalk,  imagine  the  silent  anger  it  felt  as  Wilson  went  unmolested  on  his  way,
protected by all the unsuspecting witnesses.
“George, I just can’t believe it. It’s so hard to make it seem real. And if it isn’t  totally
real, I’m not sure that I’ll be able to deal with it.”
“It’s happened before, Becky. There are even legends about it.” She waited eagerly for
more but he seemed to see no need to continue. Typical of him to lapse into silence after
making a leading statement like that.
“So go on. What are you driving at?”
“I was just thinking—you remember what you said  to  Rilker  about  werewolves?  You
might not have been too far wrong.”
“That’s ridiculous.”
“Not  really.  Say  they’ve  existed  throughout  recorded  history.  If  they  really  are  as
smart as we think, people in the past would have believed that they were men turned into
wolves.”

“Then what happened? Why did the legends die out?”
He braced his knee against the glove compartment  and  slumped  in the  seat.  “Maybe
the  reason  is  that  the  population  of  the  world  grew.  Back  in the  past  their  hunts  were
noticed because there were so few people. But as the  population  got  bigger  they  started
concentrating on the dregs,  the  isolated,  the  forgotten—people  who  wouldn’t  be  missed.
Typical predators in that respect—they only take the weak.”
She glanced at  him  as  she  drove.  “I  think  that’s  a  hell  of  an  idea,”  she  said.  “I  don’t
think it’s very good news for you and me, though.”
He laughed. “We’re not weak. That probably means they’ll be very  careful. There also
isn’t any knowledge about them at all, which must mean that they’re very thorough about
covering their tracks.”
He means  that  they  hunt  down  people  like  us,  Becky  thought  as  she  guided  the  car
through  the  traffic.  It  was  like  being  in a  bad  dream,  this  feeling  of  being  hunted.  Her
mind kept going back to the shadow on the ceiling, the shadow on the ceiling… the patient
shadow  waiting  for  that  single,  perfect  instant  when  it  could  destroy  the  woman  who
knew its secret. The  world  was  whirling  around  her,  around  her  and  Wilson,  a  world  of
lights  and  voices  and  warmth—except  for  the  darting  shape,  the  shadow  leaping  in
pursuit.
“It’s a shame nobody believes us,” Wilson said. “I mean, it’s a shame the… things  are
wasting  their  time  hunting  us  down,  seeing  as  how  we  couldn’t  reveal  them  even  if  we
wanted  to.”  He  rubbed  his  face.  “Except  maybe  to  Rilker  and  Evans.  Even  Ferguson  if
he’ll quit worrying about what they’ll say in Science News. But we just might be  able  to
convince  Rilker  and  Evans—hell,  I  don’t  care  what  they  decide  is  after  us,  I  just  want
them to  know  we’re  in danger  and  give  us  a  hand!”  He  turned  his  head,  looking  at  her
with a haggard face. “You know, that Ferguson was a prize jerk. I think he was attracted
to you.”
He’s jealous, she thought, and he doesn’t even know it. “I could tell he was a jerk from
the first moment I saw him,” she said; “he looked like one.” There,  Wilson  will  like  that.
True to her expectations he put his arm out along the seat.
“I like it when you wear that smell.”
“I’m not wearing any perfume.”
“Must be your deodorant then. It’s very nice.”
“Thank  you.”  The  poor  man,  his  best  efforts  were  so  terrible.  She  felt  a  twinge  of
sorrow for him; his loneliness was becoming more and more obvious to her. “You’re very
sweet to say that,” she heard herself say, but the words sounded false.
Apparently  they  did  to  him,  too,  because  he  didn’t  say  anything  more.  When  they
reached Police Headquarters Becky pulled the car to a  stop  on a  crowded  nearby  street
rather than risk the big, empty garage beneath the building.
“We’ve got to try  and  get  Underwood  to  assign  a  special  detail,”  she  said  when  they
were back in their office. Wilson nodded. He sat down at their desk and shuffled through
the papers heaped on top of it: a  day-old  Times  covered  with  coffeecup  rings,  a  copy  of
the New York magazine crossword, half a dozen departmental memos.
“Nobody ever calls us,” he said.
“So  let’s  call  Underwood  ourselves.  We’ve  got  to  do  something,  we  can’t  just  let
ourselves rot.”
“Don’t say that! It does bad things to my gut. Why  don’t  you  call  Underwood?  Hello,

this is the Detective with a capital D. You know the one? Well, please assign me a special
protective detail. You see, I’m being chased by these werewolves. That’ll get action.”
“An  invitation  from  Psychiatric  Services  and  a  little  confidential  note  in  the  old
personnel file. I know. But we don’t want protection, we want to eliminate the menace!”
“You think we can, Becky?”
“We’ve got to try.”
“So we’ll call Evans and Rilker and try to get them on our  side.  And  maybe  even  the
scientist  will  put  his  two  cents  in if  Rilker  pushes  him.  Stranger  things  have  happened.
Maybe we’ll at least get a scratch squad together, enough men to uncover some  positive
evidence.”
Becky didn’t feel particularly  confident  but  she  got  on the  phone.  Wilson  didn’t  even
offer to lend a hand; they both knew that his services were, at best, counterproductive in
the area of convincing people to give him help.
Evans listened to the story.
Rilker said he had suspected something like that.
Ferguson was willing to attend the meeting as long as absolutely everything was off the
record. Becky considered offering him the loan of a false beard and dark glasses but let it
go.
“Three hits,” Wilson said, “they can’t resist you.”
“Now,  now,  don’t  get  jealous.  All  that’s  left  is  for  you  to  get  an  appointment  with
Underwood.”
Despite his lack of skill with people, there was no way that Wilson could avoid being the
one to call Underwood. He was senior man on the team, and  their  mere  connection  with
the Chief of Detectives was a major disruption of the chain of command. Officially Neff and
Wilson weren’t assigned at the moment to any particular division. The Chief was keeping
them  in  cold  storage  until  he  was  sure  the  DiFalco  case  held  no  further  surprises.
Obviously  he  wasn’t  completely  convinced  that  his  quick  closing  of  the  case  had  been
wise.  With  Neff  and  Wilson  apparently  still  assigned  to  it  he  could  keep  them  from
uncovering  embarrassing  new  evidence  and  also  cover  himself  if  that  happened  some
other  way,  because  he  could  always  say  that  the  department  had  kept  a  special  team
active on the case the whole time. He didn’t want the case reopened, but if it was he was
prepared.
For  him  it  was  a  very  economical  solution  to  a  problem.  For  Neff  and  Wilson  it  was
agony—they didn’t know where they stood and neither did anybody else. This meant that
they  could  get  nothing  done.  The  resources  of  Manhattan  South  were  not  theirs  to
use—except for a dingy office. And the Brooklyn  Division  considered  them  off  its  roster.
So they had only each other, and whatever help they could get outside the department.
It wasn’t going to be enough, that had become very clear.
Underwood  was  polite,  when  Wilson  finally  got  through.  He  set  a  meeting  for  three
o’clock and  didn’t  even  ask  what  it  was  about  And  why  should  he—he  knew  that  there
could be only two topics of conversation. Either they wanted to reopen the DiFalco case or
they wanted to be reassigned. And he had one simple answer  for  both  questions.  It  was
no.
“We’ve got a couple of hours, we might as well go up to Chinatown for lunch.”
Wilson glanced out the window. “Looks like plenty of people in the streets. I guess we
can go.”

They took a cab. Despite the crowds it seemed the safest thing to  do.  Pell  Street,  the
center of Chinatown, was cheerfully crowded. They left the cab, Becky feeling a little more
at  ease,  Wilson  nervously  studying  the  fire  escapes  and  alleyways.  Becky  chose  a
restaurant that was neither familiar from her courting days with Dick nor one of the dingy
chop suey parlors Wilson would have selected. He liked to eat lunch for under two dollars.
And when he was treating he would go even cheaper unless his victim was very alert.
Becky  was  very  alert.  During  lunch  they  spoke  little  because  he  was  pouting  at  the
cost. Or at least that was what she assumed until he finally did speak. “I wonder what it’ll
feel like.”
“What in the world makes you say something like that!”
“Nothing. Just thinking is all.” She saw that he was ashen. In his left hand he held his
napkin pressed against the middle of his chest as if he was stopping a wound. “I can’t get
that damn claw out of my mind.” Now his lips drew back across his teeth,  sweat  popped
out on his cheeks and forehead. “I just keep thinking of it snagging my shirt, grabbing at
me. God knows you couldn’t do a thing once something like that was in you.”
“Now  wait  a  minute.  Just  listen  to  me.  You’re  getting  scared.  I  don’t  blame  you,
George, but you can’t afford it. You cannot afford to get scared! We can’t let that happen
to us. They’ll move  right  in if  it  does.  I’ve  got  a  feeling  the  only  thing  that’s  kept  them
from doing it before is the fact that we haven’t been scared.”
He smiled his familiar sickly smile.
“Don’t do that, I expect you to take me seriously. Listen to me—without you I haven’t
got any  hope  at  all.”  Her  own  words  surprised  her.  How  deeply  did  she  mean  that?  As
deep as her very life came the instant answer. “We’ll get through this.”
“How?”
It  was  an  innocent  enough  question,  but  under  the  circumstances  it  exposed  a
weakness she wished wasn’t there.
“However the hell we can. Now shut up and let me finish my lunch in peace.”
They ate mechanically. To Becky the food tasted like metal. She wanted desperately to
turn  around,  to  see  whether  the  doorway  behind  her  led  to  the  kitchen  or  to  the
basement. For Wilson’s sake, though, she  did  not.  There  was  no sense  compounding  his
fear with her own.
“Maybe that  claw  is  what  we  need.  When  the  Chief  sees  it  maybe  he’ll  figure  things
more our way.”
“I didn’t even remember to ask Ferguson to bring the damn thing.”
“But he will. He’s very proud of that claw.”
“I don’t blame him. He can carry it instead of a shiv.”
Wilson chuckled and sipped the last  of  his  tea,  his  fears  seemingly  forgotten.  But  the
napkin was still clasped convulsively against his chest.
As  soon  as  they  got  back  to  headquarters  they  went  to  Underwood’s  office.  It  was
actually a suite of offices, and in the outer office was the kind of policewoman Becky most
disliked, the typist in uniform. “You’re Becky Neff,” the woman said as soon as the two of
them came in; “the Chief of Detectives said you’d be  coming  up.  I’m  so  pleased  to  meet
you.”
“Pleased to meet you too, Lieutenant,” Becky muttered. “This is my partner, Detective
Wilson.”  Wilson  stood  uncertainly  staring  past  them.  There  was  nothing  on the  wall  he

was staring at except a hunting scene. “Wilson—you’re being introduced.”
“Oh! Yeah, hiya. You got any cigarettes?”
“I don’t smoke, the Chief doesn’t like it.”
“Yeah. What’s he doing? We’re supposed to see him at three.”
“It’s only two forty-five. He’s still in his other meeting.”
“Still  at  lunch,  you  mean.  Why  don’t  you  let  me  sleep  on  that  couch  he’s  got  in  his
office. I gotta sleep off about three pounds of chicken chow mein.”
The  lieutenant  glanced  at  Becky,  but  continued  without  a  pause:  “No,  he’s  really  in
there. He’s got some people from the Museum of Natural History and Doctor Evans—”
They went in.
“Sorry we’re late,” Wilson growled. “We got slowed down by your house genius.”
“Well, you’re not late. Still fifteen minutes to go. But since these men  were  all  here,  I
thought we’d get started. Everybody knows everybody?”
“We know them,” Wilson said. “Anybody in here smoke?”
“I don’t have any ashtrays,” Underwood said firmly. Wilson pulled up a chair, crossed
his legs, and sighed.
There  was  a  silence.  The  silence  got  longer.  Becky  looked  from  face  to  face.  Rigid,
expressionless,  Evans  a  little  embarrassed.  She  felt  herself  slump  into  the  chair.  This
silence could only mean that they didn’t believe. These men thought of the two detectives
as  being  a  little  off  their  rockers.  Two  famous  detectives  driven  a  little  crazy.  Worse
things have happened, more unlikely things.
“Apparently  you  gentlemen  don’t  know  what  it  is  to  be  hunted,”  Wilson  said.  Becky
was amazed— when he was up against the wall he revealed hidden resources. “And since
you don’t know, you can’t imagine the state me and Neff are in. We are being hunted, you
know. Sure. By things that have claws like this.” With a swift motion he picked it up. “Can
you imagine how it would feel to get one of these in the chest?  Rip  your  heart  right  out.
Hell, you might look at the sunset out there and think it’s beautiful. And it was for us too,
until last night. Now we don’t look at a sunset that way anymore.  We  look  at  it  the  way
deer and moose do—with fear. How do you think that feels, eh? Any of you know?”
“Detective Wilson, you’re overwrought—”
“Shut up, Underwood. I’m maybe making my last speech and I want to be heard.” He
waved the claw as he spoke, and measured his words with uncharacteristic care. “We are
being hunted down by whatever has these claws. They exist, don’t forget that! They have
for thousands of years. We have seen them, gentlemen, and they are very  ugly. They are
also very fast, and very  smart. People used to call them werewolves. Now they don’t call
them anything because they’ve gotten so damn good  at  covering  their  tracks  that  there
are no legends left. But they’re here. They damn well are here.”
  
The two who had to be killed were hard to find. They had been scented clearly as they
walked through the house where the pack had been feeding. Their car had been seen as it
left,  and  seen  again  a  few  days  later,  this  time  far  down  Manhattan  toward  the  sea.
Patience had been needed. The man was watched as he went through the streets, and his
house was finally discovered. The woman also  was  followed,  and  her  scent  traced  into  a
building with many stories. It was watched until they knew that the bedroom behind one
of the balconies must certainly hold her.

They were not rightful prey, but they had to be taken. If their knowledge of this pack
spread, all the race would suffer.  First,  the  many  packs  in this  city  would  be  hurt,  then
others nearby, and finally all everywhere. Better that man not know of the packs.  If  the
numberless  hordes  of  men  knew  of  the  many  packs  that  thrived  on  them,  they  would
surely resist. Essential that man not know.
Whenever man came close this was done. It  had  always  been  thus,  and  that  was  the
first  law  of  caution.  For  many  years  they  had  roamed  free  in  the  world  and  they  had
prospered. There was so much humanity that packs were growing through the  world,  in
every  one of the  human  cities.  When  they  were  occasionally  glimpsed  by  man  the  pack
passed as a group of stray dogs. Normally they hunted at night. By day they slept in lairs
so carefully  concealed—in  basements,  abandoned  buildings,  wherever  they  could  find  a
spot—that man never realized they were there. Dogs also posed no problem. To them the
scent of the packs was a familiar part of city life and they ignored it
Now these two humans had to die else  they  go  among  all  the  human  cities  and  warn
them of the presence of death in their midst.
So they had followed the scent of the two humans, they had followed this scent through
the streets, tracked it until it entered a great gray building in lower Manhattan. When  it
came out again and separated they split up, following both parts.
The man’s lair was easy to find. It was close to the ground, in a house with weak outer
doors and an easily accessible basement. But the man’s own room was locked and barred,
with gates on the  windows.  The  whole  place  stank  of  fear.  This  man  lived  in a  fortress.
Even the chimney leading to his fireplace had been blocked up long ago.  It  was  pitiful  to
see one so sick and full of fear, sitting his nights away in a  chair  with  all  the  lights  in his
room on. Such a one needed death, and the pack longed to take him not only because he
was potentially dangerous but because he was in the condition of prey. He needed death,
this one, and they all hoped to give it to him.
And they had found a way to move against him.
The woman lived far up in her building. Not  all  of  the  pack  were  adept  climbers,  but
some were and one of them climbed. He moved from balcony to balcony, grasping with his
forepaws,  hauling  himself  up,  doing  it  again  and  again.  Below  him  the  rest  of  the  pack
stood in the black alley longing with  their  hearts  to  howl  their  joy  at  his  heroism,  at  his
true  love  for  all  of  his  kind.  But  they  kept  their  voices  still.  It  was  unnecessary
anyway—even as he climbed he would scent the respect and gladness of those  far  below
him.
And  he  climbed  toward  the  smell  of  the  human  woman.  She  was  here,  closer  and
closer. He climbed, he longed to reach her, to  feel  her  blood  pouring  down  his  throat,  to
taste the meat of her, to feel as her body died and the threat to the race ended. The pack
was glad he could climb, and he was glad to climb for them!
When he got to her balcony he moved as softly as he could. But not softly enough. One
of his toenails clicked against the glass door as he tested the lock. To him  the  sound  was
bell-clear. Had the humans inside heard it? Had she heard it?
Her scent changed from the thickness of sleep to the sharpness of  fear.  The  accursed
creature had heard him! Slowly he inched across the balcony. She knew he was out here.
Now the sound of her breath changed. She was growing so terribly afraid that  he  longed
to help her into death even though she was not weak enough to be prey. But this was so
dangerous. If they opened that curtain, he  would  be  seen.  You  cannot  be  seen  by  those
who will live! To avoid that he was prepared to throw himself off the balcony. Or was he?
Die, for  that?  His  own  heart  began  to  pound.  She  made  a  little  cry—she  had  seen  his
shadow on the ceiling. His instincts screamed at him —growl, lunge, kill—but all that came

out was a tiny noise.
A noise which she heard.
Now it was too late! They were getting up. He glanced at the light fixture in the ceiling
of the balcony. The turning of a switch inside would  reveal  him!  Desperately  he  climbed
up to  the  next  floor,  and  not  a  moment  too  soon.  He  heard  the  sliding  door  scrape,  a
footfall  on  her  balcony.  Her  male  companion  looked  about,  moving  through  the  dense
body-heat  and  smell  of  himself  and,  in  the  marvelous  blindness  of  humans,  not  even
noticing.  These  poor  creatures  were  blind  in  all  except  the  visual  sense.  Nose-blind,
ear-blind, touch-blind. They were the best prey in the world.
When the man went back inside and all once again fell into darkness he returned to the
alley. His heart was full of sorrow. When he faced the pack—he had failed, she still lived.
But they found a way to move against her also, and now they were ready.
Chapter 5
Chapter 5
Chapter 5
Chapter 5
« ^ »
Carl Ferguson had gone back to his office. His lamp provided the last  glimmer  of  light  in
the  empty  workrooms  of  the  museum  basement.  Beyond  his  open  door  the  evening
shadows spread slowly across the workbenches, turning the half-finished  specimens  into
indistinct, angular shapes.
Under his light Ferguson held the model he had constructed of the paw.
The paw. He turned it in his hands, looking at  its  supple  efficiency  for  the  hundredth
time. He placed it on the desk, then picked it up again and ran its claws along his cheek. It
would do its job well, this paw. The long toes with their extra joints. The broad, sensitive
pads.  The  needle-sharp  claws.  Almost…  what  a  human  being  might  have  if  people  had
claws. It had the same functional beauty as a hand, a lethal one.
Suddenly  he  frowned.  Wasn’t  that  a  noise?  He  jumped  up  and  started  toward  his
door—then saw that some moving air was ruffling a box of feathers.
“I’m getting crazy,” he said aloud. His voice had a flat echo in the empty space beyond
his office.
Ferguson glanced at his watch. Seven p.m. It was dark, the winter sun had set. He was
tired,  exhausted  from  the  harrowing  meeting  downtown  and  from  his  own  hectic
schedule. The new exhibit was going to be a great achievement, one that would be sure to
get him tenure at the museum. A beautiful concept— the birds of North America. Not just
static  cases  but  a  whole  room  of  meticulous  reconstructions,  soaring,  wonderful
creatures… he looked at some of them, their great wings  spread  in the  darkness,  barely
visible, in the process of being feathered quill by careful quill.
But where did this—thing—belong  among  the  creatures  of  North  America?  What  the
hell was it, dammit!
The detectives had babbled about werewolves… superstitious fools. But they certainly
had uncovered a problem. Surely the city police could capture one of  the  things,  bring  it
in, let him evaluate  it  more  thoroughly.  Judging  from  this  paw  it  was  on the  large  side,

maybe  bigger  than  a  wolf.  Possibly  a  hundred  and  eighty  pounds.  Even  alone  such  a
creature could be extremely dangerous, highly so in a pack. Unlikely it was a mutant wolf,
they  were  too  radically  adapted  to  their  traditional  prey.  Coyotes—too  much  of  a  size
variance. Whatever had a paw like  this  had  split  off  from  the  canine  mainstream  a  long
time ago, and had reached a very, very high level of evolution.
Which brought up the question of why there were no bones, no specimens, nothing.
It  was  uncanny  and  chilling  to  think  that  a  whole  subspecies  of  canine  carnivore
existed without even a hint of it in science.
He  jumped  again—this  time  he  heard  a  scraping  sound.  Now  he  took  it  seriously.
“Luis,” he said, hoping it was the night man coming down to check on the  light,  “it’s  me,
Carl  Ferguson.”  The  scraping  continued,  insistent,  patient…  something  trying  to  worry
one of the basement windows open.
He looked at the paw. Yes, it could do that.
He turned out  his  lamp,  closed  his  eyes  to  hasten  their  getting  used  to  the  dark.  He
stood up from his desk swaying, his skin crawling.
The scraping stopped, was followed by a slight creak. A puff of icy air made the box of
feathers in the hallway rustle again. There was a sliding sound and a thump as something
came in the window, then another.
Then  there  was  silence.  Carl  Ferguson  stood  with  his  plaster  paw  in  his  hand,  his
throat and mouth agonizingly dry.
“Somebody’s over there.”
A light flashed in the scientist’s eyes.
“Hello, Doctor,” said a gruff voice. “Sorry we startled you.”
“What the hell—”
“Wait  a  minute,  wait  a  minute,  don’t  go  off  half-cocked.  We’re  cops,  this  is  an
investigation.”
“What in hell do you mean coming in here like this? You—you scared me! I thought—”
“It was them?” Wilson flipped a bank of  switches  flooding  the  basement  with  a  stark
neon glow. “I don’t blame you for being afraid, Doctor. This place is spooky.”
Becky Neff pulled the window closed. “The truth  is,  Doctor,  we  were  looking  for  you.
We figured we’d find you here, that’s why we came.”
“Why  didn’t  you  come  in the  damn  front  door?  My  heart’s  still  pounding,  for  God’s
sake! I don’t think I’ve ever been that scared.”
“Think how we feel, Doctor. We feel that way all the time. At least I do. I  don’t  know
about Detective Wilson.”
Wilson pulled his chin into his chest and said nothing.
“Well, you could have come in the right way. I don’t think that’s asking too much.” He
was angry and aggrieved. They had no right  to  do  this  to  him!  Typical  cops,  completely
indifferent  to  the  law.  They  didn’t  even  have  a  right  to  be  here!  “I  think  you  should
leave.”
“No, Doctor. We came here to talk  to  you.”  She  said  it  sweetly,  but  the  way  she  and
Wilson  advanced  toward  him  made  him  take  an  involuntary  step  back.  When  he  did
Wilson sighed, long, ragged and sad— and Ferguson saw for an instant how tired the man
was, how tired and afraid.

“Come into my office, then. But I fail to see what you’re expecting to get out of me.”
They pulled up chairs in the tiny  office.  Ferguson  noticed  that  Wilson  lingered  at  the
door, Neff sat so that  she  was  looking  out.  Together  they  had  most  of  the  workroom  in
view. “Those are easy windows,” Wilson murmured, “very easy windows.”
“The museum has guards.”
“Yeah, we figured that out.”
“All right, what is it you want—but don’t think I’m going to let this matter drop. I want
you to know I’m calling the Police Complaint Department in the morning.”
“The Police Department doesn’t have a complaint department.”
“Well,  I’m  calling  somebody.  Cops  don’t  run  around  breaking  and  entering  without
citizen complaint. You people get away with enough as it is.”
Wilson  remained  silent.  Becky  took  over.  “We  wouldn’t  be  here  if  we  weren’t
desperate,”  she  said  softly.  “And  we  realize  that  you’ve  told  us  all  the  facts  you  know,
that’s not what we want. We want your theories, Doctor, your speculations.”
“Anything  might  help  us  stay  alive,  Doctor,”  Wilson  added.  “We  are  going  to  have  a
hard time doing that as things stand now.”
“Why?”
Becky closed her eyes, ignored the question. “Imagine, Doctor,” she said, “what  these
creatures might want, what they might need—if they are as we say they are.”
“You mean intelligent, predatory, all that.”
“That’s right.”
“It’s barely a hypothesis.”
“Try it.”
“Detective Neff, I cannot try it. It’s worse than a hypothesis, it’s rank speculation.”
“Please, Doctor.”
“But  what  if  I’m  wrong—what  if  I  confuse  you  more  than  you’ve  already  confused
yourselves?  Can’t  you  see  the  risk  that’s  involved?  I  can’t  work  on  unfounded
imagination,  I’m  a  scientist!  The  truth  is  I  want  to  help  you.  I  really  do!  But  I  can’t.  I
know  that  this  damn  paw  is  something  special  but  I  don’t  know  how  to  apply  that
knowledge! Can’t you understand?”
Becky watched him, her eyes filled with the desperation that she felt.  Wilson  covered
their backs, listening to every word but watching the long row of black windows at the far
end of the workroom. From the sound of Ferguson’s voice, she  knew  that  he  was  telling
the truth. No longer  was  he  holding  back  to  protect  his  reputation.  Now,  in the  dead  of
night when the three of them were alone and the  customary  bustle  of  his  little  kingdom
around him was missing, he had forgotten worries of reputation and was forced to face the
real truth—that the two cops needed help that he could not give.
Or  could  he?  Often  the  trouble  with  scientists  is  that  they  do  not  realize  how  little
others  really  know.  “Anything  you  can  say  might  be  of  help  to  us,  Doctor,”  Becky  said
with  what  she  hoped  was  gentle  calmness.  “Why  not  tell  us  about  something  you  do
understand.”
“Like what?”
“Well,  like  the  sense  of  smell.  How  effective  is  it  and  what  can  we  do  to  cover  our
trails?”

“It varies greatly. A bloodhound might be seven or eight  times  more  effective  than  a
terrier—”
“Assume the bloodhound,” Wilson said from the doorway. “Assume the best, the most
sensitive.”
“It’s  a  very  extraordinary  organ,  a  bloodhound’s  nose.  What  it  is,  basically,  is  a
concentration of nerve endings that fill the whole muzzle, not just the tip, although the tip
is the most sensitive. For a bloodhound, you’ve got about a hundred million separate cells
in the olfactory mucosa. For a terrier, twenty-five million.” He looked to Becky as if to ask
if this sort of thing was any help.
“If we understood  their  capabilities  we  might  be  able  to  throw  them  off  our  tracks,”
Becky  said.  She  wished  that  the  man  would  explain  how  the  hell  the  sense  of  smell
worked—if she understood it she would think of something, or Wilson would.
Wilson.  His  instinct  had  told  them  that  they  would  find  Ferguson  sitting  in  here
worrying about his plaster paw. Wilson had very  good instincts. Now added to them was
the overriding feeling of desperation, the certain knowledge that something was following
them now. From the way he was  beginning  to  twist  the  edge  of  the  blotter  on his  desk
Ferguson  was  having  the  same  thought.  If  so,  he  didn’t  acknowledge  it  directly.  “You
want me to tell you how to throw the… animals off your tracks?”
Becky  nodded.  “Give  me  a  cigarette,”  Wilson  growled.  “I  don’t  think  I’m  gonna  like
what the doctor’s gonna say.”
“Well,  I’m  afraid  you  won’t.  A  lot  of  people  have  tried  to  figure  out  how  to  shake  a
tracking hound. Not much will do it except rain and a lot of wind.”
“How about snow? It’s snowing now.”
“A  bloodhound  in  Switzerland  once  followed  a  track  that  had  been  under  snow  for
forty-seven  days.  Heavy  snow.  A  massive  blizzard,  in  fact.  Snow  isn’t  going  to  stop  a
bloodhound.”
“Doctor,” Becky said, “maybe we ought to approach this from another angle. Why can’t
anything stop a hound from tracking?”
“Aside from rain and wind? Well, it’s because  of  their  sensitivity  and  the  long-lasting
nature of odors.”
“How sensitive are they?”
“Let  me  see  if  I  can  quantify  it  for  you.  The  nose  of  a  bloodhound  is  perhaps  one
hundred million times more sensitive than that of a man.”
“That means nothing to me.”
“I’m not surprised, Lieutenant Wilson. It’s a very  difficult number to grasp. Look at it
this way.” He went outside and returned with a tiny pinch of oily-looking powder between
his fingers. “This is about one milligram of brown paint pigment. Now visualize a hundred
million  cubic  centimeters  of  air—about  as  much  air  as  covers  Manhattan.  A  good
bloodhound could detect this amount of pigment in that amount of air.”
Becky felt as if she had been hit. They were that sensitive! She had never realized just
what  an  animal’s  sense  of  smell  meant  before  now.  She  fought  to  stay  calm,  her  eyes
darting  toward  the  windows  that  revealed  only  the  reflection  of  the  workroom  itself.
Wilson  got  his  cigarette  lit  and  drew  on  it,  exhaling  with  a  long  sigh.  “What  if  you
neutralized the odor, if you covered it with ammonia, say?”
“Makes  absolutely  no  difference.  The  dog  won’t  like  it  but  it  will  still  be  able  to
distinguish the odor. People have tried everything  to  break  track,  but  very  little  works.

One thing—floating down a river, completely submerged, with the wind going in the same
direction  as  the  water.  If  you  can  make  it  half  a  mile  without  putting  your  head  out  of
water you might break track. I say might because a single breath coming up through the
water could be enough for a dog if the wind wasn’t too strong.”
“Breath?”
“We don’t know the exact mechanism of a dog’s scent, but we believe that they track
by body oils and exhaled breath. They may also go by the odor of clothing.”
“There’s nothing you can do to yourself to nullify your odor?”
“Sure. Take a bath. You’ll be safe for a while as long as you don’t put on your clothes.”
Wilson raised his eyebrows. “How long?”
“A good three or four minutes. Until your skin oils start replacing themselves.”
“Wonderful!  That’s  very  helpful.”  There  was  a  ragged  edge  in  Wilson’s  voice  that
Becky didn’t like.
“There must be  something,  something  you  haven’t  mentioned  that  would  help  us.  If
we can’t get rid of our odor, what about neutralizing their sense of smell?”
“Good question. You can cause osmoanaesthesia with something like cocaine, although
I’ve never heard of a dog that would inhale it willingly. Also, you could use a phenamine.
You’d get a temporary paralysis of the olfactory sense with that, too, and administration
would  be  a  little  easier.  That  stuff  you  could  disguise  in  meat.  It  doesn’t  have  to  be
inhaled, just eaten.”
“Here doggie, have a little snacker!”
“Shut up, George. We might learn something if you’d just keep your trap shut!”
“Oh, Little Miss Muffet becomes Dragon Lady. So solly, missy!”  He  bowed,  his  hands
folded across his belly, his eyes in a mocking squint. Then he froze. His hand  dropped  to
the Colt he was carrying under his jacket
“What?” Becky was on her feet, her own pistol in her hand.
“Good heavens, put those things—”
“Shut  up,  Sonny!  I  saw  something  at  that  window,  Becky.”  The  mocking  tone  was
gone, the voice was grave and a little sad. “Something  pressing  against  it,  gray  fur.  Like
something had banged against the glass and gone off into the night.”
“We would have heard it.”
“Maybe. How thick is the glass in those windows?”
“I have no idea. It’s just glass.”
Becky remembered back to their entry. “It’s thick,” she said, “about a quarter inch.”
Wilson suddenly holstered his gun. “Saw it again. It’s a bush blowing against the glass.
Sorry for the false alarm.”
“Keep your shirt on, Detective,” Becky said “I can’t handle many more of those.”
“Sorry. Lucky I was wrong.”
Left unsaid was the fact that they had now been here a long time, longer than must be
safe. The plan was to keep to the car, keep moving. That way at least they’d be harder to
follow. In fact now that she thought of it, Becky didn’t know how they could be tracked at
all if they were in a car. She asked the question.

“The tires. Each set of tires  has  a  distinctive  odor.  Tracking  dogs  can  follow  bicycles,
cars,  even  carriages  with  iron  wheels.  In  fact  it’s  easier  in  some  cases  than  following
people on foot There’s more odor laid down.”
“But in the city—hundreds of thousands of cars I—It seems almost impossible.”
Ferguson shook his head. “It’s difficult but not out of the question. And if you two are
right about being followed all the way from the Bronx our specimens are quite capable of
doing it.”
“So let’s sum up. We can’t get rid of our odors. We can’t neutralize their noses without
getting a hell of a lot closer than we want to be. Is there any other bad news?”
“Is he always this acerbic, Miss Neff?”
“It’s Mrs. And the answer is ‘yes.’ ”
Ferguson held his eyes on her a moment, as if to ask something more. She stared right
back at him. In an instant  he  looked  away,  faintly  confused  by  the  challenge.  Becky  did
not like men to strip her with their eyes, and when they did she stripped right back. Some
it turned on, some it frightened, some it angered. She really didn’t care how they reacted,
although  from  the  way  Ferguson  both  crossed  his  legs  and  brushed  his  hand  along  his
cheek  it  looked  as  if  he  had  been  turned  on  and  frightened  at  the  same  time.  He  was
scared of a lot of things, this  scientist.  His face  was  powerful,  only  the  eyes  giving  away
the inner man. Yet there was also something else about him—a sort of buried competence
that  Becky  felt  was  a  positive  factor  in his  makeup.  He  must  be  very  professional  and
very  smart.  Too  bad,  it  probably  meant  he  was  giving  them  the  best  information  they
were going to get
“I wonder what it’s like,” Wilson said, “to have a sense of smell like that.”
Ferguson  brightened.  “I’ve  been  extremely  interested  in  that,  Lieutenant.  I  think  I
can give you something of an idea. Canine intelligence is of intense interest to me. We’ve
studied dogs here at the museum.”
“And cats.”
Becky  winced.  The  Museum  of  Natural  History  had  been  embroiled  in  a  violent
controversy about some experiments using live cats, which Wilson naturally brought up.
“That’s irrelevant,” Ferguson said quickly,  “another  department.  I’m  in exhibits.  My
work on dogs ended in 1974  when  the  Federal  money  ran  out.  But  up  to  then  we  were
making great  strides.  I  worked  very  closely  with  Tom  Rilker.”  He  raised  his  eyebrows.
“Rilker’s  a  hell  of  a  dog  man.  We  were  trying  to  breed  increased  sensitivity  to  certain
odors. Drugs, weapons—bred right in, no training needed.”
“Did you succeed?”
He smiled. “A secret. Classified information, compliments of Uncle Sam. Sadly enough,
I cannot even publish a paper on it.”
“You were telling us about canine intelligence.”
“Right. Well, I think dogs know a lot more  about  the  human  world  than  we  do  about
theirs. The reason is that their sensory input is so different. Smell, sound—those are their
primary senses. Sight is a distant third. For example, if you put on a friend’s clothes your
dog won’t  recognize  you  until  you  speak.  Then  he’ll  be  confused.  The  same  way  if  you
take a bath and walk out naked without talking your dog won’t know who, or necessarily
what, you are. He’ll see a shape moving, smell the water. He might attack. Then when he
hears  your  voice  he’ll  be  very  relieved.  Dogs  can’t  stand  the  unknown,  the  unfamiliar.
They have a tremendous amount of information pouring in through their noses and ears.

Under certain circumstances it’s more than they can handle. For example, a  bloodhound
will get completely exhausted on a track long before he would if he was just running free.
It’s  psychic  exhaustion.  Generally  the  more  intelligent  the  dog,  the  more  all  this  data
coming through the nose means. To a wolf, for example, it all means much more than to a
dog.”
“A wolf?”
“Sure.  They’re  much  more  intelligent  and  more  sensitive  than  dogs.  A  good
bloodhound might have a nose a hundred million times more sensitive than a human nose.
A  wolf  would  be  two  hundred  million  times  more  sensitive.  And  wolves  are
correspondingly  more  intelligent,  to  handle  the  data.  But  even  so  there’s  a  tremendous
richness of data, more than their minds can possibly assimilate.”
Wilson moved from his spot by the door and picked up the plaster paw model. “Is this
closer to a wolf or a dog?”
“A  wolf,  I’d  say.  Actually  it  does  look  more  like  the  paw  of  a  giant  wolf—except  for
those  extended  toes.  The  toes  are  really  wonderful.  A  marvelous  evolution.  They  are
beyond canine, as I understand the genus. That’s why I keep asking you for a head. I just
can’t  do  more  with  this  thing  unless  I  get  more  of  the  body.  It’s  too  new,  too
extraordinary.  Right  now  whatever  made  those  pawprints  is  outside  of  science.  That’s
why I’m asking for more.”
“We can’t give you more, Doctor,” Becky said, it seemed for the hundredth time. “You
know the trouble we’re in. We’d be lucky even to get a picture.”
“We wouldn’t, and live,” Wilson put in. “These things are too vicious for that.”
He  signaled  Becky  with  his  eyes.  He  wanted  to  get  moving.  Since  night  had  fallen
Wilson had  kept  on  the  move.  Officially  they  were  on  an  eight-to-four,  but  neither  of
them was recognizing duty hours right now. They had been cut loose from their division,
their squad, their block and put on this thing alone. Nobody was marking their names on a
blotter. Nobody was counting their presence or giving them calls.
They  were  on  the  case  because  the  Chief  felt  there  was  a  remote  chance  that
something  unusual  was  indeed  happening.  Not  enough  to  really  do  anything  about,  just
enough to keep the wheels turning very, very  slowly. Which meant a  single  team,  alone,
digging as best they could. And being available as scapegoats—if needed.
“We ought to go,” Becky said  to  Ferguson.  “Wë  figure  our  best  bet  is  to  keep  on the
move.”
“You’re probably right.”
Wilson stared at him. “Sorry about the  way  we  came  in.  No  other  way  to  reach  you,
the museum was closed.”
Ferguson smiled. “What if I hadn’t been here?”
“No chance. You’re really running after this. It’s got under your skin. I knew you’d be
here.”
Ferguson walked with them through the dim  corridors,  to  a  side  door  where  a  single
guard nodded under a small light. “I’m leaving with you,” he said. “I haven’t had a bite to
eat since lunch and I don’t think I can accomplish anything just sitting and staring at that
paw.”
Their  feet  crunched  in the  snow  as  they  crossed  the  quiet  grounds  of  the  museum.
Becky could see their car on Seventy-seventh Street where they had left it, now covered
with a dusting of snow. They  had  perhaps  twenty  yards  to  walk  up  a  disused  driveway

before  they  reached  the  safety  of  the  car.  Nothing  seemed  to  be  moving  among  the
shadows of the  trees  that  surrounded  the  museum,  and  there  were  no tracks  visible  in
the new snow. The wind was blowing softly, adding the crackle of bare limbs to the hiss of
the  falling  snow.  The  clouds  hung  low,  reflecting  the  light  of  the  city  and  covering
everything with a green glow stronger than moonlight. Even so, the trip to the car seemed
long. By the position of his hand Becky knew Wilson felt the same  way:  he  was  touching
the butt of the pistol he kept holstered under his jacket.
As they reached the car Ferguson turned, saying he was going to take the Number 10
bus up Central Park West to his apartment. They let him go.
“I wonder if we should have done that,” Becky said as she started the car.
“What?”
“Let him go off on his own. We have no way  of  knowing  how  much  danger  he’s  in.  If
they were watching us, they saw us with him. What  would  that  mean  to  them?  Kill  him
too, maybe? I think he’s in more danger than he knows.”
“Get moving. Put on the damn radio. Let’s listen to the traffic.”
“You handle the radio, man, you’re not doing anything else.”
He flipped it on and settled with his knee against the dash. “It’s too cold for junkies on
the streets, it’ll be a quiet night.”
They  listened  to  a  rookie  call  and  immediately  cancel  a  signal  13  at  Seventy-second
and Amsterdam. But you can’t cancel an assist officer call just like that. Guys would move
in on him anyway and then rib him about it later. “What made him jump, you suppose?”
Wilson asked. He didn’t really expect an answer and Becky didn’t talk. Who the hell cared
about some rookie and his erroneous 13. Becky headed the car  east  across  Central  Park
on the Seventy-ninth Street transverse. She was heading toward a Chinese restaurant in
her home  neighborhood  the  other  side  of  the  park.  She  wasn’t  particularly  hungry,  but
they had to eat. And what they would do  after  that,  how  they  would  pass  the  night  she
had no idea. And what about the days and nights to come, what about the future?
“What the hell are they going to do about us?”
“Do, Becky? Not a damn thing. They’re just gonna leave us hanging on this here string.
Hey, where’re you going—you live over here, don’t you?”
“Don’t get  your  hopes  up,  I’m  not  taking  you  to  my  place.  We’re  going  to  stop  for  a
little supper. We need to eat, remember.”
“Yeah. Anyway, the brass isn’t  going  to  do  a  damn  thing  about  us.  They’re  too  busy
pushing paper and worrying—who has this division, who has that precinct, who’s moving
up, who’s getting flopped. That’s their whole career, that and figuring who has the biggest
hook, who is the biggest hook for that matter. You know that’s what they do. That’s about
it in Commissioner country.”
“Bitter  boy.  I  think  maybe  Underwood  actually  thinks  we  belong  on  the  case.  He
respects us.”
“Who belongs on a closed case? Oh Jesus, Becky, this is a Szechwan restaurant—I can’t
eat here.”
She double-parked the car and pulled out the key. “You can eat here. Just ask them to
hold the hot sauce on your chow mein.”
“I can’t even get Goddamn chow mein in a place like this,” he sulked.
She  got  out  of  the  car  and  he  followed  reluctantly.  They  entered  the  dimly  lit

restaurant knocking snow off their clothes. “Getting heavier?” the coat-check girl asked.
“Heavier,” Wilson said. “Becky, this place is going to cost a fortune. It’s got a hatcheck
girl.  I  never  eat  in places  with  hatcheck  girls.”  He  followed  her  into  the  restaurant  still
complaining,  but  he  subsided  into  subvocal  grumbling  when  he  received  the  menu.  She
could see the gears turning over as he calculated whether he could  eat  for  less  than  two
dollars.
“I’ll order for both of us since I’ve  been  here  before,”  she  said,  taking  his  menu.  “I’ll
get you out for five bucks.”
“Five!”
“Maybe six. I hope you’re not too hungry though, because it’ll only be one dish.”
“What?”
The waiter came. She ordered prawns in garlic sauce for Wilson and Chicken Tang for
herself. At least she would enjoy what could easily be her last meal. But she stopped that
line of thought—you think that way, it happens. She also ordered a drink, and Wilson got
beer. “A buck for a Bud,” he muttered. “Goddamn Chinks.”
“Come on, relax. You’ll enjoy the food. Let’s talk about it.”
“What Ferguson said?”
“What he said. What ideas did it give you?”
“We could set up living quarters in Evans’s meat locker.”
“It  gave  me  a  better  idea  than  that.  It’s  something  I  think  we’ve  got  to  do  if  we’re
going to survive. Obviously it’s only a matter of time before our friends see their  chance
and move in. Sooner or later the two of us  are  going  to  join DiFalco  and  Houlihan.  Then
the  department  will  wade  into  this  thing  all  the  way.  But  it  won’t  make  a  damn  bit  of
difference to us.”
“Insufficient  evidence,  that’s  what’s  got  the  wheels  gummed  up.  We  have  provided
theories,  hearsay,  suppositions  and  a  funny-looking  piece  of  plaster  of  Paris  made  by
Doctor Whozis.”
“So  why  not  provide  photographs.  Pictures.  It’s  not  a  cadaver  but  it  sure  would
improve our case.”
“How  do  you  photograph  what  you  never  see?  If  there’s  light  enough  for  a  picture
there’s too much light. These things won’t get close to us in light  Although  we  could  use
infrared equipment. Special Services could probably  give  us  the  loan  of  a  scope.  But  it’s
bulky stuff—hard to handle.”
“I’ve  got  a  better  idea.  Narcotics  has  been  experimenting  with  computerized  image
intensification  equipment,  stuff  developed  during  the  Vietnam  war.  We  can  get  a  really
super picture even in total darkness with it. Dick’s unit’s been using it experimentally.”
“What’s involved, a support truck or something?”
“Not at all. The whole thing looks like an oversize pair of binoculars. Camera’s built in.
You just look through the thing and what you can see you can photograph.”
“What you can see?  There’s  the  hole  in the  idea.  We  have  to  be  close  enough  to  see
them.”
“Not so close. You’ve got a five-hundred-millimeter lens.”
“My God, that’s the damnedest thing I ever heard of. We could be a quarter of a mile
away.”

“Like staked out on the roof  of  my  building  watching  the  alley,  watching  for  them  to
come back.”
“Yeah,  we  could  do  that.  We  could  get  our  pictures  and  pull  out  before  they  even
started climbing the terraces.”
“There’s only one small hitch. Dick’s got to be convinced to help us. He’s got to give us
the equipment, and it’s classified.”
Wilson frowned. It meant a departmental infraction, something he didn’t need. He had
too many enemies to be able to afford getting  things  like  that  in his  file.  “Goddamn,  the
PD’d classify mechanical pencils if they had time. I don’t like to get into that kind of stuff,
it’s not going to help me.”
“Dick owes you a favor, George.”
“Why?”
“You know perfectly well why.” She said it lightly but felt the anger nevertheless. Her
staying in Detectives had depended on finding  a  place  in a  block  of  four  men,  and  to  do
that you had to get one of those men as a partner. Wilson had taken her on and she  had
not been shunted off into administration like many lady cops. And Wilson  had  taken  her
on because Dick Neff had asked him to.
“He may think it was a favor, but it wasn’t.”
“Jesus. You’re going to seed, Wilson.  You  actually  complimented  my  police  work  just
then.”
He laughed, his face breaking for a few moments into a mass of merry  wrinkles,  then
as  abruptly  returning  to  its  usual  glower.  “You  got  some  good  points,”  he  said,  “but  I
guess you’re right. Taking you on was a  favor  to  Dick  when  I  did  it.  Maybe  he’ll  let  me
collect.”
Becky excused herself and called ahead to the apartment. She wanted to be sure Dick
was there; she didn’t want to end up alone with Wilson in the apartment. It wouldn’t look
good, especially if Dick came home.
He was there, his voice sounding thick. She wanted to ask him what was wrong but she
held  back.  When  she  told  him  she  was  bringing  Wilson  over  his  only  comment  was  a
noncommittal grunt.
They ate their food in silence,  Wilson  digging  into  his  with  glazed  indifference.  If  you
fed him silage, he’d probably eat it exactly the same way.
Becky was excited about  the  idea  of  getting  photographs  of  the  animals;  excited  and
worried.  The  whole  situation  contained  menace,  every  part  of  it.  There  was  something
about the way these creatures; killed—the extreme violence of it—that made it impossible
to put the problem out of your mind even for a short time. You just kept turning it  over
and over… and Becky had a recurring picture of what they must look like with their long
toes that ended in delicate pads and were tipped by claws,  with  their  razor-sharp  teeth,
and their heavy bodies. But what were their faces like? Human beings had such complex
faces, not at all like the more-or-less frozen expressions of animals; would these creatures
also have such faces, full of emotion and understanding? And if so, what would those faces
tell their victims?
“Look  we  just  come  right  out  and  ask  Dick—  right?  Just  ask  him  without  fooling
around?”
“You mean no diplomatic subtleties?”
“Not my strong point.”

“So we just ask. Everybody’s heard rumors about  the  optical  gear  Special  Services  is
using. Just logical that a Narcotics wire man could get  his  hands  on it,  isn’t  it?  We  don’t
have to tell him we know the stuff is classified. Maybe he’ll never even bring the  matter
up, just give us the damn thing and not think any more about it. That’s what I’m hoping
anyway.”
But that wasn’t what happened.  As  soon  as  she  opened  the  door  to  their  apartment,
Becky felt something was wrong. She left Wilson in the hall while she went to Dick in the
living room. “Why’d you pick tonight to bring that old fart up here?” were his first words.
“I had to, honey. It can’t wait.”
“I got burned.”
There  it  was,  as  simple  as  that.  To  undercover  cops  like  Dick  getting  burned  meant
being recognized as police officers by their suspects. “Bad?”
“Real  bad.  Some  sonofabitch  really  put  it  on  me.  I  might  as  well  graduate  to  the
Goddamn movies.”
“Dick, that’s terrible! How—”
“Never mind how, honey. Just say it was two years of work blown to hell. And I think
I’ve got a shoofly on my ass, too.”
She leaned down and kissed his hair. He was slumped into the couch, staring at the TV.
“You’re clean, aren’t  you?”  But  her  heart  was  sinking,  she  knew  something  was  wrong.
And the inspectors from the Internal Affairs Division  knew  it  too  or  they  wouldn’t  have
put a man on him—shoofly was what cops called other cops who investigated them.
“You know damn well I’m  not  clean.”  He  said  it  with  such  infinite  tiredness  that  she
was  surprised.  And  he  looked  older,  more  hollow,  than  she  had  ever  seen  him  before.
“Look, let’s get drunk or something later, celebrate my early retirement, but bring Wilson
in now, let him do his thing.”
“It’s not much, won’t take a second.” She called Wilson, who moved forward from the
foyer where he had been standing.
They shook hands. Dick offered him a beer. They settled into the living room, the TV
cut down but not off. Becky closed the curtains.
“What’s up?” Dick said.
“We  need  your  help,”  Wilson  replied.  “I  gotta  get  some  pictures,  I  need  your
night-vision camera.”
“What night-vision camera?”
“The
 one
 you
 can
 get
 from
 Special.
 The
 five-hundred-mil
 lens,
 the
image-intensification circuit. You know what camera.”
“Why not order it up yourself?” He looked at Becky, a question in his eyes.
“We haven’t got authorization, honey,” she said. “We need it for the creatures.”
“Oh,  Christ  almighty,  that  bullshit  again!  Can’t  you  get  off  that?  What  are  you  two,
nuts or something? I can’t get that Goddamn camera, not while I’ve got shooflies hanging
from my Goddamn ears. Come on, lay off it. Why don’t you two earn your damn salaries
instead of monkeyin’ around with that shit.”
“We need your help, Neff.” Wilson sat hunched in his chair, his eyes glistening like dots
beneath the heavy folds of his brows. “I helped you.”
“Oh, Christ.” He  smiled,  turned  his  head  away.  “Oh,  Christ,  the  favor.  The  great  big

favor. Let me tell you, Wilson, I don’t give a rat’s ass about  your  big  favor.  That’s  not  a
factor.”
“That camera could solve this case for us, honey,  get  the  damn  thing  out  of  our  hair.
We only need it for a night or so.”
“You need more than the camera, you need me to work the damn thing. It’s balky as
hell, you gotta know how to use it.”
“You can teach us.”
He shook his head. “Took me weeks to learn. You don’t get it just right  you  don’t  get
any picture.”
She stared at him. “Dick, please. Just one night is all we ask.”
He frowned at her, as if asking “Is this for real?” She nodded gravely. “A night, then,”
he said, “maybe it’ll be a few laughs.”
So he agreed, just like that. She wished she felt more than grateful, but she didn’t. His
anger and tiredness made her wish to hell that  she  would  not  have  to  spend  the  rest  of
this night with him.
She showed Wilson to the door. “See you at headquarters,” she said as he pulled on his
coat. “Eight o’clock?”
“Eight’s fine.”
“Where are you going now, George?”
“Not home. You’re crazy to stay here, as a matter of fact.”
“I don’t know where else I’d go.”
“That’s your business.” He stepped out into the hallway and was gone. She started to
wonder  if  she  would  ever  see  him  alive  again,  then  stopped  herself.  Not  allowed.  She
turned, took a deep breath, and prepared to face the rest of the night with her husband.
Chapter 6
Chapter 6
Chapter 6
Chapter 6
« ^ »
They  were  hungry,  they  wanted  food.  Normally  they  preferred  the  darker,  desolate
sections of the city, but their need to follow their enemies had brought them into its very
eye. Here the smell of man lay over everything like a dense fog, and there was not much
cover.
But even the brightest places have shadows. They moved in single file behind the wall
that separates Central Park from the street. They  did  not  need  to  look  over  the  wall  to
know that few of the benches that  lined  the  other  side  were  occupied—they  could  smell
that fact perfectly well. But they also smelled something  else,  the  rich  scent  of  a  human
being perhaps a quarter of a mile farther on. On one of the benches a man was sleeping, a
man whose pores were exuding the smell of alcohol. To them the reek meant food, easily
gotten.
As they moved closer they could hear  his  breathing.  It  was  long  and  troubled,  full  of
age. They stopped behind him. There was no need  to  discuss  what  they  would  do;  each

one knew his role.
Three  jumped  up  on the  wall,  standing  there  perfectly  still,  balanced  on the  sharply
angled stone. He was on the bench below them. The one nearest the victim’s head inclined
her ears back. She would get the throat. The other two would move in only if there was a
struggle.
She held her breath a moment to clear her head. Then she examined her  victim  with
her eyes. The flesh was not visible—it was under thick  folds  of  cloth.  She  would  have  to
jump, plunge her  muzzle  into  the  cloth  and  rip  out  the  throat  all  at  once.  If  there  were
more than a few convulsions on the part of the  food  she  would  disappoint  the  pack.  She
opened her nose, letting the rich smells of the world back in. She listened up and down the
street. Only automobile traffic, nobody on foot for at least fifty yards. She cocked her ears
toward a man leaning in a chair inside the brightly lit foyer of a building across the street.
He was listening to a radio. She watched his head turn. He was glancing into the lobby.
Now. She  was  down,  she  was  pushing  her  nose  past  cloth,  slick  hot  flesh,  feeling  the
vibration  of  sub-vocal  response  in  the  man,  feeling  his  muscles  stiffening  as  his  body
reacted to her standing on it, then opening her mouth against the flesh, feeling her teeth
scrape back and down, pressing her tongue against the deliciously salty skin  and  ripping
with all the strength in her jaws and neck and chest, and jumping back to the wall with the
bloody  throat  in  her  mouth.  The  body  on  the  bench  barely  rustled  as  its  dying  blood
poured out.
And the man in the doorway returned his glance to the street. Nothing had moved, as
far  as  he  was  concerned.  Ever  watchful,  she  scented  him  and  listened  to  him.  His
breathing was steady, his smell bland. Good, he had noticed nothing.
Now her job was over, she  dropped  back  behind  the  wall  and  ate  her  trophy.  It  was
rich and sweet with blood. Around her the  pack  was  very  happy  as  it  worked.  Three  of
them lifted the body over the wall and let it drop with a thud. The two  others,  skilled  in
just this art, stripped the clothing away. They would carry the material to the other side
of the park, shred it and hide it in shrubs before they returned to their meal.
As  soon  as  the  corpse  was  stripped  it  was  pulled  open.  The  organs  were  sniffed
carefully. One lung, the stomach, the colon were put aside because of rot.
Then the pack ate in rank order.
The mother took the brain. The father took a thigh and buttock. The first-mated pair
ate the clean organs. When they returned from their duty the second-mated pair took the
rest. And then they pulled apart the remains and took them piece by piece and  dropped
them  in the  nearby  lake.  The  bones  would  sink  and  would  not  be  found  at  least  until
spring, if then. The clothing they had shredded and scattered half a mile away. And  now
they kicked as much new snow as they could over the blood of their feast. When this was
done they went to a place they had seen earlier, a great meadow full of the beautiful new
snow that had been falling.
They ran and danced in the snow, feeling the pleasure of their bodies, the joy of racing
headlong across the wide expanse, and because they knew that no human was in earshot
they had a joyous howl full of the pulsing rhythm they liked best after a hunt. The sound
rose through the park, echoing off the buildings that surrounded it. Inside those buildings
a few wakeful people stirred, made restive by the cold and ancient terror that the sound
communicated to man.
Then they went to a tunnel they had slept in these past four nights and settled down.
By long-learned habit they slept in the small hours of the morning when men mostly did
not stir. During daylight, man’s strongest time, they remained awake and alert and rarely
broke cover unless they had to. In the evening they hunted.

This traditional order of life went back forever.
Before sleeping the second-mated pair made love, both to entertain the others and to
prepare for spring. And afterward the father and mother licked them, and then the pack
slept.
But they did not sleep long, not until the hour before dawn as was  their  custom.  This
night  they  still  had  something  to  accomplish,  and  instead  of  sleeping  through  the  wee
hours they left their hiding place and moved out into the silent streets.
  
Becky listened to the phone on the other end of the line ring once, twice, three  times.
Finally Wilson picked up. He had gone home after all. “Yeah?”
“You OK?” she asked.
“Yes, Mama.”
“Now now, don’t get sarcastic. Just bedchecking.”
He hung up. The thought of slamming down the phone crossed her mind but what good
would it do? She returned the receiver to its cradle  and  went  back  into  the  living  room.
Dick  had  not  heard  her  and  she  paused  behind  him.  Sitting  slumped  in  his  chair  he
seemed smaller than life—diminished. She would have to do everything she could to help
him defeat  the  investigation.  She  had  to;  by  simply  being  his  wife  she  was  implicated.
“You  knew  he  was  getting  extra  money,”  they  would  say.  “Where  did  you  think  it  was
coming from?” And there could only be one answer to that question.
It wasn’t that she minded helping him, either. He had been a good husband for a long
time  and  she  supposed  that  what  was  happening  between  them  was  very  sad.  The
trouble  was  she  didn’t  care.  The  intimacy  that  had  once  united  them  had  died  through
inattention.  Where  once  she  had  been  full  of  love  there  was  now  just  stone  boredom.
There wasn’t even a sense of loss. Or maybe—just maybe—there was a sense of loss, for a
love that had never been real.
She had to ask herself, if a love can die like this, was it ever real? She remembered the
long happiness  of  the  past,  the  happiness  that  had  seemed  so  eternal.  When  they  had
gone sleigh riding up in the Catskills five Christmases ago, the love they shared had been
real. And in the hard times before she was a cop, that love had been very  real indeed. It
wasn’t just that Dick was a good lover, it was that he was a partner and friend of a  deep
and special kind. “You’re beautiful,” he would say, “you’re wonderful.” And it had meant
more  than  the  physical.  Maybe  the  waning  of  his  enthusiasm  was  inevitable  as  she
reached middle age. But his enthusiasm wasn’t the problem, it was hers. Try as she might
she could not love Dick Neff anymore.
  
Wilson waited five minutes to be certain she wouldn’t call back. The phone didn’t ring
again. His rudeness had evidently made her mad enough to ignore him for the rest of the
night
Fine. He went into his bedroom and unlocked a chest he kept in his closet. Inside were
a number of highly illegal weapons—a sawed-off shotgun, a WWII vintage BAR in working
order, and an Ingram M-11 Automatic Pistol. He pulled the automatic pistol from its case
and got a box of shells. Carefully he worked the pistol’s action, then hefted it in his hand.
Its  balance  was  a  pleasure  to  feel.  It  was  unquestionably  the  finest  automatic  handgun
ever  designed,  lightweight,  sound-suppressed,  with  a  20-round-a-second  punch.  It  was
not designed to frighten, slow down, or confuse, but purely and simply to kill. One  bullet
would blow a man’s head apart. The best automatic weapon ever made. The fastest. The

most  murderous.  He  opened  the  ammo  box  and  snapped  a  clip  of  the  special  .380
subsonic velocity bullets into the gun. Now it was heavier but the balance hadn’t changed.
Only three and a half pounds of weapon, it could be hefted nicely. And aimed. The sights
were precise. For a handgun, its range was almost incredible. You could shoot a man at a
hundred and fifty yards with this weapon. A burst of three or four bullets would get him
even if he was on the run.
He laid the pistol on his bed and put on an overcoat he rarely wore. When it was on he
dropped  the  M-11  into  a  pocket  which  had  been  especially  tailored  to  fit  the  nine-inch
pistol.  Wilson  had  had  the  coat  modified  when  he  had  acquired  the  pistol.  The  pocket
carried the M-11  almost invisibly. Despite the size and weight of the pistol only a careful
observer would note that he was carrying a piece  at  all.  His hand  felt  the  weapon  in his
pocket,  his  thumb  triggering  the  lever  that  moved  the  mechanism  from  safe  to  fire.  A
single press of the trigger  could  now  deliver  from  one  bullet  to  a  full  clip  in a  matter  of
seconds.  Good  enough.  Now  he  got  out  his  winter  hat,  old,  wrinkled,  perfect  for  both
protecting  the  head  and  hiding  the  face.  Next  the  shoes—black  sneakers,  surprisingly
warm  with  two  pair  of  socks,  surprisingly  agile  even  in  the  snow.  They  had  been
winterized  with  a  polyurethane  coating,  and  the  soles  scored  to  provide  traction.  The
sneakers gave him the  advantages  of  quiet  and  quick  movement,  most  useful  on an  icy
winter night. The last item was a pair of gloves. These were made of the finest Moroccan
leather,  softer  and  thinner  than  kid.  Through  them  he  could  feel  the  M-11  perfectly,
almost as if the gloves weren’t there at all.
As a final precaution he took out the pistol and removed fingerprints. Not even a gold
shield policeman goes around printing up a weapon like the Ingram. There isn’t anything
in the rule book about policemen carrying machine pistols, but that’s only  because  there
doesn’t need to be. You need a special permit to own one, and permission to move it from
one premises to another. As far as carrying one around in the street fully  loaded,  that  is
illegal for policeman and civilian alike.
He replaced  the  M-11  in its  pocket  and  stood  for  a  short  time  in  the  middle  of  the
room.  Mentally  he  checked  himself  out.  He  was  ready  to  move.  Too  bad  his  plan  to
de-scent himself had been wishful thinking. Now the M-11  was really his only advantage.
That  and  the  fact  that  hunters  aren’t  used  to  being  hunted.  Or  at  least  he  hoped  they
weren’t. His logic seemed  strong—how  suspecting  would  a  human  hunter  be  if  the  deer
suddenly turned on him, or a lion if it was attacked by a gazelle?
While he saw the danger of what he was doing he nevertheless felt that he had to act to
give Becky some  kind  of  a  chance  of  survival.  She  deserved  to  live,  she  was  young  and
strong; as for him he could take a few chances. And it was a hell of a long chance he  was
taking. The thought of being killed—by things —made clammy sweat break out.
But he  knew  that  he  and  Becky  had  to  have  help  if  either  of  them  was  going  to  live
much longer. And to get the kind of support they needed,  they  had  to  have  a  specimen.
Irrefutable,  undeniable  evidence  that  would  force  Underwood  to  act,  to  assign  this
problem the kind of manpower it demanded.
Wilson was going to get that evidence if he could. And if he got killed trying—oh. God,
he wanted to live!  No  matter  how  old,  how  beat-up,  he  still  wanted  to  live!  But  he  was
going after a carcass anyway. Had to.
He left his apartment after making sure all the lights were on. He triple-locked his door
and moved quickly to the rear of the dim hallway, where a fire escape was barred by an
accordion gate. He unhooked  it  and  pulled  it  back,  then  raised  the  window  and  stepped
into  the  winter  night.  He  took  some  putty  out  of  his  pocket—carried  for  just  this
purpose—and pressed it into the locking mechanism so that when he closed the gate again
the latch fell into place but could be raised if you jiggled it just right. If you yanked at it or

shook it hard the putty would give way and the lock would  secure  itself.  Then  he  closed
the window and moved his bulky body down the ice-covered fire escape to the street.
The snow was becoming heavier. Not good, impeded  his  vision  but  not  their  sense  of
smell. Perhaps the muffling effect would reduce the acuity of their hearing a little.
He put his hand in his pocket, closing his finger around the trigger of the M-11. It was a
mean weapon, designed for anti-guerrilla work, the kind of police work where you killed it
if it moved. Right now it felt good. It was the right pistol for this hunt—the bullets would
knock a man ten feet. A hundred-pound animal should go considerably farther.
He set out to find his quarry. He reasoned that the creatures would be more likely  to
hit  Becky  first  because  she  was  younger  and  presumably  stronger,  therefore  more
dangerous to them. Wilson, slow, old, sick, would be second in line. His theory was borne
out by the fact that they had gone to such great lengths to get to Becky and had left him
pretty much  alone.  Of  course  they  had  come  in the  basement  window,  Wilson  was  well
aware  of  that.  He  had  left  it  ajar  as  an  invitation.  His  dusting  of  the  basement  of  the
rooming house last night had revealed two sets of pawprints  as  distinctively  different  as
human  fingerprints.  They  had  gone  up  the  basement  stairs  to  the  door.  There  were
marks on the lock where they had tried to spring it with their claws.
But they had reserved their best effort for Becky, of that he felt reasonably sure. If he
was wrong, if they were around him now… with luck he would take a few with him.
He walked through the deserted late-night streets with his hand in his pocket clutching
the  M-11.  Despite  the  gun,  he  kept  close  to  the  curb,  away  from  any  trashcans  and
shadowy entranceways, out from under overhanging fire escapes. And every few steps he
stopped  and  looked  behind  him.  Only  once  did  he  see  another  human  form,  a  man
bundled against the snow and hurrying in the opposite direction.
When  he  reached  the  lights  of  Eighth  Avenue  he  felt  much  better.  He  was  safer  out
here  under  the  bright  sodium-arc  lamps,  with  the  passing  cars  and  the  more  frequent
pedestrians. Somehow he  felt  more  anonymous  taking  the  bus,  so  he  waited  at  the  bus
stop instead of hailing a cab. Ten minutes passed before a bus came. He got on and rode it
far uptown, to Eighty-sixth and  Central  Park  West.  Now  all  he  had  to  do  was  cross  the
park  and  he  would  be  in  Becky’s  neighborhood.  Upper  East  Side  cardboard  box
neighborhood… well, if that’s what she liked…
He thought better of crossing the park on foot— in fact he never really considered it at
all. To the danger of the creatures he would add the dangers of the park, very  foolhardy
indeed.
After what seemed an hour a crosstown bus appeared, moving slowly in the deepening
snow. Wilson got on, glad for the heated interior. He  let  himself  relax  in the  bus,  but  he
never took his hand out of his pocket.
When he got off he spotted Becky’s building at once. He  counted  the  balconies.  Good,
she had left her lights on, an intelligent precaution. She would probably be furious at him
for coming out alone like this, but it had to be done. If you’re going to take crazy risks, you
take them alone.
He moved  toward  the  alley  where  the  creatures  must  have  congregated.  The  snow
had, of course, covered up all trace of them. They would be  coming  back  here  sooner  or
later, of that much he felt sure. But if their  sense  of  smell  was  as  good  as  Ferguson  had
implied they would know he was  here  long  before  they  were  even  in sight.  So  what,  let
them move in on him. He hefted the M-11  a little in his pocket, then settled down behind
a garbage bin to wait.
One o’clock. The wind moaned out of the north. Two  o’clock.  The  snow  blew  in great

waves past the streetlights. Three o’clock.  Wilson  flexed  his  toes,  rubbed  his  nose  hard,
listened  to  his  heartbeat.  He  began  to  fight  sleep  about  three-fifteen.  Taking  his  cheek
between thumb and forefinger he pinched hard. The pain startled him into wakefulness.
Then  it  was  quiet.  The  snow  had  stopped.  Involuntarily  he  gasped—he  had  fallen
asleep. What time—four-twenty. Damn, over an hour out. And across the street, through
the alley, standing in the light, were six of the ugliest, most horrifying things he had ever
seen. He didn’t move a muscle, just his eyes.
These  things  were  big,  big  as  timber  wolves.  Their  coats  were  dusky  brown,  their
heads perched on necks much longer than that of a wolf. They had large pointed ears, all
cocked directly at this alley. He  could  practically  feel  them  listening  to  him.  Somewhere
his mind began to scream, Fire the Goddamn pistol, fire the pistol! But he couldn’t move,
he couldn’t take his eyes off those faces.  The  eyes  were  light  gray,  under  jutting  brows.
And they were looking where the ears were pointing. The faces  were…  almost  serene  in
their deadliness. And they had lips, strange sensitive lips. The faces were not even a little
human but they were clearly intelligent. They were worse than the faces of  tigers,  more
totally ruthless, more intractable.
Fire the pistol!
Slowly the pistol started coming out of his pocket. It seemed to take an hour for it to be
raised, but at last the long barrel swung up and… without a sound they were gone.
Not a trace, not even the rustle of a foot in the snow. They had moved! Goddamn, he
hadn’t counted on speed like that. Then he was running too—as fast as he could out of the
alley and into the middle of the snowy  street,  running  frantically,  feeling  like  an  old,  old
man  as  he  wheezed  along,  running  toward  a  lighted  window,  an  all-night  deli,  and  then
through the door.
“Jesus, don’t scare me like that, man!”
“Sorry-sorry. I—I’m cold. You got coffee?”
“Yeah, comin’ up. You runnin’ your ass off out there. You in trouble, man?”
“Just trying to keep warm is all. Trying to keep warm.”
The  counterman  held  out  the  coffee—and  held  on to  it.  “You  got  fifty  cents,  daddy?
That’s fifty cents in advance.”
“Oh, yeah, sure.” Wilson paid him, took the hot coffee cup in his hands, moved it to his
face, and sipped.
Great God I’m alive! I got that Goddamn gun out  f-a-s-t!  One  second  later  and  they
would have had me, the s.o.b.’s! It  was  exhilarating—it  might  have  felt  slow  but  he  had
drawn that gun Goddamn fast. Fast enough to save himself from them and they were fast
beyond imagining.
He sipped again, noticing how his  hand  trembled.  That  had  to  stop.  Long  ago  he  had
learned  how  to  overcome  the  special  fear  that  came  with  the  close  proximity  of  death.
Now  he  went  through  the  routine,  a  system  that  had  been  taught  to  him  by  his  first
partner, back in the forties when he was a rookie cop. There was a man—shot dead by his
oldest son in ‘52. Now wait a minute, Wilson thought, you’re  digressing.  You’re  shocked.
Come on now, policeman, snap out of it! Relax shoulders, let them fall. Let your gut hang
out. Slack your lips. Breathe deeply… one… two… and think about nothing, just let it  roll
over you.
Now when he sipped the coffee he tasted it, and for the  first  time  noticed  that  it  was
black and unsweetened.

“Hey, I said light, this coffee’s black.”
“You need it black, man. You don’t need no light coffee. You  drink  that,  then  I’ll  give
you a light.”
“Thank you, Doctor, but I’m not drunk.” The counterman laughed softly, then  looked
straight at Wilson. “I wouldn’t say you were. You scared. You the scaredest motherfucker
I’ve seen in a good long while. Maybe that coffee’ll help you get it back together, man.”
“Well, it is back together, man. And I want a light coffee. I can’t drink this stuff.”
“Sure,  you  got  money  I’ll  fix  you  a  carbonated  coffee  if  you  want  it.  I  don’t  give  a
damn. But don’t say you can’t drink what you got.”
“Why  the  hell  not!  What  are  you,  some  kind  of  a  nut?  I  said  I  wanted  light.  I  can’t
drink this junk.”
“Look in the cup, man.”
It was empty. He hadn’t even been aware of swallowing it! He shut up, returned to his
thoughts, to how incredibly fast they had been. It was almost as if they had vanished; but
he had glimpsed flashes of running bodies. Then it occurred to him that if they were that
fast  they  would  have  gotten  past  his  defenses  before  he  had  even  realized  they  were
there.
Why  hadn’t  they?  For  some  unknown  reason  this  particular  gold  shield  had  been
allowed to live. The M-11  still felt good in his pocket but it had been no protection at  all.
None at all.  It  certainly  hadn’t  been  the  speed  of  his  draw  that  had  scared  them  away.
Something,  then…  almost  but  not  quite  like  a  memory.  He  almost  knew  why  they  had
run, then—he didn’t. “Shit.”
“You ready to go, mister?”
“No.”
“Well, you notice we ain’t got no chairs in here. This is a deli, not  no coffee  shop.  You
got to buy and go in a place like this, that’s the rules.”
“So what if I don’t go?”
“Nothin’. Just I feel like you got trouble all around you. You gonna bring it in here with
you.”
Wilson debated whether to go back outside or to flash his shield. What the hell, outside
probably wasn’t the healthiest place for him to be right now. Whatever had stopped them
before might not again. So he flashed. “Police,” he said tonelessly, “I’m stayin’ put.”
“Sure enough.”
“There  a  back  room,  some  place  I  can  bunk  out?  I’m  tired,  I’ve  just  been  in  a  bad
spot.”
“I’d  have  to  agree,  judging  from  the  way  you  look.  We  got  a  storeroom.  It’s  good,
there’s plenty of place to lie, and it’s pretty warm. I get a little back there now and then
myself.”  He  showed  Wilson  into  a  low-ceilinged  room,  obviously  a  shed  attached  to  the
rear of the old brownstone building that housed the deli. There was one window, barred,
and  a  triple-locked  door.  Very  good,  very  cozy,  very  safe  until  the  morning  brought
crowds back to the street and he could safely go out. As he settled back he  reviewed  his
strange,  terrifying  failure.  Obviously  they  were  way,  way  ahead  of  him—fast,  smart,  in
complete  control  of  the  situation.  There  was  only  one  reason  that  he  wasn’t  dead  right
now—they wanted him alive a little longer.
When  he  closed  his  eyes  he  saw  them,  their  steady,  eager  eyes,  the  cruel  beauty  of

their  faces…  and  he  remembered  the  moose  and  the  wolves.  What  did  the  spent  old
moose  feel  for  the  ravening  timber  wolf—was  it  love,  or  fear  so  great  that  it  mimicked
love?
  
When they realized who was concealed in the alley they were full of glee. He had come
to protect  the  female,  just  as  the  father  had  said  he  would.  The  father  knew  man  very
well and could detect nuances of scent that the younger ones could scarcely imagine. And
Father had detected the fact that the man who had seen them loved his female coworker.
Father had said, we can move against them both at the same time because the male will
try to protect the female. And Father had selected the place and time: where the female
was most defenseless, when she was most vulnerable.
And  they  went  and  there  he  was.  Asleep!  The  second-mated  pair  prepared  for  the
attack,  moving  into  position  across  the  street.  They  were  just  about  to  move  when  the
man raised his  head  and  looked  at  them.  The  pack  froze  and  smelled  it  all  at  the  same
time: sweat from the hand that held the gun.
It was a hard decision, instantly made by Mother —we leave; we do not risk moving so
far against the gun, we get him another time.
Now the pack ran, rushing through the streets to the ruined building where they would
spend the day. Each heart beat with the same agonizing  knowledge:  they  live,  they  live,
they  live.  And  they  know  about  us.  Even  as  the  sun  rises  they  must  be  telling  others,
spreading the fear that the old legends speak about, the fear that would make life among
men hard and dangerous for future generations.
The second-mated pair was especially anguished: in the spring  they  would  litter,  and
they did not want to bring forth children if man knew of the hunter.
Not  that  they  feared  anything  from  single  individuals,  or  even  groups.  But  endless
numbers  of  men  could  overwhelm  them  or  at  least  force  them  into  furtive,  tormented
lives  unworthy  of  free  beings.  As  they  moved  warily  through  the  deserted  streets  one
thought consumed them all: kill the  dangerous  ones,  kill  them  fast.  And  it  was  this  that
they talked about  when  they  reached  their  sanctuary,  a  long,  intense  conversation  that
left them all shuddering with a furious urge for blood, all except Father, who said, we have
won. Soon he will give himself to us as men did of old, for the death wish is coming  upon
him.
  
Wilson opened  his  eyes.  The  light  coming  in  the  window  was  yellow-gray.  A  steady
tapping against the windowpane indicated that it was snowing again.
“Who the hell are you?”
A man was standing over him, a fat man in gray slacks and a white shirt. He was bald,
his face pinched with the long habit of unsatisfied greed.
“I’m a cop. Wilson’s the name.”
“Oh Christ almighty—why’d you let this damn bum in here, Eddie? Throw the  fucker
out, he’ll get weevils in the Goddamn bread.”
“He got a gold shield, man. I’m not gonna say no to a gold shield.”
“You can buy a Goddamn gold shield on Forty-second Street. Get the jerk out.”
“Don’t worry, sweetheart, I was just leaving. Thanks, Eddie, from the NYPD.”
Wilson left to a snort of scornful laughter from  the  white  guy,  a  disgusted  stare  from

the black. Sleeping over in storerooms  was  pretty  unorthodox  behavior  for  a  cop.  What
the hell, he didn’t give a damn.
It  was  still  pretty  damn  lonely  on  the  street.  Lonely  and  snowy  too.  This  was
practically  a  blizzard,  must  be  five  or  six  inches  by  now.  He  started  to  walk  back  by
Becky’s building, then stopped himself. It hit him like a haymaker—they had come when
they did because they knew he would be  there.  They  were  hunters, for  Chrissake,  they
knew damn well where he’d be. Oh, they were beautiful! They had him figured from way
back.  It  was  probably  exactly  what  one  of  them  would  have  done—protect  the  one  he
loved.
What  the  hell,  the  bitch  was  beautiful.  Fair  cop  too—but  so  beautiful.  Becky  had
creamy skin, Irish coloring. Wilson was partial to that kind of coloring. And she had those
soft,  yet  piercing  eyes.  He  thought  of  looking  into  those  eyes.  “Becky,  I  love  you,”  he
would say, and she would open her mouth slightly, inviting the first long kiss…
But not now. Now  it  was  cold  and  he  was  hungry.  He  trudged  toward  the  Lexington
Avenue subway to ride down to headquarters.  His watch  said  six-thirty.  The  Merit  Bar
was open by now, and they served up a fair breakfast. Then he felt the M-11. You didn’t
go into Police  Headquarters  with  a  loaded  M-11,  you  just  did  not  do  that.  He’d  have  to
stop by his rooming house first and exchange it for his regulation piece.
The subway wasn’t much warmer than the street, but at least it was well-lighted and
there were a few  people  around.  Not  many  at  this  hour,  but  enough  to  keep  the  things
away from him. They were after him and  Becky  because  they  had  been  seen—certainly
they wouldn’t attack except when their targets were alone. But you can be alone enough
for just a few seconds. That he had to remember.
He got off and returned to his rooming house, entering this time by the front door. At
the top of the stairs he carefully removed the putty he had left in the fire escape lock and
returned to his room. He dropped off the overcoat containing the M-11 and put on the one
containing the .38. That was all. The way he kept his place locked, he wasn’t worried that
a burglar would rip off the pistol, or anything else in his apartment for that matter.
He double-locked his door, tested it, and left the building as quickly and quietly as  he
had come. And as he did it he laughed at himself. There was no need to be so quiet, it was
just  that  it  was  second  nature  to  him  now.  Unless  he  was  acting  the  part  of  an
unconcerned civilian he was always wary, always stealthy. He walked  the  short  distance
from his place to headquarters the same way, like a thief or someone tracking a thief.
He went through the quiet, brightly lit corridors of Police Headquarters until he got to
the  little  office  occupied  by  him  and  Neff.  When  he  opened  the  door,  his  eyes  widened
with surprise.
There sat Evans.
“Hiya, Doc. Do I owe you money?”
Evans  wasn’t  interested  in  bantering  with  Wilson.  “We  got  another  one,”  he  said
simply.
“What’s the story?”
Evans looked at him. “Call Neff. Tell her to meet us at the scene.”
“Anything new?” Wilson asked as he dialed the phone.
“Plenty.”
“Why didn’t you call Neff yourself?”
“You’re the senior man on the case. I tried you first. When you didn’t answer  I  came

over. I figured you were on your way in.”
“Emergency, Doctor. You could have called Neff when you didn’t find me.”
“I have no emergencies. My line of  business  only  concerns  emergencies  after  they’re
over.”
  
Somewhere  out  there  the  phone  was  ringing.  Dick  was  subvocalizing  a  few  choice
curses each time the bell burst the silence. Ring and curse, ring and curse. “It could be for
you,” Becky said.
“Nah. I’m burned, remember. It ain’t for me.”
“Then it’s for me.”
“So answer the fucker. One of us has gotta do it.”
She picked up the receiver. Wilson didn’t waste hellos. “Oh, Christ. OK, see you there.”
She hung up. “Gotta go. Homicide in the park.”
“Since when are you assigned uptown?”
“Evans called us in. He says it looks like our friends got hungry again.”
“The  big  bad  wolves.”  He  raised  himself  up  on  his  elbow.  “What  about  our
picture-taking expedition, will it be on?”
“I hope. I’ll call you.”
“OK, honey.”
She was dressing as quickly as possible, but the gentleness in his voice made her stop.
They looked at one another. The delirious, unexpected intensity  of  the  night  before  was
written in Dick’s face.  She  saw  clearly:  he  was  grateful.  It  touched  her,  made  her  think
that maybe there was still something left after all.
“I—” The words seemed to die in her throat. They were so unfamiliar, so long unsaid.
Dick had  come  to  her  wordlessly,  in the  dark,  just  as  she  was  falling  asleep.  He  had
embraced  her,  his  body  hot  and  trembling,  and  had  awakened  in  her  a  painful  rush  of
feeling. Maybe she did care—so much that she  just  couldn’t  face  it.  Maybe  that  was  the
true  source  of  the  wall  that  was  being  built  between  them.  And  realizing  that  she  had
responded to his intensity with passion of her own and had enjoyed the violent insistence
of his body, finally crying out with the pleasure.
“What, Becky?”
“I don’t know. Just wanted to  say  good-bye.”  But  not  I  love  you,  not  that  again,  not
yet. And she felt like a heel for holding back, a selfish heel.
“Don’t make it sound so final.” He chuckled. “The worst I’ll get is early retirement.  If
the shooflies are real good they  might  give  you  a  five-day.  Don’t  let  it  bug  you,  darling.
And by  the  way,  there’s  something  else  I  want  to  say  to  you  before  you  go.”  He  rolled
over on his back, throwing off the covers, exposing his  naked  body  and  erect  penis  with
delightful lack of modesty. “You still remain one of the great American lays, darling.”
And she was beside him, bending over him, kissing his smiling face. “Dick, you silly fool,
look at you. You never get enough.”
“I’m a morning man.”
“And a night man and an afternoon man. I wish I didn’t have to go! I’ll call you when I
get  the  chance.”  She  drew  herself  away  from  him,  full  of  a  confusion  of  emotions.  Why

couldn’t she make up her mind about this: did she still love Dick Neff or didn’t she? And
what about Wilson, what did her feelings for him mean?
She  rode  the  elevator  down  to  the  garage  level  and  got  in  her  car.  As  soon  as  she
started driving her mind closed around the case. The night with Dick receded, as did the
welter  of  emotions  she  had  been  feeling.  Like  a  murky,  ugly  fog  the  case  rose  and
recaptured her. Wilson hadn’t said much over the phone, not much. But he had  sounded
uncharacteristically upset. Evans had been with him at Police Headquarters. She glanced
at her watch: seven a.m. An early hour for Doctor Evans. She stepped on the accelerator,
racing  across  Seventy-ninth  Street  in  the  snow,  heading  for  the  point  of  rendezvous,
Central Park West and Seventy-second.
The  streets  were  empty  as  she  maneuvered  the  car  around  the  corner  at
Seventy-ninth  and  CPW.  She  was  now  in  the  20th  Precinct.  Ahead  she  could  see  the
flashing lights, the dismal little crowd of emergency vehicles that always marked a crime
scene. She pulled up behind a parked radio car. “I’m Neff,” she said to  the  lieutenant  on
the scene.
“We  got  a  funny  one,”  he  intoned.  “Anticrime  boys  found  this  bench  covered  with
frozen  blood  about  an  hour  ago.  We  took  it  to  pathology  and  sure  enough  it’s  human.
O-negative, to be exact. But we got no corpse, nothin’.”
“How do you know it was a murder?”
“There’s evidence enough. First off, too much blood, whoever lost it had to die. Second,
we can see where the body was pulled across the wall.” Her eyes went to the indentations
in  the  snow  that  lay  along  the  wall.  More  snow  had  fallen  since  the  murder,  but  not
enough  to  completely  obliterate  the  signs.  “By  the  way,  Detective  Neff,  if  I  may  be  so
blunt, why are you here?”
“Well,  I’m  on  special  assignment  with  my  partner,  Detective  Wilson.  We’re
investigating a certain M.O. When the M. E.  finds  a  case  that  seems  to  fit  he  gives  us  a
call.”
“You take your orders from the M. E.?”
“We were instructed by the Commissioner.”  She  hadn’t  wanted  to  pull  rank,  but  she
sensed  that  he  was  needling  her.  He  smiled  a  little  sheepishly  and  strolled  away.
“Lieutenant,” Neff called, “is this blood all you have? No body, no clothing, nothing?”
“Hold  on,  Becky,”  a  voice  said  behind  her.  It  was  Evans,  followed  closely  by  Wilson.
The two men came up and the three of them huddled together under the curious eyes of
the  men  of  the  20th  and  Central  Park  precincts.  “There’s  more,”  Evans  said,  “there’s
some hair.”
“He’s examined some hairs that were stuck in the blood.”
“Right. This is my interpreter, Detective Wilson. I found hairs—”
“That match the hairs found at the DiFalco scene.”
Evans  frowned.  “Come  on,  Wilson,  lay  off.  The  hairs  match  the  ones  we’ve  found  at
every scene.”
“They’re pretty voracious if they only left blood,” Becky said.
“They didn’t. Don’t you see  what  happened?  They  hid  the  remains.  They’ve  learned
that we’re on their tail and they’re trying to slow us down. They’re very bright.”
“That’s for certain,” Wilson said. Becky noticed how haggard he looked, his face waxen,
his jaw  unshaven.  Had  he  slept  at  all?  It  didn’t  look  like  it.  He  cleared  his  throat.  “Are
they searching for the corpse?” he asked the Lieutenant, who was standing nearby.

“Yeah. There’s some sign of something being  dragged,  but  the  snow  covered  most  of
the evidence up. We’re just not sure what happened.”
Becky  motioned  to  Wilson  and  Evans.  They  followed  her  into  her  car.  “It’s  warmer
here,” she said, “and the Loo won’t overhear us.”
Evans  was  the  first  to  speak.  “Obviously  they  were  hiding  behind  the  wall  when
somebody  sat  on the  bench.  Judging  from  the  blood  it  happened  five  or  six  hours  ago.
They must have jumped over the wall, killed fast and dragged the corpse away.”
“Not in one piece,” Wilson said. “There’d be more  marks.  I  think  they  tore  it  up  and
carried it.”
“Jesus. But what about the clothes?”
“That’s what we ought to be able to find. The bones, too, for that matter, there aren’t
too many places they could have hidden them.”
“How about the pond?”
“You mean because it’s  frozen  over?  I  doubt  if  they’d  think  of  busting  the  ice  in the
pond, that’s too smart.”
“We need to find clothes, some kind of identification.”
“Yeah. Where the hell to look, though? This friggin’ snow…”
“I  have  the  hairs.  I  don’t  need  anything  more  to  convince  me.  They  came  here  last
night and they killed this person. I’m certain of that. It was them. Their hairs are unique,
as unique as a fingerprint.”
“So they kill a lot. That’s to be expected for a carnivorous animal.”
Becky corrected her partner. “Carnivorous humanoid.”
Wilson laughed. “From what I’ve seen they could hardly be described as humanoid.”
“And what have you seen?”
“Them.”
Becky and the M. E. stared at him. “You’ve seen them?” Evans finally managed to ask.
“That’s right. Last night.”
“What the hell are you saying?” Becky asked.
“I saw six of them outside of your apartment last night. I was hunting them, trying to
get Ferguson his specimen.” He sighed. “They’re fast,  though.  I  missed   ’em  by  a  mile.
Lucky I’m still alive.”
Becky was stunned. She looked at her partner’s  tired  face,  at  his  watery,  aging  eyes.
He had been out there guarding her! The crazy, sweet old romantic jerk. At this moment
she felt like she was seeing a hidden, secret Wilson, seeing him for the very  first time. She
could have kissed him.
Chapter 7
Chapter 7
Chapter 7
Chapter 7
« ^ »

Carl  Ferguson  was  horrified  and  excited  at  the  same  time  by  what  he  was  reading.  He
seemed to drift away, to a quiet and safe place. But he came back. Around him the prosaic
realities  of  the  Main  Reading  Room  of  the  New  York  Public  Library  reasserted
themselves. Across from him a painfully pretty schoolgirl cracked her gum. Beside him an
old man breathed long and slow, paging through an equally old book. All around him there
was a subdued clatter, the scuttle of pen on paper, the coughs, the whispers, the drone of
clerks calling numbers from the front of the room.
Because you could not enter the stacks and because you could neither enter nor leave
this room with a book, its collection had not been  stolen  and  was  still  among  the  best  in
the world. And it was because of the book that  he  had  finally  obtained  from  this  superb
collection that Carl Ferguson felt such an  extremity  of  fear.  What  he  read,  what  he  saw
before him was almost too fantastic and too horrible to believe. And yet  the  words  were
there.
“In Normandy,” Ferguson read  for  the  third  time,  “tradition  tells  of  certain  fantastic
beings known as lupins or lubins. They pass the night chattering together and twattling in
an unknown tongue. They take their stand by the  walls  of  country  cemeteries  and  howl
dismally at the moon. Timorous and fearful of man they will flee away scared at a footstep
or  distant  voice.  In  some  districts,  however,  they  are  fierce  and  of  the  werewolf  race,
since they are said to scratch up graves with their hands and gnaw poor dead bones.”
An  ancient  story,  repeated  by  Montague  Summers  in  his  classic  The  Werewolf.
Summers assumed that the werewolf tales were folklore, hearsay conjured up to frighten
the gullible. But Summers was totally, incredibly wrong.  The  old  legends  and  tales  were
true.  Only  one  small  element  was  incorrect—in  the  past  it  was  assumed  that  their
intelligence and cunning meant that werewolves were men who had assumed the shape of
animals.  But  they  weren’t.  They  were  not  that  at  all,  but  rather  a  completely  separate
species of intelligent creature. And they had been sharing  planet  Earth  with  us  all  these
long eons  and  we  never  understood  it.  What  marvelous  beings  they  must  be—a  virtual
alien intelligence right here at home. It was a frightening discovery, but to Ferguson also
one of awesome wonder.
Here were  legends,  stories,  tales  going  back  thousands  of  years,  repeating  again  and
again  the  mythology  of  the  werewolf.  And  then  suddenly,  in  the  latter  part  of  the
nineteenth century, silence.
The legends died.
The stories were no longer told.
But why? To Ferguson’s mind the answer was simple: the werewolves, tormented for
generations by humanity’s vigilance and fear, had  found  a  way  to  hide  from  man.  Their
cover was now perfect. They lived among us, fed off our living flesh, but were unknown to
all except those who didn’t live to tell the tale. They were a race of living ghosts,  unseen
but very  much a part of the world. They understood human society well  enough  to  take
only the abandoned, the weak, the isolated. And toward the end of the nineteenth century
the  human  population  all  over  the  world  had  started  to  explode,  poverty  and  filth  had
spread.  Huge  masses  of  people  were  ignored  and  abandoned  by  the  societies  in  which
they lived. And they were fodder for these werewolves, who range through the  shadows
devouring the beggars, the wanderers, those without name or home.
And no doubt the population of werewolves had exploded right along with the  human
population. Ferguson pictured hundreds, thousands of them scavenging the great cities of
the  earth  for  their  human  prey,  rarely  being  glimpsed,  using  their  sensitive  ears  and
noses  to  keep  well  distant  of  all  but  the  weak  and  helpless,  taking  advantage  of  man’s
increasing  multitudes  and  increasing  poverty.  Their  faculties  combined  with  their

intelligence  must  make  them  fearsome  indeed—but  what  an  opportunity  they  also
represented  to  science—to  him—as  another  intelligence  capable  of  study,  even  perhaps
communication.
But there was something else about Summers’ book, something even more disquieting,
and that was the continual references to men and werewolves in communication with one
another.  “Two  gentlemen  who  were  crossing  a  forest  glade  after  dark  suddenly  came
upon an open  space  where  an  old  woodsman  was  standing,  a  man  well-known  to  them,
who  was  making  passes  in the  air,  weaving  strange  signs  and  signals.  The  two  friends
concealed  themselves  behind  a  tree,  whence  they  saw  thirteen  wolves  come  trotting
along. The leader was a huge grey wolf who went up to the old man fawning upon him and
being  caressed.  Presently  the  forester  uttered  a  sing-song  chant  and  plunged  into  the
woods followed by the wolves.”
Just a story, but tremendously  interesting  in the  context  of  the  information  that  the
two  detectives  had  brought  him.  Obviously  the  references  to  signs  and  a  “sing-song”
chant  referred  to  human  attempts  to  mimic  the  language  of  the  werewolves,  to
communicate. Why did men once run with the werewolves?
Summers  said  that  vampires  were  often  connected  to  werewolves.  Vampires—the
eaters of blood. In other words,  cannibals.  To  a  less  knowledgeable  person  such  an  idea
might have seemed fantastic, but Ferguson knew enough about old Europe to understand
the  probable  truth  behind  the  legend.  Men  did  indeed  run  with  werewolves,  and  those
men were called vampires because they fed off human flesh  like  the  wolves  themselves.
Cannibalism  must  have  been  common  in  the  Europe  of  the  Dark  Ages,  when  grinding
poverty was the fate of all except a tiny minority. When men were the weakest and most
numerous  creatures  around  it  must  have  tempted  the  hungry…  to  go  out  and  find  the
werewolves,  somehow  build  up  a  rapport,  and  then  hunt  with  them,  living  like  a
scavenger off the pickings.
So much for the image of the vampire as a count with a castle and a silk dinner jacket.
The truth was more like Summers’ description—a filthy old forester scrabbling along with
a pack of werewolves to glean the leavings of their monstrous feasts.
Man the scavenger,  in the  same  role  among  werewolves  that  dogs  play  among  men!
And the human prey, unsuspecting now, but in those days it knew. People approached the
night with terror crackling in their hearts. And when darkness fell only the desperate and
the mad remained out of doors.
What,  then,  was  the  role  of  the  human  scavenger,  the  vampire,  that  ran  with  the
werewolves?  Why  did  they  tolerate  him?  Simple  enough,  to  coax  people  out  of  their
houses, to lure them into the shadows where they would be ripped apart. It was ugly but
it also meant that there had been communication of a sort between man and werewolf in
the past, and could be again. And how immeasurably richer communication between this
extraordinary  species  and  modern  science  might  be.  There  could  be  no  comparison
between the promise of the future and the sordid mistakes of the distant past.
It had gotten much easier for the werewolves in recent centuries. No longer were the
human vampires needed. Nowadays the werewolves  could  do  it  on their  own.  Just  take
up residence in any big city, live in abandoned buildings among the city’s million byways,
and prey on the human strays.
Man and wolf. It had been an age-old animosity. The image of  the  wolf  baying  at  the
moon on a winter’s night still calls primitive terrors to the heart of man.
And with good reason, except that the innocent timber wolf with his loud howling and
once  conspicuous  presence  was  not  the  enemy.  Lurking  back  there  in  the  shadows,
perhaps along the path to the well, was the real enemy, unnoticed, patient, lethal beyond

imagining.  The  wolf-being  with  its  long  finger-like  paws,  the  werewolf,  the  other
intelligent species that shared this planet.
We  killed  off  the  innocent  timber  wolf  and  never  even  discovered  the  real  danger.
While the timber wolf bayed to the oblivious moon the real enemy crept up the basement
steps and used one of those clever paws to throw the bolt on the door.
Ferguson ran his fingers through his hair, his mind trying to accept the fearful truth he
had uncovered. That damn detective—Wilson was his name —had an absolutely uncanny
intuition  about  this  whole  matter.  It  was  Detective  Wilson  who  had  first  said  the  word
werewolf, the word that had gotten Ferguson really thinking about that strange paw. And
Wilson had  claimed  that  the  werewolves  were  hunting  him  and  the  woman  down.  With
good  reason!  Once  their  secret  was  out  the  life  of  the  werewolf  would  be  made
immeasurably  harder,  like  it  was  in  the  old  days  in  Europe  when  humanity  bolted  its
doors and locked its windows, or in the Americas where the Indian used his knowledge of
the forest to play a deadly game of hide and seek, a game commemorated  to  this  day  in
the  traditional  dances  of  many  tribes.  The  werewolf  undoubtedly  followed  man  to  this
continent  across  the  Bering  land  bridge  eons  ago.  But  always  and  everywhere  he  kept
himself  as  well  hidden  as  he  could.  And  it  made  good  sense.  You  wouldn’t  find  beggars
sleeping  on sidewalks  if  the  werewolf  was  common  knowledge.  A  wave  of  terror  would
sweep the city and the world unlike anything known since the Middle Ages. Unspeakable
things would be done in the name of human safety. Man would declare all-out war on his
adversary.
And at last he would have a fair fight  on his  hands.  With  all  our  technology,  we  have
never faced an alien intelligence before, have never faced  a  species  with  its  own  built-in
technology far superior to our own. Ferguson could not imagine what the mind behind the
nose and ears of the werewolf must be like. The sheer quantity of information pouring in
must literally be millions of times greater than that reaching a man through his eyes. The
mind that  gave  meaning  to  all  that  information  must  be  a  miracle  indeed.  Maybe  even
greater than the mind of man. And man must, this time,  react  responsibly.  If  there  was
intelligence there it could be reasoned with, and eventually the two enemy  species  could
learn to live together in peace. If Carl Ferguson  had  any  part  in this  at  all  it  was  as  the
missionary of reason and understanding. Man could either declare war on this species or
try to come to an understanding. Carl Ferguson raised his head, closed his eyes and hoped
with every fiber of his being that reason would for once prevail.
He was surprised to notice somebody was standing beside him.
“You’ve got to take this call slip to the rare books department. We don’t have this book
in the reading room. All of our stuff is post-1825 and this book was written in 1597.” The
call clerk dropped the card on the table in front of Ferguson and went away. Ferguson got
up and headed for the rare books collection, card clutched in his hand.
He moved through the empty, echoing halls of the great library, finally arriving at the
rare books collection. A middle-aged woman sat at a desk working on a catalogue under a
green-shaded lamp. The only sound in the room was the faint clatter of  the  steam  pipes
and the snow-muted mutter of the city beyond the windows.
“I’m Carl Ferguson  of  the  Museum  of  Natural  History.  I’d  like  to  take  a  look  at  this
book.” He handed her the card. “Do we have this?”
“It’s  catalogued.”  She  got  up  and  disappeared  behind  a  wire-covered  doorway.
Ferguson waited standing expectantly for a few moments, then found a chair. There was
no sound from the direction the  woman  had  gone.  He  was  alone  in the  room.  The  place
smelled of books. And he was impatient for her to return. It was urgent that she produce
the book he needed. It was by Beauvoys de Chauvincourt, a man considered an authority

on werewolves in his day, and more interestingly, a familiar of  them.  The  manner  of  his
death was what had excited Ferguson—it indicated that the man may indeed have known
the creatures firsthand. Beauvoys de Chauvincourt had gone out one night in search of his
friends  the  werewolves  and  had  simply  disappeared.  The  dark  suspicions  of  the  time
notwithstanding,  Ferguson  felt  that  he  almost  certainly  had  met  his  end  observing  the
ancestors of the very  creatures whose work the two cops had  uncovered.  “Do  you  know
books, Mr. Ferguson?”
“It’s Doctor. Y-yes, I do. I can handle antique books.”
“That’s exactly what shouldn’t be done with them.” She eyed him. “I’ll turn  for  you,”
she  said  firmly.  “Let’s  go  over  there.”  She  placed  the  book  before  him  at  a  table  and
turned on one of the green-shaded lights.
“Discours de la  Lycanthropie,  ou  de  la  transformation  des  hommes  en  loups,”  read
the title page. 
“Turn.”
She  opened  the  book,  turning  the  stiff  pages  to  the  frontispiece.  And  Ferguson  felt
sweat trickling down his  temples.  What  he  was  seeing  was  so  extraordinary  that  it  was
almost too much to bear without crying out. For there on the  frontispiece  of  the  ancient
book was engraved a most amazing picture. In this ancient engraving a sparse plain  was
shown lit by a full moon. And walking through the plain was a man surrounded by things
that  looked  somewhat  like  wolves  but  were  not  wolves.  The  man  appeared  at  ease,
strolling  along  playing  a  bagpipe  that  was  slung  over  his  shoulder.  And  the  werewolves
walked with him. The artist had rendered his subjects  faithfully,  Ferguson  guessed.  The
heads with their high, wide brain cases and large eyes, the delicate and sinister paws, the
voracious,  knowing  faces—it  all  fit  the  image  Ferguson  had  created  in  his  own  mind  of
what  the  creatures  must  look  like.  And  the  man  with  them—incredible.  In  those  days
there  must  certainly  have  been  communication  between  humans  —some  humans—and
werewolves.  De  Chauvincourt  himself  must  have…  known  them.  And  in  the  end  they
destroyed him.
“Turn.”
Ferguson  cursed  his  French.  Here  were  lists  of  names—no,  they  were  invocations  of
demons. Nothing to be learned here. “Turn.”
More invocations.
“Keep turning.”
The  pages  rolled  past  until  something  caught  Ferguson’s  eye.  “The  Language  They
Assume.”
Here  followed  a  description  of  a  complex  language  composed  of  tail  movements,  ear
movements,  growls,  changes  in  facial  expression,  movements  of  the  tongue  and  even
clicks of the nails. It was as if human language had consisted not only of words but also of
myriad gestures to augment those words.
And Ferguson knew something he hadn’t known before. The creatures had vocal cords
inadequate to the needs of true verbal language. How fast their brain must have evolved!
Perhaps  it  took  only  fifty  or  a  hundred  thousand  years  and  there  they  were,  strange
intelligent beings roaming the world in pursuit of man, engaged in the age-long hunt that
occupied them to this day.
“Turn.”
Here  the  book  had  another  engraving—hand  movements.  “Can  I  get  a  Xerox  of  this
page?”

“We can’t copy this book.”
He had  brought  paper  and  pencil  and  made  rough  sketches  of  the  positions  shown
noting the meaning of each: stop, run, kill, attack, flee.
Stop—the tips of the fingers drawn down to the edge of the palm.
Run—the hands held straight out before the face.
Kill—the fists clenched, held against the throat.
Attack—the hands clutching the stomach like claws.
Flee—the palms against the forehead.
But  these  were  human  signals.  Obviously  the  werewolves  did  not  use  such  gestures
among  themselves  because  they  were  four-legged.  There  must  have  been  a  mutual
language composed of signals like these between the werewolves and—
“Les  vampires.”  The  book  said  it.  And  there  was  the  source  of  another  legend,  the
vampires  again.  This  must  be  the  language  they  used  to  communicate  with  the
werewolves.  The  vampires,  those  who  followed  the  wolves  and  scavenged  the  remains.
And the wolves needed them to induce people to come out of their locked houses.
What a different world it had been then! Werewolves and vampires stalking the night,
the vampires luring people from their homes to be devoured. No wonder the Middle Ages
were such a dark and cruel time. The terrors of the night were not  imaginary  at  all,  but
stark realities faced from birth by everybody. Only as the sheer numbers of mankind had
increased had the threat seemed to disappear. Man grew  so  numerous  that  the  work  of
the werewolves was no longer noticed. In the days of de Chauvincourt the human helpers
must  already  have  been  unnecessary  in  most  places…  and  so  as  soon  as  the  vampire
weakened with age the werewolves turned on him. The librarian turned the page.
Ferguson jumped up. He tried to stop himself, but took an involuntary step backward
and knocked over the chair.
“Sir!”
“I-I’m  sorry!”  He  grabbed  the  chair,  righted  it.  Now  he  felt  like  a  fool.  But  the
engraving that covered both of the pages facing was so terrible that  he  almost  could  not
look at it.
He was seeing the werewolf close up, face to face. This would be a reliable rendition of
the features. Even in this three-hundred-and-eighty-year-old engraving he could see the
savagery,  the  sheer  voraciousness  of  the  creature.  The  eyes  stared  out  at  him  like
something from a nightmare.
And  they  were  from  a  nightmare.  His mind  was  racing  now  as  he  remembered,  an
incident  that  had  occurred  when  he  was  no more  than  six  or  seven.  They  were  in  the
Catskills, spending the summer near New Paltz in upstate New York. He was asleep in his
ground-floor bedroom.  Something  awakened  him.  Moonlight  was  streaming  in the  open
window. And a monstrous animal was leaning in, poking its  muzzle  toward  him,  the  face
clear in the moonlight.
He had screamed and the thing had disappeared in a flash. Nightmare, they said. And
here it was staring at him again, the face of the werewolf.
The librarian closed the book. “That will be enough,” she said. “I think you’re upset.”
“Those engravings—”
“They are horrible but I don’t think it quite calls for—hysterics.”
This  amazed  Ferguson.  How  dare  she  accuse  him  like  that.  “What  would  you  say,

madam, if those were engravings of real animals?”
“These are werewolves, Mr. Ferguson.”
“Doctor. And I assure you that those animals are very real. You can imagine my shock
when I  saw  them  engraved  in a  book  of  that  age,  when  the  discovery  was  supposed  to
have taken place only a few weeks ago.”
He  left  her  to  sort  that  one  out.  Too  bad,  too,  she  was  a  nice-looking  woman,  he
wouldn’t have minded getting to know her. But not now. He went down to the basement
cloakroom  and  picked  up  his  coat.  Outside  it  had  stopped  snowing  and  the  pedestrian
traffic had transformed the sidewalk into gray slush.  He  turned  the  collar  of  his  coat  up
against  the  surging  wind  and  walked  toward  Sixth  Avenue.  He  was  going  to  see  Tom
Rilker, to get his help in determining a logical forage in the city for these creatures. There
must be  some  area  where  lots  of  homeless  people  congregated.  Not  the  Bowery,  it  was
surrounded by heavily populated areas. Rilker would have some ideas.
Then  he  stopped.  “My  God,”  he  thought,  “those  two  cops  have  a  point,  what  if  the
damn things are hunting me too?” Had they seen him with the cops last night? No way to
tell.  But  if  they  had  made  the  connection  then  he  could  be  in mortal  danger  right  now,
even here in the middle of Forty-second Street.
He  jammed  his  hands  into  his  pockets  and  walked  more  quickly  on.  And  he
remembered the face of the nightmare in the moonlit window.
Dick Neff padded naked into the kitchen to fix himself another drink. He glanced at the
kitchen clock—nearly noon. A shaft of sunlight shone in the kitchen window, as sharp and
silver as a blade. First the snow had stopped and then  the  clouds  had  blown  away.  Now
the  wind  moaned  around  the  corner  of  the  building  and  a  bright  dust  of  snow  glittered
through  the  sunlight.  The  glare  hurt  Dick’s  eyes,  and  he  fumbled  as  he  fixed  his  third
Bloody Mary.
His mind  was  working,  turning  in a  haze  of  anguish  that  would  not  go  away.  Becky,
shooflies, burns, sorrow. He took a long pull on the  drink  and  went  into  the  living  room.
Goddamn, he couldn’t believe what had almost happened to him, how close he had come
to death. Burned and didn’t even know it. He had  been  moving  with  Andy  Jakes  for  six
months, really working in with him. Hell, the guy was the biggest dealer in the Northeast.
The  Goddamn  biggest  fuckin’  dealer.  And  Andy  Jakes  had  been  playing  with  Mr.
Narcotics Cop. Jesus Christ! If he had collared Andy Jakes  the  shooflies  would  have  laid
off out of respect. Let it ride. But now he was just another victim of that brilliant crook’s
mind.
He had been about to enter Jakes’s apartment, just heading toward the elevator when
his teammates  had  gotten  to  him.  Hold  it,  Dick,  we  got  trouble.  Bobby  says  the  bug’s
pickin’ up a lot of movement in there. Jakes’s supposed to be alone?
—Yeah, he’s alone. He’s got the stuff in there. Ten kilos, let me go.
—Not  alone.  Don’t  go  in.  There’s  people  in  there,  lots  of  people  movin’  around,  not
talkin’.
—Not talkin’? Shit, that must mean—
—They suspect a bug. And they suspect you. They’re waiting for you, Dick.
—Oh, shit shit shit.
And he had stopped. He had not gone in. Follow your instincts, boy. Don’t go in there.
Another man might have shrugged it off and gone in. But not Dick.
And then they were off trying to get a warrant to bust the place when another call had

come from the wire man. They were leaving. Christ! They had left. Surveillance followed
them to Teterboro Airport, to a flight plan filed for Guadeloupe, Honduras, Brazil. Shit.
And  they  got  the  warrant  and  entered  the  apartment.  So  it’s  empty,  of  course,
completely empty except for the Goddamn note. A note on nice engraved stationery, just
as  nice  as  you  please.  “Sorry,  Richard,”  says  the  note.  “I  know  how  much  of  an
embarrassment this will be to you. You be careful now. Cordially, Andy.”
The guys got a whoop out of  that  note.  “Hey  Richard, Andy’s  some  cool  sonofabitch!
Hey, beautiful, what a shit-heel.”
The other guys were almost happy that Dick hadn’t made his collar. Robin Hood. Sam
Bass. The beautiful crook. Although there  was  also  the  other  thing.  Every  gold  shield  in
the division lusted after Andy Jakes and now it was open season on him again. Now other
guys could take a crack, now Neff had blown it.
“Dick, you know what was waiting for  you  in there,”  Captain  Fogarty  had  said.  Good
old Fogarty,  always  looking  on the  bright  side.  “A  Goddamn  arsenal.  Wires  says  six  or
seven people were in there creepin’ around as silent as cats. Waiting for you, Dick. Blown
you away. I doubt if we’d ever laid eyes on you again, old buddy.”
Maybe that would  have  been  better.  Because  another  captain,  Captain  Lesser  of  the
Internal  Affairs  Division,  was  closing  in  on  Dick  Neff.  Another  job  blown.  Somehow  or
other  IAD  had  gotten  wind  of  Dick’s  little  deal  with  Mort  Harper.  What  the  hell  was  it
anyway, a nice clean gambling establishment. The best clientele, even the fuckin’ DA was
there once. The fuckin’ DA playing blackjack and lovin’ it. Mort was protected! But he had
put the finger on Neff, had  built  up  his  City  Hall connections  to  the  point  that  he  didn’t
need Neff’s silence anymore. “Hey, Mr. DA, y’know I got this monkey on my back, a little
shit shakin’ me down—”
“What the hell, this is a  decent  place.”  Movie  stars.  Politicians.  Stockbrokers.  Marble
bar. Crushed-velvet carpets. Honest tables.
“Takin’ out a grand a month, Mr. DA.”
“Oh stop singin’, Morty, I’ll take care of it.”
Oh,  Morty  was  beautiful  too.  Smarter  than  Dick  Neff.  Everybody  was  smarter  than
Dick Neff. Even the shoofly Captain with his funny questions. “How many bank accounts
you got? Your wife? Fine, could we see your income tax returns? Just routine. Somebody
turned up a little dirt, Dick. Nothing really. Just routine. I got to go through the motions is
all.”
Go  through  the  motions  like  hell!  Dick  Neff  was  due  for  a  Board.  Early
retirement—hell, he’d be lucky to stay out of Attica!  “You  have  a  right  to  remain  silent.
You have a right to an attorney.”
Silent, damn right. An attorney, damn right. He swallowed the last of the Bloody Mary
and went to the sliding doors, looked out on the bright snow that covered the balcony.
And what he saw there made him gape. Pawprints as nice and clear as you please. He
stared at them confused and  disbelieving.  Pawprints?  And  on the  glass  door  a  smear  of
another print. He squatted down and examined it. It could just be… a smeared pawprint…
where  something  had  tried  the  door.  These  prints  must  have  been  laid  in  the  early
morning after the snow had stopped. Shit, Becky wasn’t imagining things after all. These
damn prints were real. No way to deny it, and they didn’t belong here.
He felt suddenly exposed in his nakedness and returned to the bedroom  to  dress.  He
shook  his  head,  physically  trying  to  shake  out  the  welter  of  thoughts  that  clamored  for
attention.  Dressing  automatically,  he  fought  for  clarity.  Those  two  crazies  were  right

then? That scabrous old shitkicker Wilson wasn’t senile after all. It seemed impossible, a
trivial detail suddenly expanded to fill his whole consciousness with its importance. If she
was in danger! If she was in danger and he didn’t help her he would kill himself. That was
the size of it, he would take out his Goddamn .38 and put the barrel in his mouth and pull
the Goddamn trigger. Let the department face that one.
He put  on a  conservative  suit  and  brushed  down  his  hair  until  he  looked  reasonably
presentable. He had to get that Starlight camera  out  of  Yablonski  in the  Photo  Unit.  He
had  to  look  the  part.  Would  the  good  news  about  Dick  Neff  have  traveled  as  far  as
Yablonski? Probably not. Just routine, gimme the camera. Orders? Shit, c’mon man, I got
to use this thing tonight. Easy. Peaches.
He left the apartment, then returned. As soon as he had gotten into the hall he had felt
the absence of his pistol. Like he wasn’t wearing  underpants  or  something.  The  gun.  He
dropped off his overcoat and his jacket and pulled the holster containing the .32 out of his
bureau  drawer.  The  larger  .38  he  left  behind.  This  pistol  fitted  neatly  into  a  holster
nestled in the small of his back, easy to get to, hard to spot. You weren’t too comfortable
when  you  sat  down  in  a  hard  chair  but  other  than  that  the  small  of  the  back  was  a
beautiful hiding place for a weapon.
Now  he  glanced  at  the  pawprints  again.  They  were  ugly,  frightening.  He  tested  the
door and then pulled the curtains closed. This time he left and did not return. Outside the
wind hit him with the force of a powerful shove. It bit right through his coat and made his
muscles grow taut with cold. He wanted another drink, better make a pit stop on the way
down.  What  the  hell,  make  it  now.  Across  the  street  was  O’Faolian’s  where  he  usually
made a stop on his way to the apartment. He went there now.
“Hiya, Frenchie,” he said as he slipped up to the bar, “gimme a Bloody.” The bartender
made it and set it in front of him. Instead of going about his business, though, he hovered
there fooling with glasses.
“You want something?” Dick asked. Frenchie  was  not  a  friendly  guy,  not  the  type  to
make small talk.
“Nah. A guy’s been in is all. A guy wantin’ to know about you.”
“So?”
“So I don’t say nothin’.”
“Good. What else is new?”
“You  don’t  wanna  know  what  he’s  askin’  about?”  Frenchie  looked  surprised,  a  little
disappointed.
“I  can  pretty  well  guess,”  Dick  said  expansively.  “He  wanted  to  know  if  I  had  ever
been  seen  in  here  with  a  little  kike  five-two,  greasy  black  hair,  wire-rimmed  glasses,
name of Mort Harper. And you said no.”
“Hell I didn’t say nothin’. Not yes or  no.”  He  looked  pleadingly  at  Neff.  “The  guy,  he
flashed  on  me,  see.  What  could  I  do?  You  don’t  get  ’em  flashin’  unless  it’s  serious
business.”
Dick chuckled.  “Thanks,  Frenchie,”  he  said.  He  put  a  five  on the  bar  and  left.  Damn
decent of the little jerk to tell him that Captain Lesser  had  been  in here  confirming  that
this was where Dick met Mort Harper to take the pass.  How  long  had  it  been  going  on?
Dick couldn’t remember exactly. God, though, it must be years. All that money right up to
the Stranger Nursing Home. Right up there to keep the old man in cigars.
The old  man.  A  pang  of  sentiment  went  through  him,  thinking  of  the  old  senile  man
who had once been so  powerful,  so  determined.  Drove  a  bus  for  the  Red  and  Tan  Line.

Retirement  pay  plus  Social  Security:  $177.90  a  lousy  month.  Senile  decay,  Parkinson’s
disease,
 helplessness
 had
 turned
 to
 violence,
 periodic
 seizures,
 a
thousand-dollar-a-month problem. You don’t give your old man over  to  the  tender  care
of the State, not when you’ve seen the inside of those places firsthand. “Gonna make you
go naked for a  day,  you  old  fart,  you  don’t  stop  that  shakin’.  Stop  it,  you  gettin’  on my
nerves. OK, fuck you, gimme that gown!” That’s the kind of thing that went on. A bunch
of monsters making life hell for the old and helpless. “Come on, guinea, light my cigarette!
Fuckin’ old shit.” Dick had seen what it was like in those State hospitals, a playground for
sadistic perverts masquerading as attendants. No place for his old man.
All of  a  sudden  he  was  shaking  uncontrollably,  standing  there  in the  doorway  of  the
bar. He grabbed at the door handle to steady himself, then  reeled  back  into  the  bar.  He
dropped to a table. “Shit, Frenchie,” he said, “get some food in me. I feel like shit.”
Frenchie produced a hamburger and some stale fries and as soon as he bit into the food
Dick found that he was ravenously hungry. He wolfed down the burger, ordered another.
Now he leaned back, relaxed into the mild fog that the drinks had produced, that and the
ease of the food.
What the fuck had he been doing? Oh yeah, going to get that damn camera for Becky,
his kid bride. Kid, hell, she was only a year younger than him and he was no kid. She was
still a damn good lay, though, especially the way she came. Like a Goddamn female freight
train. She made you feel like you were worth  something.  None  of  the  others  ever  really
did that. They were all pretending, wanting to fuck a cop for reasons that had nothing to
do with love. Pros that needed a friend, most of them. What the hell, they threw it at you.
Becky didn’t know and never would if Dick had anything to say about  it.  What  they  had
together was something special, something no pro was going to take away from them.
Well, what the hell, what she didn’t know wasn’t going to hurt her.
“Frenchie! Bring me another Bloody.”
Frenchie came over. “Nosir,” he said, “can’t do that.”
“Why the fuck not! What is this, a Salvation Army Shelter?”
“You’re on duty. I’m not gettin’ you drunk in here. Shit, you came in here half looped.
Now you go on about your business. I don’t want no cops gettin’ drunk in here. It’s a bad
rap with the department and you know it. Go somewhere else.”
“I’m not on duty. I’m graveyard this week.”
“You’re carryin’ a piece, Lieutenant Neff. I can’t serve you any more booze.”
“Jesus Christ, Mr. Hot Shit—OK, I’ll take my  trade  elsewhere.  But  don’t  say  I  didn’t
warn you, Frenchie. You look out for your ass, hear. Just look out real careful, you never
know what’s gonna come up your back.”
Frenchie walked away shaking his head. Dick left, wanting at once to say something to
appease Frenchie, wishing he hadn’t been so nasty, yet still feeling in himself the urge to
be even nastier, to strike out at somebody. He hailed a cab to go to headquarters.
Yablonski’s  office  was  a  clutter  of  photographic  equipment,  report  forms,  pictures
tacked to walls, half-empty coffee cups. “Hey,  Dick,”  the  little  man  said  when  he  looked
up. “What brings you down here?”
“Your beautiful face. I need some night photography equipment.”
“Yeah? You got infrared uptown. If you need a photographer forget it until next week,
my guys are—”
“Hooked up. No, we don’t need a photographer.”

“You guys take up time. I can’t spare men to spend days and days sitting in cars doing
what any moron—”
“Like me can do.”
“Yeah.  So  why  don’t  you  just  use  your  own  infrared  equipment  and  let  me  the  fuck
alone.”
“Because I don’t need infrared. I need high power and long range. You know infrared’s
no good over fifty yards.”
“No, I didn’t know that. Hell, Dick, it’s my business, don’t take that tone with me.”
Neff closed his eyes. What made this little fart so  Goddamn  difficult  to  deal  with?  He
always talked in arguments. “I need the Starlight camera.”
“Like hell.”
“For one night.”
“I repeat: like hell. That camera doesn’t leave this Bureau without a trained operator,
meaning me. And I’m not takin’ it out without a signed letter from somebody I can’t turn
down.”
“Come on now, don’t get crazy. I only need it for one night. Think if you don’t give it to
me and I lose an important collar as a result. Think how that’ll look.”
“It won’t look like nothin’. Officially you don’t even know that camera exists.”
“Oh, cut the crap. We got an eyes only on it in 1975. That thing’s been goin’ in and out
of Narcotics ever since.”
“Well,  I  didn’t  know  that.”  Yablonski  glowered,  pugnacious,  aware  that  Dick  was
somehow edging him into a corner.
“How’s the wife?”
“What’s she got to do with it? She the suspect?”
“Just trying to be friendly. Look, I’ll level with you. I got a big collar coming up but we
need evidence. We got to have pictures.”
“Big deal. Use fast film. There’s plenty of light in the streets.”
Dick sighed,  pretended  to  give  up  on something.  “I  guess  I  gotta  tell  you  more  than
you need to know. We got a big pass comin’ up. We just can’t risk missin’ it. We gotta have
that camera.”
Yablonski glared at him. He did not like to let his precious Starlight camera out  of  his
personal control.  On  the  other  hand  he  had  no intention  of  spending  the  night  on some
dangerous narcotics stakeout. He  stood  up,  brought  out  his  keys  and  went  to  a  bank  of
lockers that covered one wall of the office.
“I’m gonna be a sucker,” he said, “let you take this thing out and get it smashed. You
know how much this thing cost the City of New York?”
“Nothin.”
“About a hundred grand. Hardly nothing.”
“It’s CIA surplus circa Vietnam. You know damn well we got it for nothing.”
“Well, I’m not sure we’d get another if we lost or busted this one.” He removed a metal
case from the locker and placed it gently on his desk. “You used this before?”
“You know I have.”

“Well  I’m  gonna  go  through  the  drill  anyway!”  He  opened  the  case  and  pulled  out  a
boxy  object  made  of  gray,  burnished  metal.  It  was  about  the  size  and  shape  of  a
two-pound can of coffee with binocular eyepieces on one end and a large, gleaming fisheye
of a lens on the other. The body of the thing was entirely featureless, except for a barely
visible indentation obviously intended for a thumb.
“You open the control panel  like  this,”  Yablonski  said,  pressing  on the  indentation.  A
three-inch square of surface metal slid back to reveal a panel containing two black knobs
and  a  small  slit.  “You  slide  in  the  film.”  He  pushed  a  small  black  rectangle  into  the
opening. “That gives  you  two  hundred  shots.  That’s  the  bottom  number  in the  readout
you’ll  see  in the  lower  right  quadrant  of  the  frame  when  you  look  through  the  camera.
Above that’s the  ambient  light  reading.  You  set  the  top  knob  so  that  it  reads  the  same
value. Here—” He held the camera out. Dick took it, put it up to his eyes. The image was
blurred but the three numbers were clear. “Read off from the bottom up.”
“The  bottom  number  says  two  hundred.  The  middle  one  sixty-six,  the  top
point-oh-six.”
“Meaning  you’ve  got  two  hundred  shots  left,  the  ambient  light  level  is  sixty-six  and
you are pointing the camera at an object point-oh-six meters away. Now gimme.” He took
it back. “You set the top knob at sixty-six and the bottom one at point-oh-six. Now look.”
“What the hell is it?”
“The  top  corner  of  the  locker,  dummy.  It’s  magnified  so  much  you  can’t  tell  what
you’re  seeing  that  close.  Point  the  camera  out  the  window.”  Dick  swung  the  camera
around. The top two readings flickered and changed as he  moved  it,  then  the  limbs  of  a
tree down near street level leaped into view. He could see where ice adhered to the twigs
and  where  the  sun  had  made  it  drop  away.  Yablonski  guided  his  hand  to  the  thumb
indentation. “Pull back on it.” There was a click. The little door had closed on the  side  of
the camera and a red light had  gone  on above  the  three  green  numbers  of  the  readout.
“You get a light?”
“Right.”
“Ready to shoot. Push forward.” The camera made five shots in quick succession. The
film indicator now read 195.
“It  always  shoots  in increments  of  five.  Now  press  inward  on  the  indentation.”  The
scene  pulled  back  and  revealed  the  sidewalk  below.  “You  go  down  to  fifty  millimeters.
Fifty to five hundred, that’s the lens. If you push forward and down at the same time the
camera will take a series of shots while the lens is moving. No problem. Just remember to
always close the control housing before you try to shoot.” Dick took the camera from  his
eyes. Yablonski  was  pointing  at  the  control  housing.  “That  activates  the  camera.  And  if
you  change  position  always  check  focus.  In  operation  it  doesn’t  matter  too  much,  but
remember  that  the  camera  is  at  its  sharpest  focus  when  the  object  you  are  shooting  is
exactly as far away as that little indicator in there says. You want it to change, you’ve got
to adjust it with the knob.”
“That’s all? I remembered everything.”
“Well, aren’t we wonderful. Just don’t bring it back to me in a shoebox, for Chrissake.
And get the fucker back here before noon tomorrow or I’ll be on your ass.”
“Oh, yes sir, Mr. Commissioner, just like you say.”
“Come on, Dick, take it easy. How much film you want?”
“Another couple of boxes. That stuffs really compact. You sure there are two hundred
shots?”

“Of course. You think the camera would lie?”
Dick put the machine back in its case and hefted it. He left Yablonski staring after him.
As soon as he was gone, Yablonski was on the phone. “Captain Lesser,” he said crisply,
“you told me you wanted a call if Dick Neff came around here for anything. Well,  he  did.
He checked out the Starlight camera.”
Chapter 8
Chapter 8
Chapter 8
Chapter 8
« ^ »
The search teams kept coming back empty-handed. It looked as if the park wasn’t going
to  yield  any  worthwhile  clues.  A  bench  covered  with  a  slick  of  red  ice—  human  blood.
Some tattered remnants that might have been the victim’s clothes. That was all. No body,
no ID, no witnesses. And so far, no report of a missing person. The cops were waiting for
orders to move them out. The precinct wasn’t going to spend much more time on this, it
was just another one of those mysteries that the city tossed up. Obviously somebody had
died here, but in the absence of anything  except  blood  there  wasn’t  much  that  could  be
done to find the killer.
“Maybe it’ll tell us something,” the Medical Examiner said as a patrolman handed him
a clear plastic bag full of tattered cloth.
Becky  Neff  said  nothing.  More  vague  evidence.  Even  Wilson’s  experience  last  night
was  nothing  but  hearsay.  Hell,  maybe  he  got  panicked  by  some  dogs.  The  trouble  was,
you  weren’t  going  to  get  headquarters  to  take  a  chance  on  the  theory.  The  man  who
sanctioned an investigation of werewolves in this city was headed for  early  retirement  if
that investigation didn’t prove itself.
“Do you believe me?” Wilson said into the silence in the car.
“Yeah,” Becky replied, surprised at the question.
“Not you, dummy. The genius. I want to know if he believes me.”
“If it wasn’t delirium tremens, I’d say you saw what you saw.”
“Thanks.” Since relating his story Wilson had  fallen  into  a  silence.  Becky  didn’t  know
whether he was thinking something out or simply sinking  into  depression.  If  possible  he
seemed to be getting more morose.
When Wilson turned to stare again out of the car window, Evans raised his eyebrows.
“Listen,” he said to Wilson’s back, “if it makes any difference I really do believe you. I just
wish to God I could do more for you than that.”
“Every little bit helps,” Becky said acidly.
“I’m sure. It must be hell.”
“Yeah,” Wilson said, “it’s that.”
Suddenly there was a flurry of activity. A couple of park cops jumped on scooters; guys
from  the  20th  Precinct  piled  into  squad  cars.  Becky  flipped  on  the  radio  to  catch  the
activity. “—thirteen, repeat, thirteen to Bethesda Fountain.”
“Jesus—” Becky started the car and followed the others into the park. They slurried in

the  new  snow,  heading  for  the  emergency.  A  signal-13  was  the  most  serious  call  a
policeman  could  put  out:  it  meant  that  an  officer  was  in  distress.  It  would  cause
immediate response from all nearby units—and often some from farther away. It was the
call that cops hated most to hear and wanted most to answer.
The  area  around  Bethesda  Fountain  was  once  elegant.  Once,  during  summer,  there
was an open-air restaurant where you could drink wine and watch the fountain. Then the
sixties had come, and drugs, and Bethesda Fountain had become an open-air drug bazaar.
The  restaurant  had  closed.  The  fountain  had  become  choked  with  filth.  Graffiti  had
appeared. Murders had taken place. Now the once-bustling spot was the same in summer
as in winter: empty, abandoned, destroyed. And crumpled on the  esplanade  overlooking
the fountain was a blue uniform, its occupant bent over almost with his forehead touching
the snow. The scooter cops were the first to get to him. “Shot,” one of them shouted. An
ambulance could already be heard screaming over from Roosevelt Hospital.
Becky  pulled  the  Pontiac  up  behind  the  scooters  and  the  three  of  them  jumped  out.
“I’m a doctor,” Evans shouted pointlessly. There wasn’t a person in the NYPD who didn’t
know that the Medical Examiner was a doctor. Evans reached the wounded man, followed
closely by Becky. He was a middle-aged  cop,  one  of  the  guys  who  had  been  out  beating
the  bushes  for  evidence,  one  of  the  searchers.  “Fuckin’  dog,”  he  said  almost  laughing,
“fuckin’ dog bit a hole in my side.” The voice was anguished and confused. “Fuckin’ dog!”
“Holy shit,” Evans said.
“Is it bad, Doc?” the man said through gathering tears.
Evans looked away. “I’m not movin’ you till the stretcher gets here, buddy. You aren’t
losing any blood out of it, however bad it is.”
“Oh,  fuck,  it  hurts!”  he  shouted.  Then  his  eyes  rolled  and  his  head  slumped  to  his
chest.
“Get  some  pressure  on  it,  he’s  passed  out,”  Evans  said.  Two  of  the  man’s  friends
applied  a  pressure  bandage  to  the  gash  in  his  overcoat.  “Where’s  that  friggin’
meatwagon!” Evans rasped. “This man’s not gonna make it if they don’t hurry.”
Just then it pulled up and the medics piled out with their equipment. They cut the coat
away and for the first time the wound was visible.
It was devastating. You could see the blue-black bulge of the man’s intestine pulsing in
the blood. Becky started to sob, stifling it as it came. They had  done  this!  Just  now,  just
minutes  ago.  They  were  right  around  here!  She  put  a  trembling  hand  on  the  M.  E.’s
shoulder.
“Leave me alone.” He was examining the wound. “Move him out,” he murmured to the
orderlies. He looked up at Becky. “He ain’t gonna live,” he said simply.
They  got  the  man  on the  stretcher  and  took  him  to  the  ambulance,  heading  for  the
emergency  room  as  fast  as  they  could  go.  There  was  an  M.D.  on  the  wagon  so  Evans
returned to Becky’s car.
The  other  cops  were  still  standing  in  a  little  clump,  staring  at  the  blood-smeared
thrash marks in the snow. For a moment nobody spoke. What could you say? A man had
just had his intestines laid open— and he claimed it had been done by a dog. The Precinct
Captain came up puffing hard. For some reason he hadn’t  made  it  into  a  car.  “What  the
fuck— what the fuck happened?”
“Baker got hit.”
“What by? Hit and run?”

“Something took about nine inches of hide off his gut. Laid him open.”
“What the fuck—”
“You said that, sir. He says it was a dog.” Becky felt Wilson’s hand grasp her shoulder.
A sharp pang of fear ran through her. “Listen, kid,” he said in an  unnaturally  calm  tone,
“stroll real easy-like over  to  those  two  scooters.”  He  breathed  it  into  her  ear.  “You  can
ride a scooter?”
“I suppose.”
“Good, because you gotta. Just go real easy.”
“What about our car?”
“Stay the hell away from our car! And when you get on that scooter, move.”
She didn’t ask questions even though she didn’t quite understand why he wanted to do
this. You get to trust a good partner, and Becky trusted Wilson more than enough to just
do what he said without asking why. He’d do the same for her. Hell, he had often enough.
As she walked she noticed that he was meandering in the same direction, getting closer
and closer to the scooters without making it particularly obvious. “Now, Becky!”
They  leaped,  the  scooters  coughed  to  life,  they  skidded  onto  the  snowy  pavement,
Becky  swayed,  righted  herself  and  headed  straight  down  the  Mall,  which  stretched  to
Park East Drive and the safety of the streets.  She  heard  a  shout  behind,  an  incredulous
shout  from  one  of  the  scooter  cops  who  saw  the  two  detectives  suddenly  hijack  his
transportation.  Then  something  else  was  there,  a  gray  shape  moving  like  the  wind,  a
furious pulsing mass of hair and muscle. And she knew what had happened. “Oh God God
God,” she said softly as she rode. She turned the gas all the way up and the scooter darted
through the snow, bouncing and shaking, threatening from instant to instant to go  into  a
skid. Thirty. Forty. Fifty. Was the thing dropping back? She risked a glance. God,  it  was
right there. Its teeth were bared, and its face, something unbelievable, twisted with hate
and fury and effort—animal, man, something. She choked out a sob and just held on. The
thing’s breathing was clearly audible for a moment, then it fell back, fell back making little
sharp noises, sounds of  pure  anger!  It  was  gone  and  the  scooters  bounded  off  the  Mall,
crashed through ripping naked shrubs, shot into the roadway and tore  down  toward  the
park entrance at Fifth Avenue. Ahead the Plaza Hotel  and  the  General  Motors  Building.
General Sherman with his permanent toupee of pigeon droppings. Horse-drawn carriages
waiting in rows, the breath of the horses steaming. Then  stopping,  bringing  the  scooters
to a halt at the bustling entrance to the hotel. “We’re at the Plaza,”  Wilson  was  growling
into the scooter’s radio, “come get us.”
A squad  car  appeared.  “What’s  the  problem,  Lieutenant?”  the  driver  said.  “You  just
got reported for stealing two scooters.”
“Fuck that. We were under orders. We thought we saw a suspect.”
“Yeah. So get in. We’ll drive you up to the Twentieth.”
They  left  the  scooters  for  the  men  from  the  park  precinct  who  were  approaching  in
another car. Wilson and Neff were silent as they rode toward the precinct, Wilson because
he had nothing to say, Becky because she couldn’t have talked if she had wanted to. It felt
funny to her to be alive right now, like she had just broken through a wall into a time she
was never intended to see. “I was supposed to die back there,” she thought. She looked at
her partner. He had figured it out just in time—a trap. God, what a clever trap! And they
had slipped out just as it had been sprung.
“You know what happened,” Wilson asked.

“Yeah.”
He nodded,  silent  for  a  few  minutes.  The  squad  car  wheeled  up  Central  Park  West.
Wilson touched the door lock; the windows were closed. “They’re very smart,” he said.
“We knew that”
“But that was a very neat trap. Wounding that guy… knowing that we would respond…
setting an ambush. All very smart.”
“How did you figure it out? I’ve gotta confess I was completely taken in.”
“You oughta start thinking defensively. They wounded that guy, didn’t kill him. That’s
what tipped me off. Why wound,  when  killing  is  easier?  It  had  to  be  the  same  reason  a
hunter  wounds.  To  lure.  When  I  figured  that  out,  I  decided  we  ought  to  go  for  the
scooters. Frankly I’m surprised we made it.”
The squad car pulled up to the precinct house. After a long look up and down the street
the  two  detectives  got  out  and  hurried  up  the  steps.  The  desk  sergeant  looked  up.
“Captain’s waiting for you,” he said.
“Must be antsy as hell,” Wilson muttered as they walked into the Captain’s office.
He was a trim, neatly turned out man with steel-gray hair and a deeply wrinkled face.
But  his  movements,  his  posture,  belonged  to  a  younger  man.  He  had  just  taken  off  his
overcoat and sat down at his desk. Now he looked up, raising his eyebrows. “I’m Captain
Walker,” he said. “What the hell’s going on?”
“We saw a suspect—”
“Can that bullshit. Everybody saw those dogs come out from under your car and chase
you halfway to Grand Army Plaza. What the hell was that all about?”
“Dogs?” Wilson was no actor. The fact that he was hiding something was perfectly clear
to Becky. But maybe she underestimated him.
“Yes, dogs. I saw them. We all did. And Baker said it was dogs that laid him open.”
Wilson shook his head. “Beats the hell out of me.”
“Look,  I  don’t  know  quite  what’s  going  on here—  I  mean  you  two  are  some  kind  of
special team, that’s OK by me—but I got a guy hurt bad down at Roosevelt and he says a
dog did it. I saw you two light out like you were runnin’ from death itself. And you  were
chased by two dogs. Now I’d like to know what the fuck’s goin’ on.” His phone rang. A few
muttered words, a curse, then he hung up. “And so would the New York Post. They got a
photographer and a reporter waiting out front to see me right now. What do I tell them?”
Becky stepped in. Wilson had tucked his chin into his neck, squared his shoulders, and
was  about  to  blow  it.  “Tell  them  what’s  probably  true.  Your  man  was  wounded  in  an
unknown manner. I mean if somebody’s colon  is  lying  on the  sidewalk  they  might  get  a
little delirious. He passed out right after his statement, didn’t he? And as for dogs chasing
us, it might have happened, but it was a complete coincidence.”
The  man  stared  at  them.  “You’re  bullshitting.  I  don’t  know  why  but  I’m  not  gonna
push it. Just get one thing straight: I don’t owe you two a Goddamn thing. Now take off.
Go wherever you go.”
“What about the reporter?” Becky asked. That was important.  You  couldn’t  leak  this
to the press, not unless the problem could be solved.
“So I’ll tell the reporters what Baker said. And  I’ll  tell  them  that  he  was  delirious.  Is
that sufficient?”
“What do you mean, sufficient? How should we know?”

“You’re the people keeping this thing under wraps, aren’t you? You’re the ones who go
around and make sure no shaggy dog stories get into the paper, aren’t you?”
Wilson closed  his  eyes  and  shook  his  head.  “Let’s  get  out  of  here,”  he  said.  “We  got
better things to do.”
They  left  the  precinct  and  hailed  a  cab.  Obviously  there  was  no  point  in  asking  the
precinct  for  transportation  back  to  Bethesda  Fountain  where  their  car  was  waiting.  As
they  approached  the  car  Wilson  craned  his  neck  out  of  the  cab  window  to  make  sure
nothing was under it. But he needn’t have bothered. The car wasn’t going anywhere.
The doors were open. The interior of the car was ripped  to  shreds.  And  it  was  full  of
bloody pulp. “Jesus,” the cabdriver blurted, “this your car?”
“Yeah. It was.”
“We gotta get a cop.” He gunned the motor. “Who’s in there? What a fuckin’ mess!”
“We are the police.” Becky held her shield against the bulletproof glass separating the
passenger  seat  from  the  driver’s  compartment.  The  driver  nodded  and  headed  for  the
Central Park precinct house on Seventy-ninth Street. A few moments later they pulled to
a stop  in front.  Neff,  Wilson  and  the  driver  got  out  and  approached  the  desk  sergeant
through  the  worn  double-doors  of  the  building.  “Yeah,”  he  said  looking  up.  “You  two.  I
hear you’re a couple of mean motherfuckers on a scooter.”
“Get  your  guys  back  over  to  the  Fountain,”  Wilson  rasped.  “The  Chief  Medical
Examiner just got himself killed.”
Becky felt the blood drain out of her face. Of course, that must be who was in the car.
It had to be. Poor Evans, he was a hell of a good man! “Goddamn it,” Becky said.
“We  were  stupid,”  Wilson  said  softly.  “We  should  have  warned  him  in  advance.”  He
laughed, a bitter little noise. “They missed  out  on the  main  event.  So  they  went  for  the
consolation prize. Let’s get Underwood on the phone.”
Wilson took on Underwood. Becky watched him, annoyed that her usual role was being
usurped. “Look,” Wilson said into the phone, “you got problems. You got a cop on critical
at Roosevelt with his guts laid open. Says dogs did it. You got that? Dogs. Plus you  got  a
reporter  from  the  Post  on it,  and  more  to  follow.  So  listen,  dummy.  You  got  one  Chief
Medical Examiner just murdered out by Bethesda Fountain. And you’re gonna find it was
done by claws and teeth. And if you want this one wrapped up real good—”
“Oh my God, what about Ferguson!”
“—just  sit  on your  can  and  wait  for  it.”  He  slammed  down  the  phone.  “You’re  right!
Let’s go!” They headed for the motor pool.
“Get a car,” Becky snapped at the dispatcher.
“Well, you gotta—”
“Matter of life and death, Sergeant. What number?”
“Let’s see—two-two-nine. Green Chevy, you’ll see it against the wall out near the gas
pumps.”
They  headed  for  the  car.  To  the  south  the  sorrowful  moan  of  sirens  sounded  their
dirge for Evans. “Lot of fucking good they’ll do,” Wilson said  quietly.  “That  guy  was  just
goo.”
“You’re sure?”
“What?”

“It was him.”
“Just drive the car, Becky.”
God, he was a condescending bastard. Even if it was self-evident to  Wilson,  she  could
still  hope.  Evans  was  a  great  man,  a  civic  institution  in New  York  City  for  forty  years.
Probably  the  best  practitioner  of  forensic  medicine  in  the  world.  Plus  he  was  a  good
friend. His loss left a damn big hole. And  the  manner  of  his  death  was  going  to  stop  the
presses even over at the Times.
“This story’s gonna get out.”
“You don’t say. By the way, Ferguson’ll be at the museum.”
“Look, I don’t give a damn how bad things are, it’s no excuse to pretend I’m some kind
of a dummy. I know where the hell he is.”
“Yeah, well—”
“Well nothing, just keep your jerkoff opinions about lady cops to yourself and do your
Goddamn job.”
“Oh, come on, Becky, I didn’t mean that.”
“You did, but I don’t mind. I guess I’m just nervous.”
“That’s funny. Can’t imagine why.” They got to the museum, stopped the car right  in
front  of  the  main  entrance  and  ran  in  as  quickly  as  possible.  It  was  necessary  to  go
through the drill of getting downstairs to see Ferguson. When they were finally on it  the
elevator seemed to take hours to reach the sub-basement.
The room was full of people working on the birds. There was a smell of glue and paint,
and an air of quiet intensity. Ferguson’s office door was closed. Becky opened it and stuck
her head in.
“You! I’ve been trying to call you all over town!” They went in, closing the door behind
them. Wilson leaned against it. “I wish this cubicle had a ceiling,” Becky said, “it’d be more
secure.”
“Secure?”
“We’d better fill you in. I’m afraid you’re in great danger, Doctor. Evans—the Medical
Examiner—he’s just been mauled to death.”
Ferguson reacted as if he had been hit. His hands moved trembling to his face. Then he
slowly lowered them, staring into them. “I’ve found  out  a  lot  about  the  werewolves  this
morning,” he said almost inaudibly. “I’ve been down to the public library.” He looked up,
his face impassively concealing the determination  he  had  formed  to  try  to  communicate
with the creatures. “It’s all there, just like I thought it  would  be.  The  evidence  that  this
species  is  intelligent  is  pretty  strong.  Canis  Lupus  Sapiens.  The  Wolfen.  That’s  what  I
want to call them.”
Wilson didn’t say anything;  Becky  didn’t  want  to.  She  stared  at  the  scientist.  Wolfen
indeed. They were killers. Ferguson’s expression betrayed his innocent excitement at his
discovery. It was obvious that he still didn’t understand the extremity of his danger. She
felt sorry for him—sorry in a detached, professional way like she felt sorry for the people
left behind after murders. Residue, Wilson called them, the red-eyed wives and  numbed
husbands who were usually found slobbering over their victim’s body. Most  murder  is  a
family affair. But far worse were  the  cases  where  you  had  to  call  some  frantic  soul  who
had been waiting hours for a loved one to come home—somebody who wasn’t on the way
anymore. “Hello, Mr. X, we’re detectives. May we come in? Very sorry to tell you, Mrs. X
was  found  murdered  at  blah  blah,”  the  rest  of  it  said  into  a  fog  of  grief  beyond

communication.
“Join the hunted,” Wilson said, “and welcome. Maybe we’ll form a co-op.”
The humor was strained but it seemed to get a positive reaction from Ferguson. “You
know,” he said, “the damn thing of it  is,  these  creatures  are  so  murderous. That’s  what
makes them unusual. Canines are a notably  friendly  race.  Take  the  timber  wolf—all  the
legends, the Jack London stories, that’s mostly crap. I mean, you threaten a wolf and you
know  what'll  happen?  That  wolf  will  turn  over  on  its  back  like  a  dog.  They  aren’t
dangerous.“  He  laughed.  ”It’s  ironic.  Science  just  figured  that  out  about  the  wolf  in  the
past  few  years.  Here  we  were  so  sure  that  the  great  canine  predator  was  just  a
myth—and now this. But I think we have an  extraordinary  chance  here—there  must  be
some point of communication between us and them.“
“To a deer, Doctor Ferguson, the wolf is incredibly dangerous. No wolf is going to turn
turtle  if  it’s  threatened  by  a  deer.  The  wolf  isn’t  dangerous  to  man  because  he  doesn’t
count us among his prey. But look at the deer—to them the wolf is a scourge from hell.”
Ferguson nodded slowly. “So  these…  things  are  to  us  as  wolves  are  to  deer.  I  agree.
They are also an intelligent species and as such represent an extraordinary opportunity.”
Wilson laughed  out  loud.  The  sound  sent  a  chill  down  Becky’s  spine.  It  was  not  the
laugh  of  a  normal  human  being  but  that  of  somebody  deeply  frightened,  bordering  on
hysteria. She wondered how much longer she would have his help. And his mind! He had
saved them in the park by bare seconds. How many more times would he do it? Or could
he? Would the traps just keep getting more and more subtle until finally the hunted were
down?  As  far  as  Ferguson  and  his  ideas  about  communication,  she  dismissed  them.  He
hadn’t seen what these creatures did to people.
“Let’s plan out our next moves,” she said. “We’ve got to be very  damn careful if what
just  happened  is  any  example  of  what’s  on the  way.”  Ferguson  asked  for  the  details  of
Evans’ death. Wilson related  the  story,  very  factually,  very  coldly,  how  the  werewolves
had  wounded  a  patrolman  out  searching  for  evidence,  how  this  had  lured  them  into  an
ambush, the escape on scooters just at the moment Wilson pieced the thing together, the
subsequent discovery of the M.  E.’s body in the car.
“So  they  missed  you  and  took  him  instead.”  Wilson  was  silent  for  a  long  moment.
“Yeah,” he said at last, “I wish to hell I had realized—but I didn’t I just never thought of
him being in danger.”
“Why not?”
“In  retrospect  I  suppose  it’s  obvious.  But  I  didn’t  think  of  it  then.  That’s  the  damn
truth.” He breathed a ragged sigh. “The old s.o.b. was a good man. He was a hell of a pro.”
Coming from Wilson that was a soaring epitaph indeed. “Let’s plan our moves,” Becky
said again. “Plan what! We haven’t got anything to plan!”
“Oh come on, Wilson, take it easy. We might as well try. I thought we were going to try
to take pictures tonight. Let’s plan that.”
“How about planning how to survive until tonight? Wouldn’t that be a  better  thing  to
plan, since it looks kind of hard to do?”
She shook her head and said nothing. He was  a  petulant  bastard.  Up  to  now  she  had
relied on him,  had  always  assumed  that  he  would  pull  them  through.  And  be  had.  This
morning was an example. But he was cracking now, getting closer and closer to the edge.
Wilson had always been afraid of life, now he was afraid of death when it came close. And
how did Becky herself feel? As if she didn’t intend to die. She was afraid and not sure that
any of them would  survive—least  of  all  herself—but  she  wasn’t  about  to  give  in.  Wilson

had  taken  charge  of  this  case  so  far  and  he  had  done  fine.  But  he  was  getting  tired.  It
looked like her turn now.
“Wilson,  I  said  we  were  going  to  plan  our  moves.  Now  listen.  First,  we’ve  got  to  let
Underwood  know  the  score.  We’ve  got  evidence  that’s  going  to  be  Goddamn  hard  to
ignore.  I  mean,  Evans  getting  murdered  is  international  news.  They’ve  got  to  say
something about it. And you can be damn sure the TV stations and the papers are on the
scene.  How  are  they  going  to  take  it?  Medical  Examiner  mutilated  beyond  recognition.
It’s going to require a damn good explanation.”
“Don’t breathe a word of this  to  the  papers,”  Ferguson  said,  suddenly  understanding
the significance of Becky’s statements. “You’ll cause all  kinds  of  trouble—panic,  fear,  it’ll
be  hell.  And  the  Wolfen  will  be  threatened  in just  the  way  we  don’t  want—  grossly,  by
idiots with shotguns. Some might get hurt at first but they’ll adapt quickly, and when they
do they’ll be that much harder to find. Our chance will be lost—maybe for generations to
come.”
“How hard to find are they now?” Wilson asked bitterly.
“Well, obviously hard. I wasn’t saying that they were easy to deal with at all. But you
might  not  realize  it,  Detective  Wilson—if  these  creatures  get  it  into  their  heads  to
completely disappear, they can do it.”
“You mean become invisible?” Wilson’s voice was rising. He seemed about to lunge at
the scientist.
“For  all  practical  purposes.  Right  now  they’re  being  very  careless.  Witness  the  fact
that you’ve seen them. That’s a sign of carelessness on their part.  And  there’s  a  reason.
They  know  that  it’s  a  risk  to  allow  themselves  to  be  seen  by  you,  but  it’s  very  limited
because they also know that you will in all likelihood not live to describe them to others.”
“Maybe and maybe not.”
“They’re predators, Detective, and they have the arrogance of predators. Don’t expect
them to fear man. Do we fear hogs and sheep? Do we respect them?”
“We damn well aren’t sheep, Doctor! We’re people, we have brains and souls!”
“Sheep have brains. As for souls, I have no way of measuring that. But we know every
possible move a sheep might make. There is no way a sheep can fool a man. I suspect that
the analogy holds true here too.”
“Wonderful. Then what am  I  doing  alive?  Wouldn’t  they  have  killed  me  last  night  in
the alley of Becky’s building? Wouldn’t that  make  sense?  But  they  didn’t.  They  weren’t
fast enough. I got my gun out before they made their move.”
Becky broke in. “I hope they are arrogant, frankly. It’s our only chance.”
Ferguson  raised  his  eyebrows  and  smiled.  “Yes,”  he  said,  “unless  they’re  playing  a
little game with you.”
“A game,” Wilson said, “what do you mean a game?”
“Well,  they’re  intelligent,  they’re  hunters,  creatures  of  action.  Most  of  their  hunting
must be pretty damn  easy.  You’re  different,  though,  you’re  a  challenge.  They  might  be
spreading it out for fun.”
Wilson looked  as  if  he  would  like  to  throttle  the  scientist.  “Fine,”  he  said,  “if  they’re
playing  games  with  us  let   ’em  play.  Maybe  we’ll  get  the  fuck  out  of  the  trap  in  the
meantime.” He spat. “Who the hell knows?”
  

They ran, desperate for cover. Humanity was pouring into the park, policemen by the
hundreds  swarming  down  every  path,  passing  over  in helicopters,  roaring  along  in cars
and  on scooters.  The  sharp  scent  of  human  flesh  exposed  to  cold  air  mingled  with  the
suffocating sweetness of exhaust fumes. And they came from every direction. All around
the park the sirens shrieked, the tone causing sharp agony in the ears of the fleeing pack.
Voices called back and forth over radios; men shouted to one another. And then there was
a  new  smell,  thick  and  putrid—a  parody  of  their  own  scent.  It  was  dogs.  The  pack
stopped, cocked ears: three dogs by the sound of their claws clattering on ice; eager to be
unleashed by the exciting rasp of their breathing. Three dogs, heavy, strong, excited. And
they had the scent, the pack could practically feel them yearning on their tethers, choking
themselves with eagerness to give chase.
Very well, let them come and die. Dogs could no more hunt the pack than chimpanzees
could  hunt  men.  Defense  against  these  animals  was  based  on  established  procedures
because  the  pattern  of  the  animals’  attack  never  varied.  The  only  trouble  was  that  it
meant more time wasted in this accursed park— more time for the swarm of policemen to
get closer, more time for their luck to run out.
And  the  pack  was  divided  now:  on  one  side  were  the  two  old  ones  and  the
second-mated pair. On the other was the third-mated pair. This pair,  the  youngest,  had
run  after  the  two  humans  who  had  escaped  just  an  instant  too  soon,  and  given  up  the
chase a few moments early. Another breath, another footstep and the quarry would have
been down. The beautifully laid plan was  wasted—or  almost  wasted;  the  old  man  in the
car had been all they could kill. Very well. Certainly he had known of the pack. They had
heard  him  in the  car,  his  booming  old  voice  muttering  human  words  with  the  others…
words like wolf… wolf… wolf…
Human language, so complex and rapidly spoken, was hard to follow, but they all knew
certain words that  had  been  handed  down  from  generation  to  generation.  Among  these
was “wolf.” Traveling between cities the pack sometimes encountered these gentle things
of the forest. They had soft, beautiful faces and sweet eyes, and the blank expressions of
animals. Yet one almost wanted to speak to them, to wave the tail or knock the paw, but
they had not the brains to  answer.  They  would  trot  along  behind  a  pack  for  days,  their
empty smiling heads wagging from side to side— and cower  away  when  the  pack  took  a
man for food. After that the wolves would slink out of sight, fascinated and terrified by the
ways of the pack. But wolves were wild and never accompanied the packs into the cities.
Among men only the packs were safe— and so safe! Such a  huge  quantity  of  food  in the
cities, all of it blankly oblivious, as easy to hunt as a tree would be.
The wolf looked not unlike the werewolf. And in the car they had been saying the word
over and over —wolf… wolf. So the little old man was contaminated by the other two, the
two who knew. He died instantly. They had crept up to the car the moment the other cars
had left in search of the two on the scooters. They had crept closer and closer, and one of
them had opened the door. The man’s hands fluttered up before his  face  and  his  bowels
let loose. That was all that happened. Then they were on him, pulling and tearing, ripping
full of  rage,  spitting  the  bloody  bits  out,  angry  that  the  two  important  ones  had  been
missed, angry that this one also dared to confront them with his evil knowledge. They had
cracked  open  the  head  and  plunged  their  claws  into  the  brains,  plunged  and  torn  to
utterly and completely destroy the filthy knowledge.
And in their anger they had also shredded the interior of the car, ripping at  the  seats
for sheer hate, feeling the red pulse of their frustration well up inside them as they tasted
the very salt of the two that were to be killed. They tore the interior of the car apart, and
would have  done  more  to  it  if  they  had  known  how.  Somehow  the  humans  made  these
things move, and they made other similar things fly in the air. Humans flew in these. And
then one of them caused this thing to make a noise. They abandoned it at once, afraid that

it would begin to move with the pack still inside. Man was of two faces: naked and weak,
clothed and powerful. The same man who had no defense on his own might be completely
invulnerable in a car with a gun.
The pack had  speed  and  hearing  and  eyesight  and  most  of  all  smell  to  protect  itself.
Man had metal and weapons. They envied man his big flat paddles that could do so much
more than their hands. The things looked clumsy but they were flexible. It  was  with  his
paddles or hands that man fashioned  these  mysterious  objects  that  rolled  and  flew,  and
the  guns  that  shot.  And  it  was  because  of  them  that  man  had  been  able  to  inhabit  the
cities. No pack knew how these  cities  came  about,  but  man  inhabited  them,  keeping  for
himself the warmth they produced in winter, and the dryness that was not affected even
by the most violent rain. While the sky poured water or snow man sat comfortably in the
cities. How these things grew and why man possessed them nobody could say.
Just as well—it kept the herds of men closely gathered so that hunting was easy.
But hunting could also be fun, if, for example, you left the city and went into the forest
during  the  season  of  dead  leaves.  Then  you  would  find  men  armed  with  guns,  men
stalking  deer  and  moose,  men  who  could  be  dangerous  if  you  let  them.  It  was  a  good
game—you  made  a  little  extra  noise  and  let  the  man  become  aware  of  you.  Then  you
hunted him, letting  him  see  just  enough  so  that  he  would  try  hard  to  escape.  And  they
tried  so  hard!  They  swam  into  rivers,  climbed  trees,  covered  themselves  with  leaves.
They  tried  all  manner  of  stratagem,  doubling  back,  leaping  ravines,  swinging  through
forests in the tree-tops. And all the time their scent followed them like a blaring noise. But
the pack made conditions for itself during these hunts. If the man got  to  a  certain  point,
he  couldn’t  be  chased  again  for  a  hundred  heartbeats.  If  he  got  to  another  point,  two
hundred. So the better he was, the harder they made it for themselves. Finally, with the
very  good ones there was a last desperate chase before he  reached  his  car,  a  chase  that
ended  with  him  rolling  up  useless  windows,  fumbling  with  keys,  and  dying  there,  being
eaten while the blood still pulsed through his exhausted heart.
But not many of them were fun to hunt. For the most part it was the same routine as it
would be with these eager, stupid dogs. Certainly the humans were closing in, but it  was
very hard to believe that a man not encased in metal was a threat. Killing the three dogs
would waste a little time, but in the end the pack would escape from these human beings.
Only if  the  whole  city  was  aware  would  humanity  become  dangerous.  Everybody  knew
that  this  was  possible,  that  the  two  enemies  could  contaminate  all  the  men  of  this  city
with the dirty knowledge. Then the pack would be endangered, then the pack would flee.
But it wasn’t necessary just yet.
The  dogs  were  released.  Their  voices  pealed,  communicating  the  crazed,  heedless
excitement that was characteristic of the creature. Their breath began to pulse, their feet
to pad faster and faster as they ran madly toward the pack.
They  had  chosen  their  stand  carefully.  A  tree  overhung  the  path,  which  was  itself
choked  by  heavy  underbrush.  The  only  way  to  the  pack  was  up  a  slope,  through  this
brush. The second female went down to the base of the low hill. She sat on her haunches,
waiting to trot into the trap as soon as the dogs saw her. They were stupid  animals,  and
you had to make it very clear what they were supposed to do if you expected them to do
it.
They swarmed up the path howling, saw the female, who growled and leaped to make
sure, then ran into the underbrush. The dogs were  hot  behind  her  when  the  rest  of  the
pack dropped out of the trees onto them. Their bodies writhed,  the  howls  of  excitement
changed to shrieks of agony, and then nothing. The carcasses  were  hurled  deep  into  the
brush and the pack moved quickly on.

They went in the  direction  where  the  smell  of  man  was  the  least,  coming  out  onto  a
snowy roadway and moving to the stone wall that surrounded the park. A short trot down
the wall was  where  they  had  made  their  kill  the  night  before.  Already  it  was  afternoon
and their  minds  were  turning  to  food.  But  they  would  not  kill  anywhere  near  their  last
hunt—that might awaken man’s understanding. Best to spread the kills far apart, as far as
possible.
As  one  the  pack  stopped.  They  raised  their  muzzles  and  inhaled  deeply.  Across  the
street was a large building with a statue in front of it. And in the air was the faintest whiff
of… the two.
Had they passed by  here  recently  or  were  they  just  possibly  inside  that  building?  It
was hard to tell by the  quality  of  the  odor,  it  was  too  faint.  Just  the  slightest  trace,  not
enough to tell even whether the body was hot or cold, indoors or out.
They  crossed  the  snowy  street  and  went  into  the  grounds  around  the  building.  Yes,
that scent was now a little  stronger.  Caution!  These  creatures  were  not  dumb  and  they
knew that they were being hunted. Better be very  slow and careful. They trotted around
the  building,  three  in  one  direction  and  three  in  the  other,  easily  leaping  the  small
balustrades that surrounded the place. In this way  they  identified  by  scent  which  doors
were in use and which were not.  Without  even  needing  to  converse  they  came  together
again,  then  spread  out  to  watch  the  doors  that  might  be  used.  They  hid  themselves
wherever  they  could,  crouching  along  fences,  curling  up  in the  small  clumps  of  bushes,
lying behind stone retainers. And  the  scent  hung  here,  that  distinctive  sweet  smell  that
went with the woman, the denser smell of the man. And there was another familiar odor,
lighter and more salty: one they had smelled near the two before.
Each  human’s  distinctive  odor  separated  him  from  all  the  others,  and  the  pack
separated these three from the great mass of odors around them. And they settled down
to wait. Waiting was easy for them. It added the excitement of anticipation.
  
Sam Garner pulled his car to a stop in front of the Museum of Natural History. He got
out, relying  on his  press  ID  in the  window  to  ward  off  the  tow-away  patrol.  He  paused
before  the  imposing  building,  looking  up  at  the  statue  of  Teddy  Roosevelt.  The  Great
White Hunter with a guilt complex. Sweet guy. Sam trotted up the stairs. Two detectives
were in there whom he wanted to see. He didn’t know exactly why he wanted to do this.
He didn’t especially like detectives, and it hadn’t been easy to track these two down. But
here he was and here they were, and he wanted very  much  to  find  out  how  they  would
react when he gave them a certain piece of information.
He had it planned. He would say, “You understand that Medical Examiner Evans was
mauled to death in the park this  morning.”  They  would  say  yes  to  that.  Then  he  would
say,  “The  incident  occurred  in  your  car.”  He  was  very  interested  in  watching  their
reaction to that. Somewhere along through here there was  some  kind  of  a  story,  maybe
big. And these two just might have some idea what it was.
Chapter 9
Chapter 9
Chapter 9
Chapter 9
« ^ »

Carl  Ferguson’s  phone  rang.  He  picked  it  up,  then  handed  it  to  Wilson.  “For  you.
Underwood.”
Wilson took the phone. “Jesus, Herb, how’d you know I was here?”
“Lucky guess. Actually I’ve made about six calls. This was a last resort.”
“That’s accurate. What’s on your mind?”
“Evans. What killed him?”
“You know perfectly well, Herbie-boy.”
“Wolves?”
“Werewolves. Same as killed the other six.”
“Six?”
“Sure. The bloody bench we found this morning was all that remained of  number  six.
O-negative blood. No ID as yet beyond that.”
“Look, I gotta tell you there’s a hell  of  a  lot  of  press  out  pounding  the  pavements  on
this one. We’re crawlin’ with ’em down here, plus the park’s full of  ’em . Reporters from
every  damn  where—Evans  was  a  famous  man.  So  far  nobody’s  made  the  connection
between  his  death  and  the  other  murders.  I  mean,  obviously  there’re  similarities.  So
don’t, if you know what I mean.“
“Oh, I won’t. I haven’t got enough proof so it might not embarrass you  as  much  as  it
should. There’s a cake, but I ain’t got icing.”
“Like what?”
“Like evidence that will convince even you.  When  I’ve  got  that,  I’ll  go  to  the  papers,
but not before. That much you can count on.”
“Goddamn  you,  George.  If  it  weren’t  for  Old  One  Forty-seven  I’d  sign  your  fuckin’
walking papers.”
“Well,  Herbie,  now  what  can  you  expect?  You  were  a  dumb  kid  and  you’re  a  dumb
grown-up. You should have given in a long time ago, when you first knew I was right.”
“Which was?”
“The first time you heard  my  story.  It’s  dead  right  and  you  know  it.  You’re  just  too
damn stubborn to admit it, or too dumb. Probably both.”
This was followed by a silence at the other end of the line that lengthened until Wilson
thought  that  Underwood  had  hung  up  on him.  Finally  he  spoke.  “Detective  Wilson,”  he
said, “have you ever considered, if your story is true, what kind of  public  reaction  it  will
cause?”
“Panic, mayhem, blood in the streets. Plus heads will roll. The heads of the people who
didn’t do anything about it when they could.”
“My  head.  You’d  sacrifice  this  city  for  that? Can  you  imagine  the  economic  loss,  the
destruction?  Thousands  of  people  would  pour  the  hell  out  of  the  city.  Mass  exodus.
Looting. This is a great city, Detective Wilson, but I think that would break it”
“Yeah.  And  you  along  with  it.  People  will  come  back  when  they  realize  that  the
werewolves  aren’t  just  a  local  attraction.  But  you  won’t  come  back,  Herbie.  You’ll  be
completely retired.”
Underwood’s voice was bitter. “I must  say,  I  hope  to  hell  you’re  wrong.  Right  now  I
can’t think of anything that’ll give me more pleasure than kicking your  ass  off  the  force.

Now that would be a hell of a good feeling.” This time Wilson was sure that he had  hung
up because of the bang the phone made.
“Good God,” Becky said, “what in hell ever possessed you to talk to him like that!”
“He’s  a  jerk.  He  was  always  a  fuckin’  jerk.  Hell,  he  was  a  jerk  when  he  was  runnin’
around in a dirty bathing suit half the summer. A fuckin’ two-bit jerk.”
“That doesn’t give you the right… I mean, I know you grew up together and all that…
but my God, you’ll destroy both of us!”
“What in the world are you two talking about?”
They  turned,  surprised  at  the  strange  voice.  A  small  man  in  a  cheap  raincoat  stood
there smiling more than he should. “Name’s Garner. New York Post. You folks Detectives
Neff and Wilson?”
“Come back later. We don’t want any right now.”
“Oh, come on, Wilson, let him—”
“We don’t want any now!”
“Just one question—how come Doctor Evans was murdered in your car? You have any
comment on that?” His eyes watched them. Of course he didn’t expect a straight answer.
It was how they looked that counted. One way, he would know there was a story. Another
way, he would know zip.
“Get the hell out of here!! Whassamatter, you deaf! Move!”
He scurried away, down the hall and up the stairs, smiling from ear to ear. He loved it!
There was going to be a damn good story! As soon as he got back to his car he called in for
a photographer. A couple of pictures of them as they left the museum wouldn’t hurt. Nice
pictures, come in handy later.
“Sometimes I think maybe we should tell them something,” Ferguson asked when the
reporter was gone. “I think it’ll help us if we got more people involved.”
“You tell them.”
“Oh, I couldn’t possibly. I haven’t got enough—”
“Evidence.  Neither  have  we,  and  that’s  why  we  can’t  tell  them  either.  We’ve  got  to
wait  until  we  get  that  clincher.  Once  we  have  it,  we  can  blow  the  story  from  here  to
Moscow  for  all  I  care,  but  I’m  certainly  not  going  to  break  it  early.  Can  you
imagine—detective alleges werewolf killed M. E.? Underwood would dearly love that.”
His own  voice  made  Wilson  suddenly  very  tired.  The  long  night  ahead  was  bearing
down remorselessly; he felt a knot growing in his stomach. Already the light in the room
had  changed.  This  time  of  year  the  days  were  quick,  the  nights  long.  And  tonight
moonrise would be late. Despite the lights of the city there would be shadows everywhere
in just a few hours. The world around him seemed to be frowning, looming down at  him,
revealing within its softness a savagery he had never suspected. You think that the world
is one thing, it turns out to be another. What appeared to be a flower is actually a gaping
wound.  The  fact  that  time  was  passing  ate  at  him,  drove  him  closer  and  closer  to—the
truth,  and  the  truth  was  they  were  going  to  die.  Soon  he  would  feel  it,  he  knew  it.  He
would feel what Evans had felt, the sensation of those things pulling him apart with their
teeth. And Becky too, that beautiful skin torn open—he could hardly tolerate the thought
He had always had a knack for prophecy—now he had a premonition. He was standing
in  the  middle  of  Becky’s  bedroom  when  one  of  them  jumped  out  of  the  curtains  and
buried its head in his stomach. As the sheer pain killed, he saw its tail wagging.

Then something hit him.
“Come on! Good Christ, kid, what the hell’s got into you?” Becky? Becky  was  shaking
him.
“Now,  now  calm  down—here,  sit  him  down.  It’s  a  stress  reaction,  that’s  all.  Call  his
name, don’t let him get away.”
“Wilson!”
“Wha—”
“Call a doctor, you jerk! What the hell’s the matter, he acts like he’s made of rubber!”
“Stress did it, extreme stress. Keep calling him, he’s coming back.”
“Wilson, you motherfucker, wake up!” In response he pulled her down to the chair and
clumsily embraced her, held her against him. A choked noise started in his chest. She felt
his stubbly beard rub against her cheek, felt his dry lips come into contact with her neck,
felt his body trembling, smelled his sour, rumpled jacket. After a moment she drew back,
pushing at his shoulders, and was immediately released.
“God, I feel awful.”
Ferguson  gave  him  some  water  in a  little  paper  cup,  which  he  spilled  at  once.  “Hell,
I—”
“Take it easy. Something happened to you.”
“It  was  a  stress  reaction,”  Ferguson  said.  “It’s  not  uncommon.  People  in  crashing
planes, burning buildings, trapped people, experience it. If the situation isn’t terminal, the
condition passes.” Ferguson was trying to smile but his face was too pale to make it seem
very real. “I’ve read about it, but I’ve never seen it before,” he added lamely.
Wilson closed his eyes, bowed his head and put his fists to his temples. He looked like a
man shielding himself from an explosion.
“Goddamn, I wish to hell we were out of this!” He had shouted it so loud that the faint
hubbub beyond the tiny office came to a halt.
“Please,” Ferguson said, “you could cause me problems.”
“Sorry, Doctor, excuse me.”
“Well, you have to admit—”
“Yeah, yeah, save it. Becky, I’m sorry.”
“Yeah. I’m sorry too.” His eyes  pleaded  up  at  her,  and  she  met  them  with  what  she
hoped was a look of reassurance.
“Don’t think about death. You thought about death. Think about—our camera. Tonight
we’ll  get  our  pictures  and  then  things’ll  start  to  move.  All  the  evidence,  plus  the
pictures—nobody will be able to deny it.”
“And we’ll get some protection?”
“Damn  right.  Whatever  the  hell  happens,  it’ll  be  something.  Better  than  this,  God
knows.”
For  the  first  time  Becky  allowed  herself  to  imagine  it  What  form  would  protection
take? A cold stab of realization went  through  her—about  the  only  thing  that  would  help
would  be  virtual  imprisonment.  At  first  it  would  mean  a  good  night’s  sleep,  but  then  it
would  get  stifling,  finally  unendurable,  and  she  would  give  it  up—and  every  moment
outside  would  hold  danger,  every  shadow  the  potential  to  kill.  It  was  hard  to  turn  her

mind  away  from  this  train  of  thought.  And  now  death  flashed  into  her  own
imagination—how does it feel to be ripped to pieces: will there be desperate agony or will
some mechanism of the brain provide relief?
She  couldn’t  think  about  that  either.  Think  about  the  next  moment,  not  the  future.
Think about the camera. Men in battle must do it that way, keeping their minds fixed on
the next shell hole, shutting out the deadly whisper of bullets, the groans of the unlucky,
until they themselves…
She  turned  her  mind  from  it  again  and  said  in a  tired  voice,  “Dick  probably  has  the
camera by now. It’s nearly three. What say we get over there and plan the stakeout? It’s
gonna be a long night.”
Ferguson  smiled  a  little.  “Frankly,  I  think  it’ll  be  exciting.  Obviously  there’s  danger.
But  my  God,  look  at  the  magnitude  of  the  discovery!  All  of  history  mankind  has  been
living  in  a  dream,  and  suddenly  we’re  about  to  discover  reality.  It’s  an  extraordinary
moment.”
Both  the  detectives  stared  at  him  in  amazement.  Their  lives  and  habits  of  thought
emphasized the danger of the quest, not its beauty. Ferguson’s words made them realize
that  there  was  beauty  there  too.  The  presence  of  the  werewolf,  once  proven,  would
completely change the life of man. Of course there would be panic and terror—but  there
would also be the new challenge. Man the hunted—and his hunter, so skilled, so perfectly
equipped  that  he  seemed  almost  supernatural.  Man  had  always  confronted  nature  by
beating it down. This was going to require something new—the werewolf would have to be
accepted. He wasn’t likely to submit to a beating.
Becky felt her inner resolve strengthening. She knew the feeling.  It  often  came  when
they were confronting a particularly rough case, the kind of case where you really wanted
to  find  the  killer.  The  ones  where  a  drug  pusher  was  knocked  off  or  some  other
scum—those  you  didn’t  really  care  about.  But  when  it  was  an  innocent,  a  child,  an  old
person— you got this feeling, like you were going to  make  that  collar.  Vengeance,  that’s
what it was. And  Ferguson’s  words  had  that  effect.  It  damn  well  was  an  extraordinary
moment.  Mankind  was  already  in this  situation  and  didn’t  know  it,  and  had  a  right  to
know. There might not be much that could be done about it, not at first, but the victims at
least had the right to see the face of their attacker. “Let’s call Dick, make sure he’s ready.
No point in moving through the streets until we have to.” She picked up the phone.
“Make  sure  he’s  got  walkie-talkies,”  Wilson  rumbled.  “Civilian  models.  I  don’t  want
them on the police band.”
Dick  answered  on  the  first  ring.  He  sounded  grim.  His  voice  was  subdued  as  he
answered  Becky’s  questions.  Unspoken  was  the  fact  that  he  also  had  heard  of  Evans’s
death and knew what had killed him. She concluded the brief conversation and put down
the  phone.  “He’s  got  the  camera.  The  radios  he’ll  pick  up  this  afternoon.  A  couple  of
hand-held CB’s.” Becky had felt something new when she heard Dick’s voice. There was a
strong  warmth  in  her,  a  sensation  of  closeness  that  she  never  remembered,  not  even
when they were first married. If he had been here she would have embraced him just to
feel the solid presence of his body. Too bad for Dick, he was a better human being than he
was a cop. Too good to tough out life on the force, that was  Dick.  God  knows  it  wouldn’t
make a damn bit of difference to the Board of Inquiry when it came along, but there was a
hell of a lot  of  justice  to  shaking  down  organized  crime  to  help  an  old  man  in an  honest
nursing  home.  His old  man.  It  was  going  to  be  hard  when  he  got  his  Board,  Goddamn
hard.
Wilson was now staring off into space, vacillating between competent involvement and
numbness.

“Come on, George, snap out of it! You’re a million miles away. If we’re gonna organize
a stakeout we’d better get it together. We need to take sightings with that camera, set up
observation points that are damn well covered, all of that. We’d better go over there and
do what’s gotta be done before it gets dark.”
Becky hadn’t allowed herself to think about all  that  had  to  be  done  because  it  meant
leaving  the  momentary  safety  of  the  museum  and  facing  the  streets.  But  it  looked  like
nobody was going to think about it if she didn’t. Wilson sure as hell better hold up his end
later, when it was going to count.
“I hadn’t realized we were so close to leaving,” Ferguson said. “There are some things
I want to know from you two. A couple of things I don’t quite understand. I’d like to get
them cleared up before we move. It might be important.”
Becky raised her eyebrows. “So OK, shoot.”
“Well, I don’t quite understand the sequence of events this morning. How exactly  did
Evans get killed?”
Becky didn’t say so, but  she  would  be  glad  to  hear  Wilson’s  explanation  as  well.  The
werewolves were obviously superb hunters, but how exactly they had accomplished their
feats this morning was still fuzzy in her mind.
Wilson replied, his voice a monotone. “It must have started when we were  at  Central
Park West and Seventy-second investigating one of their homicides. Obviously, they had
us  under  observation  at  that  time.”  A  chill  went  through  Becky,  remembering  the
morning,  the  crowd  of  men  and  cars,  the  blood-soaked  bench.  All  that  had  saved  them
was the presence of so many other cops. Wilson went on. “They knew that they couldn’t
get to us easily unless we were in a more isolated situation. So they arranged a lure. It’s a
technique  human  hunters  have  used  for  generations.  And  it  worked  beautifully  in  this
instance.  They  went  into  the  park,  found  an  isolated  patrolman  beating  the  bushes  for
evidence and wounded  him.  The  fact  that  he  died  later  made  no difference  to  them.  In
Africa hunters tether wildebeest to lure lions. The wildebeest might think it’s unfair, but
they aren’t expected to survive. Neither was our lure. As soon  as  our  car  pulled  up,  the
werewolves  must  have  started  creeping  toward  it.  When  we  returned  to  it  they  would
have been underneath, jumped out and—two dead detectives. I guess I got it figured just
in time.” He fumbled in his pockets. Becky handed him a cigarette. Something seemed to
be coming over him. For a long moment his face kept getting grayer and grayer, then he
took  a  deep,  ragged  breath  and  continued.  “I  was  lucky,  but  them  leaving  that  guy
half-killed just didn’t add up. Then I figured it. We were  in their  trap.  That  was  when  I
told Becky to take off on the scooter.”
“And Evans—”
“The last I saw he was sitting in the car. You’d have thought he would have locked the
doors. I guess he didn’t think of it in time.”
“They opened the doors?” Becky asked.
Wilson shrugged. “What’s surprising about that?”
He was right. It was just hard to accept, even with all she had seen. Somehow you just
couldn’t see animals behaving like that. But then, they weren’t animals at all, were they?
They had minds, that qualified them as… something. You couldn’t include them as part of
humanity.  They  were  fundamentally  our  enemy.  It  was  in  their  blood,  and  in  ours.
Although  they  were  intelligent  they  couldn’t  be  called  human.  Or  could  they?  Did  they
have  civil  rights,  duties,  obligations?  The  very  question  was  absurd.  Despite  their
intelligent nature there would be no place for them in human society.
Except as hunter. There was a very  definite place for the hyena in wildebeest society,

for  the  leopard  in  baboon  society.  Their  presence  was  respected  and  accommodated
because  there  was  no  choice.  No  matter  how  hard  they  tried,  the  wildebeest  and  the
baboon  were  never  going  to  defeat  their  predators.  So  the  social  order  reflected  their
presence. Baboons protected the young, exposed the weak. They hated it but they did it.
You would too, in time.
Ferguson was the first to speak after absorbing Wilson’s explanation. “It fits,” he said.
“That’s a very clever plan. They must have been amazed that you got away.”
“Unless they’re playing games.”
“Not likely. You’re too dangerous. Can you imagine how it must feel, knowing that your
way of life is about to be destroyed by just two human beings? Hell, they probably knock
off one or two people a day for food. Hunting you down must have  seemed  easy  at  first.
No, I don’t think they’re playing games with you. You’re damn hard to get, that’s all. Like
all predators, when they come  up  against  competent  members  of  the  prey  species  they
have  a  hard  time.  They  aren’t  equipped  to  deal  with  determined  resistance.  Among
animals, this nets out to a trial by strength. The young  moose  kicks  hell  out  of  the  wolf.
With us it’s wits—ours against theirs.”
Wilson nodded. Becky noticed that what Ferguson was saying was having a good effect
on  him.  And  her  too,  for  that  matter.  It  didn’t  change  the  fear,  but  it  added  some
perspective.  You  began  to  get  the  feeling  that  the  werewolves  were  almost  omnipotent
and you were like mice in a trap, just waiting there until they got tired of toying with you.
But maybe Ferguson was right. After all they had thus far defeated the werewolves every
time. They could go on defeating them. But then another thought came to her, an ugly one
that had been hiding in the back of her mind untouched. “How long,” she asked, “will they
keep up the hunt?”
“A long time,” Ferguson said. “Until they succeed —or get talked out of it.”
Becky pushed hard at  that  thought,  got  rid  of  it.  They  couldn’t  afford  an  ambivalent
attitude. “OK, kids, let’s hit the road. We have work to do.”
  
Herbert Underwood was troubled.  He  was  sitting  in the  Commissioner’s  outer  office.
The  last  cigar  of  the  day  was  in  his  pocket  but  he  resisted  the  impulse  to  smoke  it.
Commissioner didn’t like cigars. Again Herb went through his mind, touching each point of
the  case,  weighing  it,  trying  to  see  how  it  could  be  used  to  strengthen  his  position  and
weaken  the  Commissioner’s.  Word  from  Vince  Merillo,  the  new  mayor’s  first
deputy-to-be, was that the Commissioner still had an inside track to reappointment. That
would mean that Herbert Underwood would reach retirement before he reached the top
job. And  he  wanted  that  job  bad.  Wanting  the  next  job  up  the  ladder  was  more  than  a
habit  with  him.  He  deserved  the  promotion,  he  was  an  excellent  cop.  A  good  man  too,
good administrator. Hell, he was a better man than the Commissioner. All he needed was
a nice, ugly embarrassment for the Commissioner and Merillo would start mentioning the
Chief  of  Detectives  as  successor.  He  was  sure  of  Merillo’s  support.  The  guy  owed  him.
Merillo was into a bank in a very  ugly way and the  Chief  of  Detectives  knew  it.  The  DA
didn’t—and wouldn’t as long as Merillo played on the right side of the net.
“Come in, Herb,” the Commissioner said from the door of the inner office. Underwood
got up and went inside. The Commissioner closed the door. “Nobody here but us rats,” he
said in his singsong voice. “I got two mayors screaming at me. I got reporters hiding in my
file cabinet. I got TV crews in the  bathroom.  Not  to  mention  the  Public.”  He  added  in a
more clipped tone, “Tell me what happened to Evans.”
“Oh come on, Bob, you know I’m up against a brick wall.”

“Yeah? I’m sorry to  hear  that,  very  sorry.  Because  it  may  mean  I’ll  have  to  replace
you.”
Underwood wanted to  laugh  out  loud.  The  Commissioner  was  crashing  around  like  a
wounded elephant. The pressure from upstairs must be hell. Bad for him, very  bad. “You
mean that? It’d be a relief.” He chuckled.
The Commissioner glared at him. “You know, our new mayor is a very smart man.”
“I know that.”
“And so is Vince Merillo, your good buddy.”
Underwood nodded.
“Well,  here  is  what  the  Mayor  and  his  first-deputy-in-waiting  think  about  this  case.
Want to hear?”
“Sure.”
“They  have  got  the  Wilson  theory  on  their  brains.  I  mean,  essentially  the  Wilson
theory. The DiFalco mess, the Bronx mess, the bloody  bench,  the  gutted  patrolmen  and
Evans—”
“All the work of hybrid wolves. I know. I’ve talked to Merillo.”
“So what’s your position?”
“The  theory  is  total  bullshit.  I’ve  known  Wilson  since  we  were  kids  and  I  think  he’s
pulling a fast one on us, trying to get us to buy bullshit so we’ll look  like  fools.  Especially
me. You I don’t think he gives a damn about.”
“OK. So what else are you working on?”
“I just organized a special  squad.  They’re  going  to  be  under  Commander  Busciglio  of
the  Fifth  Homicide  Zone.  Goddamn  good  guy.  Good  cop,  lot  of  smarts.  They  will  be
investigating the three incidents that happened  today  in Central  Park.  We’ll  be  working
on the assumption that these incidents are entirely separate from the Bronx case and the
Brooklyn  case.  I  think  that  makes  sense.  It’s  not  out  of  the  question  that  they’re  all
related, but it’s very farfetched. That enough to keep me from getting fired?‘
“You know I’m not gonna fire you, Herb. Hell, you’re the guy slated to kill me off. If I
fire you it’ll look like sour grapes to the Mayor.” He laughed. “Can’t let that happen.” He
had been standing in front of Underwood, the two men in the middle of the office. Now he
went over to a leather chair and sat down, motioning the Chief to follow. “Herb, you and I,
we’ve been  buddies  a  long  time.  I  gotta  tell  you  though,  I’ve  been  hearing  some  things
about  you  that’ve  made  me  very  sad.  Like,  you’re  trying  to  get  me  dumped,  to  put  it
bluntly. Why are you doing that, Herb?”
The Chief smiled. He had to hand it to the Commissioner, the man didn’t play around.
“No,  sir,  I’m  not  trying  anything  of  the  kind.  In  fact,  like  on  this  case,  I’m  doing
everything  I  can  to  strengthen  your  position.  I  think  we’ll  get  a  good  solution  very
quickly. It’ll help you and because of that it’ll help me. That’s as far as my ambition goes.”
Now it was the Commissioner’s turn to smile. He turned on a crinkly, jolly one, wore it
for a few seconds, then nodded, seemingly satisfied. He spread  his  hands  in a  gesture  of
meekest  assent.  “OK,”  he  said,  “just  keep  up  the  good  work.  Glad  you’re  still  on  the
team.”
Underwood left after further protestations of loyalty, capped by a solemn  handshake.
The Commissioner watched him go. Hell, with technique like that the guy  would  make  a
damn fine commissioner if he won out. Good projection of sincerity. Handles himself well.

But he ain’t gonna fuck me. He must think I’m some kind of schoolboy. He closed  the
door behind Underwood and stood there a long moment. Soon the Chief  would  be  blown
so high  and  wide  he  wouldn’t  have  a  political  future  of  any  kind.  So  the  son  of  a  bitch
wanted  to  kill  off  Bob  Righter.  Fine,  let  him  try!  Now  the  Commissioner’s  face  set.  He
leafed through a report on his desk. It  was  titled  “Project  Werewolf.  Eyes  Only.”  It  had
been seen only by Merillo, the new mayor, and the current mayor. It had been written by
Bob Righter, in longhand.
This was the only copy.
He opened it, reading to review. He had written it three hours ago, had taken it to the
Mayor and then to the  Mayor-elect.  There  had  been  a  meeting  and  it  had  been  agreed
that not one word of the  report  would  be  made  public  unless  absolutely  necessary.  The
Commissioner started to say his thoughts aloud, then stopped, the words unspoken in his
throat. How often do I talk  to  myself,  he  wondered.  Getting  old.  But  not  tired,  dammit.
Let Herb Underwood realize that once and for all. Not tired. Underwood was going off on
a hell of a  wild-goose  chase.  That  stinking  Wilson  had  been  much  closer  from  the  start.
Brilliant but a creep. A good cop after his fashion. A good cop with a good partner… Becky
Neff… no matter how old you get, you’d still like to get into something like that. Hell, stay
clear. Her husband was bent—maybe she was too for that matter…
He dismissed them from his mind and returned to the matter of the report. It was the
first time in his career that he had written something so secret, and kept  its  contents  so
close  to  the  top.  In  a  position  like  his  a  man  gets  into  the  habit  of  using  advisers,
conferees,  administrative  assistants.  He  becomes  not  an  individual  but  an  office.  He
identifies himself as “we.” Not in this case, though. There was too much here to entrust to
staff members. It was not only a horrendous crime, it was also a priceless opportunity to
completely outdistance Underwood, to crush him. “Herbie’s gonna love me,” he said, this
time without realizing he had spoken aloud. Now that he had the endorsement of both his
current and future bosses he would begin to draw together the team that would solve the
real Werewolf case. He pulled out a yellow legal pad and put it down beside his report. He
drew a box at the top, and  put  the  letter  C in the  box.  That’s  me,  he  thought.  Then  he
drew a dotted line to the Chief of Detectives and put a U in that box. And that’s as far as
he goes. All alone in his box with his Goddamn U. Now another box, with a full line to the
Commissioner. Call him Deputy Assistant for Internal Affairs. DAIA. OK, now give him a
staff. Three more boxes  under  him,  all  Police  Commanders.  Now  a  team.  Three  squads
under the three Commanders, All high power. Now assign a Tactical Patrol  Force  Group
to the Deputy Assistant, the grunt-work department so all these officers don’t have to get
their hands dirty. Very nice. About two hundred men. The Mad Bomber had commanded
a crew of two  hundred  and  fifty.  Son  of  Sam  had  tied  up  three  hundred.  The  Werewolf
Killers would be more economical with just two hundred.
Now  he  pulled  a  small  cassette  recorder  out  of  his  desk  drawer.  He  rewound  the
cassette  and  played  it  again.  Voices,  confusion,  then  a  whispered  word,  unintelligible.
Then more. “Mama… hey look out (a sob)… there it is…  (Voice:  what  is  it,  Jack?)  Dog…
somethin’  weird…  don’t  don’t  get  it…  hey…  oh,  wow  that  was—oh,  hey  it  cut,  cut  my
uniform… ouch… aaaAAHH! (Voice: Jack, you need more? The doc’s gonna give you more
painkiller.) Yeah… OK, there was a dog… big motherfucker… weird, like a human face… a
couple  of  others  standing  nearby…  face,  not  like  a  person…  you’ll  never  get  it…”  More
whispers. (Second voice: the patient is expiring.) Tape ends.
The patrolman hadn’t given them much to go on, but it was more than they had gotten
before. Enough for a good start. M.O. was established. This added a rough description. He
read  the  first  sentence  of  his  report:  “The  Werewolf  Killers  are  a  group  of  twisted
individuals  utilizing  an  extremely  skillful  disguise…”  That  was  where  Underwood  was
falling down: he didn’t realize that there was a whole group, or that they were disguised.

  
Outside the museum tension was building. The sun had moved far down the sky. The
first,  faint  smells  of  cooking  were  coming  into  the  afternoon  air.  When  the  subways
stopped  beneath  the  street  the  sound  of  more  and  more  feet  were  heard  getting  off.
Man’s afternoon ritual of moving back to his nest was under way. And this would also be
occurring to the hated ones inside the building. There would be no need to take the risk of
going inside after them. Soon they would want their food and their nests, and start  their
movement. Then the moment would come, not so long from now. Waiting like this  made
your heart soar, knowing that relief and success lay as the reward for patience. Soon they
would come out, very soon.
  
Garner had returned to the scene of the Evans murder and picked up Rich Fields, the
photographer  the  paper  had  sent  to  join  him  on  the  story.  “We’re  gonna  take  some
pictures of a couple of cops,” he said to Fields.
“What for?”
“Nothin’. Don’t even waste film. Just flashes. I want flashes.”
“Great. Makes good sense. Keep convincin’ me.”
“Shut up, Fields, you’re too dumb to understand.”
They  got  into  Garner’s  car  and  rattled  out  of  the  park,  back  up  to  the  Museum  of
Natural  History.  Garner  felt  full  of  vitamins.  There  was  a  Goddamn  good  story  in here
and these two detectives were the exact center of the whole little cyclone. Ah, a beautiful
story,  had  to  be.  Let  the  Times  send  fifty  gentlemen  downtown  to  worry  the  Police
Commissioner, Sam Garner was going to stick right close to these two detectives until he
got the story. He parked his car directly in front of the museum and settled back to wait.
“Want me to start shootin’?”
“Shut up, Tonto. I’ll tell you when. And make it fuckin’ good if you don’t mind. I mean,
run up and flash at ’em. Make   ’em  mad.”
“You payin’ my hospital bills, honey?”
“The Post‘ll take care of you, darlin’. Just do your thing.”
He  stared  at  the  huge  edifice.  Sometime  soon  the  two  cops  would  appear  in  the
doorway and start down. Fields would get after them with the camera. No words, no more
questions.  Those  two  cops  were  scared  already.  This  would  panic  them.  If  they  were
hiding  anything  interesting  the  little  picture-taking  session  would  make  them  think  the
Post was on to it. So next time Sam Garner got to them maybe they’d start trying to save
their own asses by doing a little singing.
It  had  happened  before.  Pressure  breeds  information.  The  first  rule  of  investigative
reporting. Make   ’em  think you know enough to hang ’em, then they’ll give you what you
need. Visions of delicious headlines went through his head.  He  didn’t  know  exactly  what
they said, but they were there. The  way  it  felt,  he  had  a  good  week  of  dynamite  on his
hands. The boss would love it. It must be something really horrible. Whatever was going
on,  somebody  had  seen  fit  to  tear  the  Medical  Examiner  apart.  Not  just  kill  him,  but
actually tear him apart. The skin had even been pulled down off the skull, the face nearly
separated  from  the  body.  The  throat  was  gone.  The  stomach  was  pulled  open  and  the
body  severed  so  completely  that  the  legs  fell  to  the  floor  of  the  car  when  the  orderlies
tried  to  move  the  body.  It  had  been  a  vicious  murder,  particularly  so,  unusually  so.  A
monstrous murder. Hell of a bad thing. All of a sudden he felt kind of chilled,  sick  inside,
like he was going to throw up. “Hurry up,” he muttered under his breath. A drink lay just

the other side of this little assignment and he needed it very badly.
“I got some good stuff on Evans,” Fields said. “I mean—that was some mess.”
“I  just  been  thinkin’  about  it.  Doesn’t  make  much  sense,  does  it?  Whoever  did  that
must have hated the hell out of the guy. And right in broad daylight, right in the middle of
the park. Strange as hell, weird as hell, you ask me.”
“Look close, boss. The doll and the old guy?”
“That’s them. Get moving.”
Fields  opened  the  door  of  the  car  and  walked  forward  to  the  base  of  the  statue  of
Teddy  Roosevelt  that  stood  before  the  museum  entrance.  In  this  position  he  would  be
concealed  from  Neff  and  Wilson  until  they  came  down  the  steps  and  were  beside  him.
They  were  moving  quickly.  Another  man,  hunched,  tall,  his  hands  folded  before  him,
walked just behind them. There was something familiar in the way they moved. And then
Fields realized why: in ’Nam, people under fire had moved like that.
As they came nearer he could hear their footsteps crunching on the snow. He stepped
out from his position near the statue and started shooting. The flash  popped  in the  gray
afternoon  light,  and  the  three  figures  jumped  away  startled.  Almost  before  he  knew  it
there was a pistol in the hand of the old guy. The woman was also pointing a pistol at him.
This all happened in the same strange slow motion that things had happened in the war,
when an attack was going on. The closer you got to action, the more events separated into
individual components. Then an end would come, usually violent, the  roar  of  a  claymore
going up, the black arcing shapes  against  the  sky,  the  screams  and  smoke…  “Goddamn,
they have guns and all I got is a camera.”
Something  else  moved  and  the  old  guy’s  pistol  roared.  “Don’t  shoot!”  But  it  roared
again, sending out sparks. The tall man shrieked. Now the woman’s pistol roared, kicking
back in her hand, and roared again and again. But there, off in the snow, something black
was skittering along—two things. That’s what they were firing at, not him. Then the three
of them  sprinted  toward  Sam’s  car.  “Come  on,”  the  woman  shouted  over  her  shoulder,
“move or you’re dead!”
Rich moved damn fast, diving into the back seat right across the lady cop’s knees. She
pulled  the  door  closed  and  extricated  herself.  “Step  on it!”  the  old  guy  snarled  at  Sam,
“step on it, Goddammit!”
But  Sam  wasn’t  stepping  on anything.  He  turned  to  face  the  old  detective  who  was
beside him in the front seat. “What the fuck,” he said in a high, silly-sounding voice.
The detective leveled his pistol on Sam. “Move this vehicle,” he said, “or I’ll blow your
brains out.”
Sam pulled out into traffic  very  smartly.  Neither  he  nor  Rich  had  a  mind  to  ask  any
more questions just now.
“We got one,” Becky said.
“Not dead,” Wilson replied.
Becky turned to Rich, who was sitting beside her, acutely aware of her salty, perfumey
odor,  of  the  warm  pressure  of  her  hip  against  his.  “Thanks,”  she  said,  “you  saved  our
asses just then.”
“What the hell happened?” Sam managed to bleat.
“Nothin’,”  Wilson  replied.  “Nothin’  happened.  Your  buddy  with  the  camera  got  us
riled.”

“Oh, come on, Wilson, tell them,” Ferguson said.
“Shut  up,  Doctor!”  Becky  said.  “I’ll  handle  this.  We  don’t  need  press,  we’ve  talked
about that.”
Wilson turned around in his  seat,  his  face  a  twisted,  mottled  parody  of  itself.  “If  this
gets out,” he said, “we might as well just kiss our asses good-bye  right  now!  We  haven’t
got evidence, baby, and without it we’ll come across as a couple of kooks. Lemme tell you
what’d  happen.  Shithead  downtown  would  get  us  retired  disabled.  Mental.  You  know
what’d happen then? Damn right you do! Those fuckers’d be on us so Goddamn fast!” He
laughed, more of a snarl. Then he turned and faced forward. Ferguson glared at his back.
“Take us to One fifteen East Eighty-eighth Street,” Becky said, “and get the hell away
from the park. Go down Columbus to Fifty-seventh and over that way.”
“And move the Goddamn thing,”  Wilson  said  hoarsely.  “You’re  a  Goddamn  reporter,
you  can  drive!”  He  chuckled  now,  a  dry,  spent  noise.  “What’re  you  gonna  put  in  your
gunfire report?” he asked her.
“Cleaning accident. Fired three shots while cleaning.”
Wilson nodded.
“Goddammit,  I’ve  got  a  right  to  know,”  Sam  said.  “I  have  a  right.  I  was  the  only
reporter in the whole city smart enough to figure you two had  the  real  story.  The  other
fucks are down at Police Headquarters tryin’ to get a statement from the Commissioner.
Just tell me what happened to Evans. Hell, what was going on just now I won’t even ask.”
Becky had leaned forward as he spoke, Wilson was in no shape to keep talking.
“Evans got killed. If we knew anything more we’d have a collar.”
“Oh. Then I suppose that  shootumup  was  nothin’.  I  gotta  tell  you,  you  are  two  very
funny cops. I ain’t never seen a cop pull out a piece and fire it like that just for a dog. Hell,
that in itself is news.”
“I bet. Just keep your mouth shut and drive, please.”
“Is that any way to talk to a citizen?”
“You aren’t a citizen, you’re a reporter. There’s a difference.”
“What?”
Becky  didn’t  answer.  Through  the  whole  exchange  Ferguson  had  sat  motionless,
leaning toward Becky Neff in the middle of the back seat, leaning away from the window.
Sam noticed that Wilson was also sitting well away from the window, almost in the middle
of the front seat. You could almost say that they were afraid something was going to come
at them through the windows… except the windows were closed.
Chapter 10
Chapter 10
Chapter 10
Chapter 10
« ^ »
This daylight was a curse. The leader of the  pack,  the  one  the  others  called  Old  Father,
waited  behind  the  fence  that  separated  the  front  staircase  of  the  museum  from  the
surrounding  lawn.  He  had  stationed  himself  here  because  he  knew  that  the  two  were

most likely to exit the museum by this door. It was going to be dangerous, difficult work,
sad work. It was the luck of his race to prey on humanity, but at times like this, when he
was forced to kill  the  young  and  strong,  he  wondered  very  much  about  his  place  in the
world.  His  children  thought  of  humanity  merely  in  terms  of  food,  but  long  years  had
taught him  that  man  was  also  a  thinking  being,  that  he  too  enjoyed  the  beauties  of  the
world.  Man  also  had  language,  past,  and  hope.  But  knowing  this  did  not  change  the
need—call it  compulsion—to  kill  and  eat  the  prey.  Every  single  human  being  he  saw  he
evaluated at once out of habit. He enjoyed the way the flesh popped between his jaws and
the  hot  blood  poured  down  his  throat.  Living  in  human  cities  he  gloried  in  the  heady
poetry of the scents. The  pack  was  wealthy,  for  many  humans  lived  in its  territory.  He
loved his wealth, the wealth he had bought so dearly when the pack had migrated to this
city. In his own youth their leader had preferred  the  isolation  of  rural  life  to  the  harder
job  of  maintaining  a  city  territory.  Other  packs  would  never  try  to  take  the  sparse
territory  of  that  old  coward.  Its  inhabitants  starved  in  winter  and  skulked  through
summer, always wary, always risking discovery.
When he had grown to his full size he had taken his sister and set out south, toward the
storied  place  where  an  uncountable  human  horde  dwelled.  Often  they  had  been
challenged  by  other  packs,  and  each  time  they  had  bested  the  challengers.  There  had
been fights, daylong, burning with ritual  hate  under  which  lay  the  love  of  the  race.  And
each  time  these  confrontations  had  ended  with  the  rival  pack  leader  giving  way.  Then
there would be a  celebration,  a  wonderful  howl,  and  the  two  of  them  would  be  on their
way. So it had continued until he and his sister had a beautiful space to themselves. They
marked their boundaries and bore their first litter. There had been three, a girl and  two
boys. The weakest male they killed, feeding his soft flesh to  the  two  strong  ones.  It  was
their bad luck not to have a perfect litter of four, but still two were better than none. Two
years later they had increased their space again and birthed another litter. This time only
one male and female, but both were healthy.
This spring the first pair would mate, as would he and his sister once again. With luck
they would gain two pairs of pups. Greater luck would bring three pairs or even four. And
next  year  the  second  pair  would  mate  and  still  more  would  come.  Not  too  many  years
from now he would lead a goodly pack in a large and wealthy territory. From his wretched
beginning in the desolate hills he had come to this and was glad.
The only thing that was wrong was the two humans with their forbidden knowledge. If
it  became  general  among  the  humanity  here  the  size  of  packs  would  have  to  be
diminished,  and  even  amid  all  this  wealth  they  would  be  forced  to  scuttle  like  dumb
animals… the hunter would be hunted… and it would be on his head and on the heads of
his children. For ages hence  all  the  race  would  remember  their  failure.  His name  would
become a curse. And his line, the line he had created out of courage, would wither and die.
Others would say of him, “Better he had stayed in the mountains.”
He sighed, turning his attention back to the problem at hand. Bright daylight still  and
the scent of the hunted was rising.  Yes,  they  were  coming  to  this  door.  A  few  moments
more and they would  be  on the  stairs.  He  snapped  his  jaw,  bringing  the  others  to  their
stations at the main entrance.  The  second-mated  pair  crossed  the  street  and  hid  under
parked cars. That way, if the two got past him they would not get far. The youngest, the
third-mated pair, came up and  waited  with  him.  His own  sister,  her  coat  gleaming  with
the fullness of her womanhood, her beautiful face  shining  with  bravery  and  anticipation,
her every move calm and royal, went into position on the opposite wall.
There would be no escape this time. At last, the hunt was over. And they would get a
bonus thrown in—that tall man with whom the two spent so  much  of  their  time,  he  also
would be destroyed.

Very  well,  but  it  was  all  an  ugly  and  dirty  business.  You  don’t  take  life  from  young.
Even the beasts of the forest never preyed on young. Practically speaking it was difficult,
but  there  were  also  greater  reasons.  For  the  pack  to  live  other  life  must  be  destroyed.
And it was repugnant to do this to the young.  When  one  of  their  own  kind  grew  old  the
young gave him death, but before his time he felt a fierce desire to continue and have all
of his life. So it must also be for the prey. The few times  that  he  had  been  driven  to  kill
young he had felt their frantic, struggles, the fierce beating of a life that was hard to still…
and had hated himself afterward when his belly was full and his heart heavy.
They appeared at the door, their scent  washing  powerfully  before  them.  The  woman
smelled bright and sharp, not like food. And the young man was the same. Only the older
one’s scent reminded of food; it had that pungency, that sweetness that was the smell of a
weakening body. But still it surged and pulsed with life. Taken together their three scents
sparkled.  He  sighed,  glanced  at  the  third-mated  pair  who  were  with  him.  Their  faces
expressed fear. He had made sure they would be with him for this very  reason: from this
experience they would learn never to kill the young, and also never to allow yourself to be
seen.  They  saw  the  pain  in their  father’s  face,  a  sight  they  would  never  forget.  He  let
them  see  and  hear  and  smell  the  full  depth  of  his  emotions.  And  he  noted  with
gratification  that  what  had  for  them  been  up  to  now  an  exciting  hunt  became  what  it
ought to be: an occasion of sorrow and defeat.
Now their bodies tensed. Instantly their scents changed. His own heart started beating
faster when he smelled their anticipation. The three victims were coming down the steps,
their  movements  and  smells  broadcasting  wariness—yet  they  came  on,  oblivious  to  the
trap  they  were  in.  Despite  his  familiarity  with  humanity  the  fact  that  men  would  walk
right into the plain  scent  of  danger  always  amazed  him.  They  had  little  bumps  on their
faces  for  breathing,  but  these  were  just  blind  appendages,  useless  for  anything  but
passing air in and out of the body.
The  three  reached  the  foot  of  the  steps—and  the  third-mated  pair  leaped  over  the
fence.  Simultaneously  a  man  who  had  been  standing  concealed  jumped  into  the  path  of
the three and made flashes. The old father cursed himself—he  had  known  this  man  was
there  but  had  thought  nothing  of  it!  Of  course,  of  course—and  now  his  two  young  ones
were stopping—no, go on!— too late,  now  they  were  turning  away,  confused,  their  faces
reflecting  a  turmoil  of  questions—what  do  we  do?  And  guns  were  rising,  everybody
running  for  the  park,  the  crack  of  the  weapons  detonating  through  the  air,  the  pack
leaping the stone wall, and each rushing alone into the underbrush.
They  regrouped  not  far  away,  much  closer  than  was  safe.  They  had  all  smelled
it—somebody in the pack was bleeding.
The  youngest  male  was  missing.  The  father  stood  with  his  nose  to  the  noses  of  his
family. They gave him reassurance, all except the youngest female. Her eyes said to him,
“Why did you send us?” And she meant, “We were  the  youngest,  the  least  experienced,
and we were so afraid!” In her anger she said that  she  would  not  be  his  daughter  if  her
brother had to die.
Her anger was deep, he knew, and she would not melt to the entreaties of the  rest  of
the  pack.  Now  that  such  feelings  had  passed  they  could  never  be  erased.  Even  as  they
trotted  toward  the  place  where  the  young  wounded  one  had  hidden  himself  the  father
kept shaking his head with grief. “Now look at you,” his sister said with her eyes and ears,
“you wag your head like a silly wolf! Are you father or child?”
He was humiliated by her scorn, but tried  not  to  let  it  show.  He  kept  the  hair  on his
neck carefully smooth, fighting the impulse to let it rise. His anus remained closed with a
conscious effort: he would not allow his instinct to spread the musk of danger in this place.
His tail he let hang straight out, not as a jaunty flag of pride or tucked humbly between his

legs. No, straight out and no wags: this was dignified and neutral, indicating solemnity.
For all his effort his  sister  said,  “Loose  your  musk,  show  your  grief  to  your  children.
You have not even the courage for that!”
His musk burst out, he could not withhold it longer. The clinging smell filled the air. He
cursed  himself  even  as  it  spread,  great  splashes  of  it,  betraying  him,  revealing  the
weakness he felt within.
“I am your father,” he said, now using his tail to its fullest, flashing it in a  proud  wag,
making his ears rise and his eyes glisten. But the scent was that of fear. Its betrayal was
complete. His first son stepped forward. “Let me find my  brother,”  he  signaled  with  the
snap of his jaw, and a disrespectful wag of his own tail. The four of them, sister, daughters
and son went toward the wounded scent of the youngest male. As soon as they were out
of sight their father submitted to an overwhelming impulse and  rolled  onto  his  back.  He
lay there kicking his back legs softly, feeling the warm wave of submission flow over him,
relaxing into it, giving up his leadership. But his pack was not there to see, his own son not
there  to  take  his  father’s  throat  in his  mouth.  No,  he  rolled  alone  to  the  unseeing  sky.
Even if his son replaced him, the boy would never see his father roll.
Now a soft howl arose. The sorrow in it made him tremble. His sister had sounded the
note  of  death!  Their  youngest  boy’s  wounds  were  mortal.  Wagging  his  head  he  battled
himself for control. He trotted toward his next and terrible duty. Although his elder son or
his sister  would  shortly  become  leader  of  the  pack  he  was  still  the  Old  Father  and  still
must be the one to do this. He  stopped  his  running  and  lifted  his  head.  Let  the  humans
hear!  He  would  sound  his  dirge.  He  did  it  fully  and  proudly.  And  at  once  he  heard  the
fearful whimpering of his second son. Now he hurried on again, soon coming to  the  place
near the wall where his family stood around a huddled gray shape. Their faces were torn
with grief, their mouths dripping with saliva.
They ignored him, deferring to him only outwardly. As soon as this final duty was done
his leadership would end. He went to his son, sniffed him. The boy was trembling, cold, his
eyes  even  now  rolling  up  into  his  head.  The  Old  Father  felt  the  boy’s  pain  in  his  very
bones.  Yet  even  in his  sorrow  he  felt  proud  of  this  boy,  who  had  dragged  such  painful
wounds so far in order to conceal himself from humanity. The young male took  a  breath
and stared a long moment at his father. Then he lifted his muzzle slightly off  the  ground
and closed his eyes.
The Old Father did not hesitate; he killed his son with one fierce bite. The boy’s body
kicked  furiously  in  response,  his  mouth  opened  wide.  By  the  time  his  father  had
swallowed  the  torn-out  tissues  of  the  son’s  throat  the  boy  was  dead.  Immediately  the
others surrounded him. At once he saw who would assume leadership; his sister.
Now  it  came  down  to  confrontation:  either  he  would  roll  or  fight.  If  he  fought  they
would all fight, four  of  them  against  him,  and  all  full  of  rage.  Looking  at  them,  he  knew
that he would nevertheless  win  such  a  fight.  But  at  what  cost—this  pack  would  become
rotten with hate as they followed a father they despised. For the greater good of what he
had built he therefore rolled to his sister. She disdained his overture, striding  away  with
her tail held high. Instead his youngest daughter, still quaking  with  the  grief  of  her  loss,
took  the  roll.  When  she  grabbed  his  throat  he  closed  his  eyes,  waiting  for  death.
Sometimes those too young for this custom were overwhelmed by their feelings and killed
the ones who gave them rolls. Eternity seemed to pass before she released him. Now the
whole pack displayed their tails jauntily; his own he tucked between his legs. Leadership
lost, his life would become one of risk and danger. The least gesture of superiority would
bring them snapping at him. And until his sister, his daughter, and himself had new mates
there would be an unsettled, nasty situation in the pack.

There was still a last task to perform before the reorganized pack continued on. They
turned the body of their brother on his back and ate him, crushing even his bones in their
jaws, consuming every bit of him except a few tufts of fur. He was eaten out of necessity
and respect. They would always remember him now, his brave death and good life. Each
of them committed the taste of his flesh to precious memory. Afterward they howled, this
howl expressing the idea that the dead are dead, and life continues. Then they stood in a
circle, touching noses, their joy at being together breaking through all the grief and upset,
and finally they opened their mouths and breathed their heavy air together, their hearts
transported by their intimacy and nearness.
Still, the old father and his sister were no longer a pair. She now needed a husband, a
surrogate-brother who would be willing to accept her as leader. Most males running loose,
those with some awful sin on their heads, something so serious that they had been driven
from  their  pack,  would  welcome  such  a  position.  And  the  daughter  who  had  lost  her
brother,  she  also  must  find  a  male  soon.  Already  the  two  females  were  spreading  their
scent-of-desire, causing the two males’ bodies to  react,  causing  the  old  father  to  hunger
woefully  for  his  beautiful  sister.  But  his  days  of  mating  would  probably  be  over  unless
some  female  as  wretched  as  himself  were  to  happen  along.  Let  some  time  pass,  he
thought, and then I will spread my own scent for a new mate. Let time pass… and heal.
His sister watched him as he stood confused, unable to decide what to do with himself
now that leadership had been lost. Her heart demanded that she comfort him  and  share
his sorrow, but she kept her tail flashing high and did not look at his face. They had made
this pack together but their children  could  not  accept  leadership  from  a  father  who  had
planned so badly that one of his own children had been killed. It was just, and they all had
to  live  with  it.  But  she  could  not  stand  to  see  him  like  this!  He  cringed  back,  glancing
fearfully  from  face  to  face.  Gone  was  his  beauty,  his  boundless  pride  in this  little  pack.
They  had  been  going  to  build  it  together,  she  could  not  stand  the  idea  of  doing  it  with
another. She could not remember a time when she had not been in love  with  him.  Their
own parents had paired them in a litter of four and the pairing was from the  first  one  of
love.
Until this curse had come down upon the pack there had been nothing but happiness.
They were  getting  richer  and  richer.  The  pack  could  afford  to  pass  over  many  possible
kills, picking only the best and easiest. They could afford to pass up ten for one! And their
hunting was easy, always easy in this rich territory.
The day the catastrophe happened they had been preparing to  hunt  again.  They  had
warm shelter and many potential victims. They even  had  a  nice  place  to  litter,  the  best
they had ever found. All were looking forward to an easy winter and a fortunate spring.
Then  had  come  the  news.  The  first  scent  of  it  had  arrived  on  a  clear  morning  in
autumn. This scent had been laid  at  the  territorial  boundary  by  their  neighboring  pack.
And so Old Father had met with the father of that tribe and had learned of  the  dreadful
mistake  committed  by  two  yearlings  on  their  first  hunt  They  had  taken  young  male
humans,  the  most  taboo  of  all  the  taboos,  had  taken  them  in  a  moment  of  heedless
excitement.  And  the  humans  had  noticed;  many  had  come  and  investigated.  Humanity
had taken away the remains the very day after the mistake had been made. So man knew
something,  more  than  he  should.  Then  had  come  the  pack’s  terrible  misfortune,  the
incident that had led them to the position they were now in. They had somehow sparked
an investigation themselves. It was fantastic and  impossible,  but  nevertheless  humanity
had come to the very  lair itself and taken away the remains of some kills. How they  had
cursed themselves then for not consuming even the bones! But it was too late. They could
only hope that man would be confused, but he was not. The two whom they hunted now
had come up into the lair, had been sniffing about and had almost been killed then.

Those two were the bearers of knowledge, that was why they had come into the lair.
And since then this desperate hunt had continued. It had disrupted the life of the pack,
forcing them to follow their quarry into the center  of  the  city,  a  place  of  few  abandoned
buildings, few good lairs. Now it had destroyed their happiness too. She wanted to throw
her head back and howl out pure grief but she would not. Could she lead them better than
her  brother?  She  doubted  it!  The  alternative  was  to  give  it  to  her  headstrong  first  son
who certainly could not equal the exploits of his father.
This son she distrusted.  She  looked  at  him,  so  happily  asserting  his  newfound  status
over his father. And her beloved brother cringed before the boy—he was that brave, to do
even that to preserve the unity of the pack. But a  boy  demanding  such  an  act  needed  a
lesson.  She  went  to  him,  sniffed  him  under  the  tail.  Her  hackles  rose  and  she  shoved
against  him.  He  was  a  big,  strapping  boy  of  three—his  eyes  glinted  with  humor  as  his
mother  disciplined  him.  Very  well,  let  him  laugh!  She  demanded  that  he  roll.  He  did  it
willingly enough, too willingly. That was the final straw—she grabbed the loose flesh of his
neck and bit  it  hard.  He  gasped  in surprise—he  must  have  thought  that  she  was  killing
him. Very good, let him think that a mother would kill her son. Let him know just how far
his insolent treatment of his father had driven her! She bade him rise  and  he  scrambled
up contrite. His eyes were wide, his face full of pain. Blood oozed down his neck. His sister
came up beside him and stood staring at her mother. Very good, she’s loyal. The mother
turned  and  moved  off  a  little  way.  The  others  understood  that  she  wanted  to  be  alone
with her thoughts and did not follow. The hurts in her heart  conflicted  with  one  another
for attention. Her youngest son was dead, her brother, humiliated. She herself was forced
into  leadership  at  a  desperate  moment.  The  order  of  the  pack  had  been  seriously
strained.
It was  hard  for  her  to  accept  that  her  boy  was  really  dead.  He  had  been  bright  and
eager, brimming over with life. And he had been so fast and strong, the fastest pup they
had  ever  seen!  The  truth  was,  though,  his  mind  was  not  so  fast  as  his  body.  When  the
pack gathered together to share the beauties of the world there was a  definite  confusion
in  his  eyes.  And  when  they  hunted,  his  father  sometimes  gave  him  leadership,  but  it
always wound up with his sister. But he was a fine, good male and he loved his life!
There was a sound nearby. She turned to see, completely unafraid. If it was nearby it
could not be dangerous or she would have sensed it long before. She saw staring from the
brush  her  brother’s  eyes.  Now  why  did  he  do  this?  It  was  just  like  him,  flaunting  all
custom. How dare he stand there staring at her! She tried to raise the hairs on her neck.
They would not move. She tried to growl warning but all that came out was a purr.
He came closer, never allowing his  eyes  to  leave  hers.  Then  he  shook  himself  free  of
the brush and stood there with snow clinging  to  his  fine  brown  coat.  It  hurt  all  the  way
through her to see him, to smell him so close, to hear the familiar sound of his breathing.
Putting her ears back she went to him and rubbed muzzles. She longed to mourn but held
herself back with a fierce effort. He sat on his haunches and regarded her. His eyes were
full of love and a kind of quiet joyousness that it surprised her to see in so unfortunate a
creature. “You take the pack,” he said, “our troubles give it to you.” And she felt afraid.
He  sensed  it  at  once  and  patted  his  tail  on  the  ground  briskly,  a  gesture  that
communicated the  thought,  “Have  confidence.”  She  was  fascinated  by  the  way  his  eyes
seemed  to  sparkle;  he  didn’t  even  appear  sad.  As  if  reading  her  thoughts,  he  lifted  his
eyes and made a low growl. This meant, “A heavy load has been lifted from me.” Then he
inclined his head toward her, closing his eyes as he did so. “You must take it.” The three
knocks of the tail and a tongue-lolling smile, replaced instantly by  an  expression  of  calm
repose. “Have confidence in yourself— I do. I trust you.”
These words moved her deeply. She knew that he was relinquishing his pride, his very

life,  to  prevent  discord  among  the  members  of  the  pack.  And  he  was  communicating
confidence to her not only because she needed it but  out  of  real  sincerity.  His scent  had
changed  subtly  as  he  talked,  indicating  that  behind  his  words  were  love  and  a  certain
hard-to-define excitement that revealed his real happiness at her accession to leadership.
She made a series of gestures with her right forepaw, clicking her toenails together. He
gestured  back,  nodded.  She  punctuated  her  remarks  with  brief  keening  sounds  of
emphasis. She was telling him that the only reason she had accepted his roll was that their
firstborn children would have left the pack if he did not step down. He agreed. Then they
rubbed  muzzles  again  for  a  long  time,  their  eyes  closed,  their  breath  mingling,  their
tongues touching gently. There was nothing but this to express their feelings: long  years
of companionship, puppyhood together, youth, adulthood. This parting would be the first
time  that  they  had  not  shared  life  totally.  And  there  was  no  way  to  know  how  long  it
might last. Although he might become her mate again in the future, it would never be as it
was,  with  the  sharing  of  pack  leadership  that  had  so  increased  their  pleasure  at  being
together. Abruptly she turned  and  trotted  away.  She  could  not  stay  longer  with  him  or
she would never turn away again. Full of sadness she returned to the three children. They
were standing together in the shadows of the trees, nearly motionless, their dark shapes
exuding the smell  of  fear.  Now  the  truth  had  begun  to  insinuate  itself  into  their  minds:
they dared not trust their father—they did not know if they could trust their mother.
She came up to them exuding an  impression  of  affability  and  confidence  that  she  did
not  feel.  They  rubbed  muzzles  and  the  three  stood  facing  her.  Just  hours  ago  she  had
stood thus with them, facing her brother.
Using  the  language  of  movements,  growls  and  gestures  that  communicated  so  much
without the need for articulated words, she outlined the plan of the coming night.  It  was
not an original plan, all it involved was returning to the woman’s  place  and  awaiting  any
chance that might befall. No better plan presented itself, however. The wonderfully canny
ideas of her brother had resulted in the death of a member of the pack at no gain. Simple,
straightforward plans would be more acceptable to the others now.
She knew that time was running very  short for them. Soon they  would  have  to  leave
the  center  of  man’s  city,  to  return  again  to  the  outer  areas  where  there  were  more
shadows, more abandoned buildings. Not much more time. The truth was that they were
about to lose this hunt. Man would learn about his  hunter  and  the  greatest  of  all  taboos
would be broken. What were the consequences? Endless trouble for all the race, suffering
and hardship and death.
What a monstrous burden for the pack to carry! If only… but the past was the past. If
it happened  failure  would  have  to  be  accepted.  She  thought  that  thought  but  her  heart
screamed no, they must not fail. Must not.
Sam  Gamer  watched  the  two  detectives  and  their  friends  rush  into  the  apartment
building.  They  huddled  past  the  doorman  and  disappeared.  The  afternoon  had  become
unseasonably warm, and they had splashed through slush as they ran, not even bothering
to step around the puddles.
“Unbelievable. Can you beat that?”
“Splashin’ in the puddles?”
Garner closed his eyes. Fields was a nice guy but his was not one of the great intellects.
“Let’s have some ideas about what’s going on with these folks.”
“Well, they shot a dog over there at the museum.”
“That was a dog out there in the snow? You sure?”
“Looked like a shepherd to me. And it ran like hell even though it musta taken at least

a couple of slugs.”
“I didn’t see it.”
“What  can  I  tell  you?  It  was  very  fast.”  Garner  pulled  back  into  traffic.  He  would
return to the museum, examine  the  snow-covered  lawn.  Surely  there  would  be  blood  if
something had actually been shot.
They drove back through the streets until they reached the area where the encounter
had  taken  place.  “Come  on,  and  bring  your  camera.”  The  two  men  helped  each  other
across the fence that separated the museum lawn from the sidewalk. There were  marks
there, perfectly plain to see. The melt had distorted their shape, but it was still clear that
they had once been pawprints. And there was an area spotted with blood and little clots of
meat. Farther on, toward the street, was another tiny drop of blood. Just over the  fence
more could be seen. With the photographer cursing, the two  newspapermen  crossed  the
fence again. Sam Garner loped across the street and trotted up and down before the stone
wall that marked the boundary of Central Park. Then he saw what he was hoping to see, a
long bloody  scrape  on top  of  the  wall.  “Over  here,”  he  called  to  Fields,  who  was  busy
trying to stomp wet snow off his shoes. On the way across the street he had slipped into a
slushy puddle.
“My feet’re gonna freeze,” he moaned.
“Come on! Help me across this friggin’ wall.”
He was only too glad to give Garner a leg up. Sam  scrambled  to  his  hands  and  knees
atop the wall and then dropped over into the park.
At once everything changed. Central Park  in winter  is  as  quiet  as  a  desert.  This  was
true  especially  up  here  near  the  wall,  away  from  the  paths,  an  area  choked  by
snow-covered bushes. Garner  turned  and  looked  back.  Fields  was  not  following.  “Fine,”
he thought, “I’ll get the Goddamn story myself.  Better  not  be  any  pictures.”  He  pushed
bushes  aside.  It  was  cold  and  wet  in  here  and  he  wasn’t  dressed  for  a  stroll  in  the
shrubbery. Then he saw it again, the  little  red  trace  lying  on the  snow.  And  there  were
more pawprints here, at least three sets. Whatever made them had gone tearing through
here  not  too  long  ago.  A  pack  of  wild  dogs  running  from  two  trigger-happy  detectives?
What the hell, this was getting interesting.
He followed the tracks a few more yards, then stopped. Before him was a great smear
of blood, and leading away from it were heavy splashes, impossible to miss. This trail led
up  a  low  rise  and  into  even  deeper  brush.  Cursing,  Garner  followed  it.  Low  branches
overhung,  dropping  snow  on  him  every  time  his  bent  back  brushed  against  them.  He
clambered along from splash to splash, and came upon a place where branches had been
broken, many paws had ground away the sodden snow, and everything was bloody.  “Oh
God,” he whispered. Bits of meat and fur were scattered  all  around,  lying  half-frozen  on
the  ground,  stuck  in  the  bent  twigs.  It  was  a  fearful  sight  and  it  made  Garner  feel
suddenly alone and afraid. He peered into  the  bushes  around  him.  Were  shapes  moving
there  beyond  the  edge  of  visibility?  This  place  was  awfully  quiet.  It  had  the  sullen
atmosphere  of  a  crime  scene,  a  place  where  violence  had  been  done  and  gone,  and  it
stank. All around there was a nasty, cloying animal smell. It was musty, reminding him…
it was a female odor, mixed with the  stench  of  the  blood.  “What  in hell  is  this?”  he  said
softly. His mind turned to the two detectives, to  the  strange  events  of  half  an  hour  ago.
What in hell was going on here?
He backed away from the area slowly, carefully. Sweat was popping  out  all  over  him.
He gritted his teeth, fighting an impulse to turn and run wildly through the trees. Instead
he walked as softly as he could. Not far off he could hear the rumble of traffic on Central
Park West. Yet it seemed an eternity away right now in this savage, inhuman place. That

was  the  word  to  describe  it—inhuman.  There  was  a  powerful  and  monstrous  presence
about the spot, the blood, the bits of flesh, the horrible odor—it all combined to produce in
Sam  Garner  an  overwhelming  dread  that  seemed  to  rise  up  out  of  his  dark  core  and
threaten to reduce him to blind, running panic. He moved faster but he did not run.
“Hey, Sam,” came a  distant  voice.  “Sam!”  Garner  heard  it  but  was  afraid  to  answer,
afraid  to  raise  his  own  voice.  Something  was  near  him,  he  was  sure  of  it,  pacing  him,
keeping  just  out  of  sight  beyond  the  bushes.  He  broke  into  a  trot,  then  a  loping  run.
Branches lashed at him, scratching his face, knocking off his old fur hat, cutting his hands
as he struggled. Then the wall was before him, too high to scale from this side. “Rich,” he
shouted, “Rich!”
The  photographer  looked  down.  His  eyes  opened  wide,  he  let  out  a  high  bleat  of  a
scream.
“Help  me!”  Garner  shrieked.  He  raised  his  arms,  grabbing  frantically  for  the
photographer’s outstretched hands. Slowly, painfully he clambered  up  the  wall  and  with
Fields’ help got over onto a bench.
“Good Christ, what the hell was that thing?” Fields babbled.
“Don’t know.”
“Come on—gotta get  out  of  here!”  Fields  ran  to  the  car,  causing  traffic  along  Central
Park  West  to  screech  and  skid  as  he  hurried  across  the  street.  Weakly  Sam  Garner
followed  him.  He  was  sick  with  fear.  Something  unspeakable  had  been  going  on  in  that
park, and he had been paced by some kind of hellhound as he had left.
He jumped into the car, slammed and locked the door and leaned his  badly  scratched
face  against  the  steering  wheel.  “What  was  it?”  he  whispered.  Then  he  looked  up  at
Fields, blinking tears out of his eyes. “What was it!”
Fields  was  embarrassed  and  looked  away.  “Dunno.  Lots  bigger’n  a  dog.”  Now  he
mumbled. “Had a sort of… face. Good Christ…”
“Describe it! I’ve got to know.”
“Can’t…  only  saw  it  for  a  second.”  He  shook  his  head  slowly.  “No  wonder  those  two
cops are trigger-happy. That thing came straight from hell, whatever it was.”
“Bullshit,” Garner replied. His chin was jutting out now,  he  was  regaining  himself.  He
took  deep  breaths.  “Bullshit,  whatever  it  was  it  was  real.  A  flesh  and  blood
something-or-other. Tasmanian devil, I dunno. But one thing is sure,  it’s  on the  loose  in
New York City and it’s damn well gonna be big news.”
“So a wild animal escapes. Page two.”
“Ha! Think about it. Mutilation killing in the park. Cops scared to bejesus of something
that looks like a dog. Then we get a closer look, and it ain’t no dog that’s spookin’ ’em.” He
stopped, a powerful and withering image of that thing in the bushes near him overcoming
his pugnacity. He hadn’t seen it clearly but he could imagine— “Rich, there was a fuckin’
bloodbath in there. I mean, I found a place where there was so damn much blood it looked
like  a  slaughterhouse.  Something  got  it  bad  there,  man,  not  so  long  ago,  and  the  smell,
Holy Christ!”
“Smell?”
“It was obscene. All the bushes were covered with it, like something had been sprayed
on them. You couldn’t see it but you could smell it. It was like—”
“What?”

“I don’t know. Never mind.” Out of the corner of  his  eye  he  thought  he  saw  a  fierce,
inhuman face peering over the wall so he put the car in gear and moved out. He got away
from  there,  going  downtown  into  the  heart  of  the  city.  Their  press  credentials  made  it
easy to park, so they stopped at the Biltmore for a drink.
“The  place  is  quiet,”  Sam  muttered,  “and  there  ain’t  any  other  newshounds  hangin’
around. I just want to get myself together again.”
Fields didn’t protest, just followed “So whaddaya think?” he asked as soon as they had
slipped onto a couple of stools at the luxurious mahogany bar.
Sam  didn’t  answer.  “Perfect  Manhattan,  up,”  he  said  to  the  bartender.  “They  know
how to make a Manhattan here,” he growled. “That’s my definition of a good bar.”
“What’s going on, Sam?” Fields was insistent now. He wanted to know. This was a good
story  and  there  were  going  to  be  great  pictures.  He  certainly  wasn’t  going  to  tell  Sam
Garner, but he had gotten a good look at the thing that had been following the reporter. It
had come out of the brush just as Sam reached the wall and had sat and watched him go.
Then its ears had snapped toward Rich Fields and it had simply disappeared. There it was
one second, then a flash of gray and it was gone.
There had been a perfect picture there for a second before the thing had taken off. But
Rich Fields  hadn’t  taken  a  picture.  For  that  second  he  had  been  frozen,  staring  at  the
most  horrible  living  thing  that  he  had  ever  seen.  But  it  had  all  happened  so  fast.  You
couldn’t be sure about moments like that, maybe it was a trick of light on a dog’s face. He
eyed Garner. “What was it?” he asked.
“How the hell do I know! Quit ridin’  me,  you  ain’t  an  editor.  It  was  somethin’  weird.
Out of the ordinary.”
“Well, that’s obvious. Did it kill Evans?”
Garner raised his eyebrows, looked at the photographer. “Sure. And it was responsible
for the bloody bench the cops  found  this  a.m.  too.  It’s  a  monster  livin’  in the  park.”  He
stared  a  moment  at  the  drink  before  him.  “Monster  Stalks  Park.  It’s  more  a  National
Herald  story,  ain’t  it?  There’s  no  proof,  except  what  we  might  have  seen.  That  won’t
work in the Post.”
Fields  nodded  his  head  slowly.  He  sipped  his  Martini.  Garner  was  right  about  this
place;  you  spent  half  your  life  around  fifth-rate  bars,  you  forgot  how  great  a  skillfully
made Beefeater Martini could be. Right now it really hit the spot. “We gonna file?”
“Not yet. There’s too many loose ends. I think we might get lucky, wrap it up nice and
pretty. Those two detectives, they’re scared shitless about this. You know what they did,
they shot one of those things on the museum lawn. They were scared  of  being  attacked.
I’ll tell you what’s goin’ on. We got some kind of a holy terror loose in this  town  and  the
police are scared to make that fact public.”
Fields smiled. “That’s gonna be a very  beautiful story, Sam. If we can get it  together,
that  is.  It’s  gonna  be  very  hard  to  get  together.  We  sure  ain’t  gonna  trap  one  of  the
beasts. And I can’t see us workin’ it out of those two cops. I think we got a toughie on our
hands.”
“Brilliant  insight,  Dr.  Freud.  It’s  a  very  tough  story,  but  we’ll  break  it—if  we  live
through it.”
Fields laughed but not very hard.
  
The  human  had  come  snooping  along,  following  the  blood  trail  of  the  dead  child.  As

soon as he dropped down from the wall the old father was aware of the human interloper.
He was a small man with quick, light movements.  His face  was  tense  with  curiosity.  His
movements  were  halting  and  confused  though,  as  if  the  trail  was  hard  to  follow.  And
evidently  it  was;  the  human  was  tracking  by  eye  from  blood  droplet  to  blood  droplet.
Three times the old father thought that the man would lose the trail but each time he had
regained it once again. And he kept hurrying along between the branches, oblivious of the
fact that the old father was never more than six feet away.
The rest  of  the  pack  had  moved  off,  getting  away  from  the  scene  of  this  afternoon’s
disaster. Only the old father had lingered  behind,  drawn  by  his  sorrow  to  stay  near  the
place where his son had died. He himself had been about to go, to fall into his new place at
the bottom of the pack, when he had heard the scrape  and  thud  of  the  human  dropping
over the wall. He had scented the man almost immediately; it was a fresh smell, mostly of
the cloth in which the man was wrapped. But even so the flesh beneath the wrapping had
a definite odor—a healthy man, one who smoked heavily but  did  not  breathe  poorly.  He
came  along,  crunching  and  clattering,  his  lungs  loudly  passing  air  in and  out.  As  he  got
closer to the spot where the boy had died the old father stifled an intense urge to kill him.
Here  was  another  human  meddling  in  the  affairs  of  the  pack,  further  evidence  that
knowledge of the clan was spreading.
The man clambered up the slope that led to the very spot that was still covered by the
young male’s blood. And he entered the bush under which the  death  had  taken  place.  A
stifled sound came from the man. The old father rushed up to the bush, then stood very
still as the man came out.
The human did not see him but seemed to sense his presence anyway. Fear had come
into the man; here was something unknown, and it made the  man  want  to  return  to  his
own kind. The man ran along with the old father just behind. He was in a fever to kill this
human, so much so that his mouth hung open. It took every ounce of strength for him to
let the creature escape. All his instincts screamed at him, kill it, kill it now! But he knew in
his mind that this would be a mistake. They could not risk so much killing and after all the
man had seen only blood. The snowmelt would wash most of it away before more humans
could be brought to this place. Also, the pack was not here to help him dispose of a body.
It  would  have  to  be  left  here  until  he  could  get  them  back.  They  were  not  likely  to
respond to his signal although his voice carried for miles. He was no longer pack leader, he
would have to run and get them if he wanted them. And while he was gone, other humans
might discover the carcass of this one, making the problem faced by the pack that  much
worse.
Nevertheless  his  mind  was  not  his  whole  being.  Underneath  it  were  the  powerful
emotional currents of his race, currents that now tore at him  and  demanded  that  he  kill
the intruder, tear the creature apart, end the threat.
Then the man was at the wall, screaming for help. A pale face appeared above the wall.
For an instant the old father met the eyes of this human; looking into human eyes was a
little like looking into the eyes of an old enemy, or even a beloved sister.
He should not be here—run! And he ran, moving back into the brush in the wink of an
eye. Then he sniffed  the  air,  located  the  pack  and  started  off  after  them.  His mind  was
spinning  with  the  terrible  knowledge  that  another  intruder  had  come,  and  he  was
alternately relieved and guilty that he had not killed the thing. This conflict made him feel
angry, and his anger fed his desperation. Wild, mad thoughts began to roll in his brain. He
wanted the danger to be over. The pack had to prosper.  Soon  they  must  win  this  battle
against humanity. With the appearance of this  new  factor—the  stranger  who  sought  the
lair  of  the  pack—came  proof  that  the  forbidden  knowledge  was  spreading.  It  had  to  be
stifled at the source, and soon. “Tonight,” he thought as he trotted, “or it will be too late.”

Chapter 11
Chapter 11
Chapter 11
Chapter 11
« ^ »
With the coming of night the wind rose. It swept down out of the north, freezing and wild,
transforming  the  afternoon  melt  into  a  cutting  mantle  of  ice.  The  warmer  air  that  had
lingered over the city became  clouds  and  blew  away  to  the  south,  and  remaining  in the
sky  were  the  few  stars  that  defied  the  electric  flood  below,  and  a  crescent  moon  rising
over the towers. The bitter wind flooded along the avenues of Manhattan, carrying with it
an ancient  wildness  that  seldom  reached  the  inner  sanctum  of  the  city;  it  was  as  if  the
very  soul  of  the  frowning  north  had  swept  from  its  moorings  and  now  ran  free  in  the
streets.
Buses  crunched  along  the  ice-slick  pavements,  their  tire-chains  clattering  and  their
engines wheezing. From steaming grates came the rumble of subways. Here and there  a
taxicab  prowled  in search  of  the  few  people  willing  to  venture  into  the  cold.  Doormen
huddled  close  to  the  glittering  entryways  of  luxurious  apartment  buildings  or  stood  in
lobbies staring out at the wind. Inside these buildings normally docile radiators hissed and
popped as overstrained heating systems fought to maintain comfort against the freeze.
The last light had disappeared from the sky when Becky opened her eyes. Beyond the
bedroom door she heard the drone of the evening news. Dick, Wilson, and Ferguson were
there watching. She rolled over onto her back and stared  out  the  window  at  the  sky.  In
her  field  of  vision  there  were  no  stars,  only  the  bottom  point  of  the  moon  slicing  the
darkness,  cut  off  by  the  top  of  the  window.  She  sighed  and  went  into  the  bathroom.
Seven-thirty  p.m.  She  had  slept  for  two  hours.  Disconnected  images  from  her  dreams
seemed to rush at her from the air; she splashed water on her face, ran a brush through
her hair. She shook her head. Had they been nightmares, or mere dreams?  She  couldn’t
quite remember. Her face looked waxy in the mirror; she took out her lipstick and applied
a little.  She  washed  her  hands.  Then  she  returned  to  the  bedroom  and  pulled  on  her
thermal underwear, then threw on jeans, a flannel shirt, and added a heavy sweater. The
wind  moaned  around  the  corner  of  the  building,  making  the  window  bulge  and  strain.
Long fingers of frost were appearing on the glass, twinkling softly as they grew.
Becky  walked  into  the  living  room.  “Welcome  to  the  real  world,”  her  husband  said.
“You missed the show.”
“Show?”
“The Commissioner announced that Evans was killed by a gang of nuts. Cult murder.”
Wordlessly Wilson waved a copy of the News.
Becky shook her head, didn’t bother to comment, “Werewolf  Killers  Stalk  Park—Two
Dead.”  So  ridiculously  confused,  so  mindless.  The  Commissioner  just  couldn’t  grasp  the
truth, none of them could. She found her cigarettes and lit one, then flopped down on the
couch between her husband and  Wilson.  Ferguson,  slumped  in their  reclining  chair,  had
not spoken. His face was drawn, the skin seeming to have stretched back over the bones,
giving him  a  cadaverous  appearance.  His mouth  was  set,  his  eyes  staring  blindly  in the
general direction of the television set. The only movement he made was to rub his hands
slowly along the arms of the chair.

Becky wanted to draw him out of it. “Doctor Ferguson,” she said, “what’s your opinion
of all this?”
He smiled a little and shook his head. “I  think  we’d  better  get  our  proof.”  He  felt  his
pocket for the rustle of paper. His notes on Beauvoy’s hand signals were there, ready for
reference in case his memory slipped.
“He means we’ve run out of time,” Wilson said.
“So what else is new. Any of you guys hungry?”
Everybody was very  hungry. They wound up ordering  two  pizzas  from  a  place  down
the street Beer and Cokes they had in the refrigerator. Becky was just as glad, she didn’t
particularly care to cook for four people. She leaned back on the couch crossing  her  legs,
feeling the weight of the two men beside her. “We got everything?” she asked.
“Two radios and the camera. What else is there to get?”
“Nothing I guess. Anybody been upstairs?”
Their plan was to stake out the roof and man it in relays.  One  would  stay  there  with
the camera while the other three waited below. The reason that they didn’t go up in pairs
was that they hoped it would help to keep the chance of being scented to a minimum. The
three  in the  apartment  would  keep  in touch  with  the  one  on the  roof  via  the  handheld
radios  they  had  bought.  Dick  had  purchased  them  at  an  electronics  store,  two  CB
walkie-talkies.  They  could  have  checked  out  a  couple  of  police-issue  models  but  they
didn’t want their traffic overheard on the police band. No sense in attracting attention. By
tomorrow morning it wouldn’t matter; they would have the pictures they needed. Becky’s
eyes went to the camera, its black bulk resting on the dining room table. It  looked  more
like  a  flat-ended  football  than  a  camera.  Only  the  shielded  lens,  reposing  like  a  great
animal eye deep in its hood, revealed the thing’s function. They had all handled it earlier,
getting  used  to  the  awkward  shape  and  the  overly  sensitive  controls.  You  could  take
pictures  almost  without  realizing  you  had  started  the  camera,  and  the  focusing
mechanism could be very  frustrating to work if your depth of field was changing rapidly.
How soldiers  had  ever  used  it  in battle  was  beyond  understanding.  And  it  was  terribly
delicate,  threatening  to  break  at  the  least  jostle  or  to  lose  its  onboard  computer  if  the
batteries weakened too much.
But  it  worked  miraculously  well  when  it  worked.  “Anybody  tried  it  out  yet?”  Becky
asked. “You’re going to be the first.” She nodded. By mutual agreement she would stand
the first watch on the  roof,  eight  to  ten-thirty.  They  had  divided  the  hours  of  darkness
into four two-and-a-half-hour segments and allocated the watches.  Becky  took  the  first,
Ferguson the second. He had argued that he wanted to take his watch in the alley where
he could confront the Wolfen, as he called  them,  personally.  But  he  had  been  overruled.
The third watch, from one until three-thirty, was  to  be  Dick’s.  This  was  the  most  likely
time for the night’s attempt. Always when they had come before, it had been during this
period. Dick had insisted on this watch, saying that he was the best choice, the strongest
and the most fit. Becky couldn’t deny it. She and Wilson were exhausted, God knew, and
Ferguson was showing signs of cracking. Dick was the strongest, it was right that he go at
the most dangerous time.
Still,  she  did  not  want  him  to  go.  She  found  herself  drawn  to  him  in  a  strange,
dispassionate  way  that  she  did  not  associate  with  their  married  love.  There  was
something  about  his  vulnerability  that  made  her  want  to  protect  him.  Physically  there
was  no real  attraction,  but  there  was  a  quality  of  spirit  that  attracted  her  strongly—he
had been willing, after all, to put his whole career on the  line  to  keep  his  father  out  of  a
welfare  nursing  home.  He  had  always  been  good  and  kind  to  her—but  there  was
something inside him that was growing, a kind of wall that shut her out of his heart, kept

her away from his secret thoughts. She wanted to be there but he refused her entry, and
maybe not only her but himself as well. He brought tenderness and physical  intimacy  to
the relationship but he did not bring himself. The real Dick Neff was as alien to her now as
he had been when they first met. And her spirit, after  hungering  and  trying  for  his  love
these  many  years,  had  simply  given  up.  She  knew  now  what  was  missing  in  their
relationship and she had begun to try to do what she could to repair the damage. Mostly,
it was going to be up to Dick. She longed for him to open himself to her, to give her more
than a thin veneer of himself to go with his urgent sexuality, but she felt that in the  end
he would fail. Exactly why she felt this way she could not say, but she did feel it. Perhaps
it came from the coldness she saw in his eyes, and the lust  that  filled  them  when  she  so
desperately  wanted  to  see  love.  Dick  had  been  scarred  in  a  way  that  many  cops  are
scarred.  He  had  seen  too  much  of  life’s  miseries  to  open  himself  to  any  other  human
being, even his wife. When they  were  first  married  Dick  would  come  home  hollow-eyed
with  sorrow,  unable  to  articulate  his  feelings  about  the  horrors  he  had  seen.  He  would
describe them woodenly, all emotion absent from his voice.
There  had  been  a  child  suicide,  a  little  girl  of  twelve  who  had  died  in  his  arms  of
self-inflicted burns. She had pressed herself against a gas stove,  then  lurched,  in flames,
through a window into the street.
There had been a mother,  pregnant,  beheaded  by  a  gang  of  teenage  junkies.  He  had
been first on the scene, witness to the spontaneous abortion  and  miscarriage  delivery  of
the seven-month fetus.
There had been many others in his years  on the  street,  most  of  them  connected  one
way or another with drugs. These experiences plus his time in Narcotics had made of him
an obsessive, consumed man with only one goal, to destroy the dealers who destroyed the
people.
The obsession had to be compromised in so  many  ways  that  his  hatred  of  crime  had
turned into self-loathing, a mockery of his personal worth. Problems, to a man  like  Dick,
caused a slow closing of  his  heart,  a  shutting  out  of  life,  until  there  was  nothing  left  but
anger and animal lust and a vague, overshadowing sorrow that he could not voice.
Becky knew these things about her husband, and longed to tell him about them. But it
was hopeless, and this hopelessness was now driving her away from him. She was rapidly
reaching the point where if she could not help him, she would have to leave him.
And there was Wilson. George  Wilson,  a  grumpy,  unappealing  creature  with  an  open
soul. He might grumble and threaten, but you could open Wilson  up  and  get  inside.  And
he loved her with boyish desperation. When his overtures were accepted he was amazed
and gratified. He wanted her in a raw, urgent manner that  possessed  him  right  down  to
his core. She knew that he dreamed about her at night, that he held an image of her in his
mind’s  eye  during  his  waking  hours.  And  they  fit  one  another  in strange  and  satisfying
ways.
Such thoughts were dangerous. How could anyone in her right mind want to trade the
young, vital Dick Neff for a busted-up old man like Wilson? Well, she was thinking about it
more and more lately.
The  doorbell  rang,  and  in  a  few  moments  they  were  eating  pizza.  “You  still  sulky,
Doc?” Becky asked  Ferguson.  He  was  brooding  more  than  he  should;  she  was  trying  to
draw him out.
“I’m not sulky. Just contemplative.”
“Like a soldier before a big battle,” Wilson said. “Like me this afternoon.”
“I wouldn’t know, I’ve never been in a battle. But let’s just say that sitting up there on

that roof half the night isn’t my idea of my proper role.”
“Your idea is to go down to the alley and get yourself killed.”
“We don’t  know  their  capacities,  but  I  think  I  have  the  means  to  communicate  with
them. On the roof, you’ll be in danger as soon as they become aware you’re there. You’ll
be hidden, they’ll see it as a threat.”
“And climb all thirty stories after us, I suppose.”
Ferguson stared at her. “Obviously.”
“Carl, we’ll have the Ingram up there. Have you ever seen what an Ingram M-11  can
do?”
“No, and I don’t want to. I’m sure it’s very  lethal. Naturally all you can think of is kill
or  be  killed.  And  what  about  all  the  other  buildings?  A  sea  of  windows.  Will  you  really
start spraying high velocity bullets around? I doubt it.” He  settled  glumly  into  his  chair.
He was  right,  too.  Not  one  of  them  would  feel  free  to  use  that  gun  on  a  rooftop  in  the
middle  of  Manhattan.  Hell,  you  wouldn’t  want  to  use  any  gun  in  such  circumstances,
surrounded by so many innocent lives. But the gun was the only real protection they had.
Its value lay in the fact that it would provide accurate coverage over a wide area and do it
fast. A shotgun could do that too, but they were afraid that buckshot would lack stopping
power. One slug from an Ingram would  knock  a  heavy  man  ten  feet.  They  wanted  that
kind of punch if they were going to come up against the werewolves.
“How likely are they to spot us?” Wilson asked suddenly. He had been gobbling pizza;
it had not seemed as if he was following the conversation at all. Ferguson considered. “The
more senses they can bring to bear, the more likely. If scent was all they had, we’d have a
chance. Unfortunately they have hearing and sight too.”
“We can be quiet.”
“How? Stop breathing? That’s more than enough sound to give you away.”
“Then we’ve gotta hope we see them first, don’t we? You  spot   ’em  ,  you  take  a  few
pictures, you get the hell inside.”
Ferguson nodded. “Assuming we see them first— or at all.”
“Look,  we’ve  been  through  that.  They  aren’t  going  to  come  up  through  the  building
and  they  aren’t  going  to  climb  the  balconies  that  overlook  Eighty-sixth  Street.  That
leaves these balconies, the ones that overlook the alley, as their only route of attack. So if
each person just keeps that camera  focused  on that  alley,  we’re  gonna  see  them  if  they
come. That’s damn well where they’ll be.”
The  disconsolate  look  on  Ferguson’s  face  didn’t  change.  He  wasn’t  buying  Wilson’s
theory, at least not enough to  improve  his  disposition.  “Have  you  imagined  what  it’ll  be
like  up  there  fooling  around  with  that  damn  camera  while  they  are  swarming  up  the
balconies? I have, and believe me it isn’t a very comforting thought.”
“You’d have a good thirty seconds before they reached the roof,” Becky said.
Ferguson  leaned  forward  in  the  chair,  stared  at  them  with  contemptuous  eyes.
“Assuming you even see them coming.”
“That’s the whole purpose of the camera, for Chrissakes! It makes it like daylight. We
damn well will see them.”
“Human  senses  against  Wolfen  senses,”  he  replied  bitterly.  “Technology  or  no
technology, there is absolutely no comparison. Let me tell you something. Whichever one
of  us  is  unlucky  enough  to  be  up  there  when  they  come  is  going  to  be  in  very  great

danger. Let me repeat, very great danger. Unless we all  realize  that  all  the  time,  every
second, it is very likely that one or more of us will be killed.”
“Jesus Christ, we don’t need that!” Dick blurted. “I mean, what a fucking—”
“Dick, he doesn’t understand. He’s not a cop.” You don’t look at things that way when
you’re  on  the  force.  Maybe  it’s  true,  but  brooding  on  it  isn’t  the  kind  of  thing  that
increases a man’s effectiveness.
“He’s doing a cop’s job. Oh, no, wait a minute. No cop ever had an assignment like this
before. But at least we’re prepared for it—this guy obviously isn’t”
“I don’t have to be here at all, may I remind you. In fact, I ought to be in that alley.”
Dick started to speak. Becky knew him well enough to know that he was about to  get
angry, to lash out—and they needed everybody, even Ferguson.
“Dick’s right,” she said quickly, “let’s not talk about it. I’m due to go up in ten minutes
anyway, so enough said.”
“OK,” Dick said after a long moment. Ferguson glanced nervously at his watch and was
silent.
She went into the bedroom and put a cardigan on over her heavy sweater, then wound
a thick  cashmere  scarf  around  her  neck  and  put  on her  pea  jacket.  She  drew  fur-lined
gloves on her hands and dropped an electric pocket warmer into the  jacket.  She  already
had on three pair of socks and snow boots. She pulled a knit hat down over her ears and
added a fur cap.
“Jesus,” Wilson said, “you look like a mountain climber in that outfit.”
“I’ve got two and a half hours in that wind.”
“I know, I’m not arguing. Let’s test radios.”
The concern in his eyes touched her deeply. He turned on one handset, then the other,
and  when  they  were  both  running  they  squealed.  “Good  enough,”  he  said.  “I’ll  be  over
here near the terrace. We oughta get a good signal as long as I don’t move too far back in
the apartment and you stay near the edge of the roof. You got the signals straight?”
“One  dot  every  five  minutes.  Two  if  I  want  to  go  to  voice.  Three  if  I  need  help.”
Instead of talking they planned to signal as much as possible by pressing the mike button.
It would keep the noise down.
“Right. But give us a vocal as soon as you get up there and another just before you’re
ready  to  come  down.”  He  glanced  over  her  shoulder.  Dick  was  adjusting  the  camera,
Ferguson  was  facing  the  TV  set  “Come  closer,”  Wilson  said  in an  undertone.  She  stood
face to face with him and he kissed her a long moment on the mouth. “I love the hell out
of you,” he said. She smiled at him, put her finger to her lips, then turned and  went  into
the  dining  room.  She  was  glad—he  seemed  to  be  recovering  some  of  his  customary
strength.
“Camera’s good,” Dick said. “Just for God’s sake  don’t  drop  it  over  the  ledge.  They’ll
have my head six ways from Sunday if I don’t bring this thing back intact.”
She took it from him, carrying it in both hands. Her  thermos  of  hot  coffee  was  under
her arm.
“Wait a minute, kid,” he said. “Isn’t something missing?”
“If you mean the Ingram, I’m not taking it.”
“You damn well are.” He went into the living room and lifted it out  of  the  box  Wilson
had brought it in. “It’ll fit right up under your pea jacket, very nice and snug. Take it.”

“I’ve got my thirty-eight. I don’t want the Ingram.”
“Take the fucking thing, Becky!” She took it from him. His mouth trembled as he gave
it to her. They said nothing; there was nothing more to be said.
The  three  men  accompanied  her  to  the  elevator.  It  seemed  unlikely  that  anybody
would be encountered on the way up, but if they were, the presence of four people in the
car would draw attention away from Becky’s strange outfit and equipment.
The elevator rose smoothly to the thirtieth floor. All four of them got  out.  They  went
into  the  stairwell  through  the  gray-painted  exit  door.  The  wind  could  be  heard  above,
booming against the door that led to  the  roof.  Becky  ascended  the  single  flight  of  stairs,
followed by Wilson and Dick. Ferguson remained below.
“OK, kid,” Wilson said, opening the door. It faced north, and as soon as he opened it a
brutal gust of ice-cold  wind  poured  in on them.  Becky  barely  felt  it  under  her  layers  of
clothing.  She  tromped  out  onto  the  roof—and  nearly  fell  flat.  The  snow  had  melted  up
here and now the melt was a layer of ice. She stood bracing herself against the jamb of the
open door, staring down at the two men  huddled  on the  steps  behind  her.  “Icy  as  hell,”
she shouted over the wind.
“Can you make it?” Wilson hollered back.
“On all fours.”
“What’s that?”
“On all fours.” And she pushed the door closed. At  once  she  was  plunged  into  a  dark
and alien world. The wind boomed and every move caused her to lose purchase on the ice.
The roof was flat, its expanse broken only by this door and by a shed about ten feet away
that  housed  the  elevator  motors.  The  building  was  large  and  the  roof  area  was  wide,
perhaps a hundred feet on a side. This area, roughly square, was covered in gravel which
made the layer of ice bumpy and even more difficult to walk across. If she stood still the
wind moved her of its own accord, causing her  to  lean  into  it  and  stumble  until  she  was
down  on  all  fours.  Her  eyes  were  tearing  and  the  tears  were  freezing  on  her  cheeks.
Lights whirled past. She huddled against the  door,  her  back  to  the  wind.  She  pulled  out
the pocket warmer and cradled its fitful heat near her face. The Ingram’s butt jutted into
her  left  breast,  the  coffee  thermos  threatened  to  roll  out  from  under  her  arm,  the
walkie-talkie  and  camera  further  impeded  her  movements.  She  looked  around.  Lights
glowed up from three sides of the building. Those were the street sides. The fourth side,
which disappeared into a maw of blackness, overlooked the alley.
Putting  the  pocket  warmer  away,  she  braced  herself  and  crawled  toward  the  dark
edge of the roof. For safety she finally  went  down  on her  stomach  and  slithered  as  best
she  could  with  all  the  equipment.  The  edge  loomed  closer,  the  wind  rocked  her  prone
body.  Cold  ripped  into  her,  cutting  under  the  pea  jacket,  so  bitter  that  it  felt  like  fire
against her skin. She kept telling herself that she was crazy, she had to  turn  back,  there
was no way to endure this for more than a few minutes.
But she went on, dragging herself closer and closer to the edge of the roof. At least the
alley was on the south side of the building and her back would be to the wind.
She reached the edge, touched the concrete lip of the roof with her gloved fingers and
paused.  The  lip  was  about  three  inches  high,  a  bare  handhold.  Methodically  she
inventoried:  thermos,  radio,  camera,  weapon.  OK,  now  pull  into  position.  She  dragged
herself closer to the edge, pulling with her cold-stiffened fingers until her face was just at
the lip of the roof. Before her was an empty expanse that plunged into dark. South of the
building was a sea of brownstones and  older,  lower  apartments.  Beyond  them  she  could
see all of midtown Manhattan, the lights glimmering in the wind, the moon now risen high

above the city. In the sky the anti-collision strobes of passing planes stuttered. Far to the
west a fitful carmine glow marked the very  end of day. But here the night was total, and
the alleyway below was  unlit  except  by  the  faint  glow  from  the  windows  of  apartments
low down in the building.
Clumsily she maneuvered the camera before her face, felt for the button, and turned it
on. Immediately  the  readout  jumped  into  the  viewfinder  and  she  pressed  the  focusing
lever.  The  alleyway  swam  into  view,  uncannily  bright  and  detailed.  She  could  see
trashcans,  see  the  frozen  snow  covering  their  tops.  The  brownstone  houses  across  the
alley all had gardens, and she could look into their shadows and see the frozen remains of
summer flowers,  the  hard  limbs  of  naked  trees.  The  windows  of  the  brownstones  were
almost too bright to look at, but when her eye adjusted she could see people inside, most
of them sitting like statues before television sets. One young family was eating dinner at a
table behind a glass door. There were four of them, two adults and two children. She could
make out the faces clearly.
Now  she  pulled  the  camera  back,  cradling  it  against  her  chest,  and  drew  the
walkie-talkie  around  to  her  face.  It  had  been  hanging  from  its  strap  along  her  back.
Clumsily she turned it on, held it to her ear so that the mouthpiece fit under her lips. This
would be the only voice transmission and she didn’t want it to last any longer than it had
to.  For  all  she  knew  they  were  out  there  somewhere  right  now  watching  and  waiting.
“You there?” she asked quietly.
At once there was a reply, Wilson: “Hear you.” She reported  briefly.  “I’m  in position,
camera operating, cold as hell.”
“Hell’s hot.”
“Right. Let’s test signals.”
She  released  the  mike  button,  then  pressed  it  once,  holding  it  down  for  about  three
seconds. Downstairs
Wilson followed suit. The result was a detectable change in the hiss that came from the
speaker. She replied with two presses of her mike button. Wilson responded immediately
with the same. The emergency signal, three presses, was not tried. It was reserved only
for trouble. If one and two worked, three would also. “OK by me,”  she  said.  “OK,”  came
the reply. “You’ll get your first signal five minutes from now.”
Then there was silence. In five minutes Wilson would press his mike button once  and
she would reply with the same. So it would  go  for  the  next  two  and  a  half  hours.  Every
five minutes they would renew contact, thus insuring that the cold would not lull her into
sleep. If she ever  failed  to  reply  they  would  be  on the  roof  in a  matter  of  minutes.  She
thought of them down there together in that apartment and hoped they kept away from
each  other.  Wilson  and  Dick  were  not  friendly,  to  say  the  least  And  Ferguson  was  so
nervous the least bit of tension might send  him  into  a  panic.  The  wind  rocked  her  body
again,  making  her  cling  to  the  edge  of  the  roof  with  her  free  hand.  Leaving  the
walkie-talkie against her ear, she withdrew the pocket warmer and put it on the roof just
beneath her chest, making a tiny area of relative warmth that would keep her neck from
freezing as the tendrils of Arctic wind curled around her body.
She  repositioned  the  camera  and  made  a  sweep  of  the  alley  peering  through  the
viewer. Nothing. Closing her  eyes  she  turned  her  face  into  the  pocket  of  warmth  under
her chin. The wind kept pulling at her, kept her body tense, her mind on the ragged edge.
It was going to be a long and brutal watch. The first signal came through and she replied,
then made another sweep and again bowed her head.
This continued through the first hour. At the  end  of  that  time  she  pushed  back  from
the edge of the roof, put  her  equipment  down,  and  stood  up.  Methodically  she  stomped

until she was sure her feet were  unfrozen,  then  jogged  in place  for  a  few  moments.  She
blew  into  her  gloves,  grateful  for  the  warmth  that  this  produced.  She  drank  a  few
swallows of coffee. Overall  she  was  in good  condition.  She  struggled  across  the  roof  and
peered down the three street sides. Each one revealed the same scene:  an  empty  street
with  the  ice  glaring  yellow-white  under  the  sodium-arc  streetlights.  Aside  from  a  few
parked cars there were no signs of humanity.
Then  she  noticed  one  of  the  cars.  It  was  double-parked  and  it  looked  a  lot  like  an
NYPD unmarked car. Why the hell would it be here? It could only be a stakeout. But from
this height who could be sure? Then the wind hit her and she had to go back to hands and
knees,  crawling  precariously  across  the  roof  once  more.  Let  them  stake  the  place  out,
maybe  they  would  come  in  handy  one  way  or  another.  Goddamn  them,  they  were
watching  Dick.  Those  were  Internal  Affairs  Division  investigators  for  sure.  When  you
thought about it, it was almost funny. She huddled down and made another sweep.
  
“You’re  through,  kid,”  came  Wilson’s  voice.  She  buzzed  back,  saying  nothing,  and
immediately  retreated  to  the  doorway.  It  seemed  like  an  eternity  had  passed  up  here.
Her whole body ached except for her feet, which were ominously numb.
They were waiting for her in the stairwell. Ferguson was bundled up now. She passed
the equipment to him and told him about her  experience  with  the  wind.  He  nodded,  his
face sunken and silent. Dick replaced all batteries—pocket warmer, camera, walkie-talkie
and then tucked a hot thermos under Ferguson’s arm. The scientist slammed through the
door with a bang and a gust of frigid wind.
The brutal conditions hit him harder than he  had  expected.  He  struggled  to  keep  his
balance, slipped and collapsed against the door. This whole thing was such a farce. Instead
of  hiding  up  here  they  should  be  down  in  the  alley  under  spotlights  making  the
open-handed  gesture  of  friendship  from  Beauvoy’s  diagrams.  The  wind  cut  into  him,
making  his  muscles  convulse.  How  could  those  cops  possibly  take  this  punishment?  He
tried  to  move  out,  fell  back  again.  His  eyes  were  tearing  now,  the  tears  freezing  and
obscuring his vision. He got to his feet, took a few staggering steps forward. His legs shot
out from under him and he  landed  painfully  on his  side,  smashing  the  absurd,  unwieldy
gun into the ice  beneath  him.  He  struggled  to  his  stomach  and  got  out  the  radio,  began
calling  them.  This  roof  was  beyond  his  capabilities;  despite  the  others  he  was  going  to
have to take his chances with communication—in the alley.
Back  in the  apartment  Becky  went  to  the  bedroom  and  peeled  off  her  clothes.  She
checked her  feet,  found  no signs  of  frostbite.  Still  shaking,  she  went  into  the  bathroom,
closed the door, and turned on the shower. When the warm billows of steam hit her naked
body she actually laughed with delight. Warmth, delicious warmth was all she could think
of as the water sluiced over her body. It  had  been  a  brutal,  killing  two  and  a  half  hours
and she was  bitterly  tired.  After  a  thorough  shower  she  toweled  and  powdered  herself,
then  once  again  put  on long  johns,  jeans,  and  a  heavy  sweater.  Anything  could  happen
tonight and she wasn’t about to assume that she wouldn’t be going outside again, maybe
in a hurry.
When she went into the living room, Wilson was hunched over the radio and Dick was
suiting  up.  He  was  doing  it  slowly  but  he  was  doing  it.  For  a  moment  she  was
confused—how  long  had  she  been  in  the  shower—but  then  she  realized  what  was
happening. “Just hang on, buddy,” Wilson was saying, “Neff’s gonna be up in a minute and
you can come down.”
The reply was garbled.
Becky flared with anger. “That little creep! Leave him where he is.”

“I  ain’t  hurryin’,  honey,”  Dick  said  mildly.  “He’s  been  whinin’  ever  since  he  got  up
there.”
“He’s by the door,” Wilson called from his station at the living room window.
“The  hell!”  Becky  said.  “We  need  that  little  bastard.  The  three  of  us  can’t  take  his
time.”
“We  got  to.  Dick’s  gonna  take  an  hour,  I’ll  take  an  hour,  then  you  take  a  half  hour.
Then  Dick  does  his  full  shift  and  I  do  mine.  That’s  what  we  have  to  do.”  He  said  it
laconically but his voice was tired. They all knew what hell it was up there.
“It’s  no  surprise.  You  can’t  expect  an  untrained  man  to  withstand  that  kind  of
punishment But I still ain’t hurryin’.”
“As if we were in any better shape ourselves. Hell, none of us are street cops.”
“Speak for yourself, dear. I’m in good shape. You and Wilson’re a mess, but—”
“OK, so how’s about you take his shift and yours too. Five hours. Sound good?”
“That’d be convenient, wouldn’t it, honey?” He spoke in a quiet, level tone. What in the
name of God did he mean? He couldn’t possibly suspect that there was anything between
her and Wilson. There wasn’t— at least very little!
She decided not to pick up on it.
Again the three of them took the elevator to the roof, and there was Ferguson sitting in
the stairwell looking bleak. Nobody  spoke  to  him,  just  took  the  equipment  and  got  Dick
checked out. The door to hell opened and closed again and Dick was gone.
The ride down was strained and silent. Once in the apartment Ferguson began silently
picking up his things, a book, his wallet and keys which  he  hadn’t  wanted  to  take  to  the
roof. “That roof was too much  for  me,”  he  muttered.  “But  I’ll  make  it  up  to  you,  I’ll  do
exactly  what  I  should  have  done  in  the  first  place.”  He  slipped  out,  the  door  clicking
behind him. A last glance revealed a face set with fear and determination, the  eyes  wide
and glazed.
“Don’t let him,” Wilson murmured.
“Yeah, don’t let him.”
But neither of them moved. Maybe he was going to die out on the street and maybe he
wasn’t. It was his risk, he had chosen it. “We should have stopped him.”
“How? He’s a determined man. Brave, too, even if he  couldn’t  handle  the  roof.  Signal
Dick, let’s get started.” They went to the radio.
“White male about thirty-five  exiting  building,”  said  one  of  two  plainclothesmen  who
were  sitting  in  a  car  in  front  of  the  building.  “Nah,  it  ain’t  Neff.”  The  other
plainclothesman hadn’t even opened his eyes. Inside the car it  was  warm  and  quiet,  the
two cops barely moving through the long hours of the shift. Another four hours and they
would be relieved. Hell, you could get a worse gig on a night like this. Likely Captain Neff
wasn’t going anywhere anyway until tomorrow. Still, he had that fancy camera,  he  must
be planning to do something with it.
The  two  plainclothesmen  didn’t  watch  Ferguson  as  he  rushed  past  the  front  of  the
building and turned the corner. If they had they would have noticed the furtiveness of his
movements,  the  desperate  way  his  eyes  darted  around.  But  they  would  not  have  seen
what happened when he turned that corner.
They were waiting there under cars. They had placed themselves just inside the alley.
This  way  they  could  hear  both  front  door  and  back  and  at  the  same  time  watch  the

apartment.  When  they  heard  familiar  footsteps  crunching  on the  snow  they  were  filled
with eagerness. The pack was damaged and angry, hungry to kill.
When  they  came  out  from  under  the  cars,  Ferguson  stopped.  They  could  smell  fear
thickly about him, it would be an easy kill. He spread his hands in the  palms-up  gesture
he had seen in the ancient book. They took their time getting  positioned.  He  looked  into
their  faces.  Despite  his  fear  he  was  fascinated  by  them—cruel,  enigmatic,  strangely
beautiful. They stepped toward him, stopped again. “I can help you,” he said softly.
Three of them executed the attack while the fourth kept watch. He was dead, his body
rolled under  a  car  within  five  seconds.  One  jumped  into  his  chest  to  wind  him;  another
collapsed  his  legs  from  behind,  and  a  third  tore  his  throat  out  the  moment  he  hit  the
ground.
Their race had long ago  forgotten  its  ancient  relationship  with  man.  His hand-signals
had  meant  nothing  to  them,  nothing  at  all.  The  four  of  them  literally  tore  him  apart  in
their  fury,  ripped  at  him  in  a  kind  of  frenzy  of  rage.  They  were  the  mother,  the
second-mated pair and the female of the third. Old Father had disappeared, they weren’t
sure  why.  Perhaps  he  was  too  ashamed  or  too  hurt  to  take  his  new  place  behind  the
youngest in the pack.
But he was nearby. Older, cannier and more sensitive than the others, he knew better
than they how desperate the situation had become. He was determined to right the wrong
he had done his pack— even at the cost of his life. Although he was unable to see them, he
heard their attack. “They act from fear,” he thought. “They need strength and courage.”
And  he  resolved  to  help  them.  He  had  been  aware  for  some  moments  of  a  human
presence on the roof of the building and took care to stay close to the wall, out of the line
of sight from above.
He went quickly to the front of the building, slid under a car and waited. A few minutes
later a pedestrian came along, opened the door to the lobby. He ran in past her.
“Hey!”
“A dog—damn it, Charlie, I let in a dog!”
“I’ll get it—Jesus, it’s moving!”
He raced for the stairs and went up. He knew exactly where he was going and why. He
trusted to luck  that  these  were  the  right  stairs.  The  shouts  of  the  humans  faded  below
him. Maybe they would rationalize his presence, maybe not. He recognized the danger of
what he was doing and he knew how it would probably end.
But he owed this to the pack he loved.
Dick Neff cursed out loud when he felt the cold and was tugged by the wind. Becky was
one hell of a girl to have endured this for two Goddamn hours! He was proud of her, there
hadn’t been a single peep of complaint. A  person  like  that  humbled  you,  hell,  awed  you.
She was a total pro, no question about it.
He was heavier than his wife and the wind didn’t force him to  slither  on his  stomach.
But he crawled. He crawled  slowly  and  carefully,  not  liking  the  way  those  gusts  hit  him
from  behind  and  made  him  slide.  Thirty  stories  was  a  long  Goddamn  drop.  You  went
over, you’d have time to think about it on the way down. Plenty of time. He hated heights
like this. The view from his apartment was beautiful but he hated this. In his nightmares
he always fell, and lately he had been  falling  a  lot.  His subconscious  reached  out  to  him,
imparting a strange déjà vu. It  was  as  if  he  had  been  here  before,  crawling  toward  this
precipice,  shoved  and  jostled  by  this  same  wind.  This  was  going  to  be  a  test  of  every
particle of endurance and courage that he had. No wonder Ferguson had caved in so fast,
this was a direct confrontation with the wild power of nature—and beyond that there was

the even greater danger of what they faced.
He could tell where Becky had been lying by the indentation in the  snow.  He  went  to
approximately the same place. First the equipment check, then the camera sweep.
Nothing there.
Now the voice check. Wilson came in clear. They punched off with the mike signal and
Dick settled  in as  best  he  could.  He  was  just  making  another  sweep  when  he  heard  a
muffled bang behind him. The door? He turned. It stood ten feet away. It was breathing
hard, as if it had just run up the stairs.
He jumped to his feet, snapping away with the camera. Then it moved  and  he  hurled
the  camera  at  it  The  machine  bounced  against  its  flank  and  rolled  away.  It  wasn’t
attacking, probably because he was so close to the edge that a direct assault  would  send
them both over. It moved quickly,  trotting  to  the  edge  itself,  now  parallel  with  him.  He
was going  for  the  Ingram  when  it  jumped  him.  He  lurched  sideways,  slipped  on the  ice
and found himself half over the edge.  But  so  was  the  werewolf,  just  a  few  feet  away,  so
close he could see its face.
They hung there, it with its forepaws dug into the icy edge, he hanging by his arms. Its
eyes bored into his with a look of hatred more terrible than he had ever seen before. The
eyes darted around, calculating, seeking  the  crucial  advantage  that  would  kill  Dick  Neff,
leaving the werewolf alive.
Carefully,  not  looking  at  the  emptiness  beneath  his  feet,  Dick  brought  an  arm  down
toward the .38 he had in a pocket. This was his one chance, his only chance. He wanted so
desperately to live, not to fall! The inches-high concrete lip  was  the  only  thing  that  held
him here, and it held him now by only one arm. The creature tried to pull itself up, failed,
and  hung  still.  It  bared  its  teeth  and  made  a  low,  horrible  noise.  Its  eyes  followed  his
movements, its face suddenly registered understanding.  Now  it  began  to  slide  along  the
ledge toward him, inch by inch closing the gap between them. With only one arm hanging
on Dick could do no more than stay where he was. And he was having a hard time doing
that.  He  sobbed  aloud.  Waves  of  fatigue  poured  through  the  arm  on  which  his  life  was
hanging.
Now the  thing  was  so  close  he  could  smell  its  fetid  animal  odor,  see  its  savage  teeth
working in its jaw. He grasped the .38, pulled the gun up, fired, felt an agony in his  arm,
tried to pull the trigger again. But there was nothing to  pull.  He  looked  at  the  arm—  his
hand  was  not  there.  Blood  was  pouring  out  and  steaming  in  the  cold.  And  with
horror-struck  eyes  he  saw  his  hand,  still  clutching  the  .38,  dangling  in  the  creature’s
mouth. Then his death began.
As his fall started he felt fear, then something else, a vast  and  overwhelming  sadness
so great that it was a kind of exaltation. His body bounced on the hard ice off the alley and
he died instantly. A few moments later his hand slammed into the ground beside him.
Far above the old father was in a death-struggle of his own. He had barely, barely cut
the hand  off  as  the  gun  fired.  There  was  a  searing  pain  in his  head,  an  eye  closed.  The
bullet had passed there, grazing his eye and forehead. His own forelegs were tiring and he
could not lift himself back over the ledge without risking a fall. But  he  didn’t  want  to  lift
himself. He had seen the highest of the balconies not far away; he could work his way over
there and drop down to it. When he landed he stood dazed, shaking his head. The eye was
not going to work, it seemed. Very well, he would complete this task with only one eye. He
was going to save his family and save the secret of his race. He knew it now, he was going
to win.
He climbed down the balconies  carefully  and  painfully,  wounded  more  seriously  than
he could know, until he had gotten to the one balcony that mattered.  He  crouched  there

inhaling the filthy smell of the two that were left alive, just the other side of the glass.
Chapter 12
Chapter 12
Chapter 12
Chapter 12
« ^ »
“Hey, Becky, I got a problem.” She came over to him. “He’s not picking up on the signal.”
“Interference?”
“Don’t think so.” He pressed the mike button twice. No answer. He went over to voice.
“Wake up, Dick. You gotta signal back or I can’t tell if you’re still there.”
Only the whisper of static answered.
“Maybe there is some interference,” he  said.  “I’ll  go out  on the  balcony,  get  a  better
line.”
“We’d better go to the roof. It won’t take a minute.”
“Look, I’ll just go outside and—”
“We’re going up right now. Get your coat on.”
He complied.  Now  that  she  was  making  their  command  decisions,  he  seemed  to  be
returning to a more normal equilibrium. This was fine by her; she’d trade her stripes for
his bars any time.
Both of them had moved their pistols to their jacket pockets by the time they reached
the roof door. Becky felt ice-cold inside, as cold as the night on the other side of the door.
“You cover  my  back,”  she  said.  “Draw  your  gun.  We  take  no chances.”  She  pushed  the
door open and stepped out, her eyes going at once to where Dick should be. But wasn’t.
A pang of fear made her heart start to pound. She suppressed it, took  a  deep  breath,
called him.
Nothing answered but the wind. Then she saw an object not far away, a dark bulge on
the icy roof. “Christ, here’s the camera!” Slipping and falling she went and retrieved it.
Part  of  the  housing  was  knocked  off.  The  lens  was  cracked.  She  backed  into  the
stairwell,  closed  the  door  against  the  wind.  In  the  quiet  she  heard  her  own  ragged
breathing. Her insides were  churning,  she  wanted  to  be  sick.  “Something’s  happened  to
him,” she said. “Let’s get downstairs.”
“To the alley?”
“Hell, no! If they got him that’s where he’ll be— and they’ll be there too, waiting for us
to come to him. Remember this morning—the lure? They only get to play that particular
trick once a day.” She spoke from reason, but her heart screamed at her to go to the alley,
to save her husband. If he was there, though, he was most certainly  beyond  saving.  She
wanted to weep, but instead she pressed on. “We’ll go back to the apartment and look out
over the balcony. Maybe this damn camera will work enough to let us see  what’s  on the
ground down there.”
They returned to an apartment that was already changing  for  Becky,  ceasing  to  be  a
home. Everything was the same except Dick was… gone. If he had  fallen,  his  body  must
have sailed right past these windows while they were trying to get him on the CB. She put

the  camera  down  on  the  dining  room  table,  wiped  tears  angrily  from  her  eyes  and
examined the damage. All you could see through the viewer was a pearl-white blur. “It’s
totaled,” she said. “At least the film’s intact.” She tossed Wilson the cassette.
“Six shots. He took six shots.”
Talking  made  her  throat  constrict.  She  stood  silent,  unable  to  answer,  her  mind
searching for some way to  believe  that  Dick  was  still  alive.  She  wished  that  the  camera
hadn’t broken. Then they could use it to look out over the balcony  into  the  alley,  and  at
least  confirm  the  worst.  She  went  over  the  possibilities:  he  had  been  attacked  by  a
werewolf  on the  roof  and  had  fallen—that  was  number  one.  A  distant  number  two  was
that he had  somehow  escaped  this  attack  by  jumping  onto  the  topmost  balcony.  Highly
unlikely. If he had been able to jump down there, so could the werewolf.
Wilson came to her, put his hand on her arm. “He’s had it, baby,” he  said  gruffly.  His
eyes were wet. He looked furious.
“I wish I knew for sure.”
“You know.”
“Oh, God, maybe he’s down in that alley bleeding to death!” She knew it was irrational,
a man surviving a fall like that, but stranger things had happened.
“I’ll  go  look,  Becky,  but  it  isn’t  going  to  tell  us  anything  we  don’t  know.”  He  went
toward  the  balcony,  paused  at  the  door.  He  pushed  the  curtains  aside.  “Just
reconnoitering,” he said. He failed to notice the shape huddled against the glass almost at
his feet He rolled back the sliding door.
It leaped at him through the curtains, its snarling mouth ripping the cloth. He fell back
into  the  living  room,  rolled,  and  headed  for  the  bedroom  door.  Becky  was  in  motion
behind him as the thing pulled the curtains down around itself,  shook  free,  and  came  on
into the apartment.
Becky and Wilson reached the bedroom, and she slammed and locked the door behind
them. There was a moment of silence, then the sound of a body pressing against the door.
The plywood creaked and popped, but the door held. Suddenly the handle began rattling
furiously, almost as if it would be torn out  at  its  roots.  Becky  put  her  fist  to  her  mouth.
“Did you see?” she whispered  as  she  fought  the  panic.  “It’s  brains  are  all  out.  It’s  been
horribly hurt.”
“That must be Dick’s doing.”
The door groaned. Now the beast began throwing itself against it. The hinges quaked,
the  damaged  doorknob  rattled  loosely  with  each  impact  “Shoot  it.  Shoot  through  the
door.”
“My gun is in my coat.” And his coat was in the kitchen.
She found her own  .38  and  aimed  it  about  where  she  estimated  the  creature’s  chest
would be, flicked off the safety, and pulled the trigger.
There was  a  deafening  blast,  and  a  smoking  hole  splintered  the  door.  “That’s  done,”
she  said  in a  shaky  voice.  She  started  toward  the  door,  but  Wilson’s  hand  grabbed  her
arm. “You missed,” he said.
“How could I miss—it was right there.”
“Look.”
Through  the  two-inch  hole  in the  door  she  could  see  something  gray—fur.  And  she
could hear a low, deep sound of breathing.

“I  didn’t  even  wound  it”  She  raised  the  gun  again.  At  once  there  was  light  shining
through the hole. The creature had retreated.
“They’re damn  smart.  It  must  have  heard  and  moved  to  avoid  the  shot.  There’s  no
use trying again, it won’t be there. And we aren’t doing the door much good.”
Outside the door the Old Father moved cautiously.  He  had  jumped  to  avoid  the  shot
just  in time  and  could  still  feel  a  hot  sensation  where  it  had  passed  his  face.  His  head
throbbed  terribly,  it  was  all  he  could  do  to  keep  the  pain  from  making  him  scream  in
agony. He fought for control, found it somewhere within him, and forced himself to think
about the situation. The most important thing was that he was in. He had heard the man
walking over to the balcony door and had hidden  just  in time.  The  man  had  opened  the
door and—at last.
The next thing was to get the rest of the pack up here. He wasn’t sure that they would
come if he called them, but he knew that the sounds of  a  fight  would  certainly  get  them
climbing up the precarious balconies. Very well—he would create such sounds. He leaped
into  the  living  room,  letting  his  hatred  for  his  tormentors  be  vented  in  destruction.  He
pulled down lamps, smashed furniture, did everything he could to create  a  din.  But  only
for  a  few  moments,  not  enough  to  alert  the  humans  in  nearby  apartments.  Then  he
stopped, stood with his ears cocked. And there  it  was!  The  clatter  of  toes,  the  grunts  of
struggle. They were on their way up.
How he loved them! He thought of their future and his own past, and felt hope not only
for  them  but  for  his  whole  race.  The  last  of  the  enemy  cowered  behind  a  flimsy  door
ready  for  the  slaughter.  Soon  all  packs  everywhere  would  again  be  safe  from  human
interference. They, not he—for their safety he was going to trade his life.
They came rushing in, their faces full of the lust of victory.
When they saw him they stopped. Very well, let them be shocked. He  knew  a  mortal
wound when he felt it; their  expressions  of  horror  did  not  surprise  him.  He  was  glad  to
give his life for them; now they knew it.
A curtain of grief descended over them. Very well, that was to be expected. He refused
to allow himself to share their grief. Memories clattered at the edge of his mind, but now
was not the moment for them. There was much work and little time.
Using their language of movements, tail-wags and sounds, he quickly communicated to
his family that the two behind the door had a gun and that the door must be burst. They
all knew without  its  being  said  that  he  planned  to  jump  first  into  the  room,  to  take  the
impact of the gun.
His mate looked pleadingly at him.
He reminded her that he was already as  good  as  dead.  This  last  act—of  jumping  into
the gunfire— would be useful to the pack. Her sorrow, or his own, must not be allowed to
intervene.
Inside  the  bedroom  Becky  and  Wilson  listened  closely.  They  heard  a  rapid  series  of
growls of varying pitch, then the rattle of claws against the floor.
“Now they’re all out there,” Wilson whispered. “The rest of them must have come up
from the alley. How many shots you have left?”
“Five.”
“They better count.” His voice was choked. It was obvious to them both that five shots
would not be enough.
“The phone!” Becky grabbed it, dialed 911. Nothing. “The  receiver  in the  living  room

must have been knocked off the hook.”
“We won’t make it,” he said softly.
She whirled and faced him. “We’ll make it, you bastard. If we don’t give up hope, that
is.”
“I’m just being realistic, Becky.”
“Speak for yourself.” She held her gun in both hands, pointed straight at the door. Not
even the fact that Wilson was trying to kiss her cheek caused her to move.
“Your timing stinks,” she said.
“It’s probably my last chance.”
“Shut up and watch the door.”
The Old Father had gathered the pack well clear of the door but in sight of it. He told
them what they would do, assuming his accustomed role. Nobody questioned him, nobody
dared. He had gotten them this far, they could not but listen to him.
They would go in low, burst  the  door.  Then  he  would  make  his  rush.  He  would  do  it
alone,  hoping  that  the  gun  would  be  emptied  into  him.  Then  the  others  could  destroy
them, consume his body, and leave without a trace of themselves remaining. Man  would
not understand how these tragedies had occurred, and the  secret  of  the  packs  would  be
safe once more.
He snapped his jaw, a sound that brought them all to  immediate  attention.  Now  they
prepared themselves.
They all quivered with the desire to speak but said nothing. There were no words for
what  the  pack  now  had  to  face,  for  the  sorrow  that  they  all  felt.  Despite  his  loss  of  the
right to lead, he had nonetheless founded this pack, had built it through his strength and
effort. Now in death he received its respect.
“You hear anything?” Becky asked. Wilson was standing near the door.
“They’re in the living room. Maybe we could make a break.”
“We wouldn’t get three feet. Just stay put and think.”
The phone lay on the floor, a tiny voice telling them again and again that a receiver had
been left off the hook on the line. Becky felt like ripping the damn thing out of the wall and
tossing it through the window. “Hey, wait a minute—” She went over to the window  and
peered down. “Listen, why don’t we toss the Goddamn bed out the window. That’ll bring
somebody up to investigate.”
“So the poor soul opens the door and gets torn apart. Meanwhile, we’re already dead.”
“You got a pen?”
“Yeah, but what—”
“So we write on the sheet. Gimme—” She took the pen,  threw  the  covers  off  the  bed
and started scratching big letters on the fitted bottom sheet. In a few moments there was
a rough message, “SEND ARMED COPS  16G.  MURDER.  GREAT  DANGER.  BREAK  IN.
CAREFUL OF AMBUSH!”
They pulled open the window, finding that it was not big enough to  accommodate  the
mattress. Becky stationed Wilson at the door with the .38 and wrapped the quilt  around
her right arm. She looked down to make sure the street below was empty, then smashed
the window with her fist.  “OK,  give  me  a  hand  again,  let’s  get  this  thing  out.”  Together
they pushed and struggled until the mattress fell from the window. It tumbled  end  over

end and hit squarely on the sidewalk. It must have made a noise, but the sound was lost
in the wind.
Then there came scratching at the door. “They’re onto the lock again,” Wilson said. His
voice was strained. He looked desperately at Becky.
“Get the dresser over there—move it!” He obediently shoved it against the door while
she held the pistol. A moment later there was a tremendous bang, and the door sprung on
its hinges. A crack appeared down the center. “Lean against that dresser,” Becky said to
Wilson,  who  had  cringed  away  toward  the  bathroom.  Now  he  came  forward  again,
pressing his back against the dresser. The door shook with the onslaught of the strength
behind it.
Across the street the two plainclothesmen had heard the thud  when  the  mattress  hit
the sidewalk. Both of them peered out the closed windows of their car, toward the sound.
“Somethin’ hit the sidewalk.”
“Yeah.”
Silence for a moment. “You wanna take a look?”
“Nah. You go if you’re curious.”
“I’m not curious.”
They settled back to wait out the end of the shift. Another hour and they would be able
to hand off to the next crew and get a hot shower. Despite the car heater the cold got  to
you on these long gigs.
“What do you suppose Neff is doin’?” one of them said to break the monotony.
“Sleeping in his bed like all smart people this time of night.”
They said nothing further.
The door smashed into three pieces, which came flying in over the dresser. One of the
creatures was there, pulling itself in through the space above the dresser. Becky shot as it
leaped at her. The bullet smashed into  its  head,  and  it  dropped  to  the  floor.  Wilson  had
been thrown aside by the assault on the door and now scrambled  to  his  feet.  Despite  its
head-wound  and  the  blood  bubbling  out  of  a  new  two-inch  hole  in  its  chest,  the  thing
jumped on him, clawing into him with its vicious paws. He gasped, his eyes widening, and
screamed in agony. She shot again. It had to be dead now, but still the claws worked, the
jaws cut into Wilson’s neck and his screams pealed out.
Then the thing slumped away from Wilson. The only sound in the room was its ragged
breathing.  Wilson  started  to  stagger  away,  his  whole  front  ripped  and  streaming  with
blood. She stumbled to help him—and a paw grabbed her ankle. Agony pierced her leg as
the  sharply  pointed  claws  penetrated.  She  put  her  hands  to  her  head  and  shrieked,
kicking frantically with her free foot. The blows landed again and again, but the grip would
not release.
Becky’s whole being wanted to shoot it again, to shoot it and shoot it, but she did not.
The bullets must be saved.
Then the grip faded.
She slumped back to a sitting position  on the  bedframe  and  pointed  her  pistol  at  the
broken  door,  at  the  apparitions  that  were  gathering  there.  There  were  four  of  them,
obviously  very  unsure  about  her  weapon.  She  had  two  shots  left.  Wilson,  now  huddled
moaning on the floor beside the body of the werewolf,  was  beyond  helping  her.  She  was
alone and in agony, fighting unconsciousness.

Downstairs the doorman was staring at a patrol car that had pulled up in front  of  the
building. Two cops, the collars of their heavy winter coats turned up against the wind, got
out and entered the lobby. “Help you?”
“Yeah. We gotta check out a disturbance. You ”got a disturbance?“
“Nah. It’s quiet.”
“Sixteenth floor. People been callin’ the precinct. Screams, furniture breakin’. You got
any complaints?”
“This is a quiet building. You sure you got the right place?”
They nodded, heading for the elevator. This looked like a standard family disturbance
situation—  no arrests,  just  a  lot  of  argument  and  maybe  a  little  fight  to  break  up.  You
spent  half  your  time  on family  disturbances,  the  other  half  on  paperwork.  Real  crime,
forget it.
“Lessee, sixteen.” One of the patrolmen punched the button, and the elevator began to
ascend. After a few moments the door  slid  open  revealing  a  long,  dimly  lit  hallway.  The
two cops looked  up  and  down.  Nobody  was  visible.  Aside  from  the  sound  of  a  couple  of
TVs it was quiet. They proceeded into the hall. Apartment 16-G  had  been  the  source  of
the disturbance. They would ring the bell.
The creatures were watching Becky by lifting their heads briefly above the edge of the
dresser that stood in the doorway. Though she kept the gun aimed she wasn’t fast enough
to get a shot off at one of those darting heads.
Then they became quiet. They could jump right over the dresser and get at her throat,
she was sure of that. She hobbled to the window, wishing that she could somehow protect
Wilson, who had lapsed into unconsciousness. But  she  couldn’t.  If  the  creatures  came  at
her  she  planned  to  jump.  Death  by  falling  was  to  be  preferred  a  thousand  times  to
disembowelment by those monstrosities.
A head appeared above the dresser, paused for  a  long  moment,  then  was  gone.  That
pause had been longer than the rest. Becky braced herself. Still nothing happened.  They
were being very careful. They knew what a gun could do. The doorbell rang.
One  of  the  creatures  sailed  across  the  dresser,  its  teeth  bared,  its  claws  extended
toward her throat.
It took Becky’s last two slugs in the muzzle and dropped at her feet. The claws went to
the  face  and  the  body  hunched,  its  muscles  standing  out  like  twisted  ropes.  Then  it
collapsed  into  a  widening  pool  of  blood  Becky  watched  it  with  a  mixture  of  horror  and
sadness. Her ankle was almost useless; she could barely support herself on the windowsill
with her hands. The wind was whipping her hair around her face, biting into her back. She
looked across the carnage in the room. There were three hideous faces staring at her over
the dresser that still blocked the doorway. With trembling hands she lifted her .38 in their
direction.  Without  her  hands  on  the  windowsill,  balance  was  precarious.  The  wind
buffeted  her,  threatening  at  any  moment  to  make  her  fall.  But  the  creatures  hesitated
before the gun. Then one of them made a low, strange sound… almost of grief. It closed its
eyes, tensed its muscles—and suddenly turned away from the bedroom. Now all three of
them disappeared below the edge of the dresser.
Then there came a knock on the door. “Police,” said a young voice.
“No! Don’t open that door!”
The knock came again, louder. “Police! Open up!”
“Stay out! Stay—”

With a crash the door  flew  open.  The  two  cops  who  were  standing  there  didn’t  even
have a chance to scream. All Becky heard was a series of thuds.
Then there was a silence.
Becky was crying now. Still with the gun held  in both  hands  she  moved  forward.  But
she could not go on. She sank to the bed. Her pistol fell to the floor. Any moment now the
werewolves would be back to kill her.
“Hey, what’s goin’ on in here?”
She looked up through a haze of tears. Two patrolmen were standing on the other side
of the dresser with guns drawn. She sat stunned, hardly believing what she saw. “I—I’ve
got a wounded man in here,” she heard herself whisper.
The patrolmen  pushed  the  dresser  aside.  Ignoring  the  two  werewolves,  one  of  them
went  to  Wilson.  “Breathin’,”  he  said  even  as  the  other  was  calling  for  assistance  on  his
radio.
“What’s the story, lady?”
“I’m Neff, Detective Sergeant Neff. That’s Detective Wilson.”
“Yeah, good. But what the hell are those?”
“Werewolves.”  Becky  heard  herself  say  the  word  from  far,  far  away.  Strong  arms
eased around her, laid her  back  on the  bed.  But  still  she  fought  unconsciousness.  There
was more to do, no time to sleep.
In  the  distance  there  were  sirens,  then  a  few  minutes  later  voices  in  the  hall.  Then
light, flashbulbs popping as police photographers recorded the scene. She raised her head
far enough to see Wilson being carried out  on a  stretcher.  “O-positive  blood,”  she  called
weakly.
Then somebody was  beside  her,  looking  at  her,  a  half  smile  on his  tired  face.  “Hello,
Mrs. Neff.” He moved aside as medical orderlies slid her onto a stretcher. “Mrs. Neff, do
you want to make a statement to the press?”
“You’re the man from the Post, aren’t you?”
“I’m Garner, ma’am.”
She  smiled,  closed  her  eyes.  They  were  moving  her  now,  the  lights  of  the  hallway
passing  above  her  face.  Sam  Garner  hurried  along  beside  her,  trying  to  hold  a  tape
recorder microphone in her face.
“It’s a big story, isn’t it?” he said breathlessly.
“A big  story,”  she  said.  Sam  Garner  smiled  again,  elbowed  his  way  into  the  elevator
already crowded with medical orderlies and her stretcher. Her leg  throbbed  with  agony,
she felt exhausted, she wanted to close her eyes, to forget. But she gave Garner his story.
Epilogue
Epilogue
Epilogue
Epilogue
« ^
Their mother jumped as soon as the gun had  been  emptied  into  their  father.  She  would

make the kill, then the four of them would destroy their father’s body.
Then the incredible happened. The gun crashed again and their mother was also killed.
They  stood  staring  at  her  lifeless  form,  too  stunned  to  move.  All  three  of  them  felt
aware  of  grief—and  almost  overwhelming  anger  at  the  monster  who  had  killed  their
parents.
It sat waving its gun, and the gun smelled hot and deadly.
They  watched,  not  quite  sure  what  to  do.  Then  there  was  a  sound  outside  the
door—more  humans  approaching,  their  breath  rising  and  falling,  their  feet  crunching
against the carpet in the hallway. And the sharp, nasty scent of guns was upon them also.
The  three  young  Wolfen  turned  to  face  this  new  threat.  The  door  burst  open  amid
shouting human voices, and they prepared to kill whatever appeared there.
But it was two young males, dressed as those in the Dump had been dressed. All of this
agony  had  begun  when  two  such  had  been  killed;  they  would  not  repeat  the  mistake.
They ran past the two policemen into the hallway. Now the bodies of their parents would
be left behind for men  to  see—but  this  could  not  be  helped.  They  bolted  down  the  hall,
pushed through the heavy door there, and began to run down the stairs.
They raced across the lobby of the building,  smashing  the  glass  front  door  with  their
bodies, and running on, indifferent to  the  shouts  and  crashing  glass  behind  them  and  to
the cuts they had received.
They  ran  through  the  empty  predawn  city,  moving  north  past  the  rows  of  luxury
buildings,  through  the  ruined  streets  even  farther  north,  past  crowds  of  homeless  men
huddled  around  open  fires,  not  stopping  until  they  reached  the  dark  and  rat-infested
banks of the Harlem river.
The eastern sky was glowing fitfully, the light casting into black relief the girders of the
bridges  above  the  river.  The  three  of  them  stopped.  They  had  come  to  a  well-hidden
place, marked safe by the scent of the pack that roamed this area. All felt a terrible sense
of loss. Their parents were dead, the pack they knew was ended. Worse was the fact that
Wolfen bodies had been left behind in the hands of man.
They felt loss but not defeat. What burned  in their  hearts  was  not  fear  but  defiance;
hard, determined, unquenchable.
They howled. The sound echoed up and down the  banks  of  the  river,  crossed  the  icy
muttering waters, echoed again off the distant buildings.
High  above  them  on  the  Third  Avenue  Bridge  a  repair  crew  was  deploying  its
equipment. When they heard the sound the men stared wordlessly at one another. One of
them went to the railing but could see nothing in the darkness below.
Then the howl was answered, keening on the wind as pack after pack looked up  from
their haunts in the City’s depths and responded to the powerful sense of destiny that the
sound awakened in them all.

