
PRAY FOR HER.
PRAY FOR HER UNBORN BABY.
PRAY FOR ALL OF US.
It is all ugliness and evil. It has no name. She thinks of it as the snake. It comes in the night, in her dreams.
It tells her in its sneering way some-thing she cannot bear to hear. YOU WANT TO KISS ME. It comes
closer,  ever  closer.  It  whispers  lewdly.  WE  CAN  DO  IT,  WE  MUST  DO  IT.  OUR  LOVE  IS  THE
FUTURE, THE HOPE OF THE WORLD ...
"THE NIGHT CHURCH is. . . death by blow-torch, the whiff of bubonic plague, a sinister Lourdes,
demons  shucking  off  their  human  skins.  Strieber  has  tied  everything  together  so  well  that  we
happily  accept  even  his  most  extravagant  inventions,  and  anybody  who  has  read  The  Hunger
knows that he is indeed an extravagant inventor."
—Peter Straub, author of Ghost Story

Prologue
AUGUST 1963
IT WAS A WET NIGHT in Queens. Kew Gardens  was  quiet,  the  only  sounds  along  Beverly  Road  the
slow-dripping rain, the  occasional  hiss  of  tires  on  the  slick  asphalt,  or  the  hurrying  splash  of  feet  on  the
sidewalk.
A man came swiftly along, huddling in his raincoat, his eyes hooded by a hat. When he stopped and raised
his head to read a street sign his face was revealed to be as pale and  creased  as  a  worn-out  mask.  The
wrinkles framed a tight mouth and green eyes, ironic and cold. He consulted an address book, then walked
up to the front door of a particu-lar house. It had been carefully selected; the tenants had moved here only
a  few  weeks  ago  from  another  state.  Their  little  boy  had  not  yet  begun  attending  Holy  Spirit  Parochial
School, had not yet registered.
The Cochrans were a demographic oddity of very special interest to certain people, for the Cochrans had
no relatives but one another, and the Cochrans had just come here. They were utterly alone.
The  old  man  did  not  ring  their  bell;  he  did  not  even  pause  on  the  porch.  Instead  he  glanced  over  his

shoulder, then slipped around the side of the house and disappeared at once Into the shadows there.
He moved quickly; his activities here were carefully planned. They were dangerous. Occasionally people
such as these had guns; occasionally they called the police.
They never understood. Always, there was resistance.
Franklin Titus began to work on the basement door.
Inside  the  house  nine  thirty  came  and  went.  Letty  Coch-ran  sent  little  Jerry  to  bed.  She  and  George
settled back to watch the second half of the Garry Moore show.
"Mom?"
Frank Fontaine was starting to sing, "Maytime"; Letty had just closed her eyes. She sighed. "Why aren't
you in bed, dear?"
"There's someone in the house."
George lit a cigarette, did not stir. Letty got up and went to their boy. She was concerned. Jerry was not
a fearful child. He was spunky. Seeing him standing before her, wide-eyed, full of his innocent fright,  she
felt great sympathy and love for him.
"Just us, dear."
"It's a man. He was coming up from the basement, but when I saw him he stepped back into the pantry."
This was not baseless fear. Jerry was terrified. "Come on, Jer, let's go see if we can shoo him out."
Jerry followed her into the hall, tugging at her arm. "No, Mom, don't go in there. He was a real person. I
wasn't dreaming."
"Jerry, honey, are you all right?"
Before he could answer she heard a sound from the basement—a short, bitter remark, like a curse. She
gathered her boy into her arms.
"George! I think Jerry's right. There's someone in the basement."
Her  husband  was  beside  them  in  an  instant,  his  big  hand  covering  her  shoulder.  "I'll  go  take  a  look.
Probably a cat."
He opened the basement door, reached into the darkness, and tightened the light bulb that hung over the
stairs. "Noth-ing down there."
"I certainly heard something."
"I'll go down." As soon as he started descending the stairs Letty was seized with foreboding. Fear battled
cau-tion; she wanted to stay with George, but she didn't want to go down those stairs. "Hey," he said, "you
two really are scared!" He held out his arms, took Jerry. "Come on, big boy, let's us check this thing out."
As he clumped down he swayed from side to side with the weight of his nine-year-old.
"Daddy, don't! Don't take me!"
Couldn't he see he was scaring the poor child even more? Letty started down after them, her heart going
out to Jerry.
"George, honey, let him—"
"I know what I'm doing!"
George was only a month back from Viet Nam. He felt Letty had pampered their son during his absence,
that the  boy  was  growing  up  soft.  Easygoing  George  had  come  home  to  her  with  deep  hurts,  dark  and
violent  things  inside  him  that  Letty  was  learning  to  fear.  The  war  had  wounded  him,  and  his  pain  was
leaking out all over his wife and son.
He put the boy down beside the old black furnace. "You see, son, nobody here, not even behind it. The
room's empty."
Jerry did not answer; instead he simply looked up. Letty followed his eyes. All three of them fell  silent.
One after another the floorboards above their heads were giving under weight. Someone was walking, very
softly, from the kitchen into the living room. The footsteps stopped in front of the TV.
"George, listen!"
"Shut up!"
Garry was just starting the "That Wonderful Year" seg-ment  of  the  show.  His  voice  stopped.  The  TV
had been turned off.
"What in hell—" Leaving Letty and Jerry behind, George mounted the steps three at a time.  Letty  was
terrified now. She grabbed her son by the arm and rushed up right behind George.
The living room was empty. George stood in front of the couch, staring at the old DuMont.
It was off.
"What the hell's going on here, some kind of a prank?"
"Shouldn't we call the police?"
"What's the complaint? Somebody turned off our TV? Big deal." He flipped it back on.

It took a moment to warm up. When it did, though, it just hissed and showed snow. George twisted the
dial. Nothing, no stations. "Broke the damn  thing,"  he  muttered.  "Big  sonofabitching  joke!"  She  could  tell
when he was really angry; the army always re-entered his vocabulary.
He turned the switch off and on a few times. Then, abruptly, there came a sound out of the machine that
was so big, so utterly shattering in its intensity, that it struck them all like a  great  pounding  fist.  Letty  felt
herself falling, saw the room turn upside down, floated as if by magic to the floor.
Then the sound was gone. She was sitting on the couch. "What—w-what?"
"Darling—"
What was she trying to remember? "I. . . maybe I dozed off. I dreamed we were in the basement. . . ."
George drew her to him. "Put the boy to bed." He started fondling her breasts.
"Not in front of Jerry!" She pushed at him and he stopped.
"Put the boy to bed."
She  shook  her  head.  "Gosh,  I  feel  funny.  I  had  this  dream  while  I  was  still  awake.  We  went  to  the
basement, I was real scared. . . ."
"I was asleep too. Guess we're overtired."
"I guess."
He started in on her again. "Not now!" She gave his hand a pat.
"Put the boy to bed."
Little Jerry was already in his pajamas, playing with his toy trains in the hallway behind them.
"Come on, darling, bedtime."
He  padded  along  behind  his  mother.  When  they  reached  the  bedroom  she  gave  him  a  goodnight  kiss,
embracing him, feeling the solidity and warmth of him, smelling his clean smell,  loving  him  so  very  much.
"Goodnight, Jerry. You sleep tight, now."
"You too, Mom."
"And say your prayers. Guardian Angel and three Hail Marys."
"I will, Mom."
She left him, then, to the dark of his little room.
George was waiting for her. Liberace's TV show was just starting. She sank down into George's arms as
the swelling music filled the room.
Neither of them heard the slight click made by the pantry door as it opened,  nor  the  sigh  as  a  raincoat
brushed past the dining room curtains, nor the hiss of breath, which was the only sound the old man made
as he stood in the hallway watching them.
"Lover," George whispered, "Lover . . ." How she  adored  her  George  with  his  tough  ways  and  tender
heart. She snuggled closer to him, inhaling the mixture of Jade East  aftershave  and  tobacco  that  was  his
odor.
"You will give me your son."
Now what was that he had said? "George?"
"Yeah?"
"What did you say?"
"Nothing."
"I thought you said something."
"Musta been the TV."
"There's nobody talking." Liberace smiled radiantly, re-splendent in his rhinestone dinner jacket. He was
playing Liszt's "Hungarian Rhapsody Number One," and nobody was talking.
"You will give him to me."
Letty  felt  an  awful,  queasy  sensation,  as  if  she  had  just  smelled  something  dead.  "Oh,  George,  I  feel
sick!"
He didn't seem to notice. He  was  fooling  with  the  TV.  "I  think  we're  picking  up  that  Hartford  station
again. There's some kind of a drama or something. That's what we're hearing on the audio."
"You will give him to me. Say yes, both of you. Yes!"
Letty was dizzy, so much so that she couldn't even think straight. Somebody wanted something from her,
somebody important wanted her to say yes, to give away little Jerry. . ..
"No!"
A terrible silence entered the room. George seemed fro-zen before the TV. Something  touched  Letty's
shoulder. She could feel cold fingers digging into her muscles. Her soul screamed revulsion—the hand even
 felt wicked.
"He's only going away to school, Letty. The finest school in the world. And you and George are entering

a new life, with new hopes and new beliefs. A better life than you  have  ever  known  before."  The  voice
seemed now to be coming from inside her own head, yet she was aware of a dim form in the room, a man
leaning against the far wall beside the picture of the new Pope she had just hung up yesterday, a man who
was all hat and coat and hypnotic voice. A man who was evil in a way Letty could hardly believe, totally,
utterly, in every atom of his being.
So evil he might not even be a man.  But  his  voice  curled  and  twisted  through  her  mind  like  seductive
smoke.
"A new church, Letty, and you and George are going to hear about it soon, and revere it, and join it."
"N-n-n.. ."
"When you join, you will see Jerry again, you will come to visit him at his new  school.  You  will  let  me
take him now, Letty." The voice penetrated deeper and deeper, seeming to caress  her very soul. "Say yes,
say yes.. . ."
She had an impression, quite clearly, that she was looking directly into the yellow-green eyes of a snake.
A thing of dreadful, overwhelming evil.
And overwhelming beauty.
But she could not scream, was no longer sure she wanted to. Even so  she  found  she  was  opening  her
mouth, forming a word. .  .  .  She  struggled  against  it,  fought  herself,  felt  it  welling  up  between  clenched
teeth. "Yes," she said, "Yes! Yes! Yes!"
George crumpled before the TV, struggling like a trussed animal as Liberace smiled and played. He said
it too, a stifled whisper of a yes.
"Both of you, again!"
"Yes, take him, yes!"
"Very well."
Letty's sickness passed. She and George huddled in the dark together, the two of them staring stunned at
the hyp-notic, gray glow of the TV, where Liberace swept through the final bars of the rhapsody. Outside
the rain rained and the wind whispered through the trees.
Jerry lay motionless, staring at the ceiling. As soon as his mother had left  he  had  fixed  his  gaze  on  his
owl-clock, and was still watching the dimly lit eyes moving endlessly left to right and back  again.  And  he
was listening to a persistent whisper. "Back and forth, back and forth . . . and you are getting sleepy, Jerry .
. . you are forgetting that you're supposed to go to Holy Spirit School, forgetting that you grew  up  in  San
Diego and moved to Queens—all of that. You've always lived here, and you go to another school, a finer
school, a hidden, secret school."
"Yeah . . . secret school. . ." Jerry was floating, his only awareness  the voice  itself,  the  soft,  humming
singsong of it, the intensity of it.
"The Titus School, in Greenwich Village. You've always gone there."
"Always. . ."
"And you're coming back with me, coming to start the new term."
"Yes, sir."
With rustling, with the very slightest creak of floorboards, the old man came in from the hallway. "Hello,
Jerry," he said. "We've got to go. There's an assembly in the Great Hall in an hour."
"In the middle of the night? I'm sleepy." .
The old man ignored the protest. "I've brought your uniform, little boy. Get dressed and be quick about it."
Jerry was helpless to stop the old man drawing him up from his bed, or making him cross the room and pull
the uniform on. "You have a great work to perform, Jerry, such an excep-tionally  well-built,  exceptionally
bright child as you. A great work."
Jerry had the weird feeling that this was all some kind of a dream, but it felt like real life. Only it couldn't
be.
Couldn't it? The old man was taking him by the hand, and he could feel that dry claw. It was very real.
And now the old man was leading him out of his room.
Jerry's eyes got wet. He choked up when they stopped in the living room to tell his parents goodbye. He
shook Dad's hand and kissed Mom.
"Letty, say, 'You look so handsome in your uniform.' "
"You look so handsome in your uniform," she murmured. "Doesn't he look handsome, George?"
Dad grinned, and cuffed Jerry on the shoulder.
"Tell him he's getting to be a big boy, George."
"Getting to be a big boy!"
"Mom, Dad—is this for real?"

The  old  man's  voice  began  droning,  repeating  again  and  again,  "This  is  real,  it  has  always  been  real,
you've always gone to the Titus School, you know that, you know that. . . ."
"I don't want to go!" He embraced his mother.
His mother turned desperately to the old man. "Please, let him stay just a little while longer."
The man gripped Jerry's arm. "You'll see him again on All Souls Eve, Letty."
"Momma, Daddy, don't let him take me!"
"You cannot move, George. You're frozen. You too, Letty."
George Cochran, that big, powerful man, hid his face in his hands.
"Momma, please! Momma!" Jerry struggled against the old man's vicious grip. "Help me! Don't  let  him
take me!" His parents could have stopped the man easily, but they sat as if  tied  down,  their  faces  awful,
tears in their eyes.
Jerry pushed and  shouted  and  dragged  at  the  old  man  until  they  were  in  the  kitchen.  Then  something
terrible happened. The old man drew a long, thin stiletto from a scabbard hidden in his sleeve. "If you keep
this up, I'm going to go back and cut your parents' throats. They're hypnotized, little boy, and they won't be
able to do a damn thing to stop me."
His tone of voice was the scariest Jerry had ever heard. Miserable, sick at heart, his eyes on  that  long
blue blade, Jerry went out the door with the old man.
The last he heard from his parents that night was a ragged sob, an unfamiliar sound that might have come
from his father's throat.
Jerry was going to a very special school, a place hidden down the cracks of the familiar, to learn dangers
and dark truths. From now on he would be fenced out of his own former life.
The old man took him down the wet, weed-choked alley behind his house. They disappeared together into
the night beyond.
Chapter One
JUNE 1983
IT WAS ALL ugliness and evil; it had no name.  She  thought  of  it  as  the  snake.  It  came  in  her  dreams,
telling her in its sneering way something she could not bear to hear. You want to kiss  me, it would say, and
it would grin at  her  and  come  closer.  Now,  it would  whisper,  and  when  it  did  she  could  smell  its  rotten
breath. You know  what we have  to do,  it would whisper. We can  do  it, we must do  it. Our love is the
future, the hope of the world.
No! You're evil, you have nothing to do with hope!
I must have you, my darling.
No!
When she ran it would drift and blow along behind her like a leaf, its huge form frighteningly insubstantial.
It was never far away. Let me, it would say, and its voice would become the wind's voice: Let me, let me.
No! Leave me alone!
No matter how hard she ran or where she went it would be there. She ran down empty streets and then
emptier streets; she passed gray houses and black houses and the last city places, and came into fields rich
with wheat. And the wind sang in the wheat: You can  do  it, you  can  let me touch  you.  Wish, the  wind
said, wish and it shall be so.
And she would fall sobbing in the dry stems, and the wind would blow around her  and  through  her  and
deep inside her, bringing its wild coldness to the soft and secret depths of her.
She would know the truth of what it said: some wicked part of her wanted to let it love her, to let it  do
what it wanted to the world.
But she must not!
No.  If  she  did  multitudes  would  suffer  and  die,  their  faces  blotched,  arms  flailing,  bodies  dancing  and
blackening, bursting with filth.
She would awaken from the dream so extremely terrified that for a time she would not  even  know  her

name.
As gingerly as a frightened little cat, her everyday reality would come creeping back.
"I'm  Patricia,"  she  would  say  into  the  dark.  "I'm  Patri-cia!"  And  the  summer  wind  would  whisper  no
more. Slowly the image of the evil being would fade.
Since  Patricia  Murray  had  left  the  shelter  of  the  institution  where  she  had  been  raised  she  had  been
tortured by this dream. It had emerged into her days to the point that her life was choked by it, for it carried
with it fear as destructive as a lethal bacterium.
Sometimes she discovered tears on her cheeks even when a happy moment seemed to have banished the
fear away. She suspected that her inner self  never  escaped,  not  even  for  a  moment.  Fear  and  cold  and
dread must be the only signposts on the landscape of her  deepest  being,  a  landscape  of  trampled,  rotting
wheat.
Why was she like this inside?
As  if  her  love,  the  very  fruit  of  her  body,  was  diseased.  She  would  touch  her  belly,  smooth  and  flat,
feeling how soft her skin, imagining how empty her womb, dark and silent beneath the wall of flesh.
The image of the snake would glisten in her mind.
Only once had she actually seen the terrible, slithering creature of the dream. It had been sliding through
the field, withering the wheat. Every stalk 1 destroy, it had said as it swept and curled along, is a million
human lives.
She had seen that it had the face of Death, if Death had one: green-eyed and grinning and very still.
Come, lover, and dance with me.
The sun of morning was her best friend. Fresh light brought the familiar old world back. Reaping with the
Reaper, indeed. She was twenty-two years old and people called her beautiful. Her business was life, not
death. She was an ordinary, decent girl, full of youth and life and, people said, beauty.
She wanted to believe that her dream was no more than an expression of  her  perfectly  natural  fear  of
beginning a new life. She was in fact loveless; she wanted friends of the opposite sex; she had almost none.
Dates, laughter, fun— she wanted all the pleasures that came with men.
She was even lonelier living in her own apartment than she had been in the orphanage, and the therapy
for both this and the nightmare was to meet people.
She  was  shy.  Normal,  under  the  circumstances.  She  was  unsure.  And  who  wouldn't  be,  given  her
inexperience?
No matter how odd and outcast she felt, she kept insisting to herself that she was perfectly normal.
She sat at her makeup mirror revising her looks for a date. It was to be a late meeting, drinks and talk.
Getting ac-quainted. Patricia had become skilled at arranging these dates for herself. She would not spend
too much time with a man she had never met before.
Her makeup light flickered. She jiggled it and it almost fell apart. Things like that were always happening
here; this was not the most spectacular apartment in Queens. But it was her first place and she loved every
inch of it. She loved the furniture she had managed to collect—the big couch, the Indian rug, the bed with
its pretty yellow coverlet. She loved the idea that this place, which had  been  bare  walls  and  a  dirty  floor
when she moved in, was now a home. A charm-ing, comfortable, quiet little home.
But not as quiet as it should be.
She stopped applying her eyeshadow and listened. Hadn't  she  heard  just  then  the  scrape  of  a  window
being raised?
Patricia felt she lived on a thin edge of normality. She was given to hysteria  and  night  terrors.  But  she
wasn't really worried about herself. She hadn't always been this way. It was just a reaction to moving out
into the world on her own, she told herself. The nightmares and the forebodings and the unexplained tears
would all pass.
The television suddenly went on in the living room. She was astonished, her heart thundered, she leaped
up. The  raucous  sound  of  canned  laughter  resounded  through  the  apartment,  so  loud  that  she  could  not
ignore it. She hurried into the living room and turned off the set.
Her next impulse was to rush to the door. But she forced presence of mind—she was good at that. She
stayed where she was. A robber or a rapist wouldn't announce himself by turning on the TV. Then the set
flickered  as  she  removed  her  fingers  from  the  button.  She  smiled.  Her  heart  stopped  pounding.  Silly
woman, afraid of a loose switch on a TV set. Some errant tremble must have jarred a loose connection.
"All in the Family" was no longer on. Now the screen glowed with a strange, pulsating light. The whisper
of the static became low and deep, so deep it was felt rather than heard.
For  a  few  moments  Patricia  stared  at  this  peculiar  phe-nomenon,  fascinated  by  the  sound  and  the
shadowy move-ments on the screen.

Then she unplugged the set. No point in risking further damage. She would call a repairman  tomorrow.
Drearily enough, TV was at the moment one of her chief entertain-ments. She looked forward to it of an
evening after work.
Well,  so  much  for  that.  She  glanced  at  her  watch.  Getting  toward  eight.  She  had  to  hurry  and  finish
dressing or she'd make tonight's date wait. She started for the  bedroom,  swallowed.  Her  mouth  was  still
dry from fright. She went into the kitchen and poured herself some ice water.
She stood drinking and looking at  the  open  kitchen  win-dow.  The  taffeta  curtains  she  had  made  for  it
fluttered slightly with the night wind.
She kept that window closed.
Maybe—early this morning—hadn't she burned her toast  and  raised  the  sash  then?  Or...  was  that  the
scraping sound she had heard a moment ago?
Was somebody really in here?
She shook her head as if clearing her vision. This kitchen window was on an air shaft six stories deep. It
would take a human fly to scale the wall and open it.
HUMAN FLY RAPES SECRETARY.   
That's how the Post would headline the story.
She was becoming a victim of hysterical imaginings. She slammed  the  window  and  locked  it  and  went
back to her makeup table.
The face that looked back at her from her mirror was a little pale, a little tense. She used some blusher,
which seemed to help.
Blusher. Eyeshadow. Lipstick. I have the fatal luck to be attractive to men.
The sisters at Our Lady of Victory had not taught much about sexuality. This made most of their orphans
frantic as they reached their late teens. How could they look and act right if they had no instructions? And
they were desperate to succeed with men. Far more than outside girls they wanted to be wives.  Fiercely
they reassured one another that they were the sexiest, most irresistible girls mankind had ever seen.
Looking back from her mirror was someone Patricia knew to be a pretty  twenty-two-year-old  woman.
Much  prettier  than  most  of  the  other  orphans.  And  much  more  discriminat-ing.  She  could  never  throw
herself into the kind of relation-ship the  others  would  settle  for.  She  wanted  a  little  more  than  the  usual
sullen wifehood.
She finished her makeup. She looked good. At any rate it was the best she  knew  how  to  do.  She  was
soapy clean, with gentle green eyes and, astonishingly, a smile hidden in her lips that no tragedy had been
able to erase, not even the death of beloved parents in a pointless accident, not even life amid the bells and
the cold halls and "Yes, sister," and the packed dorm and knowing that your kind always ended up last.
Her  best  feature  was  her  smoke-blond  hair,  enclosing  her  face  in  a  magically  delicate  frame  and
suggesting a sensuality that Patricia was confident she would one day fulfill—when she had found exactly
the right man to fulfill it with.
For  those  who  did  not  get  college  scholarships  Our  Lady  offered  the  option  of  a  one-year  stint  at  a
business school after graduation, Patricia had taken her secretarial degree and gone from there to her job at
the Hamil  Bank  branch  in  Queens  Plaza,  and  this  little  apartment.  She  had  joined  the  local  parish,  Holy
Spirit, and been welcomed with desperate enthusiasm by its shambling, exhausted priest, Father  Goodwin.
Harry Goodwin, pastor of a dwindling flock of widowed Italian and Irish ladies, sometimes doing five or six
funerals in a week.
At first Patricia's youth had made him suspicious.  At  parish  socials  he  probed  for  neurosis  or  perhaps
even fanaticism. She answered him with all the pity and kindness she felt for him. Lately he had changed;
suffering came into his face when she approached him now. She could well imagine his celibate anguish.
To help him she went to church dressed in what the sisters had  called  "Mary-like"  clothes  (long  sleeves,
deep hemlines, choker collars). At Holy Spirit she wore neither makeup nor scent. Even so,  when  during
Mass his eyes went to his flock they inevitably met  hers  and  could  not  look  away.  When  she  broke  the
gaze he would stumble in his prayers, and a ragged tone would enter his voice.
Tonight she was not wearing the Mary-like clothes, not for the man she was to meet. At least she could
be certain that he was no priest.
A swish of clothing startled her. She turned around, almost falling off the chair. "Who's that?"
Nobody. She pressed the heels of her hands to her temple. It would be nice right now to just scream her
heart out, but she might as well face what was really upsetting her. She was scared to death of these awful
blind dates.
But dates arranged through friends were her best shots at a decent social life. And why not? Everybody

had to start somewhere.
Although she never knew  what  to  expect,  these  nerve-wracking  meetings  were  a  habit  she  dared  not
break. Some-times the men she met were decent, sometimes they were not, and one of them had almost fit
her nightmare.
She  intended  to  marry  well.  Mary  Banion,  her  first  real  outsider  friend,  told  her  she  must  at  all  costs
conceal her desire for attachment from her prospective mates. "For heaven's sake, Pat, don't let them know
what you're after. You'll scare them to death. Men want whores. As far as they're concerned the fact that
they get wives instead is a disturbing mystery. They spend all their married lives trying to figure out  what
the hell happened."
Mary Banion was forty-one, the second wife of a high police official named Mike Banion. Both of them
had lost their first spouses. Patricia had met Mary at the bank, where casual teller-customer conversations
had led to a lunch date and friendship.
Patricia envied Mary the fact that she had always been loved. Her first husband had adored her, but his
private  plane  had  given  out  on  him  over  the  Jersey  marshes.  Now  Mike  Banion  worshiped  her  as  a
replacement for his child bride, who had died of cancer in her twenties.
Mary looked and acted Patricia's own ideal of female success. She dressed elegantly, in silks and linens.
And she was beautiful, with  delicately  sculptured  features  and  glow-ing  chestnut  hair.  The  fact  that  her
Mike affected baggy suits and low-grade cigars made her seem even more beautiful.
"I'll make him  police  commissioner,  you'll  see.  Maybe  even  mayor  if  his  style  comes  back  into  style."
Thus she justified her second marriage. "My old truck," she called him. No doubt she would drive him to the
top.
Tonight Patricia was going to go  out  with  Mary's  son  Jonathan.  He  was  late,  but  he  must  be  coming.
He'd better. She'd been preparing herself since she got home from work.
Mary  was  in  the  habit  of  overexplaining  him,  as  if  his  merely  having  been  born  was  not  justification
enough for his life. "You're going to find him fascinating. He's very bright."
Patricia looked askance at herself in the mirror, arched one eyebrow. Was that sexy? Was that winning?
Most  of  the  men  she  had  met  didn't  call  back.  Mary  said  that  often  happened  to  extremely  beautiful
women. Men feared great beauty. But not to worry, it was all to the good. Only the best of them would feel
comfortable with her. One undesirable group did call back, though—the nerds. They not only phoned, they
came  to  her  teller  window.  The  girls  at  the  bank  called  them  "schmedlocks."  "Don't  worry,"  they  said,
"every good-looking teller has her schmedlocks." Ap-parently many undesirable men had hit upon the idea
of meeting girls by becoming depositors at the banks where they worked.
Was Jonathan going to be a schmedlock? Possibly that was why Mary oversold him.
At least, she hoped, he wouldn't be frightening. There had been one young man who was too quiet, who
went through the formalities of the evening like a zombie, who had in-sisted on taking her home with him.
Even when she refused point-blank he had kept driving. Then she saw the little black pistol tucked under his
sports  jacket.  She  had  escaped  by  jumping  out  of  the  car  when  traffic  slowed  down  on  the  Fifty-Ninth
Street bridge.
Six weeks later a young man was caught in Massapequa, Long Island, with the bodies of three girls under
the floor of his elaborate basement torture chamber. Was it him? She was never sure.
When  she  heard  the  buzzer  she  leaped  up  from  her  dress-ing  table,  flipped  off  the  Sunbeam  makeup
mirror, and ran to the intercom in the living room. "Yes?"
"Miss Murray, a Mr. Banion to see you."
"Send him up, Tony."
She had been embarrassed to ask Mary what he looked like, but if he took after his mother he would be
darkly handsome, bright, and sophisticated. Thank heavens bullet-shaped Mike was a foster father. Genial
as he was, Inspector Banion was not a promising source of looks or manners.
A rap at the door. "Yes?"
"It's Jonathan Banion."
What a soft voice. She hadn't noticed that on the phone. She opened the door onto a tall, lean man who
smiled down at her.
"Hello," she said. "Come on in."
He was wearing a seersucker sports jacket over an Oxford shirt. You could even call him handsome, and
she thought he had the sweetest face  she  could  ever  remember  seeing.  He  came  into  the  center  of  the
room and looked at her for a long moment. "Have we met?"
She knew just what he meant. "I think we must have." She laughed. "I can't imagine where."
He held out his hands and she clasped them. They were warm and familiar, as  those  of  a  close  friend

might be. "I'd say that I've known you forever," he said, "but that sounds like such a hokey line."
"Let's just assume we met and forgot and take it from there."
For a moment he didn't answer. He was looking curiously at her out of his gentle green eyes. "Let's stay
here awhile," he said. "We can talk more easily."
She smiled. "Would you like a drink?"
"Fix me whatever you're having. I suspect it'll be some-thing I like."
She went to the glass-topped table where she kept her small collection of bottles and fixed two gin  and
tonics. When she turned around he was still standing in the middle of the room.
He took his drink, never for a moment looking away from her. "Sit down, won't you," she said in exactly
the way Sister Dolorosa had when greeting visitors in Our Lady's parlor. He sank onto her couch, looking
acutely uncomfort-able. She sat down beside him. She should have taken the  chair,  but  she  wanted  very
much to be near him.
"We've  got  to  figure  out  where  we  met,"  she  said.  Imag-ine  how  nice  it  would  be,  she  thought,  if  he
hugged me. Right now.
"Maybe we knew each other in another life."
"That's impossible. There is no reincarnation."
"No? You're sure?"
"Well, it's against Church doctrine."
He raised his glass. "Cheers."
"Here's to us." Watch it, lady, don't come on too strong. Take it easy. This one looks  too  good  to  lose.
"To our first date."
"It can't be. I know you."
She could almost have predicted he would say that. The more they were together the more she felt as if
they were simply renewing an old and close familiarity.
"You must go to NYU," he said. He turned awkwardly on the couch and faced her. "I'm in psychology. I
must see you in the halls or something."
"Never been there in my life. Do you use the Hamil Bank in Queens Plaza?"
"No, Citibank. There's a branch near the university with an automatic teller. I didn't meet you in a bank. I
met you ... I met you" He frowned.
They both fell silent. No doubt the same small  breath  of  fear  that  was  touching  her  was  also  touching
him. This was no joke; this was just a tiny bit scary.
Nevertheless she was awfully glad to see him. He put his drink down and, in a methodical way that was
somehow  familiar  to  her,  leaned  over  to  her  and  kissed  her  on  the  cheek.  It  made  her  smile.  "You're
incredibly beautiful," he said.
It was simply stated, and so sincerely that it only embar-rassed her a little. "Thank you, Jonathan."
"I've been missing you. I just didn't know it."
She nodded. "Me too." But when she tried to meet his eyes she found he was looking past her shoulder,
at the dark entrance into the bedroom. She shook her head slightly, as if to say, Not yet.
"Is someone in there?"
"I'm a single girl, Jonathan, and we are all alone."
"I heard something."
"My apartment's haunted tonight. You should have been here  when  the  TV  went  on  by  itself.  But  the
place is empty. I checked it out. Except for us, of course."
He turned his face to his. "You are so lovely."
"Thank you," she said again. She wished she hadn't used that  blusher.  Her  cheeks  must  be  flaming  by
now.
He regarded her. "My mother calls you Pat. But you prefer Patricia, don't you?"
"What if I said I like Pat best?"
"You'd be lying."
He was right about that. She tried to make herself laugh but the sound died away. He was beautiful, he
was sweet, he was just what she desired.
Why, then, did a little voice inside whisper, Nightmare man?
When he touched her wrist she involuntarily pulled back. "Maybe we'd better pretend  we're  strangers,"
he said. "Tell each other about ourselves. That's the best way to begin."
She smiled to cover the ridiculous fear that was growing inside her. "You start." Her voice was too sharp.
Calm down, girl. Take it easy.
"I'm a scientist. I'm engaged in arcane experiments few people can understand. Officially I'm an assistant

professor of psychology at NYU, but I'm actually an advanced re-searcher in the physiology of the brain."
"What research?" She had to keep him talking. Then she could just close her eyes and let the sound of his
voice relieve her anxiety.
"You talk, Patricia. I want you to talk too."
"You've told me so little."
"You tell me something, then I'll tell you something more."
"I guess Mary told you I'm an Our Lady of Victory girl." She did not care for the word "orphan." "I went
to Clark Secretarial and got a job at the Hamil Bank. Totally unglamorous."
"Not to me. You might be the most beautiful woman on earth. I just want to look at you. Am I  making
you nervous? Too much heavy breathing?"
She nodded—and instantly regretted it. If only she could dare her fear and let him hold her.
"Excuse me." He went over to her faded maroon Barca-lounger, the one she had bought third  hand  (at
least) from Rebecca Stangers at the bank. "This better?"
She wanted terribly for him to come back to her and carry her into the bedroom and undress her and do
with her exactly what she had intended to save for her husband. She wanted that a  thousand  times  more
than she had wanted anything else in her life.
And he wanted the same thing—anyone could tell by the intensity that had come into his expression. His
dark brows were slightly knitted, the green eyes gone from gentle to piercing. His lips were  sensuous  but
firm. If only he would do it, he could take her. She would not allow herself to stop him.
How could it be happening like this? She was actually desperate for him, yet she had just met him a few
minutes ago. It was an awful and yet a delicious feeling. As if sharing her need, he stood up and held his
hands down to her. She rested her hands in his, hoping he would draw her up from the couch. He towered
over her. But he also trembled and beads of sweat formed along his upper lip. He squeezed her hands like a
supplicant. "I'm sorry," he said. "I know I'm coming on too fast for you. I just can't help myself."
In  reply  she  smiled.  He  was  encouraged,  and  began  to  pull  her  to  him.  Their  embrace  brought  her
immediate relief from her fear and left no question about what would happen next.
The  bedroom  was  dark,  at  once  inviting  and  menacing.  Sister  Dolorosa  had  explained  what  the  nuns
called "the clinical necessities," so Patricia was not afraid of her inexpe-rience. She knew what  would  be
expected of her. But this was for marriage. This was for marriage!
They  were  sitting  on  the  side  of  the  bed  when  Patricia  sensed  movement  in  the  room.  Seeing  it  too,
Jonathan cried out. In the same slow motion that her nightmare always imposed on her, Patricia turned to
him, only to see him being taken in a hammerlock by a shadowy, fast-moving figure that had  burst  out  of
her closet.
Then someone seized her and pulled her back onto the bed with terrific force.
Impossibly, incredibly, she recognized Mary Banion among their assailants. Her surprise was so total that
what should have been a healthy scream came out as a gasp.
Somebody tried to put a wet, ethery cloth over Patricia's face but she fought free. "Patricia, calm down!"
She was not calming down. Two big, vicious-looking men already had Jonathan tied up. Patricia leaped at
them, tear-ing her dress as she tried to keep her balance.
"Get her!"
That was Mary Banion. Definitely. Patricia ran for the apartment door. She reached it, worked the locks,
threw it open.
Feet pounded behind her as she raced down the hall and slammed her hand against the elevator button.
"Oh, God, get her!" Mary really sounded frantic.
"Mary—you must be crazy!"
"Stay right there, Pat. That's a good girl." The men coming after her were horrible, big but quick, in black
raincoats and hats pulled down to disguise themselves. Patricia took the fire stairs four at a time, bursting
out the back exit of the apartment building.
She intended to race around to the front and get the doorman to call a cop, but on the way she saw old
Franklin Apple, an elderly gentleman who had come to one of the parish seniors suppers  she  had  served.
"Oh, Mr. Apple! Mr. Apple, thank the Lord you're here! I need help, I—"
He smiled at her and grabbed her wrists in his dry, clawlike hands. For an instant she was stunned, then
filled with cold,  prickling  terror.  His  skeletal  old  face  was  grin-ning.  He  cooed  at  her  as  he  might  at  an
agitated baby. His fingers around her wrists were as cold and hard as stone.
Chapter Two

PATRICIA HAD FOUGHT desperately, finally broken the old man's grip and run wildly away from  him
through the empty, rain-drenched streets, hoping to hail a cop or find a tele-phone booth. Before she could
do either she had seen three tall men pile out of a car half a block away. She had run down a side street,
her shoes clattering on the sidewalk, the trees dripping rain down her back.
She had rushed up onto a lit porch and screamed for help; she had pounded on the door and rattled the
windows. In response the porch light had gone out. Then cars, dark and coming fast, had appeared at both
ends of the street.
She had leaped over the porch rail into wet and thorny-bushes, had fought her  way  around  a  side  yard
past lighted windows, hearing the distant drone of the ten o'clock news inside that locked house. At last she
had come into the sodden, choked alley.
And found herself facing a brick wall. But above it loomed a black, blessed shadow, the familiar bulk of
Holy Spirit Church. By some instinct she had come to this protection. Surely there were places to hide in
here, if one could be still enough. And Father Goodwin never locked his church.
By the time two men emerged from the trees behind her she had scaled the wall, run down to the front of
the  church  and  entered.  The  silence  inside  stopped  her  for  a  moment.  Votive  candles  danced  shadows
around her. Every move echoed in the great stone space. Far away beside the altar shone the deep red of
the vigil candle, confirming the Blessed Life that resided here.  Patricia  forgot  her  hiding  and  her  danger;
she ran to the altar rail and knelt, her eyes seeking the low gleam of the tabernacle.
The glimmering of the votive candles made the images of the saints painted in  the  dome  over  the  nave
jerk with spasmodic, lunging motions. Rain rattled against the stained-glass windows, and wind hissed past
the  slate  eaves  of  the  old  building.  The  air  in  the  church  as  warm  and  storm-dense.  Patricia  felt  sweat
tickling her lips, beading between her breasts, trickling down her thighs.
As she knelt, she sensed the  same  sense  of  wickedness  that  infested  her  familiar  nightmare,  the  foul,
questing some-thing that seemed to want to rape more than her body. It wanted to rape her heart, her very
being, her soul.
And it was here, somehow, in this dark old church, its stink filling her nostrils, its body hissing and swirling
across the cold marble floor. She forced back wild shrieks of terror, tried  to  retain  what  little  composure
she had left because it was all she had left. The next stage was blind, helpless panic.
To  give  herself  strength  she  brought  the  soft  voice  of  Father  Goodwin  to  memory,  from  an  intimate
moment in the confessional when she had spilled out the loneliness and terror of her life to him, when she
had revealed the anger she felt toward God  for  depriving  her  of  parents.  He  had  said,  "Pray  the  rosary,
Patty. I know it's out of fashion now, but so is everything else. Just take the beads in your hands and Mary
will console you. . .."
Trembling fingers found her rosary in the pocket of her dress. But her grip was so tight she snapped the
chain in a  dozen  places.  The  talisman  was  ruined,  only  a  clutch  of  independent  beads  and  broken  links.
There was no protec-tion in a handful of plastic.
Someone came up behind her. "Be calm, Patricia. No-body will hurt you." That horrible Mr. Apple again.
"What are you doing? What's happening?"
"Be quiet, my dear. Be patient."
He had appeared at a parish  seniors  supper  where  Patricia  was  serving  the  spaghetti.  Such  a  gnarled
little old man, his eyes mud green, his face a catastrophe of wrinkles. He had stood before her, his  paper
plate in hand, his thin lips making a strange, ironic sort of smile. "At last," he had said.
"Hungry?" she had asked, basking in a moment of good feeling.
"I'm going to take you home in a few days. I wanted you to know."
Senile. She had smiled again and served him some extra. All during dinner he had watched her, his head
bobbing, his spidery little fingers working  the  fork  and  the  spaghetti  spoon  with  difficulty.  "That's  an  odd
one," she had said to Father Goodwin, "a little senile."
"Very old."
"He acts as if he owned me or something."
"Probably lonely. Why not go and talk to him?"
"He gives me the crawls."
"Offer it up. Where's the harm in a lonely old man?"

So she had met  Mr.  Apple.  Now  she  sobbed  aloud  and  twisted  the  beads  in  her  hands  as  she  strove
toward  the  tabernacle,  wishing  she  could  have  the  Host,  could  some-how  hold  Him  before  her  as  a
protecting shield. Her vision of the altar blurred  and  fluttered.  From  the  depths  of  the  church  came  avid
scuttling. She clapped her hands to her ears, scattering beads across the granite floor. Her mind screamed
frantically at her, Run, for the love of God, run.
People, hundreds of them, were filtering into the church from  the  side  doors,  from  the  crypt,  filling  the
aisles and then the pews. There were shuffles and murmured apologies, and an occasional stifled cough.
"My God, protect me!" Her own voice was a cracking moan. Hard upon her words came another sound,
soft, stifled, gleeful. "You laugh," she shouted into the dark. "You're laughing at me!"
She swept her hair out of her eyes.
"Don't be afraid, Patricia. I've told you that you won't be hurt."
"You must be crazy, all of you!"
"We're activating your subconscious minds, yours and Jonathan's. The church, the night—all the trappings
are to help your imaginations create a new reality."
"You think you're conjuring evil spirits, don't you, Mr. Apple? This is a black mass."
"Nonsense. It has nothing to do with superstition."
"It's blasphemy and I'll have no part of it!"
"You don't know what you're saying. You belong to us, Patricia. You always have and you always will.
Your parents gave you to the Church. Our Church."
How  dare  he  talk  about  her  parents!  They  could  never  even  have  known  this  vicious  old  man.  They
would never have allowed him to touch their daughter, much less ... do the things they did at a black mass.
"Hail Mary, full of grace, the Lord is with thee, blessed art thou—"
The laughter again. Pitying laughter. Embarrassed.
Mr. Apple wanted to make others as foul as he was. Evil is always missionary.
Patricia clasped her hands tightly, huddling against the crowd behind her. She was soaked through from
her run down the wet Queens streets. Behind her she heard a heavy, scraping tread. She moaned.
The  congregation  began  very  softly  to  clap.  The  sound  was  terrible  because  it  was  so  gentle;  a
quickening, savage rhythm as intimate as the rustle of leaves.
Patricia raised her eyes until she was again gazing at the tabernacle. Inside lay the living Mystery itself,
the God to whom she had given her loyalty and love. She needed intercession now. His customary silence
had to end; this was the time and place for a miracle. "Send the Archangel Michael," she whispered.
"It's starting, Patricia. Don't be afraid."
"Oh, my God, I am heartily sorry—"
"Help her, Mary."    "I will try."
Mary was no Catholic nun—Patricia knew that by the deep red of her habit. There was no red habit in
the Church. She came sweeping up, now pale  and  agitated,  floating  in  oceans  of  wine-red  silk,  her  face
framed  by  starched  black  linen.  A  real  nun's  wimple  would  be  white.  A  hand  came  around  Patricia's
shoulder and starch crackled in her ear. "Now, now, darling, you let me help you."
"Don't touch me!"
"Patricia, you don't understand. You're under hypnosis and it's made you forget your role. You must trust
us. This is to create something beautiful and important for the world."
"You're committing an act of desecration. You're a Cath-olic. We've been to Mass together—I've seen
you pray!"
"I'm going to hold a cloth over your nose and mouth, and I want you to breathe deeply."
When Mary's face loomed close, smiling, Patricia almost recognized, almost remembered—but the place
her  sup-posedly  new  friend  actually  had  in  her  past  was,  like  Jona-than's,  just  beyond  the  reach  of  her
conscious mind. Mary placed a golden bowl full of clear blue liquid on the floor and dipped a cloth in it. She
took Patricia's head in her hands and held up her face. Her arms were strong; Patricia lacked the power to
resist.
The cloth obscured her vision. She held her breath. "Now, Patricia, breathe. Come on, darling." Patricia
held on. She resolved to die just as she was, simply by not breathing again. Not ever.
A male voice rumbled behind her. "We can't hold him!"
Another: "Franklin, this is hopeless. You can't make this work with both of them uncooperative."
"Quiet, all of you!" A loud clap of hands. "Music! Now!"
A long, low note  vibrated  in  the  atmosphere.  Patricia  was  beginning  to  be  desperate  for  air.  The  wet
cloth was stifling her. Mary whispered reassurance, her flat green eyes brim-ming with what appeared to
be pity.

Then the eyes fixed on something in the  dark.  The  expres-sion  sharpened  to  fear.  Something  cold  and
hard touched Patricia's shoulder. There was awful, ragged breathing be-hind her. The sound of it mingled
with the music. Hands as rough as bark began caressing Patricia's arms, her waist, her thighs.
Strong fingers shredded her clothes, and she knelt naked amid the scraps of cloth. "Breathe in, Patricia,"
Mary said. "Breathe in!"
"Mary, get away from her."
"She's not anesthetized at all, Franklin."
"Hurry—can't you see what he's going to do?"
"Franklin—"
"Run! He'll tear you to pieces if you get in his way!"
Patricia felt herself swept off her feet, cradled by power-ful, wire-tight arms. She shut her eyes, afraid to
look on the face of one who felt so terribly wrong. The low music throbbed and the congregation resumed
its clapping. "Oh, God, please take me!"
As  soon  as  she  spoke  air  rushed  into  her  lungs.  It  was  damp  and  smelled  of  the  full  church—candle
smoke and incense . . . and the sweaty rot of the thing that held her. Now she would have welcomed the
anesthesia.
"Somebody help me!"
"Think of our goal, Patricia. It's worth the sacrifice!"
Mary was not a friend, she was one of them—here, now, wearing that profane red habit.
Kind, friendly Mary. She had trapped Patricia in sweet coils. Patricia kept her eyes closed as the thing or
man or  whatever  he  was  laid  her  out  on  the  altar  and  ran  his  hands  along  her  tingling  skin.  The  music
boomed deeper than any organ note, coming from some instrument up in the choir loft.
There  were  so  many  of  them;  Holy  Spirit  Church  was  jammed  as  it  never  was  during  poor  Father
Goodwin's Masses.
During the  day  Father  Goodwin  struggled  here  to  keep  his  handful  of  Catholics  coming.  At  night  this
huge, gaudy, rich congregation obviously met for rituals of a very different kind.
Poor Father. These must be his lost parishioners, the ones who never came to Mass.
Her new lover was heavy. Brutish and gasping, he bore down on her, pinning her to the cold marble of
the altar. So many times, in this very spot, Father had accomplished the miracle of Transubstantiation. She
wanted  to  raise  her  naked  flesh  from  the  sacred  place  but  could  not.  He  covered  her  with  himself,
enveloped her, crushed her so completely the air gushed from her lungs.
The music began to quicken.
Until  now  she  had  called  herself  the  Last  Virgin,  playing  the  old-fashioned  Catholic  game  of
How-Far-Can-You-Go,  allowing  a  thigh  to  be  stroked,  a  breast  to  be  touched,  the  press  of  trousered
hardness against her knee.
She writhed. He was so heavy, so big, so foul-smelling.
He was beginning his filthy work. She could feel it poking and prodding at her privacy. She tried to lock
her knees but it was useless. "Oh, Jesus! Oh, Jesus!"
The  pain  choked  off  her  words.  That  black  music  thun-dered  and  throbbed.  As  one  person  the
congregation groaned. The church resounded with the gasps of a mon-strous passion.
"Jesus!" There was no response, no feeling of His pres-ence. Nothing at all.
Surely, Jesus, You still love me. You want me in Your heaven. You haven't abandoned me. No.
If You no longer want me—
The arms came completely around her.
"Patricia, you must understand that you'll be hurt if you  don't  calm  down!"  That  made  her  fight  all  the
harder. Suddenly there was a pain like fire between her legs, so intense it pulled a piercing scream out of
her. "That woke the neighborhood up," someone shouted.
"Our Father, who are in heaven, hallowed be Thy name."
"There's a light across the street!"
"Okay, get him off. This isn't working."
Hands were grabbing at the dark figure atop her, but he growled and fought and tried harder to hurt her.
He  pounded  and  jabbed  and  smashed  himself  against  her.  All  her  thoughts,  all  her  prayers  were  swept
away in a flash of agony as bones cracked and nerves were severed. Her  mind  dulled  down.  She  heard
distant shouts, and saw the frantic, caper-ing form of Mr. Apple with vestments flying about his head.
Then, abruptly, the crushing weight was gone. "Calm him down! Don't let him out of the circle." That was
the last she understood. There were more voices, but they were only a buzzing, incoherent cacophony.
The  light  of  consciousness  was  flickering  and  starting  to  die.  This  time  when  Sister  Mary's

sweet-smelling cloth was pressed against her face she inhaled gratefully in sobbing gasps.
"You will forget," said Mary's voice.
"Oh, Mary, why, why did you let him hurt. . ."
Darkness  came,  and  she  sank  back  into  the  dream  she  called  ordinary  life.  They  left  her,  hurt  and
bleeding, alone.
MARY: THE RESURRECTION OF THE INQUISITION
I am so frightened for Patricia and Jonathan I do not think I can bear it. Tonight we made a terrible, terrible
mistake with them. Unbelievable that we could be so foolish! Or is it so unbelievable? In an institution two
thousand  years  old  there  is  precedent  for  every  error.  The  ones  who  unleashed  the  Black  Death
prematurely in 1334 made a greater mistake than we have, after all.
But that is history and this is now. She is bleeding, maybe dying, at this very moment! If  I  could  sweat
blood I think I would.
But I am absolutely helpless. If I show myself now I risk exposure of the whole Church. Error must not
be allowed to compound error.
So I spend these predawn hours writing, hoping that somehow the act of putting pen to paper will relax
me enough for a few hours of rest.
What a disaster! And there was so much time wasted after she was hurt! We  had  to  get  safely  away
before calling the priest. I can only hope and pray that he gets Patricia to a hospital in time.
My God, we had to leave her!
I look at my words as they stand on the paper, dry and still. Words of fear. I think it, I say it—fear, fear,
fear.
We live exactly like all night things—we hide and scurry and know the way of silence. We and the rats
and owls and bats.
The children are so incredibly important. Please, please may no more harm come to them. Our mistake
has exposed them to an even worse enemy than our own stupidity!
The Inquisition will certainly have noticed our  gaudy  public  fiasco.  Now  our  tireless  old  enemy  will  be
after them again.
It hides for a few years, to lull us, to tempt us. . . .
Then it jumps out of nowhere—right at our throats!
The Inquisition will battle us until Catholicism withers away. The last priest, in the last moment of the last
Catholic church on earth, will strike the last blow at us.
They say we are evil, that we work to make Satan mani-fest, to give Him physical form.
I say, dear Inquisitors, evil is not all black nor your "Satan" all bad, and the world is not as simple as you
would like to believe.
Inquisition: it means inquiry. Question. Such a small word for such a great terror.
To the common world the Inquisition is dead and gone. How would  the  ordinary  Catholic  feel  to  know
that the handsome priest with the briefcase, striding so confidently out of the Chancellery, is an Inquisitor?
And that the Sam-sonite case contains a thumbscrew, a radio direction-finder, and a car bomb?
Daddy laughed and called them Christ's terrorists.
I do not laugh. They murdered my father by exposing him to plutonium. They chose that particular horror
so the radiation would prevent us from salvaging his semen and thus his precious genes.
Dad—covered with sores, gasping, his hair falling out on the pillow. Oh, God, help us!
Deliver the children from such a fate. Deliver my boy!
Must these hot summer days be his autumn? Death, birth, the roll of seasons, sky-changes: Jonathan  is
the end of a long line, the perfection of two millennia of patient breeding.
The  Inquisition  is  so  skilled.  How  can  they  be  so  damn  good  at  it?  They're  just  a  bunch  of  fanatical
priests!
The world has forgotten us, but the Church has not, not for an instant.
I hear my heart beating: bump-bump, save his life, save his life.
I love you until my heart will break, it takes my breath away to touch you, and I cannot speak to look on
your beauty. You liked to swim, you liked  to  play  basketball,  to  listen  to  your  short-wave,  to  look  at  the
stars.
We raped your mind so that the Inquisition could not even torture the truth  of  your  identity  out  of  you.
And now look— the disaster of this night will attract them like flies to a corpse!

I loved my father.
And I loved my  husband.  Poor  Martin.  So  happy,  so  handsome!  And  I  don't  want  to  think  about  him
either. I'm homesick for my men, for Dad and for Martin!
It's  a  pleasure  to  write  his  name.  Martin.  Such  a  lovely  name.  I  can  almost  hear  his  plane  falling.  1
imagine wind hissing past motionless propellers.
I know all the details of loneliness, the coldness of sud-denly empty  sheets,  the  attic  boxes  full  of  new
suits.
And then there is Mike. Oh, Mike. If only you knew how tiresome I find you. I only married you because
of the cover you unwittingly provide for Jonathan. Even the Inquisition will hesitate to kill a police official's
son. Or so we hope.
Will anything work? Can we ever escape them?
"Down the nights and down the days; down the arches of the years, the Hound of Heaven . . ."
Howling in the precincts of darkness, and in my heart.
I feel awful. I hate the dreary old church we use. Of course, our priest can't command a better parish.
I am sweating. I'm sick.
I imagine  being  put  in  the  Lady,  a  steel  sarcophagus  lined  with  spikes.  When  the  Lady  is  closed  the
spikes penetrate to a quarter of an inch every surface of the victim's body.
Mother Regina was in it three  hours.  Nineteen  fifty-four.  She  really  talked!  She  gave  them  the  entire
bloodline, told them our whole history.
—Founded by Titus Flavius Sabinus Vespasianus on Sun-day, September 9, in the year A.D. 70 on  the
still-smoking ruins of the Temple of Solomon in Jerusalem.
—Based on the secrets of breeding, now known as genet-ics, contained in the scrolls that were known as
the Treasure of Solomon.
—Charged with breeding a new and greater species out of the old human stock, a species that would be
allied with what men call evil, as they are allied with what they call good.
But evil is not evil nor good good. They are simply different principles. Man calls himself beautiful. By his
standards  his  replacement  will  be  hideous  beyond  descrip-tion.  But  his  replacement  will  be  a  powerful
species, brighter than man, more resistant to disease, closer to nature.
The blood is the whole point. Jonathan and Patricia  are  precious  because  of  their  blood.  They  are  the
masterpieces of thousands of years of breeding according to Solomonic principles. Out  of  their  union  the
new species will be born.
This is worse than lying and sweating up in that bedroom. This is—oh, hell, I'm going to just burn this and
sit in the dark.
Poor Patricia. She was screaming!
"Help her, Mary." Franklin, you said that, you fool!
God knows but I tried.
Chapter Three
FATHER  HARRY  GOODWIN  was  awakened  suddenly  by  the  ringing  of  his  telephone.  The  rings
exploded in his head, one, then another, then another. Silence. Please keep ringing. Please!
No. The silence continued. There would be no fourth ring. Harry dragged himself to the edge of his bed.
His skull felt like it was going to pound itself to bits. He was nauseated with fear.
All these years he had been dreading the three rings on a night the Tituses were using the church. Three
rings were the maximum emergency signal. They meant only one thing—they have had a terrible accident
and his church was in danger.
His impulse was to race across to the church but he seemed plunged into stifling muck; his fear paralyzed
him.  It  was  several  minutes  before  he  managed  to  go  to  the  window  and  look  across  at  the  Spirit.  He
expected  to  see  destruction,  a  mayhem  of  flames,  or  some  unspeakable  horror—maybe  a  conjured
thing—crawling the roof slates.
But there wasn't even a haze of smoke along  the  roof  line  of  the  old  building,  nor  a  flicker  behind  the
stained glass. Harry Goodwin tapped his own window. Should the Spirit burn there was no chance at all of
building a new church. A fire would mean the end of this fine old parish.
Maybe  the  three  rings  had  been  a  coincidence.  The  church  across  the  parking  lot  seemed  utterly  at
peace, blurred by the beginnings of a predawn shower.

Harry's familiar morning exhaustion bowed him. His alarm clock said four fifteen. In two hours he must
say  his  first  Mass  .  .  .  before  a  congregation  of  perhaps  seven,  in  a  church  built  to  accommodate  five
hundred.
"Friday," he muttered. "God give me strength." He felt awful. Had he taken a sleeping pill last night? No,
there  weren't  any  left  and  so  much  the  better.  Leave  the  pills  alone.  Valium  priests,  Seconal  priests,
Thorazine priests. They were worse than the old-fashioned whiskey priests. He had so far escaped the lure
of  depressants  and  tranquilizers.  As  a  result,  his  life  was  raw  with  loneliness  and  a  sense  of  unfulfilled
promise. The issue, of course, was faith and the lack thereof. His confessor, Father Michael Brautigan,  a
bluff and kindly Jesuit, red with drink, would say that faith was a matter of relaxing one's instinct to touch.
"Don't try to touch Christ," he would say. "That's the point of Thomas, isn't it?"
Harry had  to touch. But it worked both ways: one who had to touch also needed touching.  Sometimes,
naked in the middle of his silent rectory, he would dip his hands into cold water until they were numbed and
did not feel his own, then he would close his eyes and embrace himself and dance around and around with
himself in the dingy rooms.
Lately he had become too desperate, too full of self-pity  even  for  that.  Never  to  be  touched—or  even
needed, for that matter—had emerged for him as the poisonous central issue of his life. When he had first
entered the priesthood, he had assumed that his services would be ardently desired by Catholics hungry for
the  succor  of  their  Church.  Instead  he  had  spent  his  life  struggling  to  pay  bills,  working  against  the
relentless dwindling of his flock, forced to hold jumble sales and bingo and raffles, until  finally  even  those
measures failed.
Then came the Tituses. Old Franklin and handsome Mar-tin, just wanting to rent "the plant," as they had
called it, a few nights a week.
Nobody will know, Father. We help out dozens of parishes in the same shape as Holy Spirit.
Nobody will even care except you.
Our money will keep you going. You won't ever have to close your doors.
At first he had thought perhaps it was drugs or counterfeit-ing or some sort of white slavery.
He had heard their soft chanting, though, and seen the flicker of their candles. He did not actually say it to
himself  but  he  knew  the  truth.  Every  Monday  and  Friday  morning,  after  their  nights,  he  had  taken  to
reconsecrating his altar. And he no longer kept the Host in the tabernacle on those nights. It stayed under
his pillow, tucked away in the pyx.
Twenty-seven years a priest, twenty a creature of the Tituses. Traitor to his own faith, to his own soul.
How black can sin be? He put his hands to his stubbly cheeks and rubbed. He longed for the velvet fingers
of a woman, or of death.
As  time  unfolded  the  sad  destiny  that  had  been  contrived  for  him  it  became  obvious  that  his  whole
life—the  vocation  itself—was  not  really  very  valuable.  In  the  world  of  his  youth  priests  were  essential
people, needed by their congre-gations for all sorts of succor. Now when the leaves fell on his walks they
stayed, and his leaking roof leaked on.
Did people sense that he was a traitor? Could they some-how smell the taint of the Night Church in the
great nave of Holy Spirit?
He didn't want to be a priest anymore. He did not even want to live. No, he had a plan for himself. He
intended  to  die  unconfessed,  and  go  to  Hell—in  which,  despite  the  modern  theologians,  he  still  firmly
believed. He actually looked forward to it: he deserved his damnation, wanted it, and had  for  some  years
been seeking the death that would bring it. Once he had attempted to commit suicide by suffocating himself
in a plastic bag, but it had been too terrifying. So he had tried sleeping pills—and vomited them up.
He  had  asked  Martin  Titus  to  kill him,  just  a  few  weeks  before  Titus  himself  had  been  killed  in  an
airplane crash. "I'll think it over," the man  had  replied  absently,  and  changed  the  subject.  Harry  was  not
even important enough for martyrdom.
He said a bitter prayer, a Hail Mary, and turned once again to his bed.
As he slid beneath the  sheet  he  heard  quite  distinctly  from  the  church  a  human  sound.  It  was  a  loud,
woeful groan, loud enough to carry across the parking lot to the rectory.
He should have gone straight over there. Damn fool not to. Three rings  at  this  hour,  and  he  had  made
himself believe it was a coincidence. Harry Goodwin was a weak man, and that was a fact.
He put his hand on the bedside table. In the drawer was a small pistol. Mike  Banion  over  at  the  112th
Precinct had given it to him after the ritual murder of Father Santa Cruz at Saint Thomas in Brooklyn. He
shouldn't have accepted it, but he didn't want Mike to know how he envied old Santa Cruz.
This was the right time to have a pistol. He felt the comforting steel of it in the palm of his hand. One day
soon, when he could bear the taste of the barrel in his mouth, he was going to use it on himself.

As he pulled on the old raincoat liner he used as a robe and jammed his feet into his aged and corn-cut
Adidas,  he  struggled  for  some  sort  of  inner  stability.  Gun  or  no  gun,  he  was  terrified.  The  Tituses  did
horrible things over there.
He  hurried  past  empty  bedrooms  (it  had  once  taken  six  priests  just  to  administer  this  parish)  and
descended the back stairs to the kitchen. There was a folding umbrella in the bottom of his briefcase. He
fished around for it, opening it as he went out the kitchen door.
Curtains of rain swept the muddy parking lot. As Harry crossed it he was reminded by the sucking of his
shoes that he could not afford reasphalting. He opened the side door to the sacristy. Inside, the Spirit was
inky black. As he care-fully pulled the door shut behind him he  twisted  the  little  pistol's  safety  to  the  off
position.
All he heard was the din of rain on the roof. Just as he was beginning to think he had dreamed the human
sound  he  heard  another  one—a  long  sigh.  At  first  he  was  frightened,  fumbling  for  the  lights.  Then  he
realized the sound was coming  from  the  altar  and  a  flash  of  anger  mixed  with  his  fear.  How  dare  they
leave him to clean up one of their desecrations.
In  the  dancing,  vanishing  light  of  the  votive  candles  he  could  just  make  out  a  dense  shadow  splayed
across the altar. Harry stared hard. Wasn't that a large animal? He raised his gun but he could not take aim
in the dimness. Then he realized that the shape was not a crouching animal but a prone human body.
His fingers found the right switches and he flipped them all at once. Light flooded the church.
There was a woman on the altar, lying on her back. Her blood flowed down to the sacristy floor in thin
streams like bars. Harry had only a moment for astonishment. The girl moaned again, horribly.
He approached the altar. The poor child lay in a dark pool of her own blood, her legs spread, her  arms
akimbo, her hair tangled about her face.
The fact that he knew this woman so well pulled the first sound from his throat.  His  own  scream  was
more real to him and more frightening than even the horror before him. In his urgency to get to the phone
in the sacristy he dropped his pistol, which went clattering into the dark behind the high altar at the back of
the nave.
This was incredible. This could not be condoned. And yet ... he had to deal very carefully with the whole
affair. His own life, his very soul, was teetering on a knife edge.
Turning away from the horror he dashed on his long legs to the phone, grabbed it, dialed 911. The Tituses
would be furious with him for calling the police, but what else  did  they  expect  him  to  do?  They  had  just
gone off and left him with this tragedy and not one word of instruction.
There were voices outside. Neighbors. Of course—the girl's screams had roused the neighborhood. The
Tituses must never have intended to leave her behind. Circum-stances had forced them. Perhaps they even
wanted her saved.
In any case, she would  be saved. He might not be much of a priest anymore, but Harry Goodwin  was
still a human being.
He  heard  the  first  siren  start  not  long  after  he  had  hung  up  the  phone.  The  New  York  City  Police
Department was more than half Catholic, and it protected the Church almost  as  carefully  as  it  did  itself.
Harry knew one of the two patrol-men who came sprinting up the aisle, their guns in their hands. Timothy
Reilly was his name.  Impossible  that  such  a  scrawny,  mischievous  altar  boy  could  have  grown  into  this
enormous, competent-looking man in blue. Reilly took in the scene at once.
"He still in the church, you think, Father?"
Harry told the first of what he realized miserably would be many lies. "I thought perhaps I heard him. I'm
not quite sure. It could have been the echo of a door  closing."  Trick  the  cops  into  searching  the  church.
Give the Tituses and their congregation a little more time to get well away.
Reilly's partner began to search with a flashlight while Reilly joined Harry beside the poor, damaged girl.
Her eyes were rolling slowly up into her head. "Her name is Patricia Murray," Harry said, and woe tugged
his heart. "She's one of the hardest-working young women  in  the  parish."  His  throat  closed.  "One  of  my
best people." He wept and could not stop, and it was useless and  stupid  but  he  was  so  full  of  anger  and
self-disgust and sorrow that he wished right now he could be torn to pieces, and the rancid bits of himself
scattered through the filthiest deeps of  the  Pit,  each  to  suffer  separately  the  full  and  eternal  measure  of
damnation.
"She's hurt bad, Father. That bleeding's gotta be con-trolled. EMS better get here damn soon."
"I'll get my kit." He raced into the sacristy and dragged his ancient first aid kit from the bottom of the old
armoire.  As  he  ran  back  he  fumbled  with  the  latch,  only  to  open  it  and  find  the  bandages  rotted  and
covered with roach sacs, the medicines dried and useless, the tourniquet a brittle mound of rubber.
"Aren't you going to anoint her, Father?"

"Anoint?" The kid had assumed he was getting the chrism. "Oh, of course."
Another  siren  ground  down  outside.  Two  black  paramed-ics  sprinted  past  the  rows  of  age-darkened
pews  carrying  their  stretcher  and  other  equipment.  When  they  reached  the  altar  they  set  to  work  with
lightning choreography, produc-ing bandages and plasma and intravenous needles and sy-ringes. In seconds
her nakedness was obscured by gauze and tape. She lay as blue-bruised and destroyed as if on a slab in a
morgue. Her eyes were waxen and staring now, her skin gray.
"She use drugs?"
"Certainly not. She's a very good Catholic."
"Then she's been drugged. You better call the next of kin, Father."
"There are no next of kin. She was orphaned in her teens. She was raised at Our Lady of Victory. She
rarely spoke of her past. She's not been in the parish more than six months."
More  police  were  pouring  into  the  church.  Outside,  siren  after  siren  moaned  to  a  stop.  The  whole
precinct must be turning out. It occurred to Harry that he ought to make a big pot of coffee.
No, that was a silly idea. He realized when he looked down and found the holy oil  in  his  hands  that  he
was in shock, moving like a robot. Part of him was still performing priestly duties. The rest wanted at this
moment to be, to do, anything else. Anything.
Patricia was already on the stretcher. Harry fumbled to her side and began administering the sacrament.
The para-medics  wheeled  her  rapidly  down  the  aisle.  He  muttered  his  prayer  as  one  of  the  men  spoke
another sort of ritual into a walkie-talkie. "Multiple pelvic fractures, possible severed spine, copious vaginal
bleeding with developed pallor. Ad-ministering plasma and anti-shock procedures with cold pack. Patient in
shock, stage two, possible drug OD."
The ambulance began sounding its siren and flashing its lights as the stretcher was wheeled up to it. The
doors slammed on the two solemn black faces and their white-draped patient.
Harry was left with chrism in hand, his sacrament incom-plete. Carefully he wiped the remaining oil from
his thumb onto the edge of the container. Then he snapped it shut and started to go back to his church.
Mike Banion stood in the doorway, looking with the light behind him like a blocky tree stump. He was an
important cop, Detective Inspector, eighteen years on the force, as good  a  friend  as  Harry  Goodwin  had
ever had. Mike was both physically and politically powerful. You saw him at all the police funerals and the
big, famous crimes, looking through the familiar bifocal glasses out of his hurt-child eyes.
Seeing him here confirmed the seriousness of the affair. So this was to be a famous crime.
As if to certify the awfulness of it all, a car from Channel Two News came roaring up Morris Street and
screeched to a halt. The rain had gone soft and dawn was beginning to outline the jumble of flashing cars,
and  to  touch  the  cross  above  the  dome  with  a  delicate  gray  glow.  When  Harry  looked  up  at  it  he  was
almost in control, but when he looked down, his throat was tight and his eyes were once again tearing.
"Father  Goodrich,  I'm  Charles  Datridge,  Channel  Two  News."  A  young  man  stuck  out  his  hand  as  a
plump girl patted at him with a powder puff. "Mind if we get started?"
"I—" There was a sudden bloom of iron-blue light. Harry squinted.
"Rolling," cried a voice beyond the glare. "Sound! Speed!"
"This  is  Charles  Datridge  here  at  Holy  Ghost  Parish  in  Queens.  With  me  I  have  Father  Michael
Goodrich. Father Goodrich—"
"Cut it, Charlie."
"Right, Inspector. Kill the lights, Benny."
"Holy Spirit Church, Charlie. And the priest's name is Harry Goodwin, not Michael Goodrich. You guys
stay in your car until we get the perpetrator pinned down. You'll get your pictures then, assuming you play
my way now."
"Playing your way, Inspector."
"Thank you, Charlie. Come on, Father, let's go where we can talk. You got any coffee in the kitchen?"
"Sure, Mike, we can make some."
Mike Banion moved toward the rectory. "Charlie's a  news  tiger.  Channel  Two's  lightnin'  reporter."  He
laughed, a deep, reassuring sound, the easy mirth of authority. "You're gonna get a horde of 'em in the next
couple of hours. First there'll be the Post lookin' for pictures. 'Where'sa body?' they'll yell. Then the News,
and they'll want a shot of the altar. Then TV and radio stations, all of 'em hollerin' like crazy." He laughed
again.  "Along  about  dawn  a  guy  from  the  Times  will probably  phone,  name  of  Terry  Quist.  Only  since
you're a priest, he'll introduce himself as Terence. He'll already know the story back to front. But he'll get
the real stuff out of you, the dope  about  how  it  feels."  They  reached  the  rectory.  "I'm  sorry  to  say  this,
Harry, but you're gonna be famous. So's that poor girl."
"Mike, she was a parish leader, one of the few young people who really cared. She was wonderful. My

star."
"I hate to hear that, Harry. You must be hurting awful bad. I gotta think the perpetrator knew. I mean,
the beautiful parish star, and he takes her and brutally rapes her on the altar. That's tellin' me he did know,
and this is one of these weirdo deals. Probably somebody she was familiar with. Struck up an acquaintance
with her on purpose. Hell, maybe even at some parish affair. Psychopath."
They reached the kitchen. Harry turned on the lights, revealing the aged stove, the greasy counters, the
yellowing oilcloth on the table. "Let me get the coffee," he said.
" 'Fill it to the rim with Brim.' "
"I don't have any decaffeinated, Mike."
"And I don't drink it. I'm just trying to take an easier tone. Lower our blood pressure before we both get
strokes. A crime like this works on you, Father. Eats you alive."
Harry looked at him. He could not find words.
After a moment Mike continued. "So this kid  was  one  of  the  parish  stars.  And  she  was  in  the  church
alone at a very odd hour. Was she a little loony on religion? I mean, was there any likelihood she might have
come there on her own and surprised some derelict sleeping in a pew? It's important we know that."
"She was a stable, normal sort of a person. Her parents died in a fire, she told me. She had been here in
Queens for about six months. She was vague about her past. Quite vague. But Mike, she was a good  girl.
A darned good girl."
Mike Banion  sank  onto  a  chair.  The  kettle  began  to  whistle  and  Harry  poured  water  into  their  mugs.
When he inhaled the steam Mike coughed, a sound like a car refusing to start.  "Foggy  morning,"  he  said,
cradling his mug in his hands. Suddenly he looked directly at Harry. As always Harry was startled by the
depths of pain in those eyes. From the day Mike's first wife had died, they had been like that. Despite his
remarriage, Mike still went to Beth's grave every Sunday. "Harry, tell me your story. What did you see?"
"I was awake. The usual morning hells. We've talked about it."
"Awake, horny, worried."
The chill in the room  enveloped  Harry.  He  talked  too  much  to  Mike  Banion,  telling  him  all  except  the
really bad part, the part about the Tituses. Should a parishioner know his priest so intimately? But who else,
if not Mike? Harry nodded at the accuracy of Mike's statement. "I heard a noise. Loud. A terrible groan.
So I went over to investi-gate."
I heard the three rings. Their emergency signal. But I can't tell you that.
"Must have been awfully loud."
"Very."
"Church unlocked, of course."
Harry had been waiting for that. "You know it always is."
Mike's face darkened. Harry had been through this with him dozens of times before. He watched Mike
relight his cigar and take a long pull. Mike smoked cigars the way other people did cigarettes. He claimed
he never got drunk be-cause there was so much nicotine in his blood there was no  room  for  the  alcohol.
Given a pint of good scotch he might nod a little, but that was all. "You lock your church at ten P.M. in the
future, Harry, and consider that an order. I'm gonna tell the patrolmen to check it out, so don't think I won't
know."
Mike's big, spotted hand came across the table and cov-ered Harry's. The touch lasted  only  an  instant,
but the tenderness in it shamed Harry almost unendurably. Thank God for good friends, there when  you
need them. The gesture did nothing to dismantle Harry's shame at what he had come to, only painted it in a
more bitter light. "Churches belong open," he said.
"You're sentimental. That's a weakness."
"God help me, the poor girl was raped in my church! Mike, don't tell me  it's  because  I  leave  the  place
unlocked."
"I'm not accusing you, Father. You just tell me if you saw the perpetrator closely enough to make an ID."
Now the lie again. "I heard a noise. Maybe a cough, maybe the sound of the side door closing."
"Meaning the guy was just that second leaving. He must still be in the neighborhood."
"Yes. I told Officer Reilly—"
Mike Banion stood up and went out the kitchen door. A few moments later he was shouting. Harry heard
him yell that roadblocks  should  have  gone  up  and  a  house-to-house  search  started  long  ago,  on  and  on.
Cops trotted here and there, lights flashed, voices kept fracturing the dawn silence
A moment later Mike was back in the kitchen. "By God, why didn't you tell me her name?"
"I—I didn't?"
"Reilly says it was Pat Murray. Father, is that true?"

"Well, yes, that's right, Mike."
"She's a good friend of my wife's. She was on a date with my stepson!"
Mike Banion thundered off into the churchyard. A mo-ment later his old Dodge was skidding its way out
of the muddy parking lot.
For a long time Father Harry Goodwin simply sat, staring. Then he tried to pray. His words mocked him,
and soon lost themselves in silence.
Chapter Four
They guided  Jonathan  to a car and  took  him home. They bathed  him and  attended  him,  six  young
sisters in their red habits,  and  a grave  man of  perhaps  thirty who  was so gentle  he must love  him.
He laid his exhausted friend in his bed.
Jonathan dreamed of wet leaves stinging  his  face,  snatch-ing  at  his  arms.  He  raced  through  a  vicious
jungle of grasping plants and slick, seething creatures barely seen. In this dream he ran with the strength of
a wild animal and the hunger of a ghoul. He pursued a woman.
"He's having a nightmare," one of the sisters said. "Shouldn't we wake him, Jerry?"
"Let him sleep." Jerry Cochran stroked Jonathan's sweaty forehead.
In his dream Jonathan stretched out his arms, grabbed at his dream-woman's flying  hair,  screamed  out
his desire. She raced on through long, dripping alleys of trees, past flicker-ing candles and bloodied crosses.
"Jerry, he's suffering!"
"We have to let him sleep, otherwise the hypnosis may be permanently weakened. He mustn't be allowed
to remember what he did." He looked long at his young friend. "Or what he is."
Jonathan heard none of this. He was  utterly  lost  in  him-self,  racked  by  his  nightmare.  In  it  he  got  his
fingers in her hair, he dragged her down, he sat astride her.
He tried desperately to wake up. The hands that had grabbed her were not his hands, they were ugly and
horn-hard and full of evil strength.
His watchers heard a noise downstairs, the slam of a door, the pounding of Mike Banion's footsteps. "If
he knows, we kill him," the young man said laconically.
One of the sisters withdrew a long, thin blade from her habit.
They retreated into the back hall as Jonathan screamed the broken screams of great agony.
Mike came running up the stairs, oblivious to the thick-ened shadows at the far end of the dark hall.
"Wake up, Jonathan!" Mike shouted over the roaring shrieks.
Jonathan heard the voice but it was too faint for him to make out the words. The  nightmare  continued.
He smoothed back the obscuring fog of his victim's hair and looked upon her face.  Her mouth opened and
a scream swarmed out like a flight of wasps—and then his anger possessed him, his horrible, vicious anger,
and made  him  delight  in  the  way  her  flesh  swept  from  her  bones  as  he  stroked  her.  Beneath  his  scaly
palms it scraped away as skin might during the flaying of a rabbit.
This was the worst ever, the most wicked dream he had ever had. And he couldn't stop it. He watched
himself tear the skin off her knotting, twisting muscles. His own screams mingled with hers.
"Wake up! Wake Up!" A frantic voice was calling to him.
Help me! Please help me!
"Wake up!" His savior grabbed his shoulders and shook him so furiously the dream finally snapped.
"Wake up, son," Mike Banion was saying. "You and I have a big problem."
"Dad?" His own voice was a whisper. Mike had him by the shoulders, had pulled him half out of the bed.
Mike threw his arms around him. "Wake up, Johnny. This is a serious problem."
Jonathan hugged him back. He had come to love gruff Mike Banion. Although Mike could be fierce, the
cop loved him too, in his own way. Behind the tough exterior the love was there. Definitely. But in his own
way.
"I've got a hard thing to tell you, Johnny."
Jonathan looked into the detective's eyes. The intensity of the dream made even the reality of Mike seem
vague, as if he were on the other side of a dirty window. Jonathan tried to bring things into focus, to prepare
himself for whatever unimaginable tragedy had occurred. "Okay, Dad."
"Your girl is in the hospital. She got raped."

Earthquake. The ceiling, the walls, the floor flying out into the night. "My—my—"
"Patricia  Murray.  She  was  raped  on  the  altar  of  Holy  Spirit  sometime  around  midnight.  She's  at  the
Polyclinic. Bad, I'm afraid, son."
That made the dream boil up once again from  Jonathan's  unconscious.  This  time  it  brought  a  stunning,
terrible image of a  blond  head  twisting  and  turning  below  him,  lips  flecked  with  blood.  He  felt  her  body
beneath his own, jerking in spasm.
A thrill tickled him like the passage of a spider across his neck. "No!"
Mike grabbed his shoulders. "You must have been the last person to see her before the rapist."
On  those  words  his  mother  swept  into  the  room,  her  red  silk  robe  fluttering  behind  her.  "Leave  him
alone!" She was not her usual self. She looked like she hadn't slept in a month; her face was a mask.
"Mary, I'm trying to console our boy. His date was raped tonight at the Spirit."
Mary forced her featured into a grimace. "No," she blurted. "That's crazy!"
"It happened."
Jonathan saw an ocean of pity in his mother's eyes. She reached out  to  him,  then  stopped.  She  looked
from Jonathan to Mike and back again. She was silent.
Jonathan's mind returned to his dream. In it he had been raping somebody. And those vast rows of tree
trunks, those crosses—the dream jungle could easily have been a real-life church.
The memory of how very much he had enjoyed hurting her made him reject Mike's comforting hug and
scramble to his feet in panic. He wanted to run, to hide, to somehow escape the red  fire  of  insane  anger
within him.
Mike enclosed his arm in a powerful hand. "That's okay, son, take it easy. Take it easy, now."
He couldn't do that—not after glimpsing a monster in the shadows of his soul. Frantically he tried to stifle
the  terror.  Dad  obviously  thought  he  was  grief-stricken.  How  could  he  say  that  the  right  emotion  was
dread?
He decided that the impression of rape was more than a dream. It was almost a memory. Maybe this is
the way psychopaths discover their crimes.
"Dad—"
How could he say it? While she was being raped I was dreaming about raping her? Funny coincidence,
right, Dad?
"Come on, son, I'll drive you over to the hospital."
"You'll  leave  him  right  here,  Mike  Banion!  Look  at  him.  He's  overwrought!  You  wake  him  up  in  the
middle of the night, drag him out of bed—"
"Oh, darlin'. Pat was his girl."
"One date! And I arranged it."
At  last  Jonathan  pulled  himself  together  enough  to  talk.  He  had  to  tell  them,  he  could  not  keep  the
coincidence  of  his  dream  a  secret.  He  worked  his  throat,  trying  to  get  the  words  out.  "I  had  a  bad
dream—my  God,  I  had  a  bad  dream!  It's—no.  It's  impossible—but  I  dreamed  I  was  raping  her.  I  was
dreaming it when you woke me up!"
"Come on, son, take it easy, now."
"Jonathan, you don't know what you're saying! Mike, he's not awake yet. You can see that!"
"Listen  to  me!  I  dreamed  this.  I  did  dream  it."  He  faced  Mike.  "Dad,  you  have  to  put  me  on  the
polygraph, and do it right now."
"The hell I will," Mike roared. "No way are you going on the poly!"
"I am a prime suspect, Dad. I was the last person to see her."
"For God's sake, the poly can lie. What if I got a posi-tive?"
"You'd do what you have to."
"Son—oh, son—are you—it almost sounds like—are you confessing this crime?"
"Mike, if you do this—if you dare—" She fell silent, her face burning with fear and rage.
Mike ignored her, regarded Jonathan sadly. "Don't tell me (his, Johnny."
Jonathan felt in that moment the most profound pity for his stepfather. "If I'd gotten hold of you in time,"
Mike had once said, "I'd have made you a cop. Such a cop." He'd cuffed Jonathan. "You'd've been a great
cop." Poor Mike, all tangled up in his dreams of the son he'd never had. His first wife had died before they
could afford children, so twenty-two-year-old Jonathan was taking the place of the unborn. Of course there
was no question of Mary giving him children. She'd had a hysterectomy years ago.
"Mike, you've got to face it. I've got to go on the poly. Especially because I'm your stepson. If you didn't
know me  personally,  I'd  be  a  prime  suspect—dream  or  no  dream—  just  because  I  was  the  last  person
known to have been with her. I'd be down at the precinct under questioning right now."

"Hell, I'd know in a second you didn't do it. I've been a detective a damn long time, kid. And I know you
didn't  do  it.  My  goddamn  trick  knee  tells  me."  He  cuffed  Jonathan's  shoulder.  "The  poor  girl  is  really
banged up. A stringbean like you couldn'ta done it."
Then why did I dream what I dreamed?
"If I weren't your son, you'd request a poly as a matter of routine. It'd be your duty  then,  and  it's  your
duty now."
Mike's face clouded. Jonathan had him  cornered.  The  truth  was  obvious.  "I'll  call  the  precinct,  get  an
operator outa bed," Mike muttered. He started to go heavily down the stairs. At the landing he paused. He
looked back, the hall light gleaming on his glasses, his skin the color of dirty flour. "Goddamn, I just had a
thought. If we were out on the lease, we'd be gettin' up just about now. I can smell that coffee, son."
Mike's hunting lease was his personal version of paradise. The two of them had good times there, despite
Jonathan's total inability to fire after he had aimed. He couldn't under-stand killing for fun. The pleasure of
the hunt did not seem justification for stealing a life. For him, getting the buck in his sights was enough. "I'll
be ready in a minute." He went to his closet, began to get dressed.
Mother followed Jonathan into  his  room,  talked  to  him  as  he  put  on  his  clothes.  "Don't  you  realize  he
thinks you're guilty? He'll make that test read any way he wants it to read!"
"Mother, for heaven's sake, I asked for the test."
She dropped her voice. "He's clever. If I didn't know better, I'd say I had committed the ultimate error of
marry-ing an Inquisitor."
"A who?"
She blinked away  annoyance.  "Just  a  figure  of  speech.  Remember  that  a  policeman's  first  concern  is
solving his case. Getting the right man is entirely secondary."
"Mike would never take advantage like that. It isn't his way."
"I'm the one who loves you, Jonathan. You're my child and it's my obligation to protect you." Her hands
fluttered helplessly before her face. "His affection—if you can even call it that—is ordinary. Just ordinary."
She clutched at him. "You're so brilliant, so good—he has no idea what you are. He's a barbarian."
"Why did you marry him then? I don't think you've ever loved him, have you?"
"That isn't your business. I had a good reason for marry-ing Mike. Better than you can imagine."
"And I have a good reason for taking the polygraph."
"I can't stop you, can I?"
"Not really, Mother."
"So put your shirt on and go take your beloved polygraph and God help  you!  You  can  defy  me  all  you
want. 1 can't stop you." She swept out, head high, fists clenched. There were tears starting in her eyes.
Poor Mother. There was so much about her own son that she did not understand.
I am a gentle man who dreams like a monster.
He went down the stairs, found Mike standing in the kitchen.
Mike's  face  was  tight  with  embarrassment.  "The  poly  operator's  waiting."  He  walked  quietly  behind
Jonathan  into  the  garage.  But  the  moment  the  door  closed  he  began  to  argue  again.  "For  God's  sake,
Johnny, the girl is over at that hospital and we're wasting time. She needs a friend right now. Let me take
you to her. Forget the damn polygraph— nobody suspects you, least of all me."
Jonathan paused beside the car. A quiet, firm voice spoke within: There is something  wrong  with you,
and now is the time to find out what it is.
"Do it for me, Dad."
That statement brought a cuff that made Jonathan's ear ring. He sat down in the cigar-cured old Dodge
and wished that Mike would for once remember his strength. "Sorry, Johnny. Sorry. It's just—I know my
own job. Don't tell me my job. And I don't want to polygraph you."
Jonathan had to be more specific with  Mike;  there  was  no  way  around  it.  "Dad,  I  was  having  a  very
strange dream when you woke me up. I was dreaming that I had raped Patricia. Violently. In a church."
Mike got into the Dodge. For a moment he was silent. Then he slammed his hands against the steering
wheel. "Coincidence."
"What if I'm a psychopath and don't know it?"
"Rare. Chance in a million."
"It happens, Dad."
"I know it happens! But it isn't happening to you. You're the scientific genius in the family. You'd know  it
if you were a psycho." He looked at Jonathan. There was fear in his eyes. "Wouldn't you?"
"There are blank areas in my memory."
"Big  deal.  There  are  blank  areas  in  my  memory  too.  You're  a  good  kid—I  mean,  don't  go  getting  a

swelled head if you get a compliment from the inspector, but I know a good kid when I see one. You live
clean, you work hard. This dream stuff is damn foolishness. Everybody has  crazy  dreams  now  and  then.
You  don't  know  where  they  come  from.  Men  are  violent.  That's  a  fact.  Hell,  I  ought  to  run  you  in  for
wasting police time with false leads or somethin'. God, do I wish that was a crime. Our job'd be cut in half.
But that's neither here nor there. The point is, that girl was brutally raped, Jonathan. Could you really hurt
somebody that way? You can't even shoot a deer, for Chrissake. You have less killer instinct than any man
I've ever known. Take my word for it, kid."
- "The  nicest  people  are  often  the  most  repressed,  the  kind  who  chop  their  families  to  bits,  then  can't
remember a thing about it. It takes years of psychotherapy to uncover the monster inside."
Mike started the car, pulled out into the soft early morn-ing, into the quiet of Kew  Gardens.  There  had
been rain before dawn, and dew now gleamed  in  the  sunlight,  sparkling  leaves  and  grass,  shining  on  the
street and the roofs of the tall, elegant houses.
As they drove along Jonathan suffered another wave of anguish over Patricia. What nameless horror had
befallen her?
If I raped her I'll commit suicide.
As they went from Kew out onto Queens Boulevard Jonathan felt in himself something almost filthy, as if
a rotten, evil presence had crawled through his soul and left greasy stains behind.
His whole life might be coming apart.
Mike  lit  a  cigar,  his  sallow  skin  glowing  briefly  in  the  lighter  flame.  From  time  to  time  he  glanced  in
Jonathan's direction. Pain seemed to ooze from Mike's sweat-gleaming brow, from his hunched shoulders,
his betrayed face.
His faith in me had finally been shaken a little.
Cold crept into Jonathan's bones. The dawn hour was a time when one's body seemed to hold less tightly
to life. He huddled into his thin jacket.
The 112th precinct house was a modern building, all gray tile and glass. Jonathan had never been inside.
Mike's  work-places—indeed  his  habits,  even  his  friends—were  mostly  kept  from  his  stepson.  Despite
Mike's  occasional  suggestion  that  Jonathan  become  a  cop,  he  kept  his  police  associations  separate.
"Hardasses," he would say. "You wouldn't go for 'em."
Mike  pulled  the  car  into  a  no-parking  zone  in  front  of  the  station.  One  thing  New  York  City  police
officials do not have is parking problems. As soon as the car stopped Jonathan got out.
"Hold it. Just wait a minute." Mike took  his  stepson's  arm.  "Look,  you  aren't  any  kind  of  a  suspect  or
anything  like  that.  Nobody  even  knows  you're  gonna  be  on  the  poly,  and  nothin's  goin'  in  the  record
unless—"
He stopped.
"Come on, Dad. Let's get it over with."
He  followed  Mike  through  an  empty  waiting  room,  past  a  desk  sergeant  with  permanently  raised
eyebrows, and into a steel-clad elevator that whined horribly when it started moving.
On the third floor there were offices, the largest among them Mike Banion's. When they went inside, a
tall, cadaver-ous man rose to his feet. " 'Morning, Blake," Mike mut-tered. "Sorry to bring you down here
at this hour."
"No problem, Inspector. Glad to do it." He glanced at Jonathan. "This the suspect?"
"Not a suspect."
Blake regarded Jonathan with neutrality so complete it was chilling. "Got the booking papers?"
"This is a voluntary. Off the goddamn record, see?"
"How do I record the polygraph use, then? It's gotta be on the record, especially with this portable unit. If
we were down at the Police Academy with the fixed installation it'd be easier. A lot of uses on that thing.
But this—nobody ever takes it out."
"Then say you were testing it. Making sure it still Works."  He  paused  a  moment.  "Look,  Blake,  you're
gonna find out when you work up the questions, so I'm telling you now that this is my stepson, Jonathan. He
had the misfortune to be the last respectable person to be seen with a very nice young lady named Patricia
Murray who was raped after he left her. So we're down here clearing him."
The  polygraph  operator's  face  closed  down  tight.  He  was  already  in  the  middle  of  this.  He  obviously
thought he ought to keep as low a profile as possible.
They left Mike's pin-perfect office with its gleaming oak desk and wall of citations and awards, and went
down  the  hall  to  a  small  inner  room  that  smelled  of  stale  cigarette  smoke  and  was  dominated  by  an
electronic apparatus on a table beside an old-fashioned office chair.
A young policeman had appeared in  the  hall  behind  them.  He  followed  them  into  the  room  and  began

going through a file cabinet.
"Out, patrolman," Mike snapped.
"But, sir, I've got to—"
"Get the hell out! This is private!"
The young cop hurried to the door. Jonathan looked around at the police equipment.  He  recognized  the
elec-trodes and wires of a skin galvanometer. He understood the principle of the polygraph; the devices he
worked with in his own lab were far more sophisticated versions of the same system.
As soon as he saw how primitive the police machine really was he began to doubt the effectiveness  of
this session. Perhaps this was all just a waste of time and emotional energy.
Mike was staring at the door. "Who was that guy, Blake, a rookie?"
"Musta been. Never saw him before."
"Got his uniform all screwed up. Notice that?"
"No, sir."
"Yeah. Some damn screwed-up rookie." Mike looked through his bifocals at Jonathan. "Let's get on with
it."
"Remove any metal objects from your pockets and roll up your sleeves, please."
Mike stood at the far side of the room with his fingers hooked in his belt loops. His lips were pursed, his
face tightly controlled. His eyes were too calm. He was preparing himself for the worst.
Jonathan said nothing about the poor rookie, who was still lurking in the  hall.  Fortunately  Mike  couldn't
see him from where he was standing. All the young cop needed was an argument with Mike Banion.
He could feel the young cop's eyes on him, watching from just beyond the edge of the  light.  Idle  eyes.
Lucky young cop, with nothing to worry about except some damn file.
The  operator  rubbed  Jonathan's  wrists  with  electrostatic  gel  and  affixed  the  straps,  then  bound  the
device's belt around his chest. He flipped a couple of switches and graph paper began spewing out of the
plotter. Next there was a test routine to confirm that the styli were rolling correctly,
"What is your name, please?"
"Jonathan Titus Banion."
"Your age?"
"Twenty-two."
"Occupation?"
"Assistant professor, New York University."
"Are you a homosexual?"
"Cut the crap! Don't ask him asshole questions."
"Sorry, Mike! Sorry! It's routine in rape cases."
"Try another tack, boy."
The operator cleared his throat. "Do you like girls?"
"Yes."
"Have you ever hit a girl or hurt a girl in any way?"
"Not that I remember."
"Do you go to church on Sunday?"
"No."
"Do you bathe?"
"Yes."
It  was  coming  soon.  They  usually  popped  in  the  big  one  after  a  few  innocuous  questions  so  that
fluctuations in the graph could be more easily read.
"Do you have a driver's license?"
"Yes."
"Did you rape Patricia Murray?"
"No."
"Were you present when she was raped?"
"No."
Silence descended. Jonathan had the happiness of watch-ing Mike's face go from tight misery  to  relief.
The needles hadn't even burped. But his own mind was just as full of questions as before. Even as he was
taking the test he was growing more sure that this polygraph was the wrong instru-ment. There were more
sensitive ways of getting to the truth than measuring whether or not a person thought he was lying.
Jonathan's outer self obviously believed that he was  inno-cent.  But  was  that  enough?  There  are  other,
deeper selves in all human beings, selves that are never meant to be seen by the person riding the surface.

A simple polygraph might not detect trouble deep down in a man, where his serpents crawl.
"As clean a test as I've ever seen, Inspector. The kid's not lying. He didn't do it. I'd stake my reputation
on it."
Slowly Mike began to smile. He clapped his hands to-gether. His eyes began to twinkle. Then, abruptly,
he shifted to a more grave expression. No celebrations now, not appro-priate. "Okay. I guess you want to
get to that hospital right away, don't you, Jonathan?"
Jonathan stood up. He wished he could be as easily convinced as Mike.
Scientist, test thyself.
In the privacy of his own lab, deserted for the summer, he might find a deeper answer  than  the  simple
police equipment offered.
But not now. He knew that Mike would object violently to a trip to the  lab.  And  he  would  too,  for  the
moment. He was needed at the hospital. And he was longing to be there, more as each moment passed.
The polygraph operator made his way out of the room. Jonathan started to follow, but Mike stopped him.
"Just hold on a  second.  I  can't  go  with  you;  I  got  too  much  to  do  on  this  case.  I  just  want  to  say—oh,
Johnny, wow. What the hell can I say?"
"I love you too, Dad." Jonathan kissed his stepfather's cheek, giving expression to the emotion that filled
and also frightened his stepfather. Mike in response shook his hand with almost comic solemnity.
"Good enough. I've a mind to send you over to the hospital under escort. Get you there in two minutes."
"I can take a cab, Dad. And don't kill yourself while I'm not watching over you. Remember to get some
sleep."
They went through the tiled  halls  again,  back  to  the  grinding  elevator,  and  this  time  the  desk  sergeant
didn't even look up as they passed. On his way down to the corner to get a cab Jonathan realized it was still
too early to find one around here. He would have to take a bus.
Standing at the bus stop with nothing to do but wait, all his energy seemed to drain from his body. He felt
like he had been awake for a month. He could conceive of going home, getting into bed, and sleeping until
noon.
How dare he even consider that when Patricia needed him?
Needs me? He'd known her for exactly twelve hours. But, yes, she did need him. She would be all alone
in that hospital right now, maybe losing her life. . .
"She really had an effect on you, for a new girl." Mike had come up behind him. "I'm avoiding a reporter,"
he said sheepishly. "Church rapes are big news. I'll drive you."
"No, I need some time to get myself together. Just about bus ride time."
"What's she like, Johnny?"
"What can I tell you? I fell in love with her. She's wonderful."
"She's one of Father Goodwin's most pious types. I see you as falling more for the easygoing kind."
"Beggars can't be choosers."
"Beggars?  Come  on,  you  must  have  'em  fallin'  all  over  themselves  for  you."   He  grasped  Jonathan's
shoulder. "You're a hell of a good guy. Girls sense things like that."
Jonathan couldn't even smile. The wrong  bus  came  and  went,  disgorging  a  rumpled  man  who  seemed
astonished to see them.
"Why, if it isn't Mike Banion, waiting for me right on the street corner. Got a scoop, Mike?"
"This is the goddamn reporter I was hiding from. The only uneducated man the Times has left."
"I'm an institution."
"You're still working the blotter after fifteen years. I guess you are sort of an institution."
The reporter smiled toward Jonathan. He had very bad teeth. "Terry Quist, at your service. You make it,
we break it."
"He means the news. All the news that fits, he prints."
"As long as it's bad. Never accuse me of publicizing good causes, please."
Quist was a thinner, more threadbare version of Mike. He had cigars in the top pocket of his jacket too.
His  feet  were  huge  clown  feet,  encased  in  shoes  that  seemed  composed  of  shine  alone.  His  ropy,
weathered face spoke all the cunning of a man who understood the intricacies of city life.
"Terry, I want you to meet my stepson Jonathan. Jona-than, meet Terry Quist."
"Hello," Jonathan said.
Terry Quist stared at him as he might at a cobra coiled on the foot of his bed. "He gonna be with us?"
Mike nodded. "Until his bus comes."
"I'm in big trouble. I've got to talk to you privately." When Quist's voice quavered, Jonathan realized that
the man was trying to control profound fear. Jonathan found his very presence chilling. His own terror, his

awful sense of evil within, was still close to the surface.
"I'll give you ten minutes," Mike told the reporter.
"Your office, please. I might be talkin' about my life, Inspector."
The bus came as Mike and Terry were  entering  the  pre-cinct  house.  Sitting  alone  as  it  swayed  along,
Jonathan tried to prepare himself for what he was going to find at the  hospital.  But  he  could  not.  A  few
hours ago Patricia had dazzled him with her beauty. Now she was the victim of somebody who despised it.
Somebody dark and wicked.
He sucked in breath. For an instant he had wanted to run, just to let his  body  take  over  and  somehow
escape the situation.
He remained on the bus as if frozen to his seat, unable for a time even to move.
By the time the bus  reached  the  huge  Art  Deco  hulk  of  the  Poly,  full  sunlight  bathed  the  streets,  the
white  walls  of  the  building,  the  sea  of  glittering  windows.  He  got  up  and  forced  himself  out  onto  the
sidewalk. He passed through the en-trance to the old building.
Once in the lobby he  sought  the  information  desk.  It  was  manned  by  a  fat  guard  complete  with  Sam
Browne belt and pistol. Queens Poly didn't fool around. It was a hard place, where the borough's desperate
emergencies came. This man often confronted people who were crazy with shock and grief.
"I'm trying to locate a woman named Patricia Murray, a rape victim, badly injured."
He consulted a computer printout. "Here—Murray, Patri-cia, Intensive Care Unit, Ward C, Section Five.
That's the fifth floor, end of the corridor."
Jonathan got on an elevator jammed with interns, nurses, and two patients in wheelchairs. It stopped for
an intermina-ble time at each floor. At last, though, he arrived at the nurses' station that controlled the ICU.
"I'm here to see Patricia Murray," he said to the nurse at the desk.
"Visiting hours start at nine." She flipped through a file. "Oh. Are you related?"
He lied because he knew he had to. "Yes."
"She may be awake. But you'll have to observe her through the window. No direct contact yet."
He  followed  the  nurse  down  a  hallway  cluttered  with  medical  paraphernalia,  IV  stands,  wheelchairs,
rolling beds, electronic equipment.
Patricia lay swathed in an olive-drab surgical gown. Her legs were spread and a tent of plastic obscured
her head. An OXYGEN IN USE sign flashed on and off above the window that looked into the room. Her
whole belly was covered with gauze and bandages, and more bandages were on her  arms.  Even  beyond
the evidence of  great  wounding,  it  was  her  absolute  stillness  that  made  Jonathan  feel  the  strange,  deep
anguish of the bereft. Only if she were dead would she be more still.
He stood looking at her, feeling the tears burn in his eyes and a tightness constrict his throat, and wishing
that some-how it could have been different.
What terrible thing had happened last night?
Was he wrong, or had her head slowly turned toward him? With the wrinkled plastic oxygen tent making
a clear view of her impossible, it was difficult to tell.
Yes, she had definitely looked his way.
But what was the expression on her face? Was it love, or terror—or was it madness?
He strained and peered at her, but he could not tell. After a few minutes the nurse nudged his elbow, then
drew him away.
As he went down the hall exhaustion hit him hard, and with it came a great sorrow. His brief love was
destroyed.
He thought of her, lying beneath him in his dream. He crept from the hospital like a guilty man.
27 JUNE 1983
                 MOST PRIVATE
To: The Prefect of the Sacred Congregation for the Defense of the Faith
From: The Chancellor for the Inquiry in North Amer-ica
Your Eminence:
I am sorry to inform you that the Night Church has surfaced publicly with a bloody ritual at a parish
in the New York City borough of Queens.
Location: Holy Spirit Parish, founded 1892, church dedicated September,  1894.  Present  population
16,231.

We have known for some time that rituals were being held at this church, but, in accordance  with
your Directive 1516, 28 October 1971, In Causa  Clandes-tina,  we  have  done  no  more  than  insert
operative observers into the congregation.
A full report of the service from observer Brother Alexander Parker (Judist) is attached. Here are
the highlights:
1. The ritual was conducted by Prince Franklin Titus himself, attesting to its canonical importance.
2. Princess Mary Titus was in attendance at the ceremony.
3. The ritual appeared to be the Rituale Pudibunda Coitus, the Shameful Coupling. (See Grimoire
Titus, Rev. XIV, vol. 11, pp. 2112-2177.)
4. Apparently the principal participants Were the two heirs who  were  successfully  hidden  from  us
dur-ing our last Oppugnatio. According to our statistics these two are the only viable heirs left:
a. Patricia Murray (from Pantera to Roland to Sheil to Murray, see Genealogies  Pantera,  Sec. 42.
Family 58, Branch Irish, yrs. 1718-1952, for lineage to Mur-ray, Jean Patricia Roisin Margaret out of
Samuel and Rebecca).
b. Jonathan Banion (believed to be Jonathan Titus, Prince, see Genealogies  Titus, Sec. 113, Family
71,   Branch  Anglo-American,  yrs.  1691-1951,  for  lineage  to  Titus,  Jonathan  Martin  Flavius  out  of
Martin and Mary).
5. Because the two viable heirs were participating, we must view this ritual as extremely dangerous.
6. Because  of  the  urgency  of  the  situation  I  would  suggest  Directive  801,  14  June  1831,  Contra
Poenam  Ultimam,  be  revoked,  and  that  His  Holiness  be  pre-vailed  upon  to  authorize  the  Ultimate
Measure against these two individuals.
Yours in Christ & for the Defense of the Faith, Brian Conlon (Msgr.)
Document Class: Urgent A, most private, Swiss Guards courier
Destination:  Paolo  Cardinal  Impelliteri,  the  Hidden  Collegium,  Prefecturate  for  the  Defense  of  the
Faith, Vatican City
Ad:  Cancellarius Inquisitionis in Septentrionalis Americanensis
Ex: Prefectus Congregationis Defensioni Fidei
You are by this order directed most specifically not to undertake  any  actions  contrary  to  Poenam
Ulti-mam.
His  Holiness  certainly  has  no  intention  of  condon-ing  the  sort  of  excesses  that  have  marred  the
history of the Hidden Collegium.
However, we do authorize you to submit either of the heirs to passive  questioning if you can find a
means of doing so that does not violate the civil laws of the jurisdiction in which you reside.
You are proceeding under the following authorities of the Holy Office of the Congregation  for  the
Defense of the Faith:
1. In Defensione Fidei, Ch. V, Pt. C, Para. 5: "The Holy Office of the Inquisition shall retain its full
powers  and  authorities,  as  granted  in  Justinian,  Lex.  1.023:325,  In  haeretici,  and  affirmed  many
times sub-sequently."
2. Canon  Lex. 221.04  (Privatus): "The Defenders  are  authorized  in  cases  of  extreme  necessity,
where the whole life of the Faith is threatened or the very existence of the Church called into question,
to take up arms in defense of our Holy Faith."
As there is a possibility that there will be sin com-mitted in the heat of your effort, and that you may
be unable to confess before death, I now pronounce the customary absolution In Futuro upon you and
your subordinates:
Auctoritate  a  Summis  Pontificibus  mihi  concessa  plenariam  omnium  peccatorum  tuorum
indulgentiam tibi impertior: in nomine Patris et Filii et Spiritus Sancti.
                                                                       Mea Auctoritate,
                                                                          Paolo Cardinalis Impelliteri
Document Class: Urgent A, destroy in presence of courier
Destination: Monsignor Brian Conlon, Chancellor for the Inquiry,  North  America,  1217  Fuller  Brush
Build-ing, 221 E. 57th Street, New York, N.Y., 10022
12 JULY 1983

                                        MOST PRIVATE
To: The Prefect of the Sacred Congregation for the Defense of the Faith
From: The Chancellor for the Inquiry in North Amer-ica
Your Eminence:
Of course we understand and respect the position of His Holiness and of the Hidden Collegium.
In no way will this office violate the provisions against execution and torture promulgated in Contra
Poenam Ultimam.
But we also apprehend what is hidden between the lines of your memorandum, that we are to  act
exactly according to the statutes you cite, which granted the Holy Office its original authority.
Be assured that we will do so with all vigor.
May God have mercy on our souls.
Yours in Christ & for the Defense of the Faith, Brian Conlon (Msgr.)
Document Class: Extraordinary, destroy after read-ing, Swiss Guards courier
Destination:  Paolo  Cardinal  Impelliteri,  the  Hidden  Collegium,  Prefecturate  for  the  Defense  of  the
Faith, Vatican City
Chapter Five
MIKE WATCHED Terry  Quist  open  a  Baby  Ruth,  stuff  it  into  his  mouth,  and  toss  the  wrapper  to  the
floor. The poor guy. He always gobbled food when he was tense. Or  scared.  Mike  eased  his  friend  into
telling his story. "You still write the blotter, don't you?"
"That and the bus plunges at  the  bottom  of  the  pages—  '158  die  in  Surinam  bus  plunge'  typa  junk.  I'll
never get anywhere on the Times. I'm more of a National Tattler kind of a guy."
"So What're you doin' here? Go plunge a bus."
"I've got serious business with you. You wanna hear my story or not? I might have a line on your raped
girl."
"Anything about Patricia Murray I want to hear. Are you lookin' for pay, or what?"
"Come on, man. By rights I ought to be back at the shop doin' my investigative reporter bit. But I'm here
because I'm a coward. I want to stay alive. Just one thing, though, before I lay what I've got on the table.
It's very weird. I want you to suspend disbelief."
"No."
"Please remember we been friends since I taught you to smoke in fifth grade."
"Fourth."
"I forget. Anyway, you promise me that you will check this one out, no matter how wild it sounds."
"You're settin' yourself up for a putdown. You been takin' rides on a UFO or Somethin'?"
"I wish I had. I'd be better off gettin' fucked over by little green men than by the Night Church."
He fell silent. His hands, Mike noticed, were gripping the edge of the desk so tightly  there  was  a  flush
beneath his fingernails. "Keep goin, buddy."
"Just that I have reason to believe from  the  nature  of  the  crime  that  your  lady  was  hurt  in  a  religious
service."
"The priest in that parish is a good friend of mine."
"You're dealing here with something much bigger than any single priest or parish. The way I see it, this
thing  is  gigantic.  World  wide.  A  festering,  deadly  cancer  hidden  in  the  Catholic  Church,  rotting  it  from
within. And evil, Mike,
 God is my witness. Unbelievably evil." "Something as big as that fools around with rape? This is lone
pervert stuff." "I said you wouldn't believe me."
"I didn't pass judgment yet. Keep convincin' me. You're doin' a wonderful job so far."
"I'll bet."
"You are. I'm takin' you seriously."
"It's got a congregation that meets at Holy Spirit. Ah, come on, Mike, I see  you  smilin'!  I'm  telling  you

something big."
Mike had smiled just a little, to test Terry's resolve. Terry's reaction meant that he, at least, believed the
story he was telling. "Prove Somethin'."
"What do you want proved?"
"Anything. Any part of it."
"The constant whine of the cop to the reporter: do my work, I can't do it  myself.  Okay,  I  got  onto  this
through a guy named Alexander Parker, lives across the street from Holy Spirit. This guy is not connected
with the media. He started comin' in to the Idle Hour about a week or so ago. He hears I'm a reporter and
he tells me he's got a story."
Mike nodded.
"He tells me how he goes home late a lot. Night person, he says. And every Sunday and Thursday night
he's noticed Somethin' funny. It's not that big a deal, just slightly more people around than usual. One night,
he's in his apartment. It's quiet, see, and he hears this real low noise. Like music, but so low he more feels
it than hears it. He thinks maybe it comes from the church. So he goes over there."
"Ought to be on the force."
"He tries the door, but it's locked. So he listens. He hears people moving around inside, like lots of people
just walking around and around in the church. Every so often a baby screams and gets stifled. That spooks
him a little, and he goes home. He watches. Along about four-thirty he's been asleep, and all of a sudden he
sees people leaving."
"He's asleep and he sees the people?"
"Will you cut it out! He wakes up and he sees the people. Clumps of two and three, like. He counts three
hundred people leaving over the space of half an hour. In the small hours of the goddamn mornin'. He can't
figure it."
"So he runs off and tells New York's most brilliant re-porter."
"He  lets  it  sort  of  slip  out.  Like  he  was  trying  to  lead  me  on.  He  tells  me  they're  dangerously  crazy.
Something about a disease they're gonna spread. Something about a new species—the anti-man. He asks
me, almost begs me, to write it up. 'Tell the world,' he says. 'Warn them.' "
"So?"
"So doesn't that sound pretty damn dangerous?"
"Hell, I'm all for it. Anti or not, a new species'll probably do a better job than we have."
"You don't understand, do you, you jerk? You're sittin' there straight as a razor and all the time laughing at
me. It's what they plan to do after the new race gets going. The rest of us—they're gonna just kill us.
All of us."
"Lotta work."
"Not for people with the kind of weapon they have. A disease has been developed. When they release it
everybody dies."
"Including the new race—and the Night Church?"
"Hell, no. Everybody except them. They all get vacci-nated."
"Your friend found out a lot. I mean, considering he  just  watched  these  people  from  across  the  street.
Supposedly."
"I thought about that. I think Alex is more than he seems. He told me, 'You're a reporter, get your story
and publish it.' "
"So you're here."
"I'm afraid for my life! This is bigger than me. I can't get the story and stay alive."
"How can I identify these people?"
"Well, most of 'em are in Holy Spirit Church in the middle of the night. Go over and pick 'em up."
"And hit 'em with a trespass misdemeanor? That'd just tell 'em to get cautious."
"Find their labs or whatever. They must have storage facilities for their disease bacteria, not to mention
delivery systems. It can't be simple to infect the whole world. There's got to be plenty of evidence of what
they're plan-ning."
"This sounds like some kind of crazy science, not a church,"
"Well, maybe that's accurate. Religion and science mix and a monster is born."
"You still haven't given me anything to go on."
"Hell, Mike—"
"You  bring  me  a  load  of  crap  like  this  and  you'd  better  have  some  tangible  evidence  to  go  with  it.
Something J can goddamn well put my hands on. Come on, Terry. I'm a busy man."
"So talk to Alex Parker! Do your goddamn job, follow the lead."

Terry's  tone  made  Mike  want  to  slug  him,  but  he  resisted  the  temptation.  "Everybody  in  the
neighborhood's being interviewed, you can bet on that."
"Oh, come on! You get your ass out of that chair and go and personally talk to Alex  Parker.  Do  it  for
me. For old times."
Mike regarded his friend. Too many disappointments, too much booze, too many hopes down the  drain.
"OK, buddy, I'll give him a call right now." Terry had the number. Mike dialled, waited through three, then
five, then seven rings. He shrugged, put the phone down. "What can I tell you? No answer. We'll have to
try again later."
Terry Quist's face was covered with a fine sheen of sweat. Mike could smell the stink of his fear.
It was the nausea as much as the riot of birdsong that awoke Brother Alexander. He opened his eyes to
blue morning sky. The lurching vertigo told him that he had been drugged. He could smell the thick  ether
fumes still in his nose, could taste them in his dry mouth. His stomach heaved and twisted.
Above him puffy white clouds crossed the clear blue. He was bound hand and foot,  chained  to  an  iron
bedstead. He was in a forest glade. He could not move his head enough to see them, but he  could  sense
people about.
When he turned his head far to the right he caught a glimpse of a familiar face. His heart began to pound.
It was the notorious Jerry Cochran, and he was carrying something that looked very much like a blowtorch.
"Good morning, Brother."
Tears sprang to Alex Parker's eyes. He had heard stories of this man, terrible stories of flaying alive and
burning, of tortures beyond belief.
There was a whump and a roar. Then Jerry Cochran came into full view, tall, grim, his eyes  crazy,  his
face so rigid it might be made of stone. In his hand was a black blowtorch gushing  fire.  Alex  turned  and
twisted on the rocking bed-stead. His mind swarmed with terrors. In the deep of the night when he was all
alone he had sweated out the possibil-ity of just this martyrdom, death by fire.
"If you answer my questions, I will first garrote you," Jerry Cochran said softly.
Alex  wept  openly.  He  already  knew  what  he  would  do,  he  had  thought  all  this  out  very  carefully.
Inquisitors must understand themselves well enough to know  what  they  will  do  under  torture.  "I'm  sorry,
Jerry,"  he  said  between  sobs.  Then  he  fixed  his  mind  on  the  Jesus  prayer,  his  only  weapon  against  the
agony of the flames: "Jesus, thou art with me, Jesus, thou art with me, Jesuss—oh! Oh, GOD! AAAHHH!"
Jerry had held the flame against Alex's chest.  There  was  a  stink  of  burnt  hair.  "You're  very  sensitive,
Alex. I hardly touched you."
Alex  felt  his  bladder  let  go.  But  they  had  prepared  for  that.  He  could  feel  that  a  towel  was  stuffed
between his legs. "Jesus, thou art with me, Jesus, thou art with—"
The flames sent tidal waves of razor-sharp agony up his thighs as Jerry played the flame along his legs.
Skin popped and crackled. Oily smoke rose.
"We know your drinking companion is a reporter, Alex. What is his name?"
"Jesus, thou art with me, Jesus, thou art with me." Alex stopped in confusion when the next application
didn't come. To his utter horror he felt Jerry pulling away the towel that had protected him.
"The Judists are celibate, I think," he said. "Well, I don't suppose it matters one way or the other, does it,
my friend? No more worries about keeping your vow."
When he felt the fire this time it was as if his insides were being torn out, as if all the  flaming  stars  of
heaven had fallen on him. Wild with torment he shrieked, he bellowed  until  his  throat  cracked,  he  jerked
and twisted on the iron bedstead.
Nobody could hear him, not out here on one of the Night Church's vast country estates.
"Name him!"
"Qui-i-st! QUIST! QUIST!!"
"Ah."
"Stop! Jerry, I told you! Stop! Stop!"
With  lazy  strokes,  Jerry  moved  the  tongue  of  flame  up  and  down  Alex's  legs  from  his  crotch  to  the
searing, crackling bottoms of his feet. "QUIST! QUIST! OH, GOD!"
Jerry gazed at him with the hooded eyes of great passion. His face was flushed. "Now we'll get started
on your belly, OK, Alex?" He smiled a little. "Maybe if you tried the Jesus prayer some more it would help.
Or if you told me the names of the other scum in your cell!"
"I told you, QUIST!"
"He was a recent contact. A reporter indeed.  What  an  amateurish  attempt  to  harm  us—attracting  the
attention of a reporter. I want to know the other names, Alex, all of them!"

To give up his cell was the ultimate failure of an Inquisitor. Desperate, knowing his own weakness, Alex
tried to knock himself senseless by banging his head against the iron bar beneath it. But Jerry had thought
of that. A leather collar restrained his neck. "Look, Alex, you're suffering  so  much  I'll  offer  you  another
deal. I'm afraid you've been too difficult to deserve garroting, but you give me the names and I'll do your
face with the torch. It'll be over very quickly."
"Jesus, thou art with me, Jesus, thou art with me, Jesus—"
When the flames came this time they pierced his belly and made his stomach boil. His bowels exploded
inside him, mixing their torment with the searing of the flesh. Hot steam rushed up his throat and scorched
his mouth and nose.
Jerry stopped. "You may be wondering why all this pain doesn't just knock you  out.  We  loaded  you  up
with ampheta-mines, Brother Alex. You cannot escape into unconscious-ness."
That did it. He had been hoping to faint, even to go into a coma from the pain and the damage. This was
just too much. Even in his worst imaginings he had never dreamed torture would be this bad. It was almost
incredible that the human body could endure such agony. Sick  at  heart,  facing  his  own  miserable  failure,
Alex listed the names of the people  in  his  cell.  "God  forgive  me.  Brother  Julius  Timothy  is  one,  Brother
George Yates the other."
"That's all? Why such a small cell?"
"Holy Spirit was a backwater assignment."
Jerry nodded. "So we thought. That's why we use it so much."
"You're very clever."
"I know we are, Alex."
There was a moment of silence between them. Alex sought the eyes of his torturer. There was contact
between the two men then, the anguished victim and his tormentor. In Jerry Cochran's eyes Alex saw so
many things: hate, enjoyment, self-loathing, and deep down in the sparks  and  the  shadows,  a  scared  little
boy who had been lost for a long time.
"God forgives you, my son, and I forgive you too."
Jerry laughed. As sad a sound as Alex had ever heard. "I ought to give you the full treatment for that."
He turned up the blowtorch until it bellowed out a great gust of flame.
For a moment he hesitated as if undecided. He pointed the torch at Alex's chest. "Jesus, thou art with me,
Jesus—"
But something had moved that hard  man,  and  he  suddenly  changed  the  direction  of  the  flame.  For  an
instant Alex saw fire, then he felt a red-hot poker go down his throat, then he was all in cool. He fell away
into timeless blessedness.
Jerry directed the work crew to complete the cremation and bag the body. Then they returned to Queens
and entered Alex's apartment  with  the  remains.  They  replaced  them  in  Alex's  bed,  which  they  then  set
afire.
Twenty  minutes  later  the  fire  department  arrived.  Ten  minutes  more  and  steam  was  pouring  out  the
window of Alex Parker's apartment. Mike arrived on the scene with Terry Quist clinging to him like a baby.
When he saw  the  charred,  wet  remains  of  Alex  Parker  being  carried  out  of  the  building  Terry  grabbed
fistfuls of his own hair.
The cause of death was listed as burns and asphyxiation. The agency was a mattress fire. The means of
ignition was theorized to have been a cigarette.
Officially, the martyr was listed as having died because he smoked in bed.
Terry Quist left the scene a haunted, stricken man.
Mike Banion watched him go. And he wondered.
Chapter Six
THE  PERMANENT  GLOOM  of  Rayne  Street  surrounded  Jona-than  the  moment  he  turned  from  busy
MacDougal.  Rayne  was  a  narrow  cobbled  lane  between  MacDougal  and  Sul-livan,  like  Gay  Street  and
Aldorf Mews one of Greenwich Village's hidden streets. Here NYU had placed its data storage facilities in
the enormous black hulk of the house that dominated the short block. In the basement they had found room
for  Jonathan's  lab.  He  hated  the  place,  hated  its  dampness,  its  inconvenient  distance  from  campus,  and

above all, the dark gargoyled ugliness of the building itself. The sun never shone on Rayne Street, not even
at high noon. It was one of the few  New  York  streets  still  cobbled  with  the  round  stones  that  had  seen
carriages and wagons and had resounded to the clatter of hoofs. Jonathan's foot-falls were the only sound
that disturbed it now. He looked up at the front of  the  house.  At  least  the  place  was  well  kept.  A  small
brass plaque on the door announced NEW YORK  UNI-VERSITY DIGITAL DATA STORAGE FACILITY.
Under the stoop
was another door, this time with a plastic sign: PHYSIOLOGI-CAL PSYCHOLOGY DEPT. LAB B.
Jonathan was expecting the lock to be stiff". He hadn't used it in three weeks, but it  turned  easily.  The
iron door opened without a squeak.
The hallway beyond was pitch black, Jonathan fumbled for the switch, found it, and turned it on.
Nothing happened.
He cursed. Here he was in the middle  of  a  sunny  morning  and  he  was  going  to  have  to  feel  his  way
down a dark hallway because an indifferent university administration had put his lab in this hole.
The door swung closed behind him. He flipped the light switch a few more times, uselessly, then began
moving along the hall, feeling for the door to the lab. Fortunately it was the only one in this wall. It led to
what had once been the wine cellars and basement storerooms of the old building.
Jonathan became aware of a curious trick of sound in the enclosed hallway. His own breathing sounded
like it was coming from the darkness beside him. The effect was so realistic that he waved  his  arms  out
into the middle of the hallway. Nothing there, of course.
He began to search the wall more urgently, sweeping his hand up and down, feeling for the door jamb.
He really wanted to have some light.
Perhaps it was another trick of sound, but he heard distinct scuttlings. Rats. Disgusting. He clapped, he
shouted "Hey!"
Then he heard something that silenced him. He became very still, listening. There were human footsteps
coming down the stairs at the far end of the hall.
Jonathan shrank back. This  was  a  closed  facility.  Nobody  worked  upstairs.  His  first  thought  was  that
some drifter had gotten in here.
A  beam  of  intense  white  light  dazzled  him.  He  shielded  his  eyes  with  his  forearm.  Fearful  thoughts
passed through his mind, of death at the hands of a maniac.
"Who are you?" The voice was old and harsh. It did not sound completely sane.
"Banion. This is my lab."
"You can't come in here. The facility is closed."
Now it made sense.  He  was  confronting  a  watchman.  "Look,  this  is  my  lab.  I'm  not  a  student,  I'm  a
professor. So please get that flashlight out of my eyes and shine it on the door so I can see the keyhole."
The beam did not waver. Instead it came closer, until it was blazing in Jonathan's face.  "Go home, young
man. You mustn't come here." The voice was so old, and the tone like ice.
Jonathan  knew  when  he  was  being  threatened.  And  it  infuriated  him.  With  a  single,  quick  motion  he
reached  up  and  snatched  the  flashlight  from  the  old  man's  hand.  There  was  an  instant  of  surprisingly
powerful resistance, then the old man sighed and quite intentionally let go of the light. As he did Jonathan
came into contact with his hand.  It  was  a  shocking  sensation.  Jonathan  had  never  felt  skin  so  hard  and
cold. More like stone than skin. He imagined that a mum-my's hand might feel like that. A dry claw.
"You're mad to come here! You're putting yourself in great danger!"
Jonathan turned the light around, catching just a glimpse of the man before he turned his back. What he
saw  made  him  gasp:  bright  green  eyes  set  in  a  labyrinth  of  wrinkles,  a  tiny  slit  of  a  mouth  open  in  an
infuriated snarl.
Then the old man was gone, his feet rat-tatting up the stairs. A door slammed.
Good riddance. The university had a nerve hiring senile old fools like that to guard the facilities. Budget,
probably.
Jonathan  selected  the  right  key  from  his  chain.  Getting  in  was  easy  now  that  he  had  the  use  of  the
flashlight.
He entered his lab, making a mental note to call the university's maintenance department and complain to
them about their watchman. Obviously unbalanced, not to men-tion being far too old for the job.

Jonathan had come to his lab in the quiet of a summer morning to try and discover once and for all if he
had done that terrible thing to Patricia. He couldn't bear to name it. He simply could not accept the idea that
her  hurt  and  his  dream  were  a  coincidence,  not  even  with  the  vindication  of  the  police  polygraph.  He
needed his own instruments to tell him if there was some hidden corruption in his soul.
Was he an unconscious psychopath?
He imagined the demon's loom clicking eagerly as strand by strand it pulled his life apart. He had come to
think of Satan as a sort of neurological shadow, a speck of dark potential in the electrochemical bath that
floats the soul. He could no longer be sure that the shadow was  not  an  actual,  outside  force.  Evil  for  its
own sake seemed increasingly to him to be a real power in the world.
Certainly when it was abroad, when the owls and jackals announced Lilith wandering, those she caressed
could not resist her beauty—nor fight her talons.
He moved among the covered instruments. During the term he had been making the first really detailed
map of microvoltages in the human brain. His work was highly technical, but beneath all the statistics were
the mystery and romance of pure science: he and others like him were cracking the code of the mind.
The room was full of galvanic  sensors  of  various  kinds,  but  mostly  there  were  computers:  Apples  and
small IBMs to handle the statistical work, terminals connected to the big  Cray  2000  at  MIT  that  was  his
main tool. He used the Cray to do the sensitive high-speed signal recognition that was needed to separate
the  various  brain  waves  into  their  hun-dreds  of  component  parts  and  analyze  each  in  isolation  from  the
others. This gave him a virtual electronic window on the mind, vastly more sensitive than any that had been
devel-oped before.
There were also racks of Petri dishes, used for culturing microorganisms, lined up against one wall. He
stopped. He ran his fingers along the edge of one of the racks.  Strange.  He  didn't  remember  authorizing
anybody to install such equipment here.
In  the  middle  of  the  wall,  what  had  been  a  closet  door  was  now  marked  in  block  letters:  VECTOR
STORAGE. It was locked.
He  didn't  do  work  on  bacteria.  He  didn't  even  know  how.  As  he  looked  around  him  he  could  see
evidence of another's recent presence. There was a lab chart with  annotations  dated  only  yesterday.  On
the  floor  was  the  cover  of  a  coffee  container.  Somebody  had  been  working  here  within  the  past
twenty-four hours.
The  university  must  have  allocated  unused  space  to  an-other  project.  Odd.  Was  it  like  NYU  to  do
something like that and not bother to tell him? He couldn't seem to remem-ber.
He stood in the center of the dim, warm room, wondering. That persistent, distant clicking was the sound
of footsteps on the sidewalk above this end of the basement. Demon's loom. His was a gothic soul.
The  clicking  died  away.  Maybe  they  had  told  him  about  this  biology  equipment.  Not  remembering
something like this fitted with a theory of amnesia.  If  he  didn't  remember  somebody  installing  a  bacterial
experiment in here maybe he didn't remember other things either.
Somehow he must uncover enough of the mechanism of his mind to determine the truth.
He had come to realize that horror and disgust were not his only reactions to the rape. His body vibrated
eagerly at the thought of it. It was awful, repulsive. And yet, when he remembered her lying there in that
hospital there came over him a sneering, hateful contempt that was at odds with everything he believed and
loved about himself.
Off  in  the  corners  of  his  mind  there  were  also  violent  bits  of  memory  that  seemed  to  go  beyond  the
rape—a screaming face, a  closing  coffin,  thuds  and  howls  .  .  .  long  marble  staircases,  lines  of  chanting
nuns, the garrote and the strap-pado and the rack. . . .
Was it another life, some horrendous past? Unlike Patricia he did not discount reincarnation just because
it was against Catholic doctrine. Had he at some time in the past been a victim of the Inquisition, suffered in
the dungeon of some elegant Spanish palace?
No, that wasn't quite right.
"Inquisitor." He whispered the word as he might the name of a present danger. "Inquisitor." Mother had
uttered the word early this morning, then waved away his question about it.
Inquisitor. His hands were shaking, his legs seemed  about  to  give  way.  The  old  man's  lunatic  warning
sounded again in his mind. He went to the door, flipped on all the fluorescent lights, then locked it securely
to the outside.
He remembered.
A priest, walking smartly  across  an  airport  lobby,  his  hair  neatly  parted  on  the  right,  his  well-fed  face
mixing self-assurance and contentment, his shoes clicking on the floor.
Then the face turns, sees Jonathan, changes. Hate re-places contentment and the face becomes terrible,

relent-less, and cruel. But this  time  the  Inquisition  is  not  success-ful.  A  tall  young  man,  a  man  Jonathan
admires, grabs the priest and forces him into a car.
Next  memory:  the  priest  is  naked,  chained  to  the  wall  of  a  cellar.  Questions  are  coming,  one  after
another: Who is your Inquisitor-General? How did you find us? On and on, while the tall man removes
strips of skin from the naked priest's body.
Jonathan is hiding in a corner, behind some shelves full of empty Petri dishes.
From the priest's mouth a ceaseless prayer: Jesus,  thou  art with me, Jesus,  thou  art with  me,  Jesus,
thou art with me.
Help the priest! I side with the priest!
At  last  the  torture  stops.  The  torturer  goes  upstairs  for  a  Coke.  Jonathan  is  left  alone,  astonished,
horrified that his friend, his hero, could do such things to another human being. The priest, his eyes watery
and bloodshot, must know that his end will not be long in coming. He fixes  his  gaze  on  the  boy  who  has
crept forward, his own eyes tearing with  pity.  Words  pour  in  a  torrent  from  the  priest's  parched  mouth.
"Young  man,  they're  going  to  destroy  humanity  for  your  sake,  yours  and  the  girl's.  Turn  against  them!
Accept Christ! Please, listen to me. Your friend Jerry is evil, your uncle is evil, they are creating... death ...
they are Satan's . . . oh ... Satan's friends." Then the eyes roll and the head sinks forward, the chin touching
the oozing, flayed chest.
No, that isn't a memory. You're imagining, spinning tales around the biology experiments that shouldn't be
here.
You're hysterical.
With an effort Jonathan pushed the mad imaginings out of his mind. Again he regarded his sophisticated
instruments, the ones that were familiar. They could sense and record brain waves; that's what they were
all about. If he could find out where a thought like the one he had just had was physically coming from in
his brain he could easily tell whether it was a memory or not.
Jonathan went over to the cubicle, took the complex, wire-covered sensor helmet in his hands.
How was he going to work the controls while wearing this thing? Its cable wasn't long enough.
Jonathan cursed silently. Without an assistant there was no way he could use the equipment.
And the alternative was not at all desirable.
At CalTech they were experimenting with a certain drug. It could be inhaled like cocaine, but it had no
euphoric effect. On the contrary, it stimulated the brain's deepest memory centers  and  caused  an  almost
incredible flow of vivid recollections.
This was N, alpha doporinol 6-6-6, a complex triumph of the biochemist's craft. It was synthesized from
naturally occurring brain chemicals. So far the cost was  eight  thou-sand  dollars  an  ounce.  There  were  a
few grams of it in the refrigerator. Jonathan had been asked to duplicate some of CalTech's experimental
results but he had shut the lab for the summer before carrying out the work.
He went to the refrigerator. It was not your ordinary Frigidaire. This refrigerator was bolted to the floor
and had a combination lock. Some of the drugs kept there, tranquiliz-ers and such, were much in demand
on college campuses. Others, like 6-6-6, were valuable.
Back behind the bottles of Valium and Quaaludes were foil packets with  hand-lettered  labels.  Jonathan
took out the packet of 6-6-6. The crystals inside crunched like sugar when he opened the foil. Ideally, the
drug should be sus-pended in a saline solution and introduced to the nasal membrane via an aspirator. But
Jonathan  did  not  have  time  for  that.  He  measured  out  a  moderate  dose,  four  grains,  on  the  sensitive
laboratory scale. Then he ground it fine with pestle and mortar. He poured it from the mortar to the flat of a
spatula and raised it to his nose.
He inhaled.
There was a gentle, pleasant aroma.
Jonathan felt no change. He went into one of the subject cubicles and lay  down  on  the  couchette.  Still
nothing.
Why do there have to be bars on my window, Mother?
The boy's voice was so clear and real that Jonathan jumped up.
That had been him, Jonathan Titus Banion, as a child.
Bars? Had there been bars on the windows of their old apartment? He didn't remember it that way . . .
and yet he did.
We've got to keep them out, to keep them away from you. The bars are against them.
This was uncanny. It had been her voice, but she wasn't here.
He could see the walls of the bedroom in which she had said those words. But he didn't recall wallpaper
like that, with moons and planets and rockets on it.

But where, then, did this memory come from?
The old man from the hallway came around the end of a lab bench. His emerald eyes flashed. Beneath
the fluorescent lights his skin was powder-gray. He looked  dead.  Hallucina-tory  phenomenon,  of  course.
Jonathan blinked his eyes, but he could not make the illusion disappear. The old man spoke. "You must not
try the door to the past, Jonathan. It's dangerous for you. Terribly dangerous."
"Who in hell are you? How dare you come into my lab!"
The man shifted and wavered, half mirage and half real. Jonathan blinked but the image remained vague.
In an odd way the old man seemed to fit among these recollections. "Danger," the old man said, "danger in
these  memories!"  Then  he  was  swinging  a  red  lantern  and  Jonathan  knew  that  this  time  he  was  an
hallucination. NYU maintenance person-nel didn't carry such lights. The real watchman was proba-bly off
sleeping under the stairs.
The false one symbolized a powerful barrier in Jonathan's mind against the very act of remembering.
But how? A barrier like this didn't just come out of nowhere. It had to be created. As wild as it sounded,
almost the only explanation was that a highly sophisticated hypno-tist had been at work on him.
Then what of those other imaginings a moment ago—the Inquisition, the tortured priest? "They're going
to destroy humanity for your sake, yours and the girl's." Hadn't the priest said something like that?
But there isn't any reason to destroy anything for us.
He sat up on the edge of the couchette and rubbed his sweaty face. Bits and pieces of memory were still
breaking through the hypnotic wall, induced by the powerful action of the drug to move toward a  surface
they could not quite reach.
Like a crust formed on lava,  his  mind  shifted  and  cracked,  and  where  it  cracked  the  searing  ugliness
beneath drove him buck.
This was not his  doing.  He  was  not  amnesiac;  somebody  had  intentionally  set  out  to  conceal  his  past
from him. And this somebody had a great deal of skill. Hypnotism was a gross craft. To  practice  it  with
such delicacy was right at the limits of modern technique, perhaps even a little beyond.
He could feel a titanic struggle building in him between the drug and the barrier. Frantic, sweating, dizzy,
he  lurched  out  of  the  cubicle.  There  was  no  antidote  to  6-6-6;  he  should  never  have  taken  it  without
controlled supervision.
The room was hot, terribly hot. He had to have water. But  the  least  movement  sent  him  slumping  and
reeling with dizziness. His head pounded, waves of nausea staggered him.
So you want to know why we protect you? Look, then, my boy,  look  at the work  of  the Inquisition
that seeks you!
He  was  surrounded  by  a  rising  wall  of  flames.  He  was  being  touched  by  them,  and  their  touch  was
hideously painful. He was attached to the stake by an iron collar.
His hands were free; he tore at the iron. He kicked the logs until sparks flew up around him. Outside of
the flames he could see a great and gaudy crowd, men and women and children. Along  the  edges  of  his
pyre little boys roasted potatoes to sell to the mob. And the mob chanted: "Evil, evil, evil! Satan's child, save
yourself!"
But I'm not Satan's child! I'm—I'm . . . something else.
He looked up into the royal enclosure, to one pale female face, her skin like milk, her eyes crystal-green,
her hair as blond as a sunlit cloud. From her  eyes  there  flowed  cooling  love.  She  was  composed,  but  he
knew how deeply tragic she felt.
As  the  flames  rose  around  him  and  he  died  in  torment  he  fixed  on  those  eyes,  and  saw  in  them  the
triumphant secret: Our nights  were not in vain,  my senor,  for  I am with child. There will be  another
generation.
Jonathan  lurched  against  a  bench,  knocked  a  computer  to  the  floor  with  a  crash  and  a  cascade  of
shattered electronic chips.
As he collected himself he realized that the fire wasn't a dream any more than the tortured priest was a
dream. They were both memories.
But what kind of memories? And what sort of a monster would have them?
The priest was recent, but that fire had burned a long time ago.
In the fire there is exaltation; the pain is your triumph.
How dare you preach to me, Lucinda, when I have to endure the stake!
Martyred husband.
O  Lucinda  Pantera,  you  are  the  image  of  my  dreams,  the  woman  who  has  always  been  beside  me.
Angel Lucinda.
Angel Patricia. You are also Patricia, and all other women I and my ancestors have loved.

Seeking the edge of the future, we go on. By breeding the two lines together again and  again,  age
by age, millennium by millennium, we are creating a masterpiece.
A  masterpiece  of  evil.  Something  far  darker  than  man-kind.  Something  unencumbered  by  impulses
toward the good.
Something unspeakably monstrous!
Jonathan was on the floor. "No!" His mouth was dry, his face smeared with tears. "No, it mustn't be!"
He could almost see it, almost smell it, and it was hideous and stank of rotted flesh.
And it was in this room.
Danger, the old man wailed, danger!
The bits and pieces of the shattered computer had cut into Jonathan viciously. He touched a gash on his
palm, tasted his blood.
Something  was  crouched  just  the  other  side  of  the  lab  bench,  breathing  softly.  Jonathan  was  so
frightened he liter-ally could not move.
It was the thing humankind with its inquisitions and perse-cutions has been trying to prevent through the
ages.
The anti-man, ugly where man is beautiful, bad where man is good, the very essence of evil.
But it wasn't on the other side of the lab bench, not really. That was only his imagination, it had to be.
Yes, but your imagination is still dangerous! It's trying to make you stop thinking these thoughts.
"I won't stop thinking. I remember the anti-man. It's been bred over thousands of years. And it's—"
He looked at his own hands, turned them slowly over and over in the merciless fluorescent light.
Cro-Magnon  was bred  out of  Neanderthal  and  destroyed  Neanderthal.  Homo  sapiens  was  bred
out  of  Cro-Magnon  and  destroyed  him.  In  the  same  way  the  anti-man  will  destroy  what  you  call
mankind. It is only following nature's law. There is nothing bad about it.
"It's Satanic! Hell's answer to the creation of God!"
Homo sapiens is a defective species, and like all of nature's mistakes, it is going to become  extinct.
You of all people should love the anti-man. You will be its father.
Jonathan felt his skin beneath his jeans, the slight damp-ness of his crotch pressed by his briefs. In him
was a new species?
You  have  already  learned  more  than  you  should.  Now  you  must  be  made  to  forget.  You  will
confront the thing behind the bench, and it will tear these past few minutes from your mind.
"No!"
I think yes. I think yessssss.
The voice in Jonathan's mind became one with the breath-ing behind the lab bench.  It  merged  into  the
hissing, terrible and loud, of something primal and big. Then came a slipping, sliding sound, weighty rubbing
against the floor, and the black gleaming head of an enormous snake  appeared  around  the  corner  of  the
table. It had coppery scales and eyes like yellow-green stones.
In  them  was  not  the  savage  blankness  of  the  reptile  species.  Instead  there  was  something  far
worse—burning, unquenchable rage mixed with the self-mocking irony of great intelligence.
It came elegantly along, its huge body sweeping  in  great  loops.  Jonathan  was  utterly  revolted,  and  yet
also fasci-nated. Nothing, not even the threat of death itself, could tear him from those staring green eyes.
But  6-6-6  isn't  supposed  to  be  a  hallucinogen.  Sloppy  testing,  California.  This  is  an  effect  you  didn't
mention in the protocols.
The serpent had coiled into a great shiny mass of scales just in front of Jonathan. It reared its head until it
was level with his own face.
It was so very real, even to the snake mites running along the edges of its mouth. Jonathan drew himself
up from his prone position. The snake rose  almost  magically,  facing  him,  staring  at  him  over  a  space  of
mere inches.
He stood fully erect. Impossibly, the snake had now risen up out of its coil, still face to face with him.
"What are you?"
I guard your memories. I live inside you.
"My God!"
Back and forth it swayed, back and forth. Its eyes regarded Jonathan evenly. He realized that, in spite of
all the fear it evoked in him, there was great beauty in  it.  He  stretched  out  his  hand,  palm  up.  The  huge
head  laid  itself  in  his  palm,  and  the  membranes  over  the  eyes  slid  down,  giving  them  a  milky  green
appearance.
An invisible claw seemed to take hold of his arm, to make him draw the head closer and closer to his own
sweating face. Up close it was terrible to see, the face of a snake with such extreme intelligence in it that it

seemed more than human. Much more. Satan would create such a face.
With a snap of its body the snake plunged its head between Jonathan's lips, forcing itself into his mouth.
He could feel the hard, cold scaliness of it, was made to gag as its tongue tickled the back of his throat.
His helpless gagging enabled it to jam itself farther down, to fill his gullet. Now the thickness  of  the  body
distended his  lips,  com-pressed  his  tongue,  made  his  jaws  click.  Fear  and  loathing  shot  through  him.  He
threw himself back, grabbed at the heavy, surging coils. As  the  snake  worked  its  way  down  into  him  he
clawed at its slick flesh with frantic hands. He couldn't breathe, could barely make a sound. He could feel
the  head  probing  against  sphincters  as  it  made  its  way  deep  into  him,  past  his  esophagus  and  into  his
stomach. The deeper it got, the faster it went.  Huge  masses  of  coils  began  sweeping  past  his  snatching,
batting hands.
Then  it  was  gone,  only  the  tail  tickling  his  throat.  He  felt  as  dense  as  thick  paste,  hideously  full.  His
stomach  was  distended,  his  belt  broken,  his  pants  torn  open.  And  the  coils  could  be  seen  surging  and
billowing beneath the skin of his belly.
Heavily,  he  sank  to  the  floor.  He  was  utterly,  completely  revolted.  As  a  teenager  he  had  tried  LSD.
Compared to this the lysergic illusion was a mere daydream.
All at once a terrible cramp doubled him over. He retched, spattering the tiles around him with flecks of
blood.
He lay a long time, groaning, wanting to give way to nausea, unable to do so.
When at last the sensation passed and he could straighten up, his belly was no longer distended. He had
not only swallowed the demon snake but somehow absorbed it. Now It was part of his body, of his soul.
There had been something else, some memory.
"I've got to remember!"
What?
It was  gone.  He  was  left  with  the  horrible  feeling  that  he  had  let  some  vital  piece  of  information  slip
through the cracks in his mind. Another unreported side effect of 6-6-6. Those idiots at CalTech were going
to get a hell of an angry letter. Ought to sue the jerks. He hitched up his pants slammed the refrigerator and
locked it, kicked the bits of broken computer under a table, and staggered out of the lab
As he went down the corridor and emerged into the sunlight he began to feel a little better, although the
smell of hot dogs from a streetcorner vendor brought renewed nau-sea.
Of course it had been an hallucination. There was no question about that. The snake was such an obvious
uncon-scious symbol, exactly the sort of thing one might see on a bad trip. There hadn't been proper testing
of 6-6-6; that was the long and short of it.
Everything that had happened, from the moment he took the drug, could be discounted.
He wanted to drink, to laugh in the sun just for an afternoon, to somehow forget the insane horror he had
jus experienced. Too bad it was clouding over. The best antidote would be the pleasure of a sunny day.
A very sunny day.
Chapter Seven
JONATHAN LAY IN his bed at home, his mind a jumble of confused and revolting images. So much for
6-6-6.  It  was  a  bad-trip  express  which  had  not  gotten  him  much  closer  to  resolving  the  question  that
tormented him.
He  tossed,  closed  his  eyes.  Despite  his  efforts  the  old  man  still  warned  him,  the  serpent  still  sent
shuddering  waves  of  nausea  through  the  depths  of  his  stomach.  There  was  also  a  confused  jumble  of
thoughts—stakes, fires, Satanic plans .. . but he had lost the thread.
At last he accepted the fact that he was going to stay awake; in his present state there was no chance
that he would find the relief of unconsciousness. Just as he was deciding to get up, his mother came in. He
did not open his eyes. Quietly she sat down beside him and took his head in her lap, as she had done when
he was a boy.
From time to time she would say his name, all the while stroking his forehead with her cool hand. Through
slitted eyes  he  watched  her.  How  sad  she  seemed,  her  eyes  gazing  at  him  with  such  softness  in  them.
Never before had she seemed so mysterious, or so beautiful, or so full of love.
Her eyes were green. As were the old man's. As were Patricia's. And his own.

A species apart. ..
It came as a surprise to realize that she had soothed him after all, and he had slept for some little time.
He sat up, startled by his return to a consciousness he  did  not  know  he  had  left.  Where  there  had  been
memories in his mind there was now darkness . . . and a watchful snake.
"What time is it?"
"Eleven thirty."
She ran her fingers through his hair. "I would have gotten you up if there had been any change. She's still
in the coma."
The cold word "coma" sighed in his mind. "Is she—"
"She'll come around this afternoon sometime. She's badly injured, darling, but she's going to be all right."
"Mother, I fell in love with her. I fell in love last night."
"She's a wonderful person."
"She's an angel." The image of that still body in its olive-drab intensive care blankets came into his mind.
He would not cry, but inside himself he knew there were tears.
And deeper, where the serpent had its lair, what emotions did he feel there? He dared not find out, and
turned his mind away. Better to cling to the surface.
"You  know  how  you  feel  sometimes  when  you  meet  somebody  who  really  fits—like  you've  always
known them? That's how we  felt.  When  I  held  her  in  my  arms,  Mother—"  He  could  not  continue.  The
thought of that  warm,  vital  body  was  so  moving  and  his  grief  so  great  that  he  was  forced  to  lapse  into
silence.
Martin Titus had taught his son not to weep, but Jonathan knew that his mother understood what was in
him.  She  had  been  only  eighteen  when  he  was  born,  and  her  relative  youth  increased  the  element  of
companionship. She was a beautiful woman. Her forty-one was a reasonable facsimile of thirty. "Did Mike
make it hard for you?"
"You have the wrong idea, Mother. Mike is good to me."
"I suppose I ought to love him for that. But I just can't, poor man."
She was always saying things like that, and justifying her marriage as having some higher purpose.
"You didn't have to marry him."
"Oh, Jonathan, let's not go over that again. I'm trying to make the best of it. Let it go at that."
"Okay,  Mother.  I  just  wish  you  were  happier.  I  don't  appreciate  being  the  cause  of  your
martyrdom—especially because you won't tell me why you did it. I like Mike, he's a good man, but if you
hadn't brought him into my life I wouldn't even know him." He got  up  and  turned  on  WNEW-FM.  Clash
was  deep  in  the  purple  rhythm  of  anger.  He  lowered  the  volume  until  it  became  a  sullen,  muttering
undertone.
"Darling, I wish I could tell you. Maybe  some  day  soon  I'll  be  able  to.  But  for  now  let's  just  drop  the
subject."
"You keep too much from me, Mother. I'm beginning to get an idea that what you're really  hiding  from
me is my past."
"What is there to hide?"
"Whatever is the matter with me. What did you do—send me to some kind of a  quack  hypnotherapist?
Let me ask you a  frank  question.  Are  we  buried  out  here  in  Queens  because  of  something  I  did  in  the
past—like maybe raping a girl, or killing her?" His voice had risen. "Who  were  our  friends  in  Manhattan,
before Dad was killed? I don't even know. I can't remember."
"Jonathan, be patient with me. Just a little while lon-ger—"
Almost before he realized it his hand had lashed out and caught her on the cheek. "Stop feeding me that
line of bullshit! I want to know now!"
His mother turned away, her cheek reddening. There was a long silence. She did not turn back  to  him.
"Perhaps we can go over to the hospital together," she said, too briskly. "I think it would be nice for us both
to be there when she comes around."
"I'm sorry, Mother. Please forgive me."
"Hush, son. You're upset. Overwrought. There's nothing to forgive, okay? Just to forget." She smiled, her
hand came out and touched his temple. "Get your clothes on and we'll go." Jonathan went into the bathroom
and applied his Norelco to his face until the shadow was gone. Then he  opened  the  aftershave,  splashed
some on,  and  combed  his  hair.  He  returned  to  his  room  and  started  to  pull  on  some  briefs.  His  mother
stopped him with a gesture, then looked long at his naked body. "There's nothing  you're  not  telling  me,  is
there? Everything went all right with Mike, didn't it?"
"What're you inspecting me for, signs of a beating? He cleared me, at least superficially. Mother, I don't

think  you  have  even  the  foggiest  idea  about  me  and  Mike.  We  love  each  other.  Somehow  or  other  it
worked out between us. He's my friend, and I think of him as my father."
He dressed in the clothes his mother handed him  from  his  closet.  She  got  his  brush  and  rebrushed  his
hair. "You're so handsome, Jonathan." She hugged him, throwing her arms around  his  chest  and  pressing
her cheek against it. "I can't believe I have a big six-footer like you. Your dad's family is small."  She  fell
silent for a moment. "Thump-bump, thump-bump—I hear your heart."
He kissed the top of her head and they went down to her car together. She had gotten the blue Audi out
of  Mike  by  simply  going  over  to  Bavaria  Motors  and  buying  it  with  a  check.  Mike  had  juggled  his
MasterCard credit lines like crazy, but when the check arrived at the bank the money was there. "She looks
like a million dollars in that thing," Mike often said.
Her whole relationship with Mike was like that—she didn't so much make demands as present him with
faits accomplis.
"Car running well, Mother?"
"I love it."
To get to the Poly they had to pass Patricia's  building  on  Metropolitan  Avenue.  Jonathan  stared  at  the
tachometer rather than look out at it.
When he saw Queens Poly again, in the light of the summer afternoon, he knew he would hate it for the
rest of his life. But then, as they rounded the corner, he counted up five rows of windows, then across six.
That was her room. And somehow that particular window looked beautiful. "Let's stop for some flowers,"
he said. "There's a shop in the lobby."
They got sixteen dollars' worth of gardenias on Mary's theory that she would still be able to smell them
even  if  all  the  tubes  prevented  her  from  moving  her  head  enough  to  look  at  them.  "Are  you  nervous,
Jonathan?"
"I suppose so."
"I am too. But I know it's nothing compared to what you're going through. I'm very, very sorry for  you
both. I want you to know that."
"It's crazy to be so attached to somebody you just met, but—"
"She's special. That's why I got you two together in the first place."
"I suppose it's inevitable that I would love someone you picked out for me."
They went up in an elevator that was, if possible, even more crowded than  the  one  Jonathan  had  used
that morning. The fifth floor bustled with activity. Like a voice of doom an operator kept droning, "Airway
team, airway team, airway team, entrance Twenty-two-B. Airway team, airway team, airway team .  .  ."
Presumably there was somebody at entrance 22B, wherever that was, suffocating.
This  time  it  was  possible  to  enter  her  room.  They  went  side  by  side  down  the  white  corridor,  past  a
window where a man lay with tubes emanating from his belly, past another where groans rose from behind
the drawn curtain, until finally they reached Patricia.
She was lying as still as Snow White beneath her plastic shroud. Other flowers, long-stemmed red roses,
stood in a water pitcher on the bedside table. The card was from Mike. "Does he know her, Mother?"
"No. He must have sent them because of you."
Jonathan hardly heard her. Patricia lay as still and pure as the Madonna herself. Three tubes came out of
her nose, crossed her ivory cheeks, and wound around into three humming machines. Intravenous needles
pierced both her forearms. Her hands rested at her sides. Jonathan knelt beside her bed in a state of sorrow
that was also a state of love. He took her right hand in his and very gently kissed it.
The  machines  hummed.  The  air  conditioning  hissed.  From  the  hallway  chimes  sounded.  A  tray  of
implements was rattled past by an orderly. Far off somebody cried out once sharply, and then fell silent.
Jonathan reached his hand in under the oxygen tent and touched her hair. It was matted with sweat, and
her head was very warm. "My love," he whispered. "Please, God, help my love." He noticed that the smell
of Mike's roses blended nicely with his gardenias.
There was  a  sound  from  Patricia's  throat.  Mary  drew  close  to  Jonathan.  "Your  hand.  She  feels  your
touch. She's going to come to."
"Patricia, it's me, Jonathan."
She made a guttural, inhuman sound, nothing like the melody of her  voice.  Then  her  eyes  opened.  She
looked straight ahead for a long time. She was absolutely motion-less.
"Patricia?"
Mary put her arm around Jonathan's shoulder. "It's us, darling, Mary and Jonathan Banion."
"John—Jonathan?"
"Hi, darling. I love you."

There was the slightest incline of her head. "Why am I here?"
"Something happened," Mary said. "There was an acci-dent, but you'll be all right. You'll be fine."
"Oh-h-h, I hurt! I hurt!" Her voice was strident; now she frowned;  now  her  eyes  darted  about  wildly.
"Why can't I feel my legs? Did I—"
"No, no, darling, nothing like that. You just got hurt, but you're going to be back to normal soon. It wasn't
that bad."
She closed her eyes. Tears popped out from beneath the lids. "Was I raped?"
"Yes, honey, that's what happened."
She nodded. Silence fell.
"Hello, folks, how's our patient?"
Mary whirled around. "Mike!" He was standing there in his rumpled brown suit. Beside him was a natty
man of perhaps thirty-five.
"This is Lieutenant Maxwell of the Sex Crimes Unit. He's going to be questioning Patricia."
Mary glared at the two men.
"Do you want us to leave, Dad?"
"It might be best. In cases like this they usually concen-trate better when they're alone."
Jonathan  withdrew  his  hand  from  Patricia's.  "Jonathan!"  Her  voice  was  sharp,  almost  commanding.
When she lifted her fingers he understood and again took her hand.
"I'm here, honey."
"Stay!"
"I won't leave unless you want me to."
Mike leaned into her field of vision. "We have some police questions to ask you, sweetie. It's better if you
let Jonathan go for just five minutes—"
"No!"
Mary spoke. "What does it matter, Mike? Jonathan told me about the polygraph."
"Police questioning is confidential, ma'am," said the lieu-tenant.
Patricia's hand gripped Jonathan's hard. "You better stay, Johnny," Mike said. "She wants you, that's the
important thing."
"Thanks, Dad."
The  lieutenant  went  around  to  the  opposite  side  of  the  bed,  turned  on  a  large,  old-fashioned  cassette
recorder, and affixed the microphone to his lapel. "Miss Murray," he said in a surprisingly gentle voice, "I'm
awfully sorry to have to bother you now, but we find it's best to do this as early as possible so you can get
on with the business of getting well without us intruding."
"Who are you?"
"My name is Tom Maxwell. I'm a police officer."
"It hurts, Officer Maxwell."
Jonathan was  aware  that  his  mother  had  gotten  another  person  to  come  into  the  room,  a  man  with  a
surgical  smock  thrown  over  his  business  suit  and  half-glasses  on  his  face.  Obviously  he  was  Patricia's
doctor.  "This  patient  has  too  many  visitors,"  he  said.  "Perhaps  it  would  be  best  if  you  left,  Inspector
Banion."
"My associate wants to ask questions."
"He can stay."
"Miss  Murray,  do  you  remember  anything  at  all  about  the  man  who  raped  you?"  Maxwell  asked  his
question softly, gently. A sensitive man.
Patricia stared straight ahead, her eyes glazed with deep inner looking. "I was on the bed with Jonathan,"
she said. She met his eyes. "I had you in my arms . . ." Behind him Mike leaned forward, put his hand on
his stepson's shoulder.
The doctor spoke up again, directing his words to Mike. "Please, you really do have to leave."
"After that, what happened? Did Jonathan stay?"
"He . . ."
Jonathan's own mind flashed a violent, confused memory, like a door that opened and shut very quickly on
an explo-sion.
They  had  been  sitting  on  her  bed,  and  there  had  been  some  erotic  play.  He  was  so  excited,  he
remembered ... Then—a blast of light, a bad dream. Then he was being shaken awake by Mike.
"He left. I made him go home." She smiled at him. "You ought to marry me. Do you want to? I'm a good
girl." Tears appeared in her eyes. She was probably afraid the rape had made her undesirable.
"I'd marry you in a minute."

She smiled a little. Silence followed his comment, broken by the doctor. "Inspector Banion, I'm telling you
now to leave this room. There are too many people here."
"Look, Doctor, this is a capital case of the utmost impor-tance."
"You aren't asking the questions."
"This  case  is  special.  I'm  following  it  very  closely."  Jonathan  felt  Mary  stiffen  beside  him.  Mike
continued. "There may be much more to it than  simple  rape.  A  great  deal  more.  Right  now  the  Queens
Detective Area rates it priority one."
That silenced the doctor. Even he realized that it would be unwise to obstruct an inspector on a case  he
considered as major as this one. The lieutenant started in again. "After he left, what happened?"
"I went to bed." She sobbed, closed her eyes.
"And?"
"Oh! All these voices! Then it's—oh . .."
"What is it?"
"Dark! My God, it's dark!"
The  lieutenant  looked  across  the  oxygen  tent  to  Doctor  Gottlieb,  who  shook  his  head.  "Should  I
continue?" Watch-ing Mike carefully, the doctor nodded. "Miss Murray, do you remember anything  about
the individual who assaulted you?"
Jonathan  felt  her  grip  weaken,  saw  her  lips  open  slightly  behind  the  obscuring  tangle  of  tubes.  "She's
fallen asleep," the doctor said. "All is well."
Mike shook his head. "I don't know what to make of this," he said.
"Obviously it's traumatic amnesia," the doctor snapped. "She can't handle the memory just now."
"It doesn't look like that to me. She—"
"Never mind how you think it looks or  doesn't  look!  When  she's  stronger  you  can  come  back.  Maybe
you'll have better luck with your bullying then."
Mike smiled. "He asks the questions but you yap at me. What's my  problem—bad  breath?"  He  led  his
lieutenant out of the room.  Beyond  the  window  Jonathan  could  see  yet  another  visitor,  Father  Goodwin,
looking even more pale and cadaverous than usual.
"I have to examine the wound and change the dressing,"
the doctor announced. "You can come back afterward,
Jonathan."
-
Jonathan  started  to  get  up,  but  the  moment  he  moved  Patricia's  hand  became  like  steel  again.  "Hey,
darling, I thought you were asleep."
She didn't answer; she was clinging even in sleep. Jona-than  was  deeply  moved.  "Jennifer,"  the  doctor
said to a nurse, "get him a mask and gown, will  you?"  When  she  was  gone,  the  doctor  spoke  directly  to
Jonathan for the first time. "After we're finished, please come into  the  conference  room.  I'd  like  to  brief
you since you're obviously the closest we're going to come to a next of kin."
Mary and the nurse managed to get Jonathan more or less covered without breaking the contact so vital
to Patricia. The surgical mask smelled faintly of iodine.
"I'm Paul Gottlieb," the doctor said as he worked. "I'm your mother's gynecologist. She called me into the
case. I have a surgical specialty," he added, as if to further justify himself. Jonathan could not see what he
was doing behind the sheets, but a blood-soaked dressing soon came out. "Oh, this looks just fine. This  is
coming right along. There's been excellent preliminary progress." Then he muttered to the nurse. "I want a
pin test, Jenny. There's still cyanosis evident in the legs."
The nurse disappeared down the hall, returning after a moment with an instrument tray. Jonathan did not
see exactly which device the doctor used, but from the length of time he spent it was obvious the test was
not immediately successful.
"Okay," he said at last, "very good. Now, Jonathan,  if  you'd  just  come  out  with  me,  I  can  go  over  our
plans. You're going to play a crucial role in Patricia's recovery, you know."
Coaxing finally got Patricia to release Jonathan's hand. He promised to come back as soon as he could.
As they left the room he saw Father Goodwin go in. He had a  pyx  in  his  hand.  No  doubt,  if  she  awoke
more fully, she would be grateful for Communion.
The conference room was as plastic as any of the hospital spaces, blue walls and an acoustic-tiled ceiling
into which somebody was in the habit of sailing pencils, two or three of which jutted out of it. There were
half-empty  coffee  cups  on  the  cigarette-scarred  Formica  conference  table.  Here  and  there  lay  a
pencil-marked yellow pad. On one was a doodle of a female foot in a tall spike heel.
"So this is Jonathan." The doctor's eyes shone.
"Doctor Gottlieb delivered you," Mary said softly.

Jonathan was touched. In all his life he had never met this man, had not even heard him referred to. His
identity was no secret, it was just that Mother tended to be quite private about female matters. "I'm glad to
meet you, Doctor. And I'm awfully glad you're here." He  had  never  said  truer  words.  He  was  feeling  a
rush of gratitude toward the physi-cian.
"I want to tell you right now that Patricia will be able to bear children normally. And there will be no loss
of sexual function. There will be a vertical scar about eight inches long, but plastic  surgery  can  deal  with
that if the patient wishes." Jonathan remembered kissing her perfect skin just above the belly  button,  how
sweet it had tasted. "Our major worry is that  scarring  to  the  vagina  will  impair  sexual  enjoyment  for  the
patient and her partners. But we tried hard to limit that."
"How badly was she hurt, Doctor?" Jonathan had to ask. He found that it  was  very,  very  important  to
him.
"She had extensive vaginal injuries. She has hairline fractures in her pelvis, and one hip was  dislocated.
She was as severely injured genitally as any young woman I've seen. We can count  ourselves  lucky  that
she's going to make a good recovery."
"You make it sound like there might be something else."
"Well, I was getting to that. We don't know for certain yet, but the indications so far are that both of her
legs are paralyzed."
Jonathan was stunned. "She can't walk?"
"Not just at the moment, no. But we haven't been able to detect any injury that would cause this, so we
don't think that it's likely to be a permanent condition."
"What does that mean? Days? Years?"
"We have no way of  telling,  I'm  sorry  to  say.  It  would  be  premature  to  take  a  completely  pessimistic
view, though."
Jonathan left the barren little conference room and went back to Patricia. He  found  the  priest  kneeling
beside the bed with his face on his clasped hands, obviously praying. He didn't blame Father Goodwin. In
fact he envied him his faith.
When Jonathan came into her view she smiled a vague sort of a smile. Her fingers moved slightly.
He twined his own in them. They stayed like that, the two of them, silent in one another's company. After
a time the priest finished whatever prayer he had been saying, and left them alone.
18 JULY 1983
                  MOST PRIVATE
To: The Prefect of the Sacred Congregation for the Defense of the Faith
From: The Chancellor for the Inquiry in North Amer-ica
Your Eminence:
This is to inform you that Brother Alexander Thomas Parker (b. 12 Oct. 1942, + 17 Oct. 1942, ord.
22 June  1964,  Judist,  Soldier  of  Christ,  Inquisitor-Captain)  has  been  martyred  in  the  line  of  duty.
Be-cause he was tortured we must assume his cell to have been compromised.
As a result I have withdrawn the cell from the Night Church Congregation Holy Spirit and am now
in the process of regrouping around a new cell leader.
This will result in a period during which we will be intelligence-blind.
The following personnel shifts have occurred:
1.  Brother  Alexander  Thomas  Parker,  deceased  by  reason  of  fire  applied  to  the  body  by  hostile
persons. Martyr.
2. Brother Julius Timothy, transferred to Prefec-turate of the West, service in California.
3. Brother George Robert Yates, transferred as above.
4. Sister Marie-Louise D'Aubusson, invested as Captain-Inquisitor, ordered to form  a  new  cell  for
penetration of the Night Church Congregation Holy Spirit.
Under separate cover please find a request for $2,114.28 to cover travel expenses involved in these
changes.
A layperson (Terence Quist, b. 22 Nov. 1933, + 25 Dec.  1933, conf. 5 April 1945, single, K. of C,
CCD) in the process of being recruited by Brother Alexander has been abandoned. Recruitment had
not  proceeded  far  enough  to  justify  shifting  to  another  operative,  and  I  prefer  to  let  the  new
Captain-Inquisitor bring in her own people.

Yours in Christ & for the Defense of the Faith, Brian Conlon (Msgr.)
Document Class: Urgent A. most private, Swiss Guards courier
Destination:  Paolo  Cardinal  Impelliteri,  the  Hidden  Collegium,  Prefecturate  for  the  Defense  of  the
Faith, Vatican City
20 IULIUS 1983
FURTIVISSIMUS
Ad: Cancellarius Inquisitionis in Septentrionalis Americanensis
Ex: Prefectus Congregationis Defensioni Fidei
We are shocked and saddened by the loss  you  have  experienced.  It  is  especially  unfortunate  that
Brother  Alexander  had  to  endure  such  a  harsh  martyrdom.  We  can  all  take  solace,  though,  in
contemplating the peace Brother knows now.
I wish  to  reassert  the  wish  of  His  Holiness  that  Contra  Poenam  Ultimam  is to  be  scrupulously
ob-served. The Night Church may be barbaric, but we are not.
I  attach  your  approved  expense  report,  with  the  admonition  that  religious  below  the  level  of
Monsignor should not have traveled business class.
Also attached is a most distressing report from the Historical Section, written in the seventies of the
last  century.  It  appeared  in  the  list  of  relevant  documen-tum  when  we  ran  Rituale  Pudibunda
Coitus through the library's database.
Mea Auctoritate,
Paolo Cardinalis Impelliteri
Document Class: Urgent A, destroy in presence of courier
Destination: Monsignor Brian Conlon, Chancellor for  the  Inquiry,  North  America,  1217  Fuller  Brush
Build-ing, 221 E. 57th Street, New York, N.Y., 10022
THE USE OF DISEASE VECTORS BY THE NIGHT CHURCH IN HISTORICAL TIMES
                                                                            by
                                                                        Anthony S. Gardner, O.S.
                                                                              March 4, 1871
(Synopsis)
1. Recent research into the Salisbury Documentum, the Annates  Emiliani, and the Marque  de la
Templars  suggests  that  the  European  plague  known  as  the  Black  Death  (1334-1360)  spread  from
three  focal  points  on  the  continent  and  one  in  Great  Britain,  in  addition  to  the  known  font  in
Constantinople. (Vat. Docs. CMXXXIV)
2. These points were:
The  Colchester  Redoubt  in  Britain  Palazzo  Emiliani  in  Venice  The  Preceptory  of  the  Hidden
Temple in Paris Rennes-le-Chateau in the Pyrenees
3.
Three of these locations were in the famous 14th-
century strongholds of the so-called "Cathar Heresy,"
which is one of the best-known disguises of the Night Church. The fourth, the Templar's House, was
the con-firmed world center of the Night  Church  at  that  time,  fulfill-ing  much  the  same  function  as
their headquarters at Lourdes does today.
4. The  Black  Death  began  spreading  within  a  few  weeks  of  the  infamous  Rituale  Pudibunda
Coitus held between Margaret de Pantera and Carolus Titus at Salisbury Cathe-dral. During this ritual
Carolus  was  killed,  but  not  before  despoiling  the  still  unfinished  cathedral  and  killing  a  substan-tial
number of the sorcerers who were attendant at the affair.
5. The period after this is known in the  annals  of  the  Night  Church  as  the  "Dolorosa,"  apparently
because the first "anti-man," which was successfully conceived in the ritual, was  born  defective  and
had  to  be  destroyed.  Many  more  years  of  breeding  between  the  Pantera  and  Titus  families  were
needed before a true success could be achieved.
6. The Night Church,  which  had  unleased  the  Black  Death  to  make  room  for  its  "anti-humanity,"
was then compelled to do its best to stave off the destruction of  the  entire  human  race  lest  the  two

critical families themselves be included. Given the primitive medicine of the day, it took  them  twenty
years to completely eliminate the plague they had started.
7. Seven out of every ten human beings on this planet died during the Black Death. It was the most
destructive  thing  that  has  ever  happened  to  humankind.  Whole  cities,  nations,  disappeared  into  the
wilderness.
8. The  disease  is  thought  to  have  been  an  artificially  created  hybrid  of  bubonic  plague.  Its  exact
nature remains to this day unknown.
9. Because of the speed of the contagion (about three hours from first symptoms to death) and the
rapidity with which it spreads, even modern medicine would be taxed by it, should it appear again.
Chapter Eight
TERRY  QUIST  KNEW  he  was  in  trouble  when  he  woke  up  in  the  middle  of  the  night  and  smelled
perfume around him. As always, he was alone in bed. Women were a thing of the past for him . . . and it
hadn't been much of a past. He was ugly, poor, and full of bad personal habits. He had not done well with
the ladies.
He lay staring into the shadows around him, inhaling and listening.
There came from the living room of his tiny garage apart-ment a steady rustling.
Woman or not, the idea of somebody out there going through the papers on his desk scared the hell out of
him.
Rustle, rustle, rustle. She was turning over page after page. All his story ideas, such as they were, lay on
that desk. Under pseudonyms  he  moonlighted  for  a  number  of  raunchy  weeklies:  The  National  Tattler,
The Midnight Express, a few others. Naturally his notes were here. They couldn't be kept at the office. If
the Times ever discovered his sin he'd be instantly fired, or so he assumed.
But  his  notes  weren't  of  interest  to  anybody—just  a  bunch  of  jerkoff  ideas.  "The  Sexual  Power  of
Celery" was one. "Telepathic Cancer Cure" was another.
Oh, God, the notes on the Night Church were there, two pages neatly typed up just this morning!
He became aware that the. rustling had stopped.
By the time he realized she had come into his room she was right beside his bed.
She stood  looking  down  at  him.  As  she  bent  close  he  saw  her  glaring  eyes.  She  was  beautiful  like  a
snake might be beautiful. You can't look, and yet you can't look away.
She was also familiar.
Although his own eyes were closed to slits, he recognized the face swimming in the dark above him. It
was Mike Banion's wife, Mary.
Seemingly satisfied he was asleep, she withdrew from the room, pulling the door almost shut.
A blinding flash filled the crack between door and jamb. Then a rustle of paper. Then another flash.
A moment later he heard his front door click shut.
He lay  motionless,  waiting  for  his  heart  to  stop  banging.  A  confusion  of  thoughts  tumbled  through  his
mind. Mary Banion? Two flashes. Pictures of the two pages.
But Mary Banion?
Oh, Christ. If they were in it together, when he went to Mike he would have  been  talking  to  the  Night
Church.
The image of Alex's charred body came to mind. Death was bad enough,  but  a  death  as  hard  as  that,
God help you.
He was in deep, deep trouble. He had to act on his own behalf or he was a dead man.
Throw himself on the mercy of the Night Church? Maybe the Banions would vouch for him. Sure they
would. God, they had to or he was going to end up just like Alex.
What  the  hell  was  the  Night  Church,  that  it  could  com-mand  the  loyalty  of  a  lady  as  fine  as  Mary

Banion? Or Mike, if he was part of it.
He was damn well going to find out. He showered and shaved and put on his best doubleknit suit.
Now  he  looked  like  an  underpaid  salesman  instead  of  an  even  more  underpaid  newshog.  Maybe  a
machine-tool sales-man or a shoe salesman, or the type of guy with a chain  of  two  or  three  newsstands.
Barely okay, in other words. But it was his best suit, so it would have to do.
The streets were empty and quiet, the big trees breaking up the glare of the  streetlights.  Flower  smells
came from the yards of the enormous old Richmond Hill houses. People sneered at Queens, but it was  a
magical place at night, on the side streets where the secrets hid.
He would walk right into the Spirit. He would become a member in good standing. Hell, he wasn't going
to go the way of Alex Parker; he was smarter than that.
The Spirit lay at the far end of Morris Street,  a  huge  black  bulk  rising  past  the  crowns  of  maples  and
chestnuts. Morris was a short block, worth only one  streetlight,  which  fitfully  illuminated  the  front  of  the
age-blackened church. Terry's footsteps sounded loud on the sidewalk.
He reached the church. Absolute silence.
He mounted the steps, put his hand on the big brass handle.
The door opened noiselessly. Somebody had been very  careful  to  keep  it  thoroughly  oiled.  Inside,  total
blackness. For a few moments Terry thought he must be early, or late, or even that they  hadn't  come  on
this particular night.
Then he sensed that the dark was full of people.
From deep within there came a low, strange musical note. In response some of the people in the pews lit
tiny  candles,  cradling  them  in  paper  cones.  Now  Terry  could  see  faces,  and  they  were  the  faces  of
everyday  life,  old  and  young,  plain  and  beautiful.  There  were  whole  families,  mothers  and  fathers  and
children, single men and women too, all sorts of people.
Terry thought he'd better make himself known instantly. They mustn't be given the idea he was spying on
them. "Excuse me," he said in a whisper that managed to echo through the whole damn church. "I'd like to
join up ... if that's okay."
They responded as one voice with a sound that at first Terry could not quite understand. Then he realized
that it was a buzz of amused surprise.
He felt horribly alone. But when he turned to leave he found  that  somebody  was  standing  right  behind
him. He was of middle age, dressed in a black pinstriped suit and a club  tie,  with  the  sensitive  face  of  a
decent and educated man. Obviously an usher. And why not? Night or day, churches needed ushers.  He
drew a long, gleaming stiletto from beneath his jacket, then replaced it. "Please be quiet," he whispered. On
the domineering side, as ushers go.
Terry decided to be just as quiet as he could.
There came from the choir loft a deep, resonating  hum,  like  the  rising  of  a  million  locusts.  The  call  of
whatever kind of hellhorn they had up there caused the congregation to drop as one man to its knees. The
service had begun.
Old altar bells, long  abandoned  by  the  day  church,  tinkled  softly.  The  congregation  raised  their  heads.
Before them stood an elderly man with blazing green eyes. The most glorious vestment that Terry had ever
seen wrapped his shoulders. It must be beyond anything created for centu-ries—not since the  decadence
of the Middle Ages—with diamonds and rubies and emeralds and sapphires, the thou-sands of tiny jewels
worked  into  intricate  symbols  and  designs.  In  his  right  hand  he  carried  a  crystal  wand.  His  head  was
mitered with a tall conical hat.
His robe shimmered in the wan light with images and suggestions  of  images,  scenes  of  horror:  corpses
woven of tiny black beads ran along the bottom hem, worked into every possible posture of agony. Above
them  rose  flames  of  ruby  and  orange  soapstone,  and  higher  still  were  obsidian  chips  fashioned  into  the
outlines of ruined cities.
He swept back and forth in front of his congregation, pacing like a lion and making passes with his wand.
Here came the mumbo jumbo. For an instant Terry actually thought that this was going to be humorous, but
then the man turned to the altar and he saw the face woven on the back of the robe.
It  was  more  than  a  monster's  face  embroidered  there;  it  was  remotely  and  disgustingly  human.  Its
features were gross, with thick lips and exaggerated brows, and an excess of teeth bulging from the mouth.
The anti-man.
Terry  wondered  why  they  would  want  to  create  such  a  thing.  What  did  they  get  from  serving  evil?
Power? Wealth? Or was it the same thing that drew  romantic  young  Germans  into  the  SS:  the  allure  of
death?
Two  members  of  this  congregation  were  supposed  to  have  been  bred  to  conceive  the  first  anti-man.

Sure. Look at this bunch, scrubbed and clean and straight.
They must all be crazy. Had to be. Nothing that ugly could come out of a human union, no matter how
horrible the parents were. And none of these people was even slightly horrible.
The chief magus, or whatever he was, turned around again and cleared his throat. He looked out across
his congrega-tion with an expression only a little nicer than the one portrayed on his vestment.
"We are  gathered  here  to  pray  that  our  Princess  may  survive  the  great  suffering  to  which  we  in  our
impiety and stupidity have subjected her." Another stiletto type came across the nave and whispered to the
dark priest or wizard or whatever he was.
Then those eyes were looking right down the center aisle at Terry Quist. "Come," the wizard said softly.
As Terry walked up the aisle faces  turned to watch him. Just normal, ordinary, everyday  faces.  A  lot  of
families had brought their kids.
The low, pulsing sound that had begun the ceremony started again, this time developing thrumming chords
that seemed capable of sinking into the depths of the mind, evoking in Terry emotions of stunning violence.
He saw by the discomfort in the pews that he was not alone in this reaction.
Here and there younger children covered their ears. And  yet  this  was  not  a  loud  sound  so  much  as  a
penetrating one. It would hardly be audible beyond  the  church  walls,  except  to  somebody  with  unusually
sensitive ears. Alexander Parker must have been one such person. The music carried a  strong  emotional
charge.  Negative.  Terry  fantasized  a  Sten  gun  in  his  hands,  pulling  the  trigger,  seeing  blood  and  brains
spray around him—
"Stop right there, young man."
Terry  stopped.  He  was  about  ten  feet  from  the  wizard.  This  close  the  man's  face  was  quite  simply
terrible. It was old and the color of newspaper, and it looked as fragile as a dry leaf. The green eyes glared
in the way that Terry's years as a reporter had taught him to associate with advanced psychosis or great
rage.
"You say that you want to join us, young man. How have you come to know of us?"
Terry's sense of the situation was that there weren't many right answers to that question.
He  hadn't  really  expected  to  be  greeted  with  suspicion,  given  his  assumption  that  they  would  want
recruits. Wrong again, Terry. His life was a tissue of mistakes, way back to the beginning. Obviously, he
had just made another. Or had he? Getting into this was his one and only ticket out of getting killed by it.
"I knew a guy named Alex Parker—"
Somebody  grabbed  his  shoulders  from  behind  and  slammed  him  to  his  knees.  "Never  address  His
Eminence from your feet, please."
"Hey, now wait a minute." He sensed an arm  being  raised  for  a  blow.  "Sorry!  His  Eminence.  Take  it
easy. I'll be real respectful."
The wizard met Terry's eyes with as cold a look as he could imagine. "So you must be Mr. Quist," he said
softly. "Yes. I see your logic in coming here. You were correct to  assume  Parker  had  talked  about  you.
Now you want to join us rather than risk sharing Parker's fate. Clever. Convenient for us, too."
Not  quite  the  right  response.  There  was  something  Terry  didn't  like  about  his  coming  here  being
convenient for them.
"We have been given a special opportunity tonight," the wizard said. "Prepare for the Rituale Cruciatus
Nexis." He clapped his hands. "Mr. Quist is going to test our revised vector."
"What kind of a vector?"
He was shoved again. "Never address a question to His Eminence."
"Sorry! Will you tell me what test—"
"It will be very brief, Mr. Quist," His  Eminence  said.  "This  vector  is  so  quick  you'll  hardly  even  know
what happened."
"Wonderful, Your Eminence. Very reassuring. I think I want to go home."
His Eminence did not even smile.
Something was going on at the rear of the church. There were a number of people consulting with  one
another. Then one of them broke away and trotted up a side aisle. He consulted briefly with His Eminence.
The old man seemed testy. "And make it fast," he rasped  at  his  departing  lackey.  He  looked  toward  the
choir loft. "Begin the processional, Bob."
"The organ?" came the reply, full of doubt.
"Of course not, it's too loud. The horn."
The  musician  was  a  master  of  his  instrument,  whatever  it  was.  The  music  swept  and  swirled  and
throbbed. Terry even forgot his aching knees. He had never before heard a musical instrument that made
such a sound. It worked on your  emotions  to  an  almost  uncanny  degree.  This  time  the  tone  was  one  of

peace and reassurance, like one might hear in an ancient monastery, where the monks were chanting their
matins.
Perhaps fifteen minutes passed before His Eminence re-turned to the center of the sacristy. At the same
time  Stiletto  Man  and  one  of  his  assistants  arrived  and  crowded  Terry  on  both  sides.  Guess  I'm  going
through with this, Terry thought.
The horn sounded a single, long note. Terry craned his neck around and saw a boy  and  girl  of  perhaps
twelve  begin  marching  up  the  aisle  with  the  self-consciously  slow  tread  of  under-rehearsed  kids.  Their
grave, soft faces  were  yellowed  by  the  flickering  light  of  the  thick  red  candles  they  held  in  their  hands.
They were dressed all in white, these children, and their footsteps made no sound.
Now things began to get colorful. The wizard—oops, His Eminence—raised his arms and spoke: "By the
power of the King of the Underworld, O Spirits of the Hells receive our gift and remember Thee us!" He
began  a  slow  twirling  dance,  his  face  sinking  to  deep  concentration,  his  wand  describing  quick  crosses.
"Come and take our offering, O Deeps!"
The congregation replied: "Come from the east, the south, the west, and the north. Come into this house."
There was the rattle of a general turning of pages.
The children reached Terry.
His Eminence stopped his dance. He dropped to  his  knees,  facing  his  congregation.  "Who  shall  be  the
medium of the experiment?"
The girl replied, "Father, it is Terence Michael Aloysius Quist," Nice. They even knew the Aloysius. The
last place that had appeared was on his birth certificate. The Night Church had done its homework.
"Do you give him up willingly?"
"We do, your Eminence." The children spoke as from rote, carefully and in unison. Their candles guttered
and swayed.
"What shall open the gates of the future?"
"The death of man."
His Eminence stood  up,  a  menacing  presence  in  his  shim-mering  robes  and  tall  miter.  "I  call  Thee,  O
dweller in the deep of hearts, come among us and receive this our gift of thanks."
The congregation responded: "May He bless our experi-ment." There was that word again. Experiment.
This Night Church was half religion, half science—the demented super-stition of  the  Middle  Ages  mixed
with a science that had progressed far beyond the worship that accompanied it.
The music stopped.
This was a cue to the children, who had paused before Terry. "Come with us, please, sir," said the girl.
She put out her free hand. Terry took it and raised himself to his feet. The two children turned him around.
His heart almost stopped. A black coffin lay open in the aisle. The boy took his other hand. "This is just
our initia-tion," he whispered. "You have to get in."
"Come on, don't be ridiculous."
Something sharp pressed up against his neck. He shud-dered; he knew that it was the stiletto.
His legs were wobbly, but he made it to the coffin. In other circumstances he might have tried to run, but
there were hundreds of people between him and the doors. He had a strong feeling that he either got into
that coffin or ended up with his throat cut.
It looked soft inside but the damn thing was hard. Beneath the white satin lining there was just wood.
"Nobody close this thing," Terry said. He did not speak in a whisper. He wanted to be heard.
The girl smiled. "Even if we do, it won't be for long. It's going to be fine. Really it is."
The intensity of the music increased, the emotional timbre became excited and mean.
There was no real pillow, so Terry had to raise his head to see what was going on around him. He raised
it and kept it raised: there was no way he was going to let these loonies put that lid down. He noticed that
the edges of the lid were lined with rubber, like the door of a refrigerator.
His Eminence approached the altar. He began to quiver, creating the impression that a tremendous inner
battle was taking place. The wand he held seemed about to drop from his hand. An acolyte appeared and
held a gold platen cov-ered by a silk doily beneath the vibrating wand.
"I conjure Thee, O Lord of Flies and Ills, through the medium of  his  dread,  bring  the  infection  unto  his
body."
A tension of expectancy filled the church. People were whispering. He saw a mother putting a surgical
mask on her six-year-old.
The music was vicious now, actually prancing with glee.
His Eminence straightened up. He raised his hands and the music stopped. With a rustle of his robes he
turned around. He spread his arms. "The time has come."

Faces began to look expectantly at Terry. The two chil-dren had taken places at the foot and head of the
coffin. The wizard said softly to them, "Now."
With a movement too sudden to avoid the boy reached out and spurted a tiny aerosol in Terry's face.  It
wasn't much of a spurt. There wasn't even any odor.
Then they started to close the coffin.
Terry had been expecting this. "No way!" He jumped right out onto the floor. "No way do I get shut up in
there."
In the dark a woman screamed, a keening sound. "Seal him up," somebody said in a frantic whisper.
People began pushing down  the  pews,  away  from  him.  His  Eminence  plastered  on  a  smile.  And  here
came the Stilettos. They were not smiling. For his part, Terry was about to sneeze.
"Amanda," the wizard said pleasantly, "tell Terry a little about the ritual." She hesitated. "Don't be afraid,
Amanda. There are still a few minutes' grace."
At the sound of  that  word  Terry  noticed  that  he  felt  like  hell.  His  bones  ached,  his  skin  was  dry  and
sensitive.
The girl took his hand again. He noticed for the first time that there was an almost childlike quality about
all these people. The gaudy rituals, the deep of the night, the secrecy, all spoke of the distant past; the terror
of it, but also the charm.
"Terry, we have to close the lid for a little while because our ritual is about dying to the past and coming
to  life  again  in  the  service  of  evil.  It  only  stays  down  for  about  two  minutes.  It's  just  symbolic."  She
squeezed his hand and gave him a cute smile. "It's what you want, isn't it? I mean, that must be why you're
here."
"Yes." Terry's voice was hoarse with fear.
"We  all  want  you  to  do  it,  all  of  us."  There  were  murmurs  of  assent  from  the  surrounding  pews,
accompanied by en-couraging nods and smiles. And then there were also the Stilettos.
"Sorry I'm so touchy," he muttered. "Claustrophobia." He got back in and the kids, smiling warmly, closed
the lid. There was a distinct click, and then utter darkness. Someone had locked the lid with a coffin key.
Oh, Christ, this was going to be hard. Almost at once the air began to go bad. He felt absolutely horrible.
The  music  started  again,  its  low  notes  filling  the  thick  air.  Muffled  but  audible  there  came  from  the
congregation a sharp sigh. This was followed by a burst of low words, sounding like Latin.
Although  he  listened  with  all  his  might  Terry  couldn't  hear  much.  He  felt  along  the  top  of  the  coffin.
Maybe there was some kind of  a  handle  or  latch  in  here—just  in  case  the  dead  man  woke  up.  But  no,
nothing.
They were doing something outside; he could hear move-ments close to the coffin.
It was hot in here. Plus he was so sick  his  chest  was  beginning  to  rattle.  He  sneezed  violently.  Once.
Again. Three times. Four. Five. He began to see the true nature of the experiment they were conducting. It
had to do with that aerosol.
They had given him the disease!
The top seemed to crash against his face.  For a moment he didn't understand  that  he  had  banged  at  it
with his forehead, trying to break out. When he did understand it scared the hell out of him. He was farther
gone that he thought; he was out of control. Must be fever coming on.
They weren't going to let him out of here. They were going to see how efficiently their disease worked.
How long it took to kill an average adult male.
He writhed, felt with desperate, questing fingers the satin flocking of the coffin. He had been an idiot to
think they would let him out! "Please!" Nothing. "Please! Oh, plea-a-ase!"
"Mr. Quist?"
"Oh! Oh, yes! Oh, thank you! Thank you for answering me! I can't get my breath. I gotta have air! I'm
sick. Sick bad! You've got to open this thing up."
"We have a few questions first, Mr. Quist." The wizard's voice sounded so close he  must  be  crouched
right  at  the  head  of  the  coffin.  Terry  had  been  fool  enough  to  come  here,  and  they  had  simply  taken
advantage.
All Terry could think to do was be agreeable. If he cooperated there might be some hope.
If not he was a dead man. "Questions? Sure, but hurry!" He had never been able to hold his breath long
in childhood contests at Miller-Walkin Public Swimming Pool in  Corona  Park.  Never  for  long.  He  would
come bursting up  out  of  the  water  first  or  second,  his  lungs  aching  for  air,  his  whole  body  filled  with  a
painfully urgent need to breathe. "Please hurry!"
"What did you tell Inspector Michael Banion about us?"
Holy God! Mike wasn't in on it, only his wife! His heart went out to the poor guy. He had to get out of

here, to somehow warn Mike! They'd been friends forever, he and Mike. The poor guy.
His wife! His wife!
That unbelievable bitch.
His throat hurt as if it were being hacked with a dull blade. He raised his hands and was horrified to find
huge swellings on both sides of his neck. Then he couldn't lower his arms. In that moment other swellings
had appeared in his under-arms. Even as the air around him went bad he kept having to take deeper and
deeper breaths through his constricted windpipe.
"Help me! I told you, I'm sick! Bad!"
"Inspector Banion—"
Maybe he could still help Mike a little. "I told him nothing!"
"You're lying."
"Let me out of here! Let me out! You've got to get me to a hospital. I'm sick. I'm smothering, for God's
sake!"
"Are you an Inquisitor? Is Banion an Inquisitor?"
"What the fuck is an Inquisitor? I don't know from Inquisitors. For the love of God, open this thing up!"
He kicked, he hammered, he tore at the upholstery. The swell-ing under his right arm burst with an audible
pop, a discharge of thick, stinking fluid, and an agonizing shaft of pain.
He knew suddenly that he would die before the interroga-tion was over. "Open it up and let me breathe!
I'll tell you everything. Please, I beg you. I beg you,"
"Did you name names?"
"Hell, no!"
"Tell us the truth and we'll open the top."
This was no time to be coy. "I told Mike nothing because he wouldn't listen to me. The minute he heard
Night Church he laughed at me. He's not the type of cop's gonna buy something like this without it  being
rubbed in his ever-lovin' face! Now let me out!"
There was whispered conversation outside, which soon died to silence. He felt himself drifting. Then he
felt nothing.
Suddenly he came to. He had been out cold! "Open this thing up!"
What air he could get past his twisted throat moved with a thin whistling sound.
This was the death of Terence Michael Aloysius Quist, reporter. Noble? Not very. No Pulitzer  for  this
turkey. He became aware  of a seething, slithering sound on the outside of the coffin, as if somebody was
lying on it. Just a few inches of wood separated his face from excited breathing.
"You perverts—you bastards!"
The  response  was  a  sort  of  whine  that  sounded  hardly  human.  The  coffin  started  to  shake  with  the
gyrations of whoever was there. "Listen with the stethoscope," some-body  whispered.  "Four  minutes  and
he can barely breath past the buboes!"
Buboes? The bastards had given him some kind of super-plague, then shut him up in here to see how fast
it worked.
Terry was almost grateful when his heart began to beat irregularly. Death is coming soon, guy. This too
will pass. Who knows, maybe there's even some kind of special heaven for the congenitally unlucky.
"Cardiac arrhythmias at five minutes," said a calm voice.
"Excellent work," His Eminence replied.
Unfeeling bastards. At the sound of those clipped, edu-cated voices Terry's fear shattered. Now he was
simply mad. Too bad there was no way to disappoint them at least a little. To die nobly,  instead  of  like  a
choking, poisoned dog.
A wave  of  raw  desperation  made  him  hammer  his  feet  wildly.  From  outside  there  came  excited  little
cries. "Delir-ium at five minutes twenty seconds!"
For an instant Terry was out again, then he returned to consciousness amid a series of white flashes. He
was going now, he knew it. Escape just wasn't in the cards.
He grieved for parts of life he had loved, for the snow-muffled nights along old cobbled streets,  for  the
pungent smell of coal smoke, for crime scenes and squad cars and all-night delis. And girls, all the girls he
hadn't had.
Outside there were eager scufflings, as if more of the ghouls were gathering around the coffin. He could
picture them  out  there,  all  crowded  around,  laughing  that  stifled  laughter,  gleeful  at  the  success  of  their
experiment.
There was a plague that killed in minutes, and it was in the hands of the mad.
He would at least show them a little human nobility, a little bravery. Mustering  every  bit  of  self-control

available to him he cleared his throat as best he could.
If he was going to die, let it be in style.
"I'm singin' in the rain," he gasped, "singin' and dan-cm —
He had to work up another breath to go on.
Outside,  silence  had  descended.  Maybe  they  were  shocked,  maybe  awed.  Good.  He  wanted  them  to
know this was a human being in here, and at the end this human being had broken through all his pain and
all his terror, and faced a hell of a death with a song.
"Singin' in the rain—"
There came a murmur of conversation. He was getting to them, he knew he was.
"Glory halleluja, I'm happy again!"
Somebody hushed the murmur.
"Singin' in the rain, you bastards! Singin' in the goddamn rain!" He threw back his head and  ground  out
some wheezy laughter. There was thunder in his ears and acid in his throat. He was dying in agony but he
did not scream.
Then singing burst forth all around him, the brightest, most triumphant singing he had  ever  heard.  From
hundreds of throats: ". . . just singin' in the rain. What a glorious feelin', I'm happy again. . . ."
They were throwing it right back at him. He hadn't gotten through to them at all. They had no feelings,
they were worse than mad, they had no souls.
At last the animal took over and he tore madly at the coffin, digging as  a  trapped  beast  would  dig.  He
sank his nails into the wooden lid.
He died.
MARY: THE TERROR OF THE INQUISITION
My dearest Jonathan:
I write this now, in this black time, in the hope that it will one day soon be possible for you to read it.
I must tell you that Patricia's injuries are not your fault. The blame rests with me and your Uncle Franklin.
All I can say in our defense is that what happened was a sort of accident. We caused it, yes, but for  the
best of reasons. We were trying to protect you both from the terror of the Inquisition.
There is a chance that we may cure Patricia, by a method that will surprise you. If the cure works, my
son, you will one day hold this letter in your hands.
I put  pen  to  paper  confidently,  trusting  that  those  we  serve  will  guide  us  through  out  troubles.  I  have
belonged to them, as have you, all the days of my life. I have come to love their hardness, to embrace their
danger.
I cannot call them evil, any more than I can call you anything but my beloved child. I hope my words will
help you in your confusion and fear. Remember yourself. Re-member what you were before the hypnosis
and what you are becoming again. Remember that you will be the father of the anti-man.
He will be a creature of what men call darkness. But not to himself. Men's dark will be his light, their evil
his good. Your son will have strengths and powers mankind never had; he will  have  the  attributes  of  the
demons.
The  anti-man  will  have  the  intelligence  of  Asmodeus  and  the  strength  of  Belial.  He  will  be  able  to
discourse like Satan and will shine with Lucifer's fire.
Do you remember learning all of that in catechism? Re-member the stories of the demons?
They are all hoping for you now, Jonathan. Can you feel them in your heart, hear them whispering to you
when the wind hisses through the leaves?
Remember the vision of Belial you had when you were nine? "I will speak to you in the voice of the dry
leaves," he said. That was such an extraordinary vision, and it filled you with such determination.
I know what you are feeling, what conflict rages in your heart. Now that you have been exposed to the
world of man you have come to love it. But, Jonathan, remember that God has owned this earth for millions
upon millions of years. It is time for the Devil to have His share of rule. This is justice.
Anti-humanity will be stronger than humanity, and far greater. Life on  earth  has  been  steadily  evolving
toward  higher  and  higher  intelligence.  So  our  creation  is  only  the  next  logical  step.  Satan  gave  man
knowledge in the first place. Now He will give the earth a humanity fashioned in His image.
Compared to us ordinary folk your son will literally be a god—as far above us as we are above the ape
men who preceded us.
When our species was born we pushed our forebears into extinction. And that was just.

But modern Homo sapiens would resist its own extinc-tion. A fearful and jealous humankind will destroy
the new species before it can get a proper start.
The destiny of this earth is to produce your son and all his race.  As a Church, we worship this destiny.
As scientists, we help to bring it about.
Jonathan, I can scarcely imagine how shocking it must  be  to  discover  these  truths  about  yourself  after
you thought yourself an ordinary man. You are not ordinary. You are the product of centuries and centuries
of the most careful breed-ing. You and Patricia are hardly even human.
Your bodies are ordinary. They are the past. Your souls, though, contain the seed of the future.
Do not recoil at the responsibility, my son: you are merely the instrument of nature. The law of evolution
is expressing itself through you.
Now I must tell you why you are going through all this difficulty and confusion, why you have been made
to forget your own past.
When your natural father and Patricia's parents were killed by the Inquisition, we hid you both. We did it
by hypnotizing you and concealing you under false identities. Even under torture you would not reveal the
truth about yourselves.
I am so sorry we made you endure this, and in our ignorance caused the accident in June at Holy Spirit.
All I can do is plead an excess of protective zeal.
You two are so precious! When I think that we nearly destroyed you by our very effort to protect you I
almost go mad!
But we were not wrong to take the steps we did. The  Inquisitors  are  master  saboteurs.  Their  murders
usually seem like accidents. They are  so  stealthy  I  think  that  they  could  kidnap  an  unborn  child  from  its
mother's womb. I myself trust nobody. When the cricket stops at moonset, I suspect the sneaking approach
of the Inquisitor with his tinder ready to set a fire in my bed. And when the darkness sighs, I listen for the
Inquisitor's voice, murmuring word of our defeat.
I sit here by the hour waiting and listening and worrying.
How can I help you through your rediscovery of yourself? Advice seems hollow, love futile. All I can tell
you is that the earth's will is toward evolution. It is your privilege to enact it.
Accept  this  fundamental  reality  and  all  your  confusion  will  evaporate.  You  will  reacquire  the  moral
precision that has always supported you. You will know the rightness of our cause.
It is the middle of the night, warm and still. I am hunched  in  a  pool  of  light  at  my  desk  in  the  upstairs
sitting  room.  I  can  hear  Mike  snoring  across  the  hall.  And  at  the  far  end,  in  your  room,  you  have  just
sighed. I will go and kiss you, my dearest son.
Five minutes have passed. I am back from your bedside. You moaned when my lips touched your cheek.
Your  sleep  is  troubled  again  tonight,  darling.  I  wish  that  I  were  a  demon,  and  could  bless  you  with  a
demon's insight.
Franklin says the life of the Church has always been this hard, but I don't agree. It was bad  during  the
Albigensian Crusade and worse during  the  Spanish  Inquisition,  but  at  least  then  the  Catholic  cards  were
placed on the table. Now the Inquisition is secret, and therefore more dangerous than ever.
My darling, may you be granted full measure of courage. May your burdens be borne with bravery.
A mother's hope is with you.
Mary Titus
Chapter Nine
PATRICIA ATTRIBUTED TO the trauma of her assault her feeling that a great unseen force was slowly
capturing her. Since the attack she was always under threat in her dreams, always being pursued by some
relentless thing she could never quite see.
During the day she tried to avoid being touched. Anybody who came into contact with her might turn out
to  be  one  of  the  dream  things.  They  might  reappear  at  night,  their  faces  stretched  thin,  the  bones
exaggerated to bestial size. In one recent dream all her friends had clawed up out of the street beneath her
feet and grabbed her legs.
Dreams that bad can drive people mad. They can even kill. Just to survive, Patricia had been forced to
make nightmare management her new specialty.

Only  Jonathan  knew  how  to  comfort  her.  She  let  him  sit  close,  and  occasionally  she  screwed  up  the
courage to clasp his hand. "At first you wouldn't let go," he had told her. From those hours she remembered
only the sense of dissolv-ing, as if her whole self were leaking out through her wounded sex. To prevent it
she had felt a desperate, over-whelming need to hold onto him.
She was grateful when she felt the sun touch her face. She had slept with the window open and now she
took breath after breath of the summer morning. There was again today no feeling of fullness down below.
The dull, unceasing pain had actually diminished to little more than a sensation of tightness.
Despite Mike's begging that she move, she had returned to this apartment. It was home, after all, her first
real home since she had been a very little girl. And it had been consecrated by her meeting Jonathan here.
In the open drawer of her bedside table lay a small black pistol, a gift from Mike Banion. On the far wall
there was a keypad. Above the keypad glowed a single red light. Until Patricia punched in the right  code
the light Would stay red and this apartment would remain  an  electronic  fortress.  Another  gift  from  Mike
Banion.
Beside her hand was a push button. If she pressed it, a bell would ring downstairs and one of the building
guards would come to her immediate assistance, twenty-four hours a day. Thanks again, Mike Banion. And
thanks for the alarm on my wheelchair and the cripple-height fire extinguishers in every room, and the carry
permit which allows me to wheel myself through life with a six-shooter at my hip. Thanks, Mike. You poor,
sweet man, you have made me feel more threatened than I think I can bear.
It was nine A.M. Time to call Jonathan. She went to the phone and dialed the Banions' number. As he
had promised, he was waiting for her and picked up the phone on the first ring. "Hi," he said. "You ready
for me?"
"I'll be ready when you get here."
"On my way."
"Love  you."  He  hung  up.  She  stared  for  an  instant  at  the  phone,  then  replaced  it  in  the  cradle.  This
morning she was going to  face  some  of  her  worst  fears.  She  would  enter  the  place  where  most  of  her
nightmares were set, and worship there among her terrors.
Jonathan was taking her to Mass at Holy Spirit.
As reward for the courage of her act he was then to escort her to the Caf6 Trianon in Queens Center for
a late breakfast of croissants and cafe au lait. During the course of the morning they would not  kiss,  and
they might not even touch. And Jonathan would not grin foolishly, or make elaborate conversational efforts
to avoid the subjects of rape, paraly-sis, or nightmare. Nor would his talk be full of unintentional innuendo
about those subjects.
It would, in short, be a nice morning after the Spirit was faced. But none of it could happen for another
twenty minutes. She had to dress herself. Hard and angering labor. Her legs dangled like soft rubber tubes.
The  worst  part  of  this  awful  immobility  was  that  there  was  no  detectable  reason  for  it.  There  was  no
physical damage at all.  They  had  even  scanned  her  brain.  She  was  healthy  and  whole,  nothing  crushed,
pinched, or severed. Only she couldn't walk.
Hysterical paralysis, Doctor Gottlieb had called it. Mary's dear friend. She had come to hate his watchful
eyes, peering at her from behind half-glasses, and those hands, so big and yet so clever with the probes and
instruments of examina-tion.
At Mass she must also see Mary Banion, who seemed desperately pained  whenever  they  encountered
one another. Did it embarrass her to be in the company of a victimized woman? Activate her own personal
sense of helplessness?
Mike and his minions had installed gripping bars on every wall in the apartment,  but  Patricia's  mainstay
was the big chrome wheelchair beside her bed. She checked the brakes, then twisted herself around so that
she lay with her back to it. Then she pushed herself with her arms until her head was in the seat. Next she
gripped the armrests and hauled herself into a sitting position. That was one of the "chair maneu-vers" she
had been taught in physical therapy. She was pleased; she had executed it well.
The rest of her dressing went as awkwardly as  ever.  She  washed  her  face  in  the  newly  installed  low
sink, and combed out her hair. She dropped her comb, then rolled over it and broke it trying to find it. Then
she took off her pajamas and got herself dressed in a light blue skirt and white blouse— and split the zipper
in the back trying to hike the skirt down under her buttocks. Then a little lipstick, a little eyeshadow, and she
looked just right. Like she had been dressed by a drunk.
Would she please Jonathan? Would she ever really please him again as much as she had? Perhaps she
was selfish even to want that. Damnit, though, she did.
He buzzed right on schedule. All of a sudden the visit to Holy Spirit—which she had been carefully not
thinking  about—seemed  formidable  indeed.  A  visit  to  the  heart  of  her  latest  inner  hell.  "You  have  to,"

Jonathan had insisted, "you need to confront these fears. We'll go  together."  He  was  the  brain  specialist,
after all; he ought to know. For an instant the back of her chair felt as cold as a marble altar.
That made her lunge forward, the involuntary response  of  a  person  forgetting  that  she  couldn't  get  up.
When she wasn't being pursued in her dreams she was always trying to find Jonathan. She would see him
walking into the ocean or across a forest glade, or down a darkly mirrored hall. She would call to him.
He used his own key to get in. "You look great."
"Thank you."
"I expected to find you upside down on the bathroom floor with lipstick in your ear."
"Funny boy."
He took the handles of the chair and pushed her out the door.
There were a couple of greetings in the elevator, more of those bright smiles she had learned to hate. It
had been awful to find out that normal people no longer had any idea of how to relate to you, and would not
do so at all unless trapped.
Tony had a Checker Cab waiting. Patricia could have kissed Mr. Checker for inventing those wonderful
rolling  boxes.  Between  the  two  of  them  she  and  Jonathan  had  only  a  hideous  time  getting  her  in.  This
contrasted with the inhu-man struggle smaller cabs entailed.
"How was last night?" Jonathan asked as soon as they were rolling. Poor guy, he had a big stake in her
last-nights. They tended to determine where on the scale from bad to abysmal her mood for the coming day
would fall.
"Not nightmare alley, anyway. But not Nirvana either."
"That's something at least. Did you trank down?"
"Nope. I slept totally drug-free, so I'm wild-eyed and bushy-tailed and ready to meet my day!"
" 'Wide-eyed.' The expression is 'wide-eyed.' "
"Not in my case."
Holy Spirit filled the far end of Morris Street. It was as large as some of the smaller Gothic cathedrals,
but  its  architects,  no  doubt  struggling  to  provide  enough  massive-ness  to  satisfy  the  prosperous  Gay
Nineties  parishioners  who  had  paid  them,  had  not  managed  to  make  its  stones  soar.  A  heavier,  more
gargoyled  and  crenelated  construction  could  hardly  be  imagined.  Its  stained-glass  windows  seemed  to
squint, little cracks in the granite facade.
"Oh, damn it, Jonathan, there's Mike's car."
"He's here, of course. Your whole entourage is here, as a matter of fact."
"And those patrol cars." She counted four in the parking area between church and rectory. "I don't think I
can stand this."
"Mike's been working on the case  like a crazy person. Twenty hours a day. He really cares  about you,
darling. He wants very badly to find whoever did this to you. Solving the case means an awful lot to him."
"I don't want to hear about the case!" The cab stopped and  they  worked  themselves  out  of  it.  Patricia
wished Jona-than had never said the word case, but now that he had, there was no point in trying to avoid
talking about it. That way ulcers lay. "Damnit all, anyway. I do want to hear about the case."
He stopped rolling her up the wooden wheelchair ramp that had recently been installed on the steps of the
Spirit.
There were benches to either side of the front door. Jonathan wheeled her to one and sat down before
her. "You're sure?"
She wasn't, but she nodded.
"They've tried to reconstruct your past, hour by hour, for the two  weeks  leading  up  to  the  incident.  All
they came up with out of the ordinary was the fact that you had spoken to an old man named Mr. Apple at
a parish seniors supper. Aside from our date, I mean."
"How did they ever find out about him?"
"An old lady who had been at the supper remembered you talking to him."
"He was just an old man. They were wasting their time."
"Mike decided to go after the guy. Farfetched, but the only lead they had. But the night  before  he  was
due to be questioned, he died. He was buried in All Souls."
"A wild-goose chase. First off, the  man  was  ancient.  Second,  he  couldn't  have  hurt  me.  He  was  like
paper.  What's  more,  he  was  senile.  They  could  have  asked  me  about  him  and  saved  themselves  some
trouble."
"No more questions, says the good Doctor Gottlieb. Not until you're walking again."
"What's the point, anyway? I can't remember anything important."
"Tell that to Mike. Maybe you'll cheer him up. His other problem is that he had something going with  a

reporter  and  the  reporter  disappeared.  Mike's  convinced  the  same  cult  that  got  you  got  him.  He  knew
something about it, it seems."
Patricia  really  wished,  just  at  this  moment,  that  she  had  been  strong  enough  to  tell  him  to  wheel  her
straight into the church. The newspapers had called it a ritual sacrifice, a cult rape, and her imagination had
been left to boil and burn with images of blank-eyed cultists waiting in the shadows around every  corner.
Cult. Ugly, stupid word. She wanted very much to  believe  she  had  been  the  victim  of  a  single  disturbed
man, acting alone.  Cult  meant  people,  dozens  probably,  ever-watchful,  alert  for  any  unguarded  moment.
She couldn't accept that; it was just too much.
And yet, she thought, she dreamed, that something was  getting  closer  and  closer,  fingers  going  around
her neck, cool and dry and tight.
Whoever  had  hurt  her  had  also  done  something  to  make  her  forget.  Something  incredible:  the  police
hypnotist had worked with her for hours. "If it were not for the physical  evidence,  I  would  conclude  that
this woman had not been harmed," he had written in the report Mike had shown her. The police hypnotist
was a bleak old man with a voice like a pillow.
Perhaps she should thank her rapist; maybe he had done her a favor. After all, she wanted to forget.
No, she wanted to remember—to remember his face, his name, anything about him that would help Mike
get him behind bars.
But if it was a cult Mike would never catch enough of them, no matter how hard he tried. That was why
she was afraid of a cult—they would be unstoppable.
She wanted to be safe. Safe and normal and happy. That was what was so sad. It was so little to want.
Now the tears were starting. She cried so easily these days. She battled with her feelings. Jonathan's hand
came out, touched her cheek. She couldn't bear it right now. She turned her head away.
"I'm ready," she said, trying to ignore the hurt in his face. He began to wheel her in.
The  big  doors  swept  open  as  they  approached.  They  had  been  watched,  of  course.  Eager  people
clustered around. Somebody found a Saint Joseph Missalette and held it out before her. She  smiled  up  at
the  grinning  face.  "I  have  my  missal,"  she  said.  The  grin  widened,  the  head  nodded  furi-ously.  Other
volunteers wheeled her; Jonathan walked be-side.
Oh, my Lord, there is the altar where most of me died.
I am so afraid. Black, ugly altar. Why is it black, anyway? Other churches don't have black  altars.  But
there  also  is  the  vigil  candle,  that  red  glow  that  tells  us  why  this  place  matters,  because  it  houses  the
fabulous enigma of the Blessed Sacrament.
Come on, girl, suppress that overwhelming urge to lunge out of this chair and crawl away  like  a  soldier
escaping from a battlefield. You  knew  coming  here  was  going  to  be  hard,  yes,  you  did.  She  wanted  his
touch,  raised  her  left  hand.  He  was  always  ready,  her  beloved,  and  his  warm,  slender  fingers  soon
surrounded hers.
There were a lot of cops in the church. Six or seven in uniform, and another five clustering around Mike
Banion  and  Mary.  Patricia  recognized  Lieutenant  Maxwell,  the  sex-crimes  specialist  with  the  bedside
manner of a friendly old doctor.
Father Goodwin  lurched  abruptly  out  of  the  sacristy  fol-lowed  by  a  plump  boy  of  perhaps  eleven  in  a
surplice at least three sizes too small. Father had lost weight; his chasuble hung on him like a shroud.
Now  for  the  Mass.  Father  Goodwin  was  spectral,  his  voice  full  of  quavers.  Patricia  wondered  if  she
could bear this ritual.
Even that word made her writhe in the chair. Ritual. Rituale.
She wanted to scream.
Frantically she fought for control. Father began the mo-tions, the drone of words. Patricia's mind battled
the chaos of terror that the place had inspired in her. Why had she been so stupid as to come here?
We know nothing of our passions, especially not  the  black  ones,  terror  and  panic.  She  sensed  that  the
saints lurking in the dome overhead were mad; she looked up at their twisted, pious faces and saw suddenly
a vast coldness written there.
Saints are not saints for love of God. They are saints because they have seen the terror of the unknown.
Of Hell. Hell is no fire, it is the emptiness, the black between the stars, and she could hear it whistling in
her own soul.
Come on, girl! Get yourself together! Work at it!
She drove her consciousness to bland and orderly thoughts. Sister Desperada: "The Holy Mass is divided
into thirty-four parts from the Entrance Antiphon to the Dismis-sal." No! I can't bear it. I'll never be able to
stay here that long!
"The Lord be with you."

A ragged trail of voices: "And also with you." Patricia wanted to run, to hide, to get down into the depths
of the earth and pull soil over her, to hide so completely that the very atoms of her body would be  mixed
forever with the anonymous brown dirt.
"My brothers and sisters, to prepare ourselves to cele-brate the sacred mysteries, let us call to mind our
sins."
Oh, yes, my sins. My sins are very horrible. I long for a loving man, and that is a sin of inordinate desire.
I want a nice little house, oh, God, in someplace like Riverdale, and some kids to need me and a husband to
grow old with, oh, God. And for me those are also sins of inordinate desire!
As if from afar she felt herself beating her breast, heard her words echoing through the stunned silence
of the church. "Through my fault, through my fault, through my most grievous fault, in thought and in word,
in all I have done and failed to do—oh, the Confiteor is a lie! A lie, God! I never did anything wrong. Hell
just opened up under my feet, God, and I fell in and now you won't pull me out!"
The silence deepened. "Lord have mercy," said Father at last.
His hands paused over the Rituale and she saw him close his eyes for an endless moment.
Jonathan's arm was around her. Mike Banion was ques-tioning her with his eyes, frowning with concern.
Mary's face was buried in her hands.
Poor Father began stuttering through his Kyrie.
"I'm sorry," Patricia muttered. She looked down. Anything but stare at that horrible altar. How stupid to
make it black!
"Shall I take you out?" Jonathan whispered.
She shook her head. Father said the Gloria in a completely new tone. He raised his head, lifted his arms,
looked as if from the bottom of a pit toward some promise above. "Glory to God in the highest, and peace to
His people on earth. Lord God, heavenly King, almighty God and Father, we worship You, we thank You,
we praise You for Your glory."
He cared about her. They all did.
She wanted to weep. But also, on behalf of the people who loved her, she wanted to be strong.
On to the Liturgy of the Word, today from the Prophet Daniel. Feast of the Transfiguration. "I saw one
like a son of man coming, on the clouds of heaven. When He reached the Ancient One and was presented
before Him, He received dominion, glory, and kingship; nations and peoples of every language serve Him."
Oh, Lord. You come on clouds of glory, I come creaking on wheels, terror in my heart.
What bitterness was in her. It was pitiful, to be bitter even against Him.
But God did not help me! God let me be raped on His own altar!
Next in the endless litany of the Mass came  the  Liturgy  of  the  Eucharist.  Mike  and  Mary  brought  the
gifts, looking from behind almost silly, the tall, elegant, chestnut-haired woman and her stocky husband.
Faith Goodwin took the chalice in hands so nervous that the wine stormed like the Red Sea. "Lord, by the
transfigu-ration of Your Son, make our gifts holy."
Is it possible, she wondered as he prepared  to  give  out  Communion,  that  God  doesn't  hate  us,  but  has
simply lost us? Maybe the earth has drifted into a part of the universe so obscure that even God  has  lost
track of it.
Human worship is chiefly characterized by the silence of God.
"Holy, holy, holy Lord God of power and might, heaven and earth are filled with Your glory. Hosanna in
the high-est."
Father hovered over his chalice, looking out at his  tiny  flock  in  what  must  seem  an  immense  ocean  of
empty pews.
The emptiness of space. The coldness. Except, oh, God, for us. We people, we are here.
Your silence is what drives us mad!  How  dare  You  do  this  to  us,  God!  How  dare  You!  We  deserve
Your involvement. We deserve Your respect. Yes, even Your admiration!
Or at least Your help. Please. Just two words, two infi-nitely blessed words. Oh, God, just say it. "I am."
Come on, say it. "I am." "Say it! Say it, damn You!"
With a horrified look at her, Father raced into the next prayer. "For the kingdom and the power and the
glory are Yours, now and forever."
"Sorry," she muttered again. Jonathan's arm was starting to hurt her shoulder. She shrugged it off.
"Let us offer each other the sign of peace."
Listen to him. It takes real faith to say something like that with any conviction. As she watched the Mass
proceed  she  fancied  that  she  could  hear  a  voice  in  the  breeze  that  was  rattling  the  old  stained-glass
windows. I love you, the voice said with a sudden clatter. You're mine! Mine! Mine! And then the breeze
went muttering off among the lush summer trees.

Father took the Host and ate it.
Patricia felt her chair wobble a little. "You sure you don't want to leave?" Jonathan whispered.
"No! Let's go ahead with Communion."
"Okay."  He  began  pushing  her  toward  the  altar.  She  was  to  lead  the  Communion  parade—which
consisted  of  Mike  and  his  entourage  and  the  usual  seven  old  ladies  who  were  Father's  morning  Mass
regulars.
Take  this  blood.  Take  this  body.  Let  us  proclaim  the  mystery  of  faith.  When  Father  approached  her,
Patricia cast her eyes down and held up her hands, cupped. She chewed the whole-wheat Host that Father
handed her. The little girl she had once been had believed that the Eucharist was the great center of human
life.
The breeze came back, much stronger, slapping at the windows, moaning past the eaves.
"Thanks be to God."
Far up in the church glass broke. The altar candles were snuffed out by a powerful blast of wind.
Faces turned, glanced up. But nothing more happened, except that the communicants shuffled back to the
three populated pews.
The concluding doxology followed. When Father turned around again he seemed unutterably sad. Patricia
felt  op-pressed;  she  did  not  want  to  share  any  more  sadness.  So  it  was  a  sad  world.  She  had  also
discovered this. A very sad world.
Father might be sad for her, but the way he was looking at his pews she suspected he was mostly sad for
his dying parish. This was probably the biggest turnout he'd had in months. So sad.
Maybe he ought to try bingo again. It hadn't worked the last time, but the prizes had been  a  joke.  Who
wants used prizes? The premium table had looked like a lawn sale.
She could easily have laughed, remembering how she had hand-drawn the stencil for the last bingo-night
poster. So very long ago, that innocent May night when the caller had called into the ocean of empty tables.
Fourteen players only. All had won at least one game. Three ended up winning back the castoffs they had
donated.
Suddenly  Mike  stood  up  and  approached  the  altar  rail.  Instead  of  going  off  to  the  sacristy  to  devest,
Father joined him. Mike drew an envelope from his pocket.
"Patricia," he said into the quiet, "I'm no speechmaker." He fingered the envelope. "This is from the Holy
Name Society. We got together and passed the hat because we wanted to give you a real good gift. Well,
open it up."
He dropped the envelope into her lap. She looked down at it, wondering dully what it would be this time.
I ought to be grateful.
"Go on, open it."       
Airplane tickets and  a  letter.  Lord  be  merciful,  they  had  given  her  a  pilgrimage  to  Lourdes.  Now  she
didn't know whether to laugh or cry. She just sat there, stunned. "I'm the pilgrimage director," Father said.
There was such warmth and anticipation in the faces around her, she had no choice but to smile.
Only Jonathan looked as desolate as she secretly felt.
Lourdes. Preserve me. They are sending their cripple for the cure. They were ridiculous, but they were
also touching. "Thank you," she said, as sweetly as she could.
"This means a lot to us both," Jonathan added in the thick silence that followed.
Jonathan took the handles firmly and wheeled her out. It was not until they were safely in a cab and well
away from the church that she did what she had really needed to do all morning, to somehow express the
irony behind the sadness, the bitterness behind the terror.
She burst out laughing. Holding  the  ridiculous  tickets,  tears  streaming  down  her  face,  she  laughed  and
laughed.
Jonathan was frightened. He shouted at her to stop, but that only made her laugh harder. He grabbed her
shoulders, held her to him.
Even so, it was a long  time  before  this  laughter,  which  hurt  so  much  she  could  hardly  stand  it,  at  last
began to die.

Chapter Ten
PATRICIA'S  LAUGHTER  SPREAD  a  coldness  through  Jonathan  unlike  anything  he  had  ever
experienced before. It was a hoarse, gasping agony. That there was no humor in it made it more awful. He
couldn't bear to hear it; he wanted to quell it with a shout. But that would never do; instead he hugged her
until it subsided to moans, then to soft breathing.
They  had  to  go  to  Tommy  Farrell's  Backroom  for  break-fast  with  the  Holy  Name  Society.  Forget
Trianon.
"I'm not going," she said. She waved the letter of invita-tion they had given her with the tickets.
Suddenly she planted her lips on his and gave him a hard, stunningly intimate kiss. There was something
lovely in it, full as it was of sudden, innocent passion. "Let's take a detour," she said. "Go to my apartment."
"We have an invitation."
"They'll wait half an hour! Driver, go to Twelve Hundred Metro Avenue!"
Jonathan did not protest. Even more than his love, he wanted to be alone with her for her own well-being.
She had been close to hysteria in that church.
She kissed him again, and when he felt the gentleness of it a joy of great proportions appeared in his soul.
No matter what happens, we have each other. Nothing can ever crush this love.
"We have each other, darling."
"Yes, Jonathan."
He had heard that word spoken another way. Yesssss.
He looked deep into her eyes. Terror flickered there, and sorrow,  and  something  immense  and  strange
and cold. The bitter fear in the church. The hard first kiss.
How  much  sanity  did  she  have  left?  Her  composure  was  growing  threadbare.  It  occurred  to  him  he
could, just possibly, help her in his lab. With him at the controls of his equipment there would be no need for
the unpre-dictable 6-6-6.
If he couldn't find out what he had forgotten about that night, perhaps she would be more accessible. At
least then she would no longer fear the unknown.
He looked at her, his heart pounding with love. If it was me. If it was me!
He did not broach the subject  of  the  lab  at  once.  Instead  he  waited  until  they  were  in  the  apartment.
They lay quietly together, still fully dressed, on her bed.
"I could find out what you're hiding from yourself," he murmured.
"Oh?"
"In my lab. I really think I could."
"Don't talk about it now. Anyway, if that police hypno-tist—"
"Primitive techniques."
"I thought you were out of school for the summer."
"I can always use the lab. The equipment's just sitting there."
"As long as I'm agreeable."
"Not much chance of that, right?"
"Oh,  come  on,  Jonathan!  I'm  nothing  if  not  agreeable.  I'll  smile  cheerfully  during  that  breakfast.  Go
humbly to Lourdes. And don't think I won't let you study my head. In the end I probably will."
"Good. We can go this afternoon."
"No, please, darling. I don't think I have the strength."
"Okay, I can understand that."
"But you're disappointed."
"I think if you could remember what happened, you might not suffer so much. The fear of the unknown is
the worst thing."
"Maybe."
"What do you mean, maybe? What could be worse?"
She took his hands. "The known," she whispered. "The known is  always  worse."  She  rolled  across  the
bed, touched his face. "Part of the problem is that people are trying too hard to help me. They already filled
me so full of x-rays at the hospital that I practically scorched my sheets when they rolled me back to my

bed. Anyway, your machine's irrele-vant. They also did a CAT scan, which is the definitive brain test."
"I don't x-ray. What I do is make a model of the brain's electrical function. I'm not interested in whether
or not it's damaged in some subtle way, but what part of it the thoughts are coming from. I can tell if you're
remembering a dream, a reality, or even telling a lie. Believe me, no hospital can do that. Safe too, as long
as I don't monkey around with drugs. I can distinguish between truth and lies better than any lie detector.
Far better."
"I'm not lying. I just can't remember."
"But there are snatches. Bits and pieces that you do remember."
"I remember people shouting. I remember being lifted up. And darkness. Absolute, black darkness."
"I'll bet we could reconstruct a great deal even from those few impressions."
"Are you sure you want to?"
"Good God, of course I'm sure!"
She laughed that knife-sharp  laugh  once  again.  "You  mad  scientists  will  stop  at  nothing  to  convince  a
subject. Next thing I know you'll be saying you can cure my legs."
"I won't say that. But I won't say it's out of the question either. If I could find out what's wrong—"
"Nothing is wrong! Oh, hell, Jonathan,  Mike  and  the  Holy  Namers  are  right.  It's  between  me  and  the
Blessed Virgin now. Lourdes is probably where I belong."
"Then I demand equal time for science. Let me do a thought-source map."
She frowned. Then she smiled. "I told you I'd give in. One of these days. But there are lots of other Good
Samaritans  in  line  ahead  of  you."  The  smile  became  too  brilliant.  "Holy  Name  breakfast,  here  I  come.
Marvelous! Rubber eggs? Love 'em!"
It  hurt  terribly  to  hear  her  pain.  He  enfolded  her  in  his  arms,  and  they  wept  a  little  together.  Finally
Jonathan spoke again. "It's a beautiful morning, my love. Let's do our best with it."
"I think that's a wonderful idea, Jonathan." She clutched at him. He kissed her.
"I love you, Patricia. I want to make love to you." At the sound of his own words his heart started beating
harder. He was amazed at himself, and at the stunning intensity of the need that had burst forth in him as
soon as he spoke.
"Don't you want to get to the breakfast on time?" Her eyes actually twinkled.
"The hell with the breakfast." He tried to kiss her lips again but this time got her cheek.
"Mike'll give you a hard time if I don't show up."
"I can handle Mike."
"You're sure?"
"Darling, I don't know how to ask this. I mean, is it safe and all for you to do it?"
"It ought to be," she whispered, "If you're gentle."
There had been a moment once before, in this same bedroom, just as they  had  embraced  on  this  same
cheerful yellow coverlet, when—
The hand of his fear clutched at his throat, constricted it, dried it to ash.
But she took his face in her hands and gazed at him. "We have to some time, Jonathan."
He dared not express his own fear when hers tormented her so. He hugged her.
Perhaps she sensed some of that fear, though, because she spoke in a tone of reassurance. "It's going to
be wonderful, darling. Just enjoy yourself. Don't be worried. The doctor said I could do anything I wanted."
She unsnapped his belt and opened his zipper.
Through the delicious film of his excitement he sensed something dark and slick and dangerous to them
both.
The serpent was sensitive to these things; the serpent could smell passion.
She poised her hand above the shaft of his penis, then began stroking it. "Oh, it feels almost like silk." She
touched the gleaming tip of it. "I thought it would be like a bone or something."
The serpent was uncoiling in Jonathan. Is love also death? Am I death?
No.  Now  whose  fears  are  running  away  with  him?  You  are  a  perfectly  normal  man.  Your  perfectly
ordinary love is not deadly.
He could tear her throat out with his teeth.
She  regarded  him.  "You're  like  an  angel  with  the  genitals  of  an  ape."  She  giggled.  He  watched  her
through a haze of pleasure and growing horror. With trembling hands he reached around her neck and undid
her blouse. Then came the bra, then the skirt and the panties.
Her  flesh,  so  perfect,  so  rich  and  full  and  young  that  it  almost  left  him  breathless,  glowed  in  the  soft
bedroom light. There was only a small scar, bright red, coming up halfway to her navel from her mound of
Venus.

"Now you've seen the defect."
"I think  you  are  the  most  beautiful  human  being  I  have  ever  seen."  He  touched  her  full  and  perfect
breasts. He was awed.
"Can you stand my scar? Oh, say you can!" In answer he finished undressing himself, straddled her, bent
forward  and  began  kissing  her  breasts  each  in  turn,  tasting  the  faint  saltiness  of  her  skin,  touching  her
nipples with his tongue until they were fully engorged.
Inside  him  the  serpent  slithered  quickly  forth,  sweeping  the  coils  of  its  hatred  into  his  mind,  bit  by  bit
possessing him.
He fumbled down below and she took his shaft again and guided it in. The sensation was stunning. For a
moment he simply sank down on her, unable to move. It was as if  the  whole  lower  half  of  his  body  had
become a blazing comet of pure excitement.
Then the serpent opened a door in  his  mind.  He  looked  around  himself  with  new  eyes,  at  the  blowing
curtains, the partly opened closet, the radiant, pleasuring face beneath his own. He thrust.
"Ouch. Too rough."
"Sorry." His own voice was a rumble. He was scared; he had wanted to thrust even harder. He saw that
scar opening again, only wider this time. He wanted to laugh, to scream with derisive laughter.
"Uh  oh.  Jonathan,  this  isn't  going  to  work."  He  thrust  again.  "Hey,  I'm  sensitive.  Take  it  easy."  The
pleasure had gone out of her face, replaced by apprehension. Tears were starting in her eyes.
He strove against himself, fighting the next  and  harder  thrust  with  all  the  force  he  had  in  him.  Finally,
trembling, battling his own raging instincts, he drew himself free.
There was silence between them. Then, slowly, bravely, she smiled. "It's a little too soon for  the  heavy
stuff, darling. But just to make it up to you I'd like to do something I've always fantasized about. Okay?"
He managed to speak. "Maybe we'd better call it off. Wait a while longer."
"There's  something  I  could  do—oh,  I'm  such  a  silly  I  can't  even  get  up  the  nerve  to  say  it!"  She
swallowed. "Here goes." She turned to him, pressed her lips against his ear. "Soixante-neuf."
"What?"
"You know. Sixty-nine." A blush flared on her cheeks. Without  a  further  word,  praying  that  the  lesser
acts of the bedroom would be ignored by his demon, Jonathan knelt above her, then bent forward. As  he
moved his lips upon her richly dampened and sharp-scented vagina, he felt her take his penis.
He thrust a little and heard her choke. He knew that even in this was terrible danger. The serpent was
fully awake now, crawling about in his unconscious, seeking access to his outer being.
She tasted wonderful; he had never known that such a  flavor  existed.  His  own  sexual  contacts  before
had been limited to the frantic couplings of adolescence.
She was sucking and licking him, bringing him very rap-idly to completion. But the snake was quick. The
snake was going to get out, he knew it was. What anger he felt, and what glee. Suddenly her back arched
and  the  rhythm  of  her  own  efforts  was  interrupted.  Then  her  fingers  clutched  his  buttocks,  instinctively
sought the intimate area there.
That  did  it.  He  simply  exploded  into  her  mouth.  She  jerked  her  head  back,  then,  in  an  instant,  had
disengaged from him. She laughed aloud.
"I'm sorry. I hope I didn't—"
"You were lovely."
Yes. I was lovely. One more moment and I would have been ugly beyond belief.
You poor, deluded girl. Beware who you love.
Chapter Eleven
FARRELL'S, WITH ITS red  vinyl  booths  and  its  Formica  bar  and  its  smell  of  Sunday  bacon  and  eggs,
made Jonathan feel the small relief of being in a friendly place.
In the ultimate moment of  his  pleasure  he  had  seen  something  within  himself  so  dark  and  alien  that  it
seemed scarcely human at all. He could only hope that the serpent was an aftereffect of the drug he had
taken, and that it would wear off.
He had wanted to thrust. Such movement taken to a level of almost superhuman violence had been what
had caused Patricia's greatest injuries.

Superhuman violence.
Tommy himself  opened  the  door  to  the  famous  Backroom.  Jonathan  wheeled  Patricia  in.  Inwardly  he
was desperate.  How  could  he  dare  to  love  her?  How  could  he  help  it?  Now  that  he  had  seen  the  true
miracle  of  her  beauty  and  tasted  her  secret  essence,  she  seemed  invested  with  magical  light,  as  if  a
goddess.
Would he kill a goddess?
Lately he had been retreating to a fantasy of another life, very different from this one. They shared it in
peace and privacy and love.
I want her. Even the wheelchair—it doesn't concern me. I want her so much.
Image of the snake: the shadow in the deep, rising to movement above.
His fantasy was of a house on the Pacific coast of Mex-ico—not Puerto Vallarta or one of those tourist
traps, but some exotic and hidden village where you could rent an old villa. They'd have a pool overlooking the Pacific, and from
 poolside you'd see yachts and sailboats in the near water, and maybe a cruise ship sparkling on the horizon.
He had a running dream of what they'd do there.  She'd  want  the  sun,  he'd  want  sex.  He  figured  they
could make love three or four times a day at least. She'd laugh, she'd ask him if he ever got tired. They'd bake awhile in the sun,
then go into the air-conditioned bedroom and make love and her skin  would  taste  of  sun  and  coconut  oil,  and  then
maybe they'd drink awhile by the pool. . . .
Not a very uncommon fantasy. Just an everyday man's dream. No serpents.
He was jarred from his fantasy by the reality of the room they had entered. Farrell's Backroom was a fluorescent
bedlam. Along one wall was a bar covered in wood-grained shelf paper. Behind it was a massive mirror completely
outlined in blue fluorescent tubing, with a red Farrell's sign in the middle. The ceiling was outlined in more blue tubing, as were
the mirrors around the walls. There were round tables with black tablecloths and red napkins on them, and a bandstand
that, thank whatever saint presided over the suppression of bad music, was empty of everything except a massive red fluorescent
F on the wall behind it. The room went zzzt! zzzt! zzz—zzzt! and the gray-green specters that were Mike and Mary and friends
looked as if their blood had been replaced by phlegm.
Mike turned, gave Jonathan a look that said, all right, so it's ludicrous, then went back to the conversation he was
having with Mary and Lieutenant Maxwell.
"You've obviously, never had the pleasure of coming here," Patricia said acidly. "I love what it does to makeup." The
women looked like they were wearing wax masks. Their eyes were glittering holes.
"When were you here?"
"The bank had a celebration Friday. I went back to work, remember?" Her voice was dry.
"A celebration? How touching."
"Very."
A waiter began laying out trays of steam-table eggs and sausages.
Mike came forward, leaned down to  Patricia,  and  kissed  her  forehead.  "Honey,  I  hope  you  aren't  too
upset about this Lourdes thing. I know it's—what's the word—"
Jonathan supplied it. "Mawkish."
"That sure as hell isn't it. Nothing to do with birds. Anyway, it's a little hokey—but Mary suggested it to
me and she and Maxwell kind of got things rolling and all of a sudden—well, hell, we're on our way. I put in
a word for Miami Beach but nobody would listen."
"Hey, Father," Lieutenant Maxwell called  to  the  silent,  watching  form  of  Father  Goodwin,  "how  about
saying grace so we can dig in?"
Father made the sign of the cross. "Bless us, O Lord, and these Thy gifts which we are about to receive
from Thy bounty through Christ Our Lord. Amen." Catholic grace at least was quick.
"Stay right where you are," Mike said to Patricia and Jonathan. "Let me get your plates. I'm sure after all
the hard work you've done this morning you're starving. I'll pile 'em high."
"He noticed we're late," Patricia said.
"Well, he's right about one thing. I am hungry."
She  squeezed  his  hand.  Mike  came  back  and  arranged  the  plates  on  their  table.  The  three  of  them
seemed to form a separate unit inside the little group. Mary  spent  time  with  Father  Goodwin;  Lieutenant
Maxwell  and  Doctor  Gottlieb  sat  together  near  the  empty  bandstand.  Jonathan  felt  com-fortable  with
Patricia and Mike. They were at ease together, the three of them.
Jonathan watched Mike. He was just another rumpled  cop,  a  little  tougher-looking  than  most,  until  you
met his eyes. Then you were shocked. In those eyes was as deeply felt a human being as you were likely
to encounter. No saint, though. In fact, sometimes a sonofabitch. Totally lacking in perspective. Either you
could do no wrong by Mike Banion or he treated you as a cross between a sewer rat and a cigar butt. But
if he  loved  you,  he  was  mad  about  you.  As  he  was  about  Jonathan,  and  had  become  about  Patricia.

Jonathan's eyes went to her, sitting so  stiffly  in  her  chair,  a  party  smile  on  her  face.  You'd  never  guess
what she'd been doing half an hour ago.
Once or twice right after Jonathan had been told of the paralysis he had awakened in the middle of the
night and sweated out what it was going to be like with her, wondering if she would be ruined.
"I  want  you  to  break  away  and  come  over  to  the  office  after  this,"  Mike  said.  "I've  gotta  tell  you
something."
He whispered this to Jonathan as one might to the parent of a sensitive child. "About the case?" Jonathan
replied.
"Yeah."
"She's not up to it."
"That's what your mother and Gottlieb said. That's what Max said."
"What're you two whispering about?" Patricia asked.
"I've got a lead. I've got to talk to you about it over at my office."
She ate her toast delicately, her lap spread with a napkin to catch the crumbs. "Look at it this way, Mike,"
she told him. "I can't break because I'm already broken. So you can feel free to tell me anything."
Mike reached toward her as if she were toppling out of her chair. His hands stopped, poised above the
table. "We've got what may be a major lead. And a  problem.  I  want  you  to  know  in  advance  it's  gonna
upset you."
Mary Banion was staring at them. She disengaged herself from Father  Goodwin  and  came  over  to  the
table. "Father is ready to bless our pilgrim, Mike," she said, loudly enough for everybody in the room to hear.
The  priest  reddened  and  stumbled  to  his  feet.  He  always  fell  all  over  himself  when  Jonathan's  mother
noticed him, It amused Jonathan  to  see  how  the  man  blushed.  When  she  idly  touched  his  wrist—as  she
often did when she talked to people—his eyes followed her fingers with frank avidity. In his daydreams it
surely was not his wrist she touched.
Father  Goodwin  came  to  the  center  of  the  room  and  faced  Patricia.  His  cheeks  were  flushed.  The
lighting made his skin appear mauve.
"I bless  you  in  the  name  of  the  Father  and  the  Son  and  the  Holy  Spirit.  Go  in  peace.  And  may  your
journey to that holy place of God's strength and curing be made easy by the intercession of blessed  Saint
Christopher, patron saint of travelers."
"Patricia, I want to add my personal blessing," Mike said. "To  help  you  out  over  there,  I  thought  you'd
need someone who speaks French, so I'm going along."
"The whole family's going," Mary added hastily.
"We leave on August fourteenth," Father said. "So far there are fifty-five pilgrims, bless their souls."
The sick, the pious, the crazy.
"Perhaps you're interested in the history of the pilgrim-age," Father continued.  "I  got  this  material  from
the Chan-cery yesterday." He handed around a brochure entitled "Queens County Pilgrimage to the Shrine
of Our Lady at Lourdes."
Fifty-seven consecutive years except during wartime.
Oldest pilgrim, Miss Mae Pztskowski, ninety-four, a traveler for eighteen years.
Sponsored by the Diocese.
Managed by Catholic Travel, Inc., in business since 1947.
Comfortable SkySaver Airlines Jetliner with facilities for The Sick. (Capitals theirs.)
Package  price  complete,  including  all  transfers,  lodging,  and,  God  help  us,  meals.  Special  diets
accommodated.
Five days and four nights in the idyllic and holy town of Lourdes, one of the most scenic in the Pyrenees
district. Accommodations at the first-class Gethsemane Hotel, a short walk from the grotto.
Price: $999.95.
When he saw the  surprising  avidity  with  which  Patricia  was  examining  the  brochure,  Jonathan  felt  an
unwelcome twinge of pity for her.
As  soon  as  Father  finished  there  was  a  general  leave-taking.  Mike  stayed  right  with  Patricia  and
Jonathan. Max-well joined them. Jonathan's last impression of the room  was  his  mother's  face,  watching
anxiously as the little entourage departed.
After Farrell's Backroom the sunlight seemed unnaturally intense.
"No cabs this time, kids. We go in my car."
"A ride in that thing is equivalent to smoking two cigars, Dad. You think she can handle it?"
"Never fall in love with a woman who can't stand cigars. Advice from the persecuted."
She maneuvered herself out of the chair and into the back seat with a certain new adroitness. "I've been

practicing on the way to work," she said. "Soon I'll be able to open the door, get in, fold the chair, and pull it
in behind me."
"And tip the driver? Cabbies oughtta be more help than that."
"You learn to tip any driver who'll pick you up. Cabbies stop for drunk killers with smoking pistols in their
hands and paralytics, in that order."
Mike hit the steering wheel with the heels of his hands. "You get the number of any fucking hack passes
you  by  and  he  will  not,  repeat,  will  not,  drive  another  day  in  this  town!  I'll  get  the  bastard  revoked  so
fast—"
"I love  you  too,  Mike,"  Patricia  said  hastily.  She  reached  forward  as  far  as  she  could,  touched  his
shoulder. "But the hacks have it rough enough already."
Jonathan could have kissed his stepfather. He was one loyal man.
Nothing more was said on the way to the 112th precinct house. Mike stuck a cigar in his face but did not
light it until they had arrived at his favorite no-parking zone.
Jonathan got Patricia out of the car while Mike hovered, not quite sure how to help.
As he wheeled Patricia along, Jonathan noticed the ugly tile corridors with their  glaring  overhead  lights
hidden be-hind wire cages. He wondered if he would ever pronounce himself guilty enough to come here
as an official visitor.
The precinct house was noisy now; the post-midnight silence of the polygraph session seemed a thousand
years away. Yet Jonathan remembered the sick dread, and the grinding sound of this very elevator. There
was a reality of some sort waiting for him in the mysteries of this place. Here, perhaps, a devastated Mike
Banion would one day book him.
Lieutenant Maxwell and an assistant were already in Mike's office. They were pulling papers out of their
brief-cases when Mary Banion arrived. Mike's eyes widened and he chewed his stogie. "Hi, hon," he said.
"You don't need to be here."
"Lieutenant?"
"I asked her, Mike. I thought you—"
"Doesn't  matter.  Glad  to  have  you,  darlin'.  Let's  every-body  pull  up  benches.  We  got  a  real  official
presentation  here,  thanks  to  Max  and  the  Sarge."  That  was  what  he  called  Maxwell's  delicate  little
assistant,  apparently.  Somehow,  though,  the  Sarge's  nickname  fit.  She  looked  feminine,  but  not  one  to
tolerate any fooling around.
"We want to take you kids through the case," Maxwell said in his rich, anchorman  voice.  Obviously  he
had  been  designated  speaker—Mike's  token  New  Policeman—the  kind  of  cop  he  liked  to  show  off  to
Jonathan.
You wanted to shake some sense into Mike; you wanted to hug him. Jonathan wished he knew how to
ask him to make his own presentation. But how could he say that they were happier hearing it  from  him,
that they trusted him and respected him more than any of his degree-bearing under-lings?
Patricia's hand slipped into Jonathan's. The gesture might as well have been spoken words, so clear was
its meaning: whatever they tell us, we are one now. We are one.
In  that  moment  Jonathan  decided  to  ask  her  to  marry  him  and  damn  the  consequences.  If  it  was
psychotherapy he needed, he would get it. They would make a life together. They had a perfect right.
"We believe that we have identified the man primarily responsible for what happened on the night of June
six-teenth."  The  lieutenant  handed  Patricia  a  composite  drawing  of  a  ridiculously  old  man.  "Do  you
recognize him?"
"He was at the parish supper."
So it was that again. Nothing new, nothing new.
"He was the one who talked to you at the seniors supper the week before the incident. His name seems
to be Franklin Apple. We aren't certain."
Jonathan's heart skipped a beat. He felt so much as if somebody were creeping up behind him that he had
actively to suppress the urge to look over his shoulder. Then he realized why: the strange old man he had
seen in his lab yesterday looked a little bit like that.
"He died the day we were going to question him."
Jonathan was relieved.
"We believe that he was the local leader of a large religious organization—we call it that for want of  a
better word—that has been operating clandestinely for some years."
Jonathan put his hand on Patricia's shoulder. He could feel her trembling. But he felt it was right that she
be here just as it had been right for her to go to the church. She had to confront these things. That was the
only way back to some kind of mental stability and a chance at happiness for them both.

Mike questioned Jonathan with his eyes. Jonathan nod-ded. "Go on, Max," Mike said.
"We  have  looked  for  some  sort  of  pattern  of  rape  in  churches—boroughwide,  citywide,  statewide.
Nothing. Your case is all but unique. What we have found is that a larger number of Catholic religious have
turned up missing or dead  by  violent  means  than  we  would  have  expected.  Fourteen  in  the  past  twelve
years."
"I don't see the connection." Patricia's voice was soft, but Jonathan could hear the fear in it.
"Admittedly tenuous. A recent case  illustrates the pat-tern, though. A Brother Alexander Parker  of  the
Society of Saint Jude was found dead, apparently of accidental causes, in an apartment  across  the  street
from Holy Spirit the  morning  after  your  incident.  Two  strange  things.  First,  he  was  living  incognito.  We
didn't know he was a  religious  until  we  questioned  his  mother.  Second,  he  had  taken  a  reporter  into  his
confidence."
"The reporter told me about the cult," Mike added. "Your Mr. Apple fit the description of the man he said
was running it."
"And the reporter is now a missing person," Maxwell's assistant said.
"I don't know what all that means and I don't want to hear any more," Patricia said, her voice ragged.
Now Mike spoke. Quietly, almost sadly, as if this were a miserable duty. "There isn't much. Just bits and
pieces. But connect the dots and you have something more than a single individual acting alone."
"Come on, Mike, get it over with! Why am I here? What do you want me to do?"
"We are assuming the surviving members of the group have the capacity to come back and finish what
was left undone."
She writhed in her chair, looking desperate. Jonathan went closer to her, knelt beside the  chair.  "That's
enough," she said in anguish. "Don't you think I know that? I mean, all those alarms and that horrible little
gun and all, how could I not know? I can't do anything about it. If they're going to kill me, they're going to
kill me." She clasped her knees. Her knuckles went white with the pressure she was exerting. "I perfectly
fulfill the cliche of the helpless fe-male."
"Honey," Mike said, "I called you here to tell you that we are going to give you protection. You're getting
twenty-four-hour surveillance."
"Oh, no! I won't live like that, I won't!"
"Max, you tell her."
"You won't even know we're there. And it's just until we roll this thing up."
"Roll it up? You said you just had bits and pieces! So now you're going to roll it up?"
"We're working on it. We're getting close."
"How close?" Mary asked. "I think it would help Patricia if you would tell us all."
"We've got Holy Spirit staked out."
"Which is to say you're not close at all. And I'm supposed to remain under lock and key—being watched
constantly—  until  you  get  somewhere?  I'll  bet  you  have  years  of  work  before  you."  Patricia  shook  her
head. "The notion of rolling myself off a cliff keeps recurring."
Mike nodded to Maxwell, who went doggedly on.
He explained the details of how they were going to guard Patricia. They were distressing: every moment
of every day somebody would be  watching.  Plainclothesmen  most  of  the  time,  but  uniformed  officers  in
places like the bank where she was exposed to the public.
Oh, Mexico, land of fantasy! A pool, a beach, a bed-room.
Patricia's only comment after the meeting was over was that Lourdes suddenly sounded more tempting.
"It says it's in the Pyrenees in the brochure," she said in the cab on the way home.
"What of it?"
"Well, you can take me mountain climbing." She didn't laugh this time, and neither did he.
Chapter Twelve

JONATHAN HAD HOPED that their journey would bring them a measure of peace. Instead, it only drew
them deeper into their fears.
The  flight  itself  was  extremely  pleasant.  Jonathan  was  amazed  to  find  that  SkySaver  Airlines  had
provided a beauti-ful L-1011 for the journey. There were a number of different pilgrimages on the plane, of
which the Holy Spirit group was by far the most privileged. They occupied the first-class section, and had
been  pampered  as  if  they  were  flying  on  the  best  of  the  scheduled  airlines.  Behind  them  in  economy
Jonathan had glimpsed seats jammed nine abreast and  peo-ple  eating  out  of  bags  they  had  brought  from
home, but the curtains were kept closed, so there was no need to dwell on their plight.
The Holy Spirit group was young and well dressed. Where they had come from Jonathan did not know.
Father's usual parishioners were old people, mostly widows. Although  the  rear  of  the  plane  was  jammed
with stretchers, and there was even a staff doctor aboard, the Holy Spirit group had no sick.
Patricia was the only one among them with any defect or disease. The two of them sat together hand in
hand  for  all  the  hours  across  the  Atlantic.  Jonathan  watched  the  limitless  waves  passing  below,  and  let
himself be  lulled  by  the  sound  of  the  plane's  engines.  He  toyed  with  the  rescue-instruction  card,  flipped
through a gift catalog. They had drinks before their dinner of lobster tails, and cognac afterward.
Then he slept. Unconsciousness brought him a new and terrible dream, worse  than  any  that  had  come
before. Like a man struggling against a stubborn current, he fought it, and like such a man, knew his efforts
were pointless.
The serpent would have its way. Jonathan must dream his dream.
He sat astride a white, undulating female  body.  Each  shiver-sweet  pulse  of  his  hardness  wounded  her
more. When he jerked his thighs she would scream, and when she screamed his whole being would explode
with pleasure. He jerked harder and harder until she was shrieking through bloodied lips and he could feel
her swooning beneath the power of his passion.
Jonathan screamed. He could not bear to look into those agonized eyes.
And yet they pleased him, and he did keep on.
Even as she screamed her voice faded into wind-noise. He grew  cold.  The  wind  mourned  and  wailed,
and the wail became a whine.  Jonathan  realized  he  was  awake.  The  pitch  of  the  engines  had  changed.
They  were  nearing  Tarbes-Ossun-Lourdes  Airport.  He  flickered  his  eyes  open  and  looked  at  Patricia.
"You were groaning," she said. "Was it a nightmare?"
He didn't want to think about it. He twined his hand in hers and settled back in the seat.
Father Goodwin began to make an attempt with his guitar, and that diverted Jonathan. The priest stood in
the aisle, his needle-thin fingers worrying the strings of the beaten old instrument. "Hail Queen of Heav'n,
the Ocean Star, guide to the wanderer here below . . ."
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Father nodded and smiled encouragement at his fashion-able pilgrims as the plane swam on through the
lambent French evening. He raised his eyebrows, he strove for a joining of voices.
Jonathan  could  almost  hear  him  thinking:  Sing.  Please  sing.  "O  gentle,  chaste,  and  spotless  maid,  we
sinners make our prayers through thee." Sing, you beautiful zombies.
Still nothing. Father  Goodwin  withdrew,  nodding  and  smiling.  People  had  barely  glanced  up  from  their
cognacs.
From the economy cabin came a renewed  burst  of  song.  Father  shifted  uncomfortably  in  his  seat.  All
during the trip the other pilgrims had been alternately singing and saying the rosary.
Across the aisle Mike slept heavily, his mouth slack, one massive arm dangling into the aisle. Beside him
Mary re-mained engrossed in Marnham's Lourdes:  A Modern  Pil-grimage. She was participating avidly
in the family absurd-ity. And why not? It was an absurdity she had created. Jonathan thought of her as far
too  sophisticated  to  suggest  this  ludicrous  journey,  but  she  had  insisted  it  would  be  good  for  Patricia.
Perhaps she was right. At least it was a change of scene.
"What was your dream, darling?" Patricia asked.
In the past few days she had grown more and more like a wife. Usually he  reveled  in  it;  to  be  known
intimately  was  a  wonderful  new  experience  for  him.  But  he  wanted  to  spare  her  the  savagery  of  his
dreams.
"Jonathan, you didn't answer me."

"I was hoping I wouldn't have to."
"You can tell me, darling."
"I don't remember."
She didn't press him but he still wished she hadn't asked. Thinking about it  forced  him  to  face  the  fact
that there was something he could not share with her, nor even explain.
"You're shaking," She slipped an arm behind his neck. The gesture had conspiratorial quality. Her other
hand she laid on his chest. She placed her lips so near his ear that they touched and tickled deliciously. "I'm
here with you, Jona-than. We're safe. We're thousands of miles from any dan-ger."
The purr of the engines dropped a couple of octaves. They were landing. A sharp bank revealed  lights
glowing in wrin-kled valleys, and off to the east a splash of color that must be Lourdes. Soon they rocked
and rumbled down the runway, coming to a halt near the gate. Next stop, God willing, was the Gethsemane
Hotel and a night's rest.
Jonathan was still not sure how Patricia was going to react to being here. She might, despite all she said,
be holding out some small hope of a miracle. If she was, then she would be disappointed. Mother had been
insensitive to this  aspect  of  the  trip,  and  Jonathan  had  told  her  as  much.  Patricia  was  an  ideal  breeding
place for forlorn hopes. She was not recon-ciled to that wheelchair, no matter how she acted.
"Lourdes," Patricia said as  the  plane  stopped  at  the  gate.  "My  first  footstep  on  foreign  soil."  Jonathan
managed a weak smile into the rich and glorious beauty of his lover's face.
She looked long at him.  Patricia  of  the  green  eyes;  Patricia  of  the  madonna  smile.  Her  lovely  breasts
were elusive beneath her blouse. Her curves were suggested by the folds of her dress.
So  far  they  had  only  been  intimate  that  once.  Subsequent  attempts  to  get  sufficient  privacy  had  been
squelched by a friend of Patricia's, a former Our Lady nun who had needed lodging while she found a place
of her own. She had moved into Patricia's living room. God willing, old Letty Cochran (formerly Sister Saint
John) would be gone by the time they got back.
To make matters worse, Mother and Mike seemed to have reached a new height of sexuality. As never
before  Mother  was  seducing  him.  She  was  almost  frantic.  And  she  certainly  knew  how  to  make  Mike
happy. Not a night passed that Jonathan wouldn't hear her in their bedroom crying out with delight, a sound
which evoked in him the most painful combination of loneliness and excitement. He would lie just across the
hall, fevered, sweating, erect in the empty air.
"Do you think it all really happened?"
"What?"
"Lourdes, of course. The cures."
"Perhaps. I don't know. There's something to faith heal-ing, that much we know. Psychological cure, like
the pla-cebo effect."
"Something  could  happen,  then.  That's  what  you're  say-ing,  since  the  doctors  say  my  paralysis  is
psychological."
Oh, boy, here it came. How dare they bring her here just to let her get hurt like this! Mother  had  been
irresponsible. "The odds are against it, darling."
"But not a hundred percent."
"I thought you were the one who considered this an insult to your intelligence."
"Oh,  Jonathan,  now  that  I'm  here—don't  you  think  there's  just  a  tiny,  outside,  million-to-one  sort  of
chance?"
He could have wept. "I'm afraid I'm too much the scientist to calculate odds. Psychosomatic  cures  are
known, but they are extremely rare."
"But if I believed—if I really believed—maybe that would be enough?"
He wanted to say no, but that just wasn't true. "There's a remote possibility. But please don't cling to it."
She sat rigid, staring into the middle distance. Without the sound of the engines the plane was filled with
the moans and coughs of the Sick in the economy section. On the flight Jonathan  had  worried  a  good  bit
about the possibility of contagion. Would it be possible to get one of the bizarre diseases represented back
there?  The  Sick  who  came  on  pilgrimage  were  the  abandoned  of  medicine.  Hardly  a  com-mon
disease—except  of  course  for  the  cancerous  and  the  diabetic  and  the  stroke  victims.  Among  the  most
bizarre  victims  there  was  a  case  of  dystonia  musculorum  defor-mans,  a  man  of  twenty-five  twisted  to
Gordian complexity, peering through his glasses at a tattered volume of Proust.
But the Sick were far to the rear. The Holy Spirit pilgrims didn't need to trouble themselves.
"All bearers to their pickup points, please," a priest's voice called over the intercom. There was a general
shuffling  among  the  economy  passengers.  Soon  stretchers  began  to  go  past,  hauled  by  relatives  and
volunteers. The worst of the Sick, a form swathed from head to toe in white, was pro-pelled down the aisle

first. No information about this indi-vidual's disease had been forthcoming.
"There goes the corpse," Jonathan muttered to Patricia.
"Our Lady doesn't raise the dead, dope."
Just then the corpse gave out a long sigh.
"It's a miracle!"
"Shh!" Patricia's pale cheeks flushed. How painfully, delicately beautiful she was.
The complete procession of stretchers took ten minutes to pass.
At last those not under constant  medical  care  could  leave  the  plane.  Jonathan  went  and  got  Patricia's
wheelchair and they were soon on their way.
The greater part of  the  airport  was  a  hodgepodge  of  victims  and  their  retinues.  It  took  an  astonishing
amount of effort and skill to move the truly sick, and people did not bring colds and rashes to Lourdes. Only
the  abandoned  entered  here  .  .  .  and  their  relatives  and  priests  and  lovers  and  friends.  The  airport
resounded with a sort of low, penitent murmur. Despite all of Jonathan's negative feelings about the place,
he saw at once that there was great faith here, and despite himself was moved.
His group was ushered by a woman with a clipboard into a  special  customs  area.  Here  there  were  no
crowds and no  Sick.  The  Holy  Spirit  pilgrims  were  grouped  with  others  like  them,  healthy,  well-dressed
people who seemed to have little relation to the struggling faithful on the other side of the ropes.
For  an  instant  Jonathan's  eyes  met  the  cute  little  usher-ette's.  She  blushed  and  lowered  her  head,
practically bowed. She hurried away.
"Who was that—a fan of yours?" Patricia asked.
"Never saw her before in my life."
"She acted like you were a movie star."
"Now, now, don't get jealous."
Across the rope hard-edged officials were screaming, "Customs! Douane!"  They were searching every
bag, even looking under the sheets covering the Sick.
On this side of the rope people got through instantly, with a polite smile and a perfunctory tap of the bag.
Their  luggage  was  not  even  checked  with  chalk  marks.  Their  passports  were  not  stamped.  And  the
customs inspectors lowered their eyes when the Banion family passed, more like servants than officers of
the law.
"No big deal," Mike said happily. "Maybe they know I'm a cop." Jonathan wasted no time rolling Patricia
out to the cab station. He really wanted time alone on the way to the hotel. He managed to get one of the
ungainly-looking Peugeot cabs especially customized to take wheelchairs.
Once inside silence descended between the two of them. He had an important reason to want to be alone
with her. So important, in fact, that he was having a hard time saying it. He wondered how she would react
when he asked her to marry him. It had been much on  his  mind,  and  he  had  decided  to  ask  her  here  at
Lourdes. Maybe the good news would soften the hurt she was going to experience when the grotto failed
her.
"Gethsemane Hotel," he said to the driver. Would it afford an opportunity of privacy, or was this to be his
only chance? He wasn't sure he had the nerve right now.
He had decided to dare marriage because he was con-vinced the serpent was a side effect of a poorly
tested drug. And he intended to enter psychotherapy for his dreams. Maybe he could become exactly what
he wanted to be—a good husband to the woman he loved. It seemed so simple.
Why, then, was he afraid to ask his question?
He thought of the dream of an hour ago, the sweet, dying flesh.
The driver  pulled  out  into  traffic.  Jonathan  watched  Patri-cia's  fingers  twisting  in  her  flat,  lifeless  lap.
"Look," she said, "the crosses."
   So those were the famous crosses of Lourdes, on the hill called Calvary just above the  grotto.  Beyond
was  the  great  Basilica  of  the  Rosary  and  farther  away  the  town  itself,  glowing  with  evening  light,
suggestions of neon shimmering in the summer haze.
Patricia smiled, and Jonathan almost sobbed. More and more he was feeling pity for her. He must not do
that.
She had the softest eyes he had ever seen, so utterly without anger in them.
"I wish we could thank Mike and Mary in some way. I want to give them a present."
"Get cured."
She looked at him,  surprise  and  confusion  following  one  another  across  her  face.  How  could  he  have
been so brusque? Did he want to make her angry at him ... or was there some deep, sadistic thing in his
soul that was actually sneering at her? In a voice dull with hurt she said she had come here only to pray.

"I know, darling. I'm sorry. It didn't come out the way I intended. I guess it's  just  that  I'm  frustrated.  I
want the best for you, Patricia. I love you so!"
Her eyes searched him. There  was  perfume  coming  from  the  blond  glory  of  her  hair.  He  noticed  the
neatness of her nails, and the  care  she  had  obviously  taken  with  her  makeup.  Even  after  the  long  flight
Patricia appeared fresh. He felt weak and coarse and mean to pity her. She must be  suffering  incredibly
just now.
But no, she was smiling, she was brushing away the wetness in the corners of her eyes.
"At least I could get something for Mary since all this was her idea."
"A plastic Virgin, maybe? A rosary? Or how about a Virgin-rosary combo? That would be generous."
She  managed  to  laugh  a  little  at  that.  "Don't  be  sarcastic,  you  evil  man.  We  have  to  find  something
appropriate."
The basilica  now  loomed  on  the  far  side  of  the  quick-flowing  River  Gave.  The  cab  made  a  turn  and
passed under the railway tracks and they were abruptly in Lourdes. Jonathan noticed the driver flashing his
lights at a small group of dark-suited men on the  corner.  The  men  doffed  their  hats.  Traffic  choked  the
streets—tour buses, taxis, private cars, trucks.
The  commercial  density  of  Lourdes  was  totally  unex-pected.  Every  inch  of  sidewalk  was  faced  by  a
storefront jammed with religious kitsch. There were exuberant fes-toons of rosaries—brown,  red,  yellow,
green, pink, white. Scapulars and miraculous medals were piled in mounds and pinned to cards in clumps of
hundreds.  Whole  armies  of  plastic  Madonnas  of  the  Grotto  disappeared  into  the  glaring  interiors  of  the
shops. Our Lady danced and jittered in neon, praying hands flickered into images of the Sacred Heart and
back again, and crucifixes were everywhere, each twisted tin Jesus identical to all the others.
The neon banished night. This was a religious Las Vegas, where piety  and  greed  had  twisted  together
like mutant chromosomes. As the cab proceeded slowly down the street, an endless, shrill babble of hymns
from storefront loud-speakers came in through the windows with the choking diesel exhaust and the smell
of frying junk food.
Patricia had  gone  pale.  Her  hands  were  tightly  clenched.  She  was  motionless,  staring  straight  ahead.
From the edges of her eyes tears once again gleamed.
Nothing Jonathan had read had prepared  him  for  the  relentless  cynicism  that  had  infected  this  city.  It
was almost us if the merchants of the place were trying to mock their Catholic customers.
And  what  of  her,  bringing  her  broken  body  here  in  hope  of  cure?  This  exhibition  must  be  shattering.
Jonathan would have done anything to spare her this ugliness. If only he had known, he would have really
fought the trip, made certain it didn't happen.
The plastic and the glare were nailing her to her wheel-chair forever. She sobbed, and Jonathan felt  as
never before her catastrophe.
The driver yanked open the cab door and drew Patricia out  with  exaggerated  gentleness  that  Jonathan
took for more cynicism. Jonathan gave him his money, adding as a tip the smallest coin in his pocket, which
the driver took with reverence. He stood on the sidewalk, his cap in his hand, smiling after them.
Jonathan became aware of the scene around them. Stretchers, wheelchairs, frames, medical supplies, and
lug-gage lay about on the sidewalk. The Holy Spirit pilgrims were nowhere to be seen. Of them only Father
Goodwin  remained.  He  was  rushing  back  and  forth  between  the  hotel  and  the  pilgrims,  his  face
sweat-shiny, helping the other priests to organize their charges.
The Gethsemane appeared to be a typical middle-grade Lourdes hostelry, six stories of small windows, a
gray  stone  facade.  Only  its  top  two  floors  suggested  any  promise  of  decent  accommodation.  On  floors
seven  and  eight  the  win-dows  were  large  and  arched.  Light  shone  from  behind  beautiful  draperies.
Well-dressed people could be seen com-ing and going in the rooms beyond.
Mary got out of her cab and stood with Jonathan, looking upward. They saw the silhouette of a trim little
man ap-proach one window. Then the light behind it went out.
"Relax, Harry," Mike called to the frantic priest. "You're gonna get a coronary."
Jonathan  really  noticed  Father  Goodwin  for  the  first  time  since  they  had  landed.  Gone  was  the
guitar-playing  priest  of  the  airplane.  This  new  Father  Goodwin  acted  like  a  man  let  down  on  the  most
dangerous street in the worst part of the Los Angeles barrio. He wasn't just overexcited, he was in a panic.
And he was looking up too, furtively, as if he ex-pected someone to stone him from above.
Jonathan followed one of his glances and was surprised to see that the  seventh  and  eighth  floors  were
now completely dark.
Mary  saw  Father's  consternation  too,  and  strode  over  to  him.  There  was  a  whispered  conversation.
Father, his face  gray  with  what  was  surely  shock,  his  eyes  stricken  with  sorrow,  spoke  to  the  gathered
pilgrims. "We have to stay here," he said thickly. "There are no other hotels available. Let's go in."

"He doesn't like the hotel," Mary said as she returned to the Banion group.
"Has he been inside?" Mike asked.
"I have no idea. I think he's suffering from jet lag."
They went into the gray-tiled lobby and found a bright young concierge behind the aged hotel desk. She
wore a dingy brown dress and greeted them with the same defer-ence everybody had thus far exhibited.
"Here  are  your  keys.  Americains.  The  lift  is  opposite  the  restaurant.  As  you  asked,  Madame,  your
rooms are on the second floor, two-oh-two through two-twelve."
Jonathan  was  disappointed.  He  had  assumed  that  Ameri-can  pilgrims  routinely  got  the  first-class
accommodations, which were obviously on seven and eight. "I'd like to be higher, Mother."
"It's not safe with the chair. These places are firetraps."
Jonathan knew better than to argue with her over a matter like this. Mother had an obsessive fear of fire.
Oddly, the elevator showed only six floors to the hotel. There weren't even keys  for  the  two  additional
floors.  Once  they  got  upstairs  it  was  clear  that  Father's  intuition  had  been  right.  The  "rooms"  were
dormitories fitted with cots and obviously intended to sleep no fewer than four. There were  no  singles  or
doubles;  the  Gethsemane  hadn't  even  been  built  that  way.  Mike  moved  his  family,  Patricia,  and  Father
Goodwin into 202. This was as depressing an arrange-ment as Jonathan could imagine. Chances of privacy
flew out the window, a crack of a thing overlooking  the  hotel's  kitchen  exhaust.  Behind  a  frayed  screen
stood an ancient lavatory and toilet. On the bidet was a handmade sign, 
FEET ONLY, NO URINATION!
"Beautiful," Mike growled, throwing luggage down. "Thank God the Sick aren't here." For pilgrims in need
of constant medical attention the Church had built Our Lady of Sorrows Hospital, which was some blocks
away.
In  that  she  did  not  require  nursing  or  medication,  Patricia  was  here  rather  than  at  the  hospital.  As
Jonathan wheeled her across the room, thinking of his unasked question, he longed to be alone with her.
She took the wheels and went over to Mike and Mary. "I don't even mind the room,"  she  said.  "I'm  so
glad to be at Lourdes."
"All the plastic Jesuses—I could do without that part of it," Mike said.
"It  won't  be  like  that  at  the  grotto,"  Mary  assured  her.  She  touched  Patricia's  face,  very  much  more
tenderly than she ever had before. "You'll see."
Mike leaned over and kissed Patricia's forehead. "You're too good, that's your problem."
Father Goodwin, who had been dashing up and down the hall in a frenzy of announcements and schedule
changes, stuck his head in the door. "Soubirous tour in fifteen min-utes! Those interested please gather in
the lobby. The bus will pull out at exactement eight P.M."
"He seems to have recovered some of his savior-faire,"  Mary said acidly. She was behind the screen;
Mike had pulled a bottle of Chivas out of his suitcase and was trying to make a drink in one of the hotel's
cracked plastic cups. "No way," he said, as it leaked whiskey from at least six different holes.
"Jonathan," Patricia said, "I'd like very much to go."
"Don't," Mary called. "We can arrange a private visit tomorrow."
"I'd like to go on the tour, really I would." That was unfortunate. Jonathan's one wish was to bury himself
in the two-inch foam-rubber mattress allocated to him and forget his disappointment.
"It won't be very pleasant," Mary said.
"It'll do me good to be with other pilgrims. I mean sick ones."
"I'll be glad to come, darling," Jonathan said. "But I intend to sleep through the Bernadette bit."
Mary laughed. "You two  go  along.  But  if  you  get  tired  and  want  to  come  back  early,  hail  one  of  the
Peugeot cabs. And make sure it's a Peugeot. They're the best."
The tour bus was huge but astonishingly flimsy, as if it might be  built  of  cardboard.  At  the  rear  was  a
large  double  door  and  a  pneumatic  chair  lift.  Jonathan  wheeled  Patricia  onto  the  contraption.  He  soon
discovered,  when  nothing  happened,  that  it  was  first  necessary  to  pay  the  driver  an  American  dollar  to
operate the lift.
He put the money into the kid's hand. Once inside the bus he had to move Patricia onto a seat. This was
a harrowing operation, involving picking her up in his arms and carrying her down the narrow aisle from the
chair-storage area in the back. She  was  not  a  small  girl,  and  the  lifelessness  of  her  lower  body  made  it
difficult. She winced as he slid her into an empty seat.
"I'm sorry, Jonathan."
"I love you."
In answer she kissed him gently on the cheek.
Behind them the lift whined again and again until there were thirty people in the bus, ten of them the Sick.

Father Goodwin, who no longer seemed to have any pilgrims from his own group, was tuning his guitar.
"Uh oh," Patricia said. "More hymns."
They were soon navigating in traffic to the strains of "Dominique." Faces pressed to the  windows.  This
was, after all, the most famous place of pilgrimage on earth. Despite the kitsch, this was Lourdes.
At the end of a shuddering, backfiring trip up a hill the  bus  came  to  a  stop.  "Maison  Paternelle,"  the
driver  roared.  Then  the  clatter  and  confusion  of  disembarking  began.  This  time  it  went  more  smoothly.
Evidently the first dollar cov-ered the whole journey.
The House of Bernadette proved to be attached to the back wall  of  a  huge  souvenir  shop.  Here  there
were even baseball caps with Aquero—as Our Lady of the Grotto was called—on their badges. Statues of
Aquero rotated on little pedestals, the "Ave Maria"  or  the  "Lourdes  Hymn"—or  "Lara's  Theme"  or  even
"Indian Love Call"—tinkling from music boxes in the bases. There were Dutch wooden shoes with Aquero
statuettes glued to the toes.
Patricia looked slowly left and right as Jonathan propelled her down  the  aisle  to  the  shrine  at  the  rear,
which  looked  more  like  a  jail  cell  than  a  one-room  cottage,  barred  to  prevent  its  being  pillaged  by  relic
hunters.
She reached back and found his hand. "Take me out," she said.
He turned her around and wheeled her back to the bus.
"Jonathan, this is awful. It's terrifying!"
"Obscene is the word. Those statues—"
"Not the souvenirs, the people behind the counters. Haven't you noticed them?"
"No, to tell you the truth."
"Jonathan, we are being carefully watched. We  have  been  ever  since  we  got  here."  She  snatched  his
hands, glared into his eyes. "Please, let's go home right now."
"Who's watching us?"
"The girl at the airport, some of the people in the streets, everybody in the shops, even the concierge at
the hotel."
"Darling, I think you're a little overwrought. Mother's right, we need to rest."
"I am not tired and I am not crazy! Everybody in this whole city—all the people who work in the stores,
in the hotel, all the drivers—they are watching you and me."
"Patricia, really—"
"Don't you 'really' me. They're all watching us—staring at us. Just at us."
Jonathan had been bending over the  wheelchair.  When  he  stood  up  he  looked  right  into  the  face  of  a
salesman who had been  standing  behind  a  counter  in  the  shop.  The  man  low-ered  his  eyes  and  walked
away.
Jonathan found one of the Peugeots. "We'll stick close to the hotel," he said. What else could he say? She
wasn't paranoid, she was absolutely right.
But why? Surely no cult was large enough to include the inhabitants of a whole town, thousands of miles
from home.
Yet they were watching, even now, from sidewalks, out of shop windows.
As the cab made its way through the jammed streets Patricia's face revealed how trapped she felt. From
time to time Jonathan saw her dart a glance out the window.
And the crowds, the swirling mass of eyes, looked back.
                         MARY: THE SHADOW OF THE INQUISITION
Now HAS COME  the night of highest peril. We will kill her or cure her. She is useless to us as she is.
We own this town—its shops, its hotels, even the spring that feeds the grotto. But the great underground
river beneath the grotto is nobody's property. Alpheus, the river of life and death.
It is not like the little aboveground trickle into which Catholic  pilgrims  dip  their  infirm  parts.  Alpheus  is
wild and dark  and  dangerous.  If  it  sweeps  you  away  you  are  lost  forever.  I  think  it  may  be  more  than
water, more than a simple trick of geology. If a demon had a body it would be very like Alpheus, a freezing
torrent raging against the rock of the earth.
This week at Lourdes many of the pilgrims are our people. We have booked the  best  rooms,  taken  the
best charters. Some of our Catholic customers will have  to  wait  until  next  week  to  continue  buying  their
kitsch and bathing themselves in one another's sweat. Yet our beloved child is in as much jeopardy here as
at home. As if the Inquisition had a sort of shadow...
Our people  have  made  us  welcome.  To  them  it  is  the  highest  honor  to  have  the  Prince  and  Princess
among them. Never have two people been so well guarded.

When Gottlieb told me that her paralysis would prevent childbirth, I remember I said I wanted to die.
He is a wise man. "Concentrate on your work. Keep to the plan." How I  threw  myself  into  my  work!
I've  arranged  the  worldwide  vaccination  program,  the  food  supplies,  all  we  need  to  see  us  through  the
coming extinction.
I even have Mike performing his allotted role. I am insisting he wear a vetiver cologne I had compounded
at Keil's in Manhattan just for him. But it is more than scent. Jerry Cochran has mixed his vaccine into it.
Every time Mike splashes some on, he contributes to the immunity he will some day need in order to fulfill
his place in our plan.
If all goes as we intend, we will require him to remain alive some little  time  after  the  others  are  dead.
Such a fatherly man can be put to good use.
Lately I have really been trying to seduce Mike, to make him love me  as  he  has  never  loved  anybody
before. Frankly, I hope we will be able to convert him.
Still, I could not bear to be with him tonight. I lay on that miserable pallet in the Catholic part of the hotel
downstairs, sweating and worrying until I could bear no more; now I am here where it is risky for me to be,
in the suite where a princess of the Night Church belongs, writing and writing and trying to pretend that I
am not exhausted, that I do not tremble, that my hand is as firm as ever.
Stupid woman. You calm yourself by writing in your jour-nal. Then you tear out the pages and burn them.
Outside quiet multitudes file toward the aid stations for their vaccinations. My own arm  itches  furiously
where Jerry himself applied the needle. Lourdes is the main vaccination  center  for  southern  Europe.  We
will vaccinate thirty thou-sand faithful in the alleyways of this town before we are finished.
When the rest of the world is weakening and dying, in that time of unimaginable chaos, our Church must
be stronger than ever.
As I write these words I feel the immensity and the difficulty of our task. Despite Jerry's brilliance and
Frank-lin's great strength, I feel almost alone. The French have filled this room with flowers, have brought
me a late supper of salmon trout and champagne. They are so awed by the presence of Titus blood among
them that they are not able even to meet my eyes.
They  must  have  a  hard  time  understanding  Mike,  who  is  so  obviously  not  of  the  royal  lineage.  The
husband of a princess? Impossible!
Oh, Mike, Mike, I rise to the heavens beneath your sweating body. I hate you! I will not say the opposite,
but I do feel it too. Love, damn it all. You obsess me for a very simple reason: I cannot decide what I feel
about you, and have good reasons for all my contradictory impulses.
Two fifteen in the morning. Throughout our  ancient  capital  our  people  have  just  begun  going  from  the
hidden vaccina-tion stations to the  basilica  itself,  for  the  great  ritual  cleans-ing.  We  will  take  our  darling
down under the grotto to the banks of the secret river.
She will overcome her paralysis or she will drown in it.
Are we about to kill the hopes of two thousand years?
I go now, as always, loyal to my duty. I am crying, weak woman that I am. 1 call to my demon fathers.
Hear me.
Chapter Thirteen
PATRICIA LAY WATCHING suggestions of movement in the shadows on the ceiling. The room was unquiet, even at three
o'clock  in  the  morning.  Father  Goodwin  had  been  up  and  down  to  the  bathroom  half  a  dozen  times.  He  was
overex-cited—which was to be expected, she supposed.
He snored now, his sleeping expression 6ne of deep sadness. In the cot beside his, Mike's breathing was
thick  and regular, a settled hound's. Mary was gone from her cot, no doubt  forced  into  a  walk  by  the  heat  and
stuffiness. Across the room lay Jonathan, and Patricia wondered if he too might be awake.
The thought brought deep stirrings. Since their half-hour in bed Jonathan had grown more and more ardent. And
she had too. In her daydreams she would kiss his rigid, silken member... then she would banish the  fantasy.  Which  would
promptly return.
Of the two of them, though, Patricia knew that Jonathan was the more enraptured. And why not—wasn't that in the nature

of the male, to have explosive passions? But how, then, could he think clearly about life  with  a  paralyzed
woman? And what if she needed more medical care? Would he accept the burden, just for love?
I want him to be as free as the wheat in the field.
Oh? The field that I dream about, where Death resides?
The scythe sighs and the Reaper sweats. He is a mad not of death  amid  the  growing,  fruiting,  bursting
fertility of humanity.
Is it love I wish for, or death?
Maybe I just ought to let him make love to me again and forget the rest. Maybe that physical contact is
the only real thing, and all this thinking is just a waste of time that might be better spent in pleasure.
I want to go across the room and place my lips on his lips, and press my tongue between his teeth, and
love him and love him until I melt into him.
I am free to die in Jonathan, free to let the living steel of him tear me apart.
God help me, I'm frightened.
The shadows seemed to move just then with a purpose of their own.
She  was  conscious  that  Jonathan  had  stirred  in  his  bed.  Fingers  seemed  to  brush  her  face;  she  was
suddenly frozen with terror. This must be another nightmare. She wasn't awake, she couldn't be, not if she
felt this afraid over so little.
Oh, he was moving—she knew he was moving.
The shadows on the ceiling were very slowly changing shape as he slipped inch by stealthy inch from his
bed.
You will go with him.
"Is that you?" Her voice was like a rattle of leaves in the quiet. Mike snuffled, Father sighed.
Don't whisper so loud, you little fool!
Now I know he is on the floor. I hear his breath, hisss, hisss, hissssss, getting nearer and nearer. I see his
shadow creeping.
You will go with him!
"I will go with him."
Far away someone was singing, the same few words again and again. And the wind made a deep note
as it surged and flowed-through the ancient streets of the town.
"Patricia?" Jonathan said softly. Oh, seductive whis-perer, where have you come from?
And why do your eyes gleam so?
"You awake?"
"Mmm..."
"I—please—"
She knew what she had to do; slip from the bed, pull on her dress, let him carry her.
They went then through the black halls of the hotel, down the cobbled streets in the night wind, her dress
hardly protecting her.
All she could think of was how his skin must taste, She was desperate, urgent to drop to her knees before
him, to free the tight imprisoned purple arrow and pierce herself with it as she had in that time of beloved
memory.
They moved through the night, beneath the stars and tossing trees.
We aren't in the town anymore. Where are we?
He was scary. His face was too sharp, his eyes too bright. There was fire in him, and she knew that if
she tempted it too much it would kill her.
"Welcome to the domain of Our Lady," said an age-dried voice. A small, quick man moved in the dark.
You look familiar, old man.
He smiled. Behind him the massive bronze doors of the Basilica of the Rosary opened just a crack.
"Come," he said.
Can this be real?
"Don't worry, you are certainly dreaming. What do you think? You must be dreaming!"  He  spoke  with
soft intensity.
"I'm not dreaming."
Her own voice startled her. She touched Jonathan's face. "I'm not either, my love," he said.
She felt, though, that she must be. Of course she was; she had to be.
The  old,  old  man  beckoned  frantically  from  the  doorway.  Then  they  were  inside  and  Patricia  was
stunned by the spectacle before her.
There were candles in the vast space, candles by the thousands, points of light, crowds of  points,  reefs

and blaz-ing cascades. Enormous curtains covered the windows.
The ocean of candlelit pews had the just-emptied look of a place where a procession began, and to which
it would return. The air smelled of hot wax and people.
At the far end of the basilica there was a stairway. Below must be the grotto. The entrance was utterly
black. After the blaze of the candles it was impossible to see.
There came from the foot of the stairs the sound of water.
As  they  descended  the  murmur  grew  to  an  echoing  roar.  In  the  caverns  beneath  Bernadette's  little
stream was a mad, frothing cataract. "The headwaters of the Holy River Al-pheus, where Parisfal drank of
death. Go now, and give yourself to Alpheus."
Give herself to Death? She clung to Jonathan.
The only light came from the phosphorescent foam. Un-seen  hands  took  Patricia,  carried  her  forward,
closer and closer to the surging water, as Jonathan rushed beside her. The water cascaded from the rocks,
flooded through the chamber, then ran gurgling and complaining down the cre-vasse beyond.
"The river wants you," whispered the old man, and there sounded above the voice of the water a deeper,
more terrible note, as of a great horn booming and booming, and with every boom the old man came a step
closer to her and Jonathan.
"Take her, boy, down into the water."
"She'll drown!"
The old man's mouth moved but Patricia could not hear. At once a change came over Jonathan. He drew
off his clothes. Now he was naked and his skin gleamed in the blue iridescence. He smiled a jack-o'-lantern
grin.
Then she was in his arms, lying helpless against his naked flesh,  and  the  water  was  coming  up  around
her, seething and tugging and lapping, covering her midriff and her chest and her arms and then her face.
Now he ceased to carry her; instead he pressed her down with his hands. She went down and down and
down into the freezing, grabbing dark.
Then his strong arms were gone.
She was tumbling, dashed again and  again  against  the  rocks.  The  current  was  holding  her  against  the
bottom.
Her arms were not strong enough to resist the power of the water. Only her legs could help her and they
were useless.
If inhaled, a half a cup of water is enough to kill. But she had to breathe, she had  to inhale! A surge of
agony swept her body. She tried to bring her hands to her face but it was no good; she was tumbling over
and over, caught in a corner between the side and the bottom of the river.
This nightmare had to end. But how could it, when the water was so very cold and the bottom  so  very
hard and her lungs bursting with desperate need?
God. God. God.
Her left foot scraped stone. She pushed, and for an instant the tumbling stopped. But then she  was  off
again, worse than before. She knew that her mouth was going to open in a second and she was  going  to
breathe, and that breath was going to be water.
Her foot connected solidly with the rough bottom, and this time she did stop tumbling. She drew her legs
up under  her  and  pressed  with  all  her  might—but  how  could  she?—against  the  battering  power  of  the
backwash that held her.
She broke free.
The air was dank cave air, but it was air and it balmed her searing lungs.
She heard hiss-whoosh! hiss-whoosh! and saw what looked like a monstrous toad waddling toward her
in the foam. Then he removed his face mask. It was a man in scuba gear.
"She's done it," he shouted over the water.
And the bone-deep note she had heard before boomed triumph.
Jonathan, naked still, came to her. Hand in hand they walked from the water. For the briefest of instants
she had brushed his great hard stone of a thigh and heard him gasp and felt him stumble. She longed then to
touch him more, to hold him delicately between her fingers, to spend long minutes  just  stroking  his  secret
part.
Mary Banion gave them their clothes.
She walked in the darkness, between cliffs of a new sound. At first she did not know what it was, then
she understood. There were throngs here, and they  were  clapping  softly.  Jonathan  drew  her  forward.  "I
can't see a thing," he whis-pered.
"There's a glow over there. It must be from the candles upstairs."

Hand in hand they went toward the light.
As Patricia sank to deeper sleep she was aware  that bells were ringing. But for the glory of those bells
she dreamed no dream, sleeping on toward the forgetful dawn.
Chapter Fourteen
WHEN THE KITCHEN exhaust fan  beneath  the  window  was  turned  on,  Patricia  awoke  instantly.  Her
sleep had been troubled; she looked at her watch. Six thirty. Around her the others slept on.
She wished she had not dreamed she could walk. It was cruel to do that  to  oneself.  The  inner  Patricia
was furious with herself for the crippling, which made it hard for ordi-nary, everyday Patricia to get used to
it.
"Good morning."
Jonathan whispered to her from his cot against the wall. Beside him Mike Banion  snored  softly.  Father
Goodwin lay twined in on himself. Mary, very still, was as pale as a lovely statue in her sleep. There was a
round patch of bandage on her right arm, just below her shoulder. Patricia looked at it, reflecting idly that it
was  the  only  imperfection  she  had  ever  seen  marring  that  perfect  body.  Even  Mary  wasn't  immune  to
scratches and cuts.
Patricia  raised  her  own  arms,  spread  her  hands,  closed  her  eyes  and  waited  a  thousand  eternities  for
Jonathan to cross the room and bend to her. "Hello," he said. "You're cool. Shouldn't you be bed-warm?"
You have dared the wild waters, and you have won.
"Jonathan, take me out of here. I want us to be alone together."
"Darling, darling." They traded a lingering kiss.
Then they dressed, he pulling jeans on over his briefs, she grappling with a skirt and blouse, working her
feet into a pair of flats, running a brush a few times through her hair.
He carried her to the wheelchair. When he sat her in it she writhed. The thing had claws, it grabbed her;
the chair was hungry for her body.
He wheeled her down the dim, stuffy hallway, past end-less rows of little black doors with slats in them,
beneath buzzing fluorescent rings, to the wide hospital-like lift. The main lobby was dark, nobody about at
this hour. In front of  the  hotel  was  a  still-bundled  stack  of  French  newspapers  and  a  few  copies  of  the
International Herald Tribune.
He wheeled her fast, almost running down the Rue Reine-Claire. "Where are we going?"
"There's a gate at the end of the street. It leads into the Domain of Our Lady. It'll be quiet there. On the
map it looks like a park."
She had seen him in the plane poring over his Michelin. "You memorized the map in hope we could slip
away, didn't you?"
"Yeah. I know all the exits."
"Love you so much."
From  behind  her  his  hand  caressed  her  cheek.  They  came  to  a  little  wrought-iron  gate  between  two
ancient buildings. Beyond was a muddy alley, and beyond that a widening expanse of grass.
The lawn went on for a while, then stopped abruptly at a tall hill. That must be Calvary. Behind it would
be the Basilica of the Rosary. In the  opposite  direction  to  the  basilica  the  land  dropped  to  the  river  in  a
jumble of rocks and ferns and gnarled trees.
Jonathan made for the hill, laboring to push the chair through the thick grass.
He was so silent and purposeful. That wasn't like him. Then she understood what he must be planning.
The anticipation thrilled her to shivering dampness. She was going to be made love to, and it was going to
be done by her delicious Jonathan, in the woods.
A hundred yards from the most Catholic place on earth.

Was  that  funny,  sad,  or  both?  Oh,  hell,  it  wasn't  sad  at  all!  She  reached  her  hand  back.  Instantly  he
squeezed it. Then he returned to his pushing.
"You're working up a sweat," she said.
"Doesn't matter."
They came to the line of trees and went a short distance in. This was a different world. Alien. Here the
low  hum  of  insects  mixed  with  the  petty  chanted  rage  of  birds.  The  light  was  rich  green.  Woods  were
beautiful places, but Patricia certainly saw why in ancient times the pagans had peopled them with nymphs
and spirits, and humming, vindictive gods.
They stopped.
Silence.
The bugs started again,  then  the  birds.  But  as  far  as  humanity  was  concerned  the  two  of  them  were
gloriously alone.
He will lift me from the chair. I will let him have his way with me.
But he hesitated. Was he afraid? Confused? "I dreamed that I took you to the grotto and put you in the
water, and you could walk."
"I dreamed I could too. I dream it a lot."
He bowed his head and kissed her hands. "I'll take you out of the chair now."
"We'll be missed if we don't get to the basilica by eight." How dare you say that, girl. Keep your mouth
shut; you don't want to ruin this beautiful moment.
"It doesn't matter. Because I want  to  ask  you  to  marry  me.  Please,  as  soon  as  we  get  back  to  New
York."
He swept her from the chair and set her on the forest floor.
"You really, really do? You want to marry me?"
He lay full on her. She felt the rigid curve of his flesh, and laid her hands on his buttocks, which rippled
beneath his jeans. "I'd like a child," he whispered. "If you want one."
She was full of laughter and tears of gratitude. "Oh, certainly! Surely I do! I want lots of them!"
"I've always wanted a child. I want him to be named Martin, after my dad."
Just  like  a  man.  It  never  even  occurred  to  him  that  he  might  have  a  daughter.  She  didn't  care,
though—not now, not about such details. She hugged him to her. "I'll marry you, Jonathan. Oh, yes, yes, I
will!"
"I want it so badly, darling. Soon. How soon can it be?"
"Next week, if we can get a dispensation on the banns. We can ask Father."
From sheer delight in each other they laughed softly, in the twilight of the woods. When he began to lift
her skirt, she stopped him. "Wait. I have to say something."
"No more delays. I won't stand for it." He kept at it.
"I have to say yes! Yes, yes, yes!" In moments she  was  naked,  her  clothes  beneath  her  body.  He  lay
beside her running his hands over her. "You have goosebumps."
"It's cold."
"Am I cold?"
His hands were like fire where they touched  her.  He  seemed  wire-tense.  "The  ground  is  cold.  You're
warm." She arched her back. "Touch me more," she whispered, feeling her cheeks go livid. She presented
her breasts to him; the grass beneath her whispered when she opened her legs. "Touch me all you want."
He laid a hand on her midriff, so roughly that she gasped. "I wish I hadn't dreamed you could walk."
Oh, God, don't let him start worrying about that the second he asks me to marry him.
"Forget it, it's no big deal. I dreamed the same thing." The water had bellowed and foamed up out of the
ground, a fantastic living organism, as far from normal water as a demon is from some placid human soul. I
will kill or I will heal, the water had said. It is all the same to me.
"In my dream they called the river—"
"Alpheus. The river of death."
His hand froze on her thigh, clutching. They looked into one another's eyes. She moved slightly. He was
hurting her just a little. "After I could walk, they rang the bells."
"I remember the bells." He fell silent. When he spoke  again  his  voice  was  almost  sullen.  "What  in  the
name of God is happening? We had exactly the same dream."
Words,  thoughts,  questions  crowded  through  her  mind.  "But  Jonathan,  I  can't  walk!  So  nothing's
happening except that we're getting, very, very close to one another."
"You haven't tried to walk." He pinched her hard just above her knee. It hurt; she jerked away.
"You have sensation!"

He stood up, held his hands down to her. She grasped his strong fingers and pulled herself to her feet. For
an instant her legs were stiff and  she  thought  she  was  going  to  totter.  His  face  reflected  awe  and  utter
amazement. "As crazy as it sounds, we dreamed this together. And you really can walk. You can!"
"Don't let go!" She lifted her left  foot,  put  it  down  in  front  of  her.  He  backed  up,  released  her  hands.
"Don't do that!" But he backed away  farther  and  farther,  until  at  last  just  their  fingertips  were  touching.
Then she was grasping air.
And walking.  She  had  the  delicate,  unsteady  gait  of  a  new  foal,  but  she  was  walking.  She  could  feel
everything from her toes to her thighs, just as she always had before the incident.
Jonathan rushed up to her and embraced her and covered her face with kisses. "Patricia, my darling, God
bless  what-ever  happened  last  night,  God  bless  it!"  He  held  her  at  arm's  length.  "You  are  so  incredibly
beautiful. Oh, you are so, so wonderful!" He hugged her; he was laughing and crying at the same time. His
hands ran up and down her back and he kept kissing her. Finally he went down on his knees and embraced
her around the waist. She stroked his head, then knelt down with him. Their bodies made a little warm tent
in the forest cool. He drew off his T-shirt and unbuckled his belt. "Shall I?"
In answer she unzipped him and drew his pants down around his knees. She laid her hands on him. He
closed his eyes, sank back on his  haunches.  Around  them  the  forest  sighed  with  morning  wind.  Sunlight
filtered through the trees. From far away came the sound of a multitude singing. It was the Lourdes hymn;
people were gathering at the basilica.'
He was warm and solid to hold, and his skin had that velvet-soft feeling she remembered. He raised his
own hands to her breasts, cupped them gently, then rubbed his palms against them. The sensation was so
strong and so fine that it made her feel pride in her own ability to experience plea-sure. She smiled, and he
leaned forward and kissed the smile.
They lay down together in the grass. She spread her legs for him and he tried to enter her. He was not
very practiced either. In the end she had to guide him. But she was too tight. That scared her; were they
going to fail?
He lay full down on her. "If you would kiss it like  last  time,"  he  whispered,  "we  could  make  it  work,  I
think."
Yes, it had to be made damp. People were so delicately constructed.
She didn't mind. Far from it, the thought of what she was about to do fascinated her. She recognized in
herself a desire to surrender to him that was very, very great. If he had been a coarser or a more cunning
man he might have found a way to make her his slave.
She knelt between his legs and lifted his penis; the end was gleaming as if it had been waxed. This she
took in her mouth. It pulsed once, then plunged deep. It hurt. For a full minute and more she kept it there.
The sensation of being filled by it was not terrible; indeed, she had discovered pleasure in this the first time
she had done it.
Like a white-hot knife it tore into you. It filled you with searing, molten lava and it ripped you  until
you thought you would die of the pain.
He  withdrew  himself.  He  was  shaking.  In  Jonathan  pas-sion  and  fury  looked  startlingly  alike.  "That's
enough! Let me calm down." He took sharp, frantic breaths. He glared at her. Then he sighed and closed
his eyes. After a short pause he asked to try again.
In answer she rolled over beside him and spread her legs. This time he slipped in much more easily. He
groaned once, then they were linked.
A thousand lonely Our Lady nights: how will it feel? They say the first time hurts, but you mustn't let him
know that. They say it's literally like an explosion in you. A million, zillion times better than diddling with the
corner of a pillow.
A million, zillion times better. She could have believed that the entire universe had reordered itself around
these two people making love.
There were waves of pleasure connected with even his  slightest  movements.  They  swarmed  one  after
another, faster and faster, rushing up from the center of her belly until they suffused her  whole  body  and
seemed to enter her very soul. She could hardly bear it. She clamped her hands to her temple, she shouted,
she kissed his face, his neck, his shoulders,  she  licked  his  skin  almost  frantically,  and  she  looked  into  his
hungry, avid, raging eyes. She felt at the same time both laughter and sadness, the whole game and tragedy
of life all knotted  up  together  and  then  bursting  into  a  huge,  impossible  ecstasy  that  was  also  hideous,  a
sharp joy that made her cry out.
And then she was aware of a bumblebee worrying a smalt blue flower near their heads.
He drew himself out of her.
"Stay in me."

"Oh, my darling." In his voice was love and joy . . . and something like relief. He laid his open mouth on
hers.  She  thought  perhaps  they  had  become  song.  Were  they  still  just  two  ordinary  people?  Could  they
possibly be?
The  bumblebee  finished  its  work  with  the  flower  and  bumbled  on.  From  the  basilica  came  the  deep
murmur of thousands of voices saying the rosary.
Suddenly  Jonathan  reared  back.  His  face  was  almost  bursting  with  happiness.  "This  is  the  greatest
moment of my life!"
"Of mine too. By far, far, far."
He fell to kissing her again. It was after nine before they even thought of dressing. Jonathan insisted he
could make love again if she wanted him to.
"We have to get back. We really will be missed."
He laughed silently. "You can walk! Can you  imagine  the  irony  of  it—you  go  to  Lourdes  and  you  get
cured. It's almost a kind of cosmic joke. I mean, you  don't want to go, I don't want you  to  go.  Not  even
good old Mike really wants you to. Then you go and cure yourself with some kind of a crazy dream."
"Is that what happened last night?"
He looked at her. Slowly he shook his head. "We dreamed the same dream. I put you in the water and
you came up cured."
"It scared me. I thought I'd drown."
He grabbed her tight against him. "The very last thing in the world I would ever, ever do is hurt you."
"The water was so loud. It was like a cataract or some-thing, just literally gushing out of the ground."
"She told me it was the river of death."
"She?"
"My mother. While you were in the water."
"It wasn't a dream, was it?"
"Don't ask me what it was, darling, because I don't know the answer. I just know that whatever it was, it
broke the psychological barrier that was forcing you to seek depen-dence."
"I was really paralyzed, Jonathan! Don't say it was psy-chological."
He hugged her. "Let's walk over to the basilica. I think you're  going  to  cause  quite  a  sensation  among
certain peo-ple. For one thing, you are going to make Mike a very happy man."
They dressed and brushed one another's clothes free of loam and bits of  fern,  and  walked  out  into  the
calm, warm sun. How good it felt to move again under her own power! It also hurt; this was more exercise
than her legs had gotten in three months.
They laid their arms along the small of one another's backs and walked across the green sweep of grass
that led up to the  basilica.  As  they  came  closer,  mounting  the  low  hill, the  voice  of  the  multitude  in  the
forecourt of the church washed over them.
Sing of  Mary  pure  and  lowly,  Virgin  Mother  undefiled.  Sing  of  God's  own  Son
most holy Who became her little child.
Then Jonathan lifted her onto the low wall that separated the court from the greensward beyond. There
gathered  a  multitude  of  sick  and  well,  crutches,  wheelchairs,  stretchers,  people  old  and  new,  priests
gathered in little black clumps, nuns in and out of habit, all the huge crowd of the world come to supplicate
at the dirty, trickling water of life.
She  sat  down  on  the  wall  and  wept  for  them  even  while  her  body  sang  its  reborn  power.  Her  lover
hugged her to him, and she heard his ragged breath.
Neither Mecca nor the raped Ganges could equal Lourdes in sheer numbers of pilgrims.
Patricia  felt  the  roiling,  frantic  living  thing  beneath  the  ground,  the  serpent  River  Alpheus  crying  out
through the stones.
"There's my mother. She sees us. Oh, boy, this is going to be something!"
Mary Banion broke away from the crowd. Turning, her face was struck by the sun and she shielded her
eyes. Then, splendid in a navy blue dress, holding down her white straw hat, she came quickly to their side.
Despite the sweltering August heat, she wore an autumn dress with long sleeves.
Most  of  the  other  pilgrims  wore  long  sleeves  too,  Patricia  noticed.  Mike  alone  was  dressed  for  the
weather, in a short-sleeved sports shirt. "Come down off that wall,  Pat.  Oh,  I  wish  they  would  stop  that
caterwauling!"
As if she had commanded them all, the crowd fell silent.
Patricia's legs ached a good deal from the walk. Mary  and  Jonathan  had  to  help  her  down.  She  stood

leaning against the low wall.
"Mother," Jonathan said, "she's cured."
Mary hugged her. "I knew you would be, Pat! I had my heart set on it!"
Mike was coming closer, his expression  one  of  purest  astonishment.  "Don't  look  now,  but  here  comes
Dad."
He came rushing up to them, followed closely by the tall form of Father Goodwin, flapping like a huge old
buzzard, his face gleaming with perspiration and excited tears. "Sometimes  it  happens  at  the  exposure  of
the Blessed Sacrament! Is that when it happened?"
Mary answered. "That's when it happened. Just a few minutes ago."
Patricia recalled that the Blessed Sacrament was carried out in procession morning and evening. All the
singing must have signified the morning exposure. But the miracle had happened during the night. "Mary—"
Mary's hand squeezed hers.
She saw a small, very old man watching them from the fringe of the mob.
In  the  crowd  there  were  at  least  as  many  of  those  strangely  attentive  faces  as  she  had  seen  on  the
Bernadette tour. More, in fact. Practically everybody.
When she looked directly at the old man, it was as if the light went out of the sun and the warmth left the
air. He turned quickly away and was lost in the crowd.
Mr. Apple is dead, isn't he?
Mike Banion's muscular arms came around her, and she let him hug her  against  his  damp  shirt.  "Glory
be!"
"Thank  you,  Mike,  and  thank  the  Holy  Namers."  She  was  playing  a  part,  and  she  knew  it,  but  that
somehow did not stop her.
"Thanks be to God," Mary added.
Father Goodwin  bowed  his  head.  The  great  copper  doors  opened  and  the  crowd  began  filing  into  the
basilica, eager to touch their wounds and agonies to the waters.
Patricia  rested  her  head  against  Mike's  shoulder.  Jonathan  joined  the  embrace  and  the  three  of  them
stood together— three common, ordinary people against the dark, the un-known, the mysteries of the night.
She wished that she could shake the feeling of dread that had been  with  her  all  these  weeks.  But  she
could not. In fact, day by day and hour by hour it was increasing.
For heaven's sake, she had been cured! Shouldn't she rejoice?
8 AUGUST 1983
                 MOST PRIVATE
To: The Prefect of the Sacred Congregation for the Defense of the Faith
From: The Chancellor for the Inquiry in North Amer-ica
Your Eminence:
It is  with  deepest  regret  that  I  inform  you  that  Sister  Marie-Louise  has  refused  her  commission.
When  the  death  of  Terence  Quist  was  added  to  that  of  Brother  Alexander  and  I  could  not  even
guarantee the loyalty of the parish priest, Sister concluded that the risk of penetrating this congregation
was too high.
Theoretically, Sister is correct, but the importance of the present mission is so great that I must ask
you to use your good offices with the worldwide body, and find me a warrior-priest of the old school,
who will brave anything for love of Him.
If you wish to reach Sister, she will be at the Esalen Institute in California for the next two weeks,
"getting her head back together," as she so aptly put it.
In  addition,  Sister  demanded  that  we  turn  over  our  files  on  the  disease  vector  to  the  secular
authorities for proper action. I do not yet wish to do this. Until we are utterly and completely defeated,
we must not risk the damage to Holy Faith that revelation of our existence would cause.
Your Grace, our one and only alternative remains to neutralize the bearers of the blood.
Please send me a good man! May God have mercy on us all.
Yours in Christ & for the Defense of the Faith, Brian Conlon (Msgr.)
Document Class: Urgent A, most private, Swiss Guards courier

Destination:  Paolo  Cardinal  Impelliteri,  the  Hidden  Collegium,  Prefecturate  for  the  Defense  of  the
Faith, Vatican City
12 AUGUSTUS 1983
FURTTVISSIMUS
Ad: Cancellarius Inquisitionis in Septentrionalis Americanensis
Ex: Prefectus Congregationis Defensioni Fidei
We  are  vexed,  Monsignor.  If  you  cannot  command  the  loyalty  of  your  own  religious,  I  fail  to
perceive any reason for you to continue in your post. Cells de-stroyed, martyrdoms, Inquisitors going
to the Esalen Institute? What can be the matter over there?
You impress upon me in the same letter both your own personal helplessness and the urgency of the
situation. I should remove you, but I cannot afford to spend time training a new man at such a tense
mo-ment.
Monsignor, I order you to go in yourself. Work  on that parish priest, Goodwin. Enlist his help if you
can.
At all costs, the monstrum  and  his  mate  must  be  rendered  impotent.  We  simply  cannot  afford  to
face the chance of their birthing the so-called anti-man. Do what is needed in this regard, bearing our
previous correspondence in mind. It has taken two thousand years of breeding to produce those two.
In two brave seconds the threat can be removed.
So I charge you: For Christ and Holy Faith, find your courage. You have done brave things  in  the
past, Brian. You always knew that your work might expose you to the threat of martyrdom.
Accept  the  cup  Our  Lord  gives  into  your  hand.  Remember  His  passion  in  the  Garden  of
Gethsemane. Brian, I cannot compel you. But I offer my prayers for you in this difficult hour.
Bless you, my son. You yourself must be our Op-pugnatio.
Mea Auctoritate,
Paolo Cardinalis Impelliteri
Document Class: Urgent A, destroy in presence of courier
Destination: Monsignor Brian Conlon, Chancellor  for  the  Inquiry,  North  America,  1217  Fuller  Brush
Build-ing, 221 E. 57th Street, New York, N.Y., 10022
Chapter Fifteen
THE LIGHT OF evening lifted from hot Queens streets. Far below the windows of  the  apartment  a  bus
roared, accelerat-ing away down Metropolitan Avenue. Jonathan wished he and Patricia were on it.
They had spent time very carefully comparing the dreams they had experienced on the night of the cure.
They were complementary in every detail, so much so that Jonathan was forced to conclude they had not
 dreamed, but in fact had undergone some sort of actual experience.
The two of them were at the edge of the unknown. Jonathan wanted to get everything out in the  open,
unlock the secrets and damn the consequences. But how do you confront something you do not understand,
which seems like a nightmare but has stunning consequences in real life?

The cure.
"Farfetched," Mike had said when Jonathan had told him about the complementary dreams. "Coincidence.
And if the cult were big enough to include Lourdes there'd be a lot of people involved. There'd be leaks, and
there aren't any. I'm looking for a group that starts and stops right here in Queens. Big enough to be mean
as hell, which they obvi-ously are, but small enough to stay well hidden. And as for the cure, just accept it.
Thank the good Lord it hap-pened."
Nightmares.  Cleansing  rivers:  Cures.  Jonathan  accepted  nothing,  not  even  the  way  they  had  been
scrutinized in the streets of Lourdes. That Mike brushed off. "The place is full of Frenchmen," seemed  to
him to be enough of an explana-tion.
But after listening to Jonathan's story on the way home in the plane, Mike had fallen silent, had stared a
long time into the distance, had finally given them both reassuring pats and told them to relax.
Now he almost haunted them; he was either with them himself or some of his men were in evidence. The
protective net around them had been strengthened.
"Patricia," Mike said around an unlit cigar, "aren't you hot?" She was sitting on the couch, her arms lying
along the back, blond hair clinging to her forehead. "If you'd turn on the air conditioner we could close the
windows." He dabbed a handkerchief along his neckline.
"It's worse than this with it on," Patricia replied. "Too humid. The coils freeze up."
"That what the super tells you? Bullshit! The thing's been tampered with. They don't wanna pay the bill.
Effing land-lords. S'cuse me."
Music blared up  from  a  passing  car.  Jonathan  went  to  the  window  to  see  a  white  Lincoln  convertible
pause  at  the  light,  the  top  down,  the  seats  filled  with  expensively  dressed,  reveling  blacks.  WPLJ.  Silk
chinos. White dust in tiny cellophane bags.
Behind him Mike breathed heavily, it seemed painfully. He stared at them out of stricken eyes.
"Have you changed your mind, Dad? Do you think this  thing  might  actually  be  bigger  than  Queens?  Is
that why you hang around all the time?"
"Come on, Johnny boy, let it rest." Jonathan could hear him chewing at the cigar. On the couch Patricia
stirred. She had a bowl of ice water, and she began dabbing her face with a washcloth.
"I want to know. You come here and you stare. What the hell for?"
Mike did not reply. Patricia went over to the window. "He doesn't know why he's here, do you, Mike?"
At last he cut his cigar and lit up. "I'll tell you," he said around it. "I'm here because I'm here. It doesn't
hurt to be cautious."
"We're all overtired from the trip and the heat, Dad. Maybe a good night's sleep—"
"Screw that, Johnny. I was trying to reassure you  two  by  soft-pedaling  your  stories  about  France.  But
there's no use in it. You're obviously not buying it. I might as well admit I think this thing is big. Very big.
Somethin' was going on over there. You're not crazy, neither am I. Right? That is right, isn't it?"
"Of course it's right," Jonathan replied.
Patricia put her hand out, tried to touch Mike's shoulder. He recoiled, then looked at the hand. "I mean,
were you paralyzed or weren't you? Was it some kind of a joke or what the hell was it?"
"Mike, I was paralyzed! Oh, I was certainly that!"
"Okay. I'm sorry." He shook his head, then rummaged in the top pocket of his suit, drawing out a sheaf of
thin paper. Third copies of some kind of police report, Jonathan saw. "This is a return on the surveillance of
Holy Spirit Church over the past three weeks." He opened it. "The goddamn thing is clear."
"They moved to another church."
Mike smiled slightly. "Why should they do that? I'm beginning to think the three of us are the only people
any of us know who aren't in on this thing. Your guards are now from the 107th, not the 112th," he added
with venom in his voice. "Maybe it's safer that way."
Jonathan heard the rage in him. No wonder Mike was scared. He was saying he felt he could no longer
trust his own men. "You want some gin, Dad?"
He stared, wordless, his papers on his lap. Patricia went to the kitchen and brought back glasses of ice.
She made three healthy gin and tonics.
Mike smiled. "Seein' you walk, darlin'—oh, Christ, I get soupy. I'm gonna be such a sentimental old fart
one of these days." He sipped the drink she gave him. "When you two went out the night before the cure,
where did you go?"
Patricia's eyes widened. "You're definitely sure we did go out?"
"Not only you. Mary was gone when you woke me up leaving. Frankly I thought you two had personal
business that was none of mine so I stayed in bed. Where did you go?"
"I told you on the plane I thought we  were  dreaming."  Jonathan's  mouth  was  so  dry  he  had  to  sip  his

drink before he could speak.
"You weren't. You really went out, both of you. Surely you remember carrying her."
"This is definite confirmation," Jonathan said, almost hating to hear the words. "Why  didn't  you  say  this
before? Why did you doubt me on the plane?"
"It's a technique. Sometimes it leaches out a few more facts. I mean, if  you  went  out,  you  must  know
where you went and what you did. Stands to reason."
"Mike,"  Jonathan  said,  "I  don't  think  you  understand  even  yet.  I've  believed  for  some  weeks  that  I'm
under some form of hypnosis. Now it seems obvious to me that Patricia is too. The story I told you on the
plane stands. We may have gone out in the real, flesh-and-blood world,  but  we  both  remember  it  as  if  it
were a dream."
For better or worse, he was going to have to try to work with Patricia on his instruments. Otherwise this
mystery was going to keep getting bigger and bigger until it consumed them both.
The evening had turned to night. Now the room was lit from below by harsh sodium-vapor streetlamps.
Some kids had opened up  a  hydrant  and  were  shrilling  gaily  in  its  illicit  spray.  Jonathan  envied  them.  A
feeling of almost unimagina-ble menace seemed to fill the air in this place.
In the secrecy of conclave that lovers have, Patricia touched Jonathan's shoulder. The damp, warm flesh
of her arm came into contact with his own. He knew just what was on her mind. The marriage. She was
now ready to tell Mike of their marriage plans.
"You two keep the alarms on every minute you're in here. And if you go out, we'll be with you."
"We've asked Father to marry us," Patricia said quietly but quite firmly, "on Saturday night. The banns are
waived." She smiled. "In view of our eagerness and the unusual circumstances of our situation."
Mike pulled his cigar out of his mouth. His face burst in an instant from shadows to smiles. "He-e-y! This
is good! This is so good! Tell me sometime, eh?"
"It was her, Dad. She didn't want to say it on the plane."
"They were already celebrating the cure. I didn't want to make more of a fuss."
"People kept kissing her on the plane. I think she was embarrassed."
"Awful fast." Mike got a canny look in his eyes. "Not gonna have a miracle seven-month baby, are you?"
Patricia blushed.
"Come on, Dad, no way. We're just two eager kids."
"Oh, sure. Eager to share your first kiss. I'm sorry you've decided to do it so soon, no chance to plan, but
I accept that if it makes you happy."
"We want it private."
"Like now. You want it private now too, don't you?"
Mike had gotten self-conscious. Jonathan wanted to hug him. "We like having you here, Dad."
He pulled himself up from his lounge chair and drank his gin. When he spoke again his words were sharp.
"I hate to leave on such a sour note, but I got to say it. You kids take care.  You're good kids, both of you."
He put out his hands, seemed about to embrace them. "I want my  chance  at  grandfathering,  goddamnit."
He turned and moved heavily out the door.
They exchanged a glance. "Let's lie down," was all she said. They had only been home a day; there was
still the jet lag. Too tired to make love, they contented themselves with a shower together, then lying twined
in bed.
When Jonathan awoke it felt late, but it was only ten. He kissed his bride-to-be and probed at her with his
inevitable erection. She moaned. He  entered  her  and  she  sighed,  half-awake.  It  was  easier  this  time.  A
slight smile came across her face. He began, trying with all his might to make it last, totally engrossed in the
astonishing experience of making love for a second time to this very beautiful woman. He had done it once
without freeing the serpent. Surely the second time would be even easier.
The phone rang.
"Leave it."
It rang again. And again. Jonathan tried to ignore it but it just wouldn't stop.
Finally he disengaged himself and, as he was the most awake of the two, padded into the living room and
answered it. "Oh, hi, Mother." What  a  magnificent  sense  of  timing.  As  she  spoke  Jonathan  watched  his
erection fade.
"You must be careful together," she said in a nervous voice. "I hadn't expected you just to move in with
her. You ought to wait until after the marriage. I think you've embar-rassed your father." That wasn't very
likely. "You're em-barrassing me." That was probably true.
"Is Dad there?"
"He just walked in."

"Well, all I can say is we're both adults, and we really would appreciate it if you wouldn't interfere."
She hung up. Jonathan stared a moment at the phone. Slamming down telephones was most unlike Mary
Banion. Nor was it like her to pry into his private life.
What role did she have in all this, anyway? According to Mike she had been out of the hotel room at the
time the cure was taking place. What role, Mother?
Maybe it was just a coincidence. Hell, maybe it was all coincidences and hysteria. Jonathan had to find
out. Beside that urgent need, spending time lovemaking seemed almost irresponsible.
Jonathan went back to the bedroom. Patricia raised her arms, inviting him to fall into them. But he stayed
where he was.
"Patricia, we have to go down to the lab. We have to find out where, we stand in this thing."
"Why? We stand together."
He would sort through the strands of her mind, separating the real from the imagined.
"We  have  no  idea  what's  really  going  on.  That's  the  whole  problem.  We're  crazy  to  lie  around  here.
We've got work to do."
"What can we do? We can't remember clearly, either one of us."
"My lab can help us. The devices there can tell the difference between dreams and memories. If we're
hypno-tized, I think we can break through." He did not tell her what he had tried on himself. There was no
point.  The  story  would  only  frighten  her,  and  he  didn't  need  to  use  6-6-6  on  her.  He  would  control  his
devices himself.
She  pulled  him  down  to  her  and  kissed  him  with  softness  and  skill.  Her  early  kisses  had  been  rough
splashes, but now she had become his geisha. You would not say whore, no, because she was the one who
owned. He felt himself en-slaved, taken in a snare so cunning it did not even know itself.
"Please come, Patricia. Please."
"We might hurt ourselves. What if there are things we don't want to know?"
"I sense that some terrible drama is being enacted. And we're the main characters."
A slight tension came into her face, visible in the careful set of her lips and the cast of her eyes. Maybe
she was a little angry, maybe scared. "Tell me your dreams, Jonathan."
"I told you the Lourdes dream."
"But there are others."
"They disgust me."
"You weren't there when I was hurt. You weren't?"
"I don't know anymore."
She laid her head on his shoulder. "We both choose  to  believe  that  you  were  not  responsible.  And  we
haven't got one shred of evidence to the contrary. Aren't we better off leaving it that way?"
"I'd kill myself if I ever hurt you!"
She  looked  at  him.  "You're  so  loyal,  Jonathan.  You  make  me  love  you  so  very  much.  Don't  you
understand yourself at all? You're the most gentle man I've ever known. You couldn't hurt me or anybody
else!" He had never seen such fiery conviction in so soft a face.
"What if it was me? What if it was? I've dreamed it more than once."
"All I want is you, the you that I know and love and trust. That's the Jonathan I want to know."
He could hardly believe what he heard. She was simply  overlooking  what  he  was  telling  her  about  his
dreams. "Don't you think I might have done it—I mean, if I dream about it?"
"When you came into the hospital and looked at me through the window, I knew instantly it hadn't been
you." She lowered her eyes. "You were suffering too much."
"And what about Lourdes? My God, surely you agree we've got to find out what happened there."
She  took  his  hands.  When  she  spoke  he  had  to  strain  to  listen,  her  voice  was  so  low.  She  ignored
Lourdes. "If it was you, I don't think I can afford to know." She snuggled deeper against him.
He recoiled. This was not working out right. "We've got to find out. We owe it  to  ourselves,  maybe  to
others as well." He took her by the wrist. "We're going to the lab right now."
"No!"
He would not, could not force her. "Please. You've got to think of others now, not just you and me. What
if I'm dangerous? What if we're both part of something terrible?"
"Jonathan, I don't want to know! I just want us to be together, and love each other, and have a family."
"Lord, darling, we are hypnotized.  Don't you want to know why somebody has invaded  our  privacy  in
this way?"
She touched his face. "You're being a fool."
"I've got to know!"

She closed her eyes, nodded her head. "I hate to hear that. But you really do, don't you? You can't live
with yourself unless you know."
"Let's go. Right now."
He did not have money for a cab into Manhattan; they had to content themselves with the F train. They
sat on the orange plastic seats in a nearly empty car.
There was no understanding her. On the one hand, she was such a sensitive and moral person—and on
the other, almost indifferent to the question of whether or not the two of them were caught up in some kind
of dangerous insanity, and unwilling even to consider that a man who wanted  her  to  marry  him  might  be
deranged.
He felt like he was smothering, took a deep breath. That was tension. He closed his eyes, listened to the
rattling of the train, let his mind wander.
We have a demon between us, she and I.
"This is the stop, honey." They got off at West Fourth Street and went upstairs into the teeming summer
night of Greenwich Village.
Down West Fourth  they  walked  past  the  grim  honky-tonks  and  shoestring  restaurants  that  served  the
New York Uni-versity  community  and  the  endless  streams  of  tourists,  past  the  lopsided  row  house  that
contained the Epsilon Rho fraternity, and down Sullivan Street.
As  Jonathan  and  Patricia  walked  along,  one  shadowy  figure  after  another  stepped  forward  saying,
"Smoke,  smoke,"  and  an  occasional  man  held  open  a  bag  full  of  pills.  Somewhere  somebody  played
haunting, ethereal ragtime on steel drums.
The  turn  into  Rayne  Street  brought  them  at  once  to  another  world.  The  street  was  dark  and  quiet.
Tourists and students did not come here. It was too forbidding at night. The streetlights at either end of the
block barely penetrated the gloom.
He wished Patricia would walk like an independent human being and not with her head bowed and  her
hand in his, as if she must go exactly where he led and damn her own feelings.
"I'm sorry if I'm imposing on you."
"That's all right."
"It's for both our sakes."
"I just don't want to risk something coming between us. I love you so much."
He led her down the outside stairway to the basement. When he stopped at the door of Room 014A, she
stood  quietly  beside  him.  When  he  released  her  hand  to  fish  for  his  keys,  she  twined  her  own  hands
together and looked at the floor.
"You're making this very hard for me."
"I know." When she raised her eyes they were full of mischief. "I think you're being an idiot, to tell the
truth."
"Well, there's some of the old spirit, at least. Why not look at this as an adventure."  He  found  his  key,
opened the lab. Inside he flipped the six light switches, flooding the cavernous room with steely fluorescent
light. "It might be one, after all. You never know."
The  lab  had  been  cleaned  up.  The  busted  microcomputer  had  been  replaced  and  all  of  the
bacteriologicals removed. Even the doorway that had led to the culture lab now led only to a storeroom full
of cartons of computer printouts.
Somebody had moved to hide all evidence of bacteria culture having taken place here. That seemed very
sinister indeed. He tried to force himself not to speculate about it right now. This wasn't the time to worry
about it.
"I don't know any bacteriologists!"
"Jonathan?"
"Sorry. I was thinking aloud." This was his old, familiar workplace now that the other things were gone.
A good laboratory is a delight to work in, and in its intact form his was no exception. "I may be bragging,
but please indulge me and admire this place." He gestured. "Just look at it."
"It doesn't make a bit of sense to me."
"My  dear,  you  are  looking  at  the  closest  thing  to  a  device  that  can  read  minds  that  has  ever  been
designed." He went over to the bench on which most of the digital EEG analyzer was lying under its plastic
tarp. "All that she requires is a little juice, a little software, and a little love, and she will tell us exactly—but
exactly—what is hidden in the deep recesses of our minds."
"Look, I'm going to say it one last time. This is all a mistake, Jonathan. What we need to do is forget."
"Just do it for me, honey. It'll be over in fifteen minutes."
"What concerns me is that I'll have to remember some-thing I simply can't face. Let Mike find them if he

can. I just want to forget. And you should too. Anyway, your machine might lie."
"For my sake, let me find out what it says. I'll never have peace if I don't."
"I wish you understood how the hell much I love you, Jonathan Banion. You're part of my soul!"
He hugged her and felt her tremble. "I'm sorry."
"What if we don't like what we find?"
"We have to take that risk? What's the good of living a lie? I don't want  that,  and  I  don't  think  you  do
either. If we really love each other, we've got to know the truth."
"Even if it destroys everything?"
He held her tight to him. "Let's face that if we have to. The point is to find out the truth, then we'll deal
with it."
"You didn't rape me. Not you."
"We have to find that out, among other things.*'
She shrieked at him. "I do not want to!" She looked at the equipment he had uncovered as if it were a
writhing tangle of snakes. Her  lips  twisted.  For  a  moment  it  seemed  as  if  she  might  faint.  "I  don't  even
allow myself to think about it. I just know it's there, deep in me, a filthy memory of—of—oh, I don't know
what it's of."
Of me?
"Darling, I'm going to ask you to lie in the cubicle. And please excuse the mildew." Will your mind tell us
what mine would not? He gave the couchette a few swipes.
"I'm doing this for you, Jonathan. Only for you. I'm going on record right now saying it's a mistake."
She lay down. A memory of Mike haunted Jonathan. Mike sitting on the lounge chair, chewing his cigar,
his bald head gleaming with sweat.
We're all afraid.
Surely  questioning  under  instruments  would  work  more  gently  on  her  mind  than  6-6-6  had  on  his.  He
hoped so; if he put her through one-tenth of the anguish he had endured he would never forgive himself.
He punched in the Telenet address of the Cray 2000 computer that controlled his software and entered
his  per-sonal  password.  The  internal  prompt  appeared  on  his  CRT.  The  computer  was  ready.  Now  he
ordered it to load  his  software  from  the  Corvus  Hard  Disk  Drive  sitting  beside  his  terminal.  The  drive's
active light came on for a long mo-ment. When it went off Jonathan knew that  the  fast,  elegant  program
had been transferred to the Cray.
The Cray came back with the diamond-shaped prompt that indicated it had successfully loaded.  "We're
go on the program," he said to his waiting subject—or patient—or was it victim?
She was lying quietly on the couchette, watching him. "Just don't mess up my brain, chromedome."
"You're  going  to  be  the  chromedome,  I'm  afraid."  He  got  the  helmet.  It  contained  a  hundred  and
twenty-eight pres-sure-sensitive electrodes and was a great improvement over the old method of  applying
them individually to the skin. But with the masses of wires coming  out  of  it,  it  looked  like  something  that
belonged on the head of a robot.
She laughed when she saw it. "We need a camera, I want you to remember me at my most beautiful."
He looked long at her. "I wouldn't do this if I didn't have to."
"Never leave me,  Jonathan.  Never,  no  matter  what."  Jonathan  fitted  the  helmet  to  her  head  and  they
laughed together. "I really  want  a  picture,"  she  said.  He  turned  to  his  instruments.  Patricia's  brain-wave
patterns were jittering across the screen of the oscilloscope.
"Remember that night? We were together. We had drinks. And?"
"Jonathan, ask about Lourdes instead."
He watched his instruments. "Remember? We were to-gether, we had just had a drink—"
"You left!"
The PV220 wave showed a peak, then settled. The thought was not coming from memory; neither was it quite a lie. It was an
implant. To break a hypnotic block, it was necessary to challenge such implants.
This was a fateful moment. If he could break what had been put into her mind to blind it, his next words would do it.
 "You don't remember that."
"That's what happened."
"Try again. We had drinks. Assume I didn't leave. What really happened?"
The sound she made was not a scream, it was an eruption. Jonathan lunged toward her. In an instant she had gone
a  ghastly  pale  gray  color,  her  eyes  almost  starting  out  of  her  head.  Her  shriek  dropped  suddenly  from  a
glass-shattering  pitch  to  a  vibrating  groan.  Then  the  computer  started  beep-ing.  Automatically  Jonathan  responded  to  the
line-failure signal and pressed the reset button. The screen flickered to blackness.  Even  as  it  was  doing  that  he  was
leaping to her aid. He thought perhaps a short of some kind was sending voltage into the headset. But even when he tore it

from her head she didn't change. She was convulsing. Her arms went out straight beside her, her legs began to hammer, her
head jerked from side to side. He shook her, he yelled at her, finally he scooped her up into his arms and hugged her to
 him.
"What have I done? Oh, stop, stop! Oh, God, God, please make her stop!"
Chapter Sixteen
HER HEAD WAS whirling, her ears ringing, the whole room shaking. Jonathan seemed to dart and flicker
as if caught in some sort of strobe light. Then his hands slapped against the helmet with a stunning clap and
he tore it from her head.
She blacked out. She knew that something was terribly wrong with her. She could feel her body jerking in
spasm, her tongue filling the back of her throat. And she was spinning, spinning fast, out of control, falling.
A great bell was booming somewhere.
Then it wasn't a bell at all, it  was  Jonathan's  voice.  He  was  crying  and  screaming,  cradling  her  in  his
arms.
Quite suddenly, all was quiet.
"Patricia?"
His face was shadowed by the glare of the fluorescent tubes above him. "Jonathan—"
"Darling, darling, darling. I'm so stupid, so damn stupid." He embraced her and she let herself be swept
up into his arms. They were strong and good and she was glad.
"I feel better. I think I'm going to be okay."
A haunted expression came into his eyes. It alarmed her; it was the expression of somebody with a guilty
secret.
"Did you hurt me, honey? Is there something I don't know?"
"I don't think so."
Another thought occurred to her. "Did you find out?" Her own voice sounded so small.
She turned her head to avoid the glaring ceiling lights.
He stared down at her.
Love me tonight. . . . She became aware, dimly, of something quick and gleaming that stank of flyblow,
chasing her through her dream country. Catching her.
Oh, God,  how  horrible! She heard  herself  gasp.  She  felt  another  scream  coming.  The  thing  she  had
glimpsed was so ugly and so utterly cold, the very  opposite  of  all  she  loved  of  humanity  and  life.  It  was
Death  coming  through  the  high  grass,  Death  rising  from  its  hiding  place  in  the  soul.  "Oh!  Oh!  No,
Jonathan!"
"Patricia! Sh! Sh! It's over, I turned it off. You were right; I won't ask any more questions. I'm so sorry."
"Oh, darling, it was so ugly!" Were there people in the world who were not quite people? What had that
thing been, straddling her, staring down with the blank eyes of a snake?
She was going to throw up. "Jonathan—" Her mouth opened. He grabbed for a wastepaper basket, thrust
it beneath her face, and held  her.  Her  stomach  seemed  to  pull  off  its  moorings.  For  an  instant  she  was
sinking in a fast elevator. Then the lights were above her again, glaring, humming  tubes  of  brilliance,  and
beneath them Jonathan's face, his lips slack with fear and his eyes still hidden in the dark of his brows.
He bent to her, lifted her in his arms, and embraced her. "I thought it would work out differently."
The  world  had  just  changed  for  her.  Her  memory  of  that  terrible  moment  was  now  clear.  She  could
remember what had raped her, and it was not a human being.
What evil has been wrought in the dark of this world?
"First I heard music, a sort of humming, very low, like a swarm of flies."
"Hush, honey, hush."

"I will not!" She reached out and snatched up the tangled pile of graph paper. "What does this say?"
"I pulled off the helmet."
"Before you did that you asked me what really happened. And I had a vivid image. Was it a memory or
wasn't it?"
"I don't know. The reading isn't reliable."
She wouldn't stand for that. "Jonathan, you opened something up in me and it feels like a memory. Now
I'm the one who has to know."
"Whatever it was sent you into convulsions, I don't think we should fool with it."
That wasn't acceptable. "You tell me—dream or mem-ory?"
He took her hands, pressed them to his lips. "I can't be sure. There's something wrong with the readout."
She could smell it, could taste its filthy, rotten kisses.  "Jonathan,  Jonathan,  look  at  you.  You  poor  man,
you're so innocent. Do you still think you did it?"
He squeezed his eyes shut, he bowed his head. He was slick with sweat. "I know." The words were a
bare murmur.
"Don't be an ass. You didn't. You couldn't possibly."
He dropped to the couchette beside her. His hands, hold-ing hers, were cold and wet.
She  tossed  her  head,  wishing  she  could  get  the  image  of  the  thing  out  of  her  mind,  could  somehow
replace it forever with Jonathan's beauty.
But that thing existed.
"Darling, we have to take a reading on me as well."
"What? Have you lost your mind, Jonathan Banion?"
"Just a short reading. And you'll have to run the computer."
"I can't run a computer, and I wouldn't even if I could!"
He glanced again at the chart of her own reading, made a sad kind of sighing sound. Suddenly he grabbed
her shoul-ders. He brought his face close to hers and she saw him clearly, without shadows. His eyes were
staring, fixed, his lips dry. He was trembling steadily, with the frantic rhythm of a  small  animal.  "You  get
over there and run it!" He picked  up  the  graph  and  shook  it  at  her.  "Do  you  realize  what  this  -  no,  you
couldn't possibly." He jumped up, went to the computer terminal with a single stride, began jabbing at keys.
It beeped, the screen came to green life, then he grabbed her by the wrist and dragged her over.
"Once the helmet is on, the computer will want to adjust to the exact frequencies of my thought patterns.
There will be a series of numbers coming across the screen. Each  time  it  pauses,  press  the  key  marked
'return.' Got that?"
"Darling—"
"Got that? Got that?"
"Okay! Got it."
"Then it will ask you a question—which measurement? You will type in the answer, 'waves by harmonic
type.' Then press 'return' again."
"I've got it. 'Waves by harmonic type.' "
"Then press 'return.' You see the return key?"
She put her finger on it. "Jonathan, what if something happens to you?"
"Do just what I did—you press this orange key marked 'reset,' then you pull the helmet off my head. But
nothing will happen because this is a passive test. We aren't fooling with thy hypnotic barriers."
"So we are hypnotized. You know that for certain?"
"Oh, yes. And the barriers are powerful. More so than I dreamed possible. One more question, baby, and
bang—the next step was brain death."
"Death by hypnosis? I didn't think—"
"Don't ask me how it's done because I don't know. Now come on, let's get this over with."
He  fitted  the  silver,  cable-strewn  helmet  onto  his  own  head  and  lay  down  on  the  couchette.  After  a
moment a string of numbers shot across the screen, and she began following her instructions.
Soon  the  numbers  stopped  and  the  machine  asked  its  question.  She  typed  in  the  reply,  then  kept  one
finger hover-ing over the reset button and the other over 'return.' She looked at Jonathan. He was lying on
the couchette, his eyes closed. He seemed fine. She pressed 'return.'
Silence. Jonathan didn't move. She kept her finger over the orange button, began watching his chest. He
was breath-ing steadily.
Soon paper started streaming out of the graph. Then the machine sounded a bell and stopped. "Jonathan,
did I do something wrong?"
He sat up, pulled off the helmet. "You were fine," he muttered. "That's all there was to it." He lunged for

the graph paper, ripped it off the roll, studied it almost franti-cally.
When he looked up at her again, his face was pallid with shock. The paper dropped from his hands.
"Jonathan, what is it?"
He shook his head. Then he came to her, almost reverently, and took her head in his hands. "Darling, our
brains show an incredible, radical departure from the normal wave pattern."
Was that all? "Well, are we okay anyway?" She could think of nothing else to ask.
He  laughed  silently,  mirthlessly.  "Dearest,  we're  fine.  But  don't  you  see  what  this  means?  We've  got
eighteen separate waves. Normal people have seven."
"Does it mean—have we got a disease?"
"In a funny kind of way. Our disease is that we aren't human beings."
"We—what?" She was mystified. "Of course we are!"
"No. We're too far from the norm. Oh,  we're  human  stock  all  right.  I  mean,  the  basic  pattern—alpha,
beta, delta—it's there. But we are not people.  We've got an alpha high harmonic, a  delta  parallel,  and  a
whole cluster of little waves down in the low frequencies."
"It must be the hypnosis. It's got to be!"
"No  way.  I'm  talking  about  brain  structures,  not  transi-tory  effects  like  that.  I  mean,  we  are  real
first-class freaks!"
That word slashed through her composure and made her shriek. She couldn't help it; freak is  a  horrible
word. "No, I'm not a freak. I hate it! I am not a freak!"
I was raped by a freak with the skin of a snake and yellow-green reptile eyes.
"Honey, come on, be quiet."
"I will not be quiet? I am not a freak! Don't you ever, ever, ever call either of us that, because we  are
normal. I'm telling you we are normal and we can have a good life! You'll see, Jonathan Banion, I'll make
a nice home for you, you'll see!"
"Come on! Pull yourself together. We've got to think this out."
She stopped, but only  by  jamming  her  own  feelings  down  into  her  guts  and  holding  them  there  with  a
fierce effort of will she doubted she could sustain for long.
"We  are  mutants.  The  other  word  was  unfortunate."  He  sounded  calm,  and  that  helped  a  little.
"Genetically we must be very different from other people." He shook his head. "God knows what we are.
Halfway between Homo sapiens  and—well, something else. I cannot imagine what our  chil-dren  will  be
like. A virtual new species."
"But we're people!"
"Not really. Close, yes, but you and I are not people."
She was losing her home, her family, her happy life. She knew it—she could feel it all being destroyed by
that one awful word. Freak. "But we look like people, we act like people!"
He nodded agreement. "We're a close mutation." He looked at his hands, felt his cheeks. "Amazing. Me.
You. That we would be this . . . whatever we are."
"Are you sure it's not the hypnosis?"
He took her hands. "I know how to read my charts, We may be under hypnosis. In fact I'm sure we are.
But  the  overriding  finding  is  the  high  degree  of  abnormality  in  our  brains'  electrical  functions.  That
means—"
"Don't say it again! Don't say that word!"
She let him hug her. Gratefully she buried her face in his chest. She remembered the monster again, and
felt all at once the absolute coldness of the unknown. How little she really knew, even about herself. "We
look like people!"
"Yeah. We can probably mate with people too. Have human-like kids. But if we mate with  each  other
our children won't be remotely human."
She couldn't stand to hear that. "Just stop it! Stop talking that way. Look, we can go away somewhere.
Nobody will ever know, nobody needs to know. Whatever we are inside,  we  can  keep  it  secret,  we  can
hide it! We'll be able to get married and all, and things'll work out. They will, I know it!"
He held her more tightly. "Baby," he said, his voice quaking, "somebody already knows all about us."
He could only mean the Night Church. There flashed in her mind again an image of the revolting thing on
the altar. She let herself weep into his shoulder, and she thought, We're in the middle of God knows what,
and we're getting more lost by the second.
She held him, and he held her, and for a precious moment (hat was all there was.
We two.
Chapter Seventeen

FEAR WAS NOT normally part of Mike's emotional makeup. Tonight, though, he could taste it in his mouth, a sour
dryness that made it hard to swallow.
It is not a sound, but you can hear it in the wind; not a presence, but you can feel it watching you.
Fear.
He had no illusions about searching Mr. Apple's house. It belonged to a powerful and hitherto unknown cult. The
Night Church. Coming here was probably the most danger-ous thing he had ever done.
He suspected he was a fool to be doing it—especially this way, alone and without backup.
He had no warrant. As far as the law was concerned, he was a common burglar. But then the law didn't know he
was here. He didn't trust his own people enough to risk swearing out papers.
He waited until the hours past midnight to drive through the streets of Kew Gardens to the empty house. He parked around the
corner and walked back, his hands thrust into the pockets of his raincoat, his hat shadowing his face when he passed under
streetlights. He moved with the precision of a dancer, his shoes making no sound on the sidewalk.
His entrance was professional, so quick that an onlooker would have assumed he had a key. As he gained the front
 hall he returned the plastic card he had used to prize the lock to  his  inside  coat  pocket.  Almost  automatically  his
fingers reached in and touched the butt of his police special, tucked into its shoulder holster.
The floor groaned with his weight. Good—that was a sign it hadn't been walked on for some time. Mike
went across the foyer and into the living room. The air was dense, faintly tinged with the musk of mildew.
As Mike's eyes got used to the light he could see that nothing had been removed from  this  room.  That
was as expected. Mr. Apple had left no relatives and no will. It would be months before Probate Court got
around to dispos-ing of this place on behalf of New York State. He took a crystal ball from a collection in a
case in the living room. The little quartz orb dimly reflected the thick  velvet  drapes,  the  intricate  Chinese
carpet, the Flemish landscapes on the walls, and the deep mahogany of the Victorian furniture. One could
almost see shadowy figures moving in the com-plex dark of the crystal.
Beside the orb was a small silver key, rounded at the end in a unique and familiar way. It was a coffin
key. Mike had seen them often enough at the morgue. Strange thing to find in a home. Was it the key to
Mr. Apple's coffin, left here by a careless mortician when the old man had so conveniently died?
He replaced the crystal, picked up the key. It was a typical stubby coffin key, steel, looking like a luggage
key, but with the name Aurora stamped on the flange. Largest coffin company in the world. Mike had used
such keys in disinter-ments.
Carefully, patiently, he moved through the living room, brushing his gloved hand along the back of a chair,
caressing the surface of a mahogany table.
Old Mr. Apple.
That  name  hadn't  checked  out.  Back  around  the  turn  of  the  century  foundlings  in  upstate  New  York
were always called Johnny Apple on their birth certificates. "Mr. Apple"  was  an  identity  generated  from
the birth certificate of a foundling who had died in the Oneonta County Institution for Indigent Children two
weeks after he was discovered in a box behind a grocery store.
"Franklin  Apple's"  birthday  was  December  11,  1893.  That  was  the  day  Johnny  Apple  had  been
discovered in the box. Developing an alias this way was a clever technique. You find somebody who died
young about the time you were actually born, and you send for the birth certificate. Then you use that  to
get a social  security  card  and  a  passport,  and  the  passport  to  get  a  driver's  license,  and  the  license  for
everything else.
You use the alias until it gets hot. Then you kill it off.
Father Goodwin hadn't mentioned  Mr.  Apple  during  inter-rogation,  but  one  of  the  ladies  at  the  supper
had. Mike was so desperate for leads he had begged Harry to dredge his memory. "The incident was very
minor," he had said. "The man made her nervous and she didn't want to talk to him. I told her to offer it up.
That kept her with him for fifteen minutes. She said that he was creepy. It's a matter of no importance, I'm
sure. He was very old."
Mike hadn't told Harry how important he thought Mr. Apple might be. Always best to play  a  case  like
this one closer than you thought you had to.
To discover the little tiny motives that always seem to start crimes, the best place to go is a man's hidden
world, his sock drawer, his medicine cabinet, the back of his closet.
Crystal  balls?  Coffin  keys?  Not  the  likely  possessions  of  just  any  old  man.  But  an  old  man  who  was
playing around with sorcery might have such things.

Strange mementoes themselves were of little value as evidence. Such things did  suggest,  though,  didn't
they?
Mike returned to the central hallway of the house. On the opposite side was a study. Behind it would be
the master bedroom and dressing room. Mike knew the layout of the house; he had lived in one very much
like it with his first wife, Beth.  Rego  Park,  from  1964  to  1975.  The  house  had  been  built  by  Butler  and
Horowitz in the late twenties—they had put up hundreds of them all over the borough. Butler Boxes, they
were called. By now most had been torn down or so altered as to obscure their original modesty. Not so
Mr. Apple's bungalow. It even retained the vintage twist-spring doorbell.
Beyond the door of the study Mike could see a big desk, shelves of books, a television set on one of the
shelves. He went in, walked the edge of the room.
When he brushed past  the  television  set  he  paused.  He  put  his  hand  on  it.  Was  there  a  little  warmth
there, or was it simply the hot  night?  He  went  on,  circling  the  desk.  Nothing  was  disturbed  in  here.  He
would save the study for a few minutes. Even as inefficient as it was, Probate would have  removed  any
important papers with the body and stored them in its vault down at the Queens County Courthouse.
To  get  an  idea  of  the  man  as  he  had  been  in  his  skivvies,  at  his  most  revealed,  Mike  would  try  the
bedroom. He stepped carefully along the Persian prayer rug that served as a hall runner. His penlight told
him that, like everything else he had seen in the house so far, the carpet was very fine. Mr. Apple certainly
hadn't lived in want.
Which raised an interesting question. Why had a rich man like this gone to a seniors supper to eat Father
Goodwin's meager offering?
The sonofabitch had gone there to observe Patricia. Even then he had been watching her.
The bedroom was a puzzle. It did not talk old man, not by a long shot. If Mike's instincts were working,
this room had been decorated by a young woman. There was even a vase of fresh roses. Perhaps only a
day old, from the feel of the petals.
Fresh flowers, a slightly warm television—somebody was living here. Mike became aware  of the weight
of his pistol. and wished he had spent some time down on the practice range recently.
He got much more careful, but also much more  interested.  He  glanced  at  his  watch.  Three  fifty.  This
time of night people who weren't home could be expected any minute or not at all. Good that his car was
around  the  corner  and  not  out  front.  He  began  to  work  the  penlight  with  his  hand  cupped  around  it.
Reflections on the ceiling would read outside like the flicker of a match.
Then he froze. He had heard a sound, a scrape like a window being raised.
There it was again. It was followed by silence. Maybe some wind had come up and was scraping a tree
limb against a pane of glass.
There was a small writing desk under the window. Lying on it was a fountain pen. Mike touched the nib.
Full of ink. It was eerie to come into the house of a dead man who might not be dead.
He  opened  the  single  drawer  of  the  desk.  Inside  was  a  black  leather  binder  that  contained  about  ten
sheets  of  blank  chart  paper,  like  something  a  scientist  might  use  to  plot  curves.  He  felt  the  surface  for
telltale indentations. Sure enough, someone had written on the top sheet and torn it off, leaving depressions
on the sheet below.
Mike took the indented sheet off, laid it on the desk, and shone his penlight along it edgewise. There were
words neatly inscribed in one corner, as a scientist might label the chart of an experiment. But the  words
were not scientific R-i-t-u—something. Then C-r-u-c-i-a-t-u-s, then a word that began with N and had an
x in it. Then a name, which Mike recognized with sick dread. Quist!
Come on, guy, quit shaking. You're a cop, you're carryin' heat, you got no problem.
Cruciatus.  Mike's altar boy Latin was exceedingly rusty, but there was  an  ugly  sound  to  that  word.  It
didn't mean crucifixion—that was crucifixus. This sounded worse.
Seems from this they must have hurt Terry. So what's the surprise? Look what they did to Patricia.
Beside Terry's name were two slashes—a date had been written there, but the numbers were too faint to
be  dis-cerned.  Below  the  name,  pressed  into  the  paper  as  if  the  writer  had  been  bearing  down  for
emphasis, was written "Titus strain 334, Cochran batch, B.  positive  3."  Here  and  there  across  the  paper
faint lines indicated that a chart had indeed been drawn. At the bottom, at regular intervals, were numbers,
but Mike could only make out a few—3:54.22 was the first. Farther down was 3:57.44. The others  were
unintel-ligible.
Titus  strain.  Mary's  first  husband  was  named  Martin  Titus.  Batch?  Mike  felt  a  cold  shiver  go  up  his
spine. What the hell was it Terry had said about diseases? And what the hell was Mary's former married
name doing on this chart?
You be careful, guy. Forget going home for tonight. Mary was now a suspect. She had gone out before

the kids at Lourdes—he had witnessed that. Now her first husband's name turns up here. So she must be
considered dangerous, and prepared for accordingly. Damn, damn. What in hell was this all about? Mary
involved? That beautiful, decent woman? He loved Mary, damn it, and  he  was  now  suspect-ing  she  was
about to become a very big disappointment to him.
Cruciatus. Whatever the hell Cruciatus was, it sounded bad. He looked at the paper. Killing by disease
and charting the results. Experimenting.
Was  Mary  crazy  or  what?  He  was  getting  all  choked  up.  He  loved  that  woman,  damn  her.  Damn
everything. People got hooked by cults all the time—Reverend Moon and all that—but this thing—God, if
Mary knew about Patricia. If she knew!
Cruciatus. It might mean excruciation. Torture. That poor guy. Such a rotten end for an innocent human
being. Mike next went to the high, beautifully carved antique four-poster. He took off his gloves and raised
the edge of the bedspread. Thrusting one arm beneath the sheets he felt the intimate space where the user
would sleep. The sheets were damp, slept in recently.
Why, Mr. Apple, you're not dead, you've just moved to some new name. As far as that beautiful piece of
mahogany amoldering six feet down is concerned, let archaeologists of the future figure out why it contains
cinder blocks.
Make a note: get the damn thing exhumed ASAP.
The house was suddenly filled with  voices.  "Please,  let  me  go,  let  me  go!"  a  woman  screamed.  Mike
whipped out his pistol and backed into the shadows.
"I can't help myself!" a man cried back, his voice full of anguish.
Then Mike saw a flickering glow in the hallway. And those voices—they were accompanied by music.
The goddamn TV had been turned on.
Mike's heart began thundering. Somebody must have come home. Now he was watching an old movie.
God, these people were stealthy. They even crept into their own houses.
A coldness spread through his body. He didn't believe people could be as quiet as this one had been. Not
normal people.
He started down the hall. To get out he had to pass that study, and the door was wide open. At least he
had the sound of the TV to cover him.
He was three-quarters of the way past it when he risked a glance in. The study was empty.
A television set turning on by itself? Mike swallowed, braced his pistol  in  his  hands,  and  went  into  the
room. The television had gone from picture to snow. The station must have signed off.
For  a  moment  he  watched  the  pulsing,  hypnotic  glow  of  the  screen.  Then  there  was  an  audio
problem—the hiss changed to a deep, tooth-jarring sound that made Mike lunge forward to turn off the set.
Don't  do  that!  You're  crazy—whoever  turned  it  on  will  notice!  He  stood  transfixed,  staring  into  the
dancing, pulsat-ing glow, listening to the low booming sound.
And didn't he hear a voice?
No.
His eyes went to a small box attached to a wall socket immediately below the TV.
He almost laughed with relief. It was a timer. The set was timed to go on  in  order  to  make  the  house
look occu-pied.
At four o'clock in the morning?
Hell, maybe the timer was defective.
Mike pulled the timer out of the socket. The TV went off. He returned to his search, feeling more than a
little annoyed with himself for letting a perfectly explainable incident throw him off balance. It now seemed
as if the place would be a rich source  of  information.  No  probate  officer  had  made  an  inventory  of  this
house, because Mr. Apple hadn't really died.
Mike looked around at the shelves and shelves of books and the big desk.
He intended only a quick glance at the books. There were a few modern titles, mostly privately  printed
from  the  look  of  the  spines.  Biogenetic  Atlas:  Engineering  the  Future,  Transmission  of  Contagious
Vectors, Genealogies Pantera, The Family of Flavius Sabinus Titus.
Who? Always go for the names. Names are hard informa-tion.
Mike took the Titus volume down. It turned out to be about a Roman emperor. A long story about how he
had sacked  Jerusalem  started  the  book.  Mike  thumbed  through  it.  A  chapter  heading:  "The  Treasure  of
Solomon."  This  chapter  was  about  ritual  magic,  hypnosis,  and  "the  calling  of  the  demiurge."  "Out  of  the
union of the perfectly bred will arise the antithesis of man, who will inherit the  mantle  of  species  and  the
favor of demons." On and on like that. Next chapter: "The Coming Good: Anti-Man."

Mike read: "He will bear the appearance of a demon, yet have a living heart. As God made man  in  his
miserable image, so Satan will make the anti-man in His glorious one. He will be as a dark fury, going about
at night and sleeping during the day. Taller, stronger, more intelligent than a man, he  will  be  heavy-boned
and  like  the  lower  animals  be  born  competent  to  walk.  He  will  have  great  jaws  and  eat  raw  flesh  by
gorging. His strength will be such that he will need  neither  house  nor  fire,  but  will  be  comfortable  in  the
fields and forests. All the despoiling of the land that man has done will end when the anti-man repopulates
the earth with his own issue."
Mike stared at the words, dumbfounded. They were talk-ing about nothing less than giving the world  to
some devil-made species.
Insane, insane, insane.
Farther along there was a complicated genealogical table, showing how they intended to bring about their
anti-human-ity. Generation by generation they were breeding toward  the  monster.  The  genealogical  table
was a chronicle of their progress. It was labeled "The Hidden Kingdom, 1021-1952." It spilled over twenty
pages of names and more names, all connected together by lines of relationship.
Mike read with increasing foreboding the lists of Tituses, until he quit trying to puzzle the middle centuries
together  and  flipped  to  the  end.  Sure  enough,  there  was  Martin  Titus,  wife  Mary  Derwent  Titus,  son
Jonathan.
Mike found a chair. His penlight was beginning to dim but he had to read more and he couldn't risk taking
books.
All the time he had been right in the middle of the thing. These Tituses weren't just in the cult, they were
the cult. And the wonderful kid was heir to the whole damn thing.
Biogenetic Atlas: Engineering the Future proved to be a complicated scientific treatise of recent origin.
The  spine  crackled  when  Mike  opened  the  book.  It  had  been  printed  in  1981.  There  were  charts  and
graphs, and detailed diagrams of what seemed to be genetic helixes. The chapter headings were daunting:
"Structural Physiology  of  Titus/Pantera  Off-spring."  "Biogenetic  Reference  Tables'  to  Families  121/166."
(Here there were thirty pages of tables of numbers, evi-dently referring to changes in the genetic structure
of gener-ation after generation. Every twenty columns or so some-body had made a check mark in red ink
beside a major change in the numbers.)
Looking  at  these  charts  Mike  got  a  sense  of  the  steady  progress  that  had  been  made  by  the  Night
Church, patiently breeding two families together over hundreds and hundreds of generations, breeding them
like  fruit  flies  in  a  laboratory.  But  the  Night  Church  didn't  have  laboratory  conditions.  This  had  been
accomplished across the tumult of his-tory.
This section of the book was accompanied by illustrations. The earliest ones were Roman wax paintings,
familiar  to  Mike  from  an  afternoon's  wandering  through  the  Metropoli-tan  Museum  with  Mary.  He  had
assumed  them  to  be  satyrs  or  something.  Not  until  now  had  he  ever  dreamed  that  those  old  Roman
monsters were real, living creatures.
According to the text, carefully bred people with the proper genetic structure could briefly become such
monsters  in  a  ceremony  called  the  Rituale  Pudibunda  Coitus.  Thus  transformed,  they  were  called
monstrum. If a man in the monstrum state inseminated a correctly bred woman, the resulting anti-human
would be male. If the woman was the monstrum, the child would be female.
Generation after generation they had tried to give birth to a living anti-man. All they needed was a male:
he  would  be  able  to  mate  with  normal  humans  and  produce  monstrous  offspring.  But  they  hadn't
succeeded. One would be born with a defective heart, another with an unformed brain, a third with some
mysterious genetic disease. It was as. if nature rebelled against the travesty.
Astonishingly their failures were chronicled publicly, there for all to see just like the old Roman paintings.
As time went on the creatures had become more and more terrible. Anybody could study them even now:
their portraits were on all the Gothic cathedrals in the world. They were the gargoyles.
Generations of failure had only spurred the Night Church to greater efforts of breeding. Mike reflected
as he read that here was a group of people in love with death. Their books were decorated by images of
Thoth, the all-seeing Egyptian god of the underworld. Thoth and the arms of the Black Prince of the Middle
Ages, and the glittering death's-head symbol of the SS.
The Night Church was a religion of death, just as Chris-tianity was one of life. As Christianity strove to
resurrect man in Christ, the Night Church sought to destroy him in Satan.
Next was a technical appendix showing recent progress in creating the state of monstrum.
Mike was more utterly revolted by this than by anything he had seen in all his years as a cop. The Night
Church was breeding human beings like lab mice, toward ugliness and deformity. And making them carry
out obscene rituals in churches, becoming monstrum in order to give birth to hideous things.

But there was genius in it, sparkling like a black, evil diamond through  these  carefully  reasoned  words.
As a cold touch, there came to Mike the realization that he was looking upon the very work of Satan. This
was real evil in all its hideous ugliness, not the paltry nastiness of human beings. The Night Church was a
dark, festering miracle, a Satanic masterpiece.
Mike wanted to throw down the book in his hand, to somehow cleanse himself of the foulness it exuded.
But he forced himself to  read  on.  Here  was  the  jargon  of  high  science:  "Signal  Ritual  Induction  in  Late
Titus Offspring." As if to crush what little hope of disbelief he had left, this section contained a photograph
of almost unspeakable hide-ousness. The  picture  was  blurred  by  the  fact  that  the  light  was  low  and  the
subject twisting and turning against chains. But Mike could see the awful, mucous-slick scales half-grown
out of human flesh, the bulging vulture eyes still bearing a man's brow, the mouth crusted with blood from
the sudden eruption of the yellow fangs, the flaring, pink snout still looking a little like the nose it had been.
This dreadful image, of a man half-transformed into something else, was accompanied by a dry paragraph
of  scientific  jargon:  "Induction  in  collateral  Titus  male  22,  Ungar,  Robert  Titus  Martin,  type  O-,  genetic
subclass AR, 22.66 measured PKO, reversion in 52 sec. to human. Outcome: monstrum deceased before
impregnation of female could be com-pleted."
Mike could no longer control himself. He cried, openly, loudly, like a child lost in a haunted forest.
The Night Church was another, darker world hidden in our own, a place of terror and agony lurking in the
shadows of everyday life.
He wanted with almost crazy desperation to get out of this wicked house. But he forced a shaking hand
to put back the atlas and draw  out  another  book,  this  one  entitled  Genealo-gies  Pantera.  This  was  the
family that had been bred along with the Tituses across so many generations.
The female line.
He  went  directly  to  the  last  few  pages,  to  see  if  he  recognized  any  of  the  modern  names.  He  was
thunderstruck by what he found. Patricia was there, listed as the daughter of Samuel and Rebecca  Murray,
who  went  through  a  long  line  of  Irish  families  back  to  Roman  Britain,  and  thence  to  someone  named
Joshua, who had been a sorcerer in the time of Solomon.
Mike had reached the end of his strength. This was more than he could bear. He threw the book against
the wall and screamed out his rage and disgust.
Every living person he loved was in this monstrous, corrupt cult! Every one of them.'
He ran, ignoring the noise he was making, out into the black night. The roses on the porch trellis filled the
darkness with their scent. As Mike ran he got scared. It was as if some great creature was following him,
reaching out for him. He vaulted a hedge and slipped in dew-covered grass, falling and rolling. He lay  on
his back gasping for breath. And saw among the stars two great vulture eyes staring down at him.
His scream was as thin and high as a baby's. His wildly pumping legs pushed him along for a  moment,
then he managed to get to his feet and scramble the thirty paces to his car.
Frantically he worked the key into the starter, said a little prayer  as  the  engine  turned  over,  fought  the
impulse to floor it when it started.
Mike drove down Abingdon Street, slowly for quiet, and did not turn his lights on until he had reached the
corner of Lefferts Boulevard.
The precinct was three minutes away, but Farrell's was what he wanted. Lights and people and normal
things like coffee and tea. Lobster-shift cops would be there. He needed the reassuring presence of other
police.
Tonight he had seen things that could drive a man mad. In an hour the whole world had changed for him.
Satan was no longer a vague symbol of emotional disturbance. Satan was a real thing, as vital and alive as
any human being. Mike had no doubt that those eyes he had seen in the sky were  Satan's.  Evil  and  ugly
and tremendous, and staring right at him.
He cruised past his own  house.  A  dim  light  shone  in  his  and  Mary's  bedroom.  What  was  going  on  in
there? What might await him?
He had given that woman his love. Goodbye to that. And the kids? He had to reserve judgment there, he
just didn't have the heart to start hating Jonathan and Patricia.
The boy had demanded a poly—like he suspected himself of the rape but did not know. Could that mean
the two of them were dupes, ignorant of their own true selves?
He thought of going over to All Souls Cemetery and visiting Beth, just to be near someone who had once
been warm and good and loved him, to wash off with memories of her goodness the evil that clung to him.
"Honey," he would say, "I never thought Mary was really a replacement for you, but she was warm and
decent,  and  she  was  real  pretty.  I  didn't  fit  with  her  and  I  guess  I  should  have  known  something  was
wrong, but she was so damn beautiful. That counts. She isn't as  pretty  as  you,  though,  no,  ma'am.  Lord,

honey, I'd like to get you in my arms right now. I'd like to kiss your neck while we made love, the way  I
used to."
His chest was tight, his throat ached with sorrow. "You had a beautiful name, Beth. A beautiful name."
Oh, quit your bawlin', you sentimental Irish asshole. You have to put yourself back together. For better or
worse, you've been handed the biggest job any cop ever had.
He felt that horrible chill again. He sensed that the eyes were back, glaring at him right through the roof
of his car. A sudden wind rocked the old Dodge on its springs, and made the trees ahead toss wildly in its
headlights. For companion-ship he flipped on the police radio. He headed for Farrell's even though he had
realized that the lobster shift was off break, so there weren't likely to be a hell of a lot of cops there.
There weren't any at all.
He was tempted to cruise the boulevard for a whore, but he couldn't do that successfully in  an  obvious
unmarked car like this. They'd run away, naturally, from a city-issue Dodge with cop plates.
Naturally.
He  finally  rolled  into  Farrell's,  put  on  his  hat,  and  went  in.  The  counter  was  empty,  the  booths  were
empty. A black preacher and his family sat at one of the tables eating a turkey dinner. At this hour of the
morning?
Okay.
Old Gus the drunk was on duty, with Reynaldo running the grill. "Gimme coffee, Gus."
"Sure thing, Inspector."
Call me Mike. I'm just Mike. Good Lord, but I am alone. 
MARY: THE WEBS OF THE INQUISITION
It is four o'clock in the morning. I sit here in my little pool of light writing, alone in an empty, hostile house.
I am a betrayer. I have lived with a man in  love  in  this  house,  falsely  drawing  him  down  into  a  pit  from
which he cannot save himself.
I look at these smooth hands of Lilith, my hands,  witch's  hands.  They  used  to  burn  my  kind  in  autumn
fires long ago, in forest villages when the wind crowded down the leaves and the sky ran gray.
I am swift in the night, the taloned maiden. Look at my red-tipped claws. Mike would call them fingers,
and say they are beautiful. I  know  differently.  When  he  thinks  they  are  caressing  him  is  when  they  are
cutting deepest. I can make a man's soul leak out through his skin.
Distantly the bell of Holy Spirit Church tolls four times. All well, all well, all well, all well. Not  far  from
here Mike is searching the cottage Franklin used while he was living under his alias. All well. Mike is being
tricked into finding exactly what we want him to find, just enough of our secrets to animate in him a great
fear of us. He will take nothing important away; he dares not. Within moments of his depar-ture the crew
that is waiting in the basement will come up and strip the house of every single scrap of evidence.
Mike is an actor now in the terrible theater of Lilith. He will strut and posture until the end of the play.
He will not escape me.
Look at the words I have just written. He will not escape me. I'm sure of that, I suppose.
By going where he has  gone,  Mike  Banion  has  delivered  himself  to  our  control.  We  are  vastly  better
equipped for this game than he.  We  have  people,  resources,  equipment,  and  above  all  the  insight  of  the
demons to guide us. For his part, Mike is afraid even to involve his own men for  fear  that  some  may  be
members of our Church.
Mankind drifts along, haunted by gibbering spirits and useless gods. At the bottom of each human soul is
the evil old ape from which we have sprung. We, the transitional species, half-animal and half-god, all full
of tragedies and destructions.
I am almost overwhelmed with a worshipful desire to get on with our great work. What a mercy bubonic
positive 3 will be. Homo sapiens has suffered itself for a hundred thousand years. It is  past  time  for  this
awful tragedy to end.
The actors upon the stage are at last dissolving into dark.
Only the Inquisition can stop us now. But will it? We are very close to  success.  And  yet  .  .  .  there  is
always the possibility of something overlooked.
The Inquisition spins subtle webs.
I worry, turning the same few facts over in my mind again and again. I imagine priests—silent, careful,
fanatical— slipping through the darkness, filling every ignored corner, obsessed with their mission to save a
religion and a humanity that are both already dead.
Most human creatures, in their secret hearts, hunger for destruction. Freud's "death wish" is the instinct

of a defec-tive species toward its own extinction.
As the church of the destruction of man, we use the great human symbols of death: the unblinking eyes
of Thoth, the steel helmet of the Black Prince, the glittering silver death's head of the SS.
Mankind longs so much for an end to itself that it has even devised means of mass suicide. Or else why
are there such vast nuclear arsenals on the earth? If man does it himself, with his atomic bombs, the race's
death  agony  will  last  for  years.  The  few  destroyed  in  the  explosions  will  be  lucky.  As  for  the
rest—radiation  poisoning,  burns,  infection  violence,  and  starvation  will  take  them  ...  so  very  slowly.  Dr.
Cochran's new bubonic positive 3 kills quickly—in under  ten  minutes,  to  judge  from  our  experience  with
Terence Quist. We, at least, are merciful.
Chapter Eighteen
THE  INCREDIBLE  REALITY  that  Jonathan's  instruments  had  unlocked  tore  at  Patricia's  mind,
threatening her very sanity.
From the moment she had understood what he meant she had thought of only one thing: escape.  If she
had  been  able  to  magically  trade  bodies  with  somebody  else  she  would  have  done  it.  But  that  was
impossible. She was in herself and she couldn't get out.
He was trapped as well. Two mutants.
Who felt like, wanted to be, in their hearts were just ordinary people.
They were going to go where they could live the lives they coveted. Their  wants  were  simple:  a  home
and children. Just like everybody else, they had a right to a quiet life.
We can life in sunshine. The shadows that have caressed us can be burned away
They crept through the dangerous silence of Kew Gar-dens, beneath the black  intricate  trees  lining  the
streets, their  feet  falling  softly  on  the  close  cropped  lawns  and  spotless  sidewalks.  It  was  so  quiet  their
breathing seemed to shake the air.
Every movement Patricia made, every rustle of her  skirt  or  touch  of  bare  arm  against  a  shrub,  almost
stopped her heart. Slowly they drew closer to the Banion house and whatever might await them there.
Had there been a choice they would have gone directly from the lab to the Port Authority Bus Terminal,
but there was no such option. Money was essential, unless they wanted to terminate their escape this side
of Philadelphia. Jonathan carried no credit cards. The best Patricia could do was a Hamil MasterCard with
a three-hundred-dollar credit line that  was  almost  used  up.  Between  the  two  of  them  they  had  thirty-six
dollars and the card.
The night through which they moved was on one level just another fragrant August  night,  rich  with  the
mysterious content of nature. But underneath  the  beauty  lurked  an  evil  presence  they  could  feel  but  not
name. They sensed it in the reflection of moonlight from the startled eyes of cats, and in the long voice of
the wind that seemed always to be with them.
The moon had dropped low. Soon the gray shadows  of  trees  and  houses  that  crazed  across  the  lawns
would be blackened away. Only the Manhattan glare in the western sky would be left providing light.
Patricia took Jonathan's hand in hers as they approached the Banion house. She wanted to say, Don't be
afraid, but she did not dare even to whisper until they were better concealed.
They  had  gone  first  to  her  apartment  to  get  her  miserable  little  cache  of  five-dollar  bills.  Four  of
them—big deal. But what could they expect? She was at the moment taking home exactly $168.42 a week.
The pistol Mike had given her was there too, guarding her fortune, and she had dropped it into her purse as
well.
It was safest to assume that the Night Church was every-where, watching, waiting. Not patient, either.
Patricia re-membered the avidity of the thing that had raped her.
With each step she took she said a prayer. But it was not your usual Catholic turn-the-other-cheek sort

of thing, it was a raging, furious prayer for the utter destruction of the Night Church and all its faithful.
Patricia had insisted that they walk instead of taking the bus from her place to  his,  for  a  very  practical
reason. This way they could better detect anybody following them. The streets of this quiet and exclusive
enclave hidden in the middle of Queens were just too empty at four  thirty  A.M.  for  a  follower  not  to  be
seen  or  heard.  They  didn't  want  the  Night  Church  and  didn't  need  Mike's  guards.  This  had  to  be  done
alone.
She intended that they would take the Long Island Rail-road milk run in from Kew Gardens at five. From
Penn Station they would walk to the bus terminal and get on the first long-distance express they found, and
go where it was going.
Now that this plan was being executed she could almost taste the freedom of the new life it promised.
She took Jonathan's hand.  Nobody  was  going  to  ruin  the  common,  everyday  happiness  she  wanted  to
share with him.
As they walked along, she felt in her purse with her other hand, touching the steel flesh of her pistol.
"I don't think I can kill," he had said when she picked up the weapon. "Can you?"
Yes, to protect us.
They reached the walkway that led up to the house- Even with the money they would get here they were
hardly in for an easy time.
She put her arm around Jonathan's waist and drew him past the house, hushing his impulse to go through
the front door with a quiet whisper. Precautions and strategies did not occur to Jonathan. If this was to be
done right she had to do it. Her ability came from dormitory sneaks, creeping out on midnight dares.
The important thing was to assume the worst. That way you wouldn't be surprised.
They slipped from bush to bush until she had a view overlooking both the Banion house and the sidewalk
before it. She tugged at Jonathan's hand, gestured, and crouched down. He came down beside her. They
were behind a shrub, perhaps an ailanthus bush, well concealed.
She risked a breathy whisper. "We'll give it five minutes, then go in through the garage."
"Give what five minutes?"
"Our tail, dope. If anybody's following us we'll see them come up the sidewalk."
"You're beautiful."
Mr. Romantic. He didn't even now understand the danger they were in, not really.
Her dream thing's eyes were yellow and huge and steady.
"What's come over you? Are you all right?"
"Sh! Whisper."
"Sorry."
She  pinched  his  wrist.  "I'm  praying  that  we'll  get  out  of  this  alive."  Lord,  let  him  finally  grasp  the
seriousness of our problem.
He  patted  her  on  the  cheek,  an  absurd  gesture  of  reassur-ance.  For  all  his  strength  and  intelligence,
Jonathan could be maddeningly guileless.
The five minutes passed without a  sign  of  trouble.  Patricia  allowed  herself  some  small  hope.  She  was
going to get them out of this. One day soon, she would have a little room somewhere and a decent little job
and the exotic luxury of this man as her husband.
Or was that more than this particular ordinary garden-variety mutant had a right to ask?
She drew him close to her; she could smell his golden body in the dark. He smelled so sweet, so unlike
the stench of a normal human being on a hot night. She  felt  her  own  body  singing  with  desire.  His  hand
came under her chin and turned her face to his. There was nothing wrong in that; kisses were silent. . The
mutants find one another attractive. Of course.
So many lonely years were being erased by his kisses, a whole girlhood of desolate tea-dances with the
Saint Dominic boys. But we orphans did not want other orphans, we wanted princes. How we dreamed, we
wizard-frogged princesses.
Somewhere  a  dog  howled.  Both  of  their  heads  turned  toward  the  distant  noise.  But  it  was  far  away,
blocks and blocks. A bird muttered a reply. The air moved a little, and a few leaves whispered.
She gave his shoulder two  quick  taps  and  nodded  her  head.  They  rose  up  from  behind  their  bush  and
trotted into the Banion side yard. Although Patricia did not know  the  place  as  well  as  he,  she  did  not  let
Jonathan lead even here. She took out her pistol, flicked off the rather stiff safety catch. For some reason
its presence in her hand was a little embarrassing; she held it down where Jonathan could not see. It implied
a kind of commitment to what they were doing that she was not entirely sure she wanted him to perceive. It
might scare him.
She hefted the gun a little, preparing to enter the house.

They reached the back door that led into the garage. Jonathan took out his keys and opened it. There was
a deafening squeak, then they were in, brushing spider webs from their faces.  The garage was black; too
bad they didn't have a small flashlight.
Jonathan's hand come into hers. "I'm scared, hon, to be frank."
"We'll be all right. Just keep on."
"If we get caught—"
"We'll back each other up. Better to be caught here by Mike and your mother if we're going to be caught
at all."
A  hard  squeeze  of  the  hand  communicated  heartfelt  as-sent.  A  few  steps  into  the  garage  Patricia
realized Mike's car was gone. All to the good. One less person to wake up.
They went through the shadowy kitchen, past the hanging plants and the gleaming appliances Patricia had
once so admired, through the dining room with its wonderful antique table and chairs, and into Mike's den.
Here were loungers and a dartboard on the wall and a case  of books about police work. Here  also  a  big
television for the weekend games and a desk for the weeknight work. The room spoke Mike  Banion  and
made Patricia feel sad for the friendship that had to die. Without her and Jonathan Mike was going to be a
very lonely man.
"I think we might find something in the desk." Jonathan lifted up the blotter. He withdrew the key from a
little leather slit on its underside. Clever hiding place, and fortu-nate that Jonathan knew about it.
There was a money clip of twenties in the top drawer. Six of them. Jonathan pocketed it.
"Hot money," he whispered. He tried to smile but it was obvious he felt as unpleasant about this as she
did.  She  took  a  deep,  calming  breath,  and  calculated.  They  now  had  a  hundred  and  fifty-six  dollars.  It
wasn't enough. They had to go upstairs.
As Jonathan knew the house so much better than she, there was no choice at this point but to let him lead
the way. She had no faith in his innocent skills as a burglar. She stopped him at the foot of the stairs. "If she
wakes up, do you know what to do?"
"Run like hell."
"No! That's how you get caught.  You  stand  absolutely  still  and  don't  make  a  sound.  She'll  go  back  to
sleep."
"Oh,  I  see."  Although  the  house  was  centrally  air  condi-tioned,  the  air  upstairs  smelled  thickly  of  the
perfumes of sleep. Patricia first sent Jonathan into his own room to get the eleven dollars and six subway
tokens on his dresser. When he came back they went together to Mike and Mary's bedroom.
Mary lay on the near side of the bed, turned toward them. Her face was almost invisible. Patricia looked
long at her from the shadows of the hall. For a breathless few moments if seemed that her eyes might be
open.
I will kill her if I must, she told herself. I will not hesitate. But that was a lie: this woman was Jonathan's
mother. His shoulder touched Patricia's. All Patricia could do was hope that Mary didn't wake up and force
the issue.
Now that they were this close to the end Patricia could leave Jonathan here in the hall for the rest of the
job. The other girls had always chosen her to sneak into Sister Saint John's room when that was called for,
replacing  her  wimple  with  the  gardener's  fedora  or  stealing  the  lenses  out  of  her  glasses  or  some  such
mischief.
Mary Banion was not the good-hearted soul Sister had been, and this was not funny. Carefully, moving so
that she rustled as little as possible, Patricia went past the bed. Mary's breathing was not regular. Bad, bad
sign. Just as she was deciding to retreat, Mary's purse swam into view on the dresser. In it would be  the
wallet. How much? A couple of hundred if they got lucky. California, Florida, Texas, Mon-tana. Freedom in
a purse.
When Patricia reached in, something made a distinct clinking sound. She froze.
No movement from the bed.
She withdrew the wallet. Before she dared leave the room she stood a long time watching and listening.
Mary was very still. Patricia began to move toward the door.
When she was beside the bed she looked down at Mary once again.
And met very definitely open eyes.
There  came  from  Mary  a  long  hissing  sound  like  cloth  tearing.  She  rose  up  in  bed.  Patricia  stood
dumbfounded, confused by the suddenness of Mary's movements.
"Stop. Both of you!" Mary leaped from the bed.
Patricia got to the door just before Mary would have blocked it with her body. "You can't run away. It's
impos-sible!"

"Leave us alone, Mary. Don't you dare try to stop us."
The sound that came in response was almost inhuman in its rage.
"I have a gun, Mary!"
"You can't escape you little fools, you belong to the Church."
"Jonathan, come on," she said as she brushed past him.
As Patricia ran down the stairs she listened for  the  clatter  of  his  footsteps  behind  and  was  relieved  to
hear them.
Would she have gone back for him, into the face of that woman?
Once outside Patricia threw her arms around him.
Then she saw Mary coming through the garage door, a raincoat thrown over her nightgown. She moved
silently, swiftly. Patricia's gun didn't even seem to concern her.
A wind came up as they raced along the alley that led into  Eighty-Fourth  Avenue.  Large  drops  of  rain
began to rustle the leaves. The air grew dense. The northern sky was a deeper black; a storm was coming.
Patricia pulled the collar of her blouse up around her neck. In a way a storm would help them by obscuring
the sounds of their movement, but they would be conspicuous on the train if they arrived wet.
"We'll  cut  through  Forest  Park,"  she  told  Jonathan.  "It's  quickest."  Would  they  be  watching  the  Kew
Gardens sta-tion? She could only hope not.
As they approached Park Lane a garbage truck clattered past, trailing from its closed maw like a flag the
tatters of a red dress. They climbed the low wall that outlined Forest Park and set off among the trees.
Absolute silence and absolute darkness filled the park. Forest Park was so named because  it  contained
the largest stand of virgin forest in New York City, uncut since before the founding of the United  States.
Seventy-foot oaks and maples soared into the dark from a bed of mist-hazed ferns. She and Jonathan kept
to familiar paths, worn clear by generations of  shortcutters.  Patricia  plodded  along,  aware  that  the  damp
was rapidly making a  mockery  of  her  shoes.  Passing  beneath  the  Interboro  Parkway  overpass  she  was
briefly spared the trickle of rainwater down her neck.  The  woods  were  deeper  on  the  far  side,  but  they
could now make use  of  one  of  the  park  roadways,  a  winding  blacktop  lane  dotted  with  potholes,  where
carriages once had rolled and lovers strolled.
The wind made the ferns whisper and the tops of the trees utter long sighs.
When Patricia saw the gleam of water on metal ahead, she realized the enormous strategic error she had
just made. Forest Park was not the same as a weed-choked alley. Here the Night Church could afford a
few risks. Screams didn't matter in this wilderness, and there was no back doors on which to pound.
The Night Church had worked very fast. Mary could not have warned  them  more  than  a  few  minutes
ago.
"Hold it." She grabbed his shoulder. "There's a van here."
"Where?"
She lifted his hand, placed it against the cold metal. His whole body jerked, as if he had been delivered an
electric shock.
"Back up," she breathed. "Maybe they haven't seen us."
They turned off the road onto a path. She wasn't sure, but she thought it led out onto Park Place. If so,
they would be safe in a few minutes. As they picked their way through the wet, slapping ferns she heard
the distinct sound of footfalls on the roadway they had just left. Then there was crashing in the brush not
fifty feet behind them.
"Oh, God, Jonathan, run!"
As  they  dashed  through  the  slapping  ferns  she  fingered  the  safety  of  her  pistol  again  and  again.  She
would use it, she told herself, she would certainly use it.
That thought was recurring so often she was beginning to be afraid she didn't really have the courage.
The ferns slapped her legs and she kept blundering into tree trunks. Beside her Jonathan clambered and
fell along. A steady shuffling of brush followed them.
They went on like that for a while, with the Night Church fifty feet behind. The memory of the thing she
had encoun-tered at Holy Spirit made her run like a madwoman, battling the wet, clawing undergrowth, her
feet sliding in mud, sheets of rain obscuring her vision.
Was the thing behind them?
Jonathan screamed and fell against her. She clutched him, got him to his feet. "Come on, honey!"
Fingers whipped like snakes around her neck and she grabbed at them, trying to fight instead of scream,
trying to keep the terror from rising up and blanking her ability to resist.
With a growl of naked rage Jonathan leaped across the three feet that separated him from whoever was
on her and grabbed him. Instantly the arm was swept away and Patricia was confronted with a  seething,

rolling  mass  of  flailing  limbs.  She  heard  blow  after  blow  land.  She  heard  air  hiss  from  lungs  and  bones
crunch.
"For God's sake, you're killing him!"
"That's  -  exactly—right!"  Jonathan  said.  Again  and  again  his  arm  rose  and  fell,  until  there  was  no
further movement from the figure beneath him. Jonathan stood up. Patricia was awed; she had never seen
anything like it before. In a few seconds he had beaten a man senseless—maybe to death.
She hugged him. "Are you hurt, darling?"
"I'm fine. Let's get a move on."
There was a shuffle of ferns ahead. A distinct click. "Drop the gun, please," said a quiet, cold voice.
Instead Patricia pointed  it  in  the  direction  of  the  sound  and  pulled  the  trigger,  a  feeling  of  vicious  and
triumphant power surging through her.
The pistol went click. Click. Clickclick.
Something pricked her neck. "Don't move, either of you." Another dark figure stepped out of the bushes
beside Jonathan. She could see in his hand the same weapon that must be cold  against  her  own  neck.  A
stiletto.
Her stomach heaved. "Drop the pistol." The razored edge of the knife caressed her neck. "It's useless to
you. The powder was taken out of the bullets the night you got it." She threw it to the ground, feeling the
most intense helpless-ness. They even had access to her apartment. There was no escape from them, none
at all. Even to have tried was stupid.
A  two-way  radio  burped  in  the  darkness.  Patricia  became  aware  that  there  were  a  large  number  of
people around them. They had been at the center of a highly organized net all the time.
She threw the pistol to the ground. The pressure of steel against her neck diminished.
"Come with us, please."
Jonathan started off ahead of her. He was pushed roughly. Behind them flashlights  bobbed  in  the  path
and voices were raised. They were trying to help the one Jonathan had beaten.
Patricia allowed herself a moment to be proud of him. He had tried hard; that meant a great deal.
Soon  more  of  the  search  party  met  them.  There  were  easily  twenty  people  around,  all  in  black
turtlenecks and jeans. Occasional flashes of lightning revealed them to be utterly ordinary young men and
women, clean-cut, even pleasant-looking.
Nobody had scales, nobody had reptile eyes.
Patricia had visualized the Night Church in terms of batwing soup and gnarled old  wizards.  These  men
probably worked in law offices and insurance agencies by day, and the women raised kids in pretty Kew
Gardens homes.
When the back door of the van was opened slightly, a shaft of yellow light leaked out. The door opened
all the way. "Come," said a pleasantly modulated voice.
Although the door was locked behind them, this luxurious interior hardly seemed  a  prison.  Jonathan  sat
back in one of the deep leather seats. "I can't grasp this." His voice was like ashes.
"I know."
The  van  had  no  windows,  and  the  walls  were  covered  with  padding.  There  was  a  well-stocked  bar,
complete with ice, glasses, potato chips, and pretzels.
"Don't eat or drink any of that stuff, Jonathan."
"Of course not." He slumped forward, bowed his head into his hands. She sat  down  in  the  seat  beside
him and put her arm around him.
The van started off. Patricia experienced what seemed an almost primordial urge to escape, as if she had
been trapped in a cave-in or locked in a coffin.
The van gathered speed, driving on deep into the night.
Chapter Nineteen
MIKE  HAD  TO  exhume  Franklin  Apple's  coffin.  The  way  the  Night  Church  operated  there  could  be
anything in there—or anybody. He might not like it, but he had to go through the whole official drill to make

it happen.
It was late afternoon before he could make all the bu-reaucracies involved agree. Finally the paperwork
was com-plete and Mike sat waiting in his old  Dodge  at  the  entrance  to  All  Souls  Cemetery.  Night  was
coming, he was tired and uncomfortable, and he wished he could go home. He rubbed his palms along his
cheeks, which itched like fire. Either he had shaved sloppily at his office or he was allergic to the cologne
Mary had given him. His whole face was sensitive. Too bad. He liked the cologne a lot. Time to  change,
probably. The older you get the more allergic you become. Allergic to life, finally. Then you pack it in.
It had been a rotten day, beginning when he woke up at eight on the couch in his office feeling like he had
been cared for by a Mack truck, and proceeding through contact with a smarmy assistant DA who  could
not understand why Apple should be exhumed on so "minor" a matter as an alias, and going from there to
miserable dealings with the Board of Health and the Cemeteries Department, getting the exhuma-tion order
initialed by the right department heads.
It had started raining just before dawn and hadn't stopped all day. The graveyard was going to be a mess.
Mike considered himself a careful, patient detective. He had learned that cases  were cracked either by
persistence or luck, and he was not the lucky type. He was no  longer  even  close  to  buying  the  fact  that
"Mr. Apple" was dead. No way was a coincidence like that going to happen. No way. Especially since his
real name was very prob-ably Titus.
Mike was pretty sure he was going to turn up a load of cinder blocks or bricks, or maybe just a coffin full
of sand. It was no big deal to get a burial like that done. The Dexter Funeral Home over on Metro Avenue
did fakeouts  for  the  Mafia  all  the  time.  Two  thousand  bucks  could  get  a  box  of  bricks  buried,  priest's
honorarium included.
Mike carried the exhumation order in his breast pocket behind his cigars.  Being  a  high-class  dump,  All
Souls did not like cops and exhumations even a little bit. To avoid being ordered off the property you had to
be sure every i was dotted and every t crossed.
While he was waiting, Mike took some more time to work on his own emotional state.
He had been crazy last night after being in that house. Crazy with fear. After a few hours on the couch
in his office he had realized that he was going to have to break this case.  He might have  to  confront  the
Devil himself to do it, but he was by God going to expose the Night Church.
That didn't change his fear, though. It was with sick dread that he had called Mary at nine, pleaded that
an emergency had kept him out all night, then told her to expect him home for dinner. As nerve-racking as
staying there would be, not doing so was too obvious a tip-off. And he dared not arrange for a backup team
out on the street. He might be making his arrangements with the Night Church.
He wasn't looking forward to the night ahead. No way was he going to sleep.
He hit his hands against the steering wheel. This case was so damn complicated. It would be nice just to
be able to walk people in on charges right now. But what charges, and which people? Christ, what a mess.
What better cover for a woman like Mary than being married to a police official?
Sweet lady. Supposed to have loved him. Maybe she did, who knew? It sure as hell didn't matter to him.
A nasty taste came into his mouth just thinking about last night. He shook his head, fighting the images.
Mike intended to sift this case exceedingly fine.
Another  car  pulled  up.  The  Department  of  Health  ob-server  and  the  Queens  County  coroner—or,  as
Mike  could  see  through  the  window  of  the  battered  green  city-issue  Dodge,  coroness.  A  fine,  robust
specimen of a woman too, and visibly pissed off about gravedigging in the rain. The two of them got out of
their jalopy and came over to Mike's.  They  knew  their  protocol,  at  least.  When  you  are  working  with  a
detective  inspector  who  is  fool  enough  to  get  out  and  wallow  in  the  mud,  you  damn  well  come  to  him
because you know he is a man obsessed. Inspectors are not even sup-posed  to  work  cases.  Their  job  is
managing detectives.
"Inspector Banion?"
"Yours truly."
The Health Department type leaned into the car, his popeyes wet with  fatigue,  his  breath  a  mixture  of
C&C Cola and streetcorner hot dog. These guys did a tough job, chasing down rats and sick dogs, scraping
shit off  floors,  examining  corpses  for  signs  of  contagion.  "I'm  Inspector  Ryan,"  he  said.  "This  is  Doctor
Phillips."
Mike unlocked his doors. "Come on in. The gravediggers are late."

The two of them piled into the police car. "Sorry about the rain," Mike said.
"As long as they can dig." The coroness was younger than she looked.
"This your first exhumation?"
"My first in a rainstorm."
"Maybe you're lucky. The wet'll hold down the stink."
Silence followed this remark. The bureaucrats were here because the law required  their  presence.  But
they were also human beings, and they must be curious about why such a high official was supervising an
emergency exhumation in the middle of a rainy afternoon. They were going to  stay  curious.  Mike  wasn't
going to repeat one word about this case to outsiders. He might be talking to the Night Church.
He looked across at a forlorn paper sign tied to the iron gate. 
GROWING  SEASON, JUNE  1-NOVEMBER  1.  FRESH  FLOWERS  ONLY.  ARTIFICIALS
WILL BE REMOVED. 
A high-toned cemetery.
In keeping with its image it was full of the most amazing monuments. For fifty years the Mafia had been
burying here. The more murderous the sonofabitch, the more elaborate the grave. Buddy DiMaestro had a
goddamn twelve-foot angel with a sword in its hand over his grave. Who was it supposed to scare, God?
Beth was also here, off in the Irish section of the bone-yard. Not a huge monument, but he kept it clean.
He came out here Sundays to talk to her. There had always been space in that plot for Mike.
A rumbling behind his car announced the arrival of the gravediggers and their trenching tool. Good they
had it; they would abandon this job if their only tools were picks and shovels. They were grim-faced, these
three sanitation-department employees. These men spent most of their time at the city  indigent  graveyard
on Hart's Island. Mike had been out there occasionally, fussing over the grid map in an effort to locate the
remains of one unfortunate soul or an-other. It was a bleak place, with a  mocking  view  of  the  waters  of
Long Island Sound, gay with sailboats and sun. The men who worked there looked like moles.
Mike started his car and began leading the procession into the  cemetery.  He  stopped  at  the  office  and
showed a tight-faced manager his EO. "You got it," was all the manager said. He held out a book for Mike
to sign. Then there was a disclaimer form, and certifications for the two bureaucrats. They read their forms
carefully and applied their precise bureaucratic signatures.
The little procession got underway again, moving down a wet, abandoned road,  almost  a  path.  On  both
sides opulent monuments loomed like watchers from the pages of some dangerous old romance.
Mike soon stopped his car. The trencher ground  its  gears  and  the  three  sanitmen  piled  down  from  the
cab. "Let's start digging," Mike said. Then he added in an undertone, "There's three fifths of Chivas in my
trunk for you guys, so drawing this gig isn't a total wipeout."
There was an immediate lift in their mood. One of them smiled,  another  gave  a  satisfied  grunt.  "That's
gonna feel good, man," the third and most articulate said. They set about their labor with something close to
gusto. From inside the car the two bureaucrats watched grimly. They had  done  most  of  their  work;  they
were afraid that they were going to be cheated.
Mike had been in the business too long to do that to city employees. "Listen," he said as he got back into
the car, "you folks want your fees in cash or goods? I got scotch in the trunk or three nickels apiece in my
wallet. Take your choice."
"Our fees always come in cash," the coroness said. "We aren't allowed to take goods." Mike counted her
out three fives.
The health inspector took liquor.
Outside the trenching tool started up with a roar and began digging away.
So everybody was happy, everybody was willing to work.  Most  times  Mike  wouldn't  have  given  these
people anything, and nothing would have been expected, but in the wet of a miserable afternoon it was only
fair.
He and the two officials sat in the car while the gravedig-gers did their business, cursing and using their
tool like a weapon, spattering mud  over  the  gravestone,  a  simple  but  expensive  piece  of  Carrara  marble
engraved with FRANKLIN APPLE,  DECEMBER  11,  1894—JULY  12,  1983.  Not  even  an  R.I.P.  The
trenching  tool,  a  small  tractor  with  a  device  on  it  like  a  huge  chain  saw,  rattled  and  swayed,  its  teeth
crunch-ing down into the earth. In fifteen minutes a goodly hill of soil had piled up beside it.
At  last  the  men  went  to  work  with  shovels.  Normally  on  an  exhumation  this  was  when  you  came
speeding  up  in  your  car,  jumped  out,  and  peered  down  into  the  grave.  Not  this  time.  Mike  had  learned

respect for the Night Church. Best to assume it was always right next to him. The coroness, for example.
Or one of the gravediggers. Or the assistant DA who had given him a hard time.
" Yo," one of the men called from inside the grave.
"Let's go, folks, this is what we came for."
They got out into drifting mist. Mud oozed under Mike's feet, sucking at his overshoes. He huddled deep
into his trenchcoat, his old snap-brim faithfully keeping his bald spot safe from the elements.
At the bottom of the grave was a steel coffin cover. At least the funeral home had done a good job, and
buried what it had said it would bury. Many a dearly beloved got prayed over in  steel  and  mahogany  but
went down in pine; it was a popular ripoff.
The wind moaned in the trees, and rain steamed on the car headlights that illuminated the scene. In  the
depths of the grave the steel gleamed in the flashlight glare. "Pull the damn thing off, boys," Mike said.
They got a rope through the hooks on the sides of the heavy coffin  cover  and  raised  it  on  their  winch.
Now the coffin itself lay exposed, clean and gunmetal gray, with raindrops beading on its polished surface.
"Go ahead," Mike said. His witnesses stood beneath umbrellas on the far side of  the  grave,  which  was
the windward side. If there was a ripe corpse in there they were going to want to move upwind with Mike
in a hurry.
The coffin was locked, and nobody had the key. Mike thought of it lying in Mr. Apple's living room. One
by one the screws  holding the locking mechanism were removed. When the  last  of  them  came  out  there
was a hermetic hiss. That had been one well-sealed coffin. "It's ripe," the coro-ness called.
"Come around here. It doesn't smell so bad." The um-brellas bobbed in the mist and soon the two officials
were beside Mike. "Okay, open it up."
The gravediggers started to lift the lid. They hesitated, dug their feet in as if it was heavier than it should
be, then heaved it back.
The coroness screamed. The Health Department inspec-tor made a sharp sound between his teeth. Mike
knew that this moment was going to haunt him for the rest of his life. He had  just  encountered  his  worst
murder. He was more than a little surprised; he had expected either cinder blocks or Mr. Titus, alias Apple.
The spectacle before him was the kind of thing every homicide professional secretly dreads, the one so bad
it gets past all your defenses. You know you will be spending nights with it from now on, seeing that frozen
scream again and again, hearing the awful ripping sound the fingernails made when they popped out of the
coffin lid.
"I'm  sorry,"  Mike  said  into  the  silence.  Down  in  the  grave  one  of  the  diggers  covered  his  face  with
mud-gloved hands. Another looked up toward Mike, or perhaps past him toward God. Or maybe just to see
a little sky. "Hold it, guys, I'm comin' down." Mike descended their ladder, slipping once on a muddy rung.
The grave had the same sweet smell that had come from the foxholes of the dead in Korea. Foul sweet.
"Poor  bastard.  Coulda  at  least  knocked  him  out."  Mike  tried  to  see  the  face,  but  the  car  lights  didn't
penetrate that far. He fumbled for his penlight.
"No shit, man," one of the diggers said. "I wish I hadn't seen this." His voice was awed to softness. A lot
of  people  who  work  with  human  death  do  not  fulfill  the  common  mythology  and  become  hard.  They
become very kind. Suf-fering respects itself.
The victim's fingers had been hooked into the coffin lid so tightly that the whole corpse had at first risen
up, then fallen  back  as  the  fingernails  came  loose.  Black  stains  covered  the  shredded  rayon  upholstery.
Blood from those scratching, clawing fingers.
With just the penlight there was no way to distinguish features.
"Get  the  big  flash  from  the  back  of  my  car,"  Mike  called  up  to  the  bureaucrats.  In  the  meantime  he
played his pen-light into the coffin. The mess it revealed told exactly what it was like to die at the bottom of
your own grave. It was very, very hard. The eyes, bulging open, had sunk to black holes; the mouth, spread
in a  last,  anguished  gasp,  was  all  teeth  and  bitten,  shredded  lips.  The  corpse  was  so  new  that  all  the
suffering was still there, in the eloquence and humanity of the frozen scream.
Policemen get good at pretending to be hard, but inside they slowly transform through the years, until the
cruelty of human beings begins to seem a monstrous defect in the species, more pitiful than bad. They start
seeing criminals and victims alike as cogs in a great wheel of human failure. Need and greed grind them all
to pulp, weak and strong, good and bad.
"Cops and clowns are sad men," Harry Goodwin once had said deep into a bottle of Chivas, "and priests
are better off dead." Mike recalled his own laughter. But now he didn't feel any of the irony or sadness of
the remark. After last night he could feel only one powerful emotion—fear. And this new horror added to it
in a particularly ugly way. Mike could imagine himself dying slowly at the bottom of a grave.
The health officer came scrambling down with the flash-light, but Mike had had enough. Let the homicide

boys identify the poor sucker, that's what they were paid for.
"I'm gonna call this goddamn mess in," Mike said to the people around him. "Anybody wanna throw up,
just do it outside of where people are gonna have to walk. All hell's gonna break loose around here in a few
minutes."
Mike didn't know of a ten code for burial alive, so he talked it. "This is Inspector  Banion.  Location:  All
Souls  Cemetery,  Roadway  W-3,  Gravesite  E-144.  I  have  a  DOA  buried  alive.  Please  respond  with  a
homicide workup."
The  radio  crackled  back  acknowledgment.  Mike  sat  star-ing  at  the  hand  holding  the  microphone.  Old
hand.  Age  spotted,  especially  on  the  back.  Busted  thumbnail  from  that  bout  trying  to  repair  Mary's
hairdryer. The tears he had felt coming passed down  his  cheeks  just  about  on  schedule.  He  wiped  them
away fast, trying to replace this big, nameless feeling with something he could  understand  and  cope  with,
like anger or outrage. Whoever the poor devil was, he did not deserve to die like that.
Sirens  rose.  Fast  work.  New  York  City  cops  are  the  best  in  the  world  at  getting  through  traffic.
Especially  with  the  new  hee-haw  sirens  making  counterpoint  to  the  old-fash-ioned  waiters  some  of  the
EMS meatwagons still use. Mike could count the cars by their sirens. Six squad cars. A large segment of
the  precinct  was  turning  out.  The  Banion  legend  was  still  very  much  alive,  at  least.  And  this  particular
discovery would not do it any damage.
Mike got out of his car and stood in the rain as Max and his lady sergeant trotted up. Their faces  were as
gray as the afternoon light. "Hello, Inspector. You sure it's not Apple?"
"Looks like a younger man in there."
"Any ID?"
"Wearing a cheap doubleknit suit. I didn't look in the pockets." He paused a moment, too stunned to talk.
His heart almost exploded in his chest. "Oh, holy God, I must be gettin' old! I know that suit!"
Max started to say something but Mike was running back to the grave, to the place where that poor jerk
was  buried.  He  clambered  down  and  grabbed  the  flashlight  from  the  health  inspector,  who  gave  it  up
gratefully. He looked sick. The gravediggers were huddled at the edge of the hole, shivering. The coroness
was off vomiting.
Terry. You poor, innocent man. Terry.
"Max," he shouted in rage and sorrow, "call  in  a  revised  bulletin  on  Terry  Quist.  Change  the  goddamn
thing from missing person to homicide."
Max turned and disappeared past the edge of the grave. Mike looked down at his friend, looked long and
hard. And he vowed vengeance.
Another man might have wanted to be alone at this point, or at least to spend some appreciable time in a
bar, but Mike Banion went from being frightened to being downright mad. He was going to get the bastards
who had done this no matter what it took. And no  matter  who  they  had  on  their  side.  If  he  had  to  face
Satan himself to do it, he damn well would.
The Night Church might be monstrous and terrifying, but this cruel murder showed it was also full of the
petty viciousness of any criminal organization. Mike could under-stand that. He could feel contempt for it.
He'd like  to  find  some  cop  who  was  a  member  of  the  thing  and  detail  him  to  go  down  and  bag  poor
Terry's body.
Police vehicles kept arriving. There were a dozen of them here,  with  men  hurrying  to  the  just-searchlit
graveside  with  their  equipment,  cameras,  and  crime  scene  tapes,  and  all  the  other  paraphernalia  that
modern detection techniques im-pose on police officers.  Mike  returned  to  his  car,  tossing  away  the  stale
cigar stub as he went. Once inside he lit a fresh one, glorying in the warm, aromatic smoke. A fresh cigar is
a nice thing when you're all twisted up inside. It can untwist you like nothing else on this earth.
Max joined him.
Mike had to talk. "They buried Quist alive. Jesus, they buried  him alive!" Now it all came pouring out.
"In all my career  I've never seen that. I mean, he was just a small-time jerkoff reporter.  Nothin'!  What'd
they do it for? Fun?"
"Rough, Mike. Real rough. But we're gonna get 'em now. Because of this."
"Don't be too sure, Lieutenant. We got a long hard ways to go yet."
"It seems to me," said Max's assistant, "that we need to physically find this alias. Apple's the key."
"His name is probably Franklin Titus."
"How'd you get there, Mike?"
"Never mind, Max. I been burnin' the midnight oil." * "Well, if we have a name, we ought to be able to find
our man easily enough."
"Okay, Sarge, you go do that. Go do it!"

"Relax, Mike, she's as committed as you are."
"Oh, hell, I'm sorry. Just think it out. Obviously Titus is the best thing we could get. But he's the last thing
we're gonna  get. You can put money  on  that.  He's  king  of  the  mountain.  We  won't  find  him  till  all  the
people in front of him have been knocked aside."
Silence followed these remarks. Sitting there  in  his  car,  listening  to  the  rain  on  the  roof,  Mike  realized
what  he  had  to  do.  It  was  simple  enough.  He  got  out,  said  his  goodbyes  to  his  people,  passed  out  the
promised scotch, and returned alone to the car.
He was going to stay real cozy with Mary from now on. She was the ticket in the front door. His own
lovely wife. Serves you right, marrying for looks.
Damn you, Mary, I'm gonna fry you!
Okay, Mr. Detective, fry her hot but move cool. Move very cool. She's one dangerous lady, Mary Titus
Banion.
He drove along the old boulevard, past Farrell's, past the skating rink that had been  a  disco  and  before
that a ballroom, and way long ago a movie theater. Before that, in the dimness of Mike's boyhood,  it  had
been a grassy field, the kind of place where kids went to smoke and drink, and explore one another's bodies
in the summer night.
"Death always sneaks up on us," Father Goodwin said. "Death is the greatest surprise of all."
Mike felt exhausted. The old body was yearning for its supper. Mary would have  a  meal  waiting.  First
there would be a nice cold martini, the kind of drink that worked. Mary would stand in the doorway to the
kitchen, smoking one of her Benson & Hedges cigarettes and talking softly to him. Mary was so extremely
sexy. He thought of the places she was curved, and how astonishingly smooth her skin was, the way there
was a sound like the whisper of snow when he moved his hands along her thighs. He liked how she smelled
at the end of the day, Lanvin powder mixed with a sugges-tion of sweat. Were women really as innocent
as they seemed of the fact that they carried the world? Even the bitches and the wrong ones.
By the time he arrived home the  rain  had  become  a  deluge.  He  operated  the  garage-door  opener  and
parked his car beside Mary's Audi. The woman had style; she looked great in that automobile.
"Mike?"
"Yeah, I'm here."
The door creaked. Footsteps clattered on the paved floor of the garage. She appeared,  her  dress  softly
dotted pink, her chestnut hair flowing down to her shoulders. He got out of the car.
He put his big, hot paw into her cool fingers.
She closed her eyes for a moment, as if a blow had passed close.
He realized as he followed her into the house that she wasn't going to ask how he was, or even kiss him.
She  was  afraid  of  her  husband.  Behind  the  sex  and  the  habits  of  living  together,  she  must  feel  him  an
absolute stranger, close only in the way people on a bus are close.
"Jonathan's not here yet. I called him an hour ago."
"Why?"
"You wanted to see him tonight. You wanted to talk about the wedding."
"Hard  to  believe."  He  felt  heavier,  let  out  a  tired  sigh.  There  was  a  wedding  planned.  He  had  once
wanted to give Jonathan some pointers about how to handle a wife. Funny.
"Forget it. He doesn't need advice from me. Relax me, girl."
She handed Mike his martini. It was exactly right, as usual. Thank God for alcohol.
"I got another break on the case," he heard himself say. He hardly even glanced at her, but he made it
count.
Inside there was a smell of steak broiling with onions.  Despite  everything,  he  felt  for  her  a  passion  so
beyond his ability to suppress that it seemed a kind of tragedy.
"I'm glad you came back. I need you." She came to him, nestled against his chest. Then  she  kissed  his
cheek, sought his lips. "Can you forget about the case for a while, do you think?"
Never, you witch. Beautiful, beautiful witch.
"Is anything going on downstairs, Michael Banion?"
"Find out for yourself."
She brushed her hand against the front of his trousers. "Shall I get ready for you?"
He kissed her neck. It smelled just as he had thought it would, of Lanvin powder and sweat. Sweet and
sour. She stroked him. "I'd better go cut off supper. I'll follow you up."
While she was in the kitchen he went up the narrow stairway to their bedroom and with fumbling, shaking
hands took off his clothes. He arranged them so that his pistol was just under a fold of his jacket, ready to
grab.

He  looked  at  his  nakedness  in  the  mirror,  his  powerful  shoulders  and  neck,  the  suggestion  of  dignity
offered by his graying temples, the bulging swoop of his gut.
Mary opened the door suddenly, light flowing in behind her, tripping softly and soft in her own nakedness,
her thatch swimming in shadow between ghostly thighs, her arms sur-rounding him and pressing him back
toward the bed, her hair tickling his chest.
But  when  he  closed  his  eyes  he  saw  coffins  and  bloody  clawmarks,  and  heard  a  man  howling  in  his
grave. He almost lost it. He opened his eyes quickly.
Mary worked on him dutifully, he had to give her that. She fondled and kissed and rubbed. He closed his
eyes again, remembering all the girls he had known who had turned him on. The best  was  Beth  because
she was so sweet and innocent except in the bedroom, where she was wild.
Mary looked down at him, trembling to a fine internal rhythm. Only all was not right: this time Mike was
waiting  for  something,  and  he  found  it.  That  familiar  faraway  look  she  got  in  her  eyes  at  moments  of
seeming passion was not ecstasy, it was detachment.
She began to act, biting her lips and moaning a little. Her tempo increased. Suddenly, still pounding, she
bent down to him and began kissing his face. Her fingernails dug into his shoulders.
A week ago he would have interpreted this as extreme excitement, but this time he understood the truth:
she was trying to get him to reach climax as quickly as she could.
No doubt that was always why she wanted the topside position—so she could control the tempo and get
it over with as fast as possible.
But, Lord, she knew how to make it feel good. He began seeing her through the haze of higher pleasure;
she was as pretty as a picture. "Mike," she gasped, "Mike, oh, Mike!"
He  came  and  she  shook  and  trembled  and  fell  down  on  him  whispering,  "Thank  you,  thank  you,  you
beautiful man," and then became still. Her thanks were sincere too, he knew. He had been quick.
After it was over they lay as usual side by side. Then she sat up and lit a cigarette, drawing her knees up
to her chin. There was in her face something scary that he did not want to see, something that looked like
suppressed glee.
"Jonathan must be at Patricia's apartment," she said. "I guess he'll stay the night."
Mike did not answer her. She had not failed herself this night. She was a very skillful deceiver—so good
that her skill itself gave her away. She had not provided him with so much as a hint, not even a flicker of
light on the way to the truth.
When she went down to complete their dinner his mind began drifting back and forth among the elements
of the case. Terry Quist. Franklin Titus. Those wicked, insane books in Titus's house.
The anti-man to come . . . and his father, the monstrum. And beautiful, sensual Mary.
Somewhere between them was his answer, his whole picture, his truth. Somewhere between the woman
and the grave and Hell.
Chapter Twenty
JONATHAN WOULD HAVE clawed out through the sides of the van if he had been able. "It's a damn
cage! They've caged us like a couple of chimps." He prowled the luxurious interior, checking the door, the
walls, feeling for some opening, some weakness.
They accelerated, decelerated, turned corners, until he lost all sense of direction.
"Sit down, Jonathan."
"If I could get this door open we might be able to jump when they slow down."
"There'll be a car following. They're very well orga-nized."
He went to her. "We have to try."
"We have to think about what's happening to us, about What might happen when they open the door."
A  sudden  change  in  the  tire  sounds  told  Jonathan  some-thing.  "We're  crossing  the  Fifty-Ninth  Street
bridge, going into Manhattan."
"Jonathan, you and I are vulnerable. We feel like ordinary people, and I doubt if we have the resources to
deal with whatever we're facing. We could even be brainwashed."
"They  picked  the  wrong  man  for  brainwashing.  I  can't  be  brainwashed—I  know  too  much  about  the
brain."

The van slowed, turned another corner.
"We're liable to stop soon, Jonathan. Whether you can be brainwashed or not, I want you to—"
He hated that idea. "I can't be!"
"Just listen. I want you to remember one thing at all costs. We may be mutated in a thousand  different
ways, but we can live ordinary lives if we try. We love each other, and we want as normal and human a
life as we can have." She put her arms around him. "If we forget that, they win!"
"What's the game, though? What do they win?"
She sobbed. "Just remember what we want."
The van stopped. He found her lips with his own. A cheerful young man opened the doors and with firm,
gentle hands drew them apart. "We're home now," he said. "Please come inside."
"The hell I will," Jonathan replied. He broke away, leaping down from the van  and  managing  about  ten
feet along the sidewalk before he was surrounded by more of them than he could resist. The most pleasant
of them, a smiling, pin-neat man in a crisp linen suit, showed Jonathan a vicious little knife.
"There  is  also  the  way  of  pain,"  he  said  affably,  shoulder-ing  Jonathan  between  two  of  his  friends.
"You're best off cooperating."
The house was shockingly familiar. He  stood  looking  up  at  the  aged  brownstone  edifice,  decorated  by
rows  of  glaring  gargoyles.  He  had  always  assumed  that  it  housed  university  data  storage.  To  his
knowledge, he had never been beyond the basement labs.
To the east little golden clouds floated above the skyline. Dawn was coming. The house itself was subtly
transformed. The wide bay windows, which had been backed by dark curtains, now stood open.
A bell rang, and sleepy children's voices filtered out.
This  was  the  Titus  School,  the  secret  training-ground  of  the  Night  Church.  Jonathan  and  Patricia  had
grown up here.
He  was  hustled  into  the  foyer  where  Patricia  was  being  ushered  along  by  one  of  the  most  fantastic
creatures Jona-than had ever beheld.
Instead of the usual black broadcloth this nun wore a rich maroon silk habit. Her  wimple  was  starched
and gleaming, black instead of white. She was beautifully made up with eyeshadow and lipstick. The small
foyer was filled with the scent of musky perfume.
She supported Patricia, who dragged along the floor as if fainting. When she saw Jonathan, though, she
made a visible effort to pull herself together. She looked at him through haunted, tear-streaked eyes. "Don't
you remember her, Jonathan?" she shouted. The nun began hurrying Patricia toward the rear of the foyer.
"She's Sister Saint John, the one I put up in my  apartment,  the  one  who  raised  me  from  the  time  I  was
thirteen!" Her voice echoed, desolate.
"Patricia!" Strong hands grabbed his arms. He kicked. He had to get to her. "Let me go!"
"I remember now! She was at the Spirit too! She was there with Mary! Oh, God, help me! Help me!"
His ears roared, his blood thundered in his veins. "Patricia!"
A great clang. An iron door had closed on her.
He had not counted on them being separated. The sudden, irrevocable fact of it brought a new wave of
effort, and he struggled against the men who were holding him, screaming into the silence that had followed
the clang of the door. "I love you! I love you!"
His own shouts were absorbed by the cavernous hall. "Jonathan," a voice said when he stopped, "we're
going to take you up to your room now."
They didn't release their grip even a little as they walked him across the marble floor. He could see that
the hall was circular, with fluted columns supporting a small interior dome. Dim light glowed through round
windows in the dome. At the rear was a sweeping horseshoe staircase that embraced a tiny, wire-enclosed
elevator.
The car was waiting behind its brass grill. Two of the men pushed Jonathan in. The three of them filled
the small space.
They  rose  in  smooth  silence,  passing  up  in  the  cage  until  the  floor  of  the  lobby  seemed  seventy  feet
below. There was a click and it stopped. The men opened a door on the far side. Beyond was a corridor,
softly lit with lamps in wall sconces. The walls were cream; the floor was thickly car-peted in tan.
"You'll remember the senior men's floor," said one of the men as the three of them left the elevator.
"No, I won't,"  Jonathan  muttered.  He  really  didn't  want  to  listen  to  that  sort  of  muck.  They  were  not
going to use disorientation techniques to confuse him. It was going to be a  lot  harder  than  that.  His  mind
turned once again to Patricia. "When will I see her again?"
"At your wedding."
"Surely that's been canceled."

"No, it's going ahead just exactly as you planned."
No matter what else might happen, at least he was certain to see her again. "Here's your room, Jonathan.
Your uncle will be in shortly." Before he could resist or say another  word  they  had  thrust  him  through  a
door and closed it behind him.
"No!" He grappled with the knob, hammered the unyield-ing metal. He kicked the door so viciously it sent
a  shock  all  the  way  up  his  leg  and  caused  him  to  fall  backward  onto  the  floor,  which  he  hit  with  a
bone-rattling crash. For a moment, he lay still. Then  he  went  to  the  window,  but  found  he  couldn't  even
raise the sash to get his hands on the bars beyond it.
When he looked around for something to use to break the glass, he was frozen with astonishment.
He knew this room.
He knew it perfectly, utterly, completely.
It was his room, his own boyhood room. The Hallicrafters was there on the desk, with the model Gemini
capsule sitting on it. His bookcase held all his wonderful old friends, Tom Sawyer,  The Once  and  Future
King, the Complete Shake-speare, the Mary Renault novels, Life's Picture History of the Earth.
The bedspread was the one Mother had made, with his name embroidered in red on a background of the
Orion constellation. His telescope stood at the foot of the bed under a dust cover, just where he had left it
when—
When?
A long time ago. He knelt down, gingerly removed the cover.  There  it  was,  his  beloved  Celestron,  the
treasure of his youth.
It had been a long time since he had thought of astronomy, of those wonderful autumn nights up in  the
Connecticut woods with Jerry  Cochran,  climbing  a  hillside  and  searching  out  Wolf  457  or  Saturn  or  the
Crab Nebula. Jerry. His boyhood idol. Tall,  cool,  a  brilliant  scientific  mind.  Jerry's  seven  years'  seniority
made him almost godlike  to  the  younger  boy.  If  Jonathan  had  modeled  himself  on  anybody,  it  had  been
Jerry Cochran.
We walked the star path, he and I.
He grew very still as the awesome power of memory began pouring his true past up from his depths. He
remem-bered his old  friend  with  almost  sacred  vividness,  his  brown  eyes,  his  great  broad  smile  and  the
sword-sharpness of his mind.
"Jerry." He touched the Celestron, his fingers caressing its controls. What  wonders  we  found  with  this
thing, you and I. "Earth is just a green bubble in the void, Jonathan. Less than a speck of dust.  Out  here,
lost, falling toward the unknown." You were wise for your years, Jerry, so very wise.
The room was a museum of his own past. There at the bottom of the bookshelf were The Winter Noisy
Book  and  The  Fire  Engine  Book  and  all  the  other  books  of  babyhood,  Mother  Goose  and  The
Encyclopedia of Things and Hiawa-tha and Olly Olly Oxen Free.
And in the big drawer under the bed—pull it  out—yes,  there  were  his  models,  the  wonderful,  intricate
airplanes constructed of balsa and paper, flown by rubber bands at high summer evening when the breeze
was still. His Rascal 18 racer, his P-51 that never flew well because it was too heavily doped, even in the
remains of Jerry's Cessna 182 that had met fatefully with the rose trellis in—in—
Uncle's front yard?
Who was Uncle, and where was that bungalow full of furniture a little boy mustn't touch?
Never mind that now. He went to the Hallicrafters, turned it on. The heterodyne wail of shortwave met
his ears as he twisted the knob back and forth. Yes,  here  was  the  BBC  and  there  was  Cuba  and  there
Radio Moscow, and down along there were the Africans and the Arabs, and in the middle the rest of the
Europeans, Netherlands with its concerts and Germany with its language lessons, and France and Italy and
Spain.
Oh, yes, on a thousand deepest nights Jerry and I were at this radio, turning the dial ever so slowly from
wonder to wonder.
Let's hear what Khrushchev's got to say about the elec-tion.
The Royal Shakespeare is doing Measure for Measure on the BBC tonight.
We don't want to miss the Cuban-English—Language News.
We were two adventurers of the mind. And what a won-derful time we had . .  .  when  I  was  normal.
When I was myself.
But there were other times.
"Let me out of here! I can't stand it in here!"
"I see you're beginning to come back to us."
"Who—"

He  was  a  dried-up,  incredibly  ancient  man.  Only  his  bright  green  eyes  had  any  life.  His  face  was  a
badland of creases, age-rotted skin stretched across sharp old bones. He wore a beautifully tailored black
suit and a silver-gray silk shirt. His head was framed by a white vapor of hair. On his fingers there were
complex rings. Jonathan saw skulls and intricate cabbalistic symbols in the gold,  and  ruby  eyes  and  open
jaws. Only his thumbs were without jewelry.
"My dear nephew." He opened his arms. Behind him in the hallway stood a young  man  easily  six  foot
five, his arms folded, watching from the shadows.
Jonathan did not move toward the little gargoyle with the open arms. He had no uncle.
Patricia's words came back to him: We may be mutated in a thousand different ways, but we can  live
ordinary lives if we try.
Much wisdom in that.
"You act like a cornered rat, Jonathan. I must confess I'm disappointed. I expected more of the Prince."
Crazy. But backed up by a powerful guard. And the windows behind Jonathan were barred.
"Frightened of me. How embarrassing. Am I too ugly for you?" He raised his hands, which arthritis had
turned to oak gnarls. There was in this man a density of menace. "You find me ugly, you of all people. You
may have a handsome appearance, but inside you are far uglier than I!"
"Get away from me."
"You are the monstrum."
"You need a psychiatrist, you're a paranoid schizo-phrenic. I can help you. I want to help you."
The sparks of eyes twinkled. "On the contrary, Jonathan, it is I who can help you. You must prepare, you
know. The Ritual Marriage is tonight."
Jonathan backed away from the eerie old man.
"Let me touch you, nephew." The hands, trembling, came out toward him. Jonathan cast around, grabbed
the radio, raised it over his head.
"Stop! Don't come any nearer!"
The old man stepped aside and his guard began moving into the room.
Jonathan hurled the Hallicrafters with all his might—and the guard caught it,  rocking  back  on  his  heels
and drawing a gasp of breath. He stood with the enormous radio in his hands, looking at Jonathan. Slowly,
he smiled.
"Jerry!"
He  put  the  radio  down  and  locked  Jonathan  in  a  strong  embrace.  "Be  careful,"  the  old  man  said.
"Remember, It beat a man to death just a few hours ago."
What a lie. The man had hardly even been knocked unconscious. "I am a human being, so don't call me
'It!' And I barely touched that man, as you well know."
"You crushed his chest and broke his back in three places. You all but tore his head off and popped his
skull."
"And you are not human, you are the monstrum."
"Shut up! Stop calling me that idiotic name!" He thought of the brain scans he had done of  himself  and
Patricia, the incredible results. Monstrum. So that was what he was called. And she too. She had the same
brain-wave pattern. Monstrum.
He turned his gaze to Jerry, just as he had when he had needed help as a boy. Friend and teacher, Jerry
had also been his bodyguard. A confused welter of memories flooded him as he looked at his friend.
The old man  soon  shattered  the  moment.  "Come  on,  Jerry.  Leave  him  to  his  memories  for  now."  He
indicated an envelope on the desk. "There's a letter that will explain a great deal. 1 suggest you read it."
They began to leave the room. "Wait!" Jonathan cried, but before he could stop them the door was closed
and locked.
Jonathan was furious. This time he lunged at the window, smashing the glass with his hands, uncaring of
gashes, and grappled with the bars. He yanked them and yanked them and kicked them and tried to spread
them. And was defeated by them.
He picked up the Hallicrafters, which Jerry had placed neatly back on the table, and threw it against the
door. It shattered into glittering electronic bits but the door did not move.
What in hell was going to happen next? He realized that this playing on his emotions, dehumanizing him
by calling him  "It,"  suggesting  that  he  was  brutal  beyond  his  own  self-understanding,  was  all  part  of  an
attempt to break him. And a much more skillful attempt than he had expected. But he told himself that he
understood what was being done to him, and his understanding would preserve him.
We love each  other,  and  we want as normal and  human  a  life  as  we  can  have.  Patricia  had  said

that. He repeated it to himself like a prayer.
He longed for her strength. If he could just spend one more minute in her arms he would have the energy
to cope with another year of the old man's weird emotional games.
"What have you done with her?" His voice was absorbed by the walls. Frantically,  aware  of  how  wild
animals must feel when first captured, he tested them. Behind the familiar wallpaper of soaring rockets and
moons and Saturns and floating spacemen was plaster. And from the solid thunk  when  he  tapped  it,  the
plaster was spread on concrete. The room was more tightly made than any prison.
It was his old room, all right. The apartment he remem-bered was just a hypnotic suggestion. This was
where he had grown up, this prison.
As the realization sunk in, a change began to come over him. The curtains that hid his past were being
made to part by the glut of familiar associations.
Nineteen Rayne Street was the Titus School, where he had been a privileged student. The Prince, they
had called him. With a cold shudder he remembered his own tragedy: he was a seasonal king, doomed to
die in the very act of procreation.
The most excruciating sorrow filled him. If that was true then all their dreams of happiness, of escaping
to the world of regular people, were hopeless. He had learned at his mother's knee—there will come a day,
a glorious day. . . .
He  looked  at  the  letter  the  old  man  had  referred  to.  Should  he  read  it,  or  did  it  contain  some  further
confusing trick? He picked it up.
On the envelope were three words: "For my son."
It was from Mother!
He opened it. The words leaped at him like fiery beasts, tearing away the last vestiges  of  the  hypnosis
which had held him in its thrall.
When the letter said "remember yourself," he did just that.
He remembered his pride in being the monstrum, and his love of the demons.
"I will  speak  to  you  in  the  voice  of  the  dry  leaves,"  Belial  had  said.  As  Jonathan  read  of  his  vision  it
returned to him: Belial, so hideous that he was beautiful, his unblinking eyes filled with so much intelligence
that it was shattering to look into them. Belial was freezing wind on a winter's night, moonlight playing on
empty snow, clear space pierced by stars.
Belial was a skull, brown and cracked, bursting with worms.
"Mother! What have you done to me? Mother! Mother!"
He rushed through the rest of the letter, squinting at it as if the words might jump off the page and pierce
his eyes. At the end he threw it to the floor, turned away from it. Remem-brance blazed in his mind:
He and Patricia belonged to the Night Church, had been born into it and raised by it.
He remembered loving it. Yes, but he had been mad then. He could not believe in something so obviously
evil ... so dangerously crazy.
Technology  had  lifted  the  Night  Church  to  immense  power.  With  their  bacteria  they  could  certainly
destroy the world.
And they are mad, as I was until I began walking the path of ordinary human beings.
No matter how bad he is there is something sacred in every man on earth, something deeply  right  that
grants him and all his fellows their lives, and seems to suggest that they procreate, and  fill  the  earth  with
their kind.
In the old days Jonathan  had  thought  of  human  beings  as  having  less  of  a  claim  to  life  than  even  the
lowest animals, because of all the species mankind was the most defec-tive.
He did not think that now. In hiding Jonathan among ordinary people Mother  had  awakened  in  him  his
own ordinariness, had made him realize that he was only, finally, and utterly human—and that was a very
fine thing to be.
Even as these thoughts raced through his mind he felt the monstrum within him stirring in its fitful sleep,
the oozing, black coils of its evil shifting wakefully in his soul.
It could not wake up on its own, but they could wake it up, Mother and Jerry and Uncle Franklin. They
could and they would.
He had to get out of here! If he was so brilliant surely he could find some way to escape.
He  recalled  the  flickering  strangeness  of  his  own  brain-wave  patterns  as  they  raced  across  the
oscilloscope.
Like all the beasts, you will do what your nature demands of you.
He had seen his strangeness in the equipment he had himself designed.
He and Jerry had worked side by side in their labs. "You tend to the future," Uncle had said. "You  are

creating a teaching machine for your son." He put his arm on Jerry's shoulder. "He  will  take  care  of  the
past."
The coldest, most hideous feeling came over Jonathan as memories of exactly what was done in Jerry's
lab came back to him. Disease vectors. Delivery systems. Contagion inten-sities.
A Titus School graduate had joined the U.S. Army in 1975, and delivered over the next five  years  vast
amounts of classified data on biological weapons.
Anthrax 4 median, which killed in twelve hours.
Parrot fever mutant 202, death in four hours.
Bubonic positive 1, death in thirty minutes.
He  suddenly  had  the  most  poignant  impression  of  his  life  in  Queens—the  simple  joy  of  having  a
hamburger at Far-rell's. Down the counter some schoolkids would be giggling over Cokes. A couple of bus
drivers would be huddled in a booth. Somebody might play "Lay Lady Lay" on the juke-box.
"Jerry, you can't kill them! You haven't got any right!"
Jonathan had a new mission, and not much life left in which to fulfill it.
"We're wrong! We are not the law!"
"You will reacquire the moral precision that has always supported you," Mother had written in her letter.
"You will know the rightness of our cause." And she had written: "The earth's will is toward evolution. It is
your privilege to enact it."
"No!  We  don't  know  anything  about  the  will  of  the  planet!  We're  mistaken,  we're  doing  something
terrible!"
Bubonic positive 2 had killed in thirty seconds, but it could  not  live  outside  a  human  host.  Transmission
only by physical contact.
"Oh, God! Jerry—let me out of here! Jerry, does bubonic 3 work? Does it work?"
His  memory  was  now  so  clear  that  he  could  almost  see  the  bacterial  colonies  in  the  microscope,
swarming and propa-gating right out of their media.
And he could smell the animal rooms, the sharp scent of fear, the thick odor of sickness. In his mind's eye
he saw the rats, exploding with buboes as soon as they were  exposed  to  bubonic  positive  3,  dying  within
seconds, and the sheep within minutes, ba-a-a, ba-a-a-a-a, as great welts  rose  and  turned  purple  beneath
their coats, then burst as they knelt and vomited and gasped and fell twitching.
And  the  rhesus  monkeys,  brachiating  frantically  in  their  cages,  screaming,  clawing  their  throats  open,
buboes raising their arms so that they looked like they were doing the turkey trot as they scurried about, and
coughing  blood  and  pus  and  dying  amid  their  own  offal,  their  eyes  fixed  on  the  unearthly  figures  who
tormented them, Jerry and his assis-tants in their green isolation suits and helmets.
"Oh,  no.  No!"  He  ran  back  and  forth  across  the  room,  hurling  things  to  the  floor,  grappling  with  the
mattress, pointlessly searching the desk for a phone.
There was no phone.
They had been about to carry out a human test of bubonic 3—murder somebody, just to test—
My dear God, what have we done? He asked, but he knew perfectly well. Jerry  had  created  from  the
bacillus Yersinia pestis a mutant, hyperactive strain  that  reproduced  itself  almost  instantaneously.  It  was
respiratory, spread through the air. It could be delivered by simply propagating it from a small plane.
Vector analysis indicated that 21.235 hours would  elapse  from  propagation  to  complete  contagion  of  a
given popula-tion. After the first one million  individuals  the  rate  of  trans-fer  would  be  very  rapid,  with  a
potential of seven hundred and fifty million further infections within another fifty-three hours.
Jonathan wanted to help them, to somehow warn them. But Jonathan was a seasonal king come to the
end of his time.
He heard the thundering music that would awaken the monstrum, remembered how it felt to change.
"Oh, God, you've got to help me! You've got to get me out of here! Please, somehow, plea-a-se!"
The disease would be fatal in  98.237  percent  of  the  cases  and  so  damaging  in  the  remainder  that  the
individuals would succumb to other diseases, especially given the chaotic nature of the social infrastructure
in which they would find themselves.
The  memories  rushed  like  fiery,  hurtling  meteors  through  Jonathan's  mind.  His  nightmares  were  a
pleasure compared to this.
Jerry had read a paper to the assembled Scientific Unit of the Night Church: "The causative organism is a
short bacil-lus which often displays bipolar staining with Giemsa stain. The positive 3 form always displays
staining, but the poles reveal flagella under light. The positive 3 is motile."
"Shut up! Shut up!"
"The  incubation  period  varies  from  a  matter  of  seconds  in  a  newborn  human  infant  to  three  to  five

minutes  in  a  healthy  adult  male  of  substantial  volume.  Onset  is  abrupt,  associated  with  deep  chills.
Temperature rises from 41C to 42.5C (106F to 108F). Pulse will be rapid and thready, buboes will appear
upon  elevation  of  temperature.  The  femoral  or  inguinal  lymph  nodes  will  be  the  usual  primary  sites  of
involvement.  The  nodes  will  initially  be  tender  but  firm,  sclerosing  rapidly  and  becoming  filled  with  pus.
Bursting of the nodes indicates that terminal praeludium has commenced."
"Help! Get me out of here! I've got to tell somebody! I've got to warn them!"
Mike! I've got to get word to Mike.
He began a more organized attempt to free himself. Again and again he ran against  the  door,  using  his
own  body  as  a  battering  ram.  It  hurt  when  his  shoulder  impacted  the  metal  but  he  didn't  care.  He  had
overwhelming humanitarian reasons for getting out. The fact that he might break a bone in the process was
of little consequence, as long as it did not prevent him from reaching his goal.
The door clicked.
He was running with all his might when it swept open. He staggered out into the hall and hit the wall.
Strong arms enfolded him. "Cool down, Jonathan. It's all right, you're home, you're safe."
"Let me go! You're crazy, Jerry, you and all the others." The arms tightened around him. "Please, listen to
me. This is all insane."
Jerry put something against his shoulder, something that stung.
"Jerry, you're a good man. A fine man. Best friend—" It got harder to talk. "Best friend  I  ever  .  .  .oh,
Jerry, it's obscene, it's . . ." He realized that he had just been sedated. The hypodermic Jerry had used was
lying on  the  carpet,  glittering  in  the  soft  light.  Jonathan  looked  at  it,  his  mind  seeming  to  sink  into  the
reflections. "Not the plague . . . no . . ."
"Sh, take it easy, guy. Get some sleep."
Jonathan's  mind  tried  a  final  struggle.  I'm  letting  him  drug  me,  put  me  to  sleep!  I  mustn't  sleep,  I
haven't got the time!
Then Jerry picked him up and carried him to his bed.
"Now, just relax, loosen up your muscles, guy. Your  uncle  says  you  need  a  little  rest  before  you  learn
anything more, and I think he's right. Don't you think so?"
"N-n-mmm . . ."
"Sure he is. Sure."
Resistance just wasn't possible. Deadening, black, hostile waves carried Jonathan away.
To the place where the serpent lived. Laughing, lifeless eyes, so cunning, so sensual, so dangerous ...
You are the guilty one, Jonathan, you, you, you. . ..
"Please—"
You will hurt her!
"No!"
You will thrust and crush and tear!
"No, No, NO!"
He sat straight up, sweating, his mouth parched, his hands shaking uncontrollably.
The sun was setting beyond the garden wall, casting warm light into his room. Down below he could hear
the rhythm of fresh-voiced Titus schoolgirls chanting jump-rope rhymes. This was the hour between dinner
and evening study hall, known as the Strolls, when the students had the freedom of the courtyard.
Farther away there were traffic noises, a horn, a shout,  and  ordinary  children  laughing  together  out  on
Sullivan Street.
The sounds of ordinary people. At that moment Jonathan would have cheerfully  traded  places  with  the
smallest, most humble human being in the world. The taste he and Patricia had gotten  of  outside  life  had
been so sweet.
If only they could somehow warn that innocent world of the danger it was in.
Somehow.
He looked down at his own perfect hands. The violence he knew to be in  himself  literally  was  another
creature, coiled beneath his own soft skin. And It did not want to escape from the Night Church.
No, indeed. It wanted to get married!
If It is the beast, the monstrum—then so am I.
I beg to die.

Chapter Twenty-one
PATRICIA  LAY  IN  the  dark  listening  to  footsteps  approach  her  door.  Others  had  come  and  passed.
These stopped.
She bit her clenched fist to keep from screaming.
It is looking for me. It knows I am here. Sometime soon It will come for me.
The door was  tested,  the  door  rattled.  Then  the  footsteps  once  again  retreated  down  the  hall.  Slowly,
carefully, Patri-cia began to breathe again.
When they had been dragging her down to this room she had smelled a thick animal smell coming from
behind a door marked LABORATORIES. And she had heard animal-like screaming.
Had that been the thing that wanted her?
Patricia lay between silk sheets, sweating with terror. Her face was cooled by a fragrant breeze.  Wind
chimes tinkled. She remembered that sound.
Such old friends,  those  chimes.  They  are  in  the  courtyard  elm.  They  rang  and  moaned  and  rustled  all
through her girlhood.
She sat up in the bed. Now she remembered. Sister Saint John had brought her down here, had given her
a shot... .
Forced it on her.
"Jonathan!"
She jumped up and rushed to the door. Then she recoiled. She couldn't go out there! But there  was  an
alternative. One wall of her room overlooked the courtyard. She threw open the French doors.
The yard was full of children, little girls in black jumpers, boys in charcoal blazers and gray pants. There
were easily three dozen of them taking their pleasure in the evening light. These were not the noisy children
of the Queens streets. These children sat in groups or strolled  together.  A  group  of  younger  girls  played
jump rope. On the low wall that separated her room from the yard a sister in red habit sat leading a group
in plainchant: "Aeterne rerum conditor noctem diemque qui regis et temporum, das  tempora ut alleves
fastidium . . . hoc excitatus lucifer solvit polum."
The chant lit darkened halls in Patricia's mind. Aeterne rerum conditor! "Eternal  creator  of  the  world,
who doth guide the day and night and give the times their times to relieve our weariness . . . through Him
awakes the morning star."
The great hymn of the Church, the Song of Lucifer, the Morning Star.
She was no orphan; she hadn't been raised at Our Lady of Victory—if such a piace even existed—she
had grown up here, at the Titus School, and she was the highest princess of the blood.
Such remembrance was brought by those clear young voices! She had sat on that  very  wall,  singing  in
the evening with Sister Saint John and Sister Mary and her classmates . . . Jonathan and his  friend  Jerry
Cochran, and Kathleen and Kevin and Susan. . .. "We've brought you to the senior women's wing," Sister
had told her as she administered the shot. "Your room is just as you left it."
So  true.  She  realized  that  she  had  chosen  exactly  the  same  kind  of  curtains  for  her  apartment  in
Queens—light green silk. Only in Queens she had settled for rayon.
She wanted the rayon curtains!
The sun passed behind the wall. A bell rang and the children began lining up at the boys' and girls' doors.
Such sweet little children.
Her  own  lessons,  thin  Sister  Saint  Julian  rasping  on  about  the  evils  of  humankind,  the  Inquisition,  the
Holocaust, Communism. "In man the animal predominates. And in the world man is himself dominant. But
not for long. This planet does not belong to animals. It has a far greater destiny."
With a force so great it almost made her cry out, Patricia rejected that belief. She had seen too much of
the outside world. There had been bad things, but there had also been much more goodness and decency
than she had ever been allowed to know about.
"The anti-man will be the opposite of man in every way. Where man is degraded, the new species will be

exalted. He will be selfless where man is greedy. And where man is weak, he will be strong. We believers
are the best of a poor lot," Sister Saint Julian had concluded. "Outside these walls there are monsters."
No, Sister. We are the worst of a good lot. As she lay on her bed, memory after memory returned. In all
the flood, one single recollection dominated: it was an image,  quite  terrible,  of  a  wild  ritual  that  had  been
held during her childhood, where she had witnessed the transformation of one Robert Titus Ungar, gangling,
jokey Robbie, into some-thing else. . . .
There had been music and strange dancing and hypnotic words, and poor Robbie, eighteen years old and
very self-conscious, had begun to change. Before them all he had  actually  undergone  an  alteration  of  his
physical body. At first mucus had come out of his nose and mouth, then out of his eyes too. He had gagged
and retched, and then screamed as his skull began to change shape  beneath  his  scalp,  blood  replaced  his
sweat, and awful scales came crinkling out from under his skin.
She slammed her fists into her eyes, trying to rid herself of the ugliness she remembered.
If he had lived he would have been the father of the anti-man.
The ritual was to unleash the creature within the human skin ... for a human body could be nothing more
than a disguise, a sort of wrapping paper for something . . . some-thing . . .
She gasped. Then she shrieked wildly and rushed up and down the room. Monstrum!
She had  to  get  Jonathan  and  get  out  of  here.  But  as  she  paced,  the  room  whirled.  "I'm  still  so  damn
dizzy!" The chimes rang and the complex scent of many flowers waxed the air.
A voice said, "Come now, Patricia, you don't belong out of bed."
"Where's Jonathan? I want Jonathan!"
Sister Saint John also had another name. She was Letty Cochran. Her husband George had been Master
Accountant for the American Church for years. And their son Jerry—he ran those foul-smelling labs in the
basement. "The Cochrans are my best pupils," Uncle Franklin often said.
"Remember," Letty Cochran said. "Patricia, remember who you are."
"I'm me!"
"You are much more than that. You—"
"I know who I want to be. I want to be Jonathan's wife and raise a family, and I want us to live together
the rest of our lives."
The way  Letty  Cochran  looked  at  her,  with  such  a  mixture  of  shock  and  sadness,  filled  Patricia  with
foreboding.
The foreboding focused into a quite specific memory. She was kneeling at an altar rail. She was trying to
say the rosary. The beads broke apart in her hands and scattered all over the floor of the sanctuary.
"My rosary!"
Then Sister Saint John were there, in her memory, bend-ing over her exactly as she was now.
She screamed. She turned and clawed her way through the yielding sheets of her bed, she leaped at the
door.
And into the arms of yet another sister. Sister Mary. Mary Banion. "Let me go!"
"Oh, you poor darling!"
A man was coming into the room behind her, a man with a mustache and great, bushy eyebrows. He bit
his bottom lip up into the mustache. "Now, Patricia, we aren't going to hurt you."
"You're crazy, Doctor Gottlieb! You're one of them."
"Shouldn't we tranquilize her again, Doctor?"
"We can't afford to impede her memory. She's got to recall her part in the ritual."
Gottlieb took her wrist, concentrated a moment. "Pulse is good. And  the  gynecological  exam  was  very
successful, Mary."
"Don't you dare examine me!"
"I did it while you were asleep, dear. I'm not a fool."
"You're evil! All of you! I want out of here!"
"Now, wait a minute. What in the world is the matter with you? Don't you remember anything?"
"You're liars, all of you—vicious, evil liars! And the Church is unholy, filthy!"
"You're badly confused, darling."
"I want Jonathan! I want him now!"
"Soon. Very soon."
"You're monstrous, all of you—"
"Patricia, I'm not sure I understand your problem. What's the matter with coming home after all this time
in hiding?"
Mary was so clever. So damned clever. Patricia told herself to remember what she had said to Jonathan:

We may be mutated in a thousand different ways, but we can live ordinary lives if we try.
"You have a great work to perform, Patricia. The greatest of all works. You must remember so you can
do it well."
She recalled how Mary had tried to press a cloth soaked in ether onto her face while she lay on the altar
of Holy Spirit Church.
As the late effects of the shot they had given her wore off, Patricia became better able to consider her
situation. She stopped arguing with her captors. There was no point to it. Instead she tried to seem a little
more cooperative. Only by winning their trust would she have any chance at escape.
"What are you thinking, Patricia?"
She couldn't be to compliant, though. That would give her away. She took what she thought might be an
expected stance. "You were there when It raped me. You let It rape me!"
It had great, heavy coils and eyes like yellow marbles.
"You were the victim of a terrible mistake. All I can say is that I'm sorry. We're all sorry."
Sorry. That was one way to be.
Again she looked out into the countryard. At the far side was a ten-foot wall. The only  way  to  scale  it
would be to jump to a low-lying limb of the elm and vault over. The wall fronted on Sullivan Street. Beyond
it would be cars and students and joggers and old ladies and derelicts and kids and all the world. Just being
a shopgirl out there would be a privilege compared to the suffocating horror of life in this place.
Patricia had been the highest of them all, but for Jonathan.
You are our hope.
Your child will be a god.
She had been seduced by such praise. She admitted it. If she was clever, she might be able to convince
the seducers that she was succumbing to them again. Then they might give her the few unattended minutes
she needed. "Our belief is that mankind is a failure, isn't it, Mary?"
"Look at the conditions you encountered on the outside."
Mary touched her wrist. Patricia let a soft and devoted look come into her eyes. But she thought only of
escape. Nothing would ever make her believe the Church's propa-ganda again.
She recalled the rituals, hundreds of them: annuals and seasonals and monthlies. Rituals for the rising and
setting of all the major stars, rituals for the rhythms of the body, the phases of the moon, rituals to mark the
earth's important passages, and prayers that praised her, the planet of pearly green beauty, whose needs the
Night Church served. Then there were the Sacrificials, the bloody rites in honor of the saints of the Church.
Saint Gilles de Rais, accused of torturing and murdering children. Actually the teacher of Jeanne  d'Arc,
another of the great saints of the Night Church. Like her, burnt.
Saint Elizabeth Bathory,  one  of  the  greatest  of  the  medie-val  genetic  experimenters.  Walled  up  in  her
own bedroom for what the ordinary population called mass murder.
Saint Appolonius of Tyana, killed by the Christians for writing of sorcery.
Saint Iamblichus, crucified by the pagans.
On and on went the list of the honored dead. Magicians, they were called, or alchemists or sorcerers or
wizards.  All  the  while,  though,  their  hidden  Church  was  the  true  guardian  of  the  future,  carrying  the
Treasure of Solomon forth to the millennium.
To the end of time.
"You must be ready to do your duty."
"Yes," was all she said. But she thought, My duty! My duty is to be destroyed.
It had come upon her stinking worse than any animal; its eyes glistening and inhuman, yet piercing with
intelligence. It had mounted her with the weight of an anvil.
Patricia's  mind  twisted  and  turned  between  thoughts  of  capture  and  freedom.  Inwardly  she  felt  like  a
kitten so desperate with pain that it begins to try to bite itself to death. But she forced herself to sit on the
beside and talk with Mary, and pretend to be a good little princess again.
She  belonged  only  to  Jonathan—the  Jonathan  of  the  ordi-nary  world.  The  dark  thing  within  was  not
really a part of him. It belonged to them.
"The  preparations  for  the  marriage  have  already  begun.  You  should  see  your  wedding  dress!  This  is
going to be the most wonderful ritual in all our history." Mary smiled, touched Patricia on the cheek, on the
hand. "Of course, it is the culmination of the Church. It ought to be grand."
"I'm sorry I've been so upset. I have a confession to make. After what happened in June—I'm scared to
try again."
Mary  hugged  her.  "My  poor  darling,  I  don't  blame  you,  not  for  an  instant.  But  remember  that  under
normal condi-tions It can be gentle. And these will be normal conditions. No surprises for either of you. Oh,

it'll be a grand occasion, you'll see!"
She returned Mary's embrace. "You're very reassuring."
Mary smiled, pleased by what she assumed to be a compli-ment. "I'm a faithful member of the Church.
And your friend, my dear."
I would like to knock you aside, run through those doors, across that terrace, grab that  limb,  and  swing
right over onto Sullivan Street.
I want to be free!
But she also wanted Jonathan. Somehow she would have to get to the senior men's wing, find him, and
free him so they could both escape together. Woe tugged at her heart when she thought just how hard that
would be.
They sat side by side in the deepening dark. Just when Patricia was deciding that Mary was never going
to leave, she kissed her on the cheek and stood up to go. "I'm glad you're getting yourself together so well.
We need coopera-tion from both of you if this thing is going to work."
In the distance a gong sounded. Mary moved toward the door. "Dinner. But I think it best that you don't
attend Commons just yet. I'll bring you a plate myself."
Patricia looked to  the  French  doors,  her  heart  already  beginning  to  pound  with  the  thought  of  escape.
"Thank you, Mary. I'm really hungry."
She almost burst into tears when Sister Saint John came back the instant Mary  left.  She  was  all  bright
and admiring. "You are coming along well," she cooed. Patricia could have choked her.
"I feel much better."
"You must be so excited," she breathed.
That hardly seemed the right word. "Why?"
"I mean, with the wedding in a few hours—"
The words, so unexpected and so shocking, made Patricia literally stagger. Sister caught her before she
could fall, and cradled her gently.
A few hours!
Her mind raced along. "But what about Jonathan? Won't I see him again—beforehand?"
Sister laughed. "Not before the wedding."
But she would see him then, before he sank into mon-strum.
They would have to make their escape from the church before the ritual.
Oh, God, protect us and preserve us!
She looked up past the doors into the dark sky. There was a little patch of heaven there, the moon riding
in twisted clouds, the moon so free, the moon so far away.
Chapter Twenty-two
HOLY SPIRIT RECTORY  was  hidden  in  a  forest  of  dark  trees,  only  its  tall,  silent  gables  rising  above
them into the moon-light. A weed-choked  path  led  to  the  front  door.  Mike  had  no  intention  of  knocking.
After the disappearance of Patricia and Jonathan and his suspicions about Mary, he trusted no friend,  not
even old Harry Goodwin.
He  had  ceased  to  trust  his  own  men  weeks  ago.  He  had  ordered  a  stakeout  of  Holy  Spirit  after  the
rape—which had been quietly canceled by Max while he was at Lourdes. No results, Max said.
Scratch Max and the whole Sex Crimes Unit for good measure, and God knew how  many  other  cops.
There must be something damned appealing about the Night Church to bend decent people the way it did.
He  intended  to  carry  out  the  rest  of  the  investigation  alone.  At  least  he  didn't  have  to  worry  about
loyalties. He was on the side of the little guy, the schmuck who got kicked, Mr.  Nobody.  Outfits  like  the
Night Church were just like organized crime, maybe worse. The Enemy.

He wasn't here for evidence. There was plenty of that in Titus's house. As the  days  had  passed,  each
person Mike loved had been implicated.
Harry  was  a  fine  old  friend.  More  than  that,  he  was  Mike's  confessor,  his  priest.  But  the  rape  had
happened in Harry's church.
Mike had shared his truth, his sins and deepest sorrows with this man. He hated to test him now.
What a luxury it would be to sit across Harry's kitchen table and talk this thing out with someone he could
trust. Surely Harry would check out. He was among the very best men Mike had ever known.
Mike looked up to the second floor. Harry's  bedroom  window  was  dark.  It  was  ten  fifteen  and  Harry
Goodwin was, as always at this hour, asleep. Those six A.M. Masses did it to him.
Rather than try to pick the difficult deadbolt lock, Mike went around the side of the house, looking for a
window to enter. It wasn't hard. Harry was hardly buttoned up. All Mike had to do was apply a little force
with his fingers and the sash of the office window went up with a dry rasp.
Mike observed thirty seconds of silence, then began the painful and difficult process of hauling himself in.
He hadn't climbed into a window in fifteen years or more.
He put his hands on the sill and struggled. His legs windmilled, caught against the side of the house. Then
he got a knee over the edge  and  heaved.  The  central  bulk  of  his  body  swung  inward,  and  he  landed  on
Harry's desk with a subdued thud. He had to lie there a moment letting his heart calm down.
The house was silent. By the faint light from the window Mike could see that  the  door  to  the  hall  was
standing open. He went over to it. The only sound came from outside, where a restless breeze snatched at
the eaves and rattled the windows. Upstairs Harry would be sleeping—if he slept at all. He looked awful
these days, nervous and thin and ill.
Conscience-stricken was how he looked.
Mike  returned  to  the  office.  The  Parish  Council  sometimes  met  here,  the  men  sitting  on  the  black,
vine-carved chairs, some of them smoking the stale cigarettes Harry always kept  in  a  box  on  the  coffee
table. Harry would preside from behind this desk, his glasses gleaming, his eyes as grateful as a dog's. You
pitied him, and it made you squirm.
Mike pulled the blinds down and closed them, then closed the door to the hall. He risked a light. If there
was any evidence of the Night Church here, it would be somewhere in these records. Mike sat behind the
desk  and  began  going  through  the  file  drawer.  The  sections  were  marked  CCD,  H.  Name,  PC,
Confraternity, Altar Society, Oil, Insurance, Mscl.  Bills,  on  and  on,  all  the  details  of  parish  management.
There was nothing suspicious, nothing even a little out of the ordinary. Mike opened first one file and then
the  next,  scanning  their  contents,  lists  of  names,  ideas  for  sermons,  parish  bulletin  notices,  diocesan
directives, bills and more bills.
Through  all  of  this  desperation  one  could  glimpse  the  determination  of  Harry  Goodwin.  Despite  the
desertion of his people, he was keeping his parish going, robbing from one account to fill another, practicing
every imaginable economy, even to cleaning his vestments himself in the basement, and  from  the  look  of
some of these bills, not paying for the cleaning fluid. Keeping it going in case  his people returned. Or when
they did. Probably it never crossed Harry's mind that they might not.
He was not getting support from the Night Church, at least not on the surface. Mike scanned the  shelf
beside the desk until he found the buff-green journal where he knew the parish finances were recorded. It
was a simple double-entry journal. No fancy bookkeeping for Harry. He could no longer rely on voluntary
help from Catholic bookkeepers in the parish. The entries were in Harry's  own  spidery  hand  ...  in  pencil
overwritten with ink.
Mike looked at the endless, meticulous entries for collec-tions, the amounts dwindling steadily as summer
settled in and people's air-conditioning bills took  more  and  more  of  their  money.  Last  Sunday  Harry  had
taken in $171.29. Paging back through the journal Mike could find no entry so low for a Sunday. It was a
parish record, forty dollars below the next lowest figure. But then, just a couple of days ago, there was a
stunning contribution, fifteen hundred dollars from the Hamil Foundation, especially earmarked for paint-ing
and cleaning the interior.
What  the  hell?  That  was  the  philanthropic  arm  of  Hamil  Bank.  Did  Laurent  Hamil  have  a  program
supporting indi-gent parishes? He was certainly a big-time Catholic. His foundation might well be called on
in emergencies. Not too suspicious. But Patricia worked there.  Was  there  a  connec-tion  between  Hamil
and the Night Church?
Mike  looked  at  the  entry.  The  hand  was  a  little  more  spidery,  and  there  was  no  penciled  trial  entry.
Harry had known the exact amount of this particular contribution.
He  closed  the  ledger.  Now  it  was  time  to  investigate  the  older  parish  records,  which  were  in  the
basement.  It  was  critical  to  look  through  the  past  couple  of  years.  Patterns  might  emerge.  This  entry

suggested that the Night Church was helping the parish, but it did not tell what Mike most wanted to know,
whether Harry was a dupe or a willing partner.
Mike went down the hall past the dining room with its ornate table and wainscotted walls, and opened the
door in the pantry leading to the basement. He didn't intend to poke into any dark holes, and looking down
those  wooden  steps  made  him  more  than  a  little  nervous.  When  he  saw  how  the  dark  down  there
swallowed  his  penlight's  beam  he  wished  he  could  dare  to  get  help.  But  he  couldn't.  Nor  could  he  just
abandon this part of the investigation—it was too important. When you were seeking evidence of payoff or
kickback the rule was to look to the time before your suspect perceived the danger of his ways ... then it
was usually all laid out neat as a pin. People kept careful records of their sunny days.
Mike had been here more than once before, both as a boy and as a man. There was a wine cellar from
long ago, and Harry still had a few bottles of Sandeman's '37 vintage port in it. Harry had brought one up
once or twice for some Holy Name celebration or other. How  Harry  had  resisted  selling  that  port.  Mike
understood why. He needed those evenings with port and cigars and good company to remind  him  of  the
importance his church had once enjoyed among men of power, and to give him leave to dream.
Mike descended the stairs quickly, his penlight beam bobbing on the steps. He crossed the floor . . . and
was  interested  to  note  that  there  was  a  great  deal  of  dust.  Good.  Nobody  was  worrying  about  the  old
records as yet. Maybe Mike was finally a step ahead.
His light danced as he swung it around, revealing steam pipes, rusty electrical  conduit,  dark  old  beams,
cobwebs, and shadows behind shadows.
The journals were in a bookcase that sagged against the far wall. As Mike moved toward it he noticed a
great  crack  beside  the  case.  Dank,  earthen  air  drifted  out.  Deep  sounds  seemed  to  come  from  it,  of
machinery  throbbing,  Probably  led  to  some  old  drainage  pipe  that  communicated  to  the  subway  out  on
Queens Boulevard. Mike peered into the hole, flashing his penlight into blackness. As  he  painted  his  light
along the walls there was a sound of rustling movement. A shadow made Mike jump back. Something the
size of a dog seemed to be scurrying toward him. But that was absurd;  it  was  a  rat  tricked  large  by  the
light. Mike shook his head. Harry's rectory was literally crumbling into the sewers.  He reached out to grab
the last three or four journals and get the hell out of there. His motions were too quick; when he brushed
matted fur he jerked away.
Lightning  flashed  as  his  head  knocked  into  a  cold  steam  pipe.  He  sank  heavily  to  the  floor,  cursing,
holding his head, his penlight rolling crazily away. That light was sanity and protection. Despite his throbbing
head he lurched after it, grabbed it, and cradled it like a candle in his  cupped  hands.  It  was  still  working,
thank God.
He had to get himself together. This was the sort of clumsy lack of professionalism you expected from a
wet-pants rookie. He scrambled to his feet and scanned the bookshelf with his penlight.
The journals went back to the turn of the century, year by year, all neatly numbered in gold embossing.
Mike took down 1963, 1971, and 1975. That ought to be enough, and long enough ago for any records  of
connection between the day and night churches to be clearly indicated.
Mike sat down on the bottom step with his penlight and began reading. He  found  nothing  of  interest  in
1963. By 1971 every third or fourth month ended with red ink. The records for 1975 told a  more  somber
story. Now the red ink was constant.
In  April  of  that  year  the  Hamil  Foundation  had  kicked  in  twelve  thousand  dollars,  earmarked  for
restoration of the portraits of the apostles in the dome. Mike remembered the scaffolding. Father had said
the  apostles  were  being  revised  to  fit  the  discoveries  of  modern  scholars.  Afterward  they  did  not  look
inspired anymore. Now that Mike  thought  about  it,  they  looked  ugly.  In  July  the  foundation  had  donated
new pews to add seating in the wings.
Additional seating in a dying parish?
Mike took down 1977 and 1978. January of 1977; $9,712 from the Hamil Foundation to soundproof the windows.
July of that year: $1,270 for three hundred folding chairs.
Soundproofing and folding chairs? It was eerie, to find the records of the growth of the Night Church this way, so
hidden, yet so obvious if you knew the basic truth that it existed.
Mike replaced the journals. All this foray had done was to confirm  what  he  had  discovered  upstairs.  The  parish
re-ceived regular contributions from the Night Church. But what about Harry? The answer to that question wasn't
here after all. It might lie somewhere in the records of the Hamil Foundation, and might even be located—given a few years of
investigation.  But  the  quicker  route  to  the  truth  lay  in  a  direct  confrontation  with  Harry  Goodwin.  "Old
friend," Mike whispered into the silence, "don't join the guilty. Be different."
Using his much abused penlight Mike made his way back upstairs. He paused in the front hall. He hated to do it,
but he was going to have to play one hell of a rough game with Harry. "Hey, Harry," he bellowed, "wake up and get

the hell down here! Come on, Harry, get moving!" That would scare  him thoroughly, get him good and vulnerable to unex-
pected questions. He unholstered his pistol.
From the distance there came hurrying feet. Then the hall was flooded with yellow light and the tall figure of Father Harry
Goodwin came gangling down the stairs wearing grayed pajamas under a raincoat liner.
"At least you remembered that pistol I gave you," Mike said from his position in the doorway. As he had known it would, his
voice caused Harry to throw up his arms, and in so doing to hurl the little twenty-two almost to the ceiling.
"Mike Banion!"
"Good morning, Harry." Mike did not put his own pistol away. Not just yet. "We have to have a discussion."
"Yes, Mike, certainly. By all means!" He was staring at the pistol. "Mike?"
"Let's go into the office, Harry. It's a couple of degrees cooler."
"I don't use the air conditioners. Out of the question."
"I understand." Mike followed the stooped, shaking man.
"Mike, you're pointing your gun at me."
"Yes."
His eyes were awful in the grim light of the office. With absurdly clumsy hands  he  put  on  his  glasses.
"Now," he said, "please, Mike, tell me why."
Best to get right into it. Make him think his interrogator knows more than he really does. "How well are
you ac-quainted with Franklin Titus Apple?"
"Oh!" He blinked furiously. "Hardly at all, Mike. And you should use the past tense. He's dead. I buried
him in July." He looked again at the gun. His eyes were practically popping out of his head. "What is this
about?"
"It's about you and Apple. Or Titus. The Apple is an alias. You'll be happy to know he isn't dead at all.
You buried another man. A very old and dear friend of mine." Mike stared hard at the  priest.  "I  want  to
know about your financial relationship with Titus."
"I don't understand, Mike." There was hurt in his voice.
"Let me try another approach. How much does Mr. Titus pay you to let his congregation use Holy Spirit
at night?"
"What do you mean, Mike?" The tone pleaded.
"The Night Church. Surely you know of it?"
He shook his head. His eyes were frightened,  his  lips  slack.  Mike  put  the  gun  away.  When  he  did  so
Harry blinked.
"You're innocent, you darned fool! Aren't you?"
"Well—I must be—I suppose—what Night Church?"
"Good God almighty! Harry, we'd better get ourselves some coffee made." The old  priest  stood  up,  his
eyes still wide, his mouth working. Mike clapped him on the shoulder. "Come on, Harry. I'm afraid I have
some bad news for you."
Mike found the old-fashioned circular toggle switch that controlled the kitchen lights and turned them on.
"Our second bad-news night," Harry said. "We mustn't make them a habit."
Mike didn't answer. He put the kettle on and got out the jar of Folger's Instant, pulled a couple of chipped
mugs off their nails "Harry, I  think  you  might  be  one  of  the  few  priests  ever  to  learn  this—"  The  kettle
whistled. "Excuse me." Mike made them their coffee, took a swallow from his cup. All these delays were
intentional. He wanted to observe Harry. Maintaining an impression that he was in suspense was one of the
most difficult things for a man to do. But Harry squirmed. He wasn't having any trouble at all, poor
guy.
"My word, Mike, this is strong. What are you going to tell me—my church has been declared off-limits to
Catholics? That I know, believe me."
"What I've got to tell you is that your parish is being used by a group called the Night Church. Mr. Titus,
known to you under the ridiculously inoffensive alias of Mr. Apple, is their leader. They meet in your church
in the small hours. They are probably the most vicious group of people you or me or anybody else has ever
heard of."
"In my church?"
"There are hundreds of them. They must fill the church when they come, and they do that often. During
one of their rituals, Patricia Murray was raped."
"But I often wake up at night. When I check my church it's always empty."
"Oh?"
"These people are using my church?" His voice sounded hollow. "Mike, are they desecrating my altar?"
"What the hell do you think, Harry? They practically tore Patricia in half on your altar!"

Harry reacted to Mike's words as if they were actual blows. Mike knew this  was  going  to  destroy  the
poor old guy in the end, no matter what happened now. The whole sense of Harry Goodwin's life was being
extinguished.
"You  say  that  the  people  attend  these  rituals?  My  Catholic  people—the  ones  who  don't  come  to  me
anymore?"
Why lie to the man? To do so would be to disdain him, and Mike did not treat his friends with  anything
less than re-spect. "I suspect that they fill the church."
Harry  closed  his  eyes.  His  face  screwed  up  into  such  pain  that  for  a  moment  Mike  thought  he  was
having a coronary.
At  last  he  let  out  a  long,  ragged  gasp.  He  stared  at  Mike  through  devastated  eyes.  His  hands  were
shaking so badly that he could hardly get his coffee cup to his lips.
"We're going to get rid of them, Harry."
Harry Goodwin continued to stare.
"Harry?"
There were perhaps words, but Mike couldn't understand them.
"Tonight it's going to be different. They are probably going to  come  here,  and  I  suspect  they  will  have
Patricia with them, and Jonathan too. I haven't been able to get in touch with the kids all day. That tells me
the Night Church has them,  and  it's  going  to  do  its  business  with  them.  But  Mike  Banion  is  going  to  be
waiting for the Night Church. And I am going to break it into little pieces."
In the absolute silence that followed Mike could hear the priest's tears dripping onto the oilcloth tabletop.
It was as desolate a sound as he had ever heard, in a life  that  had  witnessed  all  the  kinds  of  grief  there
were.
Harry Goodwin bowed his head. In the grim light Mike saw that speeches weren't going to help him. It
was too much. The priest was still breathing and thinking and living, but inside him everything important was
blowing to dust. The words from the Funeral Mass came to mind:
Man's days are like those of grass;
Like a flower of the field he blooms; The wind sweeps over him and he is gone,
And his place knows him no more.
Mike  prayed  then,  a  wordless,  desperate  prayer—not  for  God's  love  or  His  protection,  but  for  His
vengeance, that it might roar through the Night Church like holy fire.
"I'm going over to the church now, Harry."
"I'm coming too."
"I know."
They walked across the grassy parking lot to the black and silent building.
Chapter Twenty-three
THOUGH HE HAD entered this old church a thousand times through the seasons of his life, Mike Banion
had  never  approached  it  as  he  did  now,  with  the  caution  of  a  profes-sional  intruder.  He  was  here  to
investigate, not to pray.
He had no illusions about what he was doing: coming to this place was as dangerous as going to Titus's
house had been. A cop would run out of luck if he did this sort of thing often.
From the end of the block the streetlamp cast a dissipated, silvery glow. There was a smell of wet in the
air. Perhaps toward dawn it would rain as it had yesterday and break this suffocating heat.  The  sky  was
green and dense. New York summers often ended like this, with thick, humid clouds and muttering storms.
Wind soughed around the belfry and eaves but here on the ground it was stifling.
Mike reached down and grabbed an unexpected object from the grass—a bit of crumpled paper. It was
no blessing of evidence, though, only a Junior Mints box. It had proba-bly been dropped by kids on their way
home from the Cinemart on Metro Avenue.  Mike  held  it  a  moment,  unwill-ing  to  let  go  of  something  so
comfortably of the known world.
They mounted the worn granite steps to the  church.  It  seemed  a  hundred  years  since  he  had  gone  up
these same steps as a little boy all in white, on his way in to receive his first Holy Communion. The boy he

had been waved and shouted, "Remember, remember me!" And the wind blew, and the rain rained, and the
aging cop could not deny that there had once been a poet in him, but the damn thing had died.
He put his hand on the knob of the big oak door. Un-locked, of course. No matter  how  he  was  told  or
who told him, Harry was never  going  to  lock  his  church.  Very,  very  slowly,  Mike  turned  the  large,  cold
knob. It was well oiled, and obliged Mike by not making a sound. He pulled the door a bare quarter of an
inch. There was a single, distinct click, which Mike heard echo through the nave.
"Are they there?"
"Quiet, for God's sake. Just stick close to me, and don't talk."
The priest was one hell of a liability, but he had such a stake in this, he could not be left behind. No matter
the consequences, it was his church and he had a right.
If  Terry's  terrible  death  had  been  intended  to  frighten  anybody  smart  enough  to  open  the  grave  from
further pur-suit of Franklin Titus, it was certainly working. Mike admit-ted his fear. He had come to think of
these people as ghouls.
Poor Terry. Whatever had they done to him? The coroner had found evidence of severe infection in the
corpse. It had been quarantined pending virological and bacterial studies. One of the morgue guys had said
something about plague. Mike thought of the chart he  had  found  in  Titus's  house.  They  gave  Terry  their
disease before they put him in the coffin. Now that the chart had been enhanced by the lab, it was perfectly
clear that it recorded the progress of an illness so virulent it could kill in minutes.
The church door swung open on absolute darkness. The Spirit seemed empty, but Mike still did not want
to go in. The way he saw it, this was as much Mr. Titus's church as Harry's. Maybe more.
The air that came out of the dark interior was dry and had an unexpectedly familiar smell.
"Been doing some painting?"
"No. It hasn't been painted in years."
The smell told a different story. Earlier this evening they must have spruced the place up. How were they
planning to hide that from Harry?
Was all as it seemed here?
Harry, old buddy, have you put one over on me? If they feel free to paint, they don't care whether  you
know about them or not.
Mike felt very isolated, standing here in the black foyer with his old friend beside him.
Your faith matters to me, Harry. You're my damn priest!
He waited for their eyes to get used to the faint glow filtering through the stained-glass windows from the
street. It didn't amount to much, but they could see the aisle clearly enough to avoid tripping.  Mike  began
the long journey to the altar rail. He intended to hide in the narrow, dark space behind the high altar against
the likelihood that the Night Church would be here tonight.
Before him he could see the dim outline of the altar where Patricia Murray had been raped—not by some
poor screwed-up jerk but by intelligent people in a brutal ritual.
Patricia.  Pretty  kid.  Be  a  great  wife  for  Jonathan.  To  see  those  two  at  this  altar,  her  in  white,  him
jammed into a blue suit and looking sheepish—the thought was enough to make a man weep.
Wordlessly,  because  words  weren't  his  way,  Mike  prayed  for  the  kids.  He  looked  toward  the  votive
candle and was conscious of something so real and true he could hardly begin to understand it. But he loved
something about it. The mystery of it, maybe.
He went up to the altar, genuflected toward the looming dark hulk, and made the sign of  the  cross.  He
really wasn't much of a Catholic anymore. His faith, he supposed, was like the love of an old divorced man
who  has  long  known  that  the  reasons  for  the  split  were  insubstantial  and  recalls  his  partner  with  wary
fondness.
He became cold. The sensation warned him of how dan-gerous familiar places could be, transformed by
dark  and  fear.  Cops  got  killed  as  often  as  not  on  friendly  ground.  He  could  as  easily  imagine  Patricia
screaming on this altar as Harry saying Mass here, or altar boys pouring from cruets as blood running.
Progress was interrupted  for  the  moment  by  an  excep-tional  blast  of  wind.  Tonight's  storms  were  not
going to wait for dawn. As large as the old building was, it shook with the force of the  gust.  He  grabbed
Father's arm and stood a moment after the noise died down, listening for the extra little sounds that might be
made if somebody had used the roar as a mask for getting closer to them.
But  there  were  none  of  the  rustles  and  shuffles  that  people  made  when,  for  example,  they  suddenly
stopped running.
Harry, however, had made use of the disturbance and the dark. Mike first  realized  this  when  he  felt  a
distinct  tug  at  his  shoulder  holster.  He  jerked  away—and  his  thirty-eight  spe-cial  ended  up  in  Harry's
shaking hands.

"I've got it! Don't move, I've got the gun!"
"Hell, Harry. Give me that thing back. You couldn't shoot me."
"Don't force me, Mike! You stand right there." Harry put a few feet between them by sliding along the
altar rail. "Don't come near me. I'm not at all good with these things. If you startle me it's sure to go off."
Mike was more saddened even than surprised. With the loss of Harry he had only one thing left that was
worth risking his neck for. "What about Patricia and Jonathan? What's happening to them?"
"That isn't your business."
The  Night  Church  was  just  too  strong.  From  the  moment  he  smelled  the  paint,  Mike  had  suspected
something like this was about to happen. Harry  marched  Mike  into  the  sacristy.  "Mike,  I'm  sorry.  There
isn't anything else I can do. If you're cooperative they may spare your life. Please, Mike, play  along.  I've
been playing for years." His voice became high and frantic. "They keep my church alive."
"You  poor  bastard."  Even  now,  there  might  be  some  chance.  He  had  always  had  clout  with  Harry
Goodwin. "We can talk."
"No, we can't. I've already talked too much. Titus  knew  you  were  coming  here.  He  even  told  me  the
time."
"So you were waiting for me."
"And wishing to God you wouldn't come."
"You're still on the side of the good. I can hear it in your voice. Give me the gun, Harry."
"Mike, please be quiet!"
"I'm your conscience. I can't be quiet."
"Don't try the sentimental approach. I'm finished with that. I don't care how good a friend you are. I've
been tangled up in this mess for a long time, and you can't untangle me."
As Harry spoke there was a change in him. When you saw him like this, sharp and mean, you realized
what tragedy was all about. "How long?"
"They've been using my church for years. If it weren't for them, the parish would have been abandoned
in the seven-ties." The bitterness in his voice was almost shocking. This was an astonishingly  angry  man.
"What a joke to waste your precious life on a vocation!"
"I want you to give me the pistol. I want to forget I ever saw you pointing it at me. No matter how bitter
you are, Harry, you aren't bitter enough to do something so evil to a friend. If you allow the Night Church to
capture me—my God, you know, don't you, that they buried Terry Quist alive."
The gun wavered. Harry seemed about to hand it over.
"And that man who died in the fire across the street— Parker was his name—that was no accident. I'm
now con-vinced they burned him  alive  because  he  apparently  knew  too  much.  And  Patricia—remember
what they did to her."
Harry groaned, took a step closer. Mike reached out his hand.
Just at that moment the sacristy door clicked and creaked open. A small, elegant old man in  a  raincoat
and hat hurried in. He removed the hat to reveal a crown of wispy white hair.
Titus.
He smiled. "So our last problem has solved itself. Good evening,  Mike.  I  gather  you're  here  to  see  me
give away the bride."
"Give me the gun, Harry! Now!"
With a  growl  Titus  took  the  gun,  trained  it  expertly  at  the  center  of  Mike's  chest.  "Shall  I  shoot?"  he
asked in his soft, polite voice. "Or will you shut your poisonous mouth?"
Mike fell silent.
15 AUGUST 1983
                                     MOST PRIVATE
To: The Prefect of the Sacred Congregation for the Defense of the Faith
From: The Chancellor for the Inquiry in North Amer-ica
Your Eminence:
I have prayed day and night over the request made in your last letter.
Is it morally right for me to go into a situation where my own death is a virtual certainty? I wonder. Or is
this moral question spurious—a way of justifying my fear? And, Eminence, I can assure you I am afraid.
I keep thinking of Alex Parker and the blowtorch. I know I shouldn't, but I can't help it. The real issue is

whether or not I love Christ enough to risk that.
Eminence, I am so afraid. Help me.
Sincerely yours, Brian Conlon
Document Class: Urgent A, most private, Swiss Guards courier
Destination: Paolo Cardinal  Impelliteri,  the  Hidden  Collegium,  Prefecturate  for  the  Defense  of  the  Faith,
Vatican City
18 AUGUSTUS 1983
FURTIVISSIMUS
Ad: Cancellarius Inquisitionis in Septentrionalis Americanensis
Ex: Prefectus Congregationis Defensioni Fidei
My dear young man, I only wish that I were not so aged and infirm, so close  to  the  end  of  my  time.  I
would count it an honor to suffer at your side.
Recall the gospel:  "In  His  anguish  He  prayed  with  all  the  greater  intensity,  and  His  sweat  became  as
drops of blood falling to the ground." And remember your consecration into the Holy Office, my boy.
You lay prostrate before the altar in the Chapel of St. Paul the Apostle here in the Hidden Collegium just
eighteen  years  ago.  Remember  the  words:  "Oh,  glori-ous  St.  Paul,  sword  and  shield  of  the  Church,
conse-crate me to the service of our  most  holy  Catholic  and  apostolic  faith.  Intercede  for  me  in  time  of
trouble, that I may not shrink from martyrdom, indeed, that I may give my life gladly, as thou gavest thine,
for love of Him."
Let me be frank with you. When you asked me for a warrior-priest—a man who would die for love  of
Him—the only name I could come up with in all the Holy Office was yours.
You, Brian.
You are the last warrior-priest young and strong enough to carry out this difficult mission. All I have here
are myself, laid up with my damn stroke, and a bunch of dry old historians.
Brian, it is not my way to beg, but now I do beg as I think Christ wants me to beg. Please, Brian, drink of
the cup Christ holds out to you. My dear boy, pray for courage!
Holy Mother Church needs you now, and Our Lord needs you now. And I trust in  you.  I  wish  I  could
give Our Lord an army of Brians!
But all I can offer Him is my last, precious one. Go in grace to your duty. Man will not show you mercy,
my son. But God will. You shall have mercy and love in endless abundance, and all the wonders of heaven
besides.
I envy you. Paolo
Chapter Twenty-four
HARRY STOOD FROZEN, listening to the echoing  footsteps  as  Titus  marched  Mike  off  into  the  dark.
There came a creak of hinges, then the sounds dwindled as the two men descended into the crypt.
"Please, Mr. Titus," he said. His voice was so low it didn't even echo in the empty church. He swallowed.
"Please, Mr. Titus, don't hurt him."
There was no answer. From the  depths  of  the  crypt  there  came  a  loud,  angry  shout.  Mike,  protesting
whatever indig-nity had greeted him there.
Mike, Mike. What is the sense of friendship? At our age it is a dance of mourning . . . and remembrance.
"Mike, do you remember—oh, Lord, there  were  great  days!"  Like  the  day  he  had  married  Mike  to  little
Beth Herlihy. Jenny Trask was organist then, young, dedicated to music, capable of anything from Bach to

Tantum ergo. She could do a wedding march of rousing splendor.
From the crypt there came a rush of argument, then the muffled slam of wood against wood.
Harry put his hands over his ears, screwed his  eyes  shut.  As  never  before  his  church  was  oppressing
him, the ghostly images in the dome mocking his faith, the vigil candle burning like an accusatory eye. He
ran from the sanctuary, and across the muddy parking lot.
He came into his kitchen—and remembered how Beth would make them both dinner while he and Mike
sat around that table drinking beer and talking.
Harry snapped off the light, sank down at the table, and wept for his betrayal.
To keep from doing it aloud he bit his lips. His mouth began to taste sharply of blood.
Yes, and who were all the histrionics for? Our Lord?
The traitor deserves a traitor's death. Iscariot, send your-self to Hell. His  mind  went  to  his  twenty-two
pistol. It must still be lying on the stairway where he had dropped it. If he took that pistol and pointed it at
his stomach and fired,  he  would  die  in  deserved  agony.  Unconfessed,  he  would  sink  for  all  eternity  into
Hell.
A worthy end for a coward. He went to the staircase. But there was no pistol. Harry moaned. Even his
suicide was going to be denied him.
"Do you want this?"
Standing in the doorway of his office was a small, mousey sort of man. Harry had never seen him before,
but that meant nothing. The Night Church was well supplied with people. The man held Harry's pistol in his
hand. The barrel was trembling.
"I'm  a  priest,"  the  man  said  in  a  rushed  whisper.  "My  name  is  Brian  Conlon."  A  haunted  expression
passed across his face, but he blinked it away. "I am here to appeal to you to return to Our Lord, and help
me in His cause against the Night Church." He stepped forward into the hall to show himself more clearly.
His pants were torn and dusty, his gold-framed glasses were bent. With his free hand he brushed some dust
from his suit. He was wearing a Roman collar. "Father Goodwin, I am  a  secret  agent  of  His  Holi-ness."
Beads  of  sweat,  which  had  been  collecting  on  his  hairless  pate,  began  to  roll  down  his  wide  forehead,
making trenches in the dust. He smiled weakly. "I'm a bit of a mess, I'm afraid. I shouldn't have attempted
the window."
Harry was far too amazed by the mere appearance of another priest to care about the state of his attire.
"You mean His Holiness knows? Rome knows about the Night Church?"
"Rome knows. And Rome has sent me to help you."
"Father—Father—" Harry couldn't go on. Hopes he had given up for dead were soaring as they hadn't in
years. He simply stood, wordless, trying to keep himself from breaking down completely.
Father  Conlon  came  and  embraced  Harry.  He  was  short;  Harry  found  himself  looking  down  at  his
hairless scalp. Then Father Conlon met his eyes. "Rome knows everything, Harry."
"Even—you know that I'm—" Harry couldn't say it. A traitor to Our Lord.
"You're a participating member of the Night Church."
"No—that's stretching a point, isn't it? I never go over there. I just let them use it, you know."
"I know. And they pay you."
"It keeps the parish afloat! Without that money—"
"Yes, I see. Now I know exactly where you stand, Fa-ther." He put the gun into his pocket. "We have
work to do this night." He glanced at his watch. "The Rituale will begin at midnight. That gives us less than
an hour. We've got to work fast. Tell me, are they about yet?"
He thought of Titus and Mike in the crypt. "One of them is, and he's holding a  friend  of  mine,  a  police
officer, prisoner in the crypt. I think he's killing the policeman." As he said these last words the utter moral
corruption of his own soul was agonizingly apparent to Harry. He was letting Mike die!
"And you're up here, looking for a gun? To help whom?"
Harry could hardly bear to answer. "For me," he man-aged to mutter.
Conlon smiled wearily. "I see. In your opinion you're beyond absolution."
"I don't want it! Absolution is the last thing I deserve!"
"But you regret your sins—your apostasies, your lies, your sacrilege, your cowardice?"
No man who was free of them could know what it felt like to bear such sins. "I regret them," Harry said.
How small, how hollow were those words!
"May  Our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  absolve  you,  and  by  His  authority  I  absolve  you  from  every  bond  of
excommunica-tion and interdict to the extent of my power. I absolve you from your sins in the Name of the
Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit."
For a moment Harry was furious. Then an enormous relief spread through him. He could feel  Conlon's

words as truly as a tonic in his blood. They  filled  him,  revitalized  him,  gave  him  immediate  help.  And  he
said, "Amen."
Father Conlon looked up at him. "You're still very much the priest, you. You've just been frightened up to
now."
"I can't help it. I'm easily frightened."
"Well, you have another chance to overcome it. Better that than letting a little fear send you to Hell."
"They threatened me with torture!"
"I think we'll both face that, Father. They do torture priests."  The  haunted  expression  crossed  his  face
again.
Harry's mind returned to Mike. "We can save my friend. We've got to! They're torturing him now!"
"Who, exactly, has captured your friend?"
"A man named Titus. Franklin Titus."
In an instant Father Conlon's face shifted from calm resolution to terrible dread. "Titus! He's here?"
"In the crypt."
He smiled ruefully. "Very well, Father Goodwin. I may already have lost my particular battle."  He  held
out Harry's pistol. "Will you be at the wedding?"
"I am being made to officiate."
"Titus and his mordant wit. When the moment is right, I am afraid we have no alternative but to kill the
groom. If I am prevented from doing it, you must."
Harry was astonished. A priest, plotting murder?
"I know how awful it must sound to you. But you don't know the alternative. Believe me, this execution
will be a great mercy not only for the groom, but for all mankind."
"His Holiness condones this?"
"The Holy Office is empowered to act in defense of the Faith. Believe me, it is a terrible thing when we
are forced to such a measure. But we do not shrink from duty."
A sudden movement at the top of the stairs caught Harry's eye. As he turned  toward  it  Father  Conlon
pressed the pistol into his hand. "Hide it, Harry! It may be our only chance!" Conlon began backing into the
study, pulling a pistol of his own from under his suit.
"No you don't, Conlon! Drop it!"
Father Conlon threw his large, black pistol to the floor. At the same instant Harry put his own palm-sized
one into his pocket.
A troop of armed men came running down the stairs. "Your priest is lucky, Laurent," Conlon said to the
leader.
For a moment Harry didn't understand. Then he did: Father Conlon was gambling that the two of  them
hadn't been overheard. "Thank God you came when you did," Harry blurted. "He was going to kill me!"
Father Conlon was edging toward the window. "Not so fast," the one called Laurent snarled. An instant
later they took Conlon by the arms. He commenced a mild and hope-less struggle.  They  surrounded  him,
then picked him up and began to carry him away. His bald head was bobbing be-tween the shoulders of his
captors, his feet were rattling against the floor. His glasses were gone. There was a gash  under  his  right
eye.
"Come with me, Harry," said a voice from the dark. Harry knew it at once: Titus, back from his business
with Mike.
"Yes. I'm coming." The pistol felt enormous in his pocket. Surely Titus would see the bulge.
Titus led him through the dark rectory. "That man will burn to death, Harry." They went across the dusty
living room, into the overgrown rectory yard.
Harry followed him as if in thrall. Those three words kept echoing in his mind: burn  to death,  burn  to
death, burn to death.
He saw the young people stuffing Father Conlon  into  a  car.  Even  with  the  windows  closed  his  shouts
could be heard clearly. "Sounds like he's  been  given  the  bad  news,"  Titus  commented  mildly.  Again  and
again, in a frantic, breaking voice, Conlon called "Je-e-sus! Je-e-sus!" Then the big Mercedes drove away.
"Conlon knows what a hard death is like, Harry. Do you?"
"Yes, Mr. Titus, I do."
"You  agree  very  quickly,  for  a  man  who  has  just  been  proselytized  by  the  Inquisition.  Tell  you  what,
Harry. You go down into the crypt. See what you can do for your friend." He smiled distantly. "You  had
best be loyal to us if you don't care for hard deaths." The smile broadened. "Go  on.  Mike  needs  a  friend
right now."
With a toss of his head Titus disappeared into the sacristy. Harry wanted to do anything but continue with this horrible mission.

Gingerly, afraid to do it but more afraid of Titus, Harry lifted the storm door that led into the crypt.
Chapter Twenty-five
THE SAME BLOW that had knocked Mike unconscious had also given him a pounding headache, which
woke him up.
He heard music. Church music. "Aeterne rerum conditor noctem diemque qui..."
It was very beautiful, being sung by a children's choir. But so far away. He could barely hear them.
". . . regis et temporum das tempora . . ."
He wanted to hear more. When he tried to get up he was hit a flaring blow in the center of his forehead.
He lashed out with his fists and encountered sides and a top.
What the hell was this? They had put him into a box. the box was lined with satin upholstery.
A coffin.
Just like Terry! He sucked air frantically. He beat on the top, he squirmed, he kicked.
Then he stopped. He started taking controlled breaths, trying to quell the panic. If he was going to get out
of here he had to do some very clear thinking.
Before they had put Terry in his coffin they had infected him with a disease.  Was  Mike  also  sick?  He
took a deep breath. Lungs clear. And he didn't feel feverish. The only thing that hurt was his head.
He remembered the expert way Titus had pistol-whipped him, a single stunning blow  to  the  side  of  the
head.
He didn't seem to have anything else wrong with him. Then it occurred to him why they hadn't infected
him. They already knew their disease worked from trying it on Terry.
They wanted this to be as slow as possible.
It was already awfully hard to breathe. How long had he been unconscious, innocently breathing up  his
little bit of air? Not too long or he'd be dead. Not a lot of air to begin with.
Okay, guy, let's give this one hell of a good try. He braced his hands against the head of the coffin. Then
he kicked with all his might against the foot. The whole thing quaked, but it didn't even begin to give way.
Goddamn!
He spent half a minute in a losing effort to catch his breath. No matter how deeply he inhaled, it helped
less each time. The air in here stank. God, it stank.
He was suffocating in his own bad breath.
"Help!"
Silence.
Thank God he had heard that singing. At least he knew he wasn't actually underground.
"Come on, out there, have a heart!" He took gulp after desperate gulp of air.
This was the end. In a few more minutes Michael Banion was no longer going to exist.
He stopped trying to get out. That was not going to work. And he stopped bothering to call. Nobody was
going to help him.
He had other things to think about now. This was death. He tried to remember what he was supposed to
do at this point. The main thing was an Act of Contrition.
But  he  couldn't  remember  the  damn  Act  of  Contrition!  It  was  a  long  prayer,  and  he  hadn't  said  it  in
years.
He panicked again, afraid that not even God was going to help him. The frantic physical torment  of  air
hunger over-came him and he drummed his feet and slapped at the top with his hands.
Then he opened his mouth. He began gagging and gasping. Somewhere his mind turned over a page. He
couldn't re-member the Act of Contrition, but Sister Louise had paddled him into the Confiteor.  He began
praying in a loud voice, hoarse with the bad air. "I confess to Almighty God, to blessed Mary ever Virgin, to

blessed Michael the Archangel, to blessed John the Baptist, to Holy Peter and Paul ... all the saints!" Take
a breath, take another, take another. Wow, I'm flyin'! I hurt like hell but I'm flyin'. "Sinned in thought, word,
and deed, and what the hell's the rest? Oh, yeah— through my fault,  through  my  fault,  through  my  most
griev-ous fault—oh God hurry up this hurts!"
Come on, damn you, die.
I'm gonna be like, like—
Sunken eyes, lips stretched away from teeth, stinking like hell, and fingernails embedded in the lid.
Poor old Terry.
Poor old met
Everything  went,  finally,  all  the  discipline  and  fight  of  a  lifetime  as  a  policeman.  Only  the  scratching,
screaming animal remained.
He kicked and kicked and kicked and his blood pounded in his brain and he gasped until his  throat  was
raw with his own expelled gases.
When they left her alone in the bride's  room  Patricia's  heart  leaped  with  hope.  She  had  been  guarded
every mo-ment back there, and had come out here in a limousine with Mary and Letty and Jerry. Maybe
this would be her chance. But when she looked around and saw the barred  windows  and  heard  the  lock
click behind her, she could only feel the tightness of frustration in her throat.
Although as secure as a prison cell, the room was pretty. The floors were sumptuously carpeted with a
Persian rug depicting a wedding. Ancient brass floor lamps gave off warm, yellow light. A spray of roses
graced  the  delicate  antique  table  in  the  center  of  the  floor.  There  was  a  dressing  table  for  the  bride,
completely stocked with makeup and perfume of every scent.
Patricia went to one of  the  leaded-glass  windows,  wonder-ing  if  she  could  squeeze  between  the  bars.
They were newly installed; she could tell that by their shine. And they were bolted directly into the walls,
not into the window frame. They were also hopelessly close together.
Despite all her efforts to be calm and to seem cheerful to Mary and  the  others,  they  had  not  let  down
their guard. This was the longest time she had been alone since the capture. They had been very sweet to
her. They had also been very careful.
"You are our Princess," they had told her.
She had smiled and accepted their homage. But inside herself she clung to the thought that she could be
so much more than their toy, she could be  a  real  wife  and  make  a  real  home  for  Jonathan.  She  thought
bitterly, I can be a human being!
She kicked the table—but not hard enough to upset the roses.  Then  she  slumped  down  at  the  dressing
table. The face staring back from the mirror was  so  very  beautiful,  even  in  its  pain,  that  she  was  rather
startled.
Beautiful mutant.
"Hello, dear. We've got to start dressing you. There's barely half an hour left!"
How incredible that words said so cheerfully,  by  as  lovely  a  woman  as  Mary  Banion,  could  hold  such
dread.
First they had taken Jonathan's belt and shoelaces. Then they had put  him  into  a  straitjacket.  When  he
had realized how completely his suicide would ruin their plans he had become almost frantic to do it.
They watched him every second.
An hour ago ten of them carried him down to  a  waiting  van.  They  brought  him  out  here  trussed  to  its
seat. Five guards came with him.
He lay now in his straitjacket against the wall of the sacristy, trying to find some new trick of suicide. He
had pleaded with Jerry Cochran and with Uncle Franklin. "Don't you understand what  I  am?  A  monster!
And I'll breed a race of monsters!"
They agreed. In fact, that was the whole point. "They will be in the image of Satan."
"They'll be horrors! They'll destroy everything beautiful and good in this world!"
Uncle Franklin had at that moment done something that had  chilled  Jonathan  to  the  depth  of  his  being.
Very delib-erately he had leaned down and smiled beatifically into Jonathan's face.  And he had whispered,
"I know."
Jonathan had screamed to the others to listen to him. Uncle was evil! He was himself something out of
Hell—he must be! Something foul, something supernatural. Please, please listen.
He is trying to give this world over to the demons!
Jonathan began to shout yet again. "Please listen to me! Please, please, please listen!"

But they didn't listen. They went on preparing to mate their goddess with their god.
There came a sound of footsteps on flagstones. Somebody was approaching the coffin. Then there was a
desolate  sigh  just  outside.  The  wood  creaked.  Somebody  had  knelt  down  and  leaned  against  it!  "Since
Almighty God has called—"
"Harry! Oh, God, it's you! I knew you'd come if you could! Listen, I'm dying. I've got to get air."
"Mike, you're alive!"
"Air, Harry. Get me air, air!" Mike felt desperately along the seal. His mind flashed again  to  the  coffin
key in Titus's living room. "Is there a key?"
"Key?"
Now, that was confused thinking. Harry wouldn't have any keys to this thing. "Harry! Harry!"
"Oh, Mike!" There was a great clattering.
"Hurry!"
"I can't, it's too strong."
"What—were—"
"I'm hitting it with my shoe!" There was another burst of noise.
"No. No." He was drifting into unconsciousness, falling down a well.
A tiny hissing sound brought him back from the depths.
"Mike! Say something!"
"Upend the damn thing and drop it! That'll break it open!"
There  came  a  creaking,  scraping  sound  and  a  great  deal  of  labored  breathing.  Slowly  Mike's  position
changed. Soon he was struggling with the fact that Harry had lifted the thing feet first.
Then he dropped it. There was a tremendous, bone-jarring crash.
God love that old priest, was the lid actually loose? 
                                         *      *      *
People were coming and going in the bride's room,  brides-maids  with  their  dresses  and  makeup  cases,
sisters with ironing boards and needles and thread, making last-minute adjustments. Letty and Mary fussed
over their Princess, who smiled as best she could, despite the ashes in her heart.
Her mind in its desperation had fixed on the notion that Jonathan  might  rescue  her.  He  was  so  clever,
surely he would succeed where she was failing. He would find a way to get both of them out.
"Now, my dear," Letty  said  with  great  self-satisfaction,  "we  have  something  to  show  you!"  She  put  a
large  white  box  on  the  table  with  the  flowers  and  opened  it.  Inside  was  the  most  extraordinary  dress
Patricia had ever seen.
It was sewn entirely of spider-web lace worked with pearls.  Tiny  diamonds  made  the  collar  and  cuffs
glitter. An emerald belt, green to match her eyes, lay folded on top. Mary drew the dress from the box and
held it up. It was purest white silk, the delicate strands worked into flourishes and sweeps of subtle design.
Then  she  saw  the  design.  She  choked  back  a  scream.  On  the  dress,  depicted  in  lace,  were  bodies
struggling in fires, bones and skulls, and grinning devils.
"Feel how light it is! The whole thing doesn't weigh a pound."
Patricia held out her hand, touched the gossamer fabric. "It's very light."
"The dress is over six hundred years old. It was made at the height of the Middle Ages. It's been in the
family  all  this  time,  waiting  for  you.  It's  been  worn  only  once  before,  during  the  Rituale  at  Salisbury
Cathedral in 1334."
Out of the madness and desperation of the medieval world they had brought this terrible artifact. It was
as if the rotted fingers of man's mad past had reached out and clutched her. They were smiling at her. All
the bridesmaids were watch-ing. She strove for a steady voice. "It's an inspiration."
Her  mind  was  totally  concentrated  on  Jonathan.  Memo-ries  of  him,  desire  to  see  him  again,  hope  of
escape. But she dared not even ask after him for fear her tone would betray her.
They had to get careless for a few seconds. They just had to! And if they didn't, then he had to come to
her and take her away. Nothing else could be allowed to happen. Because if there was a Rituale then he
would become the monstrum.
That must not be!
Mary gave her an excited little peck on her cheek. "Be-fore you put on your makeup. For good luck."
Patricia looked down at the awful garment in her hands. A lace skull smiled up at her.

This had never been intended as a wedding dress. It was a shroud.
"Jonathan, you might as well accept your situation. You aren't going to get away," Franklin Titus said.
"Maybe not."
"And we won't give you a chance at suicide."
Jonathan did not reply. That was his one hope.
"I really feel terrible about this. If I had known what it would do I never would have tried the hypnosis.
You're pitiful now, son. I find it most upsetting to see you this way."
"You're evil. I'll never stop fighting you."
"If you don't cooperate tonight things will turn out far worse than they did in June. Should the insemination
fail because of your resistance I will not stop you like I did in June. This time I'll let you kill Patricia."
Jonathan fought against the straitjacket; he spit at Uncle Franklin and cursed him. "I  don't  want  to  hurt
her! I mustn't be allowed to hurt her!"
"I agree. Which is why you must cooperate."
"Get away from me!"
"The wedding is going to start in ten minutes, son. You might as well reconcile yourself to that fact." He
turned and walked away.
"Don't do it to me! Don't, in the name of all humanity!"
His  uncle  said  something  to  Jerry  Cochran.  Jerry  came  over.  "You're  disturbing  the  congregation,
Jonathan," he said in an embarrassed tone. "If you can't be quiet we'll have to gag you."
Jonathan became silent. Gagged, he would be helpless even to warn her away. He began to realize that
this terrible ceremony was probably going to happen just about as Uncle Franklin wanted it to happen.
He hoped, he prayed that he would somehow manage to be gentle with her.
A great, booming note resounded from the choir loft. The ritual had begun.
By pressing his mouth against the crack that Harry  had  made  and  sucking  furiously,  Mike  could  get  a
little air. As he drank it in his whole body seemed to come alive with tingling relief.
The next thing he knew  there  were  fingers  in  his  mouth.  Harry  was  trying  to  reach  in  and  widen  the
crack. Mike forced himself to turn aside into the foul air of the coffin. Harry strained. Suddenly a loud snap
brought a flood of cool, delicious breeze. Mike found the damp concrete smell of the crypt delightful.
Then Harry's arms were around him, lifting him. "Mike, Mike!"
"I made it. I'm alive."
Harry embraced him. "Thank you, O heavenly Father."
Mike saw a long piece of tubing curling down from the broken coffin lid. He took it in his fingers.
It had been leaking a trickle of oxygen into the coffin all along. "What the hell—look at this, Harry."
"What does it mean?"
"They  were  feeding  me  just  enough  air  to  keep  me  alive!"  He  stood  up,  examined  the  mechanism  of
torture. An oxy-gen tank, its valve set just to bleed. This was perhaps the most hideous torture he had ever
heard of. They could have kept him at the edge of  death  for  a  long,  long  time.  "No  wonder  I  didn't  die.
They didn't want me to."
"But they must have. You're dangerous to them."
"Oh, they were going to kill me, all right. But not soon. The point is, I would have lingered in there, slowly
suffocat-ing, until they decided to cut off the oxygen."
"Hours?"
"Maybe days."
Harry hugged him again. "Let's get out of here! We can run! Your car's outside, we can go over to the
precinct! We'll be safe there."
"Who knows where we'll be safe. What about the kids?"
Harry closed his eyes  for  a  long  moment.  "I'm  due  upstairs  in  a  few  minutes.  I'm  supposed  to  marry
them."
"And I have to rescue them. Somehow."
Harry dug in his pocket and came up with what was to Mike a fist-sized chunk of gold. "You gave  me
this, Mike. Maybe you can put it to better use than me."
Mike took the little pistol. "Thank you, Father." Mike hefted the weapon.  Good  for  head  shots.  He  and
Harry walked together across the crypt, to the spiral staircase that led up to the sacristy. From the top of
that staircase light shone down. There were excited voices. "I don't want to do this, Mike."
"You go up there. If they miss you we'll both end up getting caught." To reassure Harry he smiled. "And

don't blame me if the wedding doesn't come off quite as planned."
"I hope it doesn't, Mike. I hope to God it doesn't."
"It won't."
Chapter Twenty-six
THE ALTAR RAIL seemed very far away, a dim white line at the end of the long stone aisle. Beyond it
was the dark, ugly bulk of the altar.
The sacrificial stone.
"Do you see him?" one of the bridesmaids whispered.
Her heart began to flutter. See him?
"Look—he's just to the right among that group of aco-lytes."
She saw that noble head, those delicate features. "Jona-than!" His eyes met hers and there was lightning
between the two of them. Through all the pain and horror of the moment their love shone clear.
Then she was running down the aisle. Footsteps pounded behind her. She was halfway to him before the
bridesmaids managed to stop her. "Not too fast," one of them said. "We have to wait for the music. This is
supposed to be a proces-sion."
Standing there in her delicate shroud, captured again, she cried.
The flower girl in her white taffeta dress slipped around Patricia. The procession was reorganized.
Mary, standing behind the bridesmaids in the ranks of nuns, called up to the choir loft. "Very well, Mrs.
Trask, I think we're ready now."   .
The most beautiful, ethereal music began. Patricia recog-nized it as Bach's "Sleepers, Awake," from one
of  the  cantatas.  Sleepers  awake,  indeed.  They  had  lost  their  chance  for  that.  The  two  of  them  were
doomed to carry out the living nightmare of the ritual, and nothing could intervene.
Her flower girl began moving forward, spreading rose and gardenia  petals.  Patricia  followed,  her  heart
full of the most exquisite anguish. She felt the weight of the procession behind her, the six bridesmaids, the
deaconesses in their dark-red silk festive habits, the common sisters in then-white ones. Behind them came
the children of the Titus School, the girls in blue dresses, the boys in tuxedos. And the pews were filled with
the whole congregation  of  the  Night  Church,  resplendent  in  the  dim  candlelight  in  their  jewelry  and  fine
dresses, their tuxedos and gleaming studs.
"Patricia!"
She heard him cry out, quite clearly. The music got louder. There was a stir around him. He was entirely
sur-rounded by acolytes. She could no longer see him.
"Run!"
Her bridesmaids began pressing her from behind. "I can't, Jonathan!"
He screamed then, an awful, wild, trapped sound that made her scream too. It reminded her of the sound
of a rabbit dying in the country night, crushed in the coils of a king snake.
"Please don't do this," she wailed. "Please, all of you, listen to me! This is evil, it's terribly wrong! Don't
any of you understand? Don't you realize it? You must!"
The music swept along, so gentle, so intensely sweet.
Then they reached the altar. The music stopped.
Mike had gone up the winding stairs from crypt to sacristy with the utmost care, pausing in the shadows
behind the half-closed door. From here he could see most  of  the  sac-risty  and  an  edge  of  the  sanctuary
beyond. He had watched Harry vest and go out into the sanctuary behind his retinue  of  altar  boys.  Titus
and his  own  retinue  of  six  of  the  quietest,  best-behaved  acolytes  Mike  had  ever  seen  remained  behind.
Even so one or two of the boys amused themselves by swinging their censers at one another. From time to
time Titus would snap at them.
Why the hell didn't Titus get moving? As long as he remained where he was, Mike was stuck here.
One of the boys took a quartz wand about ten inches long from a little black case.  He handed it to Titus,
who began examining it carefully and wiping it with a bit of felt.
Outside the wedding started. Mike could see Father and Patricia clearly, but where  was  Jonathan?  He
must be among the crowd of men off to the side. Some marriage, when the groom has to be held by force.
"At the beginning  of  creation  God  made  them  male  and  female;  for  this  reason  a  man  shall  leave  his

father and mother and cleave unto a wife, and the two shall become as one. They are no  longer  two  but
one flesh. Therefore let no man separate what God has joined."
Harry's voice was quick and strained. Titus had noticed it too; he grew as still as an interested snake.
"Now he enriches you and strengthens you by a special sacrament so that you may assume the duties of
marriage  in  mutual  and  lasting  fidelity.  And  so,  in  the  presence  of  the  Church,  I  ask  you  to  state  your
intentions."
A horror that made Mike's skin crawl and his heart beat thick and slow came over him. He remembered
the picture of the dying  monster  he  had  seen  in  Titus's  library.  To  create  anti-man  a  human  being  must
become like that poor, de-stroyed thing.
To twist and contort and bulge with whatever crazy drugs or trances they used, until you became—
Dear  God,  poor  Jonathan!  Poor  damn  kid!  No  wonder  they've  got  him  trussed  up  like  a  hog  in  a
slaughterhouse. He's their damn monster!
His dream! The poor kid, he was guilty all along just like  he  thought.  What  a  damn  sad,  terrible  thing!
And he told me, he told his dad he was guilty! He was begging for help and all he got was a  pat  on  the
back. I can be goddamn thickheaded!
Tears were blurring his vision. Poor kid was crying out for help and his own dad wouldn't believe him.
Oh, Christ, help him! Her too. Help all three of us!
To the core of his soul Mike wanted to rush out there and stop that wedding. But he couldn't, not while
Titus was between him and the altar. Among so many people his only chance, and a slight one at that, lay
in achieving absolute surprise.
The old sorcerer waited in the wings. And the wedding went on.
Jonathan had struggled so hard to break  free  that  he  was  becoming  exhausted.  They  had  gagged  him
after  he  had  tried  to  call  to  Patricia.  Despite  his  hopeless  situation  he  strove  against  the  straitjacket,
frantically chewed the gag.
"Patricia and Jonathan, have you come here  freely  and  without  reservation  to  give  yourselves  to  each
other in marriage?"
Jonathan wanted desperately to tell her that he loved her, that he wouldn't hurt her as long as there was a
particle of humanity left in him. But the gag was  a  skillful  one.  It  went  all  the  way  down  his  throat.  He
could barely groan.
"They have," his mother said in a firm, clear voice. Father Goodwin looked as if he wanted to disappear
into the floor.
"Will you accept your issue lovingly from God, and bring him up in the law, Patricia?"
"No! Not unless I hear Jonathan say he wants to marry me. And you won't even let him talk!"
"She will," Mary said. Jonathan begged God to stop his heart, to somehow preserve Patricia from seeing
what was inside him. How he longed to spare her that!
Twisting,  grinding  into  her,  crushing  bone  and  flesh,  lis-tening  to  the  piercing  ecstasy  of  her
screams.
"Since it is your intention to enter into marriage, join your left hands, and declare your consent before God
and His Church."
"Their hands are joined in spirit," Mary said.
From where the deacons had forced him to crouch down among them Jonathan could just see a bit of his
mother's  face.  He  looked  at  it  with  utter  loathing.  That  was  not  his  mother.  He  considered  Mary  Titus
Banion dead. The body might be walking and talking as if she were alive, but the human being inside was
dead. By loving Satan Mother had committed suicide.
I want to be dead too. I want to be dead!
But he was far from  dead.  In  fact  a  new  life  was  beginning  to  stir  within  him.  Even  as  the  wedding
proceeded a strange, low hum began under the soaring music of the organ.
The hum got louder, and as it did Jonathan began to feel more and more and more ANGRY!
Patricia could hardly bear the bone-jarring sound that had replaced the organ music. It hurt her ears and
stirred her deepest senses to loathing. Her bridesmaids took her by  the  arms.  When  she  felt  their  strong
hands on her she had a wave of panic. Not ten feet from here she had knelt while It strode to her across
the sanctuary. She had broken her rosary, and listened to the beads scattering in the dark.
Altar boys began dousing the few candles, leaving only the vigil candles in their cups and the unwinking
red of the votive candle.

God, give us light!
Altar bells began jangling, dozens and dozens of them in  the  dark.  The  music  boomed  to  a  crescendo.
The sisters and the schoolchildren had filed into the pews. Patricia was surrounded only by her bridesmaids
now, and the deaconesses.
All heads  turned  to  the  back  of  the  church.  A  gaudy  and  amazing  procession,  far  different  from  the
wedding  party,  was  starting  there.  Acolytes  carried  bejeweled  invert  crosses,  blood  red.  Behind  them
deacons held aloft banners of richly worked silk depicting magical symbols,  pentacles  and  six-sided  stars
and rings in rings.
Behind them all came Uncle Franklin, wearing vestments of material too dark to see in the gloom. On his
bishop's miter there romped a serpent that called up in Patricia  an  emotion  so  strange  that  it  didn't  even
have a name.
She felt as if swarms of miles were crawling over her body. Her skin became so sensitive that the dress
seemed as if it were made of fire. "No! Please, no!" Her bridesmaids were close around her, holding her in
strong hands.
The acolytes went left and right along the altar rail until finally Uncle Franklin arrived face to face with
Patricia.
"At last," he  murmured.  His  dry  old  hand  came  up,  touched  Patricia's  cheek.  She  bit  him.  "Ah!  Such
spirit,  you  little  viper!"  He  wiped  his  bloody  finger  down  the  front  of  her  dress.  "Prepare  her,  please,
sisters."
Jonathan struggled on the floor like an animal. But he was no longer struggling to escape or even to end
his own life. He was struggling against the savagery that had been pouring up out of his depths ever since
that infernal horn started roaring.
Now something was happening. His guards were moving him. Were they undoing the straitjacket—was
there a glim-mer of hope?
Yes!
He was more sane than they must realize. Perhaps he would yet have a chance at killing himself.
But then he knew he would not. They had only loosened a few straps to put chains through the loops. He
was now standing up just at the gates to the sanctuary, chained tight to the altar rail. He couldn't even bash
his forehead against a corner of the rail; the chains were too tight.
Uncle Franklin stepped  to  the  center  of  the  sanctuary.  Boys  took  his  miter  and  staff.  He  held  up  the
quartz wand in the dim candlelight.
Patricia was dragged to a spot  just  in  front  of  the  altar.  How  beautiful  she  was  all  in  white,  her  face
floating in that wonderful blond spray of hair.
"I love you, Jonathan!"
"I love you! I love you!" All that issued from behind the gag was a faint series of grunts. "I want to be
gentle with you!"
I want to break you in half with my power! You'll love it too, you bitch!
Her bridesmaids laid her on the floor of the sacristy. She was tied with silken ropes to four rings that had
been fixed there.
For me. She is tied down for me.
He rattled his chains, fighting wildly, desperately. "Re-lax," Uncle Franklin muttered. "You'll have all the
strength you need in just a minute."
The madonna purity of Patricia's skin, the way she was biting her bottom lip as she tried to raise her head
enough to see him, began to excite him.
No! I must be gentle with her. It's all we have left. To deny himself the pleasure of seeing her helpless
he closed his eyes. His body, his very blood, became a prayer.
The serpent within him slithered faster and faster toward the surface of his being.
The nave was filling with an incense that seemed to mix rare perfume with the odor of decaying flesh.
Graves must have smelled thus in ancient times.
"Very well, Jonathan. I shall now dance up your demon for you."
I am the genius of death.
Uncle began by striking the tip of the wand on the altar rail. He held it before Jonathan. "Look!" Jonathan
shut his eyes.
But the demand was only a trick to get him to do that very thing. Next thing he knew the wand was being
pressed  against  the  center  of  his  forehead.  Like  a  tuning  fork  it  resonated  with  rich  vibrations.  They

penetrated deep into Jonathan's skull, filling him with the most extraordinary agony.
He  could  not  turn  his  head.  And  when  Uncle  Franklin  ordered  his  eyes  to  open,  the  lids  rose  despite
Jonathan's frantic efforts to keep them down.
He could not look away from the spinning, gleaming tip of the wand.
Uncle began moving gracefully back and forth. Such was Jonathan's own concentration that it seemed to
him as if everything else had simply disappeared, everything except the dancing, turning body of his uncle
and the glittering wand.
Jonathan's stomach twisted and rumbled and almost twisted inside out. He began to gag.
"Get ready!" Uncle shouted. "Here he comes!"
Jonathan's guts began to feel warm, then hot. In an instant he  felt  as  if  he  were  boiling  alive  from  the
inside. Almost driven mad with the clawing torment, he shrieked and shrieked. He knew that he was going
to tear off the strait-jacket. But it was not him doing it, it was the thing within, taking control of his muscles.
He found himself shaking the straitjacket away as if it were tissue paper, rattling the manacles until  his
wrists were bloody. The torment of the inner boiling had increased his strength a hundredfold.
Then the manacles parted as easily as if they had been made of wax.
When he tried to tear off his gag it snagged on his teeth. He snatched away the thin cloth.
How beautiful she was!
Clumsily, with the newfound gait of a body  that  seemed  an  unfamiliar  size  and  shape,  he  began  to  go
closer to her.
His own part of the ceremony finished, Harry had come back from the sacristy and crept around behind
the high altar with Mike. They were hiding amid the orchids and the irises just to the right of the tabernacle.
When Harry saw the horror out there he tore through the flowers and bolted across the altar. He began
struggling with the tabernacle, trying to preserve the Host from the aston-ishing blasphemy being  enacted
before it. Acolytes promptly subdued him.
The last gesture of a guilty priest.
Mike watched and waited, hoping for some chance to make a move  that  would  matter.  He  knew  only
two things— Patricia had to be saved and poor, pitiful Jonathan had to be given the best care that money
could  buy.  He  stood  glaring  down  at  Patricia  like  a  great  golem,  bellowing  as  if  in  agony.  He  seemed
bloated.
Mike noticed something extraordinary about the poor, pitiful kid, something that made his chest hurt with
sorrow. Jonathan was standing over that girl literally sweating blood. Actual, red blood.
More and more of it oozed out, covering his body with a red sheet. Then the most awful thing Mike had
ever seen began to happen to the only person he had ever been able to call a son.
His fellow human being, whom he loved, started drying  and  cracking  apart.  He  undulated  like  a  snake
shedding its skin. As he did the bloody skin began to separate from dark, scaly flesh underneath. Suddenly
he began pulling huge  slabs  of  himself  off.  He  ripped  off  his  chest,  throwing  the  translucent  skin  to  the
floor. Then with a grunt he scraped his back against the altar rail and left a mass of flesh there. Fissures
formed in his  legs  and  he  drew  them  off,  the  suddenly  hollow  skin  of  the  feet  collapsing  like  punctured
balloons. It made a sound like the shrink wrap coming off a record jacket.
Even as he did this his eyes began to bulge out of his head. They fell, two dried shells, to the floor. What
appeared from within was bright yellow, as big as  the  eyes  of  a  vulture.  Mike  remembered  similar  eyes
staring at him from the sky above Titus's house. He drew the rest of his face away with trembling hands.
There emerged a snake's face, glaring with intelligence and insane hatred.
In the dead silence of the church Mike could hear the wet "pop" as It drew off the last bit of Jonathan,
the hand and skin of his left arm, and tossed it aside like an empty glove. It  flexed  the  strange,  gleaming
claw that had been within.
Seeing this hideous miracle, Mike was at once humbled and filled with creeping horror. God was not the
only power in the universe.
Jonathan began to scream again, but this time it was an awful,  crackling  sound  somewhere  between  a
reptilian hiss and the yammering of a crow.
Mike couldn't bear it anymore. If he had ever seen human suffering, he  was  seeing  it  now.  Jonathan's
heart and mind were in there enduring the torment of becoming that— something. Mike raised the pistol to
put him out of his misery.
But he didn't get a shot. There was a flurry of activity around the thing. Two deacons grabbed  Father
and pushed him up against It.
It shrank back. They pushed Father into Its arms again. It twisted away, It screamed, but they persisted.

Soon, as if unable to stop Itself, It plunged Its claws into him.
He gasped, he hammered at the bulging, relentless mus-cles, he kicked the scaly armor that covered the
body. The claws sliced his flesh away from his muscles.
Then It threw the agonized, half-flayed priest aside and began moving toward Patricia. Father lay dying
on the floor of his own sanctuary.
God, God, why have You let something like this come alive?
Patricia began to  cry  out,  as  sharply  and  desperately  as  a  baby.  Mike  looked  for  a  good  shot  but  the
candlelight and the swiftly moving deacons and acolytes made it impossible. It knelt  down  beside  Patricia
and caressed her with one of Its long nails. Then It lay upon her.
She could do nothing to prevent that shivering, crusty body from assaulting her. "Jonathan," she shouted,
"Jona-than, remember yourself! You're not that thing, you're a human being and you love me!"
Somewhere in the depths of what he had become, she could see him remembering. It was just a glimmer
in the savagery of him, but it was human and it was good. There was a gurgling sound, and something like
sorrow began to battle the hate in the eyes.
"Oh, Jonathan, I know you're still there. I love you. I love you! I'll always love you!"
"I—I-I-ooaaahh!" It glared into her face with Its impossi-bly huge yellow-green eyes. She could not bear
to look any longer. She turned her face away.
It began Its awful croaking again. She felt It beginning to move, to twist eagerly against her, ripping the
flimsy mate-rial of the dress. "Jonathan, darling, if you can still hear me, don't hurt me! Please, darling!"
It grew rapidly more excited. She tried to remain as calm as she could. She could feel It bouncing heavily
on her, making her breath come in ragged gulps. Then It was pound-ing frantically.
But It wasn't hurting her. It was trying to be gentle!
When she opened her eyes she saw on that hideous face an expression of intense conflict. It wanted to
hurt her, but It was resisting the urge as best It could.
"Oh, Jonathan, Jonathan!"
The barrel of a pistol emerged past the edge of the altar above her head.
The  thing  that  had  been  Jonathan  stopped  moving  on  her.  It  raised  Its  eyes,  facing  the  gun.
"P-lease—shuuuhhttt. P-lease!"
For an instant nobody moved.
Bullets went snap! snap! snap.' It fell back onto the steps of the altar, thrashed once, then was still.
Pandemonium. Mary's voice, sharp and collected, rose above the  general  uproar.  "Franklin—was  there
insemina-tion?"
Patricia saw Franklin Titus smile happily. But who had inseminated her—the thing or the little spark of
Jonathan that remained inside?
Oh, Jonathan, it was you, I know it was! And it is your  baby  in me, I can  feel  it! Not the thing's! No,
not that!
People  were  screaming,  rushing  away  from  the  altar  and  the  smoking  snout  of  the  gun.  Mary  and
Franklin moved close together, quite unconcerned about the weapon a few feet from their heads. They held
hands, the old man and his faithful helper.
"All right, listen to me! Shut up and listen, all of you!" It was Mike. He came around the altar. Patricia's
eyes filled with tears. She had never been so glad to see anybody in her life.
He came through the stillness that had followed his shout, and pointed the gun directly at Patricia's belly.
"You cut her loose and bring us a raincoat."
A horrified gasp came from the crowd.
Mike cocked the pistol. His eyes met hers. "Do it. Or she dies."
Silence. Far back in the church there was a single panicky scream. "Cut her loose," Franklin said.
Patricia  got  up  on  wobbly  legs.  Mike  helped  her  into  the  raincoat.  He  half-carried  her  across  the
sanctuary, through the sacristy, and out into the parking lot. His car was there. He put her in,  then  got  in
himself.
She was so grateful and so sad and so frightened that she could hardly think, could hardly talk. She sat as
still as stone while he started the car and drove away.
This was escape! She should be glad. But she wept bitter tears.
"Let's just try and remember the Jonathan we knew."
"Oh, Mike, he's dead. Dead! And I loved him so."
Mike  drove  on  beneath  the  yellow  ranks  of  streetlights.  They  picked  up  speed  on  the  Grand  Central
Parkway. They were heading west. "Do you need a doctor?"

"He didn't" hurt  me.  He  wanted  to  but  he  fought  it.  You  should  have  seen  him,  Mike,  how  he  fought
himself!"
Mike covered her hand with his own big paw. They reached the outskirts of the city and  went  into  the
dark beyond, on and on, toward anywhere as long as it was far away.
Patricia began to allow herself to think of ordinary life again, of places far from the dominion of the Night
Church.
There would be one such place, she felt sure, where she could find peace and safety enough to raise the
child.
For there would be a child. And it would not be the child of the monster. Surely Jonathan had preserved
enough of himself to defeat the plans  of  the  Night  Church—she  just  knew  it,  could  feel  it  in  her  singing
blood. A little baby, the precious last of Jonathan.
In his name, she would bear this child.
Mary and Franklin remained behind after their stunned congregation had left the church. "We'll have to
tell them," Mary said. "They're in despair."
"Let it be a test of their faith. They'll find out soon enough."
It  had  all  gone  so  very  well.  Perfectly,  in  fact.  Well,  almost.  "Banion  drew  his  pistol  before  the
insemination."
"That was a near thing. I must have given him the autosuggestion at the wrong moment. But there was
defin-itely a complete insemination. She's pregnant. And the father was not Jonathan. The father was the
monstrum."
"But she believes otherwise."
"Of course. She'll bear the child as Jonathan's baby."
Mary put her arm around the old man. He was stooped, trembling with the weight of his years. The next
great ritual of the Church would be his funeral, she  suspected,  on  some  moonless  night  not  too  far  from
now. He has come the full distance, and now he is tired.
"I wish them well," he said in his age-soft voice.
"Mike will do an excellent job of protecting her. You can count on that."
He coughed. "I'm exhausted."
She certainly didn't want him to keel over without giving her the last critical piece of information. "Where
are they going, Franklin? You'd better tell me."
"I implanted a suggestion of Madison, Wisconsin."
"Name they'll use?"
"Edwards. And her gynecologist will be a young Doctor Jonas. He set himself up in practice last week. A
good boy, from the Congregation Saint John Martyr in Milwaukee."
Mary locked the church behind them. The air was cool and clear. The morning star hung low in the east.
"Look there, Franklin. Lucifer."
Hand in hand they gazed at the star of the Night Church. Ordinary  people  called  it  Venus,  but  Lucifer
was its proper name, and it was no star of love.
As  predawn  light  spread  over  the  quiet  neighborhood  Mary  noticed  an  astonishing  change  around  the
church. "Look, Franklin, there were demons with us."
"How do you know?"
His old eyes must not be able to see the trees. "The leaves—they went to autumn colors last night."
"So they did. Quite a wonder."
"Yes, a wonder." She watched dead leaves race down the sidewalk on an angry little breeze. How sweet
was the world in silence.
Softly at first in her heart Mary heard the plainsong of the Night Church, then heard it rising triumphant
from dark and hiding, to fill the world.
Aeterne rerum conditor.

