
 
Who on Earth is
Tom Baker?
 
An Autobiography
 
 
Start Reading
 
Table of Contents
 
www.tom-baker.co.uk

Copyright details
Copyright © Tom Baker 1997
E-book published by Tom Baker Limited
www.tom-baker.co.uk
info@tom-baker.co.uk
ISBN 978 0 9926600 0 0
Cover design hallmark-design.co.uk'
First Published in 1997 by 
HarperCollinsPublishers 
77-85 Fulham Palace Road,
Hammersmith, London W6 8JB
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library
ISBN 0 00 255834 3
The author asserts the moral right to be identified as the author of this
work. All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced,
stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means,
electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise, without
the prior permission of the publishers.
For photos and videos of Tom Baker’s life go to:
http://www.tom-baker.co.uk/photos_and_videos.asp

Dedication
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
For my wife, Sue Jerrard

Table of contents
Copyright details
Dedication
 
Introduction
1997 – a chance meeting with my son in New Zealand
Chapter 1
Growing up during the Second World War in Liverpool
Chapter 2
Collecting salvage and involvement in the Church
Chapter 3
Stories about my family, aunts and cousins
Chapter 4
Childhood memories of comics and hospitals
Chapter 5
Serving at altar and telling stories in confession
Chapter 6
My father attempts to give me away
Chapter 7
A novice’s thoughts on poverty, chastity and obedience
Chapter 8
The silence, loneliness and comedy of monastery life
Chapter 9
I leave the monastery and adjust to the world outside
Chapter 10
The Royal Army Medical Corps followed by drama college
Chapter 11
My first marriage and birth of my two sons
Chapter 12
Life as a struggling actor and a part in a Pasolini film
Chapter 13
Spotted playing a dog in York by the National Theatre
Chapter 14
The National Theatre, then Nicholas and Alexandra
Chapter 15
More National Theatre but finally my contract not renewed
Chapter 16
From English teacher to Macbeth, builder’s labourer to Dr Who
Chapter 17
Now I’m in demand and I throw myself into Doctor Who
Chapter 18
More Doctor Who until I decide to leave. I get married again
Chapter 19
Drinking in Soho, Hedda Gabler and Sherlock Holmes
Chapter 20
I marry for the third time and move to the country

INTRODUCTION
‘Would you like to go to New Zealand to do a commercial?’ That’s the
sort of question an actor likes to hear from his agent in freezing mid-
January.
‘Certainly,’ I replied. ‘What’s it about?’
‘Oh, pensions, I think,’ replied Annette, who is the second most
beautiful agent in Europe. ‘Does that bother you? The dosh would not be
light, and you could take your wife as well, first class.’
Suddenly I was desperate to go to New Zealand. But two weeks
passed and I began to forget the offer. I had also been interviewed twice
for the part of an irascible Raj man in a film about the Indian Mutiny.
Funny how all the old Raj chaps are seen as irascible. It wasn’t a very
good part and I was not keen to go all the way to India just to be
irascible. Fortunately the director, looking again at his video, realized I
would be no good and I was dropped.
So to pass the time I went down to the village and had my hair cut
short. Life can be dull in the country and a haircut can sometimes be
high drama. I gave the girl cutter a good tip for laughing at my jokes and
went back home. My wife was looking out of the window as I drove in.
‘New Zealand is on,’ she said. ‘They want you to leave in eight days’
time and to do the job as an old Doctor Who. Oh, you’ve had your hair
cut.’
I spoke to Annette and she confirmed the job and the dosh. June
Hudson, one of my favourite designers from BBC days, agreed to get the

costumes ready with the help of Angel’s, the costumiers, and I took my
trousers to the cleaners.
It was a wild few days. The alterations to the old costumes were done
with great tact. June even managed to locate an original scarf from
Madame Tussaud’s waxworks where I am still unmelted after all these
years. The scarf, being twentyfive feet long was, along with the boots,
the only part of my old costume to fit me.
So eight days later on a Thursday morning after a nice ride in a
limousine, my wife Sue and I arrived at Heathrow's Terminal 3 and
checked in. I cannot tell you how much I was looking forward to going
Air New Zealand. Haymaking in January! Everybody had assured me it
was a very special experience. Everybody was right.
‘I’m afraid one of your tickets has been cancelled, sir,’ said a
charming contralto at the check-in desk.
‘Why has one of my tickets been cancelled?’ I asked. ‘I don’t want to
pry, you understand, but I had planned on sitting next to my wife all the
way to New Zealand and back on your airline.’
‘Would you come with me, madam?’ said the contralto, and my dear
wife meekly followed her out of my sight.
Meantime, to avoid falling into a berserk attack, I struck up a
conversation with the rather fraught looking parents of a fourteen-year-
old boy. Their problem dwarfed mine. As my wife would not be allowed
to sit on my knee all the way across the world all I needed was another
seat. These anxious parents had ordered ten bottles of oxygen for their
frail child.
‘But surely nothing has gone wrong?’ I murmured in bedside tones.
‘I’m afraid it has,’ said the father sorrowfully. ‘There is no oxygen
and the plane leaves in about forty minutes.’

Just then my wife returned with her helper and told me that a solution
could not be found. The impulse for a berserk attack came rushing back,
swept to my head in a few pints of blood by the feel of it. The contralto
looked at me anxiously. My wife looked at me anxiously. I looked at
them both anxiously and wondered how long it had been since an old
man went berserk at their check-in desk. My meditation was interrupted
by the arrival of one of the airline’s male Samaritans clutching a mobile
phone. There was a good deal of movement under his clean white shirt
in the area of his sternum, as if his heart was trying to break out. His
Adam’s apple was jumping, too. In fact as he gasped ‘Hello’ to me I
caught a clear view of his uvula; it was fluttering audibly.
‘We may have found a solution, sir,’ he panted. I smiled
encouragingly at him. ‘Yes, sir, we’ve found two seats for you, sir.’
I clapped my hands gently together in the manner of a sophisticated
Jap and said: ‘Why that’s wonderful.’
‘The only thing is, sir,’ added the Samaritan, ‘they’re broken.’
‘What are broken?’ I asked.
‘The seats, sir,’ smiled the saint from customer services.
I matched his smile to the millimetre as I enquired, ‘What do you
mean by broken?’
‘I mean the electronics are not working, sir. I mean you would not be
able to listen to the stereo or hear the sound track on the films.’
It occurred to me that these seats might be just the ticket. No sound?
Great. No music or commercials from the airline. Great. The sacred
sickness that a moment before might have endangered the man’s life
receded miraculously and I nodded my agreement.

I wished the anxious parents good luck and said I was sure that Air
New Zealand were bound to solve their problem: I mean look at how
quickly they had sorted mine. As I followed the miracle worker through
secret passages which led us aboard in about five minutes and twenty
seconds, I thought I heard the price of £800 a bottle being discussed with
British Airways. They’re in a good bargaining position, I thought. We
were ushered on to the plane and to our new-found silent seats. To a
layman like me they seemed to be handsome seats. I longed to give
myself up to them. As I approached them, my New Zealand guide was
called aside for a moment by some other poor pilgrim seeking a miracle.
Instantly, the cabin steward appeared at my side.
‘Do you realize what you are letting yourself in for, sir, with these
seats?’ and he looked at them with cruel contempt.
‘Oh, yes,’ I answered, ‘we won’t be able to hear the sound tracks,
that’s all. We don’t mind at all. In fact,' and here I leaned towards him,
‘in fact, we are quite glad not to be able to hear.’ My wife nodded in
agreement and my relief was profound. It was also brief.
‘But sir,’ urged the steward, ‘nothing works in these seats. The lights
don’t work and the backs won’t recline.’
Swiftly I tried a seat. The steward disappeared instantly in the ensuing
darkness. The reclining button was pressed and, as a doctor, I could
easily and swiftly diagnose the seat as dead.
The original fixer now materialized at our elbows and then knelt
down! He too had received the latest news, that the seats were dead. The
steward passed my wife and me a glass each of champagne. It was quite
good champagne.
‘My latest information, sir, is that these seats are very severely
handicapped, sir,’ whispered the fixer who couldn’t mend the seats. I

sipped my Champagne.
‘But,’ pressed the would-be miracle worker, ‘but, there is one seat
right up front and if either, you, [a little bow] or your wife, sir, got a bit
fed up you could always do turn and turn about with the good seat up
front.’
My wife was splendid. She just smiled, shook her head and said ‘I
think not’, and we left the plane.
Sixteen hours after our early morning wakening at home we left
Heathrow on Singapore Airlines and thirteen hours after that we arrived
in Singapore. We had been awake for twenty-nine hours. A quick hour
and a half in Singapore, where chewing gum is forbidden by law, and we
were on our way again towards Auckland. Thirty hours and a half. This
next bit was also twelve or so hours. The service was very stylish with a
great deal of bowing and smiling. Continuous smiling can get to you
after thirty odd hours. Sometimes you have the impression that they are
smiling because they know something that you don’t. And they probably
do. With a smile (what else?) a girl delivered a seafood omelette to my
wife. But such is the charm of their style nobody seems to look at the
food with anything other than gratitude.
The long hours drag by and we are a bit discouraged. Fortunately my
wife is brave and knows something about Buddhism so she does not
despair. I know nothing of such philosophy so my suffering is
meaningless.
At last, forty or so hours after getting out of our beds, we arrive. And
the seafood omelette begins to do its work. My poor wife looks grey in
the face and at times is unsteady on her legs.
‘Christ,’ I thought, I’ve come all this way to be a widower.’
This thought turned out to be alarmist, but she was very sick indeed.

Fortunately we were in a wonderful hotel in the best suite and there
were taps which delivered luxury in torrents. My colleagues were tactful
enough not to meet us off the plane, so we were able to crawl discreetly
to the beds we had feared we might never see again.
And after a good long sleep I met my new employers and we got
ready to shoot some commercials. While I was busy at this my wife was
taken around the sights by wonderfully kind and amusing friends.
One evening my wife and I went to a harbour side restaurant for
dinner and we had a very good time. It was a perfect summer’s evening,
the food and wine were excellent and the view over the harbour was
quite delightful. The service, too, was perfect. The waiter could not have
been more attentive without being importunate. G. K. Chesterton once
said that all dining out begins with fear of the waiter. Not in New
Zealand it doesn’t. In London, yes. There dining out begins with fear of
the waiter and ends with the same feeling. And as I looked up at our
perfect waiter I nearly passed out. I was looking into the mysterious
liquid eyes of Sir Anthony Hopkins. I was stupefied. Why didn’t he
notice that I was close to fainting? I watched him working his table
magic all over the place.
A deep melancholy came over me. Melancholy tinged with affection.
What? Yes, sadness and love, old love to be more exact. In a driven
whisper I remarked on this discovery to my wife. ‘Yes,’ she said, ‘It is
Anthony Hopkins. But what would Sir Anthony be doing as a waiter in
New Zealand?’
In London one would not be surprised to be waited on by say Michael
Caine or Jeremy Irons; though, of course, Irons only waits on
insomniacs who are very grateful and make up the majority of his fans.
But Anthony Hopkins? As a waiter? A butler, yes, we’ve all seen The

Remains of the Day, but a waiter? At the Ferry House in Auckland, New
Zealand? Is it possible?
As he brought my main dish and placed it in front of me with perfect
grace and tact I allowed my hand to touch his. Not in a marked manner,
but accidentally, as it were. The effect on me was electric, just like the
old days. The effect on Sir Anthony was imperceptible. Perhaps he’s
forgotten me I thought and my heart dropped like a stone. I saw the
wonderful liquid eyes work their magic on all around me. I saw and
remembered that marvellous enigmatic smile of so long ago. He seemed
to be paying an awful lot of attention to a rather dreary-looking man
with a very high forehead and his blonde female companion who only
had one leg. They also felt that they were being served by a knight that
evening and both seemed to be shaking uncontrollably. Looking closer at
the blonde I realized that she did have two legs but that in the manner so
typical of certain blondes she was sitting on the invisible one. Soon the
whole area realized who the waiter was and the place simply bristled
with static.
‘Why doesn’t he recognize me?’ I asked my wife, sadly.
‘Perhaps it isn’t Tony Hopkins,’ she suggested. ‘Perhaps he’s just a
look alike?’
‘Perhaps he is,’ I muttered, and I called for the bill.
Sir Anthony materialized at my elbow and said: ‘Your bill is taken
care of, sir,’ and he smiled strangely and away he went. Isn’t life cruel?
As I gaped in astonishment at my wife another waiter came up and
asked me if everything was all right. All right? How could everything be
all right? Why didn’t I just nod and say: ‘Fine, fine, thank you?’ But no,
I said that I understood my bill had been paid and that I was surprised.
The waiter knew all about it. He said: ‘The gentleman who paid your bill

is in the bar, sir. He says he’s an admirer of yours and knows you, sir,
and would like to say hello.’
The romance dropped out of the evening. An admirer? I looked to my
wife and sighed. ‘A fan,’ I whispered. We both guessed that this
acceptance of a dinner might lead to two hours of talk on the history of
Doctor Who. The waiter offered to lead us and we got up from our table.
I nearly fell into the harbour as I had one last look around for Sir
Anthony.
We entered the bar and the waiter signalled towards a tall figure
standing in strong light. He was smiling quizzically at me. I looked at
him carefully and was about to say that there was no need for him to pay
my bill when a tiny feeling of unease hit me. His steady smile unsettled
me for a moment. Then, ever the master of the meaningless and
bullshitting enquiry, I said: ‘Is your name Morgan by any chance?’
The man shook his head, though now his smile seemed ironical.
‘No,’ he said, ‘my name is Baker, Piers Baker, I’m your son.’
I could taste again the garlic in the lamb I had just eaten.
‘Piers?’ I whispered.
He nodded and glanced from me to my wife; and still he smiled. I
looked towards my wife too, and saw that she was smiling, and with real
delight. ‘Piers,’ I thought to myself. ‘It’s Piers, my son, Piers.’ I put out
my hand to him and he took it firmly, holding on to it.
I remembered him being born. I remembered wanting to call him
Solomon and allowing myself to be bullied out of it by Constance the
Fury.
I said, ‘This is Sue, my wife.’ And the memories would not stop as I
saw him as a baby. I could not have known of the grief to come. My

suicide. My attempted murder of Constance. All the losses. Of course I
couldn’t have known. And now here he was. Piers. He ordered drinks
with great confidence. I looked at him and suddenly I thought, perhaps
all may yet be well. Perhaps this is a new beginning. And still he smiled
and it was fine to see him. Oh, Piers.
Auckland, New Zealand. January 1997

ONE
My first ambition was to be an orphan. During the war of 1939—45,
Liverpool was a good place to be. All routine was broken by the fear of
death from the Germans’ bombs. The pleasure of being a child at that
time is not easy to describe without seeming flippant. But it was drama,
high drama: fires at night, the fires that burned people’s houses down;
bombs fell and left exotically shaped fragments in the form of shrapnel.
And we collected it and traded it. As long as we were not hurt - and I
wasn’t - life seemed wonderful. At the gasworks one night a landmine,
which was a bomb on a parachute, had descended gently and was
hanging from one of the arms of the gasometer. Hundreds of people
gathered and stood around, conjecturing about the size of the bomb. Bets
were placed. The police and the fire brigade tried to get the people clear
of the scene and, with difficulty, did so. Grumbling and arguing people
were forced away from the danger area bitterly resenting the bossiness of
the authorities.
Policemen and air-raid wardens and fire watchers loved the power
they had to shout at their neighbours and tell them what to do, and they
exercised it. In the shelters we sat all night or until the ‘All Clear’. And
people talked and talked and prayed and prayed that God would spare
us. We were convinced, like all good Christians, that God was on our
side.
Later, when prisoners of war began to be seen in the district we found
them interesting and often very nice. My mother encouraged us to be
kind to the Italian prisoners who reminded her that the Pope was Italian.
The tall and ascetic Pope Pius XII, Eugene Pacelli I think he was called
in civvy street, had a big influence on us even then. That the Pope could

be on the side of the enemy was easily explained away by the teachers
and priests. The Italians were not really the enemy, it was all a
misunderstanding. How could they possibly be the enemy when the
Pope himself was Italian? But it was admitted that the Germans were the
enemy even if they did go to Mass, carry rosary beads and have mothers.
So there was no punishment if you threw stones at Germans, oh no.
Italians innocent, Germans guilty; unless of course they could play the
piano or keep goal like Bert Trautmann of Manchester City. Prayer
became dramatic, as it always does in times of danger. Like exercise to a
heart patient, it takes on an importance that makes us love it. And God,
in His omnipresence was said to be everywhere, even in the hearts of the
bombs. I worried about Him so much. I didn’t want Him to get hurt, and
I prayed that He wouldn’t get hurt, and He always answered my prayers.
He never did cop it.
The advantage of being an orphan sprang from the generosity of the
American people. If your Dad or Mam was blown up then you really got
some attention. Presents would arrive from America with a nice card
from the President himself: funny hats and jackets that were considered
very smart. At that time, the Superman comics were widely read and
there were American soldiers all over the place. As American accents
only reached us through the films, it was like being in a movie to meet
them or to wear clothes that came from their country. We adored
everything about America. We just could not get enough of it, from gum
to caps to tee shirts with funny figures printed on them. We even copied
the way the Americans walked, though Father Leonard, our parish priest,
didn’t like that bit of admiration. He disapproved of rolling buttocks.
The only drawback was that to qualify for the goodies your Mam had
to be in Heaven. So I prayed hard that a bomb would drop on mine as
she trudged home from the Sefton Arms.

It was common in those days for adults to ask quite small children
what they wanted to be when they grew up. What a question in the
middle of a world war! You can’t ask that question now because it would
be tactless as so many children are not going to become anything at all.
But then everybody seemed to be asking children what their future
would be. As if a child might know. These days when I see a child in
Waitrose and smile and say, ‘Hello, are you going to visit your Mum in
her sheltered accommodation when you grow up?’ it provokes glistening
eyes and hollow laughter. And if you pursue it with, ‘Or are you going to
be a drugs dealer?’ it may result in a snub. But in the days I’m talking
about such enquiries were quite commonplace. Of course there was also
a repertoire of stock answers from the child. One might answer: ‘I’m
going into the Merchant Navy, or the foreign missionaries, or the
Adelphi Hotel, or Tate and Lyle’s sugar factory’ or, best of all, ‘I’m
going to stay at home with me Mam and look after her.’ I don’t know
which precocious little sod first said that but the phrase passed into the
language and made hard, sceptical men nod and bow their heads and
strong, good-living women weep. It often led to a hug of such intensity
that your nose would be broken. There were several broken-nosed five-
year-olds in my school. ‘And what are you going to be when you grow
up?’ a neighbour would caw. And to prompt a dumbstruck infant (they
were not all glib), an adult witness, usually the mother, would stand on
the child’s foot. The rising anguish would jolt the memory and the poor
little sod would gasp: ‘I’m going to be a Foreign Missionary.’ That was
a safe answer and always provoked a smile and a roll of the eyes.
‘Perhaps you’ll be a bishop too?’ would be the likely riposte to this
agony-induced lie. And so in school, between singing ‘Faith of Our
Fathers’ and ‘We’re Going to Hang out the Washing on the Siegfried
Line’, Miss Egan, our pious headmistress might easily change the
subject and ask us what we wanted to be when we grew up.

So when she asked us one day, after a roaring chorus of ‘She’ll be
Coming Round the Mountain When She Comes’, what we wanted to be,
Tommy Ryan produced sighs of admiration with ‘I should like to be a
priest, Miss Egan, God willing,’ and Len McAndrews made us laugh for
wanting to be a tram driver. Then Miss Egan turned to me and said,
‘And what about you, Tommy Baker, what do you want to be?’. I
answered like a shot, ‘An orphan, please, Miss.’ The class roared with
laughter until they saw the expression of horror on Miss Egan’s face and
then they copied her expression. ‘So, you want to be rid of your mother
and father?’ she asked me.
‘Yes, Miss,’ I answered, ‘both of them.’
‘Jesus, Mary and Joseph, but why?’ choked Miss Egan.
‘So that I can get presents from America,’ I told her.
Miss Egan looked at Miss Lynch who made a clenched-fist gesture
and looked on to Miss O’Leary who in turn looked towards Miss
McCabe. There was an amazed silence which I smiled through. Miss
Egan pointed a finger at me and the venom in her voice made me shiver
as she said: ‘Go to Father Barry and tell him I sent you.’ ‘What shall I
tell him, Miss?’ I asked her. And the finger began to quiver.
‘Tell him you want to be a murderer and ask him to forgive you.’ And
I did go to Father Barry and he forgave me.

TWO
My scavenging instinct  was developed during the war by the need for
salvage. It was a way for everyone to feel involved in the war effort.
Every cardboard box or roll of newspaper might swing the war our way.
Even the Italian prisoners of war would help us to save rubbish. It was
partly for that reason we were encouraged to be nice to them. We were
to be nice to the ‘Eyeties’ but urged to throw stones at the German
prisoners. I never did, though not out of piety. The chaos of our lives
suited me; I don’t think I wanted it to end. In a way, I suppose, I was a
traitor.
Anyway, the shrapnel we all loved to collect was from German
bombs. My companion in scavenging was Leslie Hampson, a boy with
nearly white blond hair and a very tricky bowling action at cricket. We
worked every afternoon. Nothing was safe from us; if it looked as it
could be turned into a weapon we snaffled it. Of course we had no idea
how a cardboard box could possibly damage the Germans. We were just
obeying orders. Perhaps we thought the English bombers were actually
dropping cardboard boxes on the Nazis.
Most of all, the collecting gave us a sense of purpose. And we won
the Oscar for rubbish collection in our district. Miss Egan took Leslie
and me to the town hall in Dale Street to meet the Lord Mayor, Lord
Sefton. He gave us a certificate and to Miss Egan a pound note. After the
ceremony we went to Cooper’s Cafe for a lunch - my first taste of eating
out. Then we went off to the Hippodrome cinema and saw a film called
Laughing Irish Eyes. It felt so strange to be with our headmistress all
day. After the film we were taken to the Kardomah for tea in silver pots.
My thirst for salvage had made me very shifty by now; no matter what

Miss was saying I was always on the look-out for cardboard. ‘Forget
salvage for a minute,’ Miss hissed. But I’ve never been able to forget it.
Today I’m just as keen as ever to find it and bag it up.
After tea we arrived home with ten pence each out of Lord Sefton’s
pound. So for less than a quid we’d had a great day out for three people
and some change left over. It is the only award I have ever won.
I just remarked that looking for salvage had made me shifty. That is
not quite true. Most well-brought-up Roman Catholics are very self-
conscious. Mine was expressed by shiftiness and furtiveness. This
condition was only exacerbated by the salvage bug. The true cause of
my slyness was rooted in the doctrine of God’s omnipresence. The
notion that God was everywhere put paid to any possible peace of mind
by the time I was six. Not only was He everywhere and watching but so
was my Guardian Angel. I was quite an imaginative child so going to the
lavatory was torture. It still is. I still cannot do a big job if my wife is in
the house, or if the light is on. I can’t even evacuate if the telly is on,
though the wireless doesn’t cause any commotion in that area. It may be
that having God and the Guardian Angel present all the time is what
makes Catholics fast shaggers. One tortured soul I know who suffers
from amazingly premature ejaculation - I mean so premature that he
hasn’t got any children after eleven years of marriage - was told by the
priest that it was probably a blessing in disguise. What a piece of advice
to give to a poor sod who comes off at the sound of his wife’s car in the
drive.
*    *    *    *    *
Nowadays, when I think about dying it makes me clear my throat
uneasily. It didn’t always have that effect on me. When I was a child I
longed to die: I was baptised, we were poor, the house was dirty, my feet
smelled and I was no good at school. What was the point in hanging

about waiting for things to get better? To have a bath meant the murder
of six thousand cockroaches. After that you had to go out and find
maybe twenty pairs of old shoes for the fire. So really it was quite hard
to get clean. Anyway everybody else stank and to be too scrubbed might
lead to charges of getting above one’s station, or worse. It was much
easier in the circumstances to launch into a novena of prayer and hope
that over the ensuing nine days we’d somehow be snatched up by God.
And we could have a quick bath up there, and as school would no longer
be of importance it would be just heaven. The crucifix was always held
up to us to be kissed. We even had a relic of the True Cross that got
kissed by the whole school on Wednesday afternoons. There was a pietà
just inside the doorway of the church, a ghastly figure of the dead Christ
lying across His mother’s knee. The wounds were very clearly and
scarily painted in: a strong visual aid to post-crucifixion. The Sacred
Heart of Jesus stood nearby, a romantic figure with his heart on the
outside of his chest and his right forefinger pointing towards the
bleeding heart in case we hadn’t noticed it. And on both sides of the
church, seven along each aisle, were the fourteen Stations of the Cross.
This depiction of Christ’s journey to Calvary was very clear and
frightening; not like today’s, bloodless, in the style of charcuterie in
Soho butchers’ shops. They were full of blood and tears. And that was
good. We prayed for the gift of tears, and ate Christ’s body and drank his
blood every day; we heard every day how unworthy we were and
thumped our breasts and said that we were not worthy, in Latin. Ashes to
ashes, dust to dust and cries of ‘Tommy Baker’s a piss the bed’,
confirmed me in my belief that I would be better off elsewhere. That
was fifty-three years ago and He still hasn’t returned the call. But it can’t
be long now and so I clear my throat. Maybe it’s nerves?
*    *    *    *    *
I remember we used to be interrupted in our doings when I was a boy.

You’d be in the middle of some little lie you were pitching to your pal
when he would go rigid and roll his eye towards the source of his sudden
paralysis. It was often Fr. McHale on his bike, riding one-handed with
the other one tucked into his coat like Napoleon. This posture meant he
had God in his inside pocket and was on his way to a dying parishioner.
We swivelled as He went by, bowed our heads and thought of our last
ends. Not a word could be spoken; and it wasn’t, until Fr. McHale and
his Maker were out of sight. And just as you tried to pick up the thread
of your fib wouldn’t a funeral follow. Another silence and a bow and
more thoughts of last ends. Even now after more than fifty years I don’t
like to be interrupted in a tale, especially if it’s not true.
And in school we stood for Miss Lynch and then sat down again only
to leap to our feet at the entrance of Miss Egan, the headmistress. Once
she was leading an infant by the name of Moira Kelly who had just that
morning waggled one of her teeth out and then casually pushed it up her
nose. For some reason Miss Egan was slapping her on the back. Moira
Kelly was led away to be shown to some other group and I never saw
her again, or if I did I didn’t recognize her. This rising and bowing went
on everywhere: ‘Stand up when you’re spoken to’; ‘Tell the Doctor your
name’s Tommy.’ I wonder we had time to grow normally with all the
nodding and squirming towards our betters.
*    *    *    *    *
My mother was a pick-up point for my aunt who was a street
bookmaker, an illegal activity in those days. Mam and I would stand
near the gates of West Derby cemetery and ‘act natural’ very badly. After
a while another terrible actor, my dear Uncle Barney, would come along
and, sauntering by, whistling the while, he’d drop a leather bag into
Mam’s shopper. As I reached out in welcome to Barney my mother
would knuckle me savagely, causing me to forget who he was for the
sudden pain that enveloped me.

As I grew older I learned to spot strangers who might be policemen in
the street and pass the word to another lad who would do the same, so
the man taking the bets would easily evade the law. We also had God on
our side, for many of the best punters were the local priests who were
gambling the money they had stolen from poor unemployed men they’d
caught playing pitch and toss in some alley way. The poor are
marvellous, aren’t they? They hardly ever complained. Mind you the
first Beatitude kept us going: ‘Blessed are the poor, for theirs is the
Kingdom of Heaven.’ So you see it wasn’t too bad.
Because the process of taking bets, or making a book, was illegal, the
system of identifying betting slips was important. How to identify the
winner of a bet? The punter couldn’t put his real name on the slip for
fear the police might raid the premises, find the slips and identify the
gambler. This risk was avoided by a system of noms de plumes. Once
chosen the name was better kept to so that the bookie’s clerk didn’t get
confused. There was often surprising ingenuity shown in the choice of
name. ‘Valentine Dyall’ was a popular one, or simply ‘The Man in
Black’. One disgraced classicist used Thucydides which caused
pronunciation problems back at base. The accepted explanation was that
Thucydides was Turkish for nancy boy. The excitement of this watching
for ‘The Law’ was intense. We were brought up to hate the police only
slightly less than the Billy Boys, Protestants from Salisbury Road. ‘Once
a policeman, never a man’ went the saying, and nobody denied it. We
could not name a single saint who had been a policeman, nor did they
have a patron saint. It was always said that policemen got a half day off
on the feast of the Slaughter of the Holy Innocents because Herod was
their sort. And so with my Guardian Angel on my shoulder, detesting the
Orange Lodgers, and the Jews for killing Our Lord, and believing that
monkeys could talk and that the letters INRI, Iesus Nazarenus, Rex

Iudaeorum, scrolled above the crucified Christ stood for ‘Iron Nails Ran
In’, I pursued the next bit of my childhood.
*    *    *    *    *
Desperate for comfort and distraction I became more and more involved
in the church services. This parted me from my fellows in the district
who were not nearly so impressed by God being everywhere nor by
Guardian Angels sitting on their shoulders; they were more preoccupied
by their dicks.
For a little while I attended Wanking School in the house of one of the
lads called Rex Barrow. We would gather in a circle and extract our
organs. Barrow himself had a prodigious cock and was very proud of it.
We would all watch nervously while he got going. Even at the slack his
member was daunting. But as he began to recite the names of local girls
and rock back and forth to our accompanying groans, the miracle took
place before our eyes.
‘Rosie Ball, Rosie Ball,’ Rex would mutter hoarsely, for libido and
hoarseness always go together. ‘Rosie Ball,’ and as we groaned his
snake flickered into life. ‘Evelyn Coffee,’ said somebody else to a new
groan of approval and Rex’s prick filled out further, mesmerizing those
of us whose tackle remained inert.
‘Bertha Moonan?’ I suggested, desperate to kindle the flames further.
There was a howl of anger as Rex’s dick died.
‘You daft bugger, now look at what you’ve done,’ snarled Derek
Houghton, ‘you’ve killed his dick.'
This extravagant statement produced a mournful silence that would
have fetched down all the dicks in Liverpool. But at ‘Beatty Holmes’
hissed suggestively by George Beswick, Barrow’s member began to
recover consciousness and its head would sway from side to side like a

cobra. Then the names came thick and fast as we were all seized with
lust and grasped the alchemy of girls’ names and realized what a name
could do for a flabby dick. ‘Mildred Barton’ (groan of agreement),
‘Doreen 
Manning’ 
(more 
groans), 
‘Moira 
Lynch' 
(that 
was
inspirational), and Barrow’s nob rose and looked him straight in the eye
— eye to eye you could say — ‘Mary Barlowe’ (ooh, ah).
‘Say it again,’ grunted Barrow, and Wilfred Usher obliged in just the
right way and Barrow shot his lot to cries of admiration from the whole
circle. And so it went on as we all helped each other from slackness to
stiffness to joy. Reckless and Godless as we felt ourselves to be, I do
remember one session being ruined completely when the litany ran from
Mildred to Moira to Mary Barlowe and so on, when just as several were
at spilling point, someone cried out ‘Blessed Maria Goretti'. Christ, that
did it. All dicks were struck down dead by this blasphemy and we went
home ashamed.
I wasn’t too immense at this activity, though I could call a name with
the best of them; and so after a particularly satisfying confession which
allowed me to walk upright again, I broke with the Wankers and settled
for sniffing incense and God. 
*    *    *    *    *
Mr Harte, our headmaster, was always banging on about how short life
was, ‘For now thou canst be steward no longer.’ It was very difficult for
fourteen-year-olds to swallow this line of thought. He meant well, of
course, but it carried no real weight. But the organization of the school
gave strength to Mr Harte. The sexes were strictly segregated both in
classroom and playground. I was only there for one year and I can’t say
if the teaching was any good as I was classified as dull. That was the
euphemism for thick in those days. One day Mr Fred Roberts, my

favourite teacher watched me trying to work out some problem in long
division or something.
‘You know, Baker, I was talking to my wife about you last night,’ he
said. This caused fifty-eight eyes to swivel my way and fifty-eight ears
to cock. Teachers just did not say things like that. ‘Yes,’ resumed my
hero, ‘I said to her, you know, “I’ve got this lad in my class, Baker he’s
called. Thick? He’s as thick as the Pier Head. Not a brain in his head. A
good-living lad, goes to Mass every day, fast bowler and all, but thick.”
Poor old Baker,’ he said, patting me on the shoulder. ‘Still you can
always drive a tram.’ The concentration among the boys raised the
temperature, as the casual harshness of Mr Roberts’ judgement
fascinated them. I was too upset to try to argue the point of my thickness
with the teacher I liked most in the school and the boys were watching to
see if I would crack under the mockery. I didn’t show the pain I felt, at
least I don’t remember saying anything back. I wanted to, of course. I
wanted to tell him that I wasn’t thick but I didn’t know how to set about
it. In many ways, I am thick. There is so much I don’t understand. A
woman I was working with recently was staggered at my inability to
grasp the slow foxtrot. I’m not too immense at being able to make a
telephone call come to think of it. It’s to do with fear, I suppose. I can’t
swim or dance, nor do I know whether a London bus has been to the
place listed on the front or whether it’s going there; which means I’ve
never been on a bus by myself. Or perhaps it’s to do with being tall. I
remember being at six feet one, the tallest nine-year-old in Liverpool.

THREE
And now I cast my mind back to the ones who loved me. My Auntie
Louie was good to me. Because my father was away so much and my
Mam was working at scrubbing floors and being a barmaid at the Sefton
Arms, we were a bit undisciplined my sister and me. If there was jam in
the house we had it today. Never mind tomorrow or any other day, we
had everything now. I still like it now and I still love jam. I wonder if
children still have jam as often as we did? ‘You jammy bugger,’ was
sweet to hear. ‘He’s dead jammy,’ said people with envy of anyone who
was touched with luck. Though the meaning was often wrenched in the
sardonic way of frightened people trying to be brave.
‘Did you hear about Alfie Richards’s Dad?’
‘No. Why, what happened?'
‘He fell off a crane at Albert Dock, eighty feet he fell, on to a an
empty cage.’
‘Oh aye, what happened then?’
‘Well, there were twelve bars in the cage, so he was cut into twelve
pieces.’
There would be a pause, then:
‘I always thought that Alfie Richards was a jammy sod.’
When my brother was being born in the winter of I942, Mam was too
ill to look after us so Auntie Louie O’Boyle took us on. She had three of
her own, Michael, Joan and Billy. And it makes me cry to think of the
kindness of them all. I always thought of my cousin Joan as very
beautiful; I still do.

Even at the age of eight I was an embarrassment to everyone because
of my preoccupation with God.
‘Do you realize that God is everywhere?’ I’d ask, echoing Miss Egan
from school.
Yes, we know He’s everywhere, we know the catechism too, you
know.’
‘No, I mean everywhere,' I’d insist, ignoring the tone of voice from
my uncle Bill, who didn’t seem to be impressed by God’s omnipresence.
‘Yes, God is all over the place, there isn’t anywhere that God is not in.
Or up.’ I had to have the last word even if it meant hell. ‘He’s even up
the leg of Mrs Pierrepoint’s drawers.’ Auntie Louie would look at me
warningly and I’d take the hint from her and her alone. I was spoiled by
the comments of neighbours on my appearance. I was tall for my age. In
fact, I haven’t actually grown since then - not in the tallness, I mean. I
was very blond and curly and a prodigious bedwetter. Piss-the-bed Baker
they called me at school for they had sharp tongues as well as sharp
noses. One bath a week could not conceal my incontinence. There’s a
statue of some famous little pisser in Brussels, I think, called Manneken
Pis. Anyway this little statue pisses away in the street every day bold as
brass and everybody takes photographs of him. He’s famous and if he
stopped piddling then he’d probably get the push. I did it every night and
not a single admirer to hand. ‘I’ll cure him,’ said Louie, ‘if it’s the last
thing I do and as God is my judge.’
In our house we drank tea all the time. The kettle was on all day. My
mother was a thirty-cup-a-day supper and we easily burned the arse out
of three kettles a year. Today I can easily drink nine cups a day and
probably, if I wasn’t married, I could emulate me Mam and approach the
magic thirty mark. There was only one woman in the street who could
out-drink our Mam and that was Mrs Goodstone who had a son with a

club foot. On a bad day, we’d hear that Brenda, that was her name, had
reached thirty-three cups. This news would be received in tight-lipped
silence and me Mam would lower her head. Thirty-three was Mam’s
ideal number. She was proud to be in the thirty group as that was the age
of Our Blessed Lord when he did His first miracle at the marriage feast
at Canaan, the changing of the water into wine. What a beautiful miracle
that was, just as impressive though less showy than the feeding of the
five thousand, though both were prodigious feats of catering that have
never been surpassed as far as I know - and I have kept my ear to the
ground these last sixty odd years, I can assure you, oh, yes. 'The first
miracle,’ Mam would mutter in a whisper. To he fair I think my mother
would have been more impressed if Jesus had turned the water into tea.
Especially if He’d managed to make it sweet as well. But to sup thirty-
three cups of tea was considered a great achievement that compelled our
admiration for Mrs Goodstone, and her with a boy with the club foot.
Thirty-three was a sacred number as it was the age of Our Blessed
Lord at the time of His last miracle, the sticking back of the ear, so we
are told by Luke in chapter twenty-two. It was said that a woman who
could drink thirty-three cups down to the lees would receive a message
from Pope Pius the XII, Eugene Pacelli that was. But I can’t be certain
of this for great piss-the-beds often have very selective memories.
The cure for my affliction was very simple in Louie’s mind. As piddle
was simply recycled tea all we had to do was reduce the intake of the
Typhoo. And so my last cup of tea was to be at four o’clock. We went to
bed at about seven forty-three. Before that I would be marched to the lav
by Louie and emptied. At nine o’clock I would be roused and squeezed
again. To no avail, in the morning I would be found steaming. The
morning discovery of my incontinence would lower the spirits of all of
us, for Louie was above all fair and didn’t want to be too harsh.

‘Fetch the time forward,’ suggested Bill, a methodical sort of man
who in another country, and given the opportunity, might have been a
great watchmaker. So his suggestion was acted upon and two was the
new deadline. I was watched at school for the slightest sign of liquid.
Moisture on the lip would have caused uproar. I was surrounded by
informers who took a keen interest in my cure. They were only amateur
informers for there was no reward except the sadistic pleasure of the
pious doing a good deed.
Later I grew quite fond of the informers and joined their ranks as we
spied on the police who sought to steal the dreams of poor gamblers in
the alleyways of Liverpool 22. In that way the police were nearly as bad
as the priests. And so I was supervised by gleeful little sods who
climbed the door of the lavvy while I was at my grunting. And parched
as I don’t know what, I would go home to Auntie Louie who loved me
but was strict.
With so little liquid in me I must have been near danger point. I was
fed, then bed and roused again to see if that would do the trick and keep
me dry. And it began to work and Louie was pleased with me. The
pleasure of waking up in the morning nice and dry was wonderful. I still
think of it as a great pleasure.
My Auntie Louie was, as a young woman, extremely pretty. I
remember when she brought the food to the table she expected only one
reaction, head down, your irons in hand and get to it. Anything less than
this made her very impatient. If, for instance, you looked at the food as
though assessing it whooosh . . . gone! Nothing said. No need to say
anything. Nobody else at table seemed to see what had happened and
there you were, ravenous. You sat through the meal, ignored by Louie
and the rest of the company and that was that. By the next meal you had
grasped the rule and when the plate arrived you troughed it joyously and

Louie would nod. No need to talk about it; the signal had been received.
My Auntie Louie was simply wonderful to us.
She would often be in the company at our house to visit Ninny, my
grandmother. But if, for reasons of extra work she wasn’t there — for
Louie was also a barmaid — then the story of Pat Heinz might be told.
You couldn’t be certain because like all good storytellers Ninny Fleming
could be quite capricious. Sometimes her tales would make my mother
sigh with resentment though she never dared to express open
disapproval of any of them. So, after enough of the Guinness, when bits
of cheese and pickle had been downed and various little tales of, say,
The High Rip Gang, an infamous gang of street hooligans in Ninny’s
day, had been turned over yet again, there would be a pause. Ninny had a
way of getting comfortable with a little growl and a sigh that suggested
that she might suddenly say, ‘I wonder what happened to our Pat?’
So, adjusted to her liking, and lips and throat moistened, and
apparently not seeing the nudging going on among the visitors or the
mouthing of ‘I wonder what happened to our Pat?’ she’d say: ‘I wonder
what happened to our Pat?’ Corsets would creak everywhere as all got
comfortable. There would be a general murmur of approval from the
assembly and the tale would unfold. Willie, Tom, Jane, Maggie,
Chrissie, Annie and Louie Fleming all lived at 27 Lemon Street,
Liverpool, under the small mottled iron hand of their mother, Christina
Fleming, a widow whose husband had been found dead in a tram shelter
on the old Dock Road. Like many married women, once widowed the
partner in former happiness was never mentioned again. Fierce Catholics
all, who toed the Church’s line on everything, they’d hit anything they
disagreed with and not let it get in the way of supper. They had no
doubts at all about anything. They were marvellous examples of total
bigotry, like all good Catholics at that time. They were what is known as

‘good living’. That meant they were priest-ridden and jealous of their
reputation, and hated Protestants or any other race of pagans.
Tom Fleming, the eldest, was said to look like King George V, and
indeed, was often mistaken for His Majesty when in the vicinity of
Scotland Road, Anfield Road or Lime Street. Why people would suspect
that the King might be working in Tate and Lyle’s sugar factory is
beyond me, but there you are. Tom was a devoted son and brother and
would always meet his sisters from school or work or a parish dance.
The girls were all members of the Children of Mary, a society dedicated
to the preservation of chastity among young Catholic girls, and so were
objects of lust to passing heathens or even passing true believers. Willie
also prized his sisters’ virtue and would beat any man who showed lack
of respect. But they were all quick with their fists and with their wits,
too; you had to be to preserve identity and self respect.
Well, it so happened that Willie had a friend at St John’s School by
the name of Pat Heinz. This boy was an orphan and Willie, being a good
talker, warmed the whole family towards his pal Pat. Ninny said one
day, Why don’t you bring him home to us, one more won’t make any
difference.’ Things were not so complicated then in the matter of
disposing of children or snaffling the buggers, if that’s what you fancied.
And so after quick consultations with the teachers and a woman from the
orphanage, Pat Heinz was transferred to the Flemings at no fee and to
everybody’s satisfaction. So the story went. And Pat was happy and
Willie was happy and the rest of them soon became fond of the lad and
referred to him as ‘our Pat’. Being surrounded by lovely kind girls who
sometimes spoiled him made Pat feel he was in heaven. He copied
Willie and Tom and met whichever of the girls was out of the house. But
Louie was his favourite. He adored her and would do anything for her. If
he got on Louie’s nerves a bit, she hid it pretty well and was genuinely
fond of Pat. At Mass Pat would try to sit next to Louie. He’d walk her to

Benediction, too, and come home with her, both reeking of incense. And
so the time passed and Pat’s adoration increased, and everybody was
charmed by his devotion to Louie. The others teased him but Louie
defended him. While spoiling and defending the poor lovesick orphan,
Louie never ever gave the impression to Pat or anyone else that her
fondness for the boy was anything more than sisterly affection. And so
the years went by and Bill O’Boyle came along, a handsome, Liverpool
—Irish factory worker who thought he was a born watchmaker. And
Louie fell in love with Bill. Pat went a bit quiet. Jane and Annie and
Maggie and Chrissie tried to make it up to him; but they were falling in
love, too. Anyway, to get on with this tale, Louie and Bill got married
and a right old celebration took place. And Pat was there and Louie was
very, very nice to him.
Ten weeks later Pat Heinz announced he was marrying a girl from off
Great Mersey Street, not far from Lemon Street, and quite near
Fountains Road where I was to be born in January 1934. The banns were
read out over the usual number of Sundays with the happy couple
present. And so Pat and his girl, Dorothy, I think her name was, got
married. And Louie met Pat at the church door and embraced him and
cried and wished him well and Pat just smiled.
Now in those days wedding celebrations were broken into two parts.
Immediately after the ceremony, everybody went to the church hall or
function room above a pub for a few drinks and to see the bits and pieces
of presents and show off their gear. This would last a couple of hours
and then there would be a short interlude of another couple of hours.
People would nip off home and get into something comfortable. The
groom would just have time to knock up the bride and then the real
drinking and dancing would begin.

Now Pat and Dorothy were married at eleven fifteen. The service was
over by ten past twelve. Right on twelve fifteen at the church door Louie
kissed Pat, as I mentioned, and I suppose pictures were taken. I never
saw any photographs but we were not too good at preserving souvenirs
in our family. At twelve thirty the happy couple and their guests had
arrived at St John’s Parish Hall and were having a drink. At twelve
forty-five Willie, Tom and Barney their brother-in-law got to the hall
having stopped off at some pub. They got themselves some Bass Blue
Label and surveyed the scene. It was now ten to one. The boys, as they
were called, suddenly wanted to drink to Pat, to be with him and tease
him, too, I suppose, but they couldn’t see him. One of them went to the
back of the hall where the catering preparations were taking place - but
no Pat. Willie then went to the gents to see if the happy man might be
throwing up his regrets. No Pat. It was not a very big hall. Dorothy’s
family were gathered at one side in the time-honoured fashion of
wedding parties in those days. The boys nipped outside and walked
around the perimeter of the hall — but no Pat. They became uneasy
when Dorothy’s mother asked about her new son-in-law. It was now one
twenty and no Pat. The wedding had only started two hours and five
minutes ago. Pat had been kissed by Louie at the door of the church at
twelve fifteen. He’d been seen to arrive at the hall at twelve thirty with
his brand new wife, Dorothy. Where was he? As discreetly as possible,
Tom Fleming, his brother Willie, and their brothers-in-law, Bill O’Boyle
and Ernie Rowlands circled the church hall inside and out. There was no
sign of Pat Heinz. By one thirty everyone knew Pat was missing.
Dorothy the bride just kept on smiling and smiling and saying, ‘I don’t
know what all the fuss is about.’ And indeed she didn’t. Poor Dorothy
didn’t know what anything was about that day and neither did anyone
else either, because Pat Heinz had disappeared. And he was never seen
again by anyone who was at that wedding.

Through the Merchant Navy there was an immense network of
contacts in all the English-speaking ports of the world. It was not
unusual for a man to jump ship in Canada or New York or Fremantle
say, but sooner or later he’d be seen in a bar by someone from
Liverpool. But Pat wasn’t even in the Merchant Navy, so where did he
go? And while Louie was pulling pints at the “Legs O’Man”, Ninny
would sigh, sip her stout, and wiping her mouth would sigh again and
say, ‘I wonder what happened to our Pat?’ And we wondered with her,
but we never did find out.

FOUR
During the 1940s every boy I knew read the comics. Our whole week
was dominated by the arrival of these tales of propaganda and stories of
public school life. There was nothing published on a Monday as I
remember, but the week went like this: Tuesday, the Adventure and the
Wizard; Thursday came the Rover and the Hotspur; and Friday brought
the Champion. There were stories about young footballers of prodigious
strength, Cannonball Kid, who played for Burhill United and once
scored for England with a stupendous shot from the halfway line. The
manager's name was Baldy Hogan, and he’d once been a canny player
himself whose career was tragically ended through injury and the loss of
his hair. In the Wizard there was a character called Wilson. We didn't
know his first name. He lived on the moors, communed with nature, and
wore black tights. He was ahead of his time and of his opponents and
nearly always won his races. Thursday was a great day for us with the
Hotspur. The most popular stories in that comic were about public
schools. Boys were inundated with tales of how our betters behaved at
schools where there was tradition, fags, prep and detention. Places where
chaps called each other by their second names. As far as I knew, only the
Irish could effortlessly call each other by their surnames without causing
offence. I knew some Irish women who called their husbands by their
surnames. They would come to the pub and enquire with glittering eye:
‘Is Boyce there?’
Only teachers called us by our second names. In the Hotspur there
was a long-running story about a school called Red Circle. The
headmaster was called Dixie Dale, ever such a fair chap, and most of the
adventures were written around a character called Rob Roy Macgregor.

In another story in the Rover we followed the life of a bright working-
class boy called Tom Smith. Note the ordinariness of his name. He was a
clever lad who had been able to get to public school with the help of his
local vicar and lots of hard work. We learned about fagging, a system of
service in those places where young boys were the servants of older
boys. They were always making toast for their man and running errands.
God help them if they were less than perfect. The older boys had the
power to beat their fags and they did so, frequently. Fortunately for Tom
Smith of the lower third, he fagged for an easy-going chap called A. P.
E. Carew who was not demanding and had a fine line in drawling
speech. We grew familiar with these small but vital details of initials. We
knew that in the county cricket sides the placing of the initials was a
certain sign of the player’s status. By that I mean we knew whether a
man played for love or money: initials in front, N. W. D. Yardley, an
amateur; Compton D. C. S. was a pro who did it for a living, and didn’t
use the same changing room. Gentlemen versus Players. Those were the
days.
So we had words on our tongues that only applied to the fantasy
world of public schools where we longed to be. In spite of the cruelty of
certain masters, life there seemed one long wheeze. In Red Circle, one
housemaster was called Mr Smugg. How we loved to read of young Rob
Roy MacGregor outsmarting the cruel housemaster every week. It
seemed to be always summer and life full of japes and visits to the tuck
shop for buns and bottles of Cream Soda or Sarsaparilla, which was also
called Dandelion and Burdock. Dandelions were usually associated with
wetting the bed. Not one single boy in those places ever wet his bed.
This made me very depressed, as you can imagine. We picked up bits of
Latin and were brainwashed about loyalty.
In the Adventure, there was one character who puzzled us. He was
called Alf Tupper, the Tough of the Track. Alf was very working class,

rough of speech and lived in an abandoned railway carriage and only ate
fish and chips. He was just like us except that he was a brilliant athlete.
The stories were about his triumphs over drawling fellows with double-
barrelled names who wore Norfolk jackets and said I say, you chaps’ an
awful lot. He was our first antihero, I think, bloody-minded and full of
spirit, with no desire to be like the drawling enemy. These stories
swamped our imaginations and reinforced our mistrust of girls and our
patronizing attitudes towards foreigners.
The Champion, out on a Friday, was dominated by Rockfist Rogan of
the RAF. Boy, he was the terror of the dirty double-crossing wild-eyed
Huns. He feared nothing didn’t our Rockfist, he could take on three
German planes at a time, shoot down two, see the third off with the
Kraut pilot screaming, ‘Gott in Himmel' as he gratefully made his
escape. Rogan would then have his eggs and bacon, crack a few jokes
and spar a few rounds in preparation for his fight that night against the
heavyweight champion of some Highland Regiment or other. Gosh, what
a man was he. So my imagination was filled with the voices of cowardly
Italians, (Mama Mia), or Germans, (Gott in Himmel), or the whispers of
mad priests asking me ‘and did pollution take place?’, or my mother’s
exhortations to know my place, keep my bowels open and always polish
my shoes - feverish stuff.
*    *    *    *    *
When I was about nine years old I was struck with abscesses on the back
of my left leg. They got so bad that I had to stay in hospital for several
days. The pain of having my abscesses squeezed was really very severe
and it upset me terribly. The nurses chosen for this ghastly job had
tremendous thumbs. I think that most nurses in those days had powerful
thumbs but the squeezers were very special. I still tremble at the sight of
highly developed female thumbs. The squeezing nurses always seemed
to work in pairs. One would hold you down while the other with raised

thumbs and flickering tongue would approach and, with sacramental
precision, would complete the torture. These squeezing sisters always
seemed to be red- headed and very freckled. And when they had
squeezed all the pus-filled children in the dressing station they would
cruise the wards to back up other nurses. Especially they were useful to
their ward sisters when it came to making the children eat up their food.
One day I was ordered to eat up my cabbage. Being rather undisciplined
and mostly used to jam butties and sweet tea I refused to obey the order.
At my refusal to eat up my greens, the two ward sisters glanced at each
other and clicked their fingers and, as if by a miracle, two thumbs
appeared topped by freckles and red hair. I was pushed back against my
pillow by the finger clickers while ‘Power Thumbs’ slapped a wad of
cabbage across my mouth and tried to force it down my throat with her
magic thumbs which were a bit like tyre levers. Struggling to resist the
force feeding which made me feel sick, I began in my fear to fart like a
buffalo. The finger and thumbs trio of freckled harpies were appalled by
my grossness, involuntary though it was.
‘Stop that stink,’ they screamed, ‘stop it.’ But I couldn’t stop it. Like
a lost and panic-stricken tug boat in a thick fog I farted on in various
keys of terror. Gasping for breath, the cabbage squad retired and
conceded defeat.
After the healing process was judged complete, I was pronounced
well and was sent to a place called Olive Mount just outside Liverpool.
It was a convalescent home for faded children. I was glad to escape from
hospital and glad not to have to go home either. At Olive Mount the
discipline was strict but the place was wonderfully clean. I had a little
locker all to myself and was given a toothbrush and a face cloth. That
was all I had so it wasn’t hard for me to keep my locker tidy. The food
was tasty and when the servers saw the effect that a bucket of cabbage

had on me they did not insist I eat any. So I was happy there for a little
while.
The desire for change, the need to escape from one place to another
grew more intense as time went on. I wanted to escape from home into
the church because I preferred the smells in the church to the smells at
home. The overriding smell at home was one of feet, neglected feet. And
on Fridays when we had salted fish for supper the smell hung about like
an unwanted relative. It simply would not leave us. By Monday, which
was washing day, the salt-fish smell then joined the smell of soap suds
coming from the kitchen copper where the weekly wash simmered away.
So, suds, salt fish and unloved feet were the dominant odours all over
the house. To these smells was added the scent of stale tobacco for
everybody smoked all the time. So I always wanted to leave home
because the smells I have just mentioned outweighed my love for my
mother.

FIVE
Becoming a professional liar  grew out of my obsession with God’s
business. I grasped very quickly that life in the House of God was more
interesting than life at home. For one thing God was a stranger and I
always got on very well with strangers. Another attraction was the
cleanliness of the church, the lovely smell of the floor polish, the altar
rails all smooth and shiny, our highly decorative lace surplices, washed
and starched by nuns for the greater glory of God.
My own home always made me feel ashamed. My poor mother was
mostly too tired to clean our house after spending most of her day
cleaning other people’s houses. And then in the evening, after a day’s
scrubbing, she would do a shift at the Sefton Arms pulling pints. Nearly
all the women I knew were always tired. How could it have been
otherwise? They worked in the munitions factories on long shifts and
then came home to all their household tasks. And often without the
support of a husband because of the war.
Because of the bombing we were often as many as fourteen people in
our house. The whole place became a sort of billet at night. But I
remember liking the great chaos. And the refugees from the bombs were
all very nice and talked and talked all the time, which pleased me. There
was Mrs Fogarty, a widowed lady and very respectable; her brother, old
Joe Fogarty, a docker, who only shaved once a week; there was big John
Fogarty, her eldest son; and handsome young Joe Fogarty who shaved
every day and was killed a little later in the war. There was Annie, my
mother’s sister, and her husband and children and, of course, my
grandmother, Ninny Fleming.

Keeping clean in a family of fourteen people wasn’t easy. In the
mornings the smell of Lifebuoy soap filled the house. Actually the smell
of soap pervaded the whole of Liverpool most of the time. At school the
smell was of Derbac soap, the instant slayer of lice. The lice were hunted
by a special squad of highly trained women who were chosen for their
eagle vision. Sometimes they could tell you had lice when you were
thirty feet away. Being a Lice Lady was quite a good job in those days as
so many of us were lousy a good deal of the time. It was a very common
sight to see small groups of children standing on a corner with jam
butties in one hand and the other hand busily scratching away at the tops
of their heads like miniature Stan Laurels. But nobody seemed to mind
at all. Whenever I see the visual cliché of a character scratching his head
as if in thought, I am translated back to my happy lousy childhood on the
street corners of Liverpool.
At school, we were very preoccupied with cleanliness and Godliness
and leprosy and the sufferings of waifs and strays in Africa, while our
Guardian Angels perched on our shoulders sneezing away in the clouds
of dandruff and falling lice. We often heard stories of saintly priests who
sacrificed themselves among the lepers of Africa. We became obsessed
with Africa and the sufferings that went on there. We worried more
about the black people of Africa than we did about our neighbours
around us in Liverpool. Fr. Nolan, our parish priest was forever
haranguing us about saints and lepers. In singing in school we had
“nymphs and shepherds”, but from Fr. Nolan we got “saints and lepers”.
His favourite leper man was a Fr. Damian who simply adored lepers. As
he couldn’t find any in Liverpool he’d buggered off to Africa where the
place was crawling with them. There he hugged them and they made
him pots of tea and brought him water every night to wash his feet. It
sounded a great life to us, supping tea and hugging friendly lepers. Once,
so the story went, after a long day’s hugging, the time came for the feet

washing. By some accident the water was boiling, but Fr. Damian didn’t
notice because he’d caught leprosy. It was only the look of horror in his
servant’s face as he happily wiggled his toes that made Fr. Damian
realize what had happened. But he didn’t mind. ‘And he became happier
and happier,’ said Fr. Nolan, giving us the gimlet eye of the frustrated,
God-stealing missionary. ‘And why? Because Our Lord loves a leper,
because He made them lepers in His mysterious wisdom and not only
does he love a leper, He loves a leper lover.’
Fr. Damian was always hoisted up as an example of self- abnegation.
Self-abnegation, what a phrase to use to infants. Stories of leper colonies
and of dodgy saints who liked licking scabs. It was all so romantic to us
and I longed to take part in the great work of enlightening the benighted
natives of just about anywhere in the world. We weren’t frightened of
disease, we longed for it. We scoured the streets for lepers whenever we
were out scavenging for salvage, but we never found one, not even
among the supporters of Everton Football Club.
But when leprosy finally arrived in our house in the form of scabies,
Fr. Nolan was nowhere to be seen. The neighbours were informed of our
infection, and in turn informed on us to the rest of the parish. There was
no Fr. Damian to come and make pots of tea for us and give us a hug.
We were on our own, my sister and me and our Mam. Daily we walked
to the hospital aware of everybody avoiding us for fear of the plague of
scabies. Neighbours gone, Fr. Nolan gone, and banned from the church
as well. For all we knew our Guardian Angels had buggered off, too, in
fear of the dreaded scabies. We couldn’t be sure of that of course
because, as you know, angels, particularly Guardian Angels, are
invisible.
The smell in hospitals in those days was of surgical spirit mixed with
iodine and a kiss of formaldehyde. It was quite overpowering and made

people hysterical with fear. I knew lots of people who refused to go to
the hospital for treatment just because of this awful smell. They
preferred to die in their own backyards. The smell in hospital just made
them sick, and that was that.
As if the high hysteria induced by the surgical spirit were not enough,
the appalling screams of unseen children caused us to free fall into
complete panic and we clung like petrified kittens to our Mam. All to no
avail. We were stripped naked in preparation for the treatment. The
screams of other children not far away now made us forget how much
God loved us. Mam was just as terrified as we were on that first day.
There was nobody to comfort us in our terror. We were dragged off
roughly into the steamy rooms from which the screams were coming,
seized by shadowy figures with strong hands and plunged into scalding
baths. They weren’t, of course, but they seemed so. Dunked in, good and
deep and long, too, we shrieked to send the message to the other children
outside not to come in. Wasted screams, ghastly pale mothers in agonies
of confusion and helplessness and very rough nurses. We were lifted out
and rubbed down energetically. The shock eased and the near-ecstasy of
feeling clean was interrupted by the searing pain of surgical spirit being
painted all over us with wide brushes. The cold spirit on our hot little
bodies caused the screams to rise - ‘I want me Mam, I want me Mam’ -
and the nurses shouted louder to calm us down. It’s hard to calm a child
you’re hurting. Then the pain would pass and the sight of Mam would be
some comfort to us as we got dressed in our newly autoclaved clothes,
reeking we thought, of freshly roasted fleas.
Sometimes kind people waved to us in the streets but mostly we were
ignored. And this daily terror went on for weeks. We learned to
scrutinize the piece of paper given us by the examining nurse on which
would be scrawled a terrifying S or a more comforting C. The S for
spirit filled us with dread, the C for calamine lotion would make us grin

and with cheeky relief we’d show it callously to some poor sod who’d
drawn a big S. To us, S was for agony and C for relief. Finally it was all
over and we were pronounced clean and we resumed our lives in the
parish. The pain of surgical spirit had been bad enough, but to be banned
from the church, especially from Holy Mass had been a terrible event.
When people have very little and are so very ignorant as we were, not to
go to Mass made us despair. Our religion was the only thing in our lives
that made us feel important. Being a Catholic made us feel tremendous.
We were very conscious of being the chosen ones. And although a
Catholic can’t be a vegetarian because of his habit of eating the flesh of
Jesus and drinking His blood, being a cannibal was considered a small
price to pay in return for being a member of the one true faith.
The main thrust of a Catholic education all those years ago was self-
loathing. The more you despised yourself the better you were.
‘You are nothing,’ cried the teachers and priests, ‘and never forget it.
You are nothing.’
Sometimes I would catch the eye of the priest and he would point to
me and ask: ‘What are you, Tommy Baker?’ And I would yelp, 'Nothing,
Father, I’m nothing’.  ‘And don’t you forget it,’ Father Nolan would add.
Then there would be a pause and he would point again and raise his
hand and say: ‘Good boy, Tommy Baker, and how do you say that in
Latin?’ I would leap to my feet, and pounding my left breast with my
right fist I would cry out: ‘Domine non sum dignus’, (Lord I am not
worthy). As you may guess, I was a very abject child. The sense of
unworthiness that was hammered into us from the word go would
deepen in me and would remain. To teach children to hate themselves
strikes me now as grotesque and yet in my childhood it was the received
wisdom. ‘Never forget that you’re nothing,’ Miss Egan told us. And I

learned that lesson well and still feel the result of the long practice of her
advice.
Once, trying to curry favour with a teacher who asked me what I was
thinking, I said: ‘I was just thinking I was nothing, Miss.’ Miss Lynch
looked at me meaningfully and I was convinced that I was nothing. And
this bending of our wills to authority gave us an irrational regard for the
very authority that was annihilating us. We wanted to please our
superiors. And wanting to please people, to only tell them what they
wanted to hear became very deeply a part of me, as it probably did with
most children who felt uncertain of the tactic needed to avoid a blow.
I had the greatest admiration for a boy called Tommy Ryan, a lad
destined for the priesthood, they said. He was Miss Mallory’s favourite
pupil. No matter the problem, Tommy Ryan was called upon by Miss
Mallory. Ryan spent a lot of time with a lad called Brian Jones who was
always dressed in green and had a wooden leg. A peg leg, like pirates
had in Saturday morning films at the Regal cinema. It was shiny brown
and nearly filled the leg of his short trousers in the way a well-muscled
arm nearly fills a short sleeve. This wooden leg set Jones apart from the
rest of us. We were so envious of it. Secretly I prayed for one of my legs
to fall off so that I, too, could look and move like Brian Jones looked
and moved. His right shoe was always very highly polished and as he
swivelled, hopped and crabbed all at the same time down the church
aisle after communion, he was the object of many furtive and admiring
looks. His left shoe had, of course, been sent to Africa. How I envied
Jones his wooden leg. Even today more than fifty years later I feel
jealous. I realize that I still want a wooden leg, though now I’d have to
wear knickerbockers to show it off. It would guarantee me a part in
Treasure Island every Christmas. When I played Long John Silver at the
Mermaid Theatre I thought of Brian Jones at every performance. Peg
Leg Jones, we called him. I would dream of having a wooden leg, one

eye and a hook for a hand. That would have set me aside and might have
led to Peg Leg speaking to me. As it was, Jones hopped along beside
Tommy Ryan, both of them set aside from the rabble. Tommy Ryan was
said to destined for the priesthood; indeed, I heard he became a bishop
and had to flee to South America - Bogotá as it happens - but I travel too
quickly for my tale.
But Peg Leg Jones! Just get this. He was a great farter, a farter in a
million. And this is important. All boys given the chance would like to
be professional farters for it is a capacity to fart that gives a lad his first
true sense of status. Before a boy becomes a member of the SAS or a
paramilitary group with a cause that lines up with his adult psychosis, he
must first start as a farter. I suspect that there are no exceptions. Well,
some have greatness thrust upon them as the poet says and Peg Leg
Jones was in that tiny group. Several of us were competent as farters, as
we were as whistlers, or pitchers and tossers, and Jones was no slouch as
a tosser either. Oh, but as a farter! There were some who could fart wetly
or trump, as they say; others could pump as though whistling through
gooseshit. And these few variations were all more or less noxious. But
Peg Leg Jones could produce the vilest smells that ever you suffered.
And his master fart, when he wished, was perfectly silent. It was in a
register higher than humans could catch. Sometimes a dog would be
found dead near a crossing, run over after pausing to decode Jones’s
high-register signal. I may be exaggerating but, when Jones let rip, it
seemed that the green and cream paint on the walls at Saint Swithin’s
school would curdle and bubble and run a bit. But these details were as
nothing to what followed. Our teacher, Miss Mallory, who had a long
face, rather like a horse that has been baptised and can’t conceal its glee,
would in a split second be transformed. Now she would look like an
Orangeman’s horse, all tortured and filled with the agony of the true
heretic; in a word, she would resemble a horse that had lost its faith. And

there are few sights sadder than a faithless horse. Neighing hysterically,
she would squeal for Tommy Ryan. ‘Somebody’s just committed a sin,’
she’d whinny, ‘where’s Tommy Ryan?’
‘Here, Miss Mallory,’ he’d call, ‘shall I sniff him out?’
‘Do that, Tommy, there’s a good lad,’ she’d answer. ‘And show no
favour, nobody’s to be spared.’
And Tommy Ryan would come out in front of the whole class and
survey us like the young slaughterman that he was. With the eyes of a
future prelate, unconsciously miming the holding of the crook, he would
plunge in among us like an ecstatic ferret but all the while keeping well
away from the source and making sure we all knew that we were at his
mercy. We held our breath, not just out of fear of Tommy’s power, but
because a deep breath in the vicinity of Peg Leg Jones would have
required the last rites. And Tommy the corrupt, bishop to be, and bringer
of shame to our Holy Mother the Church, and look out Bogota,
identified me as the stinking sinner!
‘Get behind the blackboard, Barabbas,’ snarled Miss Mallory. And I
crept into the shadow of the blackboard and within a few minutes was
forgotten. And I stood there and wondered how Tommy the vile could be
so hard and what did he say when he confessed weekly to Fr. Barry.
Each Wednesday morning after playtime, Horseface would cry out,
‘Tommy Baker and Tommy Ryan to confession.' Why Brian Jones
wasn’t with us I can’t remember. Perhaps if you had a wooden leg you
didn't have to go to confession. And so the great liar would lead the way
and be in and out of the black confessional box where all the information
about our latest crash from grace would be recorded.
‘What do you tell him, Tommy?’ I’d ask, meekly. And, like the
Steerforth of Saint Swithin’s that he was, he’d say airily, ‘Oh, I tell him

about my impure thoughts, murders and odd other mortal sins, things
like that.’
So I learned to classify sins, to find words that might suggest what I
felt and thought. And gradually, from Tommy and other older boys, I
invented my own criminal record and began to believe it. I wanted to be
a sinner. It was the only way to be sure that God would love me. I
wanted to steep myself in sin and then to repent and cause joy in
Heaven. Within a few weeks I progressed from:
‘I was disobedient, Father, and also I looked sideways at me Mam,
and also I only washed one of me feet last night,’ to:
‘Pray Father, it is a week since my last confession and since then I’ve
had an impure thought and a deed, too.’
I heard the click of beads and caught the whiff of wine, ‘God’s blood’
came the thought. Most Catholics were a bit baffled that the blood of
Christ smelled like cheap sherry.
‘And an impure deed, too?’ crooned Fr. Barry. And did pollution take
place, eh?’ and I heard the phlegm jump in his scrawny throat for he was
a Capstan Full Strength man - nothing but the best when the poor are
paying. The pollution question seemed to please him so much that I
readily agreed.
‘Oh yes, Father, it did,’ said I.
‘And did you take pleasure in it as well?’ keened the anointed one.
‘I wasn’t too greedy,’ I said, worried about this pollution that might
have taken place. He sighed, did Fr. Barry and I think I heard his upper
denture drop to the lower set.
‘Anything else?’ he asked.
‘Yes, Father,’ I said.

‘Well?’ asked Fr. Barry. ‘What else?’
‘Murder, Father,’ I said. ‘I’ve done murder.’
There was a pause before the next question.
'How many times?’ he asked.
Very quickly I jumped in with, ‘Three times, Father.’ And the sense of
serious sin filled me with importance.
‘Three murders since last week?’ queried Fr. Barry, ‘Anyone we
know?’
Possessed by the genius of Tommy Ryan I said, ‘No, Father, they’re
all from St Teresa’s.’
This shifting of the scene of the sin to the next parish seemed to
soothe Fr. Barry and he said, ‘Well that’s all right then. Remember that
Jesus loves you and stay away from St Teresa’s.’ He was merciful to me
that day, was Father Barry, and later I grew to love him for it.
In the days before penicillin people seemed less complacent than
nowadays. A nail in the shoe at a Saturday night dance in 1942 could
result in a sore foot Sunday morning. By mid-afternoon the foot and
lower leg would be very swollen and an early night would be taken to
ease the pain. Monday morning, lower leg very swollen and dancer has a
high temperature. By late Monday patient is slightly delirious. Tuesday,
septicaemia, and fox-trot Charlie is intermittently incoherent.
Wednesday, the last rites and family gathering. Just before midday on
Wednesday, Charlie dies roaring. Saturday sees the funeral at about four
o’clock followed by ham and Guinness at the house. That evening at the
parish dance, many conversations go like: ‘And I was only having a
drink with him last week on this very spot.’ And after the dance, at
goodnight time, ‘See you next week, God willing.’ But there seemed no
hard feelings in those days. Of course, for a lot of people, death was a

welcome change. Grinding poverty takes the edge off most things
including life. And to be fair, they (the poor) were going to see God.
And that sweetened the pill a bit.
What would we have done without the sermon on the mount? It was
our great comfort and helped us to make sense of suffering which, I
suppose, is what religion is for. Certainly people had faith.
I remember my grandmother dying in ecstasy. Faith banishes fear, and
the practice of religion often brightens life up if you’re skint. If you are
beautiful and have a few bob and lots of people want you and love you
and laugh at your jokes and ask you to dinner you don’t need God. But
you do need Him when your looks go and nobody wants you. Then
religion should be dramatic not vague and milky. Real life is hardly
possible without real drama; and if we can’t have real drama then we’ll
invent it. By 1943 I was doing two or sometimes three funerals a day
come November. A good outbreak of flu would clear out a fair number
of grannies in most streets. And granddads, too, though they often
seemed to favour strokes. As an altar boy I was right in the thick of it
swinging my thurible with a will.
Without realizing it, I was addicted to the smell of incense, I just
loved it and wolfed it up. Or down. The visions I saw were less a result
of piety than incense trips and hunger. The charcoal came in large discs
about the size of a Bendick’s bitter mint. I used to blow hard on it when I
lit it in the sacristy before the services, so that when the priest put on the
incense the cloud of smoke arose like a gigantic mushroom and we were
all engulfed. It actually took away the hunger pangs. A dedicated
thurible swinger who sipped God’s blood and ate God’s body every day
could get along on very little food.
Fasting was a way of life for boys then. If you were intending to
gobble God at morning Mass, then from midnight not a morsel or a drop

must cross the lips. For fear of breaking the fast we didn’t even brush
our teeth. And after one funeral, wearing only the skimpy cassock and
surplice and, because we were fasting, and feasting only on incense
smoke, we’d go to the next funeral with a change of priest but the same
hunger. Meantime, the holy Father was in the warm presbytery at his hot
toast and pot of tea. It was not uncommon for a boy to faint from hunger
though I never heard of a thurible swinger going down, thanks to the
holy smoke, I suppose. I cannot say that I resented this regime even
though I was hungry. The drama that grief produced helped me to get
through the dizziness.
It was at a funeral that I found my true vocation as a faker. Baker the
faker. It happened at the third funeral of a cold day in November in
1943. It was the funeral of a child by the name of Audrey Cheeseman.
She was about eight years old and the cause of death was diphtheria. I
was fading a bit for want of some food. Even the cause of her death
couldn’t ease the pain. The rain was slashing down, like stair rods, as
they said then. I wobbled a bit at one point and even the word
tracheotomy hardly sustained me. After pollution it was the only other
big word that frightened small boys. We often talked of cut throats
before funerals of children. We were all convinced that when diphtheria
arrived then the doctor had to cut your throat. So when you woke up
with a touch of tonsillitis in those days you usually hid the breadknife if
your mother mentioned the doctor.
Anyway, there I was at the graveside trembling a good bit and trying
to flick the rain from my eyes and sniffing hard as I strove to keep my
incense burning, and my shoulders shook with cold. As the funeral came
to an end and we turned towards the old church I felt a hand grip my
arm, slide down to my wrist and slip a warm hard object into my incense
control hand, my left one. It felt very like a large coin. Piously rolling
my eyes, and shaking a bit more for good measure in the hope that

whoever had slipped a hard object into my left hand might slip another
hard object into my right, I hoped that nobody had seen what I can only
call ‘the incident’. In my corner of the vestry I opened my hand to
discover a florin. This was a stupefying tip for a server and I was
amazed and afraid. But not for long. Why? Why? Why such a big tip?
And then it came to me: old Cheeseman thought my shaking shoulders
and rain-filled eyes were tears for Audrey, his daughter! The penny
dropped. That florin changed my life and got me going as an actor. From
then on it was tears and snot all the way. And while the others
occasionally copped for a threepenny bit I sobbed my way to florins. I
was sniffing incense, swallowing God and on the top money, too. I was
nine years old.
*    *    *    *    * 
Of course, all my church-going led to great mockery from the street-
corner boys. Whenever I was near them, they used the vilest language
they could think of just to torment me. They knew that even to remain in
the company of blasphemers was a sin, a mortal sin, and they were
determined to drag me to hell with them. I am a very timid soul as you
will know, and like most nervous people I greatly admire courage. My
street-corner acquaintances were full of courage. They feared nothing:
not the Devil himself, not even God. This used to astound me. They
were certainly not afraid of sin, or hell, they didn't give a damn. And
they were clever. They used to get at me with their devilish
interpretation of what we were taught at school.
‘Jesus loves us more than He loves you, y’know,’ they would sneer.
‘How come?’ I would ask. And the dagger of their logic would strike
me with: ‘Because, Jesus loves sinners, y’daft bugger. He died for us. He
was crucified for us, you know, not you. He didn’t die for the likes of
you. No, He died for us.’ And they would skip off down the street

singing with terrific gusto: ‘Jesus died for us, Jesus died for us, Eee aye
ee addio, Jesus died for us.’
I would look after them with such envy. There was something terribly
disturbing in what they said. All the stuff about joy in Heaven over one
sinner. Truth to tell I was desperate to be sinner. I wanted to steep myself
in sin. And often I would listen to their dirty talk when I knew quite well
that it was a sin. And while I was afraid, I was excited, too. That’s the
problem with virtue, isn’t it? It's dull. It might be good but it ain’t
exciting. How can we make goodness exciting? I don’t know.
So when they talked of Shilling Kate of Skelhorn Street, my breath
would come short and my whole body would tingle. And now when I
think back over all those hours of going to church, all that kneeling
down and listening to various lunatics telling me the meaning of life
when I could have been tingling on the corner, I could open a vein. I’d
give anything for a tingle right now, wouldn’t you? But to get back to
Shilling Kate of Skelhorn Street. They said she’d do it for a shilling.
They said that Nick Whiteside had been there and shagged her for a
shilling up against a Ribble bus in Skelhorn Street, right next to Lime
Street Station.
‘But didn’t anyone see them?’ I asked. ‘Oh, dozens,’ replied Willie
Rotherham airily. ‘But in Skelhorn Street they are all doing it; they’re
used to it.’ I was amazed, and so excited. I was sick with desire to do IT,
whatever IT was, to Shilling Kate in Skelhorn Street, and up against a
Ribble bus as well.
‘Do you have to be sixteen?’ I asked. And Willie said stiffly and with
a sneer: ‘Even when you’re sixteen you won’t know what to do.
Anyway, isn’t it time you buggered off to confession again, you’ve been
listening to dirty talk and that’s a sin,’ and with a vicious leer, ‘a mortal
sin.’

I would slink off home, a failed sinner. Even Willie Rotherham could
see I had no future as a sinner. The Devil was my first inclination but I
was too tall and too frightened so in a sense I had no alternative to God.
All I could do was listen carefully to the dirty talk on the comer. It gave
me something to confess to Fr. Barry and I daresay it broke the
monotony for him as well.
Years later, after I’d betrayed God and blown the whistle on His
mother, I asked in the Sefton Arms if anyone knew what had become of
Shilling Kate but strangely nobody was certain. A chap called Ronald
Fogarty who still lived with his mother and was, therefore, looked at
sideways said she’d gone into a convent. But another fellow who was a
Knight of St Columbus contradicted him and claimed she’d opened a
fancy goods shop in Bold Street. I never did find out. These memories
crowd me sometimes and it downs me a bit that I’ll never know what
happened to those people from my own and my mother’s childhood:
Shilling Kate, Woodbine Emiline and Maggie Bloch, an old German
woman who ran a takeaway scouse shop in Athol Street. What a
thought, selling scouse to scousers. But she did and she did well, too,
right up to the beginning of the Great War. The scousers then lost their
sense of proportion and their sense of humour as they blamed the war on
Maggie and did her windows in.
Woodbine Emiline, so called because she would do the deed for a
Wills Wild Woodbine, was very ugly and very bandy, they said. But she
served the poor, the randy poor who had nowhere else to go to fornicate.
And because she always smoked her fees - she was quite feckless that
way — she had a terrible cough, so bad indeed that she kept a spittoon
near the shed door - proving that she wasn’t lacking in fine feelings.
Sometimes she’d make thirty fags a day. Not bad going for a bandy
scrubber between the wars. But she never worked Good Fridays or
Boxing Day.

There were mysteries as well. My uncle Tom’s wife, Ella, just
disappeared one afternoon; he found the baby’s bath water was still
warm when he got home from Tate and Lyle’s sugar factory. And by
tram and on foot he rushed to Lime Street Station in the hope of catching
her before she took the London train. He was too late. He accepted his
misfortune and scarcely ever spoke again. And there was Pat Heinz, of
course, the one who was in love with my Auntie Louie.
Occasionally I think of Dr Crippen, what a man he was. In those days
murder and the trials of the accused were the opera of the working
classes. My grandmother was a great fan of Crippen and thought Ethel
Le Neve hard done by. Personally I thought Mrs Crippen hard done by
but I never dared to say so. There seemed no great contradiction in doing
the nine first Fridays in devotion to the Sacred Heart of Jesus and
believing in the innocence of Dr Crippen. The theatre couldn’t match
what was going on in a court of law or at football grounds. The theatre
has never been able to match what goes on anywhere, that’s why so few
people go. What’s the point of going out to the theatre when you can
stay home and wonder about what happened to disappeared
bridegrooms, and hear stories that stay with you for the rest of your life?
A few Guinnesses, a few pickles and a tale or two in front of a big fire.
What could be nicer? The theatre? Stow it. ‘Pass the pickles, Lil, and
tomorrow we’ll go down to the Pier Head and watch the Mauritania sail
for America.’ And now if you get fed up talking to each other, well,
slide a video on and go to Casablanca with Bergman and Bogart. How
can the traditional theatre compete with the drama of a rock concert or
even with the drama of a well-run pub? In the early 1950s in Liverpool
the Playhouse was putting on plays like I Killed the Count and
wondering why it didn’t bring in many young people. Playhouse: 412
people, Liverpool FC: 71,000 people; Liverpool Cathedral: 611 souls,
Everton FC: 72,000 souls. Conclusion? Wrong Gods. Paddy’s Wigwam,

the Roman Catholic Cathedral, 813, Liverpool Empire: 3000 souls twice
nightly. To be fair Donald Peers was top of the bill and he certainly
couldn’t hold a candle to Albert Stubbins for thrills. Whether Albert
Stubbins could hold a note is not known, but he certainly played to big
crowds and was a great centre-forward for Liverpool.

SIX
On A Saturday night  during the Hitler war and after a few bottles of
Guinness had been sunk along with a few pickles and some Cheshire
cheese, old memories would surface of times remembered and good
deeds done.
‘Do you remember the day Willie and Barney went out to drown the
dog?’ someone would enquire. This would provoke the warm laughter of
recognition; cruelty made mellow by Guinness and the passage of time.
‘He was a big bugger.’ They were talking about the dog now.
‘We had to get a special sack from Tate’s.’ They were now talking
about Tate and Lyle, the sugar factory, where so many people in
Liverpool worked.
‘Yes, we had to find a bloody big sack for that dog, what was his
name, Jane?’
‘Bruce,’ my mother would say while she poked the fire. Cruel stories
always provoked her into a fierce fire poking. If they were not cruel my
mother would elaborate with a will; she was a great improviser, she had
to be, she was a good Catholic. The dog had been caught red-handed
shitting on the steps of St John’s Church by Fr. Lynch, the parish priest,
and Willie and Barney had been ordered to drown it. Fr. Lynch had
appeared from nowhere, spotted the crouching shitter, cursed him and
condemned him to death.
Appearing from nowhere was a great skill priests had in those days.
For a priest who could not appear from nowhere had no chance of
robbing the unemployed men as, on their knees, they played pitch and

toss. And a priest who couldn’t rob the poor had no money to bet on the
horses and no status among the jobless of the parish who loved to be
robbed by a priest. What do you mean God’s got no sense of humour?
‘Let it be destroyed,’ announced Fr. Lynch, ‘tis a sinful and Godless
dog.’ And so with the black biretta on and the dog being unable to speak
for himself, not that it would have made a scrap of difference, the
avenging judge swept back into the church knowing that his sentence
would be carried out. And Bruce, in a special sack because of his size
and with three pieces of coal to weigh him down, was dumped in the
canal by Barney and Willie who then went on to the Trafalgar for a
couple of draught bass.
Well, what with the drawing power of the story, especially the death
sentence from the Revd Judge Lynch OMI, Oblate of Mary Immaculate,
and the embroidery added by Willie as he swiftly realized there was free
drink in this tale of a dog condemned to death by the parish priest and no
chance of an appeal, the afternoon session drew to a close before Willie
and Barney set out for home. On arrival at 13 Arlington Street, humming
‘Ave maris Stella’, for they always lurched into Latin after a drink, they
pushed open the door and entered into . . .
‘Like a bloody cesspit,' my grandmother would crow, taking out her
teeth to laugh the heartier and gulping down the Guinness with bliss at
the memory.
‘The mud in the room was inches deep, inches, and there was the
bloody grinning dog behind the door.’ My mother ceased to poke the fire
and got up to go to the kettle to make tea. She knew what was coming
next.
‘So the dog survived?’ urged Ernie, my Auntie Molly’s husband,
knowing he was cueing the savage narrator.

‘Survived,’ shrieked Ninny, like a jay taken by an unneutered tomcat
under a thick berberis. ‘Survived? Only till I got home from Tate’s and
tied the bugger’s legs together.’
‘What happened then, Ma?’ breathed Mrs Robinson, a neighbour, also
a good Catholic and therefore bloodthirsty.
‘What happened then?’ screeched the demented matriarch. ‘Why we
took him back to the canal and did what Fr. Lynch told us to do, the will
of God.’
‘Well, you’ve got to laugh,’ wept Ernie as he raised a buttock and
eased a fart that must also have reminded them of the old canal. They
were all good-living people. They would have done anything for God.
*    *    *    *    *
My mother had led a very sheltered life. I suspect she had never been out
of Liverpool. Come to think of it, she probably knew very little of the
city itself. As far as I can remember she never talked about a play or a
book or a holiday. At the outbreak of war in 1939, she was thirty-three
years old. She had twenty-seven years to live and an awful lot of hard
work and worry ahead of her. But she was sustained entirely by her
religious faith. The saints were the counsellors in those days. They didn't
speak to you directly or appear to you but they were there all right.
Everyone had her favourite saint. St Anthony to find things, St Joseph if
you were having trouble with your joints, or St Chad if you were a
commercial traveller. And the Blessed Virgin if chastity was threatened.
And for those suffering from diarrhoea there was good old St Polycarp.
There were other holy icons who were not yet saints though usually
well on the way. The three steps to sainthood were: Venerable, Blessed,
and then, if enough miracles were forthcoming, SAINT.

I recall a fragment of conversation between my mother and a woman
down the road who was having anxiety with her son, Freddy.
'I don’t know which way to turn, Jane,’ said Mrs Spilsbury. ‘I think
it’s going to have to be Saint Jude.’
My mother was appalled.
‘Saint Jude, Madge? Jesus, Mary and Joseph, not Saint Jude.’ ‘Why
not?’ asked Mrs Spilsbury. ‘Nobody else is interested.’ ‘What about
the Sacred Heart?’ suggested my mother.
With a sigh Mrs Spilsbury laid her hand on my mother’s arm. ‘Jane, I
have harangued Him,’ she said, ‘harangued Him day and night. I’ve
done the nine first Fridays just for Freddy and not a light.’ Not to be
proved unhelpful my mother stroked her forehead gently, and then with
a little gasp as if to say, ‘Of course, why didn’t I think of it sooner,’ she
looked both ways in the style of Max Miller and said, ‘What about
Blessed Martin of Porres?’ She pronounced it Paws. ‘Have you ever
tried him?’
Mrs Spilsbury, intrigued, folded her arms and said, ‘No. Why? Is he
any good?’
My mother opened her mouth in horror and then covered it up as she
repeated: ‘Any good? Any good? Merciful Christ, Madge, look what he
did for Katie Welch.’
Mrs Spilsbury looked impressed, and lowering her voice and doing a
Max Miller too, said, ‘Oh, was that Blessed Martin of Prawns?’
My mother nodded very knowingly as, quite convinced, Mrs
Spilsbury made up her mind and said: ‘I’ll give him a chance.’
‘You won’t regret it, Madge,’ said my mother. ‘As God is my judge,
you won’t.’

Mrs Spilsbury went off, comforted. Two days later it was told all over
the parish that Freddy had gone to confession! Three days later the
details began to emerge. It would seem that Freddy was seeing, as they
said in those days, the wife of a sick policeman, a Protestant who had
fallen head first into his helmet and that was the rub.
Within a week the affair was over, St Jude had been bypassed and
Blessed Martin of Porres was the flavour of the month.
I never did find out what it was that Blessed Martin of Porres did for
Katie Welch.
*    *    *    *    *
Home from Fremantle, Australia, Dad was full of adventures. To Mam’s
amazement he said there were Catholics in Australia. And, even more
amazing, two of them, a couple, had befriended him. The woman was a
teacher and her husband, Joseph I think his name was, a carpenter. And
on the way back from the Stations of the Cross at St Malachy’s they’d
met Dad and taken him home. Monica, the woman, had done Dad’s
dhobi and even ironed it. ‘Washing dries in about eleven minutes over
there,’ said Dad, ever the one for the minute. Mam gasped, ‘Only eleven
minutes?’ She was staggered. Where we lived, the washing never dried,
which was later accepted as the explanation for bandy legs among the
men.
‘They couldn’t have been nicer,’ said Dad, producing a small photo of
the distant couple standing in what looked like an orchard. They’re the
nicest pair I ever met.’
‘No children?’ enquired Mam, peering closer at the photo in the hope
that among the apple trees she might spot the inevitables.
‘No,’ said Dad. ‘But Joseph told me they’ve done every conceivable
thing they could think of and not a light.’ Mam’s eyes glittered with

tears. Poor people love to cry, it makes such a change from laughing
which can make them tired if they have no savings.
‘I’ll say a prayer,’ she sniffed. ‘Isn’t there anything we can do?’
‘Well,’ said my father, ‘I did tell them that they could have one of
ours.’
‘Bless them,’ said Mam, ‘and what did they . . . what did you say?’
'I said that perhaps they could have one of ours, I mean we have got
three,’ Dad said, as if Mam couldn’t count.
‘You told them that they could have one of ours?’ repeated Mam,
suddenly looking as if she had a special vocation. ‘Which one?’ she
asked as she glanced down at me. ‘Well, which one did you have in
mind to give to your bloody Australians?’
The talk of orchards and chickens and the sun had got to me. I
listened with great care, perhaps this was my chance. I could imagine
myself up the trees. I could imagine carelessly tossing apple cores over
my shoulder without fear of the usual near riot. Over here a lad with an
apple would be followed by perhaps five other lads each one hoping he'd
cop the core. Oh, how I wanted to get away from them all and start
again; I was young and I was restless.
My mother’s legs sagged as she swung towards me. ‘You don’t want
to go to Australia, do yer?’ she squawked, holding out her arms and
looking dull.
‘Yes,’ said I, unaware of her pain. And, unable to keep the anguish to
herself, she shared it with me by hitting me so hard I skidded across the
room and crashed into the sideboard. The front cupboard doors were
carved with grapes and a curly foreign pot, not intaglio. My poor head
hit the bunch of grapes with such force that years later the dent in my
temple had to be entered on my passport as an identifying mark.

My trip to Australia was postponed for thirty-three years and the
house became silent. And that was the second terrible blow I received
from me Mam who would have died for me. It didn’t stop me loving her.
*    *    *    *    *
During the Second World War my father was away from home for two
years. When he came back we were so happy. He had a tremendous
cough and we had missed it terribly. It was a deep, resonant, Capstan
Full Strength sort of cough, the sort of cough that tells you that he had
always been in work. An out-of-work man who smoked Park Drive, for
instance, would never have been able to cough with the authority of my
Dad. So for a few hours we were happy at the arrival of Dad and his
cough. Then me Mam opened his dirty washing, his dhobi bag, as they
used to say, and found all her letters to him, all twenty-four of them,
unopened among his dirty clothes. Two years’ letters unread. She was
very nettled by that discovery.
‘Why didn’t you throw them over the side?’ she asked him. ‘At least I
wouldn’t have known anything about them.’
I could see by the way Dad looked at her that he wished he’d thought
of that. But he hadn’t, and the wound remained festering in Mam’s heart.
It is the same now with me, somehow letters don’t get opened.
Fortunately, my wife is fearless and can open any envelope, even a
brown one. Who was it that designed brown envelopes? I feel sure that
he hated people whoever he was. I wonder where he’s buried?
*    *    *    *    *
I shall never forget the expression on my father’s face as with scalded
balls he tried to find the budgie in the coal scuttle. His howl of anguish
as he abandoned his suffering knackers to rescue the bird was very
shocking. For one thing it broke the silence in the civil war between him
and my mother. In those days, just like these days, it was very common

for married people suddenly to discover that they didn’t know each
other. This discovery usually led to acrimony - the discoverer feeling
cheated, ill done by. ‘Why are you looking at me like that?’ was a
common question in the war of attrition that followed. Answer: ‘I was
just wondering what on earth I ever saw in you in the first place.’ A plate
might be smashed at this point as the victim of this remark vowed
revenge again. When my mother realized that she didn’t know my Dad
and didn’t like the sight of him anymore her disappointment was
expressed in silence. A profound silence that endured for nine years.
Trappist monks take a vow of silence, though the only time I ever went
to a Trappist monastery, on a shopping trip naturally, the buggers were
chatting away like Rat and Mole on a picnic. But then you’d expect that
from idle monks who, if they hadn’t climbed aboard the well-sprung
gravy train called ‘The Vocation Choo-Choo’, would have been seen in
Bold Street, Liverpool, selling copies of the Big Issue.
No, when my Mam decided on silence that was it. Not a smile went
in my father’s direction, not even a glance of contempt, nothing; he had
ceased to exist. Now ashore, my father worked nights at Jacobs’ biscuit
factory and she worked days at Bird’s Eye frozen foods. This kept
encounters very brief.
But let’s get back to me Dad’s scalded balls. In his solitary
confinement at home, no words, looks or comfort, he turned all his
unwanted affection towards a budgie. Unable to express his feelings for
people, he was able, like most men, to sustain a very complex
relationship with a pet. Lots of men in our street did the same. The
object of affection was usually a dog, though one man I knew, a tall man
who blinked a lot and had a terrible stammer, kept a tortoise. Its name
was Gladys but he never really managed to get the name out and Gladys
didn’t seem to mind. Tortoises are good pets for the timid, especially
timid men with house proud wives. But dogs were the objects of most

fellows’ feelings. On a Sunday, at two o’clock as the pubs closed, it was
nothing to see nine men and their dogs in Indian file and all drunk. It
was a terribly sad sight to see a drunken bulldog trying to lead his
plastered owner back home to lunch. Sitting drinking for two hours with
his whippet or lurcher (lurchers were very popular with Roman
Catholics for some reason) would give a man time to plot the spoiling of
the Sunday dinner.
And it was after lunch in the Gethsemane of our kitchen one Sunday
that the scalding of balls came to pass. During lunch, my father would
often put a whole roast potato in his mouth and then blow like a
melancholy grampus, trying to cool it. This was an appalling sight,
especially to my mother who had once worked as a chambermaid at the
Exchange Hotel and thought she knew how the best people behaved at
lunch. Her head would go down and she would reach for the carving
knife. Knuckles white, she would struggle to control herself. Even an
Orangeman would have guessed from her expression that breaking the
Fifth Commandment was on her mind. And she would mutter as Dad’s
blowing changed key and began to sound like a sad foghorn in the
Mersey in November.
After he’d finished his dinner and knowing how much he’d made my
mother suffer, he would suddenly feel affectionate and get the budgie
out of its cage. What a bloody palaver. My father had been given the
budgie just after Christmas following Mam’s fatwa and had called it
Herod. Oddly my mother didn’t seem to spot Dad’s malice in this detail
or, if she did, she never mentioned it to me or my brother. Anyway, after
dinner Herod would hop from his cage and on to Dad’s finger, then on to
his shoulder while Dad, carrying his great mug of tea, got himself
comfortable by the fire and ready for the next stage in the Sunday
roasting of the peace. So that the picture be clear, I must tell you that
Dad liked his tea strong, very strong, and no sugar. He would lean

forward and Herod, with all the agility in his genes, would hop from
shoulder to biceps, to forearm and wrist and then, with the neatest little
leap you ever saw, he’d hop on to the rim of Dad’s mug of tea and sit
there as innocent as could be. He could not have known that his destiny
was coming along the road on a bike. If he had, he would not have been
responding so cutely to Dad’s ‘Who’s a pretty boy, then?’
Swaying backwards and forwards Herod was, well, flirting is the only
word that comes to mind. And while Dad supped his tea noisily, and
made a sound like pebbles being shovelled into a zinc wheelbarrow, my
brother John parked his bike, opened the front door and - how could he
just let it go like that? He let the door go, and bang! It went off like the
one o’clock gun, sending a column of air down the narrow passage
between the front door and the kitchen where Herod was performing on
the rim of me Dad’s mug. The blast was too violent for a budgie to keep
his feet and little Herod plunged head first into a big mug of very strong
Liptons’ tea.
Father, in reflexive terror, threw up both hands, thus allowing the
scalding Liptons’ to fall into his lap and souse his balls. But at least it
got the budgie out of the tea. The falling mug jerked Herod with really
quite a lot of force into the coal scuttle, which, half full of slack and
nuts, didn’t give him a soft landing. All this happened so quickly. From
‘Who’s a pretty boy, eh?’ to the flirting of Herod, to the arrival of my
brother and the blast of air that pitched Dad’s love into scalding tea and
then into the blackness of the coal scuttle seemed a mere fraction of a
second. I saw it all, from the torture of Dad’s slurping to the bird’s silly
carry-on, to the catastrophe itself. And I saw my mother’s face change
from Deirdre of the Sorrows to a vision of bliss as the hated object of my
father’s affection fell to its doom. Well, not to its doom exactly, but it
never spoke again, or flirted again, and certainly it never danced again. It
seemed to lose all zest for life and not long after it seemed to volunteer

itself to an easy-going cat we had, called Innocent, after a famous Pope,
I believe.
A few weeks later, the man who gave Dad the budgie, a short man
with a glass eye who was keen on stamps and lived opposite to us, won a
suitcase in the parish raffle. He hadn’t got on with his wife since the day
he'd set eyes on her, so he packed his new suitcase and went away. His
wife, who hated him and was called Eunice, pined. Within sixteen weeks
she was a different woman. She had the dog put down, became very
pale, and died. She left no will so her husband came back with a nice girl
called Marge. They settled down and seemed really quite happy to the
great annoyance of the neighbours. But when he offered Dad another
bird, it was refused. Not long after, Innocent the cat was run over by
Price’s bread van. So poor Dad lost his Herod and his Innocent in quite a
short space of time. It downed him rather though me Mam was in very
high spirits for quite a while.

S E V E N
Every once in a while some man would come to the school to talk to us
about our future. On one occasion it was a man from the Coal Board. He
said being a miner was a good life and would anyone like to go down a
mine to have a look, no obligation, so to speak. I put my hand up. A few
weeks later, a dozen of us were taken down a mine somewhere near St
Helens, Lancashire. It broke the monotony of long division and the
darkness was comforting. But all the laughter from the black-faced
demons already at the coal face did not convince me.
So next time, I put my hand up for the man who said that farming was
a good life, and for the man who said Australia was a good place to be.
If there had been a sergeant recruiting for the Foreign Legion I would
have put my hand up. When a little round man came to talk to us about
being a hero for Christ, about labouring in the vineyard, and saying that
many are called but few are chosen I kept my hand up. What he
promised seemed to combine farming, grape picking and going to
heaven. Oh yes, I put my hand up. But oddly enough nobody else did. A
few days later the little round man came to talk to my mother about my
renouncing the devil, the world and the flesh. To have a son or daughter
in religion conferred great status on a working-class mother. How they
reconciled the teacher’s assessment of my thickness with my potential
usefulness in the vineyard of God I don’t know. Neither did my mother.
'Are you sure he'll please Our Lord?’ she asked.
The round man described the life of sacrifice to us. ‘It'll mean getting
up early and praying a lot,' he said. ‘We don’t even speak when were
eating,’ he added mysteriously. I couldn’t understand that last point since

it was absolutely forbidden to speak at meals in most houses I’d ever
been in.
I was an affectionate boy in those days and I was quite willing to
show God some, if that’s what He fancied. I certainly wanted to please
Him. Once during a series of sermons lasting a week in our parish - a
retreat, it was called - I recall a priest talking about adultery, one flesh
and not being put asunder. It was a Friday evening, Sixth and Ninth
Commandment night, the church was packed, naturally. Committing
adultery or coveting the neighbour’s ass was always good for a shiver.
The resident priest, Fr. Jameson, had done the warm up and retired to the
seat reserved for him at the left side of the sanctuary. The pulpit was
empty but lit interestingly by the candles. There was a profound silence.
Then, as if from the other side of the universe, we heard the sound of
dragging feet and stertorous breathing (some priests were fifty-a-day
men, adultery experts favouring Sweet Afton, a very popular Irish
cigarette. And then came the chink of rosary beads. These noises came
nearer - the sound of the terror for tonight as our man dragged himself
up the steps of the pulpit. Two claw-like hands appeared over the edge
of the pulpit and a terrifying Old Testament figure came into view. This
was our appointment with fear and the old frightener up there was our
very own answer to Valentine Dyall, the Man in Black, who terrified us
on the radio. In a black cassock and a huge crucifix tucked into his belt,
he glanced down at us. We were seized with awe and shrank within
ourselves. Just the sight of him reminded us of how unworthy we were.
His gaze swept over the whole congregation. This way and that he
looked about, and all in silence. He rocked forward a little and then drew
himself up to his full height. He towered over us like Ivan the Terrible
and drew out the crucifix from his belt. Then holding it before him as if
to bless us, he raised it up and, with the sudden strength for which
prophets are famed, he spun round towards the altar and from his great

height he hurled the crucifix across the altar rails! It landed on the
marble floor with an amazing crash and slid at speed about ten feet
before crashing into the credence table, rattling the cruets and nearly
severing the table’s legs. We were appalled. But our man slowly turned
back to us and hissed, ‘And that’s what you do every time you commit a
sin against holy purity.'
He then rapidly ran through the party line on chastity, how long a kiss
could be sustained before it went from a venial sin to a mortal sin. The
time was calculated from billiards, and the interval allowed was the
duration of a canon shot, not long if you were a keen kisser. Oh, those
Passionists hated kissing. Of course, they knew nothing of the fancy
stuff they did in France. Or if they did, they didn’t let on. That night
dicks were slaughtered and quims dried up in their hundreds as the
queue for confession stretched to the edges of the church. It was
wonderful, and I miss it still. The feeling of self-loathing and a desire to
be a slave to someone, anyone, as long as he knew what life was about
and didn’t mind if you were thick, stayed with me and led me to the
religious life in the Channel Isles.
*    *    *    *    *
So off I went in answer to the call of God to labour in His vineyard. We
just loved all this imagery of vineyards and shepherds and goats and talk
of leaving family and friends and all worldly goods. Of course, poverty,
chastity and obedience seemed no great hardship to me at the time of my
decision. What did poverty mean to me? After all, I had been raised in
considerable poverty. Most of the people I knew were poor. In a sense
we gloried in it: ‘Blessed are the poor; for theirs is the kingdom of
heaven.’ You see for us being poor was a blessing, poverty was the key,
it was the pass into eternal life. The rich just could not grasp this simple
fact. We felt sorry for the rich, we prayed for them. ‘We are so fortunate
to be poor,’ my mother used to say. ‘We may be sinful,’ said Mrs

McHale next door, ‘but at least we’re not rich.’ If someone died in
agony having lost two legs in an accident at the docks, there would
always be the comfort of: ‘Well, at least he wasn’t rich.’ This was an
amazing state of mind. All suffering was understandable to us. All pain
was a blessing because it was the will of God. There was no fear because
faith banishes fear. Fear itself is afraid of faith. So you see I joined the
rest of the labourers in the vineyard and really looked forward to being
poor and staying poor. The paradox of all this is that if the church needs
anything, such as money, why then the poor provide it. That’s what
keeps them poor. And preventing the poor from being rich was a good
deed for which God blessed his sheep. Neat, eh? God keep me poor I
prayed; and He did. He’s so good in that way, He never once let me
down.
Then there was chastity. Yes. ‘Good morning, Brother, how’s your
chastity?’ ‘Oh, can’t complain, cock, how’s yours?’ It has to be admitted
that purity is a bit of a bugger. Whichever way you look at it you’re on
slippery ground. Even to think about it is a sin. A hard heart is an
obstacle to getting to heaven, but so is a hard cock because a forty-five-
degree throbber is a real scrambler of good intentions. It’s also
embarrassing what with God and your Guardian Angel on hand, so to
speak. In fact it’s almost impossible to do a good deed with a stalk on.
Talking to God in this condition is a monk’s nightmare. You can’t just
shoo a firm dick soft, you know. And, of course, handling him is strictly
forbidden, it's a mortal sin. What to do? Well, in some orders you can
take the offending organ to another monk who has been specially chosen
by the Abbot to deal with this problem. Usually he was the one with
really sharp teeth. That’s right, it was his job to bite your dick. This
practice led to the old proverb: once bitten twice shy. Even pious monks
were loathe to have their stalks docked in this way and they just had to
put up with the engorgement if they couldn’t face Brother Richard.

Some people wonder why monks walk with a slight stoop. They walk
like that to hide their truncheons. The bigger the engine the steeper the
stoop. Monks age very quickly for this reason. They also miss a good
deal of what’s going on around them. But nature won’t be thwarted.
Why do you think monks never turn their backs to a window? Especially
a third-floor window? I’ll tell you why. After six or eight years of
chastity something’s got to give, and when a chap ejaculates eight years’
worth of the goods, he’s likely to be blown back a yard or two, hence the
narrowness of the high windows in a monastery. There is a good deal of
tension in houses of chastity.
The vow of obedience is not easy for anyone with an imagination. In
the army it can be fun to obey blindly as long as your life isn’t in danger,
and there are always fellows around who can share the contempt you
feel for authority, but not so in a monastery. For a start, the obedience
must be unquestioning otherwise there is no merit. Even if you know the
order is quite daft, you are told that God has His reasons. This rule
makes things easier for the superior monks who derive their authority
from God Himself. The great injunction of the New Testament is that we
love one another but the monastic rule may also add that no friendships
are to be cultivated. Fraternal love doesn’t include a special pal. We
weren’t allowed to go around in pairs: rarely one, never two, always at
least three; that was the rule. So someone is always cast as the
gooseberry, three’s a crowd. At home I was quite used to being ordered
about by everybody: parents, teachers, neighbours, priests, especially
priests, policemen, shopkeepers and nuns. So when I was reminded that
great store was set by obedience, why, I just smiled. I couldn’t wait to be
tried by God’s instrument whoever he may turn out to be. At my lowly
level his instrument turned out to be just about everybody. For a time it
was all worthwhile, just to be in a frock.

The soutane was great to wear. It carried all the authority of the
church. It made me feel special; it kindled a desire to be a martyr. This
pleasure was faintly odd because the priests in Liverpool didn't wear
cassocks outside the church; not that I cared about that as I spent nearly
all my time inside the church. It was in the church that I got to love
shadows and dark corners, musty cupboards and creaking floorboards. I
was a perfect recruit for the Addams family. Cobwebs made me
whimper with joy. The smell of cheap sherry on the Father’s breath
comforted me and the thick stupefying smell of incense fuelled my
fantasies, it was like inhaling zabaglione, it quite scrambled the senses
and made me think that I could understand the language of the liturgy
and, indeed, that I could follow some of it.
My favourite words were ‘Hic est enim calix sanguinis mei — this is
the chalice of my blood’. I tried to use that expression in Latin once at a
transfusion centre but the nurse was a Protestant and didn't get my joke.
She just said, ‘Pardon?’. But by that time I’d lost my faith and didn’t
really care whether the nurse got the crack or not.
The first thing that happened on entering a religious house was that
you lost your name. My name was Tommy in those days but who had
ever heard of a Brother Tommy then? Now monasteries all over the
world are crawling with Tommies and Willies and Tweaks and Larrys;
most of them don’t even wear frocks anymore, except on masquerade
days. But then, your name was changed. Then, it was virtue to leave
father, mother, brother, sister and so on and change your name, too.
In the old days, thousands of young people joined the army to get
away from their roots and make a new start somewhere else. In those
days you didn’t leave home until you got married; and often you didn’t
leave home then because you had nowhere to go. So we yearned to be
old enough to go and die for something, anything, rather than go on

living at home. There are lots of times when you are poor and
uneducated that death can seem rather attractive.
How, if you were less than eighteen, or you were a girl, how did you
get away from them all? Why, you suddenly felt you wanted to go and
work in a vineyard. Not any old vineyard, His vineyard, God’s vineyard.
A girl, be she never so plain or young, could quickly become a bride of
Christ. She’d have all her hair cut off, take the veil and spend the rest of
her life looking down at the floor as if she’d lost something. That was
called being modest. We never saw her again, or if we did we wouldn’t
recognize her because they all looked alike. People would talk of her
mother as having been chosen by God to give Him a bride. It was a very
great honour to have a daughter in religion. There is a soap opera to be
made about the dramatic jealousies that led to exquisite acts of spite in
those famous convents. Saint Teresa of Lisieux recounts some of them.
As children we knew about the little Flower of Jesus and her suffering
among the Carmelites.
But for a boy to go to God as a priest or a monk or Christian Brother,
gosh. This gave even bigger status to the mothers of such boys. Priests
were superior to nuns for the very simple reason that they could perform
the miracle of Transubstantiation, the transforming of bread and wine
into the body, blood, soul and divinity of Christ during Holy Mass. It is
impossible to exaggerate the esteem in which priests were held by the
faithful. Today we understand the star status of film actors or sportsmen
or rock musicians; they amaze us and excite us. But everybody has got
to love somebody, as the song goes. We are all fans of something or
someone. Even God has His fans and, of course, His fan clubs. The
biggest and most powerful fan clubs were the great religious orders. The
great conventions took place, and still do, at the great shrines like
Lourdes or Fatima. The smaller and daily conventions take place every
morning and afternoon in all the Catholic churches in the world, and

especially they are expressed by Holy Mass. Sometimes when I’m in the
West End I go to St Patrick’s Church in Soho and I kneel there and try to
recapture the joy I once felt when I crouched in the presence of God and
felt certain of something. Where did my once-strong faith go? The
betrayal of my faith has led to the deep self-loathing that I feel now. But
that’s now. What about then?
I wanted to call myself Sylvester. I thought it sounded good and my
mother often talked about St Sylvester’s in Liverpool. Yes, Brother
Sylvester pleased me a lot. So that when I reached the mother house in
Jersey, Maison Bon Secour, the house of succour, my happiness was
complete. I was determined to be good. We say, don’t we, ‘she’s a good
girl’ or ‘she was a good mother’ or 'he was a good man’. We still mean
it, too. To be good in the moral sense still draws us to admiration. I
wanted to be a saint. You can laugh if you like, I won’t reproach you, but
that’s what we all felt, all forty of us in the novitiate of 1951. The
discipline was very severe. The popular idea was that silence, lots of
silence, deep silence, eternal silence it seemed to me, was good for the
soul. I found it very hard.
The day started at about four thirty, I think. Odd, isn’t it, that in a
house of religion where silence was the great idea, we were roused in the
morning by what I can only call a fire alarm. The shock was appalling.
But one can get used to anything. It didn’t occur to me to complain.
Complain?
That dormitory where forty apprentice saints passed seven and a half
hours’ sleep was an anxious, damp place full of fumblings in the dark
and pretend blindness in the daylight, for after silence the great virtue
was modesty. After a year in that place I still didn’t know anybody by
sight. I think I only saw the sky about twice and each time was only for a
moment before somebody shouted, ‘Modesty’. When we went to bed at

night at eight thirty, we were allowed perhaps three or four minutes to
brush our teeth and swill our faces. Then we would all glide, walking
wasn’t permitted, each one to the foot of his bed and there you would
turn into a statue until the last glider had arrived at his bed. What a sight
it must have been. I never saw it myself because of the modesty rule.
When I cast my mind back I sometimes doubt if I ever went to Jersey at
all. I never saw anything. Bon Secour? It should have been called St
Dunstan’s for the Blind. Well, there I was at the foot of my bed and as
far as I knew thirty-nine other statues were there at the foot of their beds.
And then, on a signal - two ominous hand claps from the supervisor - the
room was plunged into darkness. Silence, gliding and darkness. And, as
the blackness fell, the fumbling started.
The reason for this little ceremony of the sudden blackout was that we
should not catch a glimpse of each other as we got into bed. Yes. This
dark spell would go on for about two minutes during which you were
required to get your clothes off, tuck your socks under the mattress to
keep them dry for morning, lay your soutane across the bed, hop in, get
flat and fold your hands across your breast as if you were dead. There
would be two more spooky claps from the man in black and the night
light would come on. And so we would all lie there bathed in Hammer
Horror red light as Brother Audifax (feast day 9 January) cruised or
rather glided like a great black pike in that lake of a dormitory, glancing
at all the beds which, like little islands, protected us for the next seven
hours. I don't know if Brother Audifax (why did he want to be called
Audifax?) ever slept. I don’t know where he was kept during the day
either. But no matter at what time you might wake, the pike was gliding
among the beds, as though waiting for some poor soul to fall out and
then, tearing him into fragments, eat him. This lying there like figures on
cathedral tombs was to maintain our modesty in the eyes of our
Guardian Angels who were also there, though we couldn’t see them -

yet. And if by any chance you should move in the night and make the
bed springs creak, why then with a little plop and gurgle Pike Audifax
would materialize at your bedside and hiss, ‘On your knees.’ With two
well-practised moves your bed would be unsealed, your soutane flung
over you and on your knees you would remain until the gliding pike
arrived out of nowhere and nudged you with his prickly gills which was
the signal that you could go back to being a dead knight on the tomb of
your bed.
Sleep would finally release me from the worry of making the bed
springs creak. At four thirty the fire alarm would yell like a lunatic and
Audifax would applaud it with the devotion of the bigot. I never heard
anybody clap so loudly; what a spanker he could have been in another
profession. And after the yelling of the bell and the clapping of our
enemy of sleep came the morning fumble. Because of my thyroid
condition I am able to see through a wide arc. What an amazing sight,
forty young men struggling to get their trousers on in bed. The bed
springs went mad with the joy of being able to creak freely; Audifax
glided every which way darting razor glances in every direction in case
one of the forty contortionists was taking pleasure in the morning
wriggle. As though on silent skates he whizzed among us calling up the
Holy Ghost. Yes, we called up a ghost first thing in the morning, and in
Latin. ‘Veni, Sancte Spiritus’, moaned the slithering pike as he swivelled
among us, and we were all of us curved like butchers’ hooks to hide our
piss-proud dicks as we responded: ‘Come, within our bosoms shine, for
where Thou art not, man hath nought.’ There is no sight so unmysterious
as forty young men struggling to pull on eighty damp socks in the
presence of some demented, railing maniac while chanting aloud, ‘Melt
the frozen, warm the chill, bend the stubborn heart and will.’ Some
mornings I suspected I could hear God tutting at the indignity of it all.
We then rushed to ease our bladders and wash our haggard faces before

the wild bell yelled again to call us to morning prayers and meditation. It
was like living in a bloody fire station.
We would gather in the beautiful dark chapel. This was an exciting
moment for me. I would watch in astonishment as from all doors, there
were about seven, black clad figures would enter at speed but in silence
to call again on the Holy Ghost. We gave Him no peace. Then we would
be invited to think of our last ends. We’d only just got up and we were
thinking of our last ends. ‘At any moment we may die and enter into our
eternity. At death we shall be judged according to our works.' In
moments of weakness and tiredness I longed for death in any form just
so long as I could lie down. How weak I was. It makes me go pink just
to think of it; and that was nearly half a century ago. Of course, I had not
yet read The Dark Night of the Soul. I did not understand that depression
and self-doubt were to be welcomed as gifts from Himself. It meant He
was interested. It meant you were in with a chance. Later, in my
madness, I would pray: ‘Come O holy depression, and fill me with
terror.’ This excess later spilled over into my style of acting and makes
me virtually unemployable. After a quarter of an hour of common prayer
we would all rise and disappear through our special door towards a
common room where we would sink into forty minutes of meditation or
mental prayer as the old hands called it.
This mental prayer would begin with what was called a colloquy or
loving conversation with the Saviour or the object of one’s spiritual
affection that morning. To tell the truth it was always Morpheus - we
were all so shagged out. But I did the best I could. I would call to mind
the suffering Christ in the garden of Gethsemane during his agony. This
could be a little risky if your thoughts wandered to the Apostles who
were there with the Lord; for as you know they fell asleep. Yes, they
actually fell asleep when Christ was in His agony. I tried to dodge that
bit or I would have followed suit and dropped off. It always baffled me

that St Peter himself could not stay awake at that moment of near
despair. The story is so beautiful and I suppose the sleeping Apostles
should comfort us in their example of human weakness. Meantime these
thoughts were interrupted by the nasal clicks of some insensitive monk
called Boniface. There was I trying to make contact with Jesus in His
agony and this tosser Boniface was clicking in his nasal passages. For
the next thirty minutes I meditated on how I’d like to torture Boniface. I
nearly went as far as to wish that he might fail in holy purity. But this
made me feel such an apostate that shame engulfed me and I toyed with
the notion of talking about it to Fr. Galleotti, our ghostly father. But I
didn’t. And as I vacillated between the garden of Gethsemane and the
desire to murder Brother Boniface that bloody yelling fire bell wrenched
me back to self-disgust. And as I slid along to Mass in line with the
other thirty-nine I would sometimes wonder what they had been thinking
about during meditation. Did I make clicking noises? Did I rock back
and forth like Brother Casimir and moan occasionally? Surely not. Did
anyone secretly want to kill me? Did anyone want to tempt me into a sin
against holy purity? And if he did and it was Brother Felix, would I be
able to resist? Would I want to resist? This thought made me shiver with
pleasure. I mean shiver with fear. Or, to tell the truth and shame the
devil, it made me shiver with both pleasure and fear. It was ecstasy and,
therefore, made me feel guilty. It wasn't yet six o’clock and all this
turmoil. How was I going to get through the next fifteen hours without a
fall?

EIGHT
The brother superior, also called the master of novices, was a tall, bald
man with sandy eyelashes; he had, as I thought, a rather insincere stoop
and was in the habit of clearing his throat a lot as though he was about to
make an announcement. When he looked at me it was as if he suspected
I wanted to slap him. Curiously, that was exactly what the devil was
always telling me to do; but I resisted him. Stooping Sandy, whose
monastic name was Etienne, always encouraged the very keen members
of the novitiate to call out reminders to the more timid ones of what our
ideals were: to be modest, by which was meant we should not look at
each other; to be pious and meditative; to work hard and not to think for
yourself; and, especially, to be obedient. The shouted-out reminders of
our ideals were meant to inspire us, to keep idle thoughts away and so
on. Come to think of it I suppose you could call out anything you
wanted as long as it was fine and noble. It was not unusual for someone
to call out at breakfast: ‘Let us think of Saint Aloysius Gonzaga.’ There
would be a general sigh of satisfaction all round and if you caught the
reference it nourished you. St Aloysius Gonzaga was famous for his
chastity so just the thought of him would lower the boom of your lust.
He was an easy reference and we all responded. And if another fervent
young novice bawled out: ‘Let us all be minims’, you might not get the
reference to St Francis of Paula who was big on humility. But the
passion to be a minim was very common and we would all bow our
heads and pray for lowliness. One cold damp morning in January, so
damp we were allowed to sleep with our socks under our pillows, I tried
to overcome my timidity about the calls to piety by suddenly yelling out
‘Polycarp of Smyrna’. Thirty-nine young men, faces buried in tin basins

of coffee were caught on the hop. I thought it was quite droll to see them
all forget their modesty for a moment and glance at each other as if to
say: 'Who the hell is Polycarp of Smyrna?’ There was a small pause and
the noise of thirty-nine gorgers ingesting coffee soaked bread eased and
someone called out: ‘Let us not be obscure.’ This rebuke from a
particularly plain tormentee to judge from his clogs irked me a bit and I
countered: 'St John Bosco?’ Plain clogs riposted with: ‘Joseph
Cupertino.' The sandy master of novices tapped the rim of his tin bowl
and hissed: ‘Let us have silence.’ And the silence descended. The
obedience was absolute. You could nearly hear the building growing
older. I never called out again, though I was often tempted to. The devil
ricocheted in my head and did his damnedest to provoke me. He kept
suggesting I shout: ‘Everybody get his dick out.’ But I never dared.
Once at collation, a few months after I had been urged not to be
obscure, I inadvertently, oh very inadvertently lost complete control of
myself and glanced up at the novice sitting opposite me. He'd been
sitting there for at least six months because I recognized a broken button
near his throat but I’d never looked past that broken button and into his
face until now. As I looked at him (in my weakness), I was quite
shocked at how beautiful he was; but not only beautiful, interesting, too,
in the way I imagined the devil might be interesting if one could only
catch a glimpse of him. As I looked at my opposite novice he seemed
contemplative - by that I mean he was being modest and looking into his
lap. I longed to look into his lap with him. I longed to lay my head in his
lap. I wanted to be in his lovely lap forever. I wanted to be his lap dog.
But even before I could enjoy that thought the ugly bugger next to him
read me real quick and shouted out: ‘Be modest, let us all be modest, let
us not look at one another.' The ugly ones always wanted the others to be
modest. He was called Linus, I think, the ugly one, and taking him at his
word I never looked at him again. Compared to him the floor was

mysterious. It was a strange life only loving someone’s buttons or
fingers or feet: the part for the whole, so to speak. I would have liked to
possess that broken button and suck it in chapel during the meditation on
our last ends.
I once spent about half an hour looking at a chap’s clogs and felt quite
affectionate towards them; he was in them, of course, but I never saw his
face and I never once shouted out a call during the remainder of that
whole year. All I wanted to do was to stroke clogs and suck buttons.
Somehow the idea of calling out ‘Let us recollect ourselves’ didn’t
appeal to me, though I was often tempted to cry out, ‘Let us love one
another.’ It was indisputably a good thought but it might have been
misconstrued by Brother Linus or old Stooping Sandy.
From morning till we dropped there was work to be done. The whole
point of that year was to learn humility and practise obedience. The
whole bloody point was the annihilation of the self. I suppose that’s
where I lost myself forever. We sat in silence at meal times while
somebody read to us from the lives of the saints. And afterwards we
washed up the dishes of the whole community, there being about sixty
senior brothers around the place. We had no contact with them at all, and
we knew nothing about them or their duties, though I knew all their
clogs by sight. Odd, isn’t it, you’d think one pair of clogs was just like
another, but no, each pair was special.
When I say there were about sixty senior men I’m going by the
number of feet I counted as I went about my duties. They all wore clogs
and as I was aching with loneliness I formed passing fancies for
different clogs. Once, just outside the kitchen where I had the honour of
washing up the monastery porridge pot, I noticed to my amazement four
clogs, which equalled two monks, and five rather shiny ankle-band
shoes of the kind that my grandmother used to wear. What were two and

a half grandmas doing near the kitchen? There was nobody I could ask
and it remains a mystery to this day. Some nights, lying on my tomb bed
while the black pike hovered around us, I got to thinking that five shoes
could have meant that one of the grannies might have been a one legger.
That kind of thought often came to me without invitation as I lay there
hoping for sleep.
Once, playing softball on a gravelly courtyard in front of a statue of
the Sacred Heart of Jesus, I struck the ball so hard it flew across the yard
and struck the Sacred Heart in the eye. There was a terrible silence and
as I looked about as though to say, ‘Sorry, I didn’t mean it,’ I noticed
several of the others were already weeping in sympathy with the statue.
We sometimes walked up and down this court in the evening at about
seven o’clock. This occasional walking was organized in a strange way.
As we stumbled modestly on to the court an assistant to Stooping Sandy
indicated with his clicking fingers where we were to be. No choice at all.
We would line up in threes facing each other. Then on a signal from . . .
God, I suppose, we walked modestly forward while the three fellows
opposite walked modestly backwards. When they hit the back wall at the
far end of the court, we walked backwards in our turn and the other three
looked forward to us smashing into the wall at the other end of the court.
Even monks need their little pleasures. The conversation during this to-
ing and fro-ing was numbing. We were encouraged to put ourselves into
the shoes, or rather the clogs, of various holy persons from the past.
‘What do you think Joseph of Arimathea felt at the foot of the cross?’ I
used to pretend I was in the next world and don’t remember saying
much. Sometimes I wanted to ask them what it must have been like for
the guests at the marriage feast at Canaan when Christ turned the water
into wine. But I didn’t dare. The first miracle of Christ’s ministry has
always been my favourite.

And so as I told myself that I was happy to be in this infernal house of
God I gradually got used to the terrific regime. Of course, I had no way
of knowing what the others were feeling or thinking. Discussion of
feelings was not allowed. Every few weeks one of us would disappear. It
would be a terrible shock.
‘Thirty-nine little novices all went off to church. 
One disappeared and all their hearts did lurch.’
This would be noticed in chapel when for a moment on the morning of
the disappearance there would a gap where some poor soul had prayed
the night before. Just as I was trying to work out who had gone,
Stooping Sandy would appear and shoo the others along. The holy books
of the disappeared one would be snatched away, the gap would be filled
and that was that. The same process would take place in the large study
area. We were told nothing. We asked nothing. To ask a question would
have meant disappearing and I feared to disappear. I simply felt sad that
I could no longer see a familiar pair of clogs or a beloved neck. But there
was nowhere to weep and nobody to talk to. It was years before I
experienced missing the front of anyone. I wouldn’t have known a front
if it had been pressed against me. That was a long way away. It was to be
a long time before I even saw a complete person and when I did I didn’t
know what to do.
Once when I was on laundry duty I had to go and fetch the clean
rough sheets for the dormitory. At the far end of an immense corridor,
perhaps two hundred yards long, I rang an old brass bell and waited at a
highly polished door on which was a brass plate so worn I could not read
the vital information on it. I listened carefully. Sure enough there was
the sound of fumbling. After what seemed about two days and nights the
door was eased open and the top of a head appeared all covered in a
black cotton veil. It was possibly the top of a tiny nun I thought to

myself. A hand stretched out towards me and I placed the requisition
note for seventy-eight sheets, thirty-nine pillowcases and thirty-nine
towels. I’ll never forget those towels. They were as coarse as cheese
graters; we didn’t need to shave. The note was enfolded in one hand and
another hand came out from somewhere and beckoned me in. I stepped
inside and made as if to advance. The figure in black hissed in my
direction and I froze. It then did a dreadful little shuffle and a hop. I
looked at it and it looked expectantly back at me and repeated the hop
and shuffle. It obviously wanted me to do the hop and shuffle, too. The
hand cocked impatiently as if to say: ‘Well, what are you waiting for?’
So I did a terrible hop and a vague shuffle, very vague I’m afraid as I’m
not too immense at ballet. The figure in black hissed with fury and
repeated its ghastly dance of death clucking as it hopped. Hiss, cluck,
shuffle hop, hiss cluck shuffle hop. I raised my hand, the gesture saying:
‘Got it, got it!’ The black-clad Sister Terpsichore (the Goddess of dance)
paused and watched. So I went into my shuffle and hop with a little hiss
and a bit of a cluck, too. This did not go down well. Later I would feel
the same degree of helplessness in front of John Dexter when he would
say: ‘Go on, then surprise me.’ The dancing thing in front of me now
gurgled in between the hisses and clucks. Like Aaron throwing his rod
down she pointed towards my feet. I leapt back and saw before me two
very neat little mats about fifteen inches by eight, like small off-cuts
from an old dark-green carpet. The little demon in front of me jumped
back and revealed two identical mats between its feet. Then with a
scolding shake of its hand as though to say, ‘This is the last time,’ it
performed the hop and shuffle which got it on to the mats, and then, with
the most shocking change of style, it skated off quite lyrically towards
the far end of an enormous room around the walls of which were high
cupboards and in the middle of which was a table maybe sixteen by
seven, though I could be mistaken. The black-clad skater seemed to do a
pirouette and with a hiss watched me set out. With more of a yelp than a

cluck, I leapt aboard my mats and skated towards my tutor. Its hands
jumped with pleasure and I distinctly heard chuckles from among its
veils. It looked down at the high gloss I had produced on the floor and
nodded vigorously. It was pleased with me. Hideous as it seemed, I fell
instantly in love with it and set off westward across the room, eased
southerly and, swinging to the east, got up speed before sharply turning
north and heading back towards my teacher producing a marvellous
gleam behind me. I had become a floor polisher. And suddenly I
wondered if this was what God wanted of me. Did He mean me to be a
minim among polishers? My lips were tumescent with affection as I
panted to a halt before my new love. Her chuckle became a chortle and
the hidden head nodded to me in approval. I skated away again and did
some fancy turns for my mysterious new love. And I remember laughing
aloud and being shocked by the noise for laughter was forbidden. The
dark figure held out its hands and for a moment I thought it was
proposing a dance. Oh, all things bright and beautiful! At that moment
two other ghostly figures skated into sight and coughed. My tutor
seemed suddenly old and defeated and turned towards a cupboard
behind her and began to load me with the linen I’d come for. Back and
forth I skated polishing the floor the while until seventy-eight sheets and
thirty-nine pillowcases and the same number of towels were stacked
outside the mysterious door to the linen studio. I never did the bed-linen
run again but I reproduced the hop, shuffle and glide in She Stoops to
Conquer at the National Theatre years later. Jack Tinker in the Daily
Mail hated it, thinking it rather overdone. I didn’t care as an ex-ballet
dancer wrote and told me she had seen the production and fallen in love
with my legs. She said that in other circumstances she could have lived
happily with my legs but that she only had a small flat in Holland Park.
The Nottingham theatre critic felt pretty much the same but was a
married man so I had to keep my legs to myself. I’ve held on to them

ever since, and honestly, I can’t say that I’ve regretted it, they’ve been
very loyal over the years and we’re still together, my legs and I.

N I N E
I have already explained that I was a sniffer of incense and of floor
polish from an early age. By the time I was ten I couldn't walk past a tin
of floor polish without having a furtive snort. The same was true of the
stupefying incense and the smoke from newly snuffed-out beeswax
candles. After a while my nostrils began to flare quite naturally so that I
was able to inhale larger and larger pockets of loaded air. On a good day
of snorting smoke, polish and incense, the holy pictures in my prayer
book began to move and the blood of the Sacred Heart of Jesus would
seem to flow; I was in ecstasy.
I still have a fairly highly developed sense of smell. A gift like that
doesn’t fade that easily. Often when I’m on the train from Ashford to
Cannon Street or Charing Cross I find myself surrounded by youngish
business men who slap on an awful lot of scent. Perhaps they are
influenced by those commercials that Henry Cooper did all those years
ago. Sometimes you can see thirty or forty commuters on the 7.02 a.m.
train to Cannon Street apparently fast asleep. But if you look closer you
will notice that they are nearly all muttering incoherently and some will
also be rolling their eyes. This is because they have been overcome by
the smell of male scent. Once on a packed train to Charing Cross —
luckily for me, the slip window was ajar — I stood next to a man who
had slapped on so much perfume that it had begun dissolve the seams of
his suit. One sleeve of his suit fell to the floor before we had reached
Staplehurst. He didn’t seem to notice anything amiss. The deadly scent
continued to rot the seams of his clothes and I’ll spare you the
description of him by the time we reached London Bridge.

Anyway an impulse to be somewhere else, anywhere else as long as it
was not where I was then was the impulse that led me to become a full-
time sniffer in the house of God. Taking the vows of poverty, chastity
and obedience, I moved to Shropshire to what they called a college and
for a time I also enjoyed the drama of the smells. As the years went by
the ardour faded but while it lasted it kept me occupied. God may be
said to have smelled of starch, incense, floor polish and beeswax in
those days. What He smells of nowadays I have no idea. The whiff in
the rest of His house was quite different. Generally it was like the far
end of a damp and very much neglected Oxfam shop.
As professional lovers of God we were not allowed out very much.
The theatre was out of bounds as was the cinema. We were not allowed
to enter Protestant churches and, of course, we had never heard of
Sketchley or even, the most famous of all cleaners, Archille Serre. The
monks could be said to divide roughly into two groups, smell-wise. One
group was made up of Lifebuoy users and the second group of Wright’s
Coal Tar users. The Lifebuoy gang seemed on the whole to be a very
vigorous group. They gave the impression of being rather immodest and
were sometimes seen to look at each other right in the eyes which was
forbidden. In contrast, the Wright’s Coal Tar brotherhood seemed mildly
asthmatic and round-shouldered. They gasped a lot as though they really
enjoyed the smell of each other. But when they crossed the path of a
Lifebuoy saint the Coal Tar mystics would be seized with fits of
coughing. It got so bad that the two groups had to be separated for
prayers in chapel, Lifebuoys to the right and Wright’s Coal Tars to the
left. Of course, it was not quite as simple as that because the ascetics
among us favoured carbolic soap. This brand of soap was not only
merciless to germs, it also murdered the libido. Oh yes, the smell of
carbolic is death to a stalk. If you were having trouble with your vow of
chastity all you had to do was get your family to send you a tablet of

carbolic. I’ve heard that the Pope has been told of this old remedy and
has even mentioned it in a bull to the British bishops. It may, of course,
be too late since lots of priests have already become hardened by the use
of ‘Soir’, the after-dark aftershave.
I lusted after new smells. I didn’t know then exactly what they would
be, how could I? When I arrived at God’s house randy for martyrdom
the only smells I was confident of were those of simmering shirts in a
hot copper and the immovable stench of salt fish. Hospital smells were a
constant in my nasal memory, along with incense mixed with the odour
of beeswax candles. I could not anticipate the amazing and suffocating
quality of Devon Violets. In an Italian fish restaurant one evening I was
enjoying a pair of kippers when an uncertain blonde girl went past my
table. So seeped was she in Devon Violets that she completely
neutralized my kippers. Suddenly the friendly and confident smell of my
fish vanished. In a flash they tasted like early Egyptian mummified
kippers taken by a grave robber from the tomb of Tutankhamun. I must
have looked startled because a waiter came up to me and asked if
everything was all right. ‘No,’ I told him, 'my kippers are dud.’ He
straightaway tried my second kipper which was untouched; and then, not
leaving anything to chance, he tried the first kipper which was nearly
finished. What a food inspector that young man would have made.
‘Hey, Aldo,’ he cried out towards the kitchen. ‘Mr Baker, he has a
dud kipper. Doctor Who no likes his kipper. What you done to him?’
The chef came out looking bemused and wiping his hands on his
checked keks.
‘How do mean a dud kipper?’ asked the chef as he walked towards
my table and the waiter and straight into the noxious cloud of Devon
Violets. The unauthenticated blonde must have been in the powder room
and hit the compact. The chef sniffed me and then he sniffed his

colleague before inclining slightly towards the blonde powder monkey
about ten feet away. Then the chef staggered back a pace or so and
groaned as he realized that his sense of smell had vanished completely.
He made a terrible scene that was only eased by the offer of a large
brandy and a Hamlet cigar. They would not take my money. What
became of the blonde I can't say; but whenever I was in that street I
always kept a small plastic tube of lighter fuel on me in case she
reappeared. But all this was yet to come and more, much more, like
fennel and dill in steamed cabbage and especially testosterone in
Aldershot.
And so it was that in my desire for other smells I chaffed at the
authoritarian demands of elders with names like Brother Provincial or
Brother District Superior. I grew to hate them all and yet I was too
frightened to do anything about it. There was no policy then of being
released into the community. Religious people who left were always
considered traitors and were said to go mad with their sense of guilt and
their inability to cope with the ‘outside world’ as life away from the
community was called.
To get away from the Lifebuoys and the Brothers Wright, I humbly
accepted the menial task of keeping the entire community warm. By that
I mean I was in charge of the furnace. I have always had an impulse for
the menial task. This furnace was enormous and digging out the clinkers
which were sometimes three feet across was not easy. When broken and
dropped in water these clinkers released gases which made me feel quite
disorientated, but I quite enjoyed it just the same. And as I struggled to
keep the brothers warm I had time to meditate on how I was feeling
towards my superiors. They were all my superiors.
Brother Provincial who limped a bit as if perhaps his wooden leg had
originally been made for a slightly taller man, was a particular target for

my new-found appetite for violent thoughts. I loathed him. As he walked
there was a slight creaking noise from under his cassock. This noise
made it impossible for him to creep up on his inferiors without warning.
We used to whisper to each other about this creaking. One timid little
soul called Nathaniel thought the creaking was from the harness of the
wooden leg. I didn’t agree with this opinion at all. In fact, I wasn’t
certain that Brother Provincial had a wooden leg. The creaking might
have come from a too-tight truss, because he always wore a distinct
frown, the frown in my view of a man who might be trying to ignore his
rupture. So repressed were we that these forbidden speculations fuelled
our imaginations to feverishness. My own uncertainty about the
wooden-leg proposition led me to admit to myself that I was not certain
that anybody else had legs at all. After being frocked from my Adam’s
apple to the floor for so long my legs, like my thoughts, had grown used
to the darkness. And as we were covered up even in the showers our legs
never met each other. It was not until I went into the army that my poor
legs actually met and got to know each other again. But my desire to
kick the poor Provincial in his harness grew more and more powerful. I
guessed that if I did suddenly kick him then I would be thrown out. I
was so afraid of what the outside world was like that I was in despair
about how I could survive it. The thought of returning to the smells of
my childhood revolted me. What could I do? What was I good for?
What skills did I have? The answers were, nothing, nothing and none. I
shivered at my hopelessness. The thought occurred to me that I might
throw a burning clinker into one of the old corridors and burn the whole
place down so that we could all escape Gods clutches. I dismissed that
thought as one of pride. Who was I to take a decision for all the others? I
wondered whether these thoughts, particularly the red-hot clinker ones,
were not just impulses to get to hell early.

Every year during the few weeks before Easter the whole community
sank into utter silence as we entered into our annual retreat. This was to
be my last retreat. It was a period of deep self-examination. We were
exhorted to examine our motives for everything in our daily lives. Now
the impossible injunction which is laid upon Christians in general and on
professed religious persons in particular is: ‘Love thy neighbour.’ Of all
the injunctions in the New Testament this is the heaviest, the hardest and
the most complex to apply. And during the long hours of meditation I
discovered to my horror that all was not well in the charity section of my
heart. The cupboard was bare. I had had enough of religious life. So
deep was my resentment of authority that I realized I had an intense
desire to break all the Commandments. All of them. Especially I had an
urge to kill, steal and bear false witness. Adultery could wait until the
opportunity arose. Prudence, Justice, Fortitude and Temperance just
seemed to me to be a firm of crooked canon lawyers.
During this long retreat from worldly thoughts one was allowed to
speak to the visiting priest whose job it was to reinforce the teachings of
the church and to encourage vacillating monks to stiffen their resolution.
In my case it did not work. Something was happening inside my head
and there was nothing I could do about it. It was a very frightening time
for me. I imagine it was a little like the onset of an illness. The
symptoms were becoming more and more evident and more and more
disturbing. And just as most people try to ignore the signs of illness, so I
tried to ignore my symptoms of fading faith. The influence from my first
year in Jersey was still deep in me and after nearly six years I was very
institutionalized. The thought of the outside world that I wanted so badly
made me very afraid. But I felt I had to have it no matter what the cost.
So when I had the chance I spoke to our visiting spiritual guide,
Father Bernal, about my fears. He was a gentle soul very willing to hear
me and to advise me on a course of action. When I told him about my

doubts and about my desire to break the Commandments, especially my
impulse to kill, he cleared his throat and looked as if he wasn’t certain
whether he should hear my confession or call the police but he
concentrated on what I had to say. When I realized he was not about to
condemn me or even just chase me out of the place I was able to be
reasonably calm as I let him hear what was in my mind. He sniggered as
I told him of how I’d thrown some rabbit droppings in the Brothers’
soup a few days before. A very small and not very serious attempt to
poison the lot of them. ‘Did you eat the soup?’ he asked me.
‘No, Father,’ I told him, ‘I was the reader that day.’ He nodded, and I
suspected that he was casting his mind back because he then asked me:
‘Was it oxtail soup, Brother?’ I told him no and he seemed relieved.
After several meetings with the old man, he began to talk back to me.
He called me Tom, which brought back the memories of my other life.
And as I told him of all the tumult inside me he nodded and said softly:
‘Tom, Tom, I think you're in the wrong place.’ That’s what I wanted to
hear him say. My heart rose as he added: 'Do you want me to help you
out?’ I nodded to him with such joy that he laughed.
‘I'll get it all started,’ he said. I felt full of optimism, full of hope that
I could at last get out of God’s clutches, sign up with the devil get on the
old primrose path to pleasure, even if it did lead to hell.
That same evening I was doing the pious reading at supper. As I
turned a page I thought I saw Brother Provincial watching me. I
wondered if Father Bernal had told him of my desire to kick him in his
harness and I carried on reading from some daft old fool called
Scaramelli. It was a tale about hermits who had sacrificed all for the love
of God but who had remained attached to their crabs or cats or lice, I
forget which, and so that after fifty years of mortification they had still
finished up in hell. In God’s vineyard you must not become attached to

anything, not to books or particular cells or even to people; friendship
itself was forbidden. And it went through my mind as I was reading all
this pious claptrap that God did ask an awful lot of us. And He seemed
to have this insatiable appetite for praise. Was God insecure, too, I
wondered? Does He really want us to serenade Him all the time? Does
He really not want us to have a pal? So it seemed to me that if you were
to get on with God you had to settle for being miserable. And I read on
from Scaramelli and wondered how soon it would be before I could get
away. These arrangements sometimes took months. But I wondered if
Father Bernal had explained that I was an arsonist, poisoner and
potential kicker of my superiors. I hoped he had for I was hot to be a
traitor, to get out to new smells and find some joy in life. I didn’t know
then that I would never find a friend, that I would go on being a traitor
and that new smells would never make up for the pernicious itch in me
to make change for its own sake.
For a few more days the thoughts of murder, kicking and fire-raising
kept me from the notions of humility and obedience that Father Bernal
was exhorting us to in the course of his three times a day homilies. As I
was digging out a young clinker from the bottom of the furnace one
morning at about five thirty I paused for a moment to sniff the noxious
fumes. In the pause, as I leaned on my long poker I heard the dreaded
creak of old leather harness muffled by a soutane and I knew that
Brother Provincial was standing behind me. I turned and looked into the
pitiless grey eyes of the saintly superior. He beckoned me to follow him
and he led the way towards my cell. As we went along I heard the bell
calling the rest of our brethren to meditation, and I suddenly realized that
I would never see any of them again. When we reached the tiny room
where I kept my prayer books and toothbrush, the Provincial turned to
me and whispered: ‘Take off your crucifix and soutane and put on these
things I’ve brought. You are going away from us because of your

selfishness.’ I caught the whiff of carbolic soap, the true odour of
sanctity, and I wondered if perhaps he actually brushed his teeth in it.
Carbolic was good at keeping holy men detumescent, but one of its side
effects was that it seemed to diminish their humanity. Lying across my
bed was a dark-coloured mackintosh and a dark, lumpy, green pullover.
My saintly superior looked away as I changed into the clothes of another
world. It struck me that these clothes were very shabby. I realized that
my trousers were rather ragged and very baggy. None of these things
mattered while I was frocked up but now, now I would look a laughing
stock. There was no collar to my shirt and my hair was very short in the
style of a vineyard labourer. People will know that I’m a runaway
labourer from God’s vineyard, I thought. I trembled uncontrollably as
the creaking and lopsided figure led me towards the front door of the
house. Outside on the gravel drive stood a small green van. Straightaway
I realized that it was the same colour as the lumpy pullover I was
wearing. The driver got out and stood with his eyes cast down as if he
sensed the fear I was going through and couldn’t bear to look. Brother
Provincial handed me four one pound notes and whispered: ‘Ask God to
forgive you and to send us someone else to do His will.’ He looked grey
in the face and a bit sweaty like an executioner on only his second job. I
glanced towards the driver and then back to God’s bailiff. He was
already back at the doorway. Grey face whispered: ‘The driver knows
what to do.’ I remember that by now I was shaking very badly, and I half
held out my hands as though to say, ‘I’m sorry,’ but old creaky turned his
face away from me in disgust and with one last creak for old times sake
he stepped back through the door and closed it quickly.
I turned towards the driver and caught him looking at me as if I were
an escaped lunatic. He gestured towards the passenger seat, got into his
van and turned the engine over. I got in as he’d signed me to do and said,
‘Good morning.' The driver shook his head slightly and made a small

movement with his left hand as though he didn’t really want me in his
van at all but was only taking me as a favour to God. I was so tense I
could not even sit back in my seat. I just crouched there, hunched and
sitting forward. I wondered how far it was from Market Drayton where
we were to Crewe station where the Liverpool train would stop to take
me home to my Mam and her sorrow. I no more knew how far Crewe
was from Market Drayton than I knew how far Montreal was. In my fear
I sank into a trance as though I was on the way to an abattoir. But the
journey didn’t seem long and I suppose at that time in the morning
nobody except treacherous young monks in vans were on the road. At
Crewe the silent driver stopped with a sigh of relief and signalled me to
get out. I said thank you but he shook his head as if that was forbidden to
us. I closed the door of the van and it went away as discreetly as a small
hearse. And I was left outside Crewe station, with four pounds and
nothing else. I hadn’t even brought my face cloth. As I walked to the
ticket office the few people about looked at me curiously and when I
looked back they looked away quickly as I imagine people look away
from newly discharged prisoners. I stood in a small line to buy my ticket
and I was aware that the man standing behind me was leaving several
feet between himself and me. After I had bought my ticket I went to the
tea bar and got myself a cup of tea. I paid the woman and then I realized
that my hands were shaking so badly that I didn’t dare to pick up the
cup. I slid it along the counter for a few feet and when she turned to
serve someone else I abandoned my tea and fled the bar and stood
among some trolleys and packing cases marked Lime Street, Liverpool.
And as I stood there I thought of the distress my mother would feel
when I told her that I’d left the Brotherhood and of how my appearance
would upset her. And the trembling wouldn’t stop.
When I got to Lime Street I felt comforted a bit at the familiar sights
of the George’s Hall and the Empire Theatre. It was still early in the day

so I decided to walk most of the way to West Derby Road where my
mother now lived. I caught a reflection of myself in shop windows and
dreaded anybody seeing me. I knocked on the door and it opened as if by
magic. My mother was just about to leave the house to go to the shops.
For a split second she looked at me in a terrible state of shock. And then,
seeing my distress and my hopeless clothes, she pulled me inside and
loved me. I remember trying to repeat the words of the pitiless Brother
Provincial. ‘They said I’ve betrayed God,’ I sobbed. My poor mother
hung on to me desperately. She must have been appalled by the
realization that I had left religion. She kept making those comforting
little noises that mothers used to frightened and hurt children: ‘Ssh, ssh,
there, there, it’s going to be all right.’ And as I trembled more and went
on sobbing she hissed in my ear: ‘I don’t care what you’ve done you’re
going to be all right.’ And after several cups of sweet tea she listened to
my story and nodded and nodded and carried on loving me.
The news of my return flashed around the family at incredible speed
and they reacted the way good kind and poor people always do: they had
a whip round for me so that I could get some decent clothes and they
promised to pray for me. What more could they do? And with the help
of my cousin, Billy O’Boyle I went to the shops and found clothes like
everybody else wore and was able to become anonymous. I went and
registered for National Service and then left Liverpool for London to
await my call up.
Billy O’Boyle saw me off from Lime Street Station on the next stage
of escape. I felt as if I was emerging from a nightmare. My mother was
disappointed that she would lose the status of Holy Mother that having a
son or daughter in religion conferred upon her. But her disappointment
could not lessen her affection for me.

So I went to London and somehow, to my astonishment, I made out
all right. I found a room in Courtfield Gardens, Earls Court, a small
room, but dry and compared to the one I had in God’s house, it was
heaven. The next morning I found a job as a runner for the Agricultural
Research Council in Lower Regent Street. All I had to do was to deliver
letters and small parcels to various Whitehall departments. In those days
there were hundreds of messengers in London and they were mostly a
friendly crowd and soon taught me the short cuts to the various
government offices.
My sense of freedom was amazing. To be able to run about and talk to
people whenever I felt like it astounded me and my enthusiasm for my
work amused my fellow runners. To look into shops and see people
buying things gave me terrific pleasure. I was too timid to go into
restaurants so I lived on sandwiches and cakes from snack bars. Quickly
I began to speak an English that people could understand. After nearly
six years of prayer, modesty and self denial, and especially after all that
chastity, I was slightly disabled. But my willingness to run about and do
what I was asked to do made people warm to me a little. I just could not
get enough of people. I think, looking back, I tried too hard, and though
people quite liked me, there was something about me that also disgusted
them. I found that out when I accidentally heard some of the people in
the office talking about me. ‘He’s quite nice,’ I heard a woman say, ‘But
there’s something odd about him, something slightly disgusting.’ I still
have that effect on quite a lot of people I meet.
And so I ran about delivering my parcels and feeling nourished by the
kindness of most people towards me. I lived on Lyons’ fruit pies. If I had
a pie and a tea in a cafe I was often too shy to ask for another in case
someone thought I was being greedy. So I’d cruise about until I found
another J. Lyons & Co. and I’d have another fruit pie and another cup of
tea. It doesn’t sound much now but for me it was quite an adventure.

And every morning I got up at five thirty and went to Mass at the
Brompton Oratory. This salved my conscience a bit and I hoped that
God would forgive my betrayal.
There was the problem of what to do after work was over. I was far
too nervous to go to the cinema or the theatre. And then the landlord at
Courtfield Gardens asked me if I was interested in a little evening job as
a barman in a nearby pub called the Bolton Arms. I was taken on
straightaway and my enthusiasm aroused great interest. No training was
given, you just watched the others and copied them. In a few days I was
reasonably competent and my fear of inactivity led me to rush about
serving like a mad thing and this endeared me to the barmaids who were
benevolently baffled by the pleasure I took in pulling pints. ‘If he likes it
that much, let him do it then,’ a girl called Maureen said.
There was some sort of gaming machine in one of the bars and people
were often asking me for change to put into the machine. So if
somebody gave me a pound and asked me for the change in sixpences I
used to ring up a pound on the till and pass over the change.
Immediately the till was out. This went on for several days and there
was considerable tension behind the bar as the grey-faced governor
scratched his head and looked frantic. His relief when he saw me
commit this act of idiocy was palpable.
So I was quite busy and very happy at all this activity. The job at the
Research Council started at eight thirty and finished at five thirty. So I
had time to go home and get a wash before my shift at the Bolton Arms.
I was so full of energy that I thought of getting a little job in my lunch
hour as well, but I couldn’t find anything suitable. So I began to go into
bookshops and sometimes I would strike up a conversation with one of
the assistants. In Foyle’s I got to know a girl called June Judge. After a
few little chats I asked her if she would come and have a sandwich with

me some lunchtime. When she said yes I nearly fainted with happiness
and promptly fell in love with her. She was a keen amateur singer and
her heroine was Kathleen Ferrier. She took me to a concert at the Albert
Hall but the crush of people scared me and made me very tense and not
good company.
I liked the smell of June so much that I used to stand as close to her as
I could. This bothered her a little and she asked me not to stand so near
to her. I then stood so far away from her that she was embarrassed
because people thought she was alone until I started talking to her from
across the room. She tried to teach me to smoke but I didn’t like it at all
as it got in the way of inhaling the smell of people, especially girls. I
bought her a Kathleen Ferrier record, ‘Northumbrian Folk Songs’, I
think, and a box of chocolates as big as a bread tray. Poor June. She
must have been so bored with me. I became so obsessed with her that I
forgot to gobble God one morning at the Oratory; it was the first time for
at least two thousand days. It gave me a great jolt. And then my call-up
papers arrived. Destination: Royal Army Medical Corps.

TEN
Waiting for the train at Waterloo were hundreds of pale-faced young
men all trying to be cheerful. We had all heard distorted stories of army
life and most of us were dreading it. I tried to strike up some sort of
conversation with a chap but he just told me to ‘Fuck off’. I kept my
head down after this and waited patiently for the train. There was a very
amiable sergeant at the platform barrier who urged us all on to the train
and smiled a lot. I got into my seat and said to the man next to me,
‘Well, if all the sergeants are as agreeable as that one we should all have
a jolly time, eh?’ He said: ‘I thought I just told you to fuck off.’ It was
the same fellow I’d tried to talk to earlier. I crept away and sat in a
corner and practised the cutting phrase.
I have often noticed that in a theatre bar during the interval there will
be somebody who very evidently wants to start a conversation with
someone, with anyone. And everybody suspects this and avoids the
would-be chatterer. It’s sometimes the same in a doctor’s waiting room
where the trier gives you the impression he is doomed. He smells, often
quite subtly, of hopelessness. I was a bit like that on the journey to the
training camp. Frightened and depressed, I looked at the others. Most of
these conscripts were eighteen, I suppose, but they seemed older than I
was although I was twenty-one. Tradesmen, professional people and
religious people were allowed to defer their stint in the services. The
young conscripts seemed to be resentful at being taken away from their
home and their mothers. My secret was that I was running from God and
looking for the devil. But I couldn’t use that as a conversation opener.
On arrival at Aldershot station we were met by three or four more
sergeants, all of them very friendly, who herded us on to some waiting

lorries. And then as soon as we were aboard the lorries all the sergeants
went mad and started to scream at us. Nothing could have prepared us
for the brutality of this appalling verbal abuse. They kept screeching at
us: ‘You’re in the army now, you’re in the army now.’
On arrival at Boyce Barracks we were rushed to the stores to be kitted
out with our new identities. And all the time the dreadful yelling went on
from everyone around us. Even people without any obvious stripes of
rank seemed to think they should scream at us. Everybody kept shouting,
'Move it, move it.’ Once or twice I glanced about to see if there was
something I should be moving but this only intensified the fury of the
screamers. One of them, his nose suddenly glued to mine and his eyes on
stalks shrieked at me: ‘Are you taking the piss, soldier? Are you taking
the piss?’ I tried to lean back and disengage my nose from his but he
wouldn’t have it. He was a lissom fellow, that sergeant, and the further
back I leaned the further forward he leaned until I could feel the
sergeant’s privates rubbing up against my own shrivelled parts. So I
straightened up and surrendered to his nose instead. ‘No, sergeant, no,’ I
cried, ‘I will never take the piss.’ ‘Well don’t, just don’t, that’s all,’
screamed Popeye as he recalled his nose and looked about for another
victim who might be taking the piss. It was the new expression of my
life. Everybody was always asking everybody if he was taking the piss.
It is a phrase that has lasted as long as the fashion for denim.
As we were prodded on towards our company office and then to our
billets hundreds of other young men gathered about us demanding to
know where we came from. ‘Anyone from Manchester? Anyone from
Catford? Anyone from Barnstable? Anyone from Birmingham?’ They
were looking to be friendly with fellow townsmen. Contacts were made
to the great joy of those concerned as the young men sought out their
own. As far as I could see there were no wide-eyed ex-monks looking

for company. Nobody shouted out: ‘Any old Benedictines? Any old
Carthusians?’
There was one powerful-looking young fellow standing slightly apart
from the others. He glanced at me and I mistook the glance for interest.
Quick as a flash I judged him to be an ex-Trappist and I smiled and
called out: ‘Dominus Vobiscum’, which means ‘The Lord be with you’.
But he just shrugged and said: ‘Get fucked ye great big nancy boy.’ So I
guessed he was probably an ex-Jesuit and, lowering my head, I plodded
on towards my next station of the cross.
I found I was in F company and billeted in hut F I0, the Roman
Catholic squad. It was army policy in the first few weeks of training to
keep the Catholics on their own. ‘No talk of religion or politics’ was the
rule. Strange that the army thought that young men would talk of
anything other than food and girls. We were hungry all the time. All day
long we marched and marched. It was quite surprising how quickly we
learned to do it. I found myself enjoying it all. I grew to like the
complicated movements and I was made right marker for the squad. At
first I thought it was because of my skill but it was only because I was
the tallest man in the group. All day long the drill corporals called out
the time: ‘Left, left, left right left’. All day came the accompanying
growls: ‘Fuck, fuck, fuck fuck fuck’. And when we stopped for a smoke
break the only thing that changed was the tempo of the swearing. For a
few days it was hell. And then, just like any word that is repeated
constantly, it all became just noise - noise noise noise - and was soon
drained of all meaning. And in the evenings we polished our boots and
scrubbed and blancoed our webbing. We learned to fold our blankets the
way the army liked them folded, and to look after our possessions for
fear of thieves. And we were always hungry.

In the dining halls of the great cookhouses we ate at tables that sat
perhaps twenty men. As we stood in the queue for our food all dignity
was abandoned in the scramble for a good helping of swill. The cooks
with their unassailable power despised us and did things to test our
hunger. In the mornings, especially, like shameless gulls we would
gather around the huge trays in which a hundred eggs could easily be
fried and we would hope for two. What a ceremony the breakfast was.
The cook would sometimes be slow in the cracking of the eggs and
might ask us, as if we were his equals, ‘Do you think the fat is hot
enough for frying eggs?’ And then he would pretend to hold his hand
close to the fat to test the heat. And then, shaking his head as if in
dreadful doubt, and making sure by his conviction that we were all
watching him attentively, he would spit into the smoking fat. The spit
would sizzle and skip across the tray. And glancing at us casually to see
if our squeamishness was greater than our hunger he would start
cracking the eggs at great speed. The sight of the egg whites frilling in
the molten fat, and the yolks misting over and the smell of fried bread
erased the memory of the spitting and we all held out our plates for as
much as we could get. Sausages like old cartridge cases and mashed
potato the colour of abandoned plimsolls could not deaden our lust for
something to eat. Once a man next to me found the handle of a radiator
in his mashed potato; he said nothing, merely moving it to the side of his
plate after sucking the mashed potato off it first. Nobody else said
anything either. If the truth was known several of us were probably
jealous.
And so the first weeks fled by. And new words arrived as well. Not
just the swear words of the barrack room but mysterious words of
foreign origin. We had to learn the names of all the bones in the body, all
the major arteries and organs, too. Femur, patella, thorax and aorta. They
seem a bit tame now but they refreshed me then. Of course the new

words couldn’t crowd out the old swear words so beloved of the chaps.
They simply talked of ‘your fucking cerebellum, mate, a bullet in that
and Bob’s your fucking uncle’.
We were taught how to make beds in the approved army fashion
which was a bit like creating a huge starched envelope into which a sick
person would not have had the strength to climb. We were shown how to
bed-bath people and do it without hurting them or embarrassing them
either. It was all a very intense rehearsal for our brief careers in the
Royal Army Medical Corps. I remained very enthusiastic and I was
quite a quick learner because I was fascinated by it all. Often my
keenness grated on the nerves of the others and they were then cruelly
sarcastic to me. I was rather eager to have a mate like all the others had -
you were nowhere without a mate — but I didn’t have the skill.
Once a week we had a kit inspection by the company commander. I
was not too good at the laying out of buckles and belts, and it showed.
But my desire to get it right and my willingness to learn slightly
disarmed the CO. Once as I stood to attention by my bed knowing that
my lay-out was not all that good, I saw the CO frown and then glance
towards the duty corporal. The corporal made a little gesture as if he was
scratching the side of his head which he changed into a tapping of his
temple. The CO spotted the reference to a half-wit and his frown became
a beaming smile. ‘Good lay-out, soldier,’ he said, and went on with the
inspection. Afterwards the word went about that I was some sort of
hypnotist. ‘Good lay-out?’ they roared incredulously, ‘Good lay-out? It’s
a fucking dog’s breakfast.’ But there was nothing they could do about
the way the CO saw things though they looked at me with more
suspicion than usual.
During this training at Boyce Barracks, Aldershot, the Roman
Catholic crowd was separated from the rest because we were a bit

suspect. By that I mean the army felt we actually believed in something -
God, for instance. Not that we were the only ones to believe, but our
faith showed and we were likely to be touchy about it. We were marched
to church every Sunday and on Holy Days of Obligation, I think. Our
corporal was called Pavey, a decent fellow who found church and
religious parades mysterious. But he was keen that the regulations were
observed and he was full of respect for the Padre. We would be hustled
into the chapel in good order and crammed together according to
Pavey’s idea of respect for the Lord, which is how he talked of God on
church parade days. There was a fellow in our squad called Manning
who was a ‘dog’s breakfast’ of a soldier according to Pavey, and he was
a bit dozy. At penning-in time one Sunday poor old Manning forgot to
take his beret off in chapel. The corporal, in his fervour to get us all
huddled in, hugger-mugger, didn’t notice until he was leaving the chapel
to go and have a smoke with the other little corporals outside. In an
instant fury, he strode up to the end of the row where Manning was
dozing, leaned in and, with the driven whisper of the actor, hissed very
audibly, ‘Oi! You! Take your hat off in the house of the Lord, cunt!'
Which Manning did as meekly as Stan Laurel, not seeming to notice
Pavey’s lack of affection.
In those days I still thought I believed in God and these outbursts of
rage filled me with terror. I couldn’t understand how the NCOs could be
reasonable one moment and demented with rage the next. I wasn’t quick
to spot the wonderful theatricality of army life.
After the basic training was over came the postings. Everybody
wanted to go overseas and see the world a bit. There was the bait of
overseas rates of pay but, more than that, there was the desire for
excitement. We had been shown a terrifying film of what VD did for you
if you dipped your wick in the wrong place. There were rules about
prophylactics, another new word for us. After pollution, prophylactics,

or your nob fell off. It all boiled down to washing your tackle in carbolic
soap when you signed in after sin. Even if you hadn’t parked your prong
it was wise to cleanse the gear if only to save face. I never saw an
audience so utterly attentive as during those films. Later, when I played
Macbeth, I tried to recall the sensation of horror I felt at the rotting-nob
shots in the scene where he sees Banquo’s ghost but it only sparked off
roars of laughter in the audience. Sometimes I suspected that Sheila
Allan, who played Lady Macbeth, had a hard time keeping a straight
face.
The National Servicemen who were shipped back to Boyce Barracks
to be demobbed treated us with the contempt that old soldiers reserve for
‘sprogs’. They told us terrible stories of men who had gone mad or
missing in Singapore and Benghazi. And the reason was always sex.
Stories of how young men got up in the night for a pee and discovered
that their dicks had disappeared. And how they had screamed and
screamed and then rushed back to town to find the brothel where they
thought they might find their best part and never did. It was the style of
old soldiers to tell terrifying stories to the young ones. They laid it on as
thick as they thought it would stick. And there were tales of other lads
who thought they would be safe as ‘rimmers’ but whose noses fell off.
These poor sods who were supposed to have lost their noses were said to
be stored in some section in Netley Hospital, the army nut-house, where
they were issued with masks so as not to frighten the nurses. But these
stories didn’t seem to frighten most of the Catholics I knew. How could
they scare them? They had heard wilder stories than of noses falling off:
of devils in pigs and eternal fires. They were not afraid of God or the
devil. They would chance their noses as they would chance their arm.
They chatted and laughed rather nervously but defiantly, too. I was still
very quiet and the company of dirty-talking cunt-struck papists aroused

powerful feelings in me. The hell of it drew me as heaven once had but I
was too afraid to join in.
And so at the interviews with the company sergeant-major, who had
heard about my bent for God, it was decided that I should become the
curator of the camp museum. This was quite a small building near the
guardhouse and contained all sorts of nostalgia from the old days. The
Medical Corps was very proud of the number of VCs it had won and one
of these was on show. There were also souvenirs from old wars, like
samples of long-forgotten brands of cigarettes and blood-stained field
bandages from former campaigns. All this stuff was in glass cases and
the heavy-duty linoleum was highly polished and this reminded me of
church. There were no chairs and no books either; and, unfortunately for
me, there were no visitors. I might as well have been a lighthouse
keeper. The hours were from 9.30 a.m. till 8 p.m. with two hours off in
the afternoon.
The keys of this museum were kept in the guardhouse and had to be
signed in and out by the curator once a day. The Regimental Police who
held the keys and supervised discipline around the entrance to the camp
were notoriously keen.
The word keen in the army had a deeply pejorative meaning in the
1950s, especially when applied to regimental policemen. They had a
wonderful job; all they had to do was look us over at every minute of the
day and if they didn’t like what they saw then they were authorized to
give us hell. They were the sort of men who were so keen that they
never sat down on duty in case they spoiled the creases in their trousers.
They were a picture of lunatic smartness. As for posture, the word
clockwork comes to mind. They used so much starch when they ironed
their trousers that even their fly buttons were inaccessible. This meant
that bladders pleading to be emptied and bowels squeaking for release

were ruthlessly snubbed. This refusal to recognize the legitimate
demands of nature led to them feeling very uncomfortable. And the pain
led the policemen to feel very angry. And this meant that any innocent
young soldier coming into the guardroom was likely to be shredded by
furious Redcaps who were bursting for a piss. Their movements were
very jerky. The policemen’s movements, I mean.
The whole aim of the average regimental policeman was to instil
terror into any passing soldier by his fiercesome aspect. He would give
the impression he had an iron railing up his arse and that it was giving
him gip. His cap - no beret for him, far too friendly - was pulled over his
eyes so that he had to look up to the sky to see whom he was talking to.
They also had a vile habit of standing very close to you, nose to nose,
and asking daft questions, ‘What are you doing in Singapore, soldier?’
To which you might say: ‘But I’m not in Singapore, Corporal.’ To
which he would say, ‘Oh, we’ve got a right one here, I can see. Good at
geography, are we? Got a keen sense of direction, have we?’
I’d say: ‘No, Corporal, I’ve got no sense of direction at all.’ ‘Then
how do you know you’re not in Singapore, then?’
‘I don’t know whether I’m in Singapore or not, Corporal.’
‘But you just told me that you weren't in Singapore,’ would snarl the
red-capped Jesuit, tilting his head and slyly smirking at his victim. ‘What
do you know, soldier?’
‘Nothing, Corporal.’
And so it would go on till he was bored or spotted another victim over
my shoulder. He would nod and I’d be able to enter the guardhouse to
ask for the key to the museum that nobody came to. As I went in, I saw
at a glance and with a gaping anus that there were five Redcaps standing

about the place. For the merest split second there was quiet as they saw
me. And then they all started to scream at me at once:
‘Come here.’ ‘Get out.’ ‘Mark time.’ ‘About turn.’ ‘Where’s your
brown paybook?’ And then all together, ‘Get out, get out, you horrible
man.’ And another one, ‘Come here, come here.’
With my highly developed longing to be a martyr I tried to obey all
these orders as they came at me. This was what they wanted and their
pleasure grew as I pirouetted, came forward, went backwards and about
turned, all at the same time. Even when they called me back, I realized
they were enjoying it and I tried to anticipate their orders; like a frantic,
crazed dervish, I spun and retreated, fumbling in my pocket at the same
time to produce my brown paybook. They were appalled at the intensity
of my co-operation. As perfectly common sadists and gobshites they
found my performance just too much to bear. ‘Stand still,’ they
screamed, ‘stand still.’ But I couldn’t stand still. I whirled and hopped
and grappled with my top-left pocket which gave them the idea I might
be on the verge of an infarction. Swiftly they seized me and shook me
out of my ecstasy. ‘What d’you want?’ came the coarse voices from far
away. I looked at my tormentors and seeing concern in their faces, I
piled on the agony. ‘I’m so sorry, Sergeant,’ I muttered to the corporal,
who seemed pleased at his sudden promotion from me. ‘It must be
nerves, did I disturb you?’ And it worked. Instead of kicking me all the
way back to the billet, they calmed down, gave me the key and said:
‘Off you go soldier. Off you go soldier!’ It was positively affectionate.
So off I went.
*    *    *    *    *
As National Servicemen our pay was four shillings a day. So that if a lad
fancied a few pints and a packet of cigarettes and maybe egg and chips
in the NAAFI he would find it hard to manage on twenty-eight shillings

a week. As I didn’t smoke or drink at that time I was able to supplement
the army rations with chocolate or chips. Most evenings we lay on our
beds and listened to Radio Luxembourg. The freedom to chat was still a
novelty for me. I just could not get enough of it. Of course, after all the
silence of the previous six years I was not good at chat between chaps.
After all, I was out of practice. I couldn’t time things properly at first
and often jumped in when it wasn't my turn. And then when it was my
turn, I missed it. Some of the men in the billet found it quite funny. One
fellow asked me if English was my first language. I suppose I was a bit
like a young Harry Worth.
The talk was often of girls and reduced me to paralysed silence. The
others knew that ‘girl talk’ made me uneasy and they never missed an
opportunity to try and embarrass me.
‘What? Never seen a fanny then, Baker?’ they would ask. And the
sight of my terror would make them chortle with malicious joy. If the
truth were known there were others there who hadn’t seen a fanny either
but they knew the chat, and like people who can’t read they were often
very clever at concealing their ignorance. A fellow called Wagstaff
always got a big laugh with his knowing description of the mysterious
fanny as: ‘Like a cat with its throat cut.'
Sometimes, before the lights were put out, the lonely young soldiers
would sit around in small groups on somebody’s bed and chat quietly.
The Christians would gather on a bed near the door and witness to each
other as Christians always seem to do. And the Fantasy Shaggers would
sit somewhere else and spin their tales of girls they hadn’t had. I never
quite knew which group was which as I was too nervous to join in. I
remember seeing a small group of three or four chaps sitting on
somebody’s bed who all seemed to be kissing each others hands. And
then by straining my ears it dawned on me that they were the lads who

had been out with some of the local girls that evening and were now
exchanging sacred smells. A small brotherhood of treacherous gropers
had returned to the billet carrying the gorgeous smell of willing fanny on
their fingers to share with their pals. Their outrageous reactions to each
other’s smells sometimes had the entire billet in uproar especially if the
Christians showed that they were upset. Once I was held down while
several grotto-gropers covered my nose and mouth with their fish
fingers.
It was deeply humiliating at first but I soon began to learn how to
play my part in this hideous cabaret and even to get some laughs on my
own account. And when things became quiet and the lights were out we
would lie there in the darkness and the talk would turn from fanny to
food. There was a man called Wainwright who could describe the smell
of fresh scones that his Auntie Jean made on Sunday afternoons. He
would do this in such detail that we would lie there completely
spellbound. The silence would be absolute as he described the sultanas
in the thin, hot pastry and the butter running on to the side of the plate as
he spooned on the blackcurrant jam. ‘With mugs of fresh tea, of course,
and two sugars.’ There would be a pause, a long pause while we all
savoured the picture of those Sunday teas at Wainwright’s Auntie Jean’s.
We would lie there salivating and wishing we, too, had an Auntie who
could perform the miracle that Wainwright was describing. And after a
silence of perhaps two minutes some greedy bugger would say thickly:
‘Tell us again, Wainwright.’ And the rest of us would moan in
agreement. And Wainwright would pretend to be asleep. And just as we
accepted that it was all over, he would start the tale again and renew our
pleasure.
*    *    *    *    *
The only regular visitor to the museum where I was imprisoned for most
of the time was an elderly major-general. He was a nice old boy who

was always asking me if I was happy in his museum. It wasn’t really his
but he thought of it as his own property. I always said I was very happy
there but the old boy had reported that I was talking to myself whenever
he went in. It was, in fact, the worst place I could possibly have found. It
was too like the religious house that I had escaped from with the help of
Fr. Bernal. The only advantage was that I was able to read a great deal. I
had got through all the plays of G. B. Shaw and that kept me amused for
a while. But I was restless and uneasy and the old general suspected it
and must have spoken to the company office about me. One day I was
called in and told I was to be posted to British Army Headquarters in
Northag, Germany. I was to be a hospital orderly there. This was a lucky
break for me as I didn't have all that long to do before my demob. So off
I went.
Suddenly I was working in a very busy military hospital called BMH
Hostert among thousands of people. For a while I loved it all. I began to
get on much better with people and my timing improved in casual
conversation. I found I could sometimes get good laughs, too. My basic
training had to be put into practice. I really did make beds and bathed
real patients.
Perhaps I had a gentle touch or perhaps they thought I was
sycophantic but I was soon moved to the officer’s ward in the rather
more luxurious part of the hospital. Here I was used as an occupational
therapist as well as a bed-bather.
A very senior officer asked me to read to him in the afternoons. He
liked it so much that the word spread around the section and while the
rest of the orderlies were scrubbing and polishing I was often reading to
the top brass. It was a doddle really and the books were sometimes quite
interesting. The wife of a brigadier became a bit jealous of me after her

husband said I was a better reader than she was. She smiled at me,
arsenically.
All the officers were in private rooms which meant that we were very
busy most of the time. This was because they had no idea how busy any
one of us was. I suppose they thought they were doing us a favour by
pressing the bell; orderlies were there to answer the bells and do what
they asked us to do. I found most of the officers to be very nice. It would
not have been a good idea to get difficult with the private who oiled your
piles or polished your nuts and they knew it. But there were a few
exceptions. One of these reckless old buffers was called Egerton, Major
Egerton, the Joey Blagstock of the officers’ ward. He had a highly
developed sense of bad timing. He was a heart case as well as a head
case and, curiously, for a chap with the MC, he was very nervous of
dying. One of my colleagues had told me about Egerton’s fear of dying
during NAAFI break. We always betrayed confidences during the break
which was one of the reasons we hated missing the mid-morning
treachery session. Armed with this bit of secret knowledge I decided to
crank up the tension in room 101.
‘Would you say you were nervous of dying, sir?’ I asked him one
morning as I was tidying up his room. He looked at me with a slight
expression of anxiety in his little milky-blue eyes. He had been told by
his consultant not to exert himself for fear of provoking a heart attack
and he had taken the advice very seriously - to the point that he even
blinked carefully.
He said, ‘Why do you ask, Baker, do you know something that I
don’t?’
‘Oh no, sir, it’s just that as I was doing up my shoelaces this morning
I thought about what happened to you yesterday week when you were
doing up your shoelaces, sir.’

‘Why, what did happen to me yesterday week while I was doing up
my shoelaces, Baker?’
I looked at him with the innocence of the born torturer. ‘Well, I
suppose you suffered a big attack, sir. Heart attack, that is, sir.’ Egerton’s
face went pink and then it went burgundy. In an effort to stop changing
colour, which he suspected might bring on another skirmish with death,
he began to growl softly. Then there was a silence as I carried on making
the room ready for the Recording Angel. I stooped behind a chair in case
the pleasure I was feeling leaked out of my eyes. The static in the room
was palpable.
‘Would you say you were a tactful sort of fellow, Baker?’ whispered
old blue eyes, sarcastically.
‘Oh yes, sir,’ I answered, pretending he’d used the wrong word. ‘You
have to be tactile in my job. I mean where would I be if I didn’t like
touching people? Yes, sir, I’d say I was very tactile.’ I peered around the
side of his armchair to see his reaction. His face was the colour of very
well-hung steak, nearly matt burgundy. Just then Sister McHale came in,
a very tall woman with immense bosoms and a tiny bottom, as though
she had been built the wrong way round or, perhaps, had never been
hugged as a child. She was the nursing officer in charge of the officers'
ward that shift.
‘Everything all right, Major?’ she asked with the rising inflection that
means, please say yes or I’ll be bored.
‘Everything’s perfect, thank you, sister,’ said Egerton MC, with very
heavy irony. I pretended I hadn’t picked it up and gurgled like a fan
which only added to his fury.
‘Private Baker not making you laugh too much, I hope,’ burbled Tits
McHale. ‘He’s something of a jester, you know, according to Captain

Aitkin next door, aren’t you, Baker?’ she said and laughed very loudly.
A tooth mug rattled above the wash basin about fifteen feet away. Major
Egerton stirred in his bed and seemed to be checking his pulse as if he
suspected he’d already died and landed in a Jean Paul Sartre play.
He said, ‘No, sister, Private Baker isn’t making me laugh too much.’
And lobbing in the heavy sarcasm again, ‘He’s not making me laugh at
all,’ he added, with one eye on me and the other on Tits McHale.
‘Good, good,’ whooped Tits, missing everything. ‘Then he can come
and give me a hand with Lieutenant Finn’s enema. He’s been here nine
days and hasn’t gone yet and the doctor insists he goes before he leaves.’
And she swept out with such turbulence that I was sucked out after her.
From then on old Egerton had it in for me. He knew that the morning
tea break was from ten until ten thirty; and he knew very well that I was
usually on duty along his section of corridor. So every day at exactly
nine fifty-nine and a few seconds he would ring for a bed pan. It was a
fairly trivial inconvenience really but, as I explained, it meant missing
the early morning gossip and malice which nourished us for the rest of
the shift. The gossip in a hospital is much more interesting than in a
theatre green room. People in green rooms and television studios may
bitch a bit but in hospitals people die every day and the reports of this
process can be astonishing, giving a marvellous edge to thirty-minute
theatre or tea break as it was known officially. To be fifteen minutes late
was to be out of it. And I didn’t like to be out of things. But old
Egerton’s bowels seemed as if they might keep me out of the NAAFI for
the rest of his life or the rest of my service, whichever was the longer. I
didn’t want to be deprived of my daily ration of detraction and I became
rather irrational about it to the great pleasure of my fellow pan handlers.
So there I was every morning all ready for calumny when the buzzer of
postponement would go.

When an officer called for a bed pan there was a special procedure.
On each corridor on our wing there was a sluice. This was a small room
where unsterile instruments like bed pans were kept and things disposed
of. As a courtesy towards Her Majesty’s Commission we not only
saluted officers, we also warmed their bed pans. Isn’t that a nice touch?
The warming process took about ten seconds under the powerful jet of
hot water in the sluice. The bed pans were made of chrome and were
very pretty, like giant’s slippers in a panto. You would place the pan in
the sluice shelf and when it was warm you would pick it up with a lovely
thick and well-ironed napkin, shake the pan, and go sailing into your
patient’s room as if you were bringing him a takeaway from Fortnum &
Mason. As you arrived at the side of your man’s bed he would smile
with joy and, licking his lips in anticipation, he would put his arm
around your neck, which he used as a lever, and raise himself up as, with
exquisite tact, you slipped his pan under him and lowered his buttocks
into place on his warm pan. Then you disappeared leaving the patient to
his pleasure. Quite often when you came back to mop up, so to speak,
the stool pigeon would ask to see his jobby and sometimes would cry
out with pride at the sight of his depth charge. If it was heroic, I’d often
shake hands with the young stoolies and congratulate them. ‘Well done,
sir,’ I’d say to some young signaller, ‘a fine specimen.’ And the young
fellow might sob with happiness and say, ‘Do you mean that, Baker? Is
it really a goodie?’ And I would reply, ‘Sir, in my job I see a great deal
of movement and this is easily par for the course.’ And then we’d shake
hands. I didn’t always mean it but it cheered up the patient and gave him
something to write home about. And that’s important in a hospital.
Generally it was a pleasure to perform. But Major Egerton was a
different kettle of fish altogether.
I grew to resent deeply his daily call. He impinged on me. His heavy
sarcasm and petulance suffocated my feelings of sympathy. He

diminished my humanity. But he was ill and knew he should not risk too
much movement even when he was at stool. He was even forbidden to
shave himself. So fed up was I one particular morning that I started to
prepare Eggy's pan about five minutes to the hour. I turned on the hot tap
and sulked for several minutes as tea break was called and the others
went off to the NAAFI. As usual, as the clock started to strike, so
Egerton’s buzzer squawked. All prepared but with no love at all, I icily
picked up the hot pan with a fresh napkin and went into Eggy’s room to
do the business. He sighed heavily as I entered. I stood next to him in
silence and with another sigh he put his arm round my neck and I raised
him up, hitched his night shirt, slid the pan into place and lowered his
pink buttocks on to the scalding hot chromium-plated bed pan. What a
fuss. Egerton roared in agony and jack-knifed to avoid the hot pot. He
did a triple salchow and then remembered that the slightest exertion
might kill him. As he was convinced that I wanted to kill him his blood
pressure rose like a Harrier jump jet and instantly reached bursting point.
‘Stay calm, sir, I cried. Don’t excite yourself, it could mean death.’
He took me at my word and instantly fell inert. I didn’t know whether he
was obeying me or had died. He fell away from me on to his left side
and I noticed with relief that there were no burn marks on his arse. By
now, of course, the pan was cold, dead cold. It went through my mind
that, with a bit of deep concern and a tear or two, I might be able to
persuade the cantankerous old bugger that he had imagined the whole
incident. But it was not to be. Gradually the seizure passed and his fear
was replaced by the cold need for revenge. I ran to the other side of the
bed and crouched close to his mouth in case he had a last wish or some
piece of advice for me. He was whispering something.
‘What is it, sir?’ I urged. ‘Is there anything I can do?’

His little eyes opened and he looked at me without affection. ‘Baker,’
he whispered, I’m going to have you charged with the attempted murder
of a senior officer.’
‘Oh no, sir,’ I said, ‘No, sir, there’s been a misunderstanding, sir.
Trying to help you towards a nice warm bowel movement, sir, I
inadvertently overheated the pan.’
Egerton closed his eyes and, for one wonderful moment,
remembering that there were no arse scars I thought he’d died. But no.
‘Get me the ward sister,’ he hissed at me. ‘Get me the ward sister and
call reception for the duty officer. Tell them it’s urgent, very urgent, and
tell them that you’re a murderer.’
‘Yes, sir,’ I said as I went to the door with the now-cold murder
weapon in my hand. And in the hope that I could roll back time I said,
‘Would you like a cup of tea, sir?’ The ungrateful bugger didn’t answer
me. As I went towards the sister’s office, pan in hand and brain in tumult
I saw her coming towards me in company with Captain Abraham Goss,
the senior physician. He knew me well and always asked for me when
broken-hearted old majors were brought in for their cardiogram tests. He
saw that I looked miserable and assumed that I had an empty pan and
that was why I looked depressed. He knew I had a tendency to blame
myself for the costiveness of others.
‘No movement from Major Egerton?’ enquired the Captain. ‘No, sir,’
I replied. ‘I’m afraid the bed pan was too hot for the Major and he’s very
angry, sir, very agitated, sir.’ I followed the doctor and the sister to the
door of Egerton’s room.
As they paused at the door I said, ‘He thinks I tried to kill him, sir.’
To my astonishment they both laughed as they went in. I crossed the
corridor to garage the Major’s pan and wait. My own heart felt close to

infarction as I loitered near the sluice expecting to see a grim sister
emerge at any moment. But nothing. After several minutes I nipped to
the kitchen to prepare tea and biscuits for the Captain and the sister. He
loved his Garibaldis did Captain Goss and I was relieved to find the
barrel nearly full of them. I set up the tray and covered it with a napkin -
Goss was fussy about things like that and simply hated dusty biscuits.
Then I returned to my loitering outside the sluice. Still no sign of Goss
or sister. I crept nearer to the Major’s door and was amazed to hear the
sound of laughter from within. It sounded slightly maniacal but it was
laughter and it nourished me a bit, and my vision of being locked up in
the army nut house at Netley faded a little. After a few more minutes the
door opened and a very cheerful Captain Goss came out, followed by a
cheerful pink sister. Goss winked at me. I loved him instantly. I still do.
‘How is the Major, sir?’ I asked with deep, deep concern.
Goss replied: ‘Well, as I’ve just told him that he’s going to be all right
he’s very cheerful, Baker.’ I clapped my hands together like a happy old
nun. Goss laughed.
‘I’ll fetch your Garibaldis, sir,’ I said. ‘I’ve done your tray the way
you like it, sir,’ Goss smiled and I left him to flirt with the sister while I
returned to Egerton’s room to congratulate him. I glided in as if on Nivea
cream and materialized as if by magic at his bedside.
‘Captain Goss has just told me the good news, sir,’ I said. 'I’m so glad
you’re going to be all right.’ I must have sounded sincere or perhaps the
relief of the good news had wiped Egerton’s memory clean.
‘Thank you, Baker,’ said the strawberry-faced old boy, ‘thank you
very much, you’re very kind.’ And I never heard anything more of his
threat to have me charged with attempted murder. Another amazing side
effect of the good news was that the old boy s bowels changed their
opening time. But my work on the wards was cut short when the matron,

a lath of a woman, sent for me and said that she had recommended me
for other duties.
I reported to the company officer and was told that I was to take over
looking after the Commanding Officer’s pigs. This promotion from
people to pigs filled me with foreboding. What did I know about pigs?
What did the duties involve? Not much, I found out. I had to feed them
twice a day and close them down each night at seven o’clock. This
meant that I had plenty of time for the hospital Christmas celebration
and Hop. This was the big theatrical event of the year. It would also be
my last chance to perform as I was about to be demobbed not long after.
I was cast to play the part of the Padre and that of the Matron. The
doctor in charge of the whole operation was called Creakle, I remember.
Or was it Jekyll? Anyhow he thought it would be a good idea if we all
tried to write our own material. As the Padre I wrote up a piece about the
incarnation and delivered it as a sermon to a bunch of squaddies. At the
first rehearsal, I plunged in with my carefully written bit.
‘I’ve heard what some of you chappies think about how it all came
about. There was Mary, a little spanking new virgin doing her petit point
one night and thinking happily about Joseph and his joints — girls took
a bigger interest in their boyfriend’s work in those days - when, all of a
sudden, there was a fluttering of wings and . . . Good Lord! Standing
there in front of her was an angel. Yes, an angel. Actually his name was
Gabriel and for your information he was an Archangel. Naturally Mary
was terrified. Who wouldn’t be? And she dived into a cupboard which
stood wide open just behind her and slammed the door closed and
cowered in the corner under a pile of Joseph’s spare smocks. But God
will not be mocked. The angel hammered at the cupboard door and
called out: “Fear not, Mary.” Fear not! The poor girl was scared out of

her skin. She was even more surprised when old Gabriel called out:
“You’re going to have a babby, Mary. God’s babby.”’
It was then that Creakle interrupted me.
‘Okay, Baker that’ll go down a treat I can see.’
I didn’t spot the irony and I felt deeply hurt when he told me I was
sacked. ‘But it gets quite funny a bit further on, sir,’ I told him. No go, I
was cut.
The part of Matron was quite small and there were no lines, just a lot
of eye rolling and fierce pointing at beds and bandages.
My awfulness was just slightly less apparent. But in the unit there was
a fellow called Killen who had done some theatre work as a stand-up
comic. He talked to me afterwards and said he thought I had something
as a performer. I was very grateful. ‘Don’t get me wrong,’ he said,
‘you’re terrible at the moment, absolutely bloody terrible, but there’s
something about you that might make it work if you can find anyone to
give you a chance.’
*    *    *    *    *
After the army I came back to Liverpool convinced that I could be an
actor. But how? I found out the names of various London drama schools
and wrote away for details of how to get in and learn to be a star. Back
came the replies double quick. Would I like to fill in the forms and wait
for an invitation to do an audition? I thought I’d try a place called the
Rose Bruford College, Lamorbey Park, Sidcup, Kent. When I went
down to see them I was astounded at the sight of beautiful girls sitting on
the grass at the lakeside, feeding the swans and learning sonnets. There
and then I decided I would like to be there too. The audition took place
in a beautiful library. There were about five elderly ladies sitting behind
a long table and smiling; it was a frosty day and there was a distinct nip

of Karvol in the air. In those days older ladies often splashed on the
decongestants. Two of the ladies, a Miss Scorer and, I think, a Miss Scott
were also sucking Fisherman’s Friends; and with the radiators going at
full blast the vapours of the cinnamon and pine oils were released into
the atmosphere of the library with such intensity that they caught at my
throat and brought tears to my eyes as I recited ‘Dover Beach’. By the
time I reached the line about ‘The long melancholy withdrawing roar’, I
was sobbing for lack of pure oxygen. The five ladies were deeply moved
by my emotional power and so on the strength, the overpowering
strength, of Karvol decongestant, I was accepted into the Rose Bruford
College of Speech and Drama where I met Laurie Taylor and shared his
jockstrap.
Over the next few years this sharing process bonded us closely; in the
winter it’s very comforting to have a warm jockstrap, and as Laurie’s
class always preceded mine my balls were cosy for nearly two years. We
both found drama school ideas quaint. In mime and modern dance
sessions we were always divided into two groups, Good and Evil. I was
driven into terrible tantrums in the Evil group because we were never
allowed to win. I was never allowed to be in the Good group either
which meant that I was always on the losing side. If it hadn’t been for
the comfort of Laurie Taylor’s hot jockstrap I think I might have
despaired.
Again, the rules of this little institution seemed crazy. On the first day
Miss Bruford, with perfect seriousness, stressed the value of obedience
to superiors and then ordered us to run about outside for three minutes
screaming the while like banshees. Naturally, while I ran about with the
screamers I remained silent. When the whistle went and we all trooped
inside Miss Bruford asked us questions. Nobody had any voice left to
answer the queries of our Principal, who then smiled sweetly and said,
‘Now you know what not to do when you’re on stage.’

All the tutors, without exception, talked about the dead all the time:
dead actors, dead writers and dead teachers. We were always being told
how Gerald du Maurier played scenes. We were always being told about
upstage knees and how Stanislavski was the oracle of actors.
Articulation exercises, deep-breathing exercises and ‘raise your
diaphragm, dears, and clench your buttocks’ were the slogans that
swamped us every moment of every day. But the secret of everything at
this little seminary of Dramatic Art was unquestioned belief that
freedom of movement led to freedom of speech. When I mentioned that
if it were so then the best speakers would be the dancers I was shouted
down. ‘Oh, don’t try to be smart, Tom, just do as you’re told or you’ll
never be a star, dear.’
And so for the next three years we went about with raised diaphragms
and clenched buttocks. This may explain why the actors who were
trained in the early 1950s walked so peculiarly. Lots of them were
tempted by ambitious young policemen when they went down into the
public loos. I found it very difficult to put up with and very tiring, too. It
is exhausting walking about for twelve hours with clenched buttocks. To
endure this discomfort most people took to clenching their teeth as well
as their buttocks and this triple tension played havoc with their
articulation.
*    *    *    *    *
In the spring of the second year, Laurie Taylor and I went to a meeting in
the Black Horse pub nearby. There were just the two of us so there was
no disorder. We decided that as the course was not consuming all our
energies we could, perhaps, do something else as well. We could open a
little business, Laurie suggested. But what? We didn’t have very much
money between us, about twenty pounds. At the most. We adjourned the
meeting and went to the Station Hotel for a drink. After a few pints
Laurie remembered that he’d seen an ad in some magazine or other for

cheap peanuts. Naturally we were familiar with the sight of roasted
chestnut peddlers near Cambridge Circus and Villiers Street. ‘Got it,’
hissed Laurie in a driven whisper, ‘got it.’ He had to pause for a few
moments as several people passed our table. He didn’t want his idea to
be hijacked. ‘Got what?’ I asked, out of the corner of my mouth. ‘Got
what? Got what?’ echoed Laurie, ‘got our future that’s what I’ve got,
cock, our whole bloody future’. Naturally, I stayed quiet but showed
intense interest. ‘Tell me,’ I implored. And he did.
‘Hot roasted peanuts,’ he said, urgently and with great discretion. And
he added, ‘In bags, sold at the side of the road or delivered to your own
home, to your own very fireside.’
I whistled softly at the brilliance of the idea. It was so simple, so
beautiful, so pure. ‘Yes,’ I murmured, ‘yes, it’s a marvellous idea.’
Laurie smiled enigmatically as if that wasn’t the end of his invention. It
wasn’t.
‘And,’ he continued, ‘and I’ve got a name for the company.’
Company? That made me jump. Company?
‘Steady, steady,’ I warned, ‘not too fast’. With an angular gesture he
dismissed my caution.
‘And the name of the company will be . . .’ and here he looked about
in case we should be surrounded by industrial spies. Seeing none, he lay
back and said triumphantly, ‘Fireside Foods Ltd’. The name hit me with
great force. Of course! How could we fail? Fireside Foods, Fireside
Foods, Fireside Foods and each time I said it Laurie nodded with
delight.
And so was born our first enterprise which would keep us distracted
as we waited for stardom. It wasn’t an easy birth. We had to get a
handcart that would also carry the brazier that would heat the nuts that

would sell like hot cakes. And we found all the necessary stuff, firewood
and anthracite coal so that we wouldn’t have to haul great sacks of coke
or any other type of fuel about with us on our travels all over south-east
London; for by now we were passed the vision stage and were
hallucinating on our new ambition.
We started trading on May Day 1957. It was quiet to begin with that
morning at seven thirty. And it was quite warm, too. By nine o’clock the
temperature was pretty high and still not a customer in sight. As it got
hotter it went through my mind that ice cream might have been a better
product for us. I kept this thought to myself. And then I realized that if
we did go into ice cream because of this sudden act of God, we would
also have to change the name of the company. You can’t call yourself
Fireside Foods and then sell ice cream. By eleven o’clock we were
parched with thirst and hadn’t sold a nut. The nuts themselves were
hopping in the heat and splitting open. Fortunately there was a pub
nearby called the Woodman. We were so dehydrated and hot we began
to hear strange noises. It was when we both saw an oasis and a line of
camels that we realized that we had to get our throats wet or die. The
noise we had heard was the sound of the bolts being drawn on the doors
of the Woodman. Dousing down the anthracite we dragged ourselves to
the pub and ordered pints.
As the sun blazed down without pity that day we realized that it was
too hot to go out in it, indeed it would have been reckless. So we
sheltered in the pub. From where we were sitting we could hear our nuts
cracking and we could see them jumping in protest off our hot plate and
down to the relative coolness of the pavement below.
Deep down I think we both knew that we were seeing the beginning
of the end of Fireside Foods Ltd. The death of our beautiful idea. It was

deeply distressing I remember as we both sat there in contemplation of
our pints.
That Christmas at Laurie’s house in Liverpool several of his friends
were staying with him. Among this little group was a girl who was a
couple of years behind us in the seminary. Her name was Anna
Wheatcroft.

ELEVEN
Being poor is a little like having an earache over a Bank Holiday. All
you can think about is the pain and how long it will be before a healing
hand can be found to take away the anguish. So it is with poverty. You
lie in bed and the refrain throbs on: ‘I’m poor. Oh God, I’m poor.’ If you
wake up in the night for a pee — and the poor always do — the refrain
knocks on again: ‘I’m poor. How long, oh Lord, am I going to be poor
for?’ And you go back to sleep, exhausted by thoughts of poverty and
the bloody alarm goes off and the chorus is picked up. It’s morning time
again. ‘Another day and I’m still poor.’ Even in the evening it’s
mourning time. I have no doubt that poverty spoils everything. It
impinges on the imagination, spontaneity vanishes. All you can think
about is the condition of being poor. Poverty can curdle the libido and
corrode civilized thoughts. One’s sense of humour vanishes, to be
replaced by a curry-spoiling sarcasm as one’s Mr Hyde emerges from
the swamp of the subconscious. And you go to church and pray for a
touch on the National Lottery. It has to be St Jude, of course, the patron
saint of hopeless cases. ‘Hey Jude, don’t let me down.’ And suddenly,
the local priest, an oblate of Mary Immaculate intones a Beatitude:
‘Blessed are the poor . . . .’ And you think, ‘Oh, bollocks to the poor.’
But follow this with a stifled apology: ‘Sorry, Jesus, but it’s not on.’
There’s the paradox: it’s the poor who provide the colossal jackpot. Oh, I
see, that’s why they say, ‘Blessed are the poor.’ But it’s not true. It
should read: ‘Cursed are the poor.’ The poor don’t really like that ticket.
They are desperate to get away and join the rich, and have glossy hair,
bright eyes and white teeth. The rich live longer and can afford to be
charming. Do you remember that daft saying: 'Civility costs nothing.’

What? It’s almost impossible to be charming and polite when you’re
skint for, above all, there’s nothing like a few bob for raising your
spirits. And your dick. All of a sudden, he’ll change from being a
shrivelled and abandoned chicken liver into a lovely, bright, shining
pulsing skittle, his one eye blinking with the milky tears of anticipation.
So having elbowed the Lord and his spin doctor St Jude, I married a
girl called Anna Wheatcroft. She was very pretty and had shiny hair and
white teeth and wonderful, soft honey-coloured skin. I so admired that
skin. When I think back I realize that I just wanted to be near her skin.
She was a nice girl, too, but above all she had that ring of confidence
that comes from possessing a few bob. I was never at ease with poor
girls. Most of the time I couldn't even perform for them; they made me
feel insecure; that is their poverty made me feel insecure. Yes, I had
always found it hard to be hard for the poor ones. No one is willing for a
shilling, as they say, but with a pound you’re on safe ground.
I have always been afraid of being poor. Of course, I am looking at it
from the point of view of a man who has been professionally poor, and
professionally chaste as well. And what with the obedience, I hadn’t
liked it at all. But that was because I was weak. After I jacked in the
chastity and the obedience, I discovered that my will (poor blind faculty
that he was) wouldn’t move in any direction at all except towards self-
loathing and destruction. There’s always a catch, isn’t there? And so I
got married to a nice girl from a family with a few bob and my poverty
made me despair because what the Wheatcrofts felt towards me was
what I felt towards the poor. They found that I made them uneasy. They
found me disgusting. They would really have preferred that I hadn’t
come into their lives at all. And so I was unhappy and resentful. I was
poor and I couldn’t do much about it. Most of the poor feel like this
according to the ones I’ve asked.

Skint, jobless and the wife pregnant, I got a job in a pottery, John
Sadler and Sons, Burslem, Stoke-on-Trent. Entirely thanks to the wife’s
family we had a flat near the factory. I felt marvellously inadequate and I
was. The boss at the factory was Mr John Sadler himself, the wife’s
uncle. He was kind to me and I worked like a maniac to prove
something. So did he, though I couldn’t see what it was that he had to
prove. Maybe he just wanted to get away from his wife. In the factory he
couldn’t wait for the automatic conveyor belts to reach him. He used to
rush ahead and go faster than the machine. Some people thought he was
trying to kill himself. They were right and he did. His heart went odd
and wouldn’t do the business. No Magdi Yacoub then. Still, I suppose it
kept him out of the house, and that’s something.
For a while he was impressed by my capacity for work. He liked us to
get on our hands and knees and crawl down the long ovens and pull
through the trucks of hot pots a bit faster than the machine wanted.
Grappling irons were supplied. It was so hot in there, you couldn’t stand
or breathe deeply and sometimes my gloves would burst into flames. But
it passed the time and kept me from thinking too much. At last I was in
hell. And it got me out of the house and I loved it. The other workers
knew I was married into the family; they probably guessed as much
when they saw Mr John and me going down the ovens on our hands and
knees. And they watched my frenzy with the good-humoured contempt
that it deserved. The thought that this torture might go on forever, and
that perhaps, like Krook in Bleak House, I too would one day
spontaneously and entirely combust, kept me going. It’s a mark of self-
pity or self-hatred that one hopes a crisis can be forced that will resolve
one’s problems. You hope that a fire will break out and eat you. A hell
fire. The more that Mr Sadler smiled at my efforts — and he could
smile, he had a really lovely smile — the more I went at it.

It didn’t break me, of course. I was young and strong and didn’t quite
realize how very much I was enjoying it all. Conjugality simply couldn’t
compete with the drama on the pot bank. It was a good part. I was the
Hairy Ape. This was better than a small part in a Royal Court production
of The Fire Raisers, directed by Lindsey Anderson. I had been
interviewed for the play. Anderson was very considerate and really
wanted me and the title drew me irresistibly. And then suddenly a song
was added and they went off me as a singing fire raiser. I couldn’t
understand why a pyromaniac had to be able to sing in tune. So I went
back to bursting into flames in Stoke-on-Trent. At least it was a bigger
part and Mr John, my very own director, liked my howling as my finger
nails fell off in the heat. ‘Don’t kill your pig, Tom,’ he used to say, which
meant, don’t overdo it. And he meant it, too.
The only way I could cope with my feelings of anxiety was to attack
the work like a madman. The voluntary hyperactivity removed the need
to think clearly about anything. I couldn’t even enjoy the consolation of
alcohol because my stomach was so jumpy. I would often be explosively
sick and couldn’t eat. Unable to get a job in the theatre, I was simply
acting in a one-man show called The Confusion and Self pity of Tom
Baker.
One day Mr John asked me if I’d like to go and have a day out at the
Great Yorkshire Show where the wife’s family were mounting a large
exhibition of roses, for they were famous rose growers. I said yes, not
realizing that this was a heaven-sent opportunity to descend into the next
layer of hell. I didn’t know it but my fire-eating days in the potteries
were over as the next stage of punishment beckoned. It smelt sweet and
would have seemed to an outsider to promise a good way of life.
I went to the Great Yorkshire Show and met a squad of flower-
arranging salesmen headed by a monster called Harry Wheatcroft. He

was a man of firm opinions and often talked of his hard up bringing. The
name Bounderby leapt to mind after five minutes. He was a thrifty man,
too; I once saw him sell a handful of rose petals to a partially sighted
flower lover so you see he wasn’t entirely without feelings. Men who
worked for him were kept going by their hatred of him. Back at the
nursery he would creep along the hedge bottoms in the hope of catching
a man leaning on his hoe. He would play hell with any poor student who
was hungry and holding his hoe too tightly. And as he loped away from
us all, there would be murderous mutters and several men would
deliberately knock out the newly emerging rose eyes.
Silly hairy Harry seemed not to grasp how much his outbursts cost
him. When he was well out of earshot we would all begin to fantasize
some ghastly end to him. We dreamed of kicking him head first into a
swamp. But of course we never did anything at all except kowtow to
him. Working long days in a mood of hatred is extremely tiring and very
depressing. We all need the nourishment of a cheerful thought and the
benefit of a kind word.
At the end of every day I went home to Harry Wheatcroft’s brother,
Alfred Wheatcroft, my father-in-law. He was a tall, slim, interesting-
looking man with a very sensitive face. He looked rather scholarly, and
wore glasses for his very bad eyes. The frames of his spectacles were
real tortoiseshell. He hated his brother and wore an ill-fitting truss which
he was constantly adjusting. It was said that he had procured the truss
from an old relative as he lay dying and had got it for a good price. But
it’s a dodgy business buying a second hand truss even at a keen price;
you only get what you pay for, as they say, and Alfred’s truss was
obviously a very approximate fit. After his death it was buried with him
and legend has it in Nottingham that the grave was broken open later by
a mean trussless neighbour with a severe rupture. But I give no credence
to such a story. In Spinney Hill, as his house was named (Castle Dracula

would have been more appropriate), he kept his wife, Constance, his
daughter Anna, his dog Julie and, as he kept reminding me, he kept me.
All my life I have felt myself to be on the edge of things. All my life I
have suffered from bad dreams. All my life I have had difficulty in
knowing whether I am awake or in a nightmare. All my life I have had
learning difficulties and been unable to grasp the point of what
everybody else sees clearly. All my life I have entirely missed the point;
and the turning, as I also have no sense of direction. This long period of
uncertainty in the twilight land of the fuddled (it is now more than sixty
years) has taken its toll. It is only in the enclosed asylum of a play that I
have any assurance at all, and then not much. So, naturally, I have
evolved a strategy of always being in a play. That way pain and
humiliation are the responsibility of the writer. But more importantly, I
can pretend it isn’t really happening; it’s just something that one feels
passionately and then goes away.
This method of pretending that something doesn’t exist applies only
to pain or sadness. Pleasure, joy and ecstasy are embraced with fervour
and are sensations to die for. And quite right, too. There isn't nearly
enough pleasure in the world. As soon as people start getting some more
pleasure and a bit more cash the world will be a better place.
*    *    *    *    *
When my son Daniel was born in Nottingham I was at the nursing home.
It was in 1961. Like most new fathers I was taking care of my wife as
her contractions began to come. We were together in the nursing home
in down-town Nottingham. It was in the month of November. Anna was
put to bed and the waiting game went on. And I waited and waited,
sitting there making conversation with Anna. I don't remember us being
very good at the talk. I had brought her a small box of chocolates as a
gesture towards the special occasion. No, it was a medium-sized box. I

can see it very clearly still, Terry’s All Gold chocolates. And so I sat by
the fire in this very nice, comfortable room and thought how well Anna
looked sitting up there in bed. I remember I was talking about the
weather while Anna sat in bed and tried to seem interested. While we
were waiting, a doctor in evening dress came in. He had a loud voice
and said to me, ‘Bartlett.’
I shook my head and said, ‘Baker.’
He laughed. ‘No, I’m Bartlett,’ he said. ‘That’s my name.’ And he
crossed to Anna who was beginning to have contractions more
frequently and disappeared under the sheet and between her legs without
as much as a by-your-leave. I felt my eyes dilate as he vanished. ‘Two
fingers,’ came his muffled voice. He said, ‘Not to worry, Anna, I’m not
far away,’ and off he sauntered.
What confidence I thought. I opened the chocolates and offered my
wife one. She shook her head so I had one myself; it was a chocolate
nougat as I recall, not a favourite. As the time went by and contractions
came quicker a nurse came in and took Anna away, saying as she went
that Mr Bartlett had been called. As soon as I was alone I felt hungry
and started in on the Terry’s chocolates. There was nothing to read
except the fire which was very red and eased my panic at being left
alone without a book. So I sat there wondering how I’d manage as a
father and wishing I didn’t have to. I can’t say I was happy at the
thought of children. But I didn’t feel resentful either. I just felt I’d rather
not. And I had another chocolate and dozed off. When I woke up, I was
sweating a lot and felt very sticky being so near to the fire. By the clock
I’d been asleep for nearly an hour. Reaching for the chocolates I noticed
that there were only three left and I felt guilty. I took out the lucky three
and put them on the arm of my chair and threw the box into the fire.
Now I couldn’t see the box, it had never existed and I felt better. The

surviving three looked at me and I looked back at them. And then
without giving them any warning I snatched them up, all three of them,
and popped them into my mouth. Cor. What a mouthful. As soon as I’d
done it part of me said, ‘Spit them out’, but I didn’t. I carried on trying
to grind them into a malleable ball that I could control - not easy - and I
felt my face all contorted in my efforts to master the three hard centres.
This went on for about five minutes, and just as I’d got a grip on the
sticky buggers in my mouth and reduced them to the size of an above-
average golf ball the door burst open and in bounded Bartlett carrying a
bloody big baby. ‘What do think of that, then?’ he said. 'What do you
think of that? Ten pounds and nine ounces, biggest baby I’ve ever
delivered in this place.’ I looked at the child and for a split second I saw
a resemblance to my brother John and I felt the deep love for a child, for
my son. I will love him, I thought.
‘Well?’ asked Bartlett. He looked at me expectantly. But I had three
hard-centred Terry’s chocolates in my mouth and could only gurgle like
a puzzled sea lion. ‘I understand,’ said Bartlett, ‘I understand, most
fathers are speechless at a time like this.’
But he didn’t understand. Every time I see a box of Terry’s All Gold,
this scene comes back to me and I resolve to call my brother John and
Daniel my son, and tell them how much I love them; but I don’t. I
finished the chewing and my jaws ached and I felt suddenly sleepy. The
hospital bed was yawning and I was very tempted to climb in. But they
brought Anna back and the nurse fussed around her, telling her with
great glee how her bikini days were over. Anna ignored their malice. I
smiled at Anna and she looked very happy and full of love for Daniel.
*    *    *    *    *
Alfred and Constance adored Daniel, they lionized him. They were both
concerned that he must have perfect sight and perfect hearing. Alfred

was always making passes in front of the baby’s eyes to test the baby’s
sight, while at the same time Constance would creep up behind the child
and clap loudly to see if he could hear. The sight of Daniel leaping in
shock brought a version of a smile to her thin lips. But they did care for
the baby. Perhaps it was because he looked like them. He certainly didn’t
look like me. He had golden honey-coloured skin for one thing.
On Sundays, when other members of the family would turn up to
endure a couple of hours of parental love, I would seize the opportunity
of turning myself into a dumb waiter as I served them drinks. I thought
my self-abnegation was complete, but I was wrong. And having poured
large gins and Italian for them all, I would retreat to the edge of the
circle and watch them.
Like a lot of bullies, Alfred the father was devoted to little babies. He
would dandle Daniel on his knee. He would bob him up and down with
many loving noises and smile his ghastly smile. ‘Hello, my baby,’ he
would say, again and again. ‘You’re my baby, aren’t you? You’re my
lovely baby, my baby, my own lovely boy, aren’t you?’ And the baby,
seeming to know which side his bread was buttered, would gurgle his
agreement. And this would delight the old boy and the same insufferable
refrain would be resumed. ‘My baby, who’s my baby then?’ as he waited
ominously for the child to call out, ‘I’m your baby.’ And then Daniel
would gurgle with terrific energy and smile in agreement. And Alfred
would cry out in triumph: ‘You see, he said yes. Did you hear that, he
said yes?’ And we would all attempt a smile. But Daniel’s mother, Anna,
the Cordelia to this Nottingham Lear, used her favoured status to say,
quite lightly: ‘He’s not your baby, Father, he’s Tom’s baby.’ I was
touched by this kindness for about one-thousandth of a second. For in
that brief time the temperature dropped to zero as Lear snarled: ‘What
did you say?’

His instant rage was terrifying.
‘What did you say?’
And Anna, a little shakily, repeated: ‘I just said he was Tom’s baby,
that’s all.’
And Lear burst out: ‘Tom’s? Tom’s? He’s mine. He’s mine.’ And he
held my child close and asked: ‘Who paid for the best nursing home in
Nottingham? Eh? Tell me that. I did, I paid. Me. Who paid for the finest
gynaecologist in the whole bloody county? I did. Doctor Bartlett. And he
didn’t come cheap. Cheap? Have you got any idea what the Bartlett bill
was?’
He was by now very close to apoplexy.
Constance tried to intervene: ‘Dad, Dad, now Dad.’
He turned on her, ‘Shut up.' And to Anna, as he hit frenzy, 'Who pays
for all the baby’s clothes, eh? Who pays for everything you’ve got? I do.
Not him,’ and he pointed to me, ‘he’s got nothing,' he roared as he eyed
me. ‘He’s got nothing. I paid for it all so he’s mine, the baby’s mine.’
For a moment I wondered if I should just pick up an antique and
strike the cruel old bugger across the head. But I did nothing. I just
shrank into utter freezing self-loathing as I realized I was not even going
to protest. The thought came again that I should kill him. And then I
sensed that I didn’t even have the strength of character to avow my love
for my only child. Even the family was impressed by Alf's volcanic
convulsions. Nobody stirred. I faded in my own sight and I couldn’t
even weep. This is the end, I thought; but it was not the end. Yet.
Gradually I got used to the abuse and the terror. Constance was
always on to me about how invulnerable they all were. ‘I can see you
looking at us and wishing us harm,’ she’d say (she had guessed), but

nothing can hurt us, nothing.’ And then she’d pause and reflect and add:
‘Except maybe an atomic bomb.’ I loved the arrogance of that ‘maybe’.
She and Alf would row so loudly that men working in a field near the
house would hide and tremble and toy with murderous thoughts. Once
when she screamed at Alf the Terrible and then fled the house to her car,
we all watched as she continued to shriek abuse at her beloved as she
drove off. Going down the drive she leaned out of the window to fire the
last insult; the car careered over a rockery and crashed to a hopeless halt
among the heathers and stones. There was a terrible silence after the
bang; and then from among the rose trees came a feeble cheer of joy
from several hidden slaves who assumed from the silence that Connie
the Viper had been catapulted into Arthur’s bosom and was even then
biting his nipples. But no. After the crash and the silence came the
shrieked abuse of the indestructible she-devil.
‘I’ll put you in a home for this,’ she screeched at her old sweetheart
who must once have thought it a good idea to share his life with her.
*    *    *    *    *
And then came another son for Anna and me. Piers, nine pounds and ten
ounces I think. Like his mother’s lot he was blond and had the usual
honey-coloured skin. They all had such great skin. I was the only one
there who didn’t have golden skin. ‘What a pity you’ve got such
working-class skin,’ Anna remarked. That really hurt me. It still hurts
me. It’s not my fault that my surface is rashy and working class. But
Piers was one of the sacred line all right and they were pleased with
another golden boy and they practised their smiles. I wanted to call him
Solomon but Constance looked askance and my suggestion was
overlooked. And so my misery deepened and I was content.
Once a short break was proposed for Anna and me and we went to
Honiton in Devon for three days, that being about the maximum time I

could be with anyone. We drove there and tried some conversation along
the way but we were neither of us too immense at that sort of thing.
Fortunately we met up with some friends who were actors and that
helped a lot. We saw a play and attempted a couple more conversations,
but to no avail; so we headed back for bedlam. There was a message
waiting for us to call Castle Dracula. Obediently we rushed up to the
dragon’s lair, also known as Spinney Hill.
‘Alfred’s had a stroke,’ crowed Connie the Triumphant as she
conducted us towards the sick room. I wondered what a stroke might
have done to the big fellow. We kissed the children and were led into the
chamber by Constance. What a sight. It had drawn big Alf’s venom all
right. He was tame at last. He lay there in terror and acute discomfort,
humiliated to be steaming in his own urine and feeling the onset of bed
sores. Some hired Sairey Gamp knitted at his bedside and I felt a flicker
of pleasure as I sensed that the click of Sairey’s knitting was needling
him. She was just going off duty and so we were left standing there
looking at the ruins of the great monster. And there he lay, the man who
never stopped reminding us that he owned us, like a huge, abandoned,
whimpering old Guy Fawkes, not at all frightening now. And I
remembered my few skills from the Army Medical Corps where I had
been a common nursing orderly.
I was strong and suddenly I knew what to do. I bed-bathed the old rip
and with a little spirit and talcum powder got his arse dry. The skin was
not yet broken. With clean sheets and pillowcases his lot was improved.
The relief he felt caused him to recognize me and suddenly he was
muttering: ‘Tom Baker. Get Tom Baker, keep Tom Baker. Don’t let him
go.’ And he clung to me in terror of being left alone to his fate. The
irony was not lost on me. The man he hated most in the world was the
only one who could comfort him. The cruel bastard was in my hands.

And I did comfort him. It is possible to nurse someone you hate. All at
once things began to look up for me.
When the doctor was there, Alfred refused to believe that he’d had a
stroke. ‘I can’t have had a stroke,’ he grated, in a terrible rage, ‘I’ve got
£93,000 in my current account.’ The doctor coughed politely, for Alfred
was a private patient and, as we all know, private patients can talk any
old bollocks they like and get away with it. The doctor urged them to
find a full-time professional nurse and promised to arrange for Sir
Russell Braine to come and see Alfred. Phone calls were made and a
male nurse arrived. He was very experienced and very well qualified. He
settled in and within two weeks was close to nervous collapse and fled.
Money being no object, another male nurse was located, interviewed
and hired. This man also had a wonderful record as a nurse. He had seen
serious action in the army and had a medal or two. Within two weeks he
left nursing as a profession to become a lighthouse keeper.
A third man was procured who, amazingly, had actually been a
lighthouse keeper before becoming a nurse. And so he came to take on
the impossible task of nursing the source of all ingratitude. He lasted
eleven days and then went to join the Trappist monks at their place in
Charnwood Forest, Leicestershire, where, after the rules were eased, it
was said that he electrified the monks with his tales of lamping. As
Alfred wanted only me, I was able to get rid of the entire family at one
go. They were delighted to hand over the raging carcass to me. So for
nine months I tended Alfie the Ungrateful and he swallowed all my
energy and wore me out. Not the tiniest effort would he make to walk or
talk or be nice. I wiped the hen shit off his eggs every morning before
soft boiling them to perfection. His toast was fresh and generously
buttered with the crusts off. I spoon-fed him and afterwards scrubbed his
dentures. And when I popped them into his mouth he used to tut. Yes, he

actually used to tut, and loudly. And then he would growl, ‘Lavatory,’
and I’d fix that, too. And after a great Rabelaisian movement he seemed
nearly to enjoy my servitude. Never once did he say, ‘Thanks, cock. You
might be a lousy son-in-law, but you wipe good arse.’ No, he never said
it.
To relieve his self-pity Alfred was prescribed an anti-depressant pill
called Tufrinol, I think. The doctor said it might cheer him up. The dose
was one, three times a day. As he was often asleep in the afternoon, I
managed to hoard a good number of these pills. A plan was forming in
what passed for my brain. I was sinking into sadness myself. Alfred used
up so much of my energy and time I had no opportunity to refresh
myself elsewhere. The selfish old sod had killed my pig. I had become
impotent at home, a condition that swiftly leads to misery. Having
ditched Almighty God in favour of a hard on and now having lost it, my
will to live slackened, too. And so I started to work out how I might end
it. Life, I mean. I counted up all the Tufrinol pills I had saved. How
potent were they, I wondered? There seemed to be a lot, though I’m not
good on pharmaceuticals. So I resolved to take all of the Tufrinol pills
and die of happiness. I thought that the ecstasy of more than two dozen
pills might outweigh the misery of a blank future and a dead dick.
Constance the Unspeakable was away in London at a meeting of the
National Rose Society. She was a great one for Peace. The rose I mean.
Bundles of Peace for sale but crowns of thorns at home. I decided to die
in the late afternoon of a day when I knew that nobody would come to
the house for at least four or five hours. I gave Alfred a large tea of
smoked salmon and thinly cut brown bread, followed by raspberries well
soused in sugar and cream over the top. After that he had a medium-
sized custard from Burtons of Nottingham and two cups of tea, three
sugars in each. I thought that would keep him going while I got out
laughing.

I sat in the kitchen and swallowed all of the pills I had saved. I
wanted so much to die of happiness. I wrote no note. I sat there and
waited for oblivion. ‘Let the buggers try to decipher my smile,’ I thought
as the last three beans sailed down my throat in a stream of Jersey milk.
I became drowsy and then, blackness. I woke up about half an hour later
to the noise of the old devil banging his stick on the floor. He was very
agitated and wanted to go to the lavatory. I leapt to my feet feeling
miserable on discovering I was still alive.
‘Quick, quick,’ growled Alfred, I think it’s a big one, get a move on.’
A big one? The movement was heroic, the wind gale force, tumultuous,
the stool like a shillelagh. I mention this detail because within a few days
I realized that the Tufrinol which had failed to help me to die happy had
cemented my bowels. Costive was not the word. I grew frantic. Was I
never again to know the pleasure of a normal bowel movement?
Impotent and constipated, too? I strained so hard in between wiping the
big fella’s arse that I nearly lost the sight of my left eye. And the harder I
set, the looser bully boy became. I grew distraught and ate lots of any
fibre I could. I was saved finally by Senekot, the natural laxative. If
anyone who is reading this needs any reassurance, take it from me,
SENEKOT. If Henry the Eighth had known about it he would have
used it to dissolve the monasteries. Senekot moves the immovable. And
gives pleasure, too.
The woman who came to help in the house was a Mrs Farmer. She
was a lovely, hard-working and very sweet lady. I sometimes had
conversations with her - in a whisper, of course, for talking was
forbidden at Castle Dracula. The grunting of stricken Alfred and the
creaking of Connie’s corsets were the daily sounds that gladdened our
working hours and warned us that they were both still alive. The distant
noise of Connie’s threats to have her husband put away would cause Mrs
Farmer and me to lower our heads and think of our last ends. We would

smile furtively to each other and that helped to alleviate our fears. Mrs
Farmer had a wonderful smile. I used to think about her smile when she
wasn't there. This struck me as odd. And then I began to notice that I
was losing the knack of smiling. I actually began to forget how to do it.
And my fear of them all grew. I longed to be bursting into flames back
in Stoke-on-Trent.
If I was reading in the kitchen when Mr Wheatcroft was asleep, I
always kept a bucket of water, a scrubbing brush and floor cloth in the
middle of the room and the kitchen table drawer open. If I heard the
click of the front door, I would sling the book in the drawer and throw
myself on the floor and scrub away as if it was my vocation. At home I
discovered that I couldn't look at my wife because she looked like her
mother. I couldn’t look at her brothers because they looked like their
father; and finally I couldn't look at my children because they looked
like my wife. I began to feel very isolated. The only little change in
these drab days was that my patient seemed to be somewhat quieter and
rather glazed in the eye. This caused me some anxiety as I realized I was
afraid he was going to die. ‘Don’t die, Alfred,’ I prayed. ‘Don’t die, and
leave me to the rest of the pack.’ The monster had become my protector.
But he didn’t hear my prayer. He slipped into a coma, and we waited and
waited. Constance was the model of a loving and caring wife for hours
together, but her patience wore thin and I suspect that like a lot of
married women she was yearning to be a widow.
The coma drew him down deeper and we that were to go on stood by
and watched. No soft-boiled eggs were required now. No more bullying
to look forward to. I washed him carefully, and kept his hair neatly
combed. He was very proud of his fine hair. As his breathing grew more
rapid and erratic we knew that Alfred was ready to go. His two sons,
Philip and Roger, clung together in terror as the moment came. I stood
back in case they wanted to be close to their father. My last act of

deference in Alfred’s life. But the sons were afraid and gripped each
other. Constance was in the kitchen about ten feet away and I went to the
door to signal to her that she was nearly free. Before she could reach the
bedside Alfred gave one last great sigh and died. Constance was so self-
controlled that a passer-by might have thought she didn’t care. A half
sob nearly escaped her but she stifled it and solemnly kissed the dead
man’s forehead. I wrapped a box of tissues in the top sheet and pushed it
up under his chin to keep his mouth shut. The sons left the room with
their mother and went to the kitchen to drink tea. I remained, watching
the changes that take place a few minutes after the last sigh. And I
thought of all the Wheatcrofts on my side of the family and of what sort
of a future lay before me; and I envied Alfred.
Constance in the part of a new widow asked me if I’d like to lay the
old sod out. When he was alive I often wanted to lay him out, but now
that he was gone the passion had passed. How often when he was so
unkind to me I had wanted to cork his arse or sever his jugular vein. So I
settled for giving him his last wash before a professional layer-outer
came in for the nitty-gritty. I bathed him with all due respect and tidied
him up for the man who was to cork and knot him.
The funeral was fascinating to me, as I watched the family in their
grief. They all kept their heads down and held their noses in hankies.
And so we buried the old bugger in his second hand truss. Everybody
was very pleasant after the funeral, and phrases like ‘Blessed relief’
were heard as the ham sandwiches were passed around.
The change in my life was noticeable. So busy had I been with the
father that the rest of the family had become used to me being invisible
in the sick room. Now what was to happen? Alfred was dead, my dick
was dead and so was my alibi.

Nobody said what I should do. So I took a day off which was far too
long a time to be with the daughter of the dead man. The next day I
reported to the treadmill shed where Philip Wheatcroft through the
mouth of the foreman, Jock Murdock, issued the orders for the daily
round of work at the rim of madness. There must have been thirty men
working there in those days. Each morning little Jock invented a strategy
and groups were posted in all directions to maintain the lovely roses,
Wheatcroft Selected Roses as they were known throughout the world.
I was assigned to a tractor driver who was to harrow the plants as the
growing season started. The tractor had special wheels and the harrow
straddled five or six rows of young trees. My job was to steady the
harrow from behind. This involved being bent very low and struggling
to make sure that the harrow didn't veer left or right and damage the new
plants. It was extremely arduous work which really should have been
shared between five or six men during the day. But that was not how
things worked in the world that Alfred had bequeathed to his heirs. For
two weeks I went through the pain of working from seven thirty till ten
and then from ten thirty till one o’clock. After lunch the shift was from
two till five thirty. It was a wretched two weeks. I could scarcely prepare
anything to eat when I got home. After the usual bathing of children I
fell into my sack and died until six thirty the next morning, when the
torture would start all over again. By now I was part of this family that I
rarely heard speak two sentences to each other. How did they think I was
feeling all those hours as they watched me from the headlands of the
fields?
Why didn’t I just stop? Why didn’t I just tell them I couldn't bear it
any longer? I cannot answer those questions. Somehow I got through it.
But the harshness of the experience left me very disturbed.

The next job was to help clear up the great shed and prepare for the
showing season, when big firms like Wheatcrofts competed against
other rose growers from all over the country for the lucrative trade in
retail plants to the ordinary gardeners everywhere. After the anguish of
the harrowing, I was enjoying working with a kind fellow called George
Sycamore. He carried me to a large extent for I wasn’t really very good
at anything. And he certainly didn’t drive me like the Wheatcroft man
did. Anyway, one day we were painting some squalid little caravan and
washing plant labels in preparation for the flower shows when George
noticed we were getting short of paint. So off I went to Nottingham, a
distance of about five miles. It gave me the opportunity to get off the
place for perhaps an hour.
‘What’s going on here, and where is Tom Baker?’ asked Constance
Wheatcroft of dear old gentle George about five minutes after I’d gone
to town.
‘Gone for paint,’ explained George, who was a nice man whom I shall
never forget.
He could not know that Constance the Cruel was having a turn. She
suddenly started to give George and a young student very sharp orders.
She started to behave like a mad fatigue sergeant in the pioneer corps.
And quite innocently I returned and found my pal George and the
student being bullied mercilessly. She didn’t notice me for a minute or
two so I was able to assess the scene. There was nothing novel about it. I
had seen and accepted such a happening scores of times. My usual
reaction was to be conciliatory and very busy. But that day my hearing
was sharper than usual. Her dreadful voice was more grating than usual.
Then she saw me.
‘Come on, there’s work for you, too,’ she cawed as I got out of the
car. I began to lift out three or four large cans of paint which were on the

back seat of the car which was also crammed with perhaps ten newly
sharpened hoes that I had collected while down in the town.
'Never mind the paint, there’s clearing up to do first,’ screeched the
old witch. Slowly, I went to the other side of the car and just messed
about for a moment or two with the tools that filled the entire rear of it.
'Never mind playing about at nothing,' came the voice, ‘you’ve had it
easy enough for too long as it is, it's time for real work again.’
I was honestly very nervous of Constance Wheatcroft. Suddenly I
could not bear it. The sight of George’s pale face and the student trying
to hide anywhere he could seemed to me to be unfair.
'Why don’t you just fuck off and leave us alone,’ I said. As the words
came out of my mouth my legs began to shake and my sight became
strange. George and the boy became slightly distorted and seemed to me
to need protection. Protection? From me?
'What did you say?’ she yelped.
I repeated what I’d just said.
‘You dare to speak to me like that after what we’ve all done for you?’
she screamed.
I turned away from her and went to the front of the car and began to
get in. It wasn’t easy with my legs out of control and my eyes seeming
to fail me. Of course, they were trying to save me from seeing her. But I
could see her, and she could see my fear of her.
Her voice suddenly seemed strong and confident. I was so frightened
I put my right leg into the car first. I was in a terrible tangle. I heard her
snort, and as I clutched hold of the steering wheel to stop myself from
falling down, she laughed. ‘Don’t you dare get into that car when I’m
talking to you, you kept man, you. That’s all you are, a kept man, You
couldn’t eat if it wasn’t for us.’

I tried to straighten up and turn towards her. But my right leg was
even more afraid of Constance than the rest of me. It didn’t want to
come out of the car at all. I wrenched him too hard and fell between the
car door and the running board. She laughed again. She seemed
suddenly very large and ugly. Beyond her George and the young student
were watching this grotesque little happening. George seemed to be
making patting movements with his right hand as if that might allow us
to go back in time to just a few moments ago before I’d told her to fuck
off. But George could not take back what I had said. I struggled to my
feet and heard myself trying to clear my throat. I opened the back of the
car and tried to climb in there. And she laughed again.
But I wasn’t trying to get into the back of the car because I had lost
my bearings but because the sharp hoes were there. I reached the bundle
and fell out of the back of the car and drawing one hoe I took aim at the
screeching old bat and hurled it straight and hard towards her face. She
was only about fifteen feet away and my aim was excellent. But old she-
devils don’t die that easily. She ducked and turned to look where the hoe
had landed and scurried towards it to pick it and defend herself.
‘Who bought that shirt you’re wearing?’ she wailed as she stooped to
pick up the hoe. And as she did so with more speed than I could have
expected, she ripped off a tremendous fart. That should have eased the
tension and perhaps saved my mind, but no. She straightened up and
turning towards me she said: ‘You’re common and disgusting, too,’ as if
it was me who’d farted. That did it. Hoe after hoe flew towards her. I
was utterly frantic. But not one got to her. She ducked and weaved and
skipped and panted, all the while shrieking, ‘Take that shirt off, you kept
man. Kept man.’ And like a banshee I fled screaming across the fields
towards a main road. The house where I lived was about a mile away.
There was a man called Bob standing by his tractor as I screamed past
him. He looked at me helplessly, as if he wanted to help. I was past him

in a flash and near the main road. Several motorists seemed able to hear
me and looked beyond me for a sign of the terror that had reduced me to
a wreck.
I lay on the bathroom floor and was sick into the bath. I suddenly
remembered it was their house and I stumbled down and locked and
bolted the door. I got back to the bathroom and was sick again. I was
trying to be sensible and not make too much mess. My thoughts kept
yanking me back to her trying to blame the fart on me. I tried to drink
some warm water but then had to gargle to unlock my throat. As I
struggled to swallow and to stop shaking, I remembered a girl I had
treated badly and I suddenly got a terrific trembling erection. I was very
mixed up and in the tumult I was sick again and my stalk vanished. After
a while I was able to brush my teeth and try to think a bit. Anna, my
wile, was in London doing some shopping. And then it hit me: the
children were up at Castle Dracula. That meant I would have to face
Constance yet again to get my little boys.
After a while I managed to clean up the mess. And then I thought I’d
have a bath and tidy myself up a bit. It wasn’t easy. I was so tense I
couldn’t stand properly. I had to crawl over the side of the bath and I lay
in it heaving with anger and fear. The hot water soothed me a bit and I
kept adding more hot water to calm me. After a while I tried to get out of
the bath but I discovered I still could not stand properly. It passed
through my head that perhaps I had broken some part of myself. But
there was no pain anywhere. So I crawled out of the bath and into the
bedroom to dry myself in the dark. The bedroom walls were painted
deep tapestry blue - a good colour for someone on the edge of total
collapse.
I lay there for a while and then tried to stand again. This time I was
more successful. I realized that the crouching position I wanted to adopt

was something to do with my desire to be sick.
I managed to get dressed and go downstairs. Nothing in the house
seemed familiar anymore. My books seemed to me to be someone else’s
books. I remembered that the house was called Lark Hall, and that the
name of the village was Bunny, and that my next-door neighbour was
called Blood. I found myself saying over and over again, Lark Hall,
Bunny, Blood. It made me giggle a bit so I changed the order: Blood,
Bunny, Lark Hall. Because nothing in the room seemed to be mine
anymore, the name of the house and village comforted me a bit.
The thought of the children being up at Constance’s house filled me
with fear. How was I going to get them back? Suppose she insulted me
again? And pretty calmly I thought of having to kill her in order to shut
her up. But there was nobody to help me with the children. I had no
close friend I could call. Never have had one, even to this very day. I
wondered if Anna’s car was in the garage. I couldn’t remember if
someone else had driven her to the station or not. Maybe her brother
Roger had taken her to Nottingham? He was very fond of his sister and
was quite capable of doing a good deed.
Her car was there. Good. Strangely my stooping was eased when I got
into the little car and drove towards Constance. I couldn’t go very fast as
the road also seemed strange. I found it helped to keep repeating Blood,
Bunny, Lark Hall. In the forecourt of Spinney Hill, Constance’s lair, I
carefully turned the car round for a neat escape. I walked into the house
muttering ‘Blood, Bunny, Lark Hall, Blood, Bunny, Lark Hall’.
‘What did you say?’ called the old witch as I crossed the hall. Her
voice was slightly lower than usual. I guessed it was because the
children were with her. They were so pleased to see me. They loved me.
And I loved them. I picked up their toys and other bits and pieces and
tried to usher them out of the house without speaking to Constance. The

car key was safely in my pocket. I wasn’t going to let her suddenly get
to the car before me and steal the key. But she didn’t try it. She just said:
‘Well, haven’t you got anything to say to me?’ I looked her right in the
eye and said: ‘Blood, Bunny, Lark Hall’. As I got the boys out she tried
to speak to me again and again I repeated, ‘Blood, Bunny, Lark Hall.’
‘What time will Anna be back?’ she asked, and I told her: ‘Blood,
Bunny, Lark Hall.’
The children thought this was very funny and they began to repeat it.
As I bundled them into the motor they said: ‘Blood, Bunny, Lark Hall.’ I
kept smiling at them and laughed as I struggled into the driving seat. As
we drove off we all said in unison: ‘Blood, Bunny, Lark Hall.’ And all
the way home we laughed and sang the same old silly refrain with me
tooting on the horn in time. It was only a few miles back to Lark Hall
but we laughed and laughed and laughed. Back at Blood, Bunny, Lark
Hall I prepared the children for bed. Anna told me once that I was very
good at it. Certainly the children seemed to enjoy it. Their night things
were always kept immaculately clean and I adored that marvellous
moment of holding happy clean children before putting them to bed.
They had kept on with the silly ‘Blood, Bunny, Lark Hall’ in the bath
and as I said goodnight they burst out with it again and we all laughed
together. It was to be the last time.

TWELVE
Waiting for a 136 bus from Highgate station to Muswell Hill Broadway
on a misty evening in February is a bit like lurking outside the gates of
purgatory. I stood there once; at the bus stop I mean, one nineteenth of a
grey-faced crocodile of the depressed, all anxious to get away from each
other and find comfort in their homes. The feeling in the queue was that
the next 136 might come in about a fortnight’s time. Resignation tinged
with despair was in the air. Nobody spoke, a few shuffled and one man
caused a near-ecstasy of excitement when he had a fit of coughing; but it
soon passed and apathy returned as we all took root again. About a
quarter of an hour passed, during which time several of the rooted queue
glanced furtively at the man who’d coughed, as if in the desperate hope
that he might cough again and thus suggest we were still alive. As these
sly glances darted about the Trappist line, something happened; an event
took place. This event changed my life.
The fence to Highgate Woods lay to our right at a distance of about
six feet. It was a beaten fence, a fence that looked as if it was made up of
former queue members for the 136 bus who had waited in vain and
finally weathered into knot-holed palings. Through a hole in this fence
came an angel of change in the shape of a mongrel dog. No best in show
this little fellow, oh no. He might have got his coat from an Oxfam shop,
for it was without a hint of lustre and had a whiff of other long-dead
dogs. He gave me the impression of having once belonged to a
taxidermist. What I mean is that there was something odd about him. His
ears didn’t seem to match and might have been won in a raffle in, say,
Kentish Town. They seemed unacquainted with each other. One stood up
quite boldly and the other one was obviously a bit shy. But in his eyes

there glowed the life force. Greyish brown and twinkling bright,
speckled and flecked, and full of unquenchable optimism. A bit like Sir
Ian McKellen, I suppose. Be that as it may, he wriggled through the
broken palings and stopped short at the sight of us undead all in a line.
But he wasn’t daunted. He trotted down one side of the queue and up the
other, wagging his tail and whimpering quietly to himself as if to say:
'He must be here somewhere.’ He repeated this journey around the
queue about three times, stopping here and there and sniffing at a shoe
or a trouser turn-up. As he came near to me I looked down at him and
smiled beseechingly, hoping he would sniff at me and approve of my
bouquet. But he didn’t. He continued his quest elsewhere among us.
About four zombies along from me stood a pale, grey man with a
tinge of blue to him. He could have passed for a ghost anywhere. There
was not a single feature in him that leapt at you. Born to be in the
Special Branch but as though even they had overlooked him, he was
instantly appalled when the tail-wagging mongrel chose him. With a
yelp of sudden adoration the dog looked up at the near-invisible man he
had chosen, this revenant, and with a quite goatish leap he butted spy
man just below the knee. Then he raced away and round the queue and
back to grey face and butted him again. The excitement caused the
queue to tremble into life and people began to look towards the chosen
one in curiosity. I was drowning in jealousy. Malice rose in me and I
began to loathe the pale, blue-grey figure who had been preferred to me.
Again the dog tore around the slightly trembling queue and again he
stopped at shadow man, rose a little on his hind legs and butted him
below the knee. Shadow man didn’t want to be noticed. He shifted
slightly, ignoring the giggles of delight that ran among us. Giggles of
delight. We had been brought back from the dead by a mongrel dog. One
of us had been chosen for God knows what mysterious reason and it

wasn’t me. Twice more the ceremony was repeated and the giggles
turned to laughter, healthy laughter; a girl smiled at the man next to her.
Our saviour seemed to sense our rebirth and did another circuit. As he
arrived at the feet of the drab bastard he’d selected, a huge truck roared
towards our bus stop. The darling dog arched his back and attempted his
knee-butting act of homage. The grey man shifted again and more
nimbly than you’d have thought possible, he kicked sideways and caught
our life-giving little dog on the side of his mouth. With a yelp of
amazement he leapt away from his kicker and back into the road right in
the path of the great truck and disappeared between the wheels of an
Ernest Roderick Foden. A gasp of horror burst from us all as our miracle
maker disappeared under the truck. In a second the lorry was past us and
there, looking quite amazed, but still smiling, was our God. I mean our
Dog. And do you know what? He rushed with delight to the swivel-eyed
git who’d kicked him, and arching his back he butted him affectionately
again as if to say: ‘You didn’t mean that did you?’ And he circled us one
more time before dashing through the hole in the fence and disappearing
back into Highgate Woods as the 136 came to carry us all away.
I didn’t get on the bus with the others. I decided to walk down to the
Broadway. Some of my meanness evaporated and I felt at one with that
dog. ‘I don’t care who kicks me in the lip,’ I thought, ‘I’ll go on and do
what is necessary.’
At the time of the dog incident I was living in a wonderful house off
Muswell Hill with an actor friend, Richard Ainley, his wife Rowena
Woolfe and their three children. Richard had been very badly wounded
at the very end of the war and his career as a handsome young leading
man had ended. He taught in various drama schools and when I’d found
myself guttered he and Rowena took me in. In return for shelter I got the
children off to school and met the little one, Rosa, from her school and

took her to piano lessons. I was very happy with the Ainleys and they
encouraged me more than anyone else. Rowena was a doctor and a wise
one, too, and lots of warm and generous people came to the house.
When the children were off to school Richard and I would read together
and he would make me laugh with tales from the old days. His father
was the great Henry Ainley and Richard adored talking of Harry and his
adventures. There was always plenty of Guinness in the house and
always a few bottles on various radiators, for Richard liked his stout
with the chill off. I told Richard about the dog and he responded as I
had. ‘That’s it, Prince,’ he said, 'be a mongrel, fuck the thoroughbreds
but be a mongrel.’
Living with the Ainley family was a great stroke of good fortune for
me. I was in an awful mess and state of confusion being away from my
own children. And being away from Anna, too. And then she met a man
who came from Leighton Buzzard. What’s in a name? Her preference
for a fellow from Leighton Buzzard helped me to come to terms with the
break in family life. Of course the Ainley children were in a way a
substitute for my own children who, in my imagination, and to my
horror, were calling a man from Leighton Buzzard Daddy.
A couple of mornings later I had the house to myself. About ten
thirty, waiting for the second post, I made myself a pot of tea and sliced
a couple of rounds of bread for toast. I folded back the paper and thought
I’d enjoy an hour at the crossword. While the tea was drawing I went to
the front door and looked out for the postman. There was no sign of him,
but just outside of the gate was the regular road sweeper leaning on his
brush, which served him as a third leg and helped keep him upright in
quite a swirling wind. Christ, he was an ugly old bugger. He was ageing
very badly and might be said to have let himself go a bit, not to say
entirely. Perhaps he was at the Dr Collis Brown mixed with rum,
blackcurrant and Jeyes fluid. I’d noticed him before on my way to

Rosa’s school or while waiting for the bus up to Highgate station. He
generated a terrible smell, so bad that even cab drivers raised their
windows as they passed him. But I’d never spoken to him. This was
unusual since when I’m out of work I’ll talk to anybody. He was often
muttering to himself as he went about his tasks and for a while I
suspected that he might not have been a career road sweeper at all, but
perhaps an opportunist of some kind, maybe a novelist; you never know,
do you?
When I’m on my way to Soho during the week, I often give a beggar
or two the chance to make a pound. By that I mean I like a chap who’s
on the make to have a pitch of sorts, you know, a story of some kind.
Years ago beggars always said things like, ‘Jesus, you’re a great
handsome lad, I wonder could you help us to a bottle?’ And if one felt
charitable that morning a coin would change hands and the fellow would
be on the way to his bottle while I was on my way to tap some agent or
other for a job. Nowadays when I stop and talk to Big Issue lads or semi-
sleepers I’m often struck by their resonant voices and swift articulacy.
Sometimes I recognize them as actors from the RSC or the National
Theatre and discover that they’re researching a production of say The
Lower Depths or maybe a script for Mike Leigh. Or, if they’re not
actors, they’re journalists from the Guardian or researchers from
Channel Four. This is around the Strand, especially on the corner of
Villiers Street or John Adam Street, which is quite handy for the Green
Room Club. I’ve never noticed a Garrick Club member on the game,
which is not to say they don’t do it; I wouldn’t put anything beyond a
Garrick Club loiterer.
But back to my sweeper outside Richard Ainley’s house that morning
when I was looking for the postman in 1966. As I looked at my sweeper
clinging on to his great big brush and being buffeted by a freezing
February swirler I suddenly wanted to talk to him. I wanted him to be a

brief listener. When I’m in that sort of mood anyone will do. ‘Hello
there, boss,’ I called out to him. He lurched a bit at my shout and looked
at me over his left shoulder in a furtive manner. It had to be his left
shoulder because we were an odd number and he was facing west. When
he saw me properly one of his eyes widened more than the other. I
smiled as winningly as I could in such a cutting wind and enlarged on
my greeting. ‘Do you fancy a mug of tea and a bit of toast?’ I called out
to him.
‘What? What did you say?’ he called back. I repeated my invitation,
coming down the steps to reassure him.
‘Do you fancy a bit of toast and a tea?’
He stiffened in the wind and said, with the appalling certainty of a
Roman Catholic, ‘Ere, are you after my bottom?’ Curiously, I went hot
at the squalor of the thought.
‘I just wondered if . . . ,’ I began, but he cut me off and in a louder
voice he shouted out, ‘I’ve heard about you theatrical buggers, trapping
innocent . . .' I didn’t hear the last bit as I slammed the front door shut.
But my rage mounted as the warmth of the house hit me. I stood there in
the little hallway panting with temper. The gall of the bugger. After his
bottom? Christ, you couldn’t have persuaded a termite near his mouldy
arse. And yet, just two minutes before I’d wanted to use him as a
listener. I’ve been pretty wary of street sweepers since, though it is true
that since we left the European Exchange Rate Mechanism some
sweepers are really quite dashing to glance at. Even so, you can’t be too
careful, can you? Nowadays I am reconciled to being solitary when at
my early morning pot of tea. It’s very sad really, but I suppose it’s a sign
of these awful times we live in. Even the Latter Day Saints won’t come
in for a mug. They prefer to trade secrets on the doorstep for the first
few dates. So now I sup alone and watch the cartoons on the telly.

*    *    *    *    *
It was Miss Egan who said don’t look back. She was the headmistress of
my elementary school. But she wasn’t the only one to say it. Don’t hark
back all the time said Mr Harte, the headmaster of the new secondary
modern. The reason that Catholics said don’t look back was to do with
their obsession with death. ‘Let us think of our last ends’ someone was
always intoning. And it was supposed to comfort us! ‘At any moment
we may die and enter into our eternity.’ It was as if the past reminded the
church of the fall from grace in the garden of Eden.
But we can’t escape into the future like we can escape into the past.
So those of us who are not certain of things, and there are an awful lot of
us, often rush back to the past. And each one has a particular past he
prefers to the present. Sometimes I feel that any past is preferable to the
present.
Today I saw the two men who would be our leaders. God, dear God
(oh, of course, You don’t exist, sorry), they made me realize how frail
we are. We must believe in something and so they take advantage of us.
And what do we do? We believe them. To repeat the old adage from G.
K. Chesterton, ‘Men cannot believe in nothing. When they stop
believing in God, they will believe in anything.’ And I think that is true.
It is the only explanation I have for my own uncertainty. It is the only
way I can begin to explain why it is that so often I feel dead when I
know I’m alive. And why it is that I feel so alive when I know I’m being
entirely fictional. It’s rather like the ecstasy so many of us feel at a great
football match, or sometimes a great production of a fine play. We watch
other people being heroes and we are nourished by their heroism in the
struggle.
I thought back to my mother today, remembering that it is more than
sixty years since she delivered me into a world that has always baffled

me. I can still remember her so well. She was slightly tall, had brown
hair and brown eyes and a lovely smile. She had beautiful hands, hard
but beautiful. And her fingernails were curved and lined very noticeably
though her thumbnails were flat, which was useful when she picked the
lice out of my head for the practice was to crack them between the
thumbnails. She always showed me the louse before the slaughter. But
she crushed them too hard and I could never separate the bodies and take
them to school, all counted up and in a matchbox like a boy called
Raymond Monaghan did. I think his mother killed his lice with a look.
How to be invisible was what my mother was always teaching us -
what to do to not be noticed. It was part of a servant mentality; thanking
God for the station in life that He has called us to. Her willingness to
say, ‘Know your place’ and to mean it amazes me. I suppose it goes
back to the permanent state of fear everybody lived in. At school we
were told the same, ‘Never forget that you are nothing. What are you?’
‘Nothing, Miss, I’m nothing at all, Miss.’
In my house of religion it was the same. Annihilate the self. In the
army we were always advised never to think only obey. Never to
volunteer for anything.
'Just keep your head down and don't get noticed.’ My poor mother
said things as silly as that.
‘Listen,’ she’d say, ‘Just say your prayers, keep your bowels open and
always polish your shoes.’
‘Is that all?’ I'd ask. And she would add:
‘Know your place, tell the truth and keep your nose clean.’
Her mother must have told her that because I once heard my Auntie
Chrissie say exactly the same thing to someone else. So my Mam was
just passing on the old claptrap she got from her Mam, a fierce old bag

who punched anything she didn’t understand. Christ, she punched an
awful lot of people in her time. Why should I be surprised that it’s
always the same script? For after that came Miss Egan, Miss Reynolds,
Miss O’Leary, Mr Ryan and Mrs Fogarty, Miss Sharkey and Miss
Deegan and more. Come to think of it, they were also obsessed with
bowels. Chastity and bowels and do as you’re told. Keep your nose
clean; keep your shoes clean; wash behind your ears; and only speak
when you are spoken to. We sought approval in every glance that an
adult might aim our way. And if instead of a nod there was a frown, we
would shrivel up and want to die.
The priests were our biggest fear; if you couldn’t please a priest then
you couldn’t please Our Lord, for the priests were the embodiment of
the Saviour on earth. They would appear from nowhere to make you
uncertain of yourself. Where are you now, blessed Fathers Dougan,
Molloy, Heenan, McCormack, Nugent and Flanagan and Moriarty
himself; the line stretches out to the crack of doom. They were powerful
teachers who knew the party line. We were worthless and evil. We were.
So evil were we that our mothers had to be purified after our birth. There
was nothing to do save despair and die.
‘Any questions?’ asked Fr. McQuaid (there, I knew there was another
of the buggers) as he counselled us on empty stomachs one morning.
‘Tommy Ryan, I believe you are going to ask me something?’
Tommy Ryan didn’t know of the existence of Bogotá at that time. Did
he have a question! ‘Do you mean, Father, that there is hope for us all if
we are sorry for our sins?’ We didn’t know that the question was a plant.
‘Well, now I’m glad that one of you can see the light,’ replied Fr.
McQuaid, the Edward Carson of the parish, so silky he was. ‘When Our
Blessed Lord died on the cross for us - and do I need to remind you of
the rusty nails through His hands and feet? And let us not forget the

vinegar sponge - He made heaven possible [pause] even for the likes of
you.’ He seemed to be looking at me as he said that and my anus
squeaked. Tommy Ryan raised his hand.
‘Do you mean, Father, that we needn’t be afraid?’ McQuaid the
Terrible looked at Tommy as if that wasn’t the way he’d have put the
question.
‘I wouldn’t go that far,’ he growled. And then he gave us the line on
the ten big ones, the Commandments, I mean. He laid special emphasis
on the Sixth and Ninth; the terrors of fornication and coveting your
neighbour’s ass were imposed early, we were about eight years old.
*    *    *    *    *
Pier Paolo Pasolini was seeing people at some hotel in Knightsbridge for
his film The Canterbury Tales. So, along with lots of other fantasists
who didn’t fancy the real world, I trotted down to see the famous
Marxist director. Of course, I knew nothing about him and cared even
less; it was just another trip towards another rejection.
Well, I was sitting in the outer office when in sauntered himself,
wonderfully relaxed and very gentle. He was a small man, full of easy
grace and especially full of natural authority. He glanced at me and
smiled, and then he stopped and looked at me more carefully. Then he
called into the other room and out tumbled one of his assistants who
spoke English. Paolo hadn’t taken his eyes off me during this brief
moment. He exchanged a few words with his man and seemed pleased
with what the man told him. Then he smiled at me again, shook my
hand, and told me through his interpreter that he would like me to play
the husband of the Wife of Bath. He asked if that was all right with me.
He had such a lovely way of looking at an out-of-work actor (we are not
always a very pleasant sight) that I could have embraced him. I said I
would be delighted to play the part. ‘What sort of a part is it?’ I asked.

He said, ‘Your sort of part.’ When people are out of work they are very
impressionable and I was very out of work and I thought his answer was
magic. He asked me if I had read the story and when I said no it was his
turn to beam.
‘That’s wonderful. He thinks that’s wonderful,’ said the interpreter.
‘The character is very unspoiled,’ said Paolo, ‘are you unspoiled?’ I
looked at him wondering what the answer was. Should I tell him, yes,
that I’d led a very sheltered life? That I still lived with my sister and
collected butterflies?
‘Do you mean he’s not corrupt?’ I asked.
‘That’s it, he’s not corrupt,’ said Paolo. ‘Are you corrupt?’
‘Yes,’ I said, ‘I’m afraid that I’m very corrupt.’
Pasolini smiled and said, ‘How interesting, but you don’t look corrupt
and that’s all that matters.’ Then he asked me if I had seen his film
Theorem, with Terry Stamp. I told him yes. ‘Do you remember the scene
where Sylvana Mangano took her clothes off at the station?’ I nodded.
‘When I put that together it was artistic, don’t you think?’ I nodded.
Even if I hadn’t agreed I would have nodded.
‘Then we are agreed,’ he said.
‘Oh, absolutely,’ I said, ‘absolutely,’ wondering what it was that I
absolutely agreed with.
‘Good,’ said Paolo, shook hands again and off he went.
The production assistant said, ‘So you’ve nothing against nudity?’
‘Do you want me to be nude?’ I asked, reaching to undo my shirt.
‘Not now,’ he said quickly. ‘Later, later. In the film.’ Suddenly I was
gripped with anxiety. Nudity? On camera? I wanted to tell him that self-

loathing was my speciality. I must have looked a bit baffled. ‘Look,’ he
said, ‘there’s a scene where you offer the Wife of Bath a strawberry,
okay?’
‘Oh, absolutely,’ I told him, my fears diminishing at the mention of
strawberries. ‘Got you, don’t worry about me, I’ll offer her a strawberry
all right.’ I must have said this in an odd way because the man looked at
me in an odd way.
‘But she doesn’t accept the strawberry, she knocks it away and
without more ado tears open your flies, hauls out your skittle and starts
to play with him.’ The man was English but he had obviously spent a
long time in the sun and he pronounced the word skeetle. This made me
feel unsophisticated.
‘How do mean, skeetle?’ I asked him.
He said impatiently, ‘You know, your skeetle,' and after a second,
‘your prong’. And seeing my poor face he asked in a low voice, ‘You
have got a prong?’
The background office went faintly out of focus. Prong? Skeetle? I
looked at him for help and he hissed through a chink in his top set, ‘Your
dick, for Christ sake, your mutton dagger.’ That rang a bell from my
army days; even the vegetarians said mutton dagger. Then pulling
himself together he told me what was required. He told me that the scene
was very rural, very summery and lyrical, very hot.
I was to offer the Wife of Bath a strawberry from my punnet, she was
to knock it out of my hand and dive into my flies. Then she was to haul
out my skittle, say hello to him, and, in shot, pay him some attention.
‘Off the wrist, you know,’ said the assistant as he mimed the action of
relief to me. ‘It’ll look terrific, the audiences will love it.’ And then he
said, ‘Maybe you’ll love it too, it’s up to you.’ My heart sank, my skittle

shrank and tears came to my eyes. ‘Don’t cry,’ ordered the assistant.
‘Stay there and don’t cry.’ He disappeared into the office. After what
seemed a long time he came back and said, ‘Don’t worry, Paolo likes
you so we can shoot round your skittle.’ And so I kept the job.
And a couple of weeks later we went off to Sussex for the filming. On
the night before we were to shoot the scene between the Wife of Bath
and me I met the production assistant who’d ordered me not to cry.
‘Can I get you a drink?’ I asked him.
‘Sure,’ he said, ‘as long as you promise me not to cry.’ And so, dry-
eyed, I bought him a drink and he told me what they planned to do.
‘Lucky for you,’ he said, ‘we’ve got a man on the unit who can get it
up just like that,’ and he clicked his fingers with astonishing force. I
looked at him neutrally as if to say, ‘Could you explain that to me,
please?’ The assistant cocked his empty glass as if to say, ‘Don’t forget,
you owe this job to me.’ Swiftly, I fetched him another large G and T.
‘Make sure it’s High and Dry,’ he called out as the barmaid approached
me.
‘Large High and Dry, kiss of lime and a ton of ice,’ I said, marvelling
at how quickly a sycophant can pick up a catchphrase.
‘Yes,’ he said, pulling hard on his High and Dry, ‘it was one of the
sparks that told me about this bloke.’ And then he told me about how at
a session at the hotel ‘this bloke’ had casually remarked that he could
raise his skittle to order. The claim had been met with fog horns of
derision and disbelief.
‘Bollocks,’ said the set dresser. ‘Bollocks, a fiver you can’t. No, a
tenner.’ In the uproar that followed a hundred and sixty quid was thrown
into the kitty against the promise of a drink each and eternal shame for

bragging. ‘It was a late session,’ the assistant told me, ‘and only the lads
were there and the old night porter who was in charge.’
‘And, of course, he did it,’ I said, knowing that otherwise I’d have
lost the job. The expression on the assistant’s face was astonishing as he
told me the story. He was obviously describing a miracle. Imagine the
faces of the people who saw the feeding of the five thousand. Imagine
the faces of the people at the marriage feast at Canaan when the water
was turned into wine. Okay? Now try and imagine the faces of the
people who saw Lazarus raised from the dead. Got it? Well, it was
nothing compared to the look of amazement on the face of the third
assistant as he said in a voice that was hardly of this world: ‘Yes, yes,
right there and then, in front of us all, in front of the old night porter as
well he opened his flies thumbed out his dong, looked everyone in the
face, looked down at his dick as if he was going to hypnotize it and said,
“Come on old cock, up you get.”’
I found myself leaning in and whispering, ‘And it arose?’ I didn’t
mean to sound biblical, it just slipped out.
The third assistant nodded, and picking up my Easter reference said,
‘Yes, it slowly became engorged and stood up to attention.'
Curiously, I felt a little empathy in my loins, but I wouldn’t swear to
it.
‘Yes,’ said the assistant with a kind of grating whisper, ‘it stood up.
Veins as well.’
I found myself echoing the words of the true witness: ‘Veins as well?’
‘Veins as well,’ he murmured.
And then he said, as if he felt sorry for me, ‘Which is just as well for
you, eh? As it’s his dick we’re going to show in close up. All you have
to do is look blissed when we do the close up on your face, okay?’

I looked at him in humble silence, and after a moment he whispered,
with a very faint smile: ‘It might make you a star.’
‘Don’t move,’ I said, ‘I’ll get them.’ And I glided to the bar and
fetched him another.
‘Well?’ he demanded, when I had returned with his third large High
and Dry. ‘What do you think of that?’
And then I heard myself say: ‘Did he go to RADA?’
The assistant lowered his glass, looked at me with pity, and said:
‘RADA? RADA? Fuck RADA, cock, this fellow’s an ex-Trappist monk,
mate, seven years of chastity and silence, seven years, with nothing else
to think about, and no chance to talk about it either. He’s an American,’
and he paused before he added, ‘from Gethsemane in Tennessee.’
The next morning at about six we were on location and shot the first
part of the scene with me and the Wife of Bath. It was April, bright and
clear. All went well as the lecherous Wife of Bath looked at me with
such intense desire that my blood ran thin. Meantime I was acting as if I
had no idea what was going on. Apparently I was utterly convincing and
Paolo ordered us to move on to the next bit of the piece.
It was now nearly eight o’clock. The little scene near the corner of a
field had been dressed and lit for the Wife and me. ‘Action,’ called the
first assistant, and with an innocence to make St Francis weep, I held out
my strawberries to the Wife of Bath. The whole punnet exploded with
the force of her lust-fuelled blow. She grabbed me with amazing
strength. I felt I was being sucked into jet engine as she pulled me to the
ground ripped open my flies and scrabbled in vain to find my cock who,
having more sense than I, appeared to have done a runner. He may have
gone, but my balls were still there, shrivelled as they might have been,
and who could blame them? I screamed with fright and felt my anus

gape in sympathy. ‘Cut,’ shrieked the first assistant but the Wife of Bath
hadn’t heard. Like Mike Tyson ignoring the bell she kept after my
member. Easier to have found a needle in a haystack. Eventually, two
dressers and her agent pulled her off me to a round of applause from the
Italian crew. The scene was reset while three people from wardrobe
stitched my medieval trousers together.
Paolo talked to us and emphasized how we must have a sense of
sequence or the scene would appear blurred. And so we started again.
‘Action,’ yelled the assistant. I offered my strawberries and wham, I felt
my wrist snap as I offered myself up to her as the South Sea islanders
give themselves up to a king octopus. I was embraced by the storm,
sucked in, snatched and pulled to the ground. With a tremendous
flourish, as if she was opening the curtains of her apartment to admit
Count Dracula she parted the seams of my flies and tried to enter. ‘Cut,’
bawled the assistant and the rescue squad piled in to save me from her. I
felt as I’d been rescued from the inside of a very active volcano. The
crew was convulsed with laughter and they kept showing each other
cigarette stubs and winking as they did so as if to say that was the size of
my skittle. Camera crews are notorious for their unkindness in these
matters.
To my astonishment, Paolo liked the take and I was brought some
coffee, a cigarette about three times the size of my dick and two blankets
to keep me alive; it can be very chilly on a Winchelsea hillside in April.
And so I sat there waiting for my stand in. About halfway through my
fag I became aware of a certain atmosphere, as they say. Everybody
seemed to know something that I didn’t. It’s always been like that with
me.
Then the assistant arrived, looking very much older than half an hour
ago, pale and, I thought, a little stooped. He whispered hoarsely in my

ear: ‘He can’t get it up.’ It was lovely having his warm breath on my ear.
‘Who?’ I asked rather unhelpfully. This archness on my part sent the
assistant into a frenzy.
‘The fucking Trappist, that’s who. He can’t raise his dick.’
‘Well, I’m not surprised,’ I said, ‘I can hardly raise my eyes in this
weather.’
‘That’s not helpful,’ he said. ‘That’s not helpful. We’re going to have
to shoot the scene again and use yours.’
That revved me up a bit. ‘Mine?’ I shrieked at the poor pasty-faced
git. ‘Mine?’ It suddenly became like a scene in some Victorian lunatic
asylum with two frantic inmates screeching at each other. ‘Mine?’ I
bellowed. ‘Mine? You mean you want to use my prong at this time of
the morning and in this weather? You daft bugger, you wouldn’t find
him with a macro lens. You’d better get down to Winchelsea and find a
watchmaker. And tell him not to forget his eyeglass.’ We stood there, the
assistant and I, panting like two old swimmers on the verge of serious
heart trouble. Erect against the hedge stood the ex-Trappist whose dick
had gone shy. Seven years of chastity and silence - what a preparation -
and no dice. The props department were called over and with the
wonderful flair of the Italians, they found a screwdriver, wrapped some
tape around it, stained it a bit to make it look broken down and offered it
up to Paolo as a substitute for my invisible tool. With the sort of sublime
calm that Buddha might have envied, Paolo shrugged and smiled at me.
Somehow or other we got it done. Somehow or other I managed to smile
beatifically as the Wife of Bath caressed a screwdriver; and we moved
on to the next scene. I never did see the film, and I never met anyone
else who had ever seen it either. But I would not have missed it for
anything. Just to be near Paolo Pasolini was great.

THIRTEEN
Peter Crouch, my agent, called me and told me I was wanted by York
Rep for a part in a Northern comedy by William Stanley Houghton
called Hindle Wakes. I was to play some windy old Manchester
businessman. ‘You’re too young,’ Peter said, ‘But it’ll pass the time, and
you can do something with it even if it’s only fucking it up.’ He was
right, of course, it would pass the time and I could do something with it.
So off I went to York to try my luck. But my luck was out, I was a
disaster. That was what the other actors thought but the audience seemed
to like me and that’s the main thing, isn’t it? They particularly liked it
when I shook my head and disappeared in a shower of talcum powder.
So you can guess what sort of a performance I gave: a real headshaker.
When you can’t act, shake the talc. Many a performance has been saved
by talc or a slipping toupee. I once did the talc and wore squeaky shoes.
When I look over my shoulder into my past, I mostly see flops or
even disasters. I have seen plays that were so bad I would have paid a
small sum to be in them. There was a production of Henry V given by
out-of-work professional actors on a Sunday night in a little theatre near
Paddington Green. The Duke of Exeter was so drunk and so wonderfully
brave that I felt he should have been knighted. When it came to his
speech about the harmony of the spheres in the heavens he just could not
get started. While the court looked on in horror, Exeter, not admitting
defeat, started to improvise.
‘My Liege.’ He got that out okay and went on, ‘You know how in the
sky there are lots of er, er . . . balls. Planets! And they’re just all
whizzing about all over the show?’

The audience was shaking with pleasure. This was a good way to
spend a Sunday night. Exeter, looking at the others who were looking
back at him in amazement, tried to be more helpful. He seemed to
suspect that they hadn’t noticed the planets whizzing about in the sky.
‘You must have noticed them?’ he declaimed.
The audience roared and Exeter, glancing in surprise at them, I
suppose because the speech hadn’t got any laughs last week, emphasized
the point.
‘And the amazing thing is that they never collide. And that’s because
of God and the power of music.’
At that point the King, being unable to bear the laughter any longer,
cried out - guess what? He was so into the part of the King, he shouted,
‘Let’s away!’ And all the actors buggered off leaving Exeter on his own.
And he, suddenly feeling that the others knew something that he didn’t,
tried to exit too. Suddenly, he remembered that he had to strike the
tennis balls. It was that sort of production, the actors did everything; out-
of-work stage hands never work for nothing on a Sunday night. Now in
this production the tennis balls were oranges; there was a stage-struck
greengrocer nearby. And as Exeter stooped down to pick up the
oranges/tennis balls, he went arse over tit and landed on his back. The
audience was in a state of hysteria. Some were standing and stamping
their feet, others were holding on to each other and all were weeping
with pleasure. Some wanted to step forward to affirm that they loved the
Duke of Exeter, and all were applauding madly. Meanwhile, the Duke
was on his back like an overturned tortoise, unable to get a purchase
anywhere to get up. In this production the Archbishop of Canterbury
was played by an actor called Oliver Barton. So here we have the Duke
of Exeter on his back, oranges everywhere and pandemonium in the
stalls. Suddenly, like a thunderbolt, somebody threw the Archbishop of

Canterbury on to the stage to rescue the stranded Exeter. Now Barton is
not a big man and Exeter is. Further comedy as he struggled to raise the
mighty Duke. In the audience, St John’s ambulance men and women
were treating people who were overdosed on pleasure, as the struggle
went on. At last, to a mighty cheer, the Archbishop raised the Duke. As
the cheer died down a little and the audience watched them together,
Exeter looked at the Archbishop, smiled sweetly, and said, with
marvellous clarity:
‘Thanks, Oily, you’re a real pal.’
The tumult in the theatre cannot be described. But in the Bunch of
Grapes opposite, the actors drank free that evening courtesy of the
ecstatic audience.
York was not quite that jolly for me but Peter Crouch had been right
to encourage me to go there. The Houghton play was well attended; he’s
a very popular writer up there, his great humanity and high old
commonsense endears him to Yorkshire people, who feel he is reflecting
them - and he is.
My next play was Stop it, Nurse by Sam Cree. What a hoot. It
contained everything a bunch of actors could wish for. Sex, drink,
operations going wrong and plenty of chances for very broad visual
comedy. In one scene four characters in a line drink a tumbler of vodka
each. The audiences in Yorkshire are pretty generous and they liked our
efforts to play drunk. Well, one night a member of the cast, a
professional wrestler, thought it would be a good wheeze to put real
vodka in the bottle. So we blithely poured it out and with our usual lack
of subtlety toasted each other and swigged it down. Boom. Our reaction
was, of course, real. We were exploded with spirit. We fell about
coughing and spluttering and rolling our eyes and making noises like

booming bitterns in a heavy fog. But the audience wasn’t very taken
with our efforts and thought we were overdoing it.
There was one terrible joke somebody put in during a scene when the
patients were supposed to be reading out to each other bits from
magazines. ‘Hey, listen to this,’ called the joker, ‘Dear Marge Proops,
can I find happiness with a man twice my age, I am fifty-one. Yours
Hopeful.’ (Big laugh from the audience.) Answer: ‘Dear Hopeful, grab it
while you can!’ This got a terrific laugh and we all enjoyed it. There is
no doubt that British audiences adore terrible jokes. And there is no
doubt that a lot of actors like cracking them.
It was approaching the time of the York Festival, a heavily cultural
affair in the 1960s. In between our broad comedy at the Theatre Royal I
had been seeing a good deal of Laurie Taylor, my old friend from my
student days. He and I had started out as actors and he got off to a fine
start at Stratford East in a new play by Alan Owen. But he soon got tired
of acting and, by a terrific effort of teaching during the day and studying
at London University in the evenings, he got a first-class degree and
changed careers. By the time I met him in York, he was a professor and
becoming very well known. Seeing me revived old interests and we
decided to write and present a fringe comedy show. And so it was that
Professor Laurie Taylor and I put on Late Night Lowther starring Laurie
Taylor and Tom Baker with Jazz Quintessence. All the good ideas came
from Laurie, and most of the jokes, too. He encouraged the musicians
and persuaded a technician from the university to rig a light for us. But
the real big idea was this: York was a bit dull in those days after hours so
Laurie, with his standing as a professor, got us a late-night drinking
licence for the Lowther and, here’s the sweet bit, you could only drink
late at the Lowther if you had a ticket for our show! We were a sell-out.
There was no opposition. And with two lamps and a hundred candles we
set about preparing the material. We needn’t have worried, the audience

was so drunk and so grateful to us for the late drinks, they simply adored
us. But Laurie left nothing to chance, cod reviews were written up in
which we gave ourselves stupendous notices and were distributed by
students eager to break the monotony of being honest. What a scam. We
made a fortune. And Laurie was clever enough to make sure we had a
fair number of awful jokes. We did sketches about the Pope’s underwear
and talking dogs and jokes about the Theatre Royal and crazy appeals on
behalf of the daft in our society.
The talking-dog sketch in which I played the dog Clint and Laurie my
brutal Bill-Sykes-type trainer, caused a great stir. Behind my back Laurie
would hold up three fingers and ask me how many he was showing the
audience. He would then kick me three times and elicit three very
pathetic yelps from me which was, of course, the answer. People wept
when Laurie kicked me and some threatened him. I went along with the
audience, of course, and overdid the beaten-dog stuff. People offered me
saucers of Guinness and drags at their fags and yelled abuse at cruel
Laurie. Laurie later retrieved the affection of the audience by a great
impression of Malcolm Muggeridge demonstrating the existence of God.
I remember all this because in the audience one night there was
someone from the National Theatre. He thought my dog was a
masterpiece and on the assumption that Laurence Olivier needed a dog
down at the Waterloo Road, he quickly arranged for me to come down
and audition for the National Theatre at the Old Vic. About ten days
later, it being the time of the year when the National collected down and
outs to walk on and understudy I arrived at the head office of the
National Theatre in Aquinas Street in Waterloo. I was all revved up at
the thought of spinning a line to Laurence Olivier and it so happened
(isn’t the theatre wonderful?) that Lord Olivier was working late at some
studio or other, Pinewood, I think, where he was dubbing some film and
the auditions had been cancelled. As I was travelling overnight from

York, the message missed me. And so when I turned up everybody was
dumbfounded. Gillian Diamond, the casting director, and Ann Robinson,
her assistant, could not have been kinder. But what to do? The great man
wasn’t there. And then came a small miracle. Olivier happened to
telephone the office and somebody told him that a poor shagged-out
dreamer had come all the way from York by mistake. And Sir Laurence
said that if I could wait till he got back to the office he would see me. If I
could wait! And I did wait and other people on the staff gathered around:
Kate Fleming, the voice coach, and Michael Halifax, the head of
planning, and Donald McIntyre and Donald McKechnie, too. And I was
presented to the Lord. And he was great. He was just marvellous. He
thought I was funny and strange and hopeless and he invited me to join
the National Theatre. And I said yes. And he said he was pleased. And I
was pleased. And there you are. It’s not so simple nowadays. Peter
Crouch, my agent, thought I’d do well there so he was pleased, too.
A contract arrived and in it I was to play and understudy as required.
The only play mentioned was Rosencrantz and Guildenstern are Dead. I
was to understudy the players. I missed that plural and read ‘The
Player’, a wonderful part at that time being played by Graham Crowden
with almost supernatural aplomb. I was in heaven. For the next three
weeks before the first rehearsal I worked on the part and learned it, dead
letter perfect. The play was coming back into the repertoire and new
people were being rehearsed in. On the first day Claude Chagrin, our
resident mime teacher, and Edward Petherbridge, the leading man, were
in charge. The stage-management team was led by the incomparable
Diana Boddington, a woman who feared nobody, was the world’s
greatest authority on Catherine Cookson, and a wonderful knitter and
very good to me. Those of us who were new, Michael Edgar, Malcolm
Reid and a few others, were terribly self-conscious as we tried to fit in
unobtrusively. The time dragged as we were placed as courtiers and

learned a few shouts-off for the storm scene at the beginning of act two.
We all bellowed 'Splice the main brace’ and Land ho’, stuff like that. I
rather spoiled it a bit and added, ‘Whales off the starboard bow.’ Some
wag asked very loudly how I could see whales in the dark. This led to
me being asked to cut the reference to whales. Those who had been in
Treasure Island at the Mermaid found this very undemanding. We new
fellows were all sizing each other up. Nobody knew our names and the
principal actors seemed brilliant, and that lowered our spirits.
On the second or third day, we got to the entrance of the players and
for some reason Graham Crowden wasn’t there. ‘Who’ll read in?’ asked
Edward Petherbridge, glancing around the company. Claude Chagrin
said she would and there was a move to get on.
‘Excuse me,’ I called out.
Honestly, I really only meant to call out. Why was everybody looking
at me so amazed? I must have said it too loudly. ‘I’ll do it,’ I said,
standing up and walking towards Edward Petheridge in a fierce way. He
looked astonished, but he smiled thinly and held out the script to me.
‘I don’t need that,’ I said, ‘I know it.’ And I walked to where the
players were gathered. The whole room went quiet and everybody
looked at me and then at Diana Boddington.
‘What’s your name?’ she asked me, not unkindly.
‘Tom Baker,’ I whispered. Why did some people cover their ears?
‘Are you the understudy?’ she asked me.
Again I whispered, ‘Yes.’ And again several people blinked.
‘Don’t shout, dear. We’re not deaf,’ she said.
‘Sorry,’ I whispered. ‘But it’s in my contract, you see.’

One quick phone call to the office cleared up the confusion. I was not
the understudy. I had misread the contract. And so the whole trivial
misunderstanding was unravelled and explained gently to me. I felt very
unwell. Everybody knew my name, but I felt very unwell.
In the pub next door at the lunch break, Edward Petherbridge came
over and shook my hand and said how glad he was to see me and he
bought me a pint. I shall never forget his kindness to me. Years later in a
Manchester hotel I tried to tell him, but he couldn’t remember and
anyway I was by then a children’s hero and Edward wanted my
autograph for his son who lived in New Zealand. But it still makes me
weep to think of that incident. He could have so easily crushed me; but
he didn’t, he spared me. And so Rosencrantz and Guildenstern went on
and continued to be a great success.
The next play was The National Health, by Peter Nichols directed by
Michael Blakemore. I read the board extremely carefully to find out
what my parts were before we went into rehearsal. I was to play various
doctors and ward orderlies as well as a hospital visitor during the
interval. So that kept me out of the pub. I was also to understudy Jim
Dale who was the comic lead. My army service in the hospital came in
handy.
Michael Blakemore is the most fastidious of directors and he was
pleased with my enthusiasm. I admired, from across that big ugly
rehearsal room, the expertise of the leads and how Michael worked with
them. Robert Lang, Brian Oulton and Charles Kay, Harry Lomax, Ken
Macintosh and John Nightingale as the biker. Poor John was not to live
much longer, and neither was Brian Oulton and Ken Macintosh was
soon to lose a leg. None of these sad events could be blamed on me but I
felt that, perhaps, I could have done more to cheer them up. But it was

good fun and I felt really alive. It was only when the rehearsals were
over that I died.
*    *    *    *    *
The only imperfection in life then was that we didn't really have much
money. We used to get thirty shillings a performance. I was not unhappy
with this; indeed, I would have worked for nothing if it had been
necessary. Later on, when I knew the ropes a bit better, I worked as a
builder’s labourer to help make the eating more regular. And I wasn’t the
only one. Some poor fellow who had three children to support worked
nights at a filling station to get some more money. He had a breakdown
during Volpone and was led away. The shortage of money was only
really felt from Wednesday afternoon into Thursday midday, when we
were paid. Treasury, it was called then. In the army it was called ‘the day
the golden eagle shits’. Anyhow, one Wednesday Jim Dale, who wore
very smart gear and had a Gucci briefcase, was sitting next to me at
rehearsal. As I was his understudy he was very good at passing on any
notes I might have missed. Suddenly this particular Wednesday
afternoon he said, ‘Eh Tom, look at this,’ and he opened his Gucci. It
contained £2000 in one-pound notes. I was thinking about egg and chips
as he opened his case and the sight made me salivate. I was sorely
tempted to ask him for one and I’m sure he would have given me one,
he’s a nice fellow. But I didn’t dare and Jim didn’t read my face or sense
my appetite for chips. ‘I sold my car this morning,’ he explained. I have
never forgotten that little moment. Later when I began to earn some
money, I developed an anxiety that actors might be hungry and always
offered them sandwiches. I still do, but quite discreetly. Usually I take in
biscuits and leave them near the tea table. Jaffa cakes are a great
favourite among actors and so are chocolate digestives.
Once when I was at an audition for some American series, the
American producers kept me waiting for a couple of hours in the lobby

of the Royal Garden Hotel. I got very fretful and murderous and Maud
Spector, the casting lady calmed me down and said I’d probably get the
part. When I was shown up to the producer’s room, a really nasty, rather
small place for such a grand hotel, I was tense. We got off to a bad start,
‘Well then, tell us what you’ve done,’ said some bonehead, trying to put
me at my ease.
‘Why don’t you read the list that Maud Spector has written out for
you?’ I asked him, looking straight at him and thinking ‘God rot your
bollocks’. This unkindness in my thoughts may have reached the hulk
for he seemed suddenly uneasy. Maud Spector’s head went down a bit.
Knucklehead cleared his throat and pushed out his tits.
‘Well,’ he said, ‘we’re about to make a motion picture based on a
book by Albert Speer, called Inside the Third Reich.’
I’d like to cut your dick off, I thought. I kept looking at him. He
looked at me. Silence. And then he said, ‘Have you heard about the
Third Reich?’
I put on the look which suggested doubt and said, ‘No, would you like
to tell me about it?’ And he started to tell me!
‘Well,’ he said, reflating his tits. ‘In the beer halls of Munich just after
the First World War . . .’ And he saw I was shaking with unmerry mirth.
‘Are you really interested in my motion . . . ?’
‘No,’ said I. ‘And the way you explain it nobody in the whole world
could possibly be interested.’ And I strolled out, giving him a little
Buddy Hackett wave. In the gents down the corridor I nearly choked
with nerves and tears and resolved to jack it in. But I didn’t.
The word was out that we were to do a Christmas show called The
Travails of Sancho Panza by James Saunders, from the Cervantes book.
It was announced that Joan Plowright would direct assisted by Donald

McKechnie. The designer was to be Tony Walton and the music was to
be composed by Marc Wilkinson. On the internal phone next to N0.16
dressing room I got a call from Aquinas Street, our headquarters, the
Vatican of the National Theatre. It was the two Donalds, McKechnie and
McIntyre. They sounded mysterious, each on his separate receiver.
‘We’ll see you in the pub in ten minutes,’ was the message.
The two Donalds arrived breathless and worked me towards the
corner of the saloon bar. They were really excited and both looked at me
the way good-news carriers look at their targets, with a sense of power.
‘We’ve got news,’ said the Donalds in unison. ‘You know about the
Cervantes piece?’ I nodded, the pain was exquisite and I became
breathless, too.
‘Well, you’re in,’ they said. I nearly swooned at the thought of Don
Quixote.
‘Dons,’ I said, ‘I was born to play the Don, I really was, I am
Quixote.’ The two Donalds looked at me in amazement.
‘The Don?' Don said. Are you mad? Derek Godfrey's the Don, isn’t
he, Don?’ Don agreed.
‘Well, what’s the news, then?’ I asked.
‘The news?’ said McKechnie, ‘The news is that you’re the horse,
you’re Rosinante, you’re to be the most famous shagged-out old jade in
all literature and Tony Walton’s going to design you. He used to be
married to Julie Andrews.’
The news sank in like a dagger. I was not going to play Don Quixote,
I was to play his horse. His horse? The National had spotted me playing
Clint the dog to Laurie Taylor’s Bill Sykes and now they wanted me to
be a horse. Was this progress? I asked myself.

I remembered how in Venice I had played the Bear in A Winter’s Tale
- my first job, which first ran at the Cambridge Theatre. At the very
moment when I was towering over Alan Foss who played Antigonus he
turned too quickly for me and banged my left paw. The costume was so
large and so high that I was looking through a little grill in the chest of
the bear skin. As Alan knocked my arm the grill shifted and I was in the
dark. It was just like real life. But it is a scene where the stage direction
famously states: ‘Exit Antigonus, pursued by a bear.’ Alan didn’t know
that I was now blind and off he went as we had rehearsed. The problem
was I could not pursue him because I didn’t know which way the bugger
had gone. I turned this way and that, desperately trying to remember the
way off. The audience sensed something was wrong and they laughed as
they saw I was lost. They also knew the play and when they spotted
Antigonus coming back on stage they realized that he’d come back for
the bear. Meantime, utterly lost, I guessed wrongly about the way off
and, so they told me, I began to walk towards the orchestra pit. The
Italian audience shrieked in pleasure and then alarm as I neared the edge.
But Alan Foss raced downstage to rescue me from the huge drop into the
pit that might have killed me. As he caught me by the paw the Italians
cheered with relief and delight and they simply screamed as I was led off
by Alan. Thus, for perhaps the first time since Shakespeare wrote the
play, the stage direction was altered and became: ‘Exit a bear, led by
Antigonus.’
And now I was to play a shagged old mare. For a moment I was
anxious, but then I told myself that this was the National Theatre of
Great Britain and anyway the British loved animals, especially horses.
My fears fled and I began to wonder what Tony Walton’s designs would
be like.
‘And Marc Wilkinson’s to do the music,’ whispered Donald, looking
at me in a very odd way. ‘Isn’t he, Don?’ And the other Don agreed, and

that strange look made me hope desperately that there would be a
number for my horse. My life was on the turn. But then my life has
always been on the turn even when it was going well. Especially when it
was going well.
So we started in on the Saunders script. Derek Godfrey was the Don
and Sancho Panza was played by Roy Kinnear. Anna Carteret was the
love interest and Freddy Pine was Sancho’s mule. Tony Walton had
designed me a wonderful trolley with eccentric wheels that made the
back end sway in the manner of a Derby favourite. Well, I thought it did.
Joan Plowright could not have been more encouraging and, as time went
by, I became more and more certain that the play was about this clapped
out old mare that was me. Laurence Olivier, supporting his beloved
Joan, often came to the rehearsals. Don Quixote was not really Sir
Laurence’s sort of character so he took more notice of the grotesques
and oddities. And as I was the pushiest old jade you ever saw, he noticed
me. People told me that when I wasn't in the rehearsal room he tried out
my trolley. Lord Olivier had a go on my trolley! The horse masks were
astonishing, with great detail but space enough for the audience see our
faces. Years later I thought that John Dexter had been inspired to have
similar masks in Equus.
So we rehearsed and rehearsed, and Marc Wilkinson, the musical
director, was always there encouraging us; and Joan and Donald
McKechnie worked themselves to a standstill. It was marvellous. Roy
Kinnear was terrific as the wiseacre Sancho Panza; Derek Godfrey was
quite charmingly mystical as the Don. Anna Carteret looked amazing.
The music was lively and the movement and special effects were
excellent but the audience was completely indifferent. It was a hard
show and lots of performances were scheduled and we grew very
despondent. My efforts as Rosinante got more desperate by the minute.
Roy Kinnear started to improvise and I took to stamping on his foot if he

came near me; the actors played with redoubled energy and still the
audiences would not come in. I was told that I had got a tepid review in
Horse and Hound, but that may just have been malice. Compared to my
Dog, my Horse was a flop.
Some good did come out of it. Sir Laurence and Joan Plowright were
very generous hosts and often had the cast back to their flat in Stag
Place, Victoria. And that’s how I began to get to know Sir Laurence. He
once asked me if I had ever played humans and I told him not often. He
laughed and I nearly fainted with pleasure. And so we dragged our way
through the remainder of the performances. The audiences didn’t see me
but Sir Laurence had and that was more important to me.
A tour to America was announced. The productions of the Three
Sisters, starring Maggie Smith and Robert Stephens, and The Beaux
Stratagem, again with Maggie and Bob and with Ronald Pickup as
Archer, were booked to go to Los Angeles for a season. Supporting
actors and understudies were invited as well. Michael Halifax came
round to all the dressing rooms to find out who wanted to go. We all
wanted to go. I suddenly had an idea that with half the company away in
the States for a while my chances of a decent part might be improved, so
I turned down the trip and hoped that something might turn up while the
other half was away.
Something did turn up. The two Donalds remained loyal to me and
were always on the look-out to recommend me to some innocent
director. The Merchant of Venice was announced with Sir Laurence to
play Shylock and Jonathan Miller to direct; the sets were to be designed
by Julia Trevelyan Oman. Once again a Donald encouraged me.
Naturally I had read the play and thought I could play Gratiano. I had
more chance of playing Portia. I had no real idea how things worked
there. Joan Plowright was to be Portia and Jeremy Brett Bassanio,

Charles Kay was to be Aragon and Ben Whitrow the Duke of Venice.
The whole play was sewn up. Perhaps I should have gone to America?
Anyway Donald McKechnie found me in the pub talking to a down and
out I’d mistaken for a journalist. I thought he was making notes and
certainly he seemed impressed and amused by my delusions. As Donald
joined us I realized my ‘journalist’ was trying discreetly to open an
abandoned sandwich he’d probably found in Aldwych. Donald, no snob
most of the time, muttered, ‘Who’s your friend?’
Leaning left I whispered, ‘I think he’s from the Guardian.’
‘A word,’ said Donald, and to my guardian, ‘Excuse us for a moment,
please.’ In the corner where staff directors (that was Donald’s title)
plotted with actors for a line, any line so they could stop miming,
Donald hissed, ‘Jonathan Miller’s over at Aquinas Street.’
‘Can I audition for Gratiano?’ said I to my Donald.
‘Gratiano?’ Donald gaped at me. ‘Gratiano? Pull yourself together,
that’s for Derek Jacobi.’
‘What’s left that speaks?’ I asked him. ‘Just hold it a second,’ he said,
‘and I’ll tell you. There’s only one part left, the Prince of Morocco, and
Jonathan likes the idea of a dwarf for the part.’ I mulled it over for a
moment.
‘But Donald, I’m standing next to you, towering over you and you are
five foot ten tall. How can I get the part of a dwarf? Jonathan Miller is a
doctor, he’s clever, he’ll notice straightaway that I’m not a fucking
dwarf. As I walk in he'll say to himself or to his assistant, “Hello, this
fellow’s a bit tall for a dwarf, wouldn’t you say? He’s the size of two
dwarfs, one on top of the other, what are they up to these staff
directors?” And then you’ll be in trouble for trying to pass off a chap

who was too tall for the Grenadier Guards as a dwarf in The Merchant of
Venice.’
Donald looked up at me and said: ‘Tell him he doesn’t want a dwarf.’
And off I went to Aquinas Street on Mission Impossible. The girl at
the door with the short list looked at me carefully and said: ‘You’re a bit
on the tall side, aren’t you?’ I smiled shortly and strolled in. The
rehearsal room at Aquinas Street was very large. It wasn’t tall, but it was
large. As I closed the door and tried to lean nonchalantly back on it I
realized with horror that I’d stepped in too far to lean back. As I fell
away from Jonathan Miller, who was about sixty feet away, he seemed
to grow towards the ceiling. In a flash, I pretended to be a cowboy and
with my right hand hovering over an imaginary holster I approached
Jonathan as if for a shoot out. Hiding his disappointment at my size, he
also swung his shooting hand into the area of his National Theatre
holster and we approached each other in pale imitation of Alan Ladd and
Jack Palance. As we met in the middle I said: ‘Hi, sorry about the height.
I was brought up a Roman Catholic.’ Jonathan was instantly appeased
by this confession and asked me to sit down. ‘I’d like to play Morocco
with a tall hairdo and a bone through my nose and have a small boy to
carry my scimitar,’ I said.
Jonathan looked at me and smiled and said: ‘Yes, and you could talk
like George Sanders and gimbal all the way through the scene.’ He
explained that a gimbal was a continuous side-to-side nod. He showed
me and then I said the opening line, ‘Mislike me not for my
complexion,’ and I gimballed.
Jonathan laughed and seemed to have forgotten about the dwarf and
an hour later little Donald gave the news that I was the Prince of
Morocco and that Jonathan thought it should be funny. I should mention
for the sake of anyone who doesn’t know the piece that Morocco in our

version had only one scene. Anyway, after my efforts as a horse and
having made Sir Laurence laugh, I was well on the way to being funny
at the National Theatre with the help of Sir and Jonathan.
There are lots of people who can tell horror stories of being an actor,
me too, but in that production it was roses all the way. From Jonathan
and Sir Laurence to Charles Kay and Jeremy Brett I was encouraged to
be extravagant. There is a wonderful line when Morocco opens the
wrong casket, ‘Oh hell, what have we here?’
‘Break it,’ Sir Laurence said. ‘Break it and there’ll be a big laugh.’
On the first night there was a woman in the audience who used to
haunt Sir Laurence. She was near the front, watching and listening
carefully. I didn’t know about this until afterwards. The scene was going
well, Joan Plowright being very generous in her reactions to my alien
naturalism. I approached the casket and remembered Sir Laurence’s
advice - the audience was very attentive - I opened the casket and said,
‘Oh hell!’ The laugh was terrific. As it eased, the mad woman in the
front called out, ‘That’s not Shakespeare.’ This caused another big
laugh, and as that one eased, I looked towards the lady at the front and
said, ‘What have we here?’ There was uproar. It was the only great laugh
I have ever had. Forgive me dwelling on it but as I turned back towards
Joan and Anna Carteret I saw Sir Laurence in the assembly watching
me. He looked delighted. As the scene ended and there was a big round,
I wanted to die.
All I have ever wanted to do is to make someone laugh. In between
performances I was as inert as Count Dracula in his coffin. And so it
went on for more than a hundred performances. Years later Mike
Ockrent told me he saw the production when he was on his way to Perth
Rep to play Morocco. ‘I nicked your performance, Tom,’ he told me. I
glowed with contentment.

My difficulty in existing outside the plays became extreme. I used to
go into the theatre with the cleaners at about five thirty in the morning.
Not long after, I’d hear Anthony Hopkins rapping out some speech or
other. Sometimes he and I would go for breakfast in some cafe in The
Cut opposite. We became quite friendly for a while, and then quite
inseparable. I absolutely adored him. I would listen, rapt, to the tales of
his demons.
At the time he was going out with a wonderful girl called Jenny. She
was utterly committed to him in the lightest possible way. She was a girl
to die for. One night Hopkins and Jenny and I were in Luigi’s in
Tavistock Street, Covent Garden. Lots of actors went there. It was a
good restaurant, more like being in a play, really. If you were really
down in spirits you could sit near your own picture and be reassured that
perhaps you did exist if only in a photograph. And if nobody was
looking you could smear zabaglione on the picture of someone you
envied - John Wood, for example. So Hopkins and I were there, full of
conviction and red wine. Jenny was, as usual, completely self-assured
and patient towards us. Suddenly something unusual occurred. Hopkins
said: ‘Well, Jenny, it’s all over, love. I’m off with Tom, to live the way
he does.’
Drunk as I was this jolted me a bit. I couldn’t remember discussing
this with Tony. Besides, I only had a single bed, and what would the
landlord say? Pushing money towards Jenny, we tottered out hissing at
Norman Rodway and Alan Howard who were sitting quietly at a nearby
table. So, on the boil with house red, we rolled out into the night to start
a new adventure. Outside the restaurant we turned left and walked
towards the Theatre Royal, Drury Lane.
We crossed Catherine Street and passed one side of the theatre and
then turned left along the other wall. The Fortune Theatre loomed up and

we tuned left again along the third wall of the Theatre Royal. Still we
didn’t speak. We turned left again and walked down past the front of the
theatre and noticed the Opera Tavern on our right. We eased across the
street in silence and found we were back in Tavistock Street. This time,
dizzy from going left, we turned right. Outside the restaurant Jenny was
sitting in her car. As we approached she leaned over, opened the door,
and Tony got in and slammed the door. Jenny waved kindly to me and
drove off.
He could be quite fickle, that Tony Hopkins. I consoled myself by
thinking that he would not have been happy living in the Blackfriars
Road in a small room with no piano. I lay there on my bed and within a
few minutes I passed through the grieving process into a coma.

F O U RT E E N
Living in an institution, rumours of change can make life more bearable,
and starting rumours can be a wonderful pleasure for those without
much hope. The National Theatre was like that. We used to watch each
other with eagle eyes to make sure that nobody had strange powers, to
make sure that, give or take a patron, the degree of suffering through
uncertainty was more or less equal. I am talking, of course, of the other
ranks. The leading actors were consulted by the directors. Below decks
we had to guess what was going on and we guessed like mad and mostly
got it wrong.
As love affairs broke up we watched girls alone in the canteen reading
The Pursuit of Happiness, or Small Is Beautiful or sometimes Henderson
the Rain King - but that was rare. Grief would be resisted by taking
counsel from some kind soul who was sometimes only the next seducer.
What pleasure these scenes of real drama gave us. For those of us who
were not used up by the casting directors, these personal dramas were
our substitute for lack of parts. Such dramas were mostly two handers,
of course, but no less intense for all that.
The lunches in the pub next door were just as good as the food in the
canteen in the Old Vic basement, and going to the alehouse got us out of
the theatre for a while. I was sitting in there one day with the wardrobe
girls and a couple of actors when the mighty John Dexter, who at that
time was one of the most famous directors in the world, wandered over
to us. I’d never met him before, but I knew of his fiercesome reputation.
He didn’t really know anyone in our little group except Vera Martin, the

head of wardrobe. I was to discover later that Dexter was not at home in
pubs. The crowded and noisy atmosphere diluted his authority and that
didn’t go down well with him, as he was very keen on discipline and
self-control in other people, not subjects that get you much attention in a
bar. But sometimes, because nearly everybody else was in the pub, he’d
stroll in and spoil it for one or two poor souls. It passed the time and
made a few of his victims long for death. Even the great Dexter had to
relax.
So he came over and first asked Vera Martin what she would like to
drink, then Michael Edgar, and Malcolm Reid and the two girls. I
remember it was an easy round, most people were fairly abstemious;
looking back, you didn’t know if an offer of a drink from Dexter was a
trap or not.
We were very aware of him as we knew that he was preparing his
production of A Woman Killed with Kindness. As he took the round of
drinks his eye fell on me and I noticed a slight change in him; he became
almost interested in a sinister way. ‘And the good doctor?’ he asked.
‘What’s the good doctor’s pleasure?’ I didn’t know what he was talking
about until Vera Martin, a kind lady, tried to resolve the enigma by
pointing out to John Dexter that he was mistaking me for Jonathan
Miller, a very good doctor, indeed. Dexter changed mood slightly,
shrugged and went off to get the drinks. He came back with the first
three drinks and then, after a little pause, he arrived back with two more
drinks. But there were three of us left. Vera got hers and Michael Edgar
got his and I got nowt. In pub life it’s a very hostile act to deliberately
exclude someone in a group after taking on the round but Dexter didn’t
care about pub-life conventions. The whole group was deeply upset at
the maestro’s cruel snub and the remaining quarter of an hour was
spoiled. ‘Well, cheers everyone,’ said Dexter as he strolled off to viper

someone else. For people who don’t use pubs it may seem a small matter
but John’s attitude diminished that little group.
This insult of Dexter’s was talked about a good deal that season, as
we laughed and swapped stories about the tyrants in our lives. We
marvelled that after the way they treated us we were still capable of
enjoying them. Dexter’s brutality often brought to mind the army tyrants
most of us had experienced on our national service. Our monsters in the
army were theatre, too; theatre of the absurd, per- haps, but then most
theatre is, which must be because life itself is absurd a lot of the time.
Our vivid gutter language was sometimes poetical and always vital.
Ben Whitrow at the National once told that when he was in the army he
fell foul of a company sergeant-major who didn’t like his turn out and
made life hard for him. As a soldier your most prized possession was not
your gun or ammunition but your brown paybook. This was called your
AB64. Without it you ceased to exist; the army could hardly cope with
you if you lost your AB64. It contained all the basic information the
army needed to know about you. Anyway, Ben Whitrow’s sergeant-
major was taking duty parade one morning and was particularly irked by
Ben’s appearance. Leaning in to rub noses and shaking with instant
passion, he roared at Ben: ‘Whitrow, if you don’t pull yourself together
I’m going to stick my prick in your brown paybook and fuck your next
of kin.’ The sergeant-major was staggered by the look of admiration on
Ben’s face.
Tony Hopkins went as far as to trace his company sergeant-major and
call him up to ask him out to dinner. He actually got through to the now-
retired Sergeant-Major Hackett. ‘Yes? Hackett here.’
‘Sergeant-Major Hackett, this is Hopkins here, 23260976 Private
Anthony Hopkins, sir. I was a clerk in the company office at Second
Battalion headquarters, sir.’

‘Hopkins? Hopkins? Haven’t you become some sort of film star,
Hopkins?’
‘Yes, sir, and I was wondering if you and your wife would like to
come to the National Theatre and maybe have dinner with me, sir?’
‘Have dinner with you, Hopkins? With you? You were a shambles at
headquarters office, a shambles, Hopkins. Why should I want to have
dinner with you?’
‘Well, sir, I was thinking . . .’
‘Don’t think, Hopkins, it doesn’t suit you. It didn’t suit when you
were in the army and I don’t suppose it’s changed now. Get off the line,
I’m going to New Zealand, tomorrow.’
This ferocious rejection from his old sergeant-major gave Hopkins a
lot of pleasure and he told the story very well, even with affection.
*    *    *    *    * 
Suddenly, it went up on the board that Derek Jacobi was to play his first
title role, Myshkin, in The Idiot. The piece was to be adapted for him by
Simon Gray. Rhogozen was to be played be Tony Hopkins, the narrator
by David Ryall and the female leads by Louise Purnell and Diane
Cilento. The director was to be Anthony Quayle, that master of dullness.
I was in the crowd. At the read through Anthony Quayle held forth for
ever on Russia and Russians and told us all about the Russian characters,
how they wept more than we did and generally felt things more
profoundly than the rest of us. All balls, of course, but par for the course
in Quayle’s mind. His opening talk went on for so long and was so dull
that Tony Hopkins suddenly developed a gumboil and had to withdraw
from the production. There was some consternation about this and for a
day or so a lot of talk about who would get the part. If Quayle had
stopped talking for a while Hopkins’s gums might have got better but he

wouldn’t stop, and Hopkins’s absence was announced as eternal. Simon
Gray, who was spending a good deal of time with Quayle, looked
shattered. There were quite a few changes in the script and Simon
looked even more clapped out. This, of course, may have had something
to do with having to work at London University where he was a teacher
as well as a playwright. It may also have had something to do with
malnutrition because Tony Quayle shared his lunch with no-one.
Eventually Quayle asked me to audition for Hopkins’s part. Major
Quayle had a habit of calling actors ‘amigo’. I was just about to say he
called us ‘hombres’. But that might not be true. He kept putting his arm
around my shoulder and saying duff stuff like: ‘I can see there is a fine
actor deep down in that old hulk, amigo.’ And his eyes would fill with
what seemed to be tears. I never met a man who could move himself so
swiftly.
So I took over from Hopkins. The cast was huge and the blocking
was very difficult. Poor old Tony Quayle had eight performances a week
of Sleuth to do at the Garrick as well as constant planning meetings and
rehearsals. Why on earth did he accept to direct The Idiot? Was it,
perhaps, that nobody else wanted to do it? Fairly soon he ran short of
energy. The designer had the idea that if boat trucks were used we could
speed up the scenes. As one scene finished, there would be a cross fade
of the lights and trucks would come cruising in to push the narrative
along faster. It was a great idea.
When we reached the technical rehearsals the stage looked a bit like
Clapham Junction. But all worked well as trucks quietly disappeared
upstage while other trucks came in at quite lick downstage. Then came
the dress rehearsal. The scene change was from an orchard to a banquet.
The orchard scene ended and the cast sailed away on its truck. From
dark upstage came the banquet truck carrying about twenty Russian toffs

all loaded with champagne and no sense of direction. The audience,
made up of heads of department and other staff, gasped at the brilliance
of the idea as on sailed the banquet gang, looking like a piss up on the
top deck of the Titanic. The truck reached its mark and stopped, and all
the actors fell down. It was a scream. Nothing in the theatre has ever
surpassed the pleasure I felt at the sight of twenty National Theatre
actors in a heap as a result of this idea. It was plain that there was an
imperfection in the arrangements. What to do? Well, I'll tell you what
we did: the upstage trucks were kept in service and entered empty
behind the actors who ran on at the beginning of a scene. At the end of
the scene the actors boarded the ship and were carried upstage into the
darkness and all fell down at the upstage wall. The downstage trucks
were taken out of service. And as the upstagers disappeared, the
downstagers ran on across the train lines which inexplicably criss-
crossed the banquet hall. Nobody dared to ask why we were doing the
play in a railway yard. Nobody seemed to be surprised that in the
ballroom there were railway tracks everywhere. It didn’t make any
difference to the piece.
As the murderer Rhogozin I didn’t make much impression on the
audience. I just had to stand around and look menacing. This bored me
as well as them. At one performance I tried to make it more energetic
than usual and as I folded my terrifying knife away I caught my fingers
and nearly cut them off. Blood flew everywhere. Luckily it was my
upstage hand so only the cast saw the blood. I felt no pain, though the
sensation of blood dripping from my hand was quite interesting. More
interesting were the faces of the some of the girls who obviously did not
like blood. I clearly remember Anna Carteret swaying about a bit and
looking ill. Someone in the wings also spotted the blood and as we came
off stage the St John’s first-aid people were waiting for me. The more
they fussed the more I pretended to be indifferent.

In the late 1960s a book about the Russian royal family had been
published, called Nicholas and Alexandra, by an American writer,
Robert Massie. Beautifully written, it told the story of the last of the
tsars and his family, and the fall of the Romanovs. This book had been
bought by Sam Spiegel and was being made into a movie at exactly the
time that Tony Quayle was telling us at the Old Vic about how sensitive
the Russians were. Everybody who was anybody was in this movie
including Lord Olivier, who was playing the Russian prime minister.
Sam Spiegel loved to be with the leading actors and therefore saw
something of Sir Laurence during the filming. It so happened that the
part of Rasputin remained uncast. The production was moving along
quite smoothly apart from this one detail of the mad monk. Spiegel was
a very opinionated fellow and could not accept any of the suggestions
for Rasputin that were offered by the casting people. He told Laurence
Olivier of his dilemma and Sir Laurence remarked that he had just such
a character as Rasputin in his company back at the Old Vic.
With a sore finger as a result of being an incompetent murderer, and
always skint by Wednesday, I was waiting for something to happen.
Anything would have been welcome. I received a call from my agent,
Peter Crouch. He told me that Maud Spector wanted to see me. ‘Go and
talk to her,’ said Peter. ‘There may be something in the wind.’ He often
said things like that. So off I went to Upper Brook Street, Mayfair, to see
little Maud.
‘Darling, do come in, sit down and have a drink.' I was dumbfounded.
On the several occasions that I’d met her she hadn’t taken much notice
of me and I hadn’t blamed her for that. ‘Take your coat off, here, I’ll
take it, sit down, and I’ll get you a drink.’ Bemused is the word I’d use,
bloody bemused. ‘Darling, have you got any pictures of yourself?’ I said
yes. She kept peering at me as though she’d never seen a tall, bearded
fellow who might be said to be a bit vague. ‘Please, please can I have

one or two?’ I told her that I’d send her a couple when I got home. ‘No,’
said Maud, emphatically, ‘I’ll send you home in a taxi, dear, and you can
give the driver the pictures, I must have them today.’
‘What’s this all about, Maud,’ I asked. ‘Never mind, darling, don’t
ask, but I’ve had an idea.’ And I did as I was told.
That night I told Derek Jacobi about this little event as we sat in the
railway carriage on stage at the Old Vic, waiting for curtain up. He
seemed interested, but then Derek has lovely manners. I told Edward
Hardwicke about it and for some reason I felt he knew something. Later
he mentioned that Sir Laurence was in Spain on a film about Russia.
Then Peter Crouch told me that Sam Spiegel was coming to the play to
see me. And he did, and he was not impressed, and I couldn’t blame
him. The play was going well mostly on the performance of Derek and
the name of Simon Gray as the writer; Anthony Quayle appeared to
disappear after the first night. It may have been on a Tuesday that
Spiegel came because the next day, there being two shows, a message
came that I should go to Grosvenor House, Park Lane, between the
shows, to be seen by Sam Spiegel. There wasn’t much time between the
shows so Diana Boddington, our stage manager, lent her Mini to my
friend Lionel Guyett and he drove me to see the great film producer.
There was so little time that I went in full Russian costume minus my
padding. Sam looked at me and I looked at him and he said, ‘Don’t look
at me like that.’ So I stopped looking at him like that. It then came out
that Sir Laurence had mentioned my name and that was why I was now
in the presence of his greatness. He told me that I was to come to Spain
as soon as possible and be tested for the part of Rasputin.
Back to the theatre I went and among my lot there was great
excitement and I was touched by their kindness. So it was fixed that I
should go to Madrid very soon and be tested for the part and that the

director of the test would be John Dexter. This caused me a second’s
anxiety. My old skill at self-delusion overrode my doubts as I told
myself that Dexter probably believed in me. I could believe anything
then. I still can as long as it is improbable. And so a date was fixed for
me to fly to Spain (first class) for make-up tests and costume fittings in
preparation for a film test. The excitement nearly suffocated me. There
were three trips, all fairly short, and then, when a gap in the schedule
allowed, I was taken back to Madrid to await John Dexter who was
coming up from his home in France.
I was picked up at the theatre by a big car. Later I would casually call
it the limo.
‘Mr Baker?’ enquired the driver.
‘Yes,’ I said.
‘Passport, please, sir.’ I passed it over and he looked at it and gave it
back with a reassuringly thick envelope. ‘Ticket, sir,’ he said, and I was
on the way, first class to Madrid.
The head of security at the airport met me off the plane and whisked
me through the formalities. Dexter met me at the smartest hotel I could
imagine and I was given a few pages of script to learn and another
envelope which held a wad of exotic-looking dosh. John was very kind,
and over the next three days we met about three times a day and worked
on the pages. At night he arranged that I could see a few of the actors he
knew for dinner or drinks. Michael Jayston, star of the film, was one of
the first and was certainly the funniest and most encouraging. His
kindness was all the more surprising as he was totally and supernaturally
in love with Heather Sneddon. Just the sight of her nourished him. Later
I saw that he could scarcely drag himself on set to film he loved her so
much. And, indeed, she was a beautiful girl and obviously returned
Michael’s madness. The day of the test came and I was put into the

hands of Tony Sanchez for make-up. Janet Suzman was friendly but
cool, too. Dexter cosseted me all afternoon and did his part. It was like a
dream, with all the heightened actuality that dreams can have. I floated
through it and, on Dexter’s advice, never wasted a single second looking
at anyone but Janet. I had to rush back to London for a performance and
then wait.
A few days later my agent rang and told me I'd got the part. I rushed
to Aquinas Street, the head office of the National Theatre, about half a
mile away, to find John Dexter and thank him. He was in one of the
offices making a phone call. I caught his eye and made gestures of
happiness, thumbs up and silly, bowing efforts. John seemed not to
understand why I was doing this which made me feel embarrassed as he
turned his back on me. For a moment I was baffled at what to do. Should
I creep off and speak to him later, or had he misunderstood my mime? I
waited a split second too long. As he turned again and found me still
there and still smiling fatuously, he muttered into the mouthpiece,
covered it up and snarled: ‘What do want, Baker, can’t you see I’m
talking?’
I was astounded at his anger and said lamely, ‘Sorry, John, it’s just
that Sam Spiegel has offered me Rasputin and I just wanted to say thank
you. Thanks, John, I’m very grateful.’ Too late, I realized I was talking
too much. That marvellous head turned away and then back towards me
and I could see that he was furious about something. It hadn’t entered
my head that his conversation was more important than my delight over
getting a part.
‘Baker,’ he said tightly. ‘You are so fucking boring that there’s
nothing else for you to do except to be a movie star. Of course, you got
the part, I showed you how to do it, didn’t I?’ I raised a hand in
surrender as if to say I understood. It didn’t placate Dexter. With a sigh

of infinite weariness he said, ‘Just go away, will you, go away,’ and he
turned his back and resumed his phone conversation. I got the message
and I crept away feeling baffled. I was filled with disgust at my lack of
anger. Was there no limit to what I’d put up with to hold on to a job? No.
There was no limit that I could think of. That’s how it is with incomplete
personalities.
Back at the Vic I brushed my teeth and my memory and putting on a
tie went off to meet Maud Spector at the White Elephant restaurant in
Curzon Street. I had never been in such a place as a guest. I was led to
Maud’s table, she had a permanent place there, and the waiter laid me
out for her, covering me with a napkin as big as a sheet. For a moment I
thought he was going to shave me. He merely offered me a menu as big
as a Monopoly board. And the wine! The smoked salmon! The quality of
the glassware! I glanced around me and saw all those famous faces. I
was the only one there I’d never heard of. Such posing, such loud talk,
such vulgarity. I was completely at home.
I think that to be a good actor you have to prefer strangers. After all to
act you have only to be able to fake the truth. And it’s much easier to
convince strangers than it is to persuade those who know you. If the
audience believes your story, you’re home and dry.
I have always liked the rehearsal period as much as the performance
itself. If the cast is interesting and friendly then you are assured of a
fascinating time. If the director is sympathetic and helpful then things
often go well. And if the director is very special, like Michael
Blakemore or Jonathan Miller, the work becomes much more
fascinating. I shall never forget the pleasure of working for Jonathan
Miller. I have never heard anyone say otherwise. Of course, I’m
hopelessly biased; Jonathan’s production of The Merchant of Venice did

me so much good at the National Theatre. I was never able to exploit it
but Jonathan gave me the chance.
Before the days of read-throughs and speeches - ‘Rodney will now
say a few words’ - lots of supporting actors didn’t know what the play
was about. They just knew their scenes and played them. And even
today there are plenty of leading actors who don’t take much notice of
what the supporting people are up to. They just get on with their own
scenes and hope for the best.
I don’t think I care to know what a character has been up to in another
room or another country. But the style these days is for investigation of
the text. This can lead to an acceptance by the cast that the director
knows best. This is not always easy to take.
Once when I was asked to be in Hedda Gabler I arrived knowing
Hedda pretty well only to discover that Donald McWinnie had promised
Hedda to Susannah York. I was deeply hurt and as Susannah insisted she
was to play Hedda Gabler, I had to settle for the part of Judge Brack. I
played Brack the way I would have played Hedda and it was a great
success for me, one of only three that I’ve had.
In a production of The White Devil at the Old Vic, Anthony Nicholls,
an actor whom I admired immensely, had no time to black up for the
scene in which he meets Zanche the Moor, played by Jane Lapotaire.
When he met her he had to say: 'I never loved my complexion until
now.’ Nobody noticed he was white and the play did about a hundred
performances. And Beatrix Lehmann once told me that when she was
acting in a play at the Queen’s Theatre, a drunken actor who was in a
play next door at the Lyric walked into her theatre by mistake and right
into her solo scene. He looked at Bea, looked again, as if to say ‘What
are you doing here?’, said ‘Ah!’ in a very meaningful way and nipped
next door to his own play.

‘Were you angry, Bea?’ I asked her.
‘Not until I heard the round of applause he got,’ she told me.
So off I flew to Madrid for what I thought was stardom. A large
apartment in Calle Doctor Fleming, instant intimacy with famous actors,
and a driver by the name of Jesus - I was in heaven. Late evenings with
Harry Andrews and sometimes Jack Hawkins and Michael Redgrave; I
never wanted it to stop. When Harry asked me out, ‘Would you like to
come to supper with Irene [Worth] and me, Tom?’
‘Yes, Harry, yes,’ I said.
Sam Spiegel had an apartment that seemed to me like another
universe. He had a valet called James who read me real quick and liked
the empty spaces he detected. Caviar with chopped egg whites and little
lozenges of toast and chopped onions. Fish jam some people call it. Not
I. The vodka bottle encased in ice and carried in a gleaming napkin.
Janet Suzman was there, I think. It was as though the Oracle from
Delphi had dropped in for a snack and a spot of enlightenment, for Janet
has special insights which are not given to others.
Michael Jayston, with terrific aplomb, teased Sam Spiegel about past
movies: ‘Was the scene with Rod Steiger and Brando in the taxi very
difficult to achieve, Sam?’ And Sam, falling for it and elaborating on it,
‘Now you come to recall it, Michael, I must tell you that the taxi was my
idea.’ And Michael kicking me under the table. It was great. And as if
that wasn’t enough Jayston would swing the talk round to Greta Garbo
and Sam would leap to the bait.
One day on the set of Nicholas and Alexandra during a difficult scene
involving lots of elegantly dressed extras and two camera moves I
managed, as Rasputin, to do my bit in one take. Everybody made a fuss
of me and we finished for the day. As I was leaving the set surrounded

by brand-new best friends, Sam Spiegel appeared and called out: ‘Tom,
come here while I speak.’ Taking my arm and enveloping me in
exquisite cigar smoke, he said mysteriously, ‘I want you to know that
I’ve just seen the rushes of yesterday’s scene with you and Janet.’ This
was the scene when I first meet the Tsarina and the spell begins. Sam
waited for me to speak. But I couldn’t, I simply trembled. ‘I would like
you to know that I am pleased, very very pleased.’ The relief was
overpowering. Sam Spiegel was pleased with me! Never mind that I had
betrayed God and slung my faith, never mind that I had cheated every
good girl who had been willing to try and make me happy. Never mind
that my two young children didn’t know where I was and that I did
nothing about it out of loathing for their mother, never mind that I had
no idea who I was or how I was going to get through the night when
there was no performance. Sam Spiegel was pleased. He was pleased
with me! With me.
I looked at him and said, ‘Sam, that makes me very happy.’ I was
already picking up the way he spoke.
He looked at me in surprise, no, with incredulity: 'It makes you
happy?’ he said, and went off shaking his head slightly as if to say,
‘What odd balls these actors are.’
Of course he was right to be surprised. What had my happiness to do
with anything? If the rushes had been bad I would have been on the
plane home back to the all-night cafe in the Waterloo Road and the
renewed search for an identity. But Sam was pleased and I was happy to
feel unreal and to get away from myself.
The whirligig spun and I flew back and forth between London and
Madrid first class with VIP on my ticket. I flirted with air hostesses and
travelled with people like Alan Webb whose exquisite style of
complaining about everything delighted me. He had no luggage to pick

up at the carousel and therefore sailed through the airport with great
panache. He told me that it was quite impossible to be mysterious when
carrying luggage. At a distance, he said, ‘even expensive luggage
reduces one to refugee status.’
‘Sam Spiegel may be common,’ he added. ‘But he never stoops so
low as to carry his own luggage.’ He said this with infinite malice,
knowing perfectly well that I was lugging a large case in the manner of a
refugee.
As the days passed I came to believe the publicity about my
compelling, hypnotic eyes and powerful aura. What I couldn’t know was
that the aura came from the first-class ticket. That dawned on me later
when the aura had vanished with the ticket and I was sleeping on Paul
Angelis’s floor in Holbein Place, Pimlico.

F I F T E E N
My filming schedule was coming to an end and I was back at the Old
Vic deliberately hanging about in the hope that John Dexter would send
for me for his production of A Woman Killed With Kindness. I had heard
a whisper from Aquinas Street that he had mentioned my name for a
good part.
Within a day or so I saw him again in the pub but this time surrounded
by a group of about six actors and some stage management. I ducked
away out of his eyeline and got on with my pint. Suddenly there was a
little messenger with a little message from the big man. ‘John wants
you,’ and a tiny flick of the head due north towards Dexter’s throne in
case I had no sense of direction. I went over to his group. When you
don’t know who you are and don’t even like what you suspect ‘they’
might think you are, you feel vulnerable and hopeful at the same time. It
was within a director’s gift at the National to recreate people like me. It
was a bit like being in a fairy tale as a poor, wandering woodcutter who
suddenly meets a hideous witch. Or in the case of John Dexter, a hideous
wizard. He could call me into a new existence, much more interesting
than my own. He could turn me from a poor strolling woodchopper into
a court jester or even a prince. John knew it and he knew that I knew it,
and received me with a smile like the glint of winter moonlight on a
coffin lid.
There was no space made for me by the litter of six pups snuggled
round the great wizard. John made as if he was assessing me. ‘Well, if it
isn’t Mr Baker, the future movie star. Do you think, Mr Baker, that you
can pretend with the help of a sword that you’re dangerous and would
you like to be Joan Plowright’s brother in my production?’ I looked at

him as calmly as I could, dreading some awful put-down. ‘Don’t try to
look mysterious,’ he beamed, ‘the answer’s yes, isn’t it?’
‘Yes,’ I said, and humbly, too, I’m afraid.
‘Of course, it’s yes,’ repeated John, and the news is that you’re going
to play Sir Francis Acton in A Woman Killed with Kindness.
When one receives a good bit of news in an alehouse, it is customary
to offer a drink to the bringer. ‘Can I get you a drink, John?’ I asked him.
‘No, you certainly can’t,’ he sneered. ‘You can leave the pub and start
work on the script, we start in four weeks.’ I stood before him and his
pups watched me with interest, they were seeing the great bitch at work
and they were liking it.
‘Well? What are you waiting for?’ cooed John. ‘You’ve got
something to do at last, off you go.’ And I went, not daring to go back to
my unfinished pint in case Doctor Frankenstein changed his mind and
withdrew the offer of a new life from a poor monster who only wanted
to make people laugh.
I was still going back and forth to Spain when the rehearsals for A
Woman Killed with Kindness started. They took place in an abandoned
public library just across the road from the Old Vic. It was a marvellous
arrangement for Dexter. Once everyone was in, there was no way out
without passing him. A stage had been built to raise the rehearsal area
and beyond that was a study area with lots of books about the period.
There was a kettle for tea and coffee and a lavatory and that was that.
John stood guard like Cerberus. There was no opportunity to talk. I was
cast back to my religious days in the novitiate in Jersey. I felt stifled and
without ideas. What was the point of making us into Trappists for six
weeks? I had a lovely part and a very severe problem with John. After
his great kindness to me in Spain I felt indebted to him and this made me

anxious. Because of the filming dates and my other commitments at the
Vic my schedule became frantic. I would be picked up at 5.30 a.m. at the
theatre and driven by limousine to Heathrow, where I was booked first
class to Madrid. At Madrid I was met by the chief of security and rushed
through customs and driven to the set where I filmed all day. So there I
was involved in a big film, rehearsing a new production and also acting
in two other plays all at the same time. I loved it all.
Once I missed the flight to London and had to be sent to Paris for the
night. Next morning I was on the first flight out and driven at speed to
the ghastly public library to face the sarcasm of the very man who’d
helped me get the movie. John was very keen on discipline, he would
have appreciated the training methods of the SAS, he could even have
devised them. Every morning there were movement classes. During the
first week no exceptions were tolerated, absolutely none. But by the end
of the second week, John himself had to be elsewhere at meetings and I
noticed that Joan Plowright and Anthony Hopkins were ducking the
sessions. Dexter knew this and said nothing, but it depressed me. There
were fight scenes to be prepared and bird-handling scenes too. The
budget was big enough in those days to include six mighty hawks and
their handlers. I was nervous of those great hawks. Derek Jacobi’s bird
seemed to dislike me intensely. I suspected Dexter had been on to him
because I was suddenly allocated Derek’s bird. I became terrified and
John was delighted at my fear. The hawk would rise up and flutter like a
bloody great eagle, all the while shitting over me as if he’d been on
curry all night.
Perhaps I was tired and didn’t quite realize it, but John seemed unable
to stand the sight of me at work. I couldn’t think what to do to heal his
anger. He and Jacobi’s hawk seemed to feel the same about me. It did
not seem enough for John that the hawks were shitting all over me, he

soon got used to that and was bored. Suddenly Dexter changed tack and
found another way to get to me.
One morning he seemed particularly tense and I noticed that my
understudy, Howard Southern, an excellent actor and a real threat to me,
was standing by very obviously and looking towards Dexter as if waiting
for the signal for the ‘excuse me’ cut in. Sword in belt and very lively,
young Howard Southern was making me anxious. He was a much more
fluid mover than I and a lot better looking and probably a better actor.
In the first scene of the play I had to enter to the sound of wedding
bells and announce with great joy the marriage of my sister, Joan
Plowright. After a long speech in a broad northern accent, the rest of the
company would come pouring on and the play would race away. This
particular morning I sailed on and gave the speech my all. But in my
eyeline was handsome Howard, my understudy. Armed to the teeth, the
complexion of a peach and a fine pair of legs, he looked very
threatening.
I desperately recalled the days when I believed in God and was
passionate to hug lepers. John Dexter was not impressed. As I finished
and the rest of the company swept on, he pulled us up and, with the
moan of St Sebastian as yet another arrow struck him, he ordered a
restart of the scene. The rest of the actors took it well and got back to
their marks. That morning they got used to those marks as time after
time we did the scene because of John’s dissatisfaction with me. My
understudy was ready as we reached the sixteenth attempt, his legs
seeming to get sturdier, his complexion more perfect and his sword
shinier and sharper. I was in a terrible state and not getting any better as
the words were, by now, meaningless. I looked towards the company for
sympathy but they were exhausted and nobody said a word; it was
between Dexter and me. On the nineteenth attempt he let us continue

and the relief was palpable in the library. At lunch that day nobody said
a word about the torment of the morning. People kept a reasonable
distance from me, as though my fear and bad luck were contagious. But
that day was a turning point. Dexter appeared to become resigned to me
being in the cast and the gibes were less frequent. ‘You are so boring,
Baker that you might as well become a movie star,’ he repeated.
The play was pretty well received and I got a few laughs during the
fight scenes as I skidded about a bit in hawk shit. Anyway I survived it.
Joan Plowright, playing a wonderful woman, had to do a very old-style
death scene surrounded by her extended family. As her brother Sir
Francis Acton I had to lead the grieving gang. Of course I couldn’t do it
as I had sobbed all those years ago in Liverpool at the gravesides of
diphtheria victims - no, Acton was sterner than that. As I entered the
chamber of death and we all gathered round, carefully grouped by
Dexter, I was the first to speak. We all spoke in broad northern accents
for no clear reason except that John felt we were Northerners. Anyhow,
there we all were looking sad around Joan Plowright’s bed and the
company looked to me for the first sign of sympathy. And my line, in
broad northern was: ‘How do you feel yourself?’ The rest of the cast
were convulsed by this enquiry and so were a good number of the
audience. I asked John if we could modify it but he pretended that the
text was sacred and insisted I say it. And I did and the convulsions
continued. That wasn’t all. As we all knelt around the deathbed
muttering the paternoster, we began to vary the prayer to tease Anthony
Hopkins. For some reason we started to say in guttural tones, ‘Edward
Woodward, Edward Woodward who art in Heaven’. This was all very
silly but it amused those of us not playing very big parts and made life
hard for Hopkins, because the dying Joan Plowright was supposed to be
his wife. Hopkins grew to dread the scene and even begged me to use
my influence on the others. I suppose our silliness was just a tiny bit of

sabotage in revenge for what John Dexter had put us through in
rehearsals.
The months fled by with established favourites remaining in the
repertoire and new productions being announced and fought over. As
Dexter’s production ran its course we began rehearsing Pirandello’s
Rules of the Game during the day with Paul Scofield and Joan Plowright
playing the leads. We toured this to great success, how could it fail with
Paul on great form and Joan being deliciously operatic as Paul’s wife?
We came into London at the New Theatre and the play was set for a run.
I was playing Paul Scofield’s servant Luigi and I had the idea of playing
him as neurotically possessive of Paul. It worked quite well and it
amused Paul and the director Anthony Page tolerated my excesses.
Meanwhile Michael Halifax, our resident planner and diplomat, had
told me that there was nothing for me in the next season. What a terrible
job it was to tell people that as of August they would cease to exist. Only
Michael with his great tact could have managed it. This crushed me a bit
and I asked for early release which was granted with terrific speed. Joan
Plowright gave a little party for me and Sir Laurence came and even
Paul stayed for a few minutes after the play. What was to become of me?
Well, it so happened that the film of Nicholas and Alexandra was
opening in America and I was invited to go over to help promote it, if I
had time. Oh, I had time all right, and like Barkis, I was willin’. I was
desperately willin’.

S I X T E E N
‘Christopher Isherwood has written the script, Tom, and we’d like to
think about you for the part of the monster.’
I was bowled over at the prospect.
‘And who’s going to direct it?’ I asked, as if that mattered to me who
was out of work; but actors ask that even though they know the film will
probably not happen. It’s probably part of the whole madness of movies.
So they said ‘Jack Smight,’ and I said ‘Ah,’ as if that meant something
to me. The film was Frankenstein, the True Story and it did get made.
For a few days everything went to plan, and I kept thinking about
being a darling monster and how my performance might get me a
Golden Globe award. And then, you’ve guessed it, the phone rang. It
was Hunt Stromberg, the producer. The studio wanted a ‘name’ for the
monster and also Christopher would prefer somebody who was er, well,
handsome. There was nothing I could say to that, except that as far as I
knew Dr Frankenstein was not a plastic surgeon and the monster had
never been beautiful before. Hunt Stromberg is a prince of a man and he
was sympathetic, very sympathetic, to my point but the studio was the
studio, ‘you know’. So that was that. I would not get to meet James
Mason and Ralph Richardson after all.
Quickly I turned to the next non-event which was to learn to swim.
Trying to stay ahead of the game, I thought that perhaps someone might
want to do the life of Captain Webb and, as I smoked in those days, I’d
noticed a certain resemblance to me in the picture of Captain Webb on
the matchbox. I told my swimming coach about why I wanted to learn to
swim and he was very encouraging as he struggled to teach me in the

shallow end among the young mothers and babies - for I am nervous of
water. My enthusiasm was high for about two lessons until I heard my
chap telling one of his pals, a man with wispy hair and a very black mole
on his very pale upper lip about my hopes of playing Captain Webb.
'But he only had one leg,’ remarked black mole, obviously a man with
a facility to down actors he didn’t know. As soon as I heard that Webb
was a one-legger I lost interest in him and in swimming and decided to
learn to live with my fear of water.
Then somebody asked me if I’d ever taught English as a foreign
language. No, I hadn’t. Why? It turned out that there were schools all
over the place who needed tutors in English. I was given the name of
one and went along with the deep trepidation of the amateur conman.
What did I know about teaching foreigners anything? I needn’t have
worried, the man at the desk, who seemed to be smoking two cigarettes
at a time, was delighted to see me. He gave a very good impression of
being my loving father and asked me if I could start right away as three
tutors hadn't shown up for their classes.
‘How many in a class?’ I asked him.
‘Oh, it can be as many as five or six,’ he said. ‘We have about thirty
tutors in all and several levels of study.’
Five or six was a reassuring figure and I agreed to give it a go. He
handed me a few textbooks, gave me the number of a room on the
second floor and off I went to act the part of a tutor at a pound an hour.
There were a handful of young people in room nine, all waiting to be
taught to speak English. Four of them were Spanish, one French and a
couple of Italians; they all worked in the catering industry as waiters or
commis chefs. Not one of them spoke English that would have got him
back to where he lived in London.

So there was my audience, only seven, but better than nothing. To
begin with I found out their names and devised some games to play. I
went home and worked out a few exercises using the same twenty-five
verbs. I got some props from the lost property office at the school and
we improvised situations and had fun. In the large room we had it was
easy to move about and act out little plays. I got to play the dissatisfied
customer, by turns sarcastic or loud or with a stammer. All our little
games were about restaurants or shopping and progress was really good.
This went on from Tuesday through to Friday, two hours a day with
about the same time for me to prepare the lessons. Over Saturday and
Sunday I worked out scripts with good lines for the students and I was
looking forward to my Monday afternoon class. The students could only
do afternoons as they all seemed to work split shifts. On Monday I
strolled in ready for some fun and to my amazement found the room
packed with young people, perhaps thirty of them. I sent for the
secretary to ask why the sudden increase without warning and she
explained to me that the word was out that my lessons were amusing
and, as there were no rules about the movement of students between
classes, they could go where they liked. I asked about the teachers in the
classes from where my new students had come. 'Oh, they’ll have an easy
time until the students get tired of you,’ she said, cheerfully. I tried to do
what I could but the odds were against me. Some of the newcomers
spoke better than my original seven and all of my seven were furious
that they had to share me with the others. It was all too much and too sad
to watch them trying to follow my desperate efforts to fascinate them.
Within two weeks I was knackered and disheartened and I gave in my
notice. ‘Have you got any friends who might like to give it a go?’ asked
the jolly secretary. But I had no friends then and, come to think of it, I
have none now.

During 1973 I felt very fragile. After the language school
disappointment I was penniless and unwell and very sorry for myself.
My girlfriend, Jo, had found a new love in Birmingham. The Duchess of
Malfi often strains old love to breaking point. When you are in a terrific
play in a terrific part in Birmingham, one’s partner back home often
ceases to be mysterious. This is especially noticeable if you have to
share a bathroom. It’s very hard to sustain any relationship with one
bathroom, but if one of you is in The Duchess of Malfi as well, hell. The
chances are you will cease to be an item before the run is over. And so it
was with Jo and me. She called and said she had found ‘great love with
a man’. I put the phone down. The pain was exquisite. I resolved to be
calm. But everywhere I looked I saw signs that wrenched at my heart; I
kept passing Casa Pupa in Pimlico, where we’d shopped together, and
seeing Le Boucher advertised at the Chelsea Classic. I took to popping
in to the Church of the Holy Redeemer and gazing at the statue of the
Sacred Heart, peering closely at the dripping blood. The Stations of the
Cross became a great pleasure and consolation to me. I kept bursting
into tears and once I deliberately cut myself deeply in my left breast. As
the blood flowed all over me (I was naked as I struck the blow), I felt
myself to be at one with the Sacred Heart of Jesus. I was alone, poor,
bleeding and unwanted. I had never felt happier.
Just as I was fading away in self-pity at being abandoned for a new
love from The Duchess of Malfi, a job came up. When depression sets in
one longs for a contrast in one’s work but fate, with marvellous
casualness, invited Peter James to offer me Macbeth. It's an interesting
part for someone in deep depression. Peter had just been appointed the
artistic director of the Shaw Theatre in the Euston Road. The choice of
play had nothing to do with him. It had been selected by the powers that
be because it was a school text that term and therefore was sure to sell a
lot of tickets. Peter had some good ideas for it, and one or two that were

not so good. The really big mistake was to cast me as Macbeth. I just
could not get a hold on it. During rehearsals I didn’t get a single laugh.
This is very unusual for any actor and should have rung alarm bells in
Peter James’s head. For all I know it did but Peter is a very loyal man
and he decided to stick with me in spite of my lack of comic flair.
We had about four weeks to get the play together. About half-way
through the rehearsal period Peter got a stiff dose of flu. He came in to
work but was too unwell to be inspiring. So we struggled on knowing
that things were not too good as regards the leading actor. We had an
appalling first night when I suffered a terrific dry towards the end of the
play. This caused havoc and took about fifteen minutes off the
anticipated running time. The audience seemed quite pleased about it all
and we hoped the rest of the run would be better.
But from then on the audience was made up of sceptical O-level
students who were bussed in to the Shaw to watch a great play in which
I took the lead. I was so shocked by my first-night dry and so sorry for
myself at Jo’s new-found happiness in Birmingham that my old desire
for death came back. Suddenly I was convinced that I was going to die
before the run of the play was completed. I think we were signed for
about six weeks. At the time I was living in a room in Westbourne
Terrace W2. I didn’t have a great deal of property apart from some first-
edition books and old play scripts that I’d gathered together. As the
conviction grew that I was about to die, the problem of disposing of my
bits and pieces worried me. I had grown fond of some actors who
sympathized with my suffering. Every night before curtain-up I was
violently sick. The actors in my dressing room used to run the water in
the wash basins very loudly and talk at the tops of their voices to drown
out the disgusting noises I was making. I was so grateful to them that
each night when I came to the theatre I brought a few of my things in
and gave them to any actor who fancied them. Most of them were quite

pleased and thought I was a good chap to be dishing out books and little
ornaments as presents.
And so the run of the play continued. I never dried again, of course,
but I didn’t get any better either. Several times I was booed at the curtain
call and this helped to lower still further my already low self-esteem.
During the matinees, the children drank beer and got quite rowdy; and
when the play started they resented having to come in and watch me. I
never blamed them. If I could have avoided it, I would not have come in
myself.
Sometimes the children threw marshmallows on to the stage. I had
cultivated, for the part, a special way of walking. I felt that Macbeth,
feeling trapped, might express this in a rather jagged style of movement.
The children in the audience may have hated my performance as mad
Macbeth, but they adored my walk. Of course, because of the lights, I
couldn’t see where the marshmallows were on the stage but the audience
could. Every time I stood on one a great yell of laughter went up from
six-hundred sadistic teenagers. Several of my fellow actors advised me
to modify my style of walking but it was too late. I thought I could hear
the wings of the angel of death and in my despair I refused to accept
their advice. I felt that if I couldn’t hang on to my girlfriend then I could
at least hold on to my walk.
In this way the evenings of agony passed slowly and, at the same
pace, I fetched in my few remaining belongings to dispose of among the
cast. By the last performance all I had left was an old Edwardian chaise-
longue. It was about eight feet long and very heavy. Even in my strange
state of mind I realized I could not get a chaise-longue on to a Northern
Line Tube train. So it remained my last possession, everything else had
been gratefully received by members of the cast.

The last performance arrived and passed and, dear God, I was still
alive! I went home to W2 feeling cheated. Suddenly I felt that not only
could I not trust life but death too was unreliable.
Some comfort was waiting for me in Passmore Street, SW1, where
there is a warm little world called the Fox and Hounds, where the
landlady is Diane. She is a wonderful woman with large eyes and a
capacity to listen even to dull stories, so naturally lots of actors go there.
She is known among bores as the Mother Teresa of the licensed
victuallers. And it was in that snug little world that I was introduced to a
man who was known as Derm the Worm. He was very handsome, a
good talker and his girlfriend wanted to see him dead. It turned out he
was an expert in Turkish carpets and chaises-longues, too. Without any
trouble he took my last remaining possession off my hands and that was
that. I wondered what would become of me.
*    *    *    *    *
One day in the Fox and Hounds, I was told that if I were to go to Ebury
Street the following morning at 7.15 and stand outside number 182,
where the young Mozart had written his first symphony, I would meet a
man called Arthur Cordes who was in the way of needing a labourer.
The work would be entirely menial, there would be no security and the
wages were the legal minimum.
In a state of deep apprehension and joyous depression I loitered at the
gate to Mozart’s place at 7.05 and waited for Arthur Cordes. He came
right on time in the shabbiest van imaginable, took me to the site, which
was about three doors from Wolfgang’s place, gave me a cup of tea and
a piece of bread pudding the size of a half brick and I set to work as a
builder’s labourer. Arthur was my master and a good one, too. He was as
jolly as Mr Fezziwig; though whether he could dance I never did find
out. Fuelled by sweet tea and bread pudding I set to work, happy in the

thought that nobody knew where I was or even cared, and that Jo was
happy with the ‘great love’ she had found in The Duchess of Malfi.
Arthur was intrigued to have an actor on the site and was amused at the
way I used to come through the door in the morning. I’ve always found
it difficult to come through a door sincerely and for that reason people
often laugh. It’s not as simple as it sounds. You just watch out the next
time you’re in the theatre. Or you could try it at home on your partner.
Tom Conti has a way of coming through a door that makes you gasp,
and Jeremy Irons, even as Richard II, always excited great admiration as
he entered — and there wasn’t even a door in that production. The
greatest of all is Donald Sinden. He is so astonishing at entering that you
can sometimes tell he’s coming two minutes before he arrives. He’s my
hero as an enterer, but somehow I’ve never been able to get the knack of
it, as Arthur noticed during my time in Ebury Street, though he never
held it against me as John Dexter had.
The work was so hard that it soothed me. I was shattered at the end of
the day and that helped me to get through the nights. As it sank in to my
poor nut that sheer bone-shaking activity was good for me, I redoubled
my efforts and always asked if I could do the Kango drill. To use a
Kango drill without ear muffs three or four hours a day takes away all
fear of death and memories of old loves finding new loves in
Birmingham. I didn’t entirely forget, of course, and sometimes that great
Webster line came to me from The White Devil. ‘He once bottled a fart
that poisoned the whole of Dublin.’ How I wished I was Doctor Julio
and could rush away and poison all Birmingham.
Gradually, the Kango drill did its work and the pain eased. My desire
to make people laugh came back and Arthur said I was coming through
the door in the mornings with a bit more aplomb than when I had first
started. This raised my spirits no end. The only side effect from the

therapy of the Kango drill was that my arms and hands shook so much
that I couldn't eat or drink properly. It was very bad for a few days and I
began to feel dizzy. To keep my strength up I would wait till Arthur was
gone to another site and then I’d put my bread pudding in a dish on the
floor and get down on my hands and knees to it. After a while it’s not as
difficult as you might suspect. I noticed, though, that supping my tea
from the same dish I made the same noise as my father had made all
those years before in the days when he used to torture my mother at
meal times. This bothered me a bit but not too much; anyway I was
alone and only wanted to torture myself.
From time to time my agent called to encourage me. Now that I was
getting a weekly wage, though being on an emergency tax code
swallowed a good bit of it, I was able to go into the Fox and Hounds for
a toasted sandwich and a glass of bitter and that made me feel even
better.
Some years before this I had been in The Millionairess with Maggie
Smith for the BBC’s Play of the Month series. It was directed by Bill
Slater and had been something of a success in spite of my not very good
impression of Peter Sellers doing an Egyptian doctor. For a while the
company of James Villiers and Charles Gray kept me amused and made
me feel as if perhaps I was one of them. It was not to be. The production
went to air and was reasonably well received and that was the end of it.
So all those years later, sleeping on a mattress in Bourne Street, Pimlico,
I remembered Bill Slater and wrote him a desperate letter. I pointed out
to him that there had to be some sort of a part for me in the huge Series
and Serials Department of the BBC. I wrote the letter on a lonely
Sunday night. Sunday has been a bad day for me for many years and
often I’ve drafted a suicide note on a Sunday evening.

The letter was posted on Monday morning on my way past Mozart’s
house to pick up my bread pudding and start work for Arthur Cordes
who was now my friend. It arrived at the BBC on the Tuesday morning
and reached Bill Slater’s office after he had left for a meeting with Barry
Letts, a senior producer in the Serials Department. His responsibility
was for Doctor Who. As chance would have it, Jon Pertwee had given
up the part of Doctor Who and Barry Letts and other colleagues were
having casting meetings to find a replacement. Jon Pertwee had been a
huge success in the part and there was a good deal of talk required
among the staff on who was to be the new Doctor Who.
That was the first coincidence. Now, how about this? The reason that
Bill Slater was attending this meeting called by Barry Letts was that in
the next week he was to become the head of the department. It was
considered by Barry, who has exquisite manners, that Bill Slater, as the
future boss, should be in on the discussions to recast Doctor Who. And
so he was.
I heard later that an actor called Richard Hearn was being considered.
Later somebody told me that Graham Crowden had been offered the
part. I can’t be sure of any of these points, and I don’t really care. At the
meeting, Bill Slater was asked if he had any strong views on who the
new man should be; he had none, and went about the rest of his heavy
schedule. Another meeting was fixed for the next day and Bill said he’d
think about it.
Bill had a late meeting with other people that day and then, after some
drinks with colleagues, he went to his office picked up my letter, and
went home to Mary Webster, his wife. They had supper and got ready
for bed and Bill told her about his day and about the casting session for
Doctor Who. He told me he was actually getting into bed when he
glanced at my poor begging letter. He read it to Mary Webster. The time

was 11.15 p.m. in Great Titchfield Street where Bill and Mary did their
conjugality. About three and a half miles away in Pimlico at exactly the
same time I was tossing on my mattress in Bourne Street.
Bill and Mary thought I would he a good choice for Doctor Who and
Mary said: 'Call him now,’ and Bill did, and I answered. Bill was very
nice and said he’d just read my letter and would I like to come and see
him at the TV Centre the next evening at about 6.30p.m.? He was not
specific and I didn't care. All I wanted was to be seen by someone who
could help me. Yes, I said, thanked him and fell back into my pit.
On the Wednesday morning Bill attended his second casting session
for Doctor Who. Views were exchanged and names bandied about.
Barry Letts again asked Bill if he had a view on the replacement and Bill
said yes. He mentioned my name and added that I would be coming to
see him at 6.30 that evening.
I was on time. Bill Slater was waiting for me and took me up to the
office of the head of drama, Shaun Sutton. Barry Letts was there. So
there I was with three very nice men who chatted and laughed at my
jokes and seemed very pleased to see me. Someone fetched me a glass
of beer but I couldn’t drink it.
'We’ve got an idea, you see, Tom,’ said Bill after nearly an hour. ‘Do
you think you could come back and see us tomorrow?’
I agreed to come back. I was quite willing to spend the night outside
the office it they'd wanted it but I thought that would have betrayed
anxiety; so I went home.
The next day I mentioned to Arthur that I’d been to the BBC and that
they were thinking about me for some job. Arthur was delighted and
began the teasing that actors get when between jobs. I was referred to as
‘Sir Laurence’ and generally had the piss taken something chronic. It

didn’t bother me at all. I fled the site at 5.15 and rushed to Bourne Street
for a swill and a change of clothes, and then took the Circle Line to
Notting Hill Gate, Central Line to Shepherd's Bush and a little gallop
along Wood Lane to the TV Centre. I was a bit late but Bill said not to
worry, and up we went to Shaun Sutton’s office again. Like the night
before Barry Letts was there. They sat me down, asked me how I was,
and then fell into an interesting silence. By that I mean they were not
speaking but it wasn’t oppressive. They all looked at me and then at
each other as if to say, ‘Who’s to speak?’
Shaun nodded to Bill who looked towards Barry who said: ‘Tom,
we'd like you to be the next Doctor Who. What do you think?’
I have to remind you that in those days, Doctor Who was a very big
job in television. I have to remind you that I was living on the smell of
an oil rag and bread pudding.
‘Well?’ said Barry, ‘What do you say?’
The three of them looked at me and were smiling and all I could do
was nod. You know how it is with pleasure, one nod led to another nod
and soon I couldn’t stop nodding and they laughed kindly. We all shook
hands. I felt reborn in the good news.
Then Barry said, ‘There’s just one thing, Tom.’ My heart skidded and
my arse pouted in terror. What was this one thing? Did it mean that
somehow I wasn’t to be Doctor Who?
Barry saw my anxiety and said: ‘It’s just that we’d like to delay the
announcement for a while, we think about ten days. Do you think you
can sit on the news for ten days?’ I nodded. And then they all started
nodding and smiling and off I went into the darkness of Wood Lane
heavy with the great news that had to be kept secret. On the tube I kept

wanting to nudge somebody, anybody, and tell her the news. But I didn’t
dare.
I got back to the Fox and Hounds in Passmore Street, not any old Fox
and Hounds, Diane’s Fox and Hounds, the Fox and Hounds where I
stood next to Fred Fellowes who worked on the London Underground
and I couldn’t tell him my news. He bought me a drink and remarked:
‘Are you all right? You look as if you’ve just had some news.’ I
shrugged as if to say, ‘well, you know how it is, Fred?’ And I muttered
about there being the possibility of a little job on the telly.
And so I stood there, bursting with my promotion from general
labourer to Time Lord. The burden was too much and I went home to the
mattress. No sleep came and when I got to work next morning the first
thing Arthur wanted to know was how the interview at the BBC had
gone. It was an amazing few days. Dear Arthur who brought me bread
pudding made by his Babs would have loved to hear what I had to say
but I had promised Barry Letts and I was terrified that something might
spoil my good fortune. To get through the time I went mad at the work.
Naturally, the Beeb had got in touch with my agent who swiftly, very
swiftly, tried to get in touch with me.
I deliberately did not return the calls for the first two days. I think I
was possessive of the news and the jackpot I’d hit by my own effort.
Eventually, though, I did call and went in and signed the contract. The
first wages were not all that good, but I didn’t know that. Later, Philip
Hinchcliffe, my producer, was to assure me that he wanted me to have
more money. And I accepted it and blew it as fast as I could. The odd
thing was that as soon as I got some dosh the poor dodged me. The only
people I met were those who were well fixed. I couldn’t tell the
difference and blew it.

Good or bad it’s a terrible thing not to be able to tell someone.
Anyway the day was fixed and I was able to say to Arthur that I needed
a whole day off to go to the BBC about this little job I’d mentioned. I
then went to my friend Ted Whitehead and asked him if he’d like to
come to the BBC for the enthronement of the new Doctor Who. Ted said
he’d come and I was so proud to be seen with him. I kept hoping I’d
have the chance to mention Ted’s play Alpha Beta. And I did drop it out
proudly to the script editor on Doctor Who, Terrance Dicks.
On the great morning Ted and I went to the centre of the universe in
Wood Lane and were whisked — stars always get whisked — into the
Bridge Lounge to await the presentation of the new Doctor to the
waiting press. I wore a white suit and a Peruvian sweater and a tie
painted by some poor exploited Atahualpa or other. Barry Letts led me
forth for the presentation. Not since I’d faced the foreign press in Los
Angeles for Nicholas and Alexandra had I felt so well. The press turn
out was so great that we had to do the whole ceremony in the BBC bar.
There was clapping, there was flashing of cameras and then more
clapping; and I desperately hoped it would never stop and it didn’t for
quite a while. I whirled and posed and smiled and looked alien and the
more they gasped the more I did it and so it went on. At last, I had
ceased to exist and that was a great feeling. Ted Whitehead smiled to see
me so happy and everyone wanted to touch me and I wanted them to
touch me, too, and they did and it was just marvellous. Oh yes.
From all directions chaps wanted to discuss projects and girls looked
at me in a meaningful way. Thousands of pictures were shot by snappers
from all over the country. This gave me a lot of pleasure but when the
man said he was from the Evening Standard my cup ran over. I knew
that if I was lucky the men on the site and especially Arthur Cordes
would see it that day and I wanted that so badly. But they wanted no
more than the others and the moment passed. I was whisked — there I

go again — into a special studio and was on air to the Midlands and the
North. The man from the North asked me if I’d be doing the Doctor with
a Liverpool accent and did I have a message for anyone. I was
speechless. And when it was all over, Ted and I went off and knocked
out a few drinks in Shepherd’s Bush. Then on to the whizzy West End.
The second edition of the Standard carried a picture of me on the front
page. Oh, bliss. Fuck off anonymity, hello everybody. Ted and I
stumbled about and laughed. When I got back to the Fox and Hounds
they roared with pleasure. I knew, of course, that Arthur and the chaps
on the site would have got the paper and wouldn’t be expecting to see
me again.
Next morning I arrived on site as usual. The men were amazed.
Arthur kept looking at me and laughing. And the day passed in a cloud
of madness. I asked Arthur if I could leave a bit early and could we all
have a drink at five thirty. Yes, he said, and off I rushed to the bank and
then to Partridges in Sloane Street for little goodies to go with the booze.
It was all too much. The men were so kind as well as totally incredulous.
They kept shaking their heads and then shaking my hand. Somebody
turned up from the Daily Express and asked if we could all be there the
next morning for a picture, hods and shovels at the ready. And the joy
increased as the fellows realized that they, too, were in on the madness
and that people wanted to look at them and talk to them as well.
Never was there such keenness at a photo call the next day. We all
stood in line with our tools at hand and obeyed the snapper’s every
whim. The Daily Express! It was difficult to work after our taste of
stardom but somehow the day passed. The next morning we were all
famous. A lovely picture and a very warm little article, too. That
lunchtime I shook hands and swore eternal friendship with everyone and
full of tears and good resolution I tottered off past Mozart’s house. I
never saw them again. I was Doctor Who now. I was an alien.

S E V E N T E E N
After I had signed my contract and felt secure in a year’s work, Bill
Slater, Barry Letts, Bob Holmes, the script editor, and Philip Hinchcliffe,
who was shadowing Barry before taking over the programme, took me
out to lunch. It was at the Balzac Bistro on the corner of Wood Lane and
Shepherd’s Bush Green. After an hour’s jolly chat and a few drinks
Barry asked me how I might be playing the part of the Doctor. What a
question! I had to tell him that I had no idea. Although I’d seen the
programme a bit, I was not knowledgeable about it and I was so tense
after my recent troubles that ideas just fled my head.
Barry was a little amused by my admission. He certainly didn’t seem
worried and for that I was grateful. Those four men at the lunch, who
thought of me a couple of weeks earlier, are the ones who gave me the
most important break of my life. At that lunch I had no idea that Doctor
Who would be sold in seventy-four countries. The thought that I would
be on more than two hundred stations in America alone would have
flattened me. Even now, the thought that I am a star in Abu Dhabi tickles
me. I often wonder how I can turn it to my advantage. So we just got on
with the lunch and had a grand time. The changeover shot was done and
I met the great Jon Pertwee at last. He was very nice and didn’t wish me
luck or anything like that.
And then things began to hot up for me. I was offered the part of the
hero in a film called The Author of Beltraffio. Even at the time I thought
the title was a bit naff. It sounded as if it had been lifted from a story by
Henry James or some other out-of-copyright source. It was to be
directed by a fellow called Tony Scott. Everybody even then used to say,
‘Who?’ And the answer was always, ‘You know, Ridley Scott’s brother.’

And then they’d say, ‘Oh, that Tony Scott.’ You know the routine. Well,
I didn’t think he was a very good director, in fact I thought he was
terrible. I believe he did try to be a car mechanic but he just couldn’t get
started though he certainly seemed to know a lot about cars. So he
became a film director instead and probably did less harm that way.
Anyway, I don’t want to get trapped into saying anything too positive
about Tony Scott in case he ever offers me a job.
But it was while I was doing this film and all dressed in late Victorian
clothes that Peter (Lock up Your Daughters) Coe turned up on location
and, seeing me all dressed up, offered me the part of Oscar Wilde at the
Oxford Festival. But first we had to complete the Tony Scott job.
Sometimes when we were shooting exteriors we had to wait for passing
aeroplanes to go over. You can’t have the sound of planes in a Victorian
costume drama. We were also bothered by the bells of ice-cream vans.
The tune of ‘London Bridge is Falling Down’ would irritate our director
no end and that gave me a certain amount of pleasure. He was so
impatient one day that he made a beautiful error of judgement. He sent
one of the runners to pay the ice-cream man to go away. And the ice-
cream man did go away. He went about three hundred yards in another
direction, and rang his bell very loudly. Because it was from another
direction Tony Scott assumed that it was a different ice-cream man. So
he despatched another runner to pay off the van driver. The driver said,
of course, that he would stop ringing his bell, took the tenner and drove
off east by east, waited for ten minutes, and gave us the bell again. The
first runner was sent this time and not having a terrific memory he failed
to see that it was the same man. So the same man accepted another
tenner and moved along. About £300 later Tony Scott’s penny dropped.
By which time the ice-cream man was planning a career in films, on the
catering side.

But they were all very nice to work with and the time passed
reasonably quickly. I met a girl on this picture called Marianne Ford.
She was marvellously amusing and very good to me. When the filming
was finished I went straight into rehearsal for The Trials of Oscar Wilde
and Marianne came with me. Thanks to her we were sometimes very
happy over the next few years and the times we were not happy were all
my fault.
We rehearsed The Trials of Oscar Wilde in an old hotel in Earls Court.
It was terribly run down but very genteel. The permanent guests each
had their own table in a very sad and neglected dining room which might
once have been a ballroom. We worked there for about four weeks and
discovered our characters. Aubrey Woods was Edward Carson, the
prosecutor, and Nigel Stock was Sir Edward Clarke, counsel for the
defence. I must say that Aubrey and Nigel were absolutely wonderful as
lawyers. They fed me all the cues that provided me with the chance to
fire off lots of witty answers.
EC: ‘You were educated at Oxford, Mr Wilde?’
OW: ‘I was educated at Trinity College, Dublin.’
And later from Aubrey as Carson, ‘Is that beautiful, Mr Wilde?’
OW: ‘Not the way you read it, Mr Carson.’
And so it went. It was a doddle really.
Anyway, we opened at the Playhouse, Beaumont Street, to very warm
reviews. The boys playing Oscar’s lads were simply amazing. They
were irresistibly cocky and sly and very sexy. Lots of very heavy leather
gays piled in to the play and followed us into the pub afterwards. I was
always with the ‘Boys’, and this caused some jealousy in the bar and
some pushing and shoving. It’s always such a pleasure to be in a good
piece of theatre and we whooped it up shamelessly. Gerald Cross, who

played the judge who sent me down, gloried in his power to make the
audience hate him. Being gay himself, this amused Gerald no end. So we
were the hit of the festival, I think. Marianne organized witty parties in
the green room for me and for the ‘Boys’, hampers from Partridges or
Fortnums; they loved it and so did I and Marianne loved me. So before
starting on Doctor Who in earnest, I managed a film and a play and a
new love.
In those days I suffered from a very jumpy tummy and I was often,
without warning, very sick. I hid this as much as I possibly could from
the others in case the word got back to the BBC that I wasn’t strong
enough to cope with the heavy schedule of Doctor Who. One evening
Marianne arranged for Barry Letts, Philip Hinchcliffe and others from
the Beeb to see the play and have supper afterwards in a room at the
Turf Tavern. They all said they liked the play, though it was a bit long,
and the supper afterwards went brilliantly thanks to Marianne. So I drew
a bit nearer to the chaps who were going to arrange my translation from
‘who?’ to ‘Who?'
The play ran to full houses and afterwards I went to live with
Marianne in Notting Hill Gate and for a while we were happy. But the
attention that came with the success of the programme brought
temptation after temptation from curious girls whom were enthusiastic to
lay a Time Lord. It had very little to do with me at all. How could it,
they were strangers. But I didn’t spot it. I thought that I was genuinely
irresistible and I gave in to most of the time travellers. Marianne was
very patient and I think she may have thought the madness would pass;
but it didn’t. And so I hurt the very person who was willing to protect
me.
I remember I was asked to do a little piece in the Sunday Times called
A Day in the Life o f . . . .  I can’t remember the details but when it came

out and I read it early one Sunday morning I knew that Marianne
wouldn’t like it and so I tore it out of the magazine. What I hadn’t
noticed was that there was another reference to it elsewhere in the paper.
So when Marianne turned it over and saw that I had ripped it out she
suspected my motives. I was making myself utterly ridiculous and she
saw it and couldn’t help me. But I missed all the signs. I couldn’t stop
being ridiculous because I am ridiculous. The work at the BBC was very
demanding but I loved it. I simply couldn’t wait to get to North Acton
rehearsal rooms and enjoy realizing the scripts. It was a pleasure to go to
work in the mornings. And this whirligig of activity went on for all my
time as Doctor Who.
Life seemed to be one long party. Journalists were interested in
talking to me, there were regular press calls at the BBC and endless
personal appearances to promote the show or for charity. The faster it
went the faster I wanted it to go. You know that wonderful feeling at a
party when you never want it to stop? After rehearsals I was usually in
Soho for some commentary or voice-over and after that went on to the
Colony Room for champagne if Francis Bacon was there or very serious
gins if he wasn’t. It was an amazing period.
There was one break when I went to Italy for a few weeks to write a
script with Ian Marter. We had an idea for a film (don’t we all?), and
somehow the director James Hill had become interested. The
arrangement was that Ian and I would prepare the storyline for Doctor
Who Meets Scratchman and write the dialogue and that James would
shape it into a screenplay. It was basically a horror story about some
scarecrows who came to life and began to terrorize a small community.
We decided that if Ian and I went on a little holiday together we could
finish the script and have a good time together somewhere nice. So
Marianne and her daughter, Harriet, with a little friend called Sophie

Maloney, the daughter of a Doctor Who director, David Maloney, came
with us to a house near Sienna.
We stayed in a large, interesting old family house, in reasonably good
order, and heaving with fleas. For the first few days Ian and I worked
hard at the script and tried to come up with some good stuff for James.
But the fleas got to Ian, Marianne and the two children. They bled us
every night and spoiled the fun of being somewhere pretty. We bought
some Italian flea powder but it only seemed to make the buggers grow.
Whenever we scattered the stuff on the beds it seemed to throw them
into a frenzy of ecstasy - maybe it was speed.
There was a swimming pool in the garden which was the only
pleasure for Sophie and Harriet, who refused to believe that I couldn’t
swim and was indeed very frightened of water. So did Ian Marter: ‘Don’t
listen to Tom,’ he told them, ‘he’s just being silly.’ But the girls did
believe me, and they gave me a swimming lesson and I made some
progress. The children were delighted, but Ian was sceptical. ‘I told you
he could swim,’ he said.
At first all went well and I began to feel a little less afraid. I was quite
proud of my progress and off we went for a lovely lunch. About four
o’clock, back to the pool we went for my second lesson. I did my
ferocious doggie paddle and, with new confidence, I swam out of the
shallow end. The girls shrieked with joy and yelled encouragement to
me as they took the credit for my quick learning. It was then that I
realized I was in the middle of a deep pool and didn’t know what to do
next. I lost all my new-found confidence and sank out of sight. In my
panic, I touched the bottom. I remember trying to think clearly as I rose
to the surface. I opened my mouth to breathe but couldn’t take in any air.
Fear took hold. I thrashed about bellowing and gasping like a buffalo.

The girls on the side of the pool shouted to Ian who strolled over to see
what the fuss was.
‘Tom’s drowning,’ I heard Harriet scream. ‘Tom’s drowning.’
And then, to add to my terror, I heard Ian Marter laugh. ‘No, he’s not
drowning,’ called Ian, ‘he's only acting drowning and very badly, too.’
This harsh criticism wounded me deeply and, unable to breathe, my
panic grew until, in despair, I sank again. Coming up, still I thrashed this
way and that, trying in my agony to get a purchase on anything that
might drag me back to the safety of life. And still Ian laughed and with
his laugh condemned me to death.
But those wonderful little girls chose to believe me rather than Ian.
Sophie jumped in and so did Harriet. They were both terrified by the
noise I was making and the tumult in the water. Harriet held on to the
side, and Sophie held on to Harriet’s legs and tried to reach me. In utter
despair, I suddenly caught hold of Sophie’s leg and managed to heave
myself to the side. At the same moment Ian at last believed in my
performance and used his strength to pull me out. Oh, the terror as I
spluttered and choked and felt I was going to suffocate. Ian was hitting
me and shaking me and finally a breath got through. As I felt the life
come back into me I remember resolving never to complain about
anything ever again. I’ve never been near deep water since, and at home
I only ever have showers.
The next morning we decided to cut short our holiday. I wanted to be
back in Notting Hill Gate. I had had enough of abroad and fleas and
scripts and new-fangled ideas like learning to swim. So we packed up
and soon I was safely home in London. I forgot my new resolution and
reverted quickly to ingratitude. We were back to normal.
The script was completed and briefly it flickered towards realization
before being blown out for lack of interest. James Hill later had a huge

success with Worzel Gummidge for Southern Television. Jon Pertwee
was Worzel and very good he was. I never saw James again and didn’t
see much more of Ian Marter. He left the programme and died suddenly
in a diabetic coma. Poor Ian. We might have become friends but, as
usual, I let the chance slip. I’m afraid I have no gift for friendship. I
quickly get tired of people and off they go. Only the other day I tried to
think of a single friend I had made in my life and drew a blank. Odd,
isn’t it, not to have a friend. In particular, I have always admired people
who can be friends with old loves. I can’t do that. I find it painful even
to think of them. I haven’t even got a dog, though I’m acquainted with a
man who has a border terrier. And yet during the run of a play or a film
I’m able to be very concerned that people are well and fed. I also like to
know about people’s aunts. I have always loved tales of aunts.
Sometimes I wish that I had got This is Your Life, after Eamon
Andrews died. It really would have thrilled me to have all those aunts
about the place. After Eamon died, well, to tell the truth about half an
hour after he died, I asked my then agent at London Management to ask
the television people if I could take it over. I understood that for a
moment they did consider me and then gave it to Michael Aspel. I
haven’t watched it much since then but when I have switched on I notice
that they seem to have cut back on the aunts; so it all probably turned out
for the best.
*    *    *    *    *
Playing Doctor Who came as a great surprise to me. I had no idea that I
would enjoy it so much. All that was required of me was to be able to
speak complete gobbledygook with conviction. Barry Letts and Philip
Hinchcliffe seemed delighted with my efforts. It was easy because all
my life I had been taught nonsense by priests and teachers on all sorts of
subjects. It was no problem for me to say I came from another world and
could go back and forth in time in my emphysemic old Tardis which was

bigger on the inside than it was on the outside. Problem? For me who
believed in Guardian Angels and was convinced that pigs were
possessed by devils after their New Testament encounter with God’s son.
It was easy and I loved it.
I didn’t see much of Barry Letts, who had given me the chance to
play such a lovely part, as he was coming to the end of his period as
producer when he decided to employ me. We got on very well for the
little time left to him and I very much enjoyed being directed by him in
‘The Android Invasion’.
The first story, still under his production, was about a giant robot
played by Michael Killgariff, a very tall man with a big voice. He was
splendid as the tin threat in the story but the office didn’t seem to know
anything about Michael apart from his tallness. Of course the rest of us
in the cast knew how well Michael could perform as a music-hall artiste.
He could play the piano and sing and spin all those lovely improbable
Edwardian monologues that have lasted so well, and he had a
marvellous natural authority as a chairman; he’s great at being in charge.
Now it struck me very quickly that just being a solemn threat to the
earth was not very surprising. I kept thinking to myself how it might be
interesting if the Giant Robot had not been programmed perfectly. It
occurred to me that if he suddenly went into some song like say ‘The
Galloping Major’ or ‘There’s an Old Mill by the Stream, Nellie Deane’
then the earth people led by the Brigadier, Nick Courtney, would have
something to react to. I did mention this to Patricia Maynard who tried
to hide her natural glamour as she played the freezing Miss Winters.
Patricia was amused by my notion so we got on very well together. Of
course I didn’t dare mention these thoughts to Barry Letts or Philip
Hinchcliffe. I was still in the early moments of my deep gratitude to
them for the chance to earn a living.

I did not allow my own thoughts to interfere with the fun of it all. Jim
Acheson, our designer, told me I looked like his Auntie Wyn and I have
never forgotten it. I wondered if it was the way I walked or wore my hat,
but Jim just said that I had some indefinable air of an aunt. It was then I
began to hope that one day I might play Lady Bracknell. Later on, as I
got to know more and more people, I was often told that I looked like
some favourite aunt. Never a nasty aunt, of course, but often a maiden
aunt.
What struck me very deeply about Doctor Who was that the
performers were often more fascinating than the characters in the script.
You might ask, ‘Who, for example?’ And I might say, ‘Well, everybody
to be frank.’ This is not meant as a slight on our writers; after all they
didn’t know anything about the people who were to realize their ideas;
they had no control over the casting. If they had, then the results would
have been very different.
Now we pressed on to the next tale, ‘The Sontaran Experiment’. We
filmed on location on Dartmoor, and while doing a fight scene out on the
moor, I fell and broke my collar bone. This made me very anxious for a
few hours. I needn’t have lost any time worrying about it with Terry
Walsh on the shoot. He was my stunt double and more. As I couldn’t
move without my bone clicking out of place and making me squeal,
Terry did all the work and I just stood still for the close ups. I never ever
overdid the fight scenes again, and I shall never stop being grateful to
Terry Walsh.
‘The Ark in Space’ written by a deadly professional writer, Bob
Holmes, who was also the script editor at that time, was something about
a space station where the whole future population of earth was stored in
deep freeze. The set was by Roger Murray Leach. It was marvellous, all
curves and slopes. A bit hard on the camera crew but it worked out very

well for all of us. The monster was called the Wirrn and was a hideous
sort of giant bug that wanted to eat the sleeping humans. It was really
grisly and very well done by Stuart Fell, I believe, despite the costume
made out of green blister pack. Of course with the help of Lis Sladen
and Ian Marter I overcame the Wirrn and returned to earth.
When Philip Hinchcliffe took over as producer we became very
friendly and laughed a lot. He, Bob Holmes and I often met and
discussed scripts. Philip pushed ahead with the Sword-and-Sorcery style
of scripts, as he called those inspired by fairytale and King Arthur, and
they were very successful. He and I were always at ease together and he
certainly developed and consolidated the programme during his time in
charge.
By now I was getting to know Lis Sladen and Ian Marter rather well
and life became full of fun. When we were in hotels or pubs on location
we usually had our meals together and discussed the day’s filming and
swopped ideas for the next day’s work with our director. Lis sometimes
talked about the Dalek stories she had done with Jon Pertwee and we all
looked forward to Terry Nation’s script in six parts called (wait for it)
‘Genesis of the Daleks’. I was already meeting small numbers of fans
who constantly wanted to talk about my attitude towards Daleks. Of all
the monsters in all the stories, I have no doubt that the Daleks were the
most successful. They could not go upstairs, of course, and they always
screeched at the top of their voices about how they were about to destroy
me but somehow, with the help of Lis Sladen and the writers, I always
escaped them.
When we were rehearsing at BBC North Acton, the chaps playing the
Daleks never wore their top bits. This meant that during the scenes when
they were threatening me, they held out their right arms in place of the
regular sink plungers. They took it all very seriously, of course, and this

only added to the fun. Very often the cast of Z Cars would creep into the
back of the rehearsal room and watch us with delight. They particularly
liked my turn-of-the-century style of pretending to be frightened. Frank
Windsor told me that I reminded him very much of his Great-aunt Mimi
who never married because she was frightened of men, whom she saw as
aliens from another planet. I was very flattered by this and I filed away
the idea that perhaps, if they wouldn’t let me play Lady Bracknell, I
could do Miss Prism in the style of Frank Windsor’s Aunt Mimi.
As the rehearsals went on it seemed to me that the BBC was missing
an opportunity to make two programmes for the price of one. If they had
recorded the rehearsals and the arguments that went on, they could have
cut some excellent stuff for light entertainment. Our director, David
Maloney, had just as much difficulty as the rest of us keeping a straight
face. Michael Wisher, who can seriously be described as the creator of
the character of Davros, used to work with a kilt on and paper bag over
his head to maintain his feel for the part. He took his work so seriously
that he would not remove the bag even at coffee break. To see coffee and
biscuits being pushed under the paper bag, followed by a cigarette, while
the bag continued to express the most passionate views on how Davros
felt about things was just bliss. He did allow us to make a hole in the top
of his bag so that the smoke could escape.
If I wasn’t in the scenes being rehearsed, I spent as much time as I
could with Dennis Chinnery who was playing a small part in the Davros
story and who was also the world’s greatest authority on the
Shakespearean actor-manager of the 1940s, Robert Atkins. As far as I
know Dennis never did a one-man show on the subject of Atkins, but I
wish he had. From what he told me, I think Robert Atkins would have
approved of my style of doing things, and might well have given me a
job.

Great discussions ensued during rehearsal when we examined the
section of the script that dealt with the possible abortion of the Daleks. It
really was a scream. I am trying to remember if it was David Maloney
who put in the line, ‘Have I the right?’ as I played with the Dalek
umbilical cord. Of course, I didn’t interfere with destiny and that must
have been a great relief to Terry Nation who was really quite fond of his
Daleks. Who could possibly blame him? To have created the creatures
that terrified millions of children all over the world was an amazing
achievement. And so I blew the chance of changing the whole history of
the planet Earth. Looking back on it I can’t say I regret it. Perhaps if the
Daleks had been the inventors of tobacco the BBC would have asked me
to cut the cord. Who knows?
It was not long after the Dalek story that I proposed that the
Cybermen adventure should start with a clip from a Fred Astaire movie.
The idea was that the Cybermen had got hold of an old film and liked
the way Fred Astaire moved. Naturally they also liked Ginger Rogers
who could do everything Fred did while travelling backwards in high-
heeled shoes. You may recall that Cybermen moved as if their knickers
were twisted, and not only twisted, but tightly twisted, too. Anyway, I
said it would be funny if we started on a clip of Fred and Ginger dancing
wonderfully. Then the camera should pan across and reveal Sarah-Jane
and me tied to a post. And the first challenge from the Cybermen would
be that we should teach them how to move as gracefully as Fred and
Ginger. Bob Holmes, the script editor, did laugh and filled his pipe so
that he could create a smoke screen between us while he turned the idea
down. I didn’t really mind. Most of my ideas were rejected and I got
used to it. One can get fond of almost anything, even rejection.
So we did the script the way it was written. William Marlowe and
Ronald Leigh-Hunt were the visiting stars and they played it really
straight and were therefore hilarious. Just as Daleks could not go

upstairs, Cybermen could not live if there was any gold dust in the air.
Sadly, we never did devise a little gold-powder spray. As usual we blew
them up. It used to get a bit monotonous solving things by explosion, it
was so like the real world just outside the BBC. There was a character
called Sheprah, played by a very funny actor named Brian Grellis. He
had the idea of playing his robot as an asthmatic. This meant that when
he tapped his chest to clear his throat he had a coughing fit. The whole
cast thought it was very funny but it was cut at the recording, thus
depriving children of a great deal of fun and Brian Grellis of the chance
to further his career. Fortunately, he was a very good carpenter and this
allowed him to earn a few jam butties when he was resting.
The really big drama on this tale was not the script but the disaster of
nearly losing Lis Sladen while on location. We were filming at the
underground lakes, all sinister black water at Wookey Hole. Elisabeth
clambered into her little, paddleless, craft and pushed out, and we rolled
the cameras. About sixty feet away from her was a low arch, no more
than three feet high, beyond which the black water ran and dropped into
black nothingness. As the director called action, as if by magic, a current
appeared in the treacly water and started to draw Elisabeth to her doom
beyond the arch. Terry Walsh, our stunt arranger, was marvellously
quick to spot the danger; he dived straight in like Superman and pushed
the boat to safety and Elisabeth survived the fright. Even despite this
episode, everybody found the long hours underground very oppressive
and we were glad when we could finish and get on to our next
adventure, ‘Terror of the Zygons’.
Douglas Camfield was an excellent director. He ran the whole film
unit like an army unit. His second-in-command was one of his favourite
PAs, Edwina Craze. Douglas had plenty of bottle and wasn’t at all
anxious that the Zygon computers looked like abandoned pizzas. He also
had the excellent idea of having the monsters whisper their threats. This

made a change from shrieking Daleks. We filmed in Sussex, though we
were meant to be in Scotland, but the Loch Ness monster connection got
us a lot of publicity and, with a really astonishing performance from
John Woodnutt as a duke and a monster, we were watched by more than
eight million people.
During the shooting of ‘Planet of Evil’ we filmed at Ealing Studios
before going back to the BBC for the rehearsals of the interior shots at
North Acton. Philip Hinchcliffe was not at the last day of filming and his
absence led to a happy coincidence. There was a scene in which I had to
seize some poor alien and threaten to kill him with a knife in order to
persuade his comrades to reveal their leader to me. It was a very
ordinary little scene; so ordinary that I hadn’t really read it properly.
When the knife was offered to me I felt suddenly impatient and then
disgusted with the idea of using such a coarse threat in our lovely
programme. The line I was to say ran, ‘Take me to your leader or I’ll kill
him with this knife’. Yes, I think it was as plonking as that. So I refused
to say it. We had very little time left on our final day of filming to get
this scene in the can and my refusal caused a problem for David
Maloney, the director. In Philip’s absence he had to log the scene I was
causing about my lines. I didn’t really care. David and I were very
friendly colleagues and he knew I was not just being difficult. But,
without the producer there, who could take responsibility for a line
change? Me, of course.
We rolled the cameras and, as written, I grabbed some pitiful little
native of Zeta Minor, pulled him close, and said: ‘Take me to your leader
or I’ll kill him with this deadly jelly baby.’ When the other little Zetas
agreed to comply, I bit the head off the jelly baby (orange was my
favourite) and I think I offered the rest of it to the captured Zeta. That’s
the way I remember it. I don’t think David Maloney was too thrilled
with my effort and, reading this now, neither am I, but there you are, we

did it, and that was the end of filming. We all went off to resume our
lives and met up again a few days later at North Acton for the rehearsals.
I asked David how the rushes were and he said they were fine (directors
and producers always say that rushes are fine, sometimes they say they
are fantastic and sometimes some actors believe them). But a few
minutes after I had seen David in came Philip Hinchcliffe.
‘How were the rushes?’ I asked him.
‘Oh, terrific,’ said Philip, ‘really fantastic. I loved that bit with the
jelly baby.’
When at last the episode was aired, the children loved the scene and
realized that I was bluffing the Zetas who wouldn’t know a jelly baby
from a kangaroo. It made just as much or as little sense as a knife. It was
really gratifying to have had that little bit of encouragement from Philip,
since most of my ideas were thrown out very quickly. I hold no grudges
against anyone for that reaction because most of my ideas were truly
terrible.
All this happened in October 1975. A few weeks ago, in a bookshop
in Manchester, a child of about ten offered me a jelly baby. He was so
happy when I laughed, then he quoted my line, and it was my turn to be
happy.
The viewing figures for ‘Terror of the Zygons’ were easily surpassed
by David Maloney’s production of ‘The Talons of Weng-Chiang’, written
by Bob Holmes. He said the tale was based on The Phantom of the
Opera and some of Sax Rohmer’s tales of Fu Manchu and pretended to
be amazed when I said that I had noticed the origins.
The locations - the moody sewers around St Catherine’s Dock and the
beautiful C. J. Phipps theatre in Northampton - were wonderful, and the
characters ripe. London sewers in the late nineteenth century, giant rats,

villainous Chinese Tongs and Christopher Benjamin and Trevor Baxter
doing a great double act, like Naunton Wayne and Basil Radford in The
Lady Vanishes. There were magic tricks arranged by Ali Bongo and
Larry Barnes and a homunculus played by Deep Roy. I felt we were on
to a winner, and we were.
These were the early days of the character of Leela, played by Louise
Jameson. I can remember not liking the Leela character. I don’t have
much of a sense of humour so the ironies in Leela escaped me.
Whenever she was threatened (her character that is) she simply slapped a
Janus thorn into the nearest male buttocks. I didn’t much like this - it
made me very protective of the chaps and very mistrustful of Leela; I
was afraid even to turn my back, let alone bend down. This meant that I
felt a bit stifled at the rehearsals. I couldn’t find any ideas to help us out.
Fortunately David Maloney was in form and the visiting actors pulled it
together brilliantly. John Bennett did a great turn as the sinister Li H’sen
and I really think he enjoyed it. I know we did. My performance in this
piece led to me being offered the part of Sherlock Holmes years later in
Hound of the Baskervilles.
*    *    *    *    *
After a while, following three or four thousand fan letters, all expressing
approval, I began to get into the part and then the part began to get into
me and oh! I was the Doctor and the Doctor was me. From then on, we
were one. I could do nothing else. In 1978, when we came to make the
hundredth Doctor Who story, ‘The Stones of Blood’, I’d been playing the
part for four years. By now, Graham Williams was the producer and he
and I were not close. By this I mean that he often disagreed with me,
though I have to admit that his casting was sometimes fun, and for that
reason I have good memories of him. After one has been to a good
dinner party the people who weren’t there always ask about the people
who were there. And if the people who were there were fun or dreadful

or, better still, simply wonderful, then you have a captive audience at the
office next morning. Well, at ‘The Stones of Blood’ party (host Darrol
Blake) it was terrific.
The storyline was something to do with the Key to Time, a subject so
serious that all we could do was howl with laughter. There were
creatures called Ogri who were made of stone but fed on blood. They
were crude symbols of big businessmen and just as dull. The real
pleasure was when the Doctor met a girl called Vivien Fay who was four
thousand years old. It was said that our producer had tried to get Molly
Parkin for the part but that her agent, some ex-Cardinal or other, wanted
so little money that the bookers at the BBC smelled a rat. I was never
able to confirm that story so it may just have been malice on somebody’s
part. Anyway God was on our side and we got Susan Engel. She was
obviously too young but never mind. That was the first bit of fun chez
the Ogri, blood-suppers that they were. No matter what was going on in
rehearsals, I couldn’t wait to leave the floor to get back to Susie Engel
and her tales of her aunts in Vienna’s patisseries: ‘Go on Sadie, put some
jam on it and make it really nice.’
The second bit of amazement for us guests was Professor Rumford,
played by Beatrix Lehmann. Now Beatrix had a powerful line in
heavenly hypnotism. To be with her was to feel grateful for life. So
many theatricals make one long for death — and occasionally they fit in
with one’s mood — but Beatrix was just wonderful.
The third magic strand to this little BBC do was a girl by the name of
Elaine Ives-Cameron. Why she has never become a great star I cannot
even guess. She was a tall, slightly built, dark and beautiful girl, an
exquisite spider-like creature who could walk through a door, say hello,
and turn your blood to quicksilver. She was dangerous just to look at. I
won’t ask you to imagine what it was like to have a hot, toasted teacake

with Elaine; you wouldn’t believe me anyway. But I can tell you this,
I’ve never had a teacake like it. No canteen is the same without Elaine
Ives-Cameron. And why she isn’t a world-famous actress baffles me. All
I can offer by way of an explanation is that there is no truth, no justice
and no God in this industry; apart from Bill Kenwright and Elaine would
dilute his tan, which perhaps is why he has never employed her.
Evenings at the hotel were such fun during this bit of tosh. Bea
Lehmann took a real shine to John Leeson, the voice of the insufferable
K9 (Canine). During the run of the series I had to be a bit tactful on the
subject of K9. Graham Williams knew that I didn’t like it but we glossed
over our hatreds by simply ignoring them. It was a bit like the days of
my religious mania. If we didn’t mention a problem then it didn’t exist.
It was no use trying to tell our producer that John Leeson’s performance
in rehearsal was sublime, poor Graham couldn’t see things like that, he
was hopelessly earthbound. I have read that people say he crawled about
the floor with enthusiasm - John Leeson, that is, not the producer - but
that is not true. The mischievous quality and the affection in John’s
voice was reflected in his performance at the North Acton rehearsal
rooms. Only the actors can know that. When I gave K9 an order or
praised him for being clever we used to cut to this boring,
expressionless, little robot and nothing could nourish the viewers. Some
people said that the creation of it was to do with the commercial arm of
the BBC looking for something to exploit. I can’t believe that. But in my
opinion the dog was a disaster compared to what John Leeson could
have done. The wonderful thing about John Leeson's performance was
that he helped the scenes to move swiftly and often very wittily. He
would scamper about, stand on his back legs and smile and was just so
expressive that we were captivated. But our producer was already
committed to the tin dog that I disliked so much.

Every shot was the same because the dog was on the floor. Two-shots
had to be realized by me kneeling down. If there happened to be a
matchstick on the ground K9 stopped abruptly. John used to scamper
about and be terribly concerned with the tensions of the tale. Sometimes
we could hardly contain our love for him. I wanted to do scenes where I
gave him biscuits for being clever and which allowed the viewer to see
that K9 used to put the biscuits back for me to have later. This meant
that if he thought that I had been clever then he could give me a biscuit.
I hope I’m not making too much of this. It’s just that I feel that the
series could have had another astonishing character which would have
appealed to the children among our audience and to the parents, too.
Adults are always pleased by what makes their children happy. I
remember being pinched in Harrods by some delirious granny who
adored Doctor Who. And why? Because when the children were
frightened they would bury their faces in her bosom. Every Saturday she
would hope the story would be terrifying so that her little ones would
cling to her like sticky buds. And they did, and I got pinched by the
grateful grannies and I was grateful in my turn.
Back at the hotel with Beatrix Lehmann, John Leeson and I just
lapped up her stories. She was so taken with John that she gave him a
lovely Leica camera. She was so taken with me that she allowed me to
buy her a drink and three times she winked at me. She knew that John
was a keen photographer but she rightly sensed that I preferred winks to
cameras. Over a few evenings she told us things from her past. How she
had known Ralph Richardson as a young man and washed his shirts. She
told us he was very bossy and wanted to give her notes on her
performance all the time. And it became clear that she had admired him
very much and considered him a friend. Anyway, as time passed he
elbowed her and she was deeply wounded.

About a year after this snub she was at some smart party or other and
who else should be there but himself. She spotted him across the room
and detecting his shiftiness made certain that he couldn’t escape her by
remaining between him and the door. As the party went on there was a
movement of people and suddenly Ralph was alone and Beatrix
pounced.
‘Hello, Ralph.’
Ralph looked at her amazed.
‘Good God! Didn’t I once meet you at a party at the French
Embassy?’
Beatrix looked at him sadly. ‘Ralph, Ralph.’
He said: ‘Yes, it was at the French Embassy and I think, no, I’m sure,
Herr von Ribbentrop was there. I think.’
Bea said: ‘Ralph, Ralph, it’s Bea. Why are you pretending? Why do
you do this, Ralph?’
She said that he looked hunted and haunted and, glancing about, he
said:
‘Bea, the thing is you see, I have absolutely no personality of my
own.’ And as somebody else approached them he reverted to his
opening dottiness:
“Yes, the French Embassy, that was it and you were wearing a thing,
long and full of silk. Nice to see you again.’
And he was off to seek another scene.
And there we were, John Leeson and I, hearing the little tale from
fifty-one years ago. And it was just good to be with her and the whole
encounter was so much more interesting than the script we were doing.
It was Beatrix’s last performance. We watched her riding a bicycle and

we shivered with fear. And so, although I can’t recall the script, I still
feel grateful to those three women and to John Leeson, who if he’d been
allowed to be a dog could have been immortal.
In the meantime, I worked hard at raising the audience figures. There
were BBC exhibitions around the country at places like Longleat and in
towns such as Blackpool. These shows were run by Terry Samson, the
head of exhibitions at the BBC, and his assistant Lorne Martin. They
realized I was enthusiastic to help and so they took care of all the travel
schedules and the accommodation. At the Doctor Who exhibition in
Blackpool the children always signed their names, gave their dates of
birth and wrote in their addresses. Children like doing that sort of thing.
This meant that through the year I could send out birthday cards all over
the country. Wherever we were, I was writing messages to children I’d
never met. That didn’t matter as they used to meet me every Saturday
during the season on the telly.
The effect of these cards was dramatic. Sometimes we would send
them to schools but usually they’d go to the children’s own homes. We
heard that these cards caused little explosions of interest in any street
and this led to a large increase in viewers. I knew all this from the letters
that came back to the office. It was also great fun to do. Terry Samson
organized visits to schools all over the country. I was taken to visit dying
children in the hope that my presence might help the poor things. I
cannot say what anguish this was, as distraught parents watched while I
repeated what they told me might rouse their child. It never did but they
insisted I try and were so sweet even in my constant failure. They would
thank me for trying. Thank me!
I did long signing sessions, too. On one occasion at Longleat, the
Marquis of Bath’s place, it needed an army platoon to get me to the
signing desk. They had perhaps twenty thousand visitors. I smiled and

signed for seven hours. The cramp was so bad I had to be helped away
from the table and into some tea tent. As Terry supported me along the
way we passed two fat harpies who jeered at me: ‘Pissed already?’ They
could not imagine my murderous thoughts. Of course they couldn’t, they
couldn’t imagine anything at all. All this activity became an extension of
the show. It meant that I never stopped being the Doctor. The endless
enthusiasm of the children and parents fuelled us all.
Sometimes the events left the staff with the problem of having to calm
down the children for a long time afterwards, but they never complained.
Once when I was in a closed ward for children, an eleven-year-old boy
who hadn’t spoken for nearly a year came out of his secret world and
embraced me very cheerfully. The doctors and nurses were so pleased.
And I was able to avoid myself during all these activities and pursue the
fantasy life of the benevolent alien. It suited me very well. I’ve never
liked myself much and being able to escape the despised self kept me in
good spirits.
The welcomes and the smiles came from all levels of the audience.
There was no hostility anywhere, I think because the character I played
didn’t threaten anyone. It was all rather dotty and the tumultuous
welcome from children gave me the imprimatur of approval. If they
approved then so did the rest of their families. The days all mixed, and
rehearsals and recordings and appearances for charities all mixed. I
became used to being called Doctor by real doctors and nurses and the
pleasure the children derived from all this was enough to make me
happy. It was no great sacrifice, I can tell you.
By the time we reached ‘The Deadly Assassin’ in 1976 I was
completely immersed in the part of the Doctor. The character was a
wonderful cover for my smallness of mind and my lack of real courage.
The children all assumed I was the Doctor and they responded

accordingly. I tried so hard never to disappoint them but being a
charlatan is exhausting work. Never once was I challenged by anyone to
‘come outside and let’s see how hard you really are.’ I went to any
lengths to avoid unpleasant scenes. I carried dramatic pictures and jelly
babies by the hundred and little cards of all descriptions to give out to
anybody who smiled or scowled.
In ‘The Deadly Assassin’ there was a scene where I was being held
under water and where I had to appear genuinely afraid of death. It
wasn’t too hard for me to do this because I really am very afraid of water
and I suppose this fear made me overdo the terror. David Maloney said it
was very powerful and this made me faintly ill at ease. I didn’t see the
editing, and the broadcast came as I happened to be going through
Preston on the way back from the Doctor Who exhibition in Blackpool. I
was with Terry Samson and talking to him about this episode and my
anxiety about the water sequence. Terry suggested we watch it in the
window of a TV shop. We tried to but all that time ago in Preston the
shop was either closing or the sets were tuned to the other channel. So
the driver took us disappointedly off through some suburb or other and,
as he slowed down on a corner, I saw a couple of kids’ bikes in a garden
and wondered if I dared invite myself into the house to see Doctor Who.
Terry encouraged me and stayed tactfully with the driver while I went to
the back door of this house and knocked.
The programme was due at any moment and I felt a bit self-conscious
about barging in on some innocent family at sacred tea time. I need not
have feared. A young man of about thirty opened the door to me and I
asked, ‘Do you watch Doctor Who in this house by any chance?’ For a
split second the young man looked puzzled and then he smiled, opened
the door wide, and simply said, ‘Come in, Doctor.’ And in I went.

As he ushered me into the sitting room I heard the title music and I
quietly sat in the chair the man pointed to. As I took my seat, he pointed
towards two little boys sitting on the sofa, eyes glued to the screen as I
appeared. They watched with terrific intensity as a bit of the drama
unrolled and then, as someone else took up the plot, they lost interest
slightly and glanced up at their dad and then at me. Just as they did so, I
reappeared on the screen and they looked at me there. Their amazement
was simply amazing! They were utterly gobsmacked as the two images
jostled in their heads. They could not grasp how I could be in two places
at once and then, to the delight of their dad, they couldn’t believe Doctor
Who was in their house. What a wonderful hour or so that was.
After the episode ended the two little boys became anxious that
nobody at school would believe them when they said that Doctor Who
had just dropped in at tea time on Saturday. For the first time ever I had
no souvenirs with me: not a picture or jelly baby. Everything had been
used up at the Blackpool event, I suppose. Terry Samson joined me and
his presence and the promise of proofs through the post eased the
children’s anxiety. Terry was as good as his word and better. Pictures
were sent from the BBC and Terry called their local paper. A reporter
was sent round to the house and the children became famous and were
believed. It had to be true, it had been in the newspaper. Oh boy, those
were the days. I was a hero in Preston and all over the world. And now
what? Now I get mistaken for Shirley Williams and scowled at for
closing the grammar schools.
Nowadays I escape into the world of Charles Dickens. What a
Pecksniff I might have been! But any of the great hypocrites would do
me. There is a serene quality in a fine hypocrite that I greatly admire. I
don’t think it’s possible to be a frenzied hypocrite. That wouldn’t do at
all. There is nearly always a sublime self-assurance to a good hypocrite,
don’t you think? Hypocrites are not prone to self-doubt. I always

imagine that great hypocrites have no interior life at all. What you see is
what they are. All good actors have a touch of the hypocrite. I think I
was born to be a hypocrite, all exterior and hollow, but wanting to
amuse. Hypocrites can be very generous; as long as the world is
watching. I’d like to specialize in them: Bounderby, Sapsea, Fosco and
Chadband. Oh, and Turveydrop that master of deportment, he’d be
another good one. I’ll get my agent on to it. Perhaps I could do a one-
man show of hypocrites? And I could call it ‘Hypocrites’ with Tom
Baker.
Once in Chicago, a PhD student who was doing his thesis on ‘The
Improbability of TV Heroes’ remarked to me in front of about a
thousand people that he thought I was a unique actor. As I lowered my
head to hide my pleasure he cited as evidence of his claim my manner of
coming through doors. This brought me up with a jolt and the blood fled
from my cheeks. Was he taking the piss, I wondered? Doors? Doors are
my bêtes noires. I heard John Dexter’s voice echoing in the horror vault
of my memory: ‘You can’t walk through a door sincerely, Baker.’ But
my PhD man was not taking the piss.
‘When I perceive the delicate way you cross the threshold of the
Tardis, Mr Baker, and you close the door with such precision, and you
never lean back against the door the way that most actors do. Why, I just
marvel.’
I thanked him with shameless humility and decided not to explain that
it was often impossible to enter into our sets and close the door
‘naturally’ without the whole set shaking. Not that I objected to the sets
shaking; it was the producers who called for retakes. I could never
persuade them that on other planets the architecture was a bit different.
This led to bickering between us all in the rehearsal room, the bar or the
canteen. I used to see Graham Williams struggling to control himself as I

developed my notions about how it all should be. But he never did lose
his rag with me. And I never stopped insisting that if the Tardis was
bigger on the inside than it was on the outside then it could be very big. I
could not understand why my potting shed should not be the interior of
Wells Cathedral or, indeed, why I should not sometimes get lost there. I
suspected that Graham Williams was longing for me just to get lost
anywhere. But I kept at him. Sometimes I felt that the entire production
office was staffed by people from another world, a world that was
preventing the Tardis world from being wonderful. This was because my
judgement was a bit wonky. As the part took hold of me I began to think
that the entire BBC was colonized with hostile aliens who were slyly
spreading a hideous and incurable virus of ordinariness. This could not
have been the case but it was the way I was seeing things.
At one time I toyed with the idea of suggesting that Doctor Who and
K9, with John Leeson in vision, should take over the Open University.
I'd seen some Open University stuff and thought it was so turgid we
could do it better. It even flashed through my mind that perhaps we
could take over the whole National Education programme in Whitehall.
But I stayed schtum in case they locked me up.
The response of the children gave me these delusions. I felt I could do
anything if only the stories were good. My lack of identity was so
complete and the vacuum so deep that I found myself wanting to run
Save the Children or the United Nations from North Acton rehearsal
rooms. But it didn't happen as you probably know. And I have never
mentioned all this until now.
Madame Tussaud’s called the office and wanted to make me into an
effigy, or whatever they call it, in Marylebone Road. Yes, I said, and
went along to be operated on. It was probably rather uncomfortable but I
was so far removed from such a trite consideration as discomfort that it

passed without notice. I do remember that nearby was an undressed
figure in wax of Barbara Cartland and when my sculptress turned her
back I jabbed old Cartland with a sharp tool I was holding; how silly that
was.
To be in the waxworks and from a hiding place see the children gather
about my effigy and take photographs gave me great pleasure. It was
rather a good likeness, too. Years later when I turned down the chance to
be in a special programme called The Five Doctors, they simply used my
wax effigy. Nobody noticed any difference. So much for my acting.

E I G H T E E N
Once in a taxi in London about 1976 I asked the driver to take me to
Chepstow Gardens, Notting Hill Gate. The pick- up took place in Soho
and we were facing the wrong way in the rush hour. As most people are,
I was glad to find a cab and suitably humble once I was inside. For two
or three minutes the driver ignored me and I thought I was going to get a
little rest on the way home; I was slightly plastered from a couple of
hours in the Colony Room. Then the sliding window was pushed along
at the next red light and he bawled above the noise: ‘It’s a pleasure to
have you in the cab, Mr Pertwee.’
‘It’s a pleasure to be in the cab,’ I replied, being patient in my gin and
tonic.
‘You know, Mr Pertwee, my wife thinks you’re the business.’
‘Really?’ I smiled, wondering if I’d ever get the chance to pass this
compliment on to Mr Pertwee, whoever he was.
‘Oh, yes’, relished the cabbie, warming to a celebrity on board, ‘my
wife . . . whoops, bloody idiot’, as some innocent soul without a creature
from outer space to share her car came a bit close to us, ‘my wife thinks
that you, get this Mr Pertwee, she thinks that you are sexy.’
He glanced in his mirror to see how Mr Pertwee was taking this
promotion to sex symbol. ‘What do you think of that, then?’ he asked
triumphantly, as though he was the man from Littlewoods with the Big
News and Joanna Lumley on his arm. I tried to look incredulous, but
because of the gin and being slumped in the corner of the cab my shrug

of amazement was probably a trifle less than convincing. ‘Are you all
right, Mr Pertwee?’ asked my interrogator.
‘Oh, fine,’ I bellowed, longing for us to be crushed under a passing
juggernaut, anything to shut him up. Death itself would have been a
relief from him.
‘Well? What does it feel like to be desired by my wife, then?’ he
asked, looking at me with his head cocked on one side like a lecherous
old panda.
‘Very flattering,’ I screamed, as a juggernaut with the chance to put
me out of my misery turned me down and roared past.
‘What did you say?’ shouted Torquemada. What did you say?’
Leaning forward, I yelled clearly and with articulation, ‘I’m very
flattered.’
It suddenly went quiet as we came to a juggernaut-free zone. The cab
driver roared with laughter and over his shoulder he said, ‘You wouldn’t
be flattered if you saw my wife, she’s a right pig.’ And then, turning
right round as if he was going to try and get into the back of the cab with
me, he said, ‘Are you Jewish by any chance?’ The loud hooting from a
passing vehicle made my man change his mind about trying to get into
the back of his own cab through the passenger window and gave me the
respite I needed to wonder what I should answer to the Jewish question.
‘Why do you ask if I’m Jewish?’ I enquired of my torturer.
‘Well, Mr Pertwee, if you’ve ever had a bacon sandwich you’d know
what my wife was like, and if you’ve never had a bacon sandwich . . .’
he continued. Swinging into Moscow Road, and pausing by the pub on
the corner, he said, ‘Do you ever use that pub, Mr Pertwee?’ By now I
was beaten. He had mastered me. All I wanted was to die. And for a few
moments it seemed like I was to have a little convalescence. Then:

‘Were those frilly shirts yours, Mr Pertwee? Or borrowed from the
BBC?’ I must have looked as gobsmacked as I felt. ‘You know, the
fancy shirts you wore when you was being so sarcastic to the monsters.’
And then, with the most wonderful casualness he asked: ‘Who was it
came after you, Mr Pertwee?’
It was a chance for me to try and be myself. Quick as a flash I said:
‘You mean that tall, curly-headed fellow, Tom Baker?’
‘That’s the one,’ agreed the driver. I waited for a tiny glimmer of a
word of praise, anything not to be Mr Pertwee for a moment. ‘That’s the
one,’ exclaimed my master. ‘What a piss artist he was, do you know he
was always drunk, used to throw up all over the place. What happened to
him then, Mr Pertwee, I never see him on the box these days?’ Desperate
for some reassurance, maddened by this crisis of who I wasn’t, I pushed
out my plea for a small gesture of affection from a cab driver.
‘Didn’t you hear?’ I said, perched only on my coccyx as I leaned
forward to catch a crumb of kindness. ‘Didn’t you hear, he died in a
basement flat in Clapham, not a pot to piss in.’ And I added, to
guarantee some humane response: ‘He’s buried over that way at Saint
Michael and All the Holy Angels, Elm Road.' This invention of a parish
and a road I thought was a stroke of eloquence. No answer.
And then from Charon, ‘What a tosspot.’
Distraught for a kind obituary from him, I added, out of God knows
what wastepaper basket of my mind, ‘If you go to the grave, you can
actually smell the fumes of Carlsberg Special.’ And in despair, I gilded it
with, ‘Sometimes, you can see some skint old alkie lying on the grave
having a sniff.’ I watched and hoped, like a dog that’s been kicked
nineteen times hopes that the kicking is over and the kicker for a change
might become St Francis of Assisi and fondle him.

But, ‘Well here we are Mr Pertwee.’
As I got out of the cab he said, producing a little red book, ‘Would
you just do the business for the grandchildren before you go, Mr
Pertwee?' And then, and this is a sign of how reduced I was, I gave him
a two-pound tip and signed his autograph book, ‘Happy Days, from who
on earth is Tom Baker?’ I handed him the book and, without glancing at
it, he slung it on to the dashboard.
As I turned away, some happy piss artist weaved by us clutching his
can of lager. ‘Possibly the Greatest Lager in the World’, intoned the
driver with a quite good impression of a TV voice-over. This was
twenty-one years ago, and I still tremble when I have to use a cab.
On charity trips to Belfast I was carted about by the British Army. I
took great care to hug my long scarf close to me. The blades of the
helicopter filled me with thoughts of Isadora Duncan. As my scarf was
twenty feet long it went through my mind that should it get entangled in
the blades of a chopper it would swing me clean out of the Province. But
the same thought had gone through the pilot’s head and we were all very
careful. To guard against charges of partiality, I went to Protestant and
Catholic schools. It was an amazing sensation to receive the same wildly
affectionate reception.
‘The Doctor’s here,’ they shrieked. Coming from another place -
Gallifrey, in the constellation of Casterborous - allowed me to be very
casual with everybody. They didn’t expect me to have a bias and I didn’t
disappoint them. All prejudice was forgotten. All the children wanted to
know was if I was afraid of monsters. I was constantly invited to listen
to whispers on how to solve the Dalek problem.
‘Just run up the stairs, Doctor, and they’ll be foxed,’ whispered seven-
year-old children. And their pleasure at my amazed reaction is a
precious memory. But the same reaction came from the tense young

soldiers. The appearance of the Doctor reminded them of teatimes past,
of Basil Brush and meals of baked beans served by ‘Me Mam’, at home
where they were loved and didn’t have to walk backwards in fear for
their lives. So the healing power of popular drama was clear. Doctor
Who fans don’t fight. Why should they? They are all agreed that he’s the
tops. I often feel the same about rock and roll. Rockers don’t fight much
either. Rock bonds them together. Rock music has been a vitally
important influence for peace among the young. It is the universal
language of youth. I have occasionally been to rock concerts and the
friendliness of the fans always amazed me.
Football, too, can be a help in cultivating friendship. But it has to be
the football of the past, mellowed with age and the memories of when
we were all young. If you're in Hungary, and they discover that you’re
from Liverpool, out come ejaculations of joy and amazement. 'Bill
Shankley!’ says someone and everyone nods and murmurs approval.
And you come back with, ‘Pushkas,’ and they all roar and embrace you.
Now, of course, the magic name is ‘Ooh Ah Cantona’. The supreme Eric
of our times. When the name of a great god is mentioned, it often defeats
words. Shoulders shrug and heads nod; hands wave and lips are curled
down to express the simple phrase: ‘What a man!’
For a few years it was like that for me. To be a children’s hero was
my supreme pleasure and pride. ‘Don’t talk to strange men,' did not
apply to me. In any family where there were children I was welcome. In
the park I could buy the ice cream and goodies and they would sit by me
on the park bench and laugh, and when an anxious mother came rushing
up to find out who this man was in the Burberry coat and fright wig, as
they thought of my hair, the children would be embarrassed and mutter,
‘Go away, Mum, it’s Doctor Who.’

There were no exceptions as long there was telly. A small Arab boy
was introduced to me in the Fulham Road. ‘Look, Ahmed, it’s Doctor
Who, say hello to him.’ And the little fellow held my hands tightly and
said, ‘I think I am about to faint.’
Fortunately I always had jolly pictures and badges with me. Never
trust an actor who doesn’t carry at least a hundred pictures of himself.
Show me such an actor and I’ll show you someone with a sense of
identity; or, worse, a man with a private life. For more than six years I
left myself and floated about as a hero. Nobody was allowed to smoke or
swear near me. I always sat down if I could for the children were always
a bit alarmed at my height.
Once, walking along Westbourne Grove I was surrounded by a group
of ecstatic children and for ten minutes or so I entertained them and their
teacher. As they went off, chortling with pleasure and waving
affectionately to me, I noticed a young Greek shopkeeper watching me.
As I turned to go on my way he said, ‘Everybody knows you, Doctor,
and I was thinking as I watched you with those children, who knows
me? Who knows Dimitri? When I walk down the street nobody knows
Dimitri, no children hold out their arms to me.’ And he was right and I
shall never forget it. Once I was a hero.
The students of St Andrew’s University wanted me to put my name
forward as Rector. The ultimate expression of student power was to
appoint a fiction to the governing body. But I turned them down when I
discovered that I was not the first choice. By universal acclamation Basil
Brush was announced as their first selection. He was my hero, too.
While we were on our little tours about the country to promote the
programme, I was often pulled by women who were keen fantasists. The
Star Trek women seemed to be very libidinous and extremely forward.
But, of course, there were Who fans and Dracula fans and ex-nuns, too,

who were all keen to have a slice of me. I had never been so sought after
in my life before.
George Simenon, the creator of Maigret once remarked that the world
is divided into two groups, the Spankers and the Spankees. Simenon was
very sure of himself but when I noticed that remark I was inclined to
disagree with him. I don’t want to suggest that I’m an authority on this
harmless little hobby, but I certainly came across a good few of them
while on the road as Doctor Who. Simenon didn’t mention that a
Spanker, if the conditions are right, can become a Spankee and vice
versa.
Once when I was out on a promotion for the Doctor, I accepted an
invitation for coffee in someone’s hotel room. She seemed so proper and
serious when she asked me up. Several large gins later I entered her
room for a coffee which became a green Chartreuse! After a couple of
those holy sips and with a few clothes left on I suddenly noticed that
there was a Bible on the bedside table and that laid across the Bible was
a whip. I must admit that these scenes scared me a bit. I didn’t like the
whip to be too fierce and I cheated on the bondage. By that I mean I
always made sure I wasn’t too tightly bound and I never allowed myself
to be noosed or hooded. Personally I prefer tickling to the whip but
there’s a price for everything and one has to take the rough with the
smooth. A good few of these women wanted to whip or cane me. For
most of them it was probably as a punishment for my performance, so I
couldn’t complain too much. But when it was my turn to be the spanker
my passion would fade a bit. Sometimes the screams and moans
provoked knocking on the wall from some poor rep trying to get some
sleep in the room next door. And at the cries, ‘Harder! Harder!’ I
frequently got softer and softer. But that’s life, I suppose.

One young university don asked me if I had my costume with me. I
said no, but that I had three hundred pictures of myself and would one
do? She looked at me and then looked towards the open wardrobe
behind me.
‘Isn’t that your scarf hanging out of that suitcase on the shelf?’
‘Scarf?’ I said. ‘Scarf? What scarf, where?’
‘This scarf here,’ she said brazenly flicking open the lid of my BBC
costume case.
‘Oh, that costume?’ I said. ‘I thought you meant my swimming
costume, and the reason I said no is because I can’t swim, you see . . .’
‘Can I just look at it?’ she asked with the sort of smile that suggested
she was perhaps a superior second hand clothes dealer.
‘Oh, certainly, certainly,’ I said, thinking, Christ, she’s going to ask
me to wear my costume while we do the deed. But no, she didn’t want
me to put the costume on - oh no, she wanted to put it on herself. And
she did and she looked terrific and as she threw herself wantonly on to
the wide Holiday Inn bed she growled: ‘Come on, Doctor, let’s travel
through space.’ She really did say that. She did. I nearly laughed in her
face at the line. But then we were not in our right minds at the time and
we had been drinking champagne. I managed to travel as far as the bed
and then I fell aboard. As we grappled like demented stoats and her in
my gear I kept thinking I was shagging myself. At least she didn't want
to whip me, which made a change. But for a long time after, the
questions, ‘Are you a swinger?’ or worse, ‘Do you swing?’ used to make
me fear the end might be nigh.
*    *    *    *    *
By late 1978 we had Douglas Adams as our script editor and he was full
of energy. He had just written the first part of ‘The Hitchhiker's Guide to

the Galaxy’, and his first story for Doctor Who, ‘The Pirate Planet’. It
was something to do with a planet that could hop about the Universe and
suck out the energy of other planets. The earth was threatened and that’s
where I came in. It is too long ago for me to remember the storyline but I
can vividly remember the performance of Bruce Purchase as the rogue
captain of Zanek. He was half-robot and had a mechanical parrot
fastened to his left shoulder. It was a very funny performance. Years
later when I was invited to be in ‘Treasure Island’ as Long John Silver, I
remembered Bruce’s performance and applied some of his extravagance
to my own.
By now I had done more than 120 episodes and felt so proprietorial
about the part of the Doctor that I found it hard to take direction or notes
from the directors. I don’t mean there was any great hostility between
us; it would be truer to say that the directors sensed my difficulty and
were very sympathetic. Part of the problem was the fact that I was so
familiar with the formula. I knew where all the shots were in the Tardis
and often had to remind directors that we had filmed a sequence in such
or such a way only the week before. And then I became too sensitive to
the dialogue I was given. Of course, I usually did my job which was to
act the lines provided by the office. But after a time I felt that I could
write my part better than the writers. I was wrong, but I think that
Graham Williams found me tiresome.
Under June Hudson’s influence my costume became more and more
operatic. This pleased me very much. Some people said that my
performance became more and more operatic, too, and they were
probably right. Anyway June Hudson was very influential and she and I
became friendly. We still are. She also designed lovely things for Lalla
Ward, who had now taken over the part of my ‘assistant’. Lalla was
marvellously witty and so good to be with that I fell in love with her.

Later we got married and were happy for a little while. Our wedding
made the national news. How we laughed.
*    *    *    *    *
Douglas Adams's next piece was ‘Shada’, a story in six parts, filmed on
location in Cambridge. It is one of the most talked about stories among
the fans because it was never shown because of a strike at the BBC. We
went off to lovely Cambridge and had a wonderful time. I was staying
just opposite St John’s College where the music scholars go. Every night
a group of undergraduates would come into the pub and sing for us. I
persuaded Pennant Roberts, our director, to put this group of about ten
young singers into the story. As I cycled madly past some college or
other, there they all were. ‘Pardon me boy, is that the Chattanooga Choo-
Choo?’ If it had not been for that strike, those boys might have become
the Who Singers. But it was not to be.
One bit of the script required me to punt along the river and, at a
certain spot, to get my pole stuck in the mud and leave the punt drifting
on out of control. The camera may have been in another punt, I can’t
remember. Anyway, it took an awful lot of takes. My bit was easy
enough as I had an eyeline for when to lose my pole; but the camera
crew had a harder time of it because of the movement in the water. What
made it hard to bear was that about a thousand students were gathered on
the riverbank to watch us. Because they didn’t know the script, they
assumed that I kept getting my pole stuck in the mud through
incompetence. On each take a great roar of derision would go up as my
pole stuck in the mud. They were all probably very good at punting and
seemed to enjoy my mistake. After perhaps fifteen rounds of jeering I
was fed up. I have always found filming in public very difficult. But
when finally we got the shot, the students were convinced that we had
given up on the sequence because I was a bad punter.

So we had all the filming done and then the strike came. For years the
footage lay at the BBC and seemed to be of no possible use. That was all
changed about fifteen years later when ex-producer John Nathan-Turner
devised a way of making a video for the BBC. On various locations at
the Museum of the Moving Image, I faced a camera and told the
audience what we would have done if the strike had not happened. The
fans all seemed interested and the video sold well, I believe.
There had been four producers during my time as the Doctor: Barry
Letts, who had made the decision to employ me in the first place,
followed by Philip Hinchcliffe, followed by Graham Williams and then,
finally, John Nathan-Turner. It would be impossible to have a nicer man
than Graham Williams as a producer, and indeed for a lot of the time we
got on very well. But there was something about me that made Graham
insecure. As time went by there was increasing tension between us and
I'm sorry to say I was probably at fault. He was younger than I was and
yet I thought of him as older. I grated on his nerves a bit and some of my
notions just exhausted him. They exhausted me. By the time he finished
as producer things were very cool between us.
I had known John as the production unit manager for Graham
Williams. He was very friendly and very knowledgeable about the
programme and was naturally keen to influence it, and he did, and that
was fine: for him. I was now finding the work a little arduous and the
new characters who had been brought into the series didn’t stimulate me
at all. It was time to go.
It had been an amazing period for me. After seven years I had come
to think of it as my programme. How silly I was. The thought of leaving
it after 178 episodes, the equivalent of forty-five feature films, filled me
with apprehension. I pretended to be philosophical about it and I really
did think that I could beat the problem of being typecast. But I couldn’t.

N I N E T E E N
I remember going into a hairdresser’s shop in Chelsea to have some of
my hair cut off. As I went in the staff were delighted to see me and
asked for my autograph. I sent out for a bottle of vodka and some peach
juice and we all had a slug of it before the selected cutter got to work.
He was very chatty and it took about forty-five minutes altogether. I told
him to take off quite a lot. He did so and as I strolled out nobody
recognized me. It was a great shock. I felt as if I was invisible, as if I
were dead. But I tried to make the best of it and hoped that new work
would come in to distract me from the death of the Doctor.
There was no quick coming back from the dead. The very success of
the programme and my efforts to promote it were now factors that
worked against me. I think it is very common for actors to feel that they
have died when a job comes to an end, and sometimes they lose
confidence, too, as they are forced back to real life and lines that have
not been written for them.
In my case, real life was something I was only very tenuously
connected to. The hardest thing of all was to be aware that I was no
longer a hero to children. I had become used to being greeted ecstatically
by children and their parents everywhere. I suffered dreadful withdrawal
symptoms, I was bereaved of my fictional existence which was so much
more important to me than a real one. During this visit into my past I
realize that the reason I was so obsessed with religion and going to
church was that I wanted to get away from me and find a fantasy that I
could immerse myself in. As a boy, the idea of being a martyr, of
suffering for some cause, God’s cause, filled me with hope and

happiness. I was delighted to lose my name, to be changed, to be
directed by someone wise, to have a good part.
Now, after seven years of adulation, my future seemed bleak. Nobody
wanted an old Doctor Who. ‘I suppose you’ve retired now,’ people
would say. Retired? Retired? Go back to the only identity that one has
been struggling to escape from all one’s life? What kind of a fate is that?
In the old days of the Music Hall the leading comic turns would
perform in perhaps three or four theatres a night. They would rush from
one to the other, polishing and refining the act. The distance between the
theatres was not large and could easily be managed on foot or by cab.
In the West End the busy drinkers would also move between their
theatres, which were the pubs, in the way that George Robey had done
so long ago. The alehouse run was a cabaret circuit, too. You could test
your new lies in the French Pub and if they didn’t go well there was
always the possibility of more applause in front of another house like the
Swiss Tavern or the Coach and Horses, or the Helvetia in Old Compton
Street if you were feeling particularly insecure. This is true of all pub
crawling. But the movement between alehouses was less to do with the
quality of the beer than the quality, the star quality, of the top turns.
In the square mile of Soho there were probably a couple of dozen
circuits. If fruit and veg was your living then the Blue Posts in Berwick
Street was probably a decent meeting place for you, or the King of
Corsica. If you were an off-duty policeman, an opera singer or an actor
then the Kismet Club in Great Newport Street was a good meeting place.
Down a curved flight of stairs, and with a choice of two bars, the Kismet
Club was the place where the lunatic mixture of anxiety and hope filled
the fetid air and Bing Crosby sang ‘I’m Dreaming of a White Christmas’
all the year round.

The licensee was Maltese Mary, the nom de plume of Mary Dowsie, a
disciplinarian of the old school. Everything that went on here did so on
Mary’s terms. ‘I’ll have no fuckin' swearing in my club’ she would
scream, without the faintest trace of irony. And the Law and the actors
and certain chaps who could always supply a watch and wore camel
coats drank side by side and spun yarns while demented members of the
Opera House chorus sang from Nabucco.
Mary Dowsie’s sole indulgence was henna; her head gleamed like a
horse chestnut in October. Of course, lots of actors and opera singers
have a tendency to go coppery as the times roll by; so Mary’s use of
henna was not criticized, it was merely noticed and its intensity was
frequently the cause of deep sighs from other conker heads. Her
favourite song was ‘The First Time Ever I saw your Face’, sung by
Roberta Flack. If you wanted to cash a cheque it was wise to spend
sixpence in the jukebox before edging up to Mary at the counter and
smiling uncertainly towards her right eye while gently waving your
folded cheque in your left hand.
The other bar was dominated by another Mary, an Irish girl called
Mary Parperis, married to a Greek chap who wore silver-grey suits and
was charming. Mary Parperis’s bar often seemed a bit quieter than Mary
Dowsie’s bar. A rather less noisy group talked horoscopes in a cloud of
Paco Raban and Senior Service ciggies. Actors’ agents sometimes used
this bar and, in the jolly madness of the atmosphere, tales were told of
the lives of great drinkers from the past. The favourite supper of all was,
without any doubt, Wilfred Lawson. Everybody thought he could do a
good impression of the legendary Wilfred. We were all consoled to think
that no matter how much we were lowering down our throats Wilfred
Lawson had lowered more.

I remember Richard Ainley told me he used to drink with Wilfred in
the Two Brewers in Upper St Martin’s Lane where there is a wonderful
large picture of Buster Keaton. One evening talking about acting - what
else would they talk about as they kept dull domesticity and ageing at
bay - Wilfred remarked that he had always wanted to play Anthony if
only he could think of a satisfactory Cleopatra.
‘But, Wilfred, Wilfred,’ Richard said. ‘You did play Anthony, you
played him twice.’
Wilfred looked astonished and said: ‘Did I?’ And as Richard nodded
reassuringly, Wilfred asked, ‘Was I any good?’
Richard replied ‘Wilfred, you were marvellous, old cock, absolutely
marvellous.’
Lawson looked at Richard with tears in his eyes and said, ‘I say
Richard, what a marvellous memory you’ve got, did I get my laughs?’
Anyway, in the right-hand corner of the left-hand bar as you went down
into the Kismet, John Bay, an American actor, sat drinking Guinness. He
knew an awful lot about films and the tragic private lives of many actors
and he would very much have liked to be Groucho Marx. In those days I
had a lot of curly hair and was very shy. At the sight of me John Bay
would interrupt any conversation he was having and cry out: ‘Why,
Harpo! When Chico gets here we’ll start rehearsing.’ And he would
jump off his stool and walk like Groucho through into the next bar
shouting: ‘Harpo’s here, Harpo’s here, we’ll start rehearsing in about ten
minutes or whenever Chico arrives.’ This always got a laugh and
somebody would buy us a drink. And I would stand near to John and
smile and smile and play his brother, Harpo the Trappist.
As long as I said nothing the drinks kept coming. Of course within an
hour I was incapable of speech of any kind and so my transformation
into Harpo was complete. We loved John Bay and longed for him to love

us but he was, for so gregarious a fellow, just slightly remote. Years later
to the amazement of everyone, he married Elaine Stritch and lived
happily with her at the Savoy until his sudden death from a brain
tumour. With his marriage he ceased to be Groucho and I lost the part of
Harpo and all the free drinks that went with it. For years after his
marriage I was pretty sober and pretty sad, too.
My cabaret performances in various pubs were sometimes interrupted
by work in the theatre. I didn’t get important parts, of course. In a
production of Richard II at the Oxford Playhouse I played Scroop and
the Marshall to the astonishment of the audience, who up until then did
not know they were the same man. A bit later in A Winter's Tale I was
the Bear, and also Rogero, a gentleman, and two dancing rustics in
masks. I also covered the part of Autolycus for Jim Dale unofficially. I
actually played it in the West End one matinee when Jim was filming at
Pinewood. The director did not stay in the theatre to see my performance
and it did me no good at all.
But apart from my sad performances as Harpo Marx in the Kismet
Club, most of the acting I did was in the Swiss Tavern, artistic director
Charlie Stevens; the French Pub, where Gaston Berlemont was the
creative man; the Colony Room, where the presence of Muriel Belcher
was supreme even when she was no longer there; and the Coach and
Horses, where Norman Balon practised his rudeness and was secretly
kind to several stars and to bit-part players like me. A certain amount of
time was also used up in Gerry’s Club, Shaftsbury Avenue. And it was in
these places that I got to know other performers on the circuit.
In Gerry’s Club Peter Crouch introduced me to Jeffrey Bernard. Jeff
then introduced me to Frank Norman, Francis Bacon and Ian Board at
the Colony. Gaston, in the French, was particularly good to me and
would always cash a cheque. The way of life in these places meant that

we didn’t have to use banks or post offices at all. There was always
someone around who would run off and post a letter or put on a bet
while the sender carried on talking and drinking.
Once, in the Colony a fellow came over to me with the racing page
open and asked me if I’d like to have a bet as he was just off to the
betting shop. I was with Jeff Bernard and, wanting to impress him, I
looked casually at the runners for the next race and had a £5 win double
on Wedded Bliss and On a Promise. I think I’d just got married at the
time and so was full of sentimental hopes. I hadn’t mentioned it much in
Soho in case they left me. Anyway, Hassan, the runner, came back
within the hour clutching a handful of fivers and the news that my two
choices had done the business. Hassan got his cut, Jeff Bernard laughed
approvingly and I was happy. My winnings swiftly made the short
journey from my pocket to the Colony Room till and my moment of
triumph was forgotten.
These new companions became important to me over the next few
years. It didn’t matter where I was working or what I was working at, I
always wanted to get down to Soho and be with Jeff Bernard and
perhaps Francis Bacon and Dan Farson, too, when he was in town. Dan
Farson, like Francis Bacon, would often disappear from the club scene as
he withdrew to do some work. I didn’t know how Francis worked but I
was aware of how hard Dan Farson kept at it. He interviewed me a few
times for the Sunday Telegraph and maybe did me some good. Dan also
like to drink gin and tonic which was my favourite number in those days,
and that was a tiny little bond between us.
It was Jeff Bernard’s company that I enjoyed the most. He was a born
cabaret artist who was tragically shy and virulently misanthropic but,
among the small groups in Soho and the very select groups in the racing
world where he was very well known and greatly loved, he was a star.

He still is a star, a one-legged star, but still glittering in Soho. He was
sometimes short of money and this would make him uneasy and
irascible, but he bore his poverty with great fortitude.
Jeffrey Bernard compels affection from those he meets, and his wry
and sometimes savage sense of humour is very nourishing for his
friends. There were people who mocked him for his lack of seriousness,
whatever that means, but the more they sneered, the more we cared for
him. Sometimes he would mention one of us in his Spectator column
and it would be the imprimatur of existence. People would often speak
to me after a little mention in Jeff ’s piece.
He could talk brilliantly on Lord Nelson and could not bear to be
gainsaid. He has a slightly irrational regard for admirals, come to think
of it, but Nelson is his favourite by a long sea mile. Jeffrey was Nelson’s
Hardy in Soho. Nor would he tolerate an argument on the merits of Sir
Thomas Browne or Lord Byron. He seemed to have read all Byron’s
letters to his agent, Hobhouse, especially those that were on the subject
of money, and most of Byron’s letters seemed to be about money. Jeff
would allow us some leeway on the subject of greed or revenge. He
knew Treasure Island better than I did and I had played Long John
Silver. But when we got on to the subject of revenge, Jeff was the very
John Chrysostom of the Coach and Horses; and when he started on
about The Count of Monte Cristo, the company would fall silent.
In some ways I would describe Jeff as a saint. I never ever heard him
say an unkind thing about the rich. No matter how viciously others
might bad mouth the wealthy, Jeff would leap to their defence. Poverty
simply disgusted him and he didn’t care who heard him say so.
He was often in the company of Graham Lord, then the literary editor
on the Sunday Express, and a very cutting girl called Eva Johanssen. She
was Jeff’s big fan and was, I think, in love with him, though as far as I

knew there was no biblical connection there. Another daily contact was
Conan Nicholas who worked for Cassell as an editor. Nobody could tell
a story with such passionate conviction as Conan. Jeffrey would shake
his head in astonishment and would often say he didn’t believe him, but
it didn’t deter Conan. And when he wasn’t with us in the Coach and
Horses, we were often talking about him.
Conan, who originally came from Yorkshire, was so poor as a child
that his father had great difficulty affording the fare for the little family
holiday to London he liked to organize every year. One year he
discovered that it was cheaper to catch a cargo boat from Hull and sail
with the entire family to Norway. They would then disembark at Oslo,
catch another boat sailing to Tilbury, London, where they would catch a
tram to Camden Town and have a few days’ excitement in town. They
say that it is still cheaper to do the same trip nowadays.
Eva Johanssen, who sometimes seemed to think that the Coach and
Horses was the Algonquin, had a friend called Gilly Conyers. Now Gilly
sometimes thought she should take care of people like Jeff Bernard and
even Tom Baker. Usually solicitous females would have enraged us. We
were on the run from deeply caring girls nearly all the time. But Gilly
Conyers was not only generous and glamorous, she was fun to be with.
If she decided that Jeff should have a beautiful blazer, then she got it
organized. Jeff loved beautiful things and was always very elegantly
dressed. He particularly liked things from Jermyn Street: lisle socks and
silk ties and marvellous shirts. I shall always remember Gilly Conyers
arriving in the French Pub to give Jeff a fitting for his new blazer.
I realize now that we were competing for Jeff’s affection. Actually I
realized it then but I’m admitting it late. We tried to outdo each other in
little ways to please him. I did not know of anyone else in Soho who had
quite that effect on so many people. Francis Bacon and Norman Balon

felt the same and so did many of the racing people from around
Lambourne. Whenever Jeff fell ill and seemed about to die - and he did
so quite often - a shiver ran through us all. What would we do if he died?
So Norman Balon would secretly arrange smoked salmon and other
goodies, Eva would hold her head like Greta Garbo in Queen Christina,
Conan Nicholas would rise up and down on the balls of his feet and
shake his head in a way that suggested that this time Jeff was to be
called home, and very glamorous ladies would arrive from Oxfordshire
bearing gifts of vodka disguised in Perrier bottles.
In the hospital, the medical staff would rise to the occasion and try to
prise Jeffrey free from the vice-like grip of jealous death who also
wanted to get in on the act and steal Jeff away from us. Once when I
went to see him in the Middlesex Hospital, I was shocked and frightened
to see how weak he looked. He was suffering from an attack of
pancreatitis, I think. It must be an agonizing ailment to have reduced Jeff
so quickly. There was a youngish doctor there who wondered if perhaps
Jeff could knock off the vodka. Bravely, Jeff shook his head and the
doctor sighed in admiration.
‘Perhaps you could cut down on it, Jeff?’ he suggested.
But Jeff was not to be dissuaded, ‘I’ve been with Sally Smirnoff too
long to leave her now.’
The doctor understood perfectly.
‘OK, Jeff,’ he said, ‘we’ll just hope for a miracle, then.’ And off went
the wise doctor. And the miracle happened and we all sighed with relief
and admitted that there was probably a power somewhere that was not
entirely malevolent. And within a short while the show was back on the
short road that ran between our day centres.

Everyone, except perhaps Tony Harrison who was said to run a book
on the next one of us to die in the French Pub and had Jeff as the next to
go, was pleased. And we went on laughing and doing anything to avoid
going home to those who loved us. It is a common anxiety among
drinkers that they find it hard to go home. We don’t like to leave each
other. I have often noticed that when someone from home enters the pub
scene, then the personality of the drinker dies. It’s a fearful sight to see a
man diminished by the appearance of a loving partner who has only
turned up to please.
I think what we liked was the sense of seeming to be free from the
nightmare of domesticity and all desperately together: the desperation
was the feeling. I never met anyone who was, say, a Buddhist, or who
talked about Transcendental Meditation. The talk was of Derby winners
and heroic jockeys, of tragedies at the Grand National and the state of
Ian Board’s nose at the Colony Room.
One day Billy Connors took a group of us out for lunch. It was
Wheeler’s Fish Restaurant, I think. Jeff was there and so was Francis
Bacon and maybe John Edwards who was to be Francis’s heir, and
Michael Nelson and, perhaps, Conan Nicholas. We had a marvellous
time. Billy Connors was as generous a host as Francis Bacon was. It was
Billy who would take a whole double-decker busload of his friends to
the Derby every year. And so there we were in Wheelers, laughing and
feeling secure in the knowledge that when the ecstasy of Billy’s lunch
was over we could all go on to the Colony Room and the next level of
our heaven.
Wheeler’s Restaurant was one of Francis Bacon’s favourite places.
The staff adored him there because they knew that they were in for a
good time and great tips just waiting on Bacon’s table.

Not everybody was as besotted by Francis as we were. Sometimes
other people in the restaurant were made uneasy by our noise and chat.
Jeffrey told that once he was in Wheeler’s with Francis and a few friends
for lunch after a few starters at the Coach and Horses.
There were several rather solemn Americans in there, too. Everything
about Francis Bacon was unusual. I suppose his paintings were unique, I
don’t know. Francis certainly had a very penetrating voice. People say it
was a sort of posh cockney: it was just his way of speaking, that’s all.
But there is no doubt at all that Francis had a tremendous presence. He
was, above all, very funny. He had such a droll way of saying things that
the company would crack up. He had a way of saying something very
suddenly and directly without any preamble that seemed very funny to
me. He said to Jeffrey one day in Wheeler’s: ‘Tell me, Jeffrey, what are
you going to do for a living now that you’ve lost your looks?’
This caused a couple of the solemn Americans to glance at each other
and then to glance at Jeff. Even dull Americans could see in Jeffrey’s
face the ruins of a certain delinquent beauty. He had been very
handsome as a young man. Anyway, the conversation ran along the lines
of the sadness of fading looks and the cruelty of time passing, that sort
of thing. During these odd conversations Francis was quite likely
suddenly to whip out his comb and do his hair without the slightest self-
consciousness. And the talk ran over former loves and fantasies; which
are perhaps the same thing.
Francis said, ‘Tell me, Jeffrey, who do you admire?’ And Jeffrey,
quick as a flash, said, ‘Cyd Charisse’. The American listeners sincerely
approved of that choice but then frowned in irritation when Francis said:
‘Cyd Charisse? Never heard of him.’ Jeff explained that Cyd Charisse
was an American film star and that her legs were amazing and lots of

men dreamed about her. To change the direction a bit and irked by the
Americans, Jeff asked Francis to name someone he admired.
‘Well,’ said Francis, instantly breathing in dramatically and showing
his profile, ‘I’ve always rather fancied Colonel Gadaffi.’
There was a certain clicking of old tongues and expensive top
dentures among the Americans. The waiters were delighted. And when
one of the other lunchers asked a waiter in a sharp whisper: ‘Who is that
man?’ The waiter smiled and smiled and with the same feeling he might
have used for His Holiness the Pope, said: ‘He’s Mr Bacon, very famous
artist. Very rich. A very very nice man.’ This reassured the Americans
and they got on with their lunch in a respectful quietness that was not to
be allowed to last.
Just as suddenly as he had launched the subject of the decline of
Jeffrey’s beauty, Francis said: ‘I was in Paris the other day, Jeffrey, and
waiting for the aeroplane I got rather bored. So I thought, why not treat
yourself, Francis? And I did.’
The Americans paused to hear the details of the treat, and even the
waiters were still and didn’t interrupt with ‘Is everything all right, sir?’
Francis sailed on with marvellous casualness: ‘So I bought myself a little
watch to pass the time. A Piaget, it was. Yes, a very pretty little Piaget
that told the time.’
And then the waiter came over and said: ‘Everything fine, Mr
Bacon?’ and being told it was all fine the waiter disappeared to
everyone’s relief while Francis carried on with his tale.
‘Well, the next night I met a sailor without a ship to his name and I
picked him up and took him home. He seemed very grateful, now that I
come to think of it. Anyhow, there I am lying on the bed like a vestal
virgin while my rescued matelot is in the bathroom doing his ablutions

or whatever seafarers do when they’re alone. And suddenly I thought,
“He ‘s not having my Piaget.” So I took it off the bedside table and
slipped it under the bedside mat.’
The silence in Wheelers was sacred, holy even, as the blessed
congregation waited for the climax.
‘Yes, I slipped it under the mat out of sight. And at that moment the
bathroom door opened and out sprang the bos’n who reached the bed in
three strides. Down came his heel as he leapt aboard and I heard a
dreadful squelch as he crushed my pretty little Piaget to puree.’
At the other tables, mouths gaped and gestures remained incomplete.
One man stroked his Rolex in the utter silence that often falls after the
climax of a great tragedy is revealed. And out of this silence and with
perfect timing, Francis, disdaining self-pity remarked: ‘I suppose it was
the most expensive fuck I’ve ever had.’
For a while the Americans seemed to have died where they were
lunching. And then gradually the spark of life reasserted itself and like a
group of Lazaruses they began to talk quietly among themselves. Francis
paid the bill and something towards the waiter’s mortgage and he and
Jeffrey strolled along to the Colony Room for another drink and a glance
at Ian’s nose.
Some time later Keith Waterhouse adapted Jeff’s weekly column in
the Spectator into a play called Jeffrey Bernard is Unwell. As I
remember John Hurt was considered for the part but the idea was
dropped and the mighty Peter O’Toole decided he would do it. Ned
Sherrin agreed to direct it and a copy of the Coach and Horses was built
as the one and only set. Peter O’Toole was simply brilliant playing Jeff
and the play was a big success in London and later in Australia. I saw it
twice and marvelled at O’Toole’s capacity to make the character he was
playing so lovable. The success of the play made Jeff very happy and

gave him some financial security at last. The success of a close friend is
always wounding especially if he has been poor for so long.
I’ve always found the marriage of drinking partners deeply
distressing. When my agent Peter Crouch got married I felt I had to
leave. The marvellous thing about Crouch was that he understood
perfectly and wished he could do the same. We remained friendly.
Somebody once remarked that the Kismet had a strong smell of
failure. I didn’t detect that sort of smell. It is true that Eugene O’Neill
was often the subject of conversation, especially The Ice Man Cometh.
But in the Kismet, a Hickey was always arriving in the shape of Ronnie
Fraser or James Villiers or Peter Crouch. And unlike those in Harry
Hope’s bar, we always managed to leave as the regular pubs reopened.
Sometimes as I walk through Great Newport Street nowadays, I find
myself pausing where I think the door to the Kismet Club was. I am no
longer certain of exactly where it was. I glance over my shoulder to see
where Max River’s rehearsal studio was and that too has gone, and the
Pickwick Club. And then I remember the Cranbourne pub next to the
Arts Theatre, which later became The Frigate and had tapes of seagulls
screaming and ropes creaking, and I wonder how Sandy Fawkes and
Tom Hawkyard are getting along.
Gerry’s Club in Shaftsbury Avenue was the favourite late-night roost
for actors who were in work. There is a natural impulse in actors to
move around a bit when they’re in work and make it clear to their
drowning comrades that they, at least, are in the lifeboat and that so far it
is so good. The ones who are full of hope and loud laughter are
surrounded by the ones who were in work until just recently and who
would like to suggest by the way they buy drinks that they expect to be
in work again in the near future.

And then there were the ones who were not in work but,
mysteriously, were in the funds. This was a potent group. ‘How do they
do it?’ we would ask ourselves. ‘How do they hold on to their dosh?’ We
never found the answer to this question. For while people are willing to
give one advice on how to play some great comic role like Coriolanus or
Laertes, they will never explain the secret of how to hold on to the dosh.
But there was fun to be had in Gerry’s. The regular pilgrims were to
do with acting or actors; agents were very common in Gerry’s bar,
extremely common. And there were casting people. If the word got out
that somebody in the bar was casting a film or a big telly series then she
had no need to buy a drink that night. Casting agents seemed to us to be
the people who were dishing out the secret of life. ‘I’ve got a part,’ a
friend might whisper.
‘Does it speak?’ one would ask.
‘No, but it moves,’ might come the response, and the tiny smile
would be very wry.
‘Does it move a lot, though?’ would be the next wounding question.
‘Not a great deal,’ the victim would murmur. ‘But I do have to wave
to a taxi driver. Twice.’
‘My advice would be to do it,’ would be the counsel offered. ‘And by
the way what’s that smell you’re wearing, French Fern?’ And in another
corner a voice would be heard to cry out incredulously: ‘Michael
Denison? Playing Macbeth?’
I once met a young actor down in Gerry’s who was showing his old
English master a bit of low life. He came from Banbury. The old teacher
was a very nice man and I gladly got him a drink and asked him how he
was enjoying his visit to Soho. He told me he was having the time of his
life and then fell to the floor unconscious. I didn’t take this too

personally, although he was not the first person to collapse while talking
to me; to tell the truth it has happened quite often. And I think that it is
why whenever I offer to buy a drink for someone he usually chooses
brandy. There just happened to be a nurse in the club at the moment of
the fall of the teacher. She was having a pre-theatre snack and she
seemed very fed up at this collapse. ‘What terrible timing,’ she growled
at me as she jumped on the teacher’s chest.
‘Well, you see he’s not an actor.’ I explained to her. ‘He’s a teacher.
He comes from Banbury.’
The nurse got on with the business but to no avail. The spark
appeared to have been extinguished. But she kept at it, pressing with her
right forearm on the teacher’s chest and holding her bacon, lettuce and
tomato sandwich in her left hand. Somebody had called an ambulance
and the few people there were very tense; especially the old pupil who
was looking at me as if I were responsible.
‘Look,’ said the nurse, finishing pushing for the vital spark and
popping the last bit of her BLT in her mouth, ‘I’ve got a ticket for The
Norman Conquests and the curtain goes up at eight, I’ve just got to go.
Sorry.’ And she smiled swiftly at the distraught young actor. He
understood perfectly.
‘Of course, of course,’ he said to the departing nurse, ‘the show must
go on. I’m sure he would understand,’ he added as he glanced down at
the crumpled heap on the floor. And so the nurse went to see Michael
Gambon as the vet in The Norman Conquests while the remaining
eleven of us wondered how long the ambulance might be. The drinking
now was very furtive and the conversation muted. The tension was
palpable. And as if to break it and go for the miracle, the young actor fell
to his knees beside the unconscious form of his old master and began to
pray. It was an amazing sight. I’ve seen actors on their knees to their

agents, desperately seeking an advance, and I’m sure lots of actors
believe in gods, but to show it and do it in Gerry’s bar!
‘Hail Mary, full of grace, the Lord is with thee, blessed art thou
among women and blessed is the fruit of thy womb,’ that was as far as
he got before the management stepped in. The barman was appalled at
this introduction of the divine element into the club without permission.
He leaned over the bar and bawled at the young actor who was by now
well into his pleading for the life of his beloved old teacher.
‘Oi, Oi,’ roared the barman. ‘Knock it off, knock it off. No prayers in
here.’
Just then a couple more punters came down the stairs, both actors,
and took in at a glance the figure of the kneeling actor at the side of his
dying friend. Realizing that a Hail Mary was of no help at all, the
grieving actor, bowing as well as kneeling to the will of God, went
straight into the De Profundis. ‘Out of the depths I have cried unto Thee,
O, Lord, Lord, hear my voice.’
The barmen was now frantic with anger and then nearly collapsed
himself when he realized that the two newly arrived actors thought that a
rehearsal of Romeo and Juliet was in progress.
‘Hear my voice, you deaf bugger,’ he screeched. ‘You’re barred, do
you hear me, you’re barred. No more prayers, this a drinking club not a
fucking chapel of ease.’
‘Dear God!’ the actor moaned, unaware that the Holy Spirit had
suddenly entered into him. ‘Dear God, how long is that bloody
ambulance going to be?’
And raising his eyes towards the ceiling the sceptical, mocking,
sneering barman said: ‘Dear Christ, let it be soon.’ And as the words

passed his lips three ambulancemen, three of them, came down the stairs
and relieved us all of our misery. Some people might call that a miracle.
*    *    *    *    * 
The terrors of ‘real’ life had been eased for a while by my new marriage.
I was comforted in my anxiety by the steadiness and wonderful wit of
Lalla Ward. But Lalla is more intelligent and serious then I am, she
didn’t need the low life of Soho at all. After a while I realized that I
preferred the smoky comfort of the Colony Room in Soho to the
domestic certainties of Hereford Square with Lalla. Our relationship was
not moving in any direction at all. I knew that and if I had spotted it then
so had Lalla. I wasn’t going anywhere except Soho, and the Colony
Room was the terminus.
It was such a tiny little world - one room, that’s all. But it was a
refuge for a lot of desperate people. Not everyone there was desperate,
of course; some simply used it as a place for an afternoon drink after the
pubs had shut. But for me it was a place of comfort, a place where we
could laugh at the world on the other side of the green curtains of the
Colony.
To arrive at the club in the company of Francis Bacon, Jeff and Conan
Nicholas after a lunch at Wheeler’s in Old Compton Street was such
pleasure. Francis would have paid for the lunch, of course; with the
exception of Billy Connors I never knew anybody who was able or
allowed to pick up the lunch bill. Francis would pick it up and pay with
terrific style, always in cash; and then off to the Colony. Once there
Francis would order champagne. And the whole place would be
revitalized by his presence.
Of course there were always some who just wanted to drink for
nothing, and Francis didn’t seem to care. He was quite able to look after
himself. Once I was in the Colony with Micky Nelson, who had been the

PR man for the Bookmakers’ Association and who adored low life in
Soho. It was really lively in there and Micky and I were well on the way.
I can’t remember if it was Micky who was attacking Francis or some
totally plastered guest we’d signed in but somebody was having a go at
him.
‘Those fucking disgusting paintings of yours, Bacon. Fucking
screaming Popes and butcher’s shop scenes; bloody disgusting I call
them; fucking bloody disgusting.’ And the same fellow was actually
drinking Francis’s champagne. ‘You should be ashamed of them. People
are just so much pork to you, Bacon, that’s all, just so much bleedin’
pork, aren’t they?’
And Francis, listening carefully and even smiling as he considered the
insane outburst, waited till the gap came. And then, as if he had really
pondered on the points made, he said, with an air of calculated
insouciance: ‘Oh, I don’t know, I think they’re really rather pretty.’
There was a pause.
‘Anyhow, what about another drop of champagne?’ Francis said.
These mad little incidents amused us and passed the afternoons away
before the disintegration of the evening arrived - for many of us feared
to leave the Colony. If it had been large enough to let rooms as the
Groucho is I would at one time have lived there. All this was in spite of
the endless petty rows that broke out all the time. No group of people is
so utterly treacherous as drinkers are. We often bitched about each
other’s drinking and behaviour. Alcoholic amnesia was regularly
invoked as the excuse for some small act of betrayal or unreliability.
Even some landlords who depend on piss artists for their living will
backbite the drinkers.
It was a mad and dangerous time for me. I knew it could not continue
at that pace but I didn’t care. I was just waiting for something to happen.

Several of the group I was with died in falls. It was not at all unusual,
especially for those who lived in basement flats. The smokers were even
more at risk. A last cigarette at three in the morning after a thirteen-hour
drinking session could really turn out to be the last cigarette prior to an
unscheduled appearance before God. Several witty but reckless drinkers
burst into flames and were seen no more, including Eva Johannsen who
had become our very own Dorothy Parker after Muriel Belcher fell off
her stool in the Colony Room.
And one evening after a gentle, kind and quite short conversation
with Lalla, we parted. She had swiftly realized that domestic life did not
nourish me at all and she very kindly made it easy for me to escape it.
We decided in a very gentle discussion that it was time to go our
different ways and see what happened. We never saw each other again.
So something did happen to me. But it had no deterrent effect. A
broken marriage was obviously not the event I was waiting for. Life
went on as usual. And if I wasn’t working I’d head for town to have the
first one with Jeff Bernard or Frank Norman. Frank didn’t often come
out early as he was happily married and quite enjoyed seeing something
of his wife, Geraldine. Frank had once had a stupendous success with
Fings Aint What They Used to Be. He would often talk about it and I
liked to hear the tale. Barnardo’s boy writes West End smash hit is my
idea of a good story. And in Frank’s case it was a true story. So if I was
in Soho early, I would go to the Swiss Tavern, now called Comptons.
One morning, Charley, the governor, called me over.
‘Sorry you can’t have an early one, Tom, but the police are here.’
I said, ‘Oh, yes, what do they want at this time of the day?’
‘You know little Julian, the Maltese ponce?’ Charley said.
‘You mean the little fellow who sleeps here sometimes?’

‘Yes,’ said Charley, ‘he slept here last night, and when I came down
to make the tea this morning he was lying just there.’ Charley pointed to
a spot between us and where the electric kettle point was. ‘Anyway,’ he
said, ‘I gave him a little kick and said, get up you drunken Maltese
ponce, it’s tea time.’ Charley looked at me, waiting for his cue. So I said,
‘What happened then?’ As I did so, two policemen came through the bar
on their way to West End Central, I suppose.
‘We’ll be in touch a bit later, Charley,’ one of them said. The other
one looked at me, recognized me and nudged his mate knowingly.
And Charley, savouring the added importance the two passing
bobbies gave his story, continued.
‘So I put the kettle on and the wireless and little Julian was just lying
there. So I went over and kicked him again.’ And Charley looked at me
again before he gave me the news I d already guessed.
‘So I turned him over with me foot, and there he was - dead. Do you
fancy one now that the Law’s gone?’
I was quite shocked at this piece of news but the death of a tiny little
Maltese ponce was not what I was waiting for either. We had a whip
round to bury him, for piss artists dread a pauper’s grave, and several of
us who didn’t like him but had sod all else to do went along to the
disposal ceremony. It kept us together and was the excuse for yet another
session. The thing about piss pots is that although they often can't bear
each other, they can't bear to be apart either. Some marriages are like
that, too.
I was working on Hedda Gabler at this time, playing Judge Brack.
Tom Bell, Ralph Bates and Irene Handl provided the fun and Susannah
York provided the gloom. It was directed by Donald McWinnie and

designed by Voytek. Although Donald was very nice and had done
wonderful work before, this was not one of his best productions.
One day there was a demonstration in Parliament Square and
Susannah York persuaded several members of the cast to go and show
willing, including Irene Handl. Donald gave his permission for them to
have a couple of hours off rehearsal. He and I stayed back at the
rehearsal room and talked. Irene Handl was rather elderly to be in among
thousands of people but the demonstrating members of our cast
promised to look after her. After about two and a half hours back they
came but minus Irene. It really was very funny that each one thought
someone else was looking after her. So it turned out that they had left
Irene Handl on her little stool outside the Houses of Parliament.
We rehearsed for about three weeks, minus costume fittings and
political demos. Somehow we could not raise the play off the page.
Paula Wilcox was very funny as Mrs Elfstead, much funnier than Hedda
Gabler. This caused a slight imbalance as you may guess and not a little
tension. While we were at the Cambridge Theatre playing to poor
houses, Tom Bell looked after us all and saw to it that we were well fed.
Tom makes wonderful summer pudding.
Irene Handl summed up our feelings one evening as she came slowly
off stage. There is a reference in the play to a dead aunt called Aunt Julie
and as Irene passed me in the wings she said: ‘I’d rather be with Aunt
Julie.’
Well, Aunt Julie died first and one by one we all died until finally the
blessed release of The Notice put us all out of pain. But I would not have
missed the experience for anything. Now I remember that Donald
McWinnie is dead and so is Irene Handl and so is darling Ralph Bates.
Immediately after Hedda Gabler I joined the Royal Shakespeare
Company for Educating Rita and had one of the few successes of my life

thanks to Mike Ockrent and Kate Fitzgerald. We toured for about sixteen
weeks and did terrific business everywhere. We filled the opera houses
of Glasgow and Belfast. During the tour we used to meet wonderful
people who had managed to get a degree at the Open University. The
most amazing ones were the housewives who had succeeded in spite of
having children and husbands to take care of. Most of them confessed
that it had changed their lives. Willy Russell’s play certainly worked for
such people and they roared their approval as they watched Kate
Fitzgerald and me act out their journey to success.
The tour was to go on for another three months, but I had an option to
leave. Due to a mix-up over a film that was supposed to happen but
didn’t, I left the cast of a great success and took the train to Soho via
Euston. What a prat I was. What a prat I am. For the sake of some poxy
old movie that wasn’t a patch on Willy’s play I threw away the chance to
be happy in a good piece of theatre with lovely people to support and
comfort me. I never saw Kate Fitzgerald again as I never saw anyone
from Hedda Gabler again. Come to think of it I have never seen
anybody again after the end of any production of any kind, marriage,
play or television.
Barry Letts who had changed my life so long ago by offering me
Doctor Who now called up and offered me Sherlock Holmes. The BBC
was to do The Hound of the Baskervilles. As you know, it is a story that
gives Doctor Watson the star part for a change. Terry Rigby was to play
Watson. My two favourite performances of Holmes have been by
Douglas Wilmer and Jeremy Brett. Both suggested that Holmes lived in
a secret world that remained secret. Well, then I had my chance. I so
enjoyed working with Terry Rigby and he was terrific as Watson, but as
in my Hedda Gabler experience, I couldn’t lift the character into that
special world that makes Holmes so funny and so fascinating.

The only relief for me was during the shooting of the dog scenes on
Dartmoor. The dog who had been engaged by the BBC to play the hound
was gentler than Mother Teresa. He didn’t want to threaten Nicholas
Woodeson who was playing Sir Henry Baskerville. In fact I can tell you
after all this time that the bloody dog had fallen in love with Nicholas.
He just adored him, and it was obvious in spite of its SAS make-up.
After hours and hours of trying, with the dog becoming more and more
infatuated with Sir Henry, somebody had the notion of hiding chipolata
sausages under the lapels of Nick’s dinner jacket. It was all of no use.
The dog actually appeared to be blowing kisses at Nick. And then a
member of the camera crew suggested that, as Nick was not a giant, why
didn’t we throw him at the dog and then run the film backwards? Nick
Woodeson was not amused but I was. I laughed so much I was hoping
that the joke was what I had been waiting for all these years before I
died. I never saw Nicholas Woodeson again and later on the BBC
apologised in the Daily Telegraph for my performance as Holmes.
Then there came a phone call from Hunt Stromberg who had once
wanted me to play the monster in Frankenstein, the True Story.
‘What’s the part?’ I asked him.
‘Oh, it’s not too terrific,’ Hunt told me. ‘It’s the part of Raymond
Burr’s servant in a motion picture, The Curse of Tutankhamun.’
Peter Crouch, my former agent, advised me to go to Africa just for the
hell of it. So, as usual, having nothing much to do, I accepted.
‘You never know what might happen when you’re there,’ Peter said.
He was such a lovely man he could get away with paralysing
observations like that.
So I said yes. They also offered a first-class ticket and promised me
billing. It sounded mad to me so I couldn’t resist it. At London airport

somebody met me and, true enough, the ticket was first class and I was
reassured; the part might be paltry but the ticket was great, and that’s
important to a fellow who isn’t sure of himself. People may say it’s a
first-class script, but what I want to know is, is it a first-class ticket? I
always read the ticket before the script and, usually, the ticket is more
dramatic. Sometimes I have done scripts that are less dramatic than
ironing a shirt.
Somehow I was nearly last to board the plane so I hadn’t got to meet
anyone from the production. So there I was in an aisle seat BA first-class
to Cairo. I was having a quiet but immense gin and tonic when it dawned
on me that the two fellows across the aisle and a bit ahead of me were
well tanked up, not to say bladdered. They were bickering away very
charmingly and I was intrigued to know who they might be, as they were
both very well dressed and obviously very confident; though that might
have been the champagne. It turned out that it was the champagne. I
looked questioningly at the air hostess and, as she delivered me another
blinding gin, she whispered: ‘They’re your producers, VIPs.’ It’s a small
world, in the first class. Further up front and across from me I could see
Harry Andrews being very distinguished and charming to a lady I
guessed must be Eva Marie Saint. The cocktails having been served,
orders were being taken for dinner. One of the VIPs across from me said
he didn’t want any dinner but his companion ordered quite happily and
charmingly for himself.
As the place was being got ready for the meal I recognized the voice
of our producer, Hunt Stromberg, saying to his pal: ‘Time for a wee wee,
Joe.’
And Joe said: ‘Well if you feel like a wee wee go take a wee wee.’
But Hunt said, ‘Not me, Joe, I don’t want to take a wee wee, I was
thinking about you taking a wee wee; take a wee wee, Joe.’

This suggestion seemed to puzzle Joe a bit and he was silent for a
moment. Then: ‘Anyway, what makes you think I need to take a wee
wee? If you don’t want to take a wee wee why should I want to take a
wee wee, I mean we’re partners, aren’t we?’
I noticed Harry Andrews glance towards the producers and clear his
throat before resuming his conversation with Eva Marie Saint. Harry’s
voice became more resonant as though to drown out the wee-wee boys.
But they could not be drowned out.
‘Joe,’ said Hunt as if he was talking to a beloved old aunt, ‘Joe, Joe
Joe! It’s dinner time, Joe, and just before dinner you always want a wee
wee. Sometimes you wait till I’m pouring out the white wine and then,
no matter who’s there, you suddenly want a wee wee, now don’t you?’
Joe said, ‘Well, it’s not my fault that you pour the wine like someone
was taking a leak, no wonder it makes me want a wee wee. It would
make a horse want a wee wee.’
Hunt said: ‘So you’re sure you don’t want a wee wee now?’
‘Absolutely,’ said Joe. ‘If you don’t pour the wine I don’t want a wee
wee.’
At that moment the trolley arrived and the stewardess put a bottle of
Pouilly Fumé on the eating desk in front of Hunt who immediately
poured some into his glass.
‘That’s it,’ said Joe, ‘I’ll take a wee wee.’
The girl who was in charge of the trolley looked thoughtfully at her
carving knife as she backed up to let Joe go the wee-wee house. Hunt
apologized for his pal and the girl smiled at his obvious affection for his
friend. As she was serving Hunt with his beef Wellington or whatever he
had chosen, Joe suddenly reappeared on the scene apparently rather
annoyed about something.

‘Hunt,’ he said. ‘I told you I didn’t want to take a wee wee and then
you pour out the wine like that and suddenly I thought, oh Christ, I’ve
gotta take a wee wee and off I go and then nothing happens. No wee
wee, Hunt, no wee wee.’ The plane pitched slightly and Joe was dumped
into his seat without hurt. ‘Anyway, where’s my dinner?’ he asked the
stewardess as she turned away from serving Hunt.
‘You said you didn’t want any dinner, sir,’ she said quietly.
‘I didn't hear me say that,’ said Joe. And then rather ominously and
with great politeness he said: ‘May I please have something to eat,
young lady?’ She went off and Joe slumped back in his seat and wearily
lit a cigarette and mumbled something to Hunt who seemed very cheery
and was eating happily. The stewardess appeared with a portion of foie
gras and rather frostily offered it to the now dozing Joe. He looked up at
her with incomprehension, saw the round of foie gras on the plate, and
thinking it was an ashtray, he muttered, ‘Why thank you,’ and stubbed
his out his cigarette in the foie gras. I shall never forget the look on that
girl’s face. And later, when I got to know Joe, I just adored him.

T W E N T Y
After Lalla and I parted and in between bouts of madness in Soho I
began to see Sue Jerrard again. I had met her first when she was an
assistant editor on Doctor Who, and for a while things went very well
with us. Then, as they usually did with me, things went very badly,
which was all my fault. I went off and got married to Lalla and that was
the end of Sue Jerrard, I thought. But it wasn’t the end at all.
After Lalla there were times when the cracking pace in Soho was too
much for me and I looked for some peace and comfort elsewhere. I
called Sue and we met and laughed and began to have a good time again.
And the result of this good time was that the itch to get to Soho every
day began to fade. I noticed that after some voice-over or commentary I
found myself walking past the Colony Room door and going back to
Sue. This was a very peculiar feeling which made me uneasy for a time.
But for the rest of the time, I began to feel better and the uneasiness
faded a bit, apart from missing Jeff Bernard. At around this period, I
began to drink more often with Michael Nelson who seemed to have
ditched the ‘whizzy West End’ as he called it. We started to go to the
Phene Arms in Chelsea and to the Man in the Moon on the corner of
Park Walk and the King’s Road and to the Cross Keys. Francis Bacon,
Ian Board and their crowd came down on some Sundays and we would
all go to a Chinese for a pissy lunch at about four o’clock.
Life was a bit less feverish and just as enjoyable. Sue used sometimes
to come over to Chelsea from Kensington where she had a place and
spend time with Ted Whitehead and his wife, Gwenda, who were regular
pals of mine. It was all very agreeable to me. I thought it would go on

like that indefinitely and saw no reason why it should not. But there was
a reason and when it came I could not at first believe what I was feeling.
Is it possible I wondered that I could be ready to leave London and go to
the country?
Over a period of several months this urge to ditch London became
much stronger. And then I was offered a job in Dublin in a new play
called The Mask of Moriarty by a fine writer called Hugh Leonard. The
play was about Sherlock Holmes and one of his adventures against the
devilish, Moriarty. What attracted me towards this piece was that I could
play Holmes and Moriarty. This had never been done before as far as I
knew. Anyhow, whether it had been done or not didn’t matter as I
thought the play excellent. So off to Dublin I went, putting aside
thoughts of the country for the moment.
The Gate Theatre management in Dublin were marvellously kind to
me. They found me a flat that I liked and made sure that, since I like
ironing, that I had an ironing table and a good steam iron. The rest of the
cast were very nice to me and the director confessed he’d never directed
a play before. Apart from that small detail everything appeared fine. We
worked very hard at the piece and several times the author came to
watch rehearsals. He seemed happy, the rest of the cast seemed
reasonably happy, and the designer, Poppy Mitchell, had done us a fine
set. But somehow nothing much happened. The play opened and was
received politely and took a fair amount at the box office. But it was not
an exciting time for me as I realized that I was making theatre history in
two ways: I was the first to play Holmes and Moriarty in the same play
and the first to fail at both parts. This conviction sent me to my bed. And
for nearly the entire run I only got out of bed to go to the theatre for the
performance. Sue came over for a few days and consoled me but I could
not shake off the despair at failing in both parts.

As the run in Dublin came to an end, Sue who at that time was
working at TVS near Maidstone was passing though a little Kent hamlet
and she saw an old school for sale. She told me about it just as I finished
in Ireland and I came back rushing to see the house she thought she
could be happy in. Her intuition was right. I adored the school. There
was a bell tower to be restored. There was a sitting room that was fifty
feet long. There were two graveyards around the place - heaven. We
could have cats, lots of cats, I thought; we could be happy there.
So in 1986 we bought the place and moved in. Sue already had two
cats, Willow and Magic. We got two more, two Burmese called Garbo
and Horace. It wasn’t for a week or two that I could ask myself if this
was what I really wanted. When I asked myself this question the answer
was yes. I wanted to be with Sue in the country and be quiet and have
lots of cats.
We do have lots of cats, eight of them. The bell tower had been
restored and Sue has a firm grip on the garden. I help out here and there
but only as a second man in the kitchen and at rough work in the garden.
Ten years ago on 1 April we got married in Maidstone. During the
ceremony the registrar recognized me and asked for my autograph. Sue
was slightly irritated by this but I was amused. We are still here together
with no complaints and really very happy. We are.
It is part of my duty as a decent member of my local hamlet to mow
the grass in front of the church. It’s a pleasant little task and mowing is a
favourite activity of mine; it gives me a lot of pleasure to make the
churchyard look tidy. I sometimes pause at the grave of someone or
other and speculate what he might have been like when he was alive; but
gravestones don’t tell much.
Sometimes I pause at my own stone, which is very beautiful and
already engraved for the moment of the great escape. It, too, doesn’t tell

very much, but I have inside information. I haven’t put the closing date
on yet as I suspect that would expose me to comment among the
members of the Parish Council. One wouldn’t want to be ostentatious.
But sometimes I stand there by my gravestone and think about all the
convictions that I might have had in the past.
Right now I’m thinking about a letter I received this morning. The
writing suggests tension. In the top left-hand corner there is an illegible
place and then Iran. Iran? The programme doesn’t show in Iran as far as
I know. Abu Dhabi, yes. They tell me at the BBC that I’m still a big star
in Abu Dhabi. Never mind that, what can this morning’s letter mean? It
was postmarked West London. That bodes ill to me. I was never happy
in West London. Here is the letter.
Prince of the Air
Dear Tom,
It seems I am to be murdered. If I am, note to be made of my passing.
Please raise a subscription for a set of Apache Arrows I promised to
Princess Margaret.
May we meet at the Pillars in happier climes.
Ultra regards
J
Apache arrows for the Princess Margaret? I don’t care for these
mysterious instructions. I don’t care for any instructions.
I resumed my mowing and tried to forget the letter. After a quarter of
an hour or so, as I bent to dump a load of clippings to the sheep, I
noticed a strange figure standing at my gravestone. I could feel a little
snag of quick in the corner of my left thumbnail; so it obviously isn’t me
standing by my gravestone.

Its head is bowed. So? Any fool can bow his head. Yes, it is probably
a he. There’s no evidence at this distance of where he comes from. You
can’t tell that a man comes from West London at a glance. Anyway, the
letter was only postmarked West London. Perhaps he comes from
Pimlico?
I find I can mow away for hours, gradually becoming deaf to the
noise of passing tractors and cess-pit lorries. This simple pleasure is
only surpassed by my love of ironing. I do nearly all the ironing in our
house, in fact it would be very true to say that I’m rarely far from my
Rowenta.
He’s still there. What can he want? Anyway, I don’t know Princess
Margaret.
When I’m in London and have an hour to spare I often go into John
Lewis and stand for an hour or so in the household goods department. I
particularly enjoy the ironing-board section. I find I can pass an hour or
more admiring the various ironing boards. The Brabantia is my great
favourite. I have a very good model with a flowered cover, pretty though
fading slightly. It folds so smoothly that all fear flees. It’s the folding
action of good modern boards that has removed the terror that so many
men used to feel at the prospect of opening or closing the old,
temperamental type of ironing board when naked. Now a naked man can
iron with confidence and take unimaginable pleasure in pressing a shirt.
The old, wobbly, sudden- collapsing type of board caused many a man
of strong will to tremble and feel adrenaline in the pelvic area. All these
fears are in the past.
The man at my gravestone is now looking about the place. He’s tired,
then, of the respectful attitude and is now just curious.
Forget him.

To stand in the ironing-board department of John Lewis with other
chaps who have overcome their fears is deeply satisfying. Quite often I
get invited home for tea but, so far, I have never accepted. Some people
go too quickly for their own good.
As I mow and sometimes read the graves I feel comforted by the
quietness of the old churchyard and the unchanging thoughts on the old
stones. ‘Not Dead, only sleeping’ makes me smile wryly as I rev my
powerful Honda in the ear of a deceased. As far as I can see, they are all
dead and not sleeping at all. And as I go about my little task, people
sometimes toot their horns or shout from their car windows as they roar
past. Usually they cry out: ‘Aye-aye, Doctor,’ or something like that.
And I bawl back, ‘Aye-aye, there,’ and wave my right hand. But
sometimes people stop and get out of their cars and loiter nearby and
watch me in a funny way.
Like the fellow who is near my gravestone right this minute. Christ,
he’s sucking his thumb now and looking at me in a funny way.
Not everybody knows that looking at people in ‘a funny way’ is the
commonest cause of sudden murder. I happen to know that because I
read a Home Office brochure once.
I feel very edgy. My watcher seems to be wearing a sort of
mahogany-coloured coat and - is his hair mahogany, too? After about
forty minutes I can bear it no longer and I say rather tartly, ‘Good
afternoon.’
No answer, and as I empty a load of clippings I’m suddenly aware of
Mahogany standing close to me. We look at each other and he says: ‘I’m
a fan,’ looking past me as if he saw something to my disadvantage over
my shoulder.
‘I’ve just been standing by your grave paying my respects.’

This fetches me round to face him again. (If I’d been able to see
myself, I’d probably have said that my eyes narrowed.) Not being able
to see myself, I say nothing. Then he says: ‘You see, I’m a great fan, and
I just thought I’d put some flowers on your grave.’
Suddenly I want to say: ‘Why do you want to put flowers on my
grave when I’m standing in front of you? Can’t you see that I’m alive?’
Too obvious.
He looks rather foolish and I feel sorry for him. A car goes by and he
says, ‘You’ve got a lovely Honda.’ His voice is rather thick.
‘No,’ I said, ‘I’ve got a Peugeot, a French job, an estate. I like it.’
He looks at me sadly.
‘I mean your mower; I’m so sorry to hear about Mr Pertwee.’
This swift jump from Honda mower to dead Time Lord makes me
feel uneasy. Who does he think I am? Come to think of it who am I? It’s
very true that I’m often mistaken for other people so I avoid leaping to
conclusions when people talk to me. Recently I was in Berwick Street,
Soho, where I often work, when a man said to me outside a studio: ‘I’ll
never forgive you for what you did to our grammar schools.’ The man
looked extremely respectable and sane too.
I said to him: ‘What did you say?’
And he said: I’ll never forgive you for what you did to our grammar
schools, and neither will my wife.’
I was suddenly very irritated with him: ‘What are you talking about,
you silly bugger, what have I done to grammar schools?’
My aggression obviously startled him, for he looked at me rather
more carefully, cleared his throat and said, ‘I do beg your pardon, I
thought you were Shirley Williams,’ and he went off muttering.

Quite baffled, I went into the studio reception and sat down. What did
he mean? Shirley Williams? I glanced at my reflection in the window of
Silk Sound and suddenly I felt I was turning into Shirley Williams, I felt
a bit regretful. I am used to being mistaken for Miriam Margoyles;
Private Eye noticed that, and once I was even taken for Gertrude Stein.
But that was at Chelsea Flower Show where uncertainty of identity is in
the air. But Shirley Williams?
When I was younger I used to be mistaken for Jonathan Miller, and I
remember that once during the interval at a matinee of The Three Sisters
I shook hands with about thirty-five Americans who thought I was Dr
Miller.
‘What a great pleasure to meet a true polymath, Dr Miller,’ they said.
I didn’t like to embarrass them by saying I wasn’t Dr Miller so I went
along with their mistake and chatted on about the sadness of ambition
not being realized and the humiliation of varicose veins. The generous
Americans took it well, probably thinking that they’d caught Jonathan
on a bad day. Anyway I didn’t feel at all threatened with so many people
there.
But now, standing in the churchyard with someone who has come to
pay his respects, and who seems not to be sure if I am alive or dead
while he’s talking to me makes me feel uneasy. Some Doctor Who fans
tell me they believe in reincarnation and maybe this mahogany fellow is
confused about something, you never can tell. Christ, I’m thinking in
play titles now. Just because he is feeling something strongly doesn’t
mean he is right. We are all quite capable of believing in anything as
long as it’s improbable.
Last year I had to be at the British Film Academy in Piccadilly for
some little function or other and in the crush at the bar I heard a
woman’s voice say:

‘Well, hello there, dear, dear, Tom.’ This was said with that
challenging inflection which means: ‘Well, isn’t this a surprise, and
you’ll never guess who I am.’
I turned to face the inflection who was forty-something and very
pleasant to look at apart from the way she held her head on one side as
though one side of her head was heavier than the other.
‘Oh, hello there,’ I said, wondering who on earth it could be. ‘How
are you?’
She looked at me steadily and said with a tiny but superior edge, ‘You
don’t remember me, do you?’
Trying to bluff it out, I said with terrific confidence: ‘Of course I do,
it was the National Theatre, wasn’t it?’
She shook her head triumphantly: ‘I knew you’d forgotten. Oh, how
could you, Tom?’
Her confidence unnerved me a bit and I found myself guessing
wildly. ‘Play for Today?’ She shook her head and smiled on. ‘The Royal
Shakespeare Company?’ Surely that was it, everybody’s worked at the
RSC. She went on with the enigma and suddenly I knew the impulse to
strangle someone. ‘Doctor Who! Yes, it was Doctor Who, wasn’t it?’
Again she shook her head unhelpfully. I was now caught up in this little
mystery and was curious to find out where I had known this head-on-
the-one-side tease. Smiling in as friendly a way as I could I said: ‘It was
a play though, wasn’t it?’
She looked at me rather sadly, still shaking her head and said: ‘No, we
used to be married.’
I spun round towards the bar to find my pale ale and when I turned
back she was talking calmly to someone else.

I was disturbed. In the same way I am by this chap in the churchyard
who seems to think I am dead even though he is talking to me.
‘Yes,’ he said, ‘I’m very sorry to hear about Mr Pertwee, that’s why I
came.’
I said to him, ‘Yes, these things happen. Anyway nice to talk to you
but I must be away now.’
And as I pushed off, with my Honda in front of me, the fan added:
‘Do you realize that you are now the senior Doctor Who?’ The tone of
voice in which he said this made me feel cold.
At one o’clock the following morning two balaclava-wearing thieves
reversed a flat-backed pick-up against my garage and attempted to pull
the doors off. I woke in time and lit up the house to distract them. They
went away without any sign of panic.
The sight of balaclavas at one o’clock on a Sunday morning struck
terror into my wife and me. When the police arrived and investigated the
attempted theft, they deduced that the villains were probably after my
Honda mower.
Is that why Mahogany said I had a lovely mower? The Law had no
comfort to offer and tacitly conceded that they are a beaten lot, a spent
force. The fear we felt was terrific. All this terror for a mower! Even
though it is a Honda. There was no sleep to be had as the police warned
us that the balaclavas might come back. When it got light at 4.10 a.m. I
wandered out to the churchyard to look at my stone. There it was leaning
in its usual place against the porch of the church, waiting for its last
resting place on my head.
TOM BAKER
1934 -

I can’t of course be sure of the second date. But scrawled in chalk across
those simple lines was the word WA N K E R. I felt quite desecrated. With
a clump of grass clippings and a lump of sheep shit I rubbed out the
insult and went indoors feeling defeated and defaced.
Now I keep the Honda by my bed and it’s not easy to go for a pee in
the middle of the night. Life is not so comfortable. On the bedside table,
for fear of more balaclavas, I keep an axe. My intention is to chop off
my head before they can get to me.
Before who can get to me? As for the Apache Arrows for Princess
Margaret, let her go to Lillywhites and get her own arrows .
THE END

