Gregory Fell 
& Mike Barlow
Who Are the Bad 
Guys and What 
Do They Want?


Gregory Fell and Mike Barlow
Who Are the Bad Guys and
What Do They Want?
Boston
Farnham
Sebastopol
Tokyo
Beijing
Boston
Farnham
Sebastopol
Tokyo
Beijing

978-1-491-94324-3
[LSI]
Who Are the Bad Guys and What Do They Want?
by Gregory Fell and Mike Barlow
Copyright © 2016 O’Reilly Media, Inc. All rights reserved.
Printed in the United States of America.
Published by O’Reilly Media, Inc., 1005 Gravenstein Highway North, Sebastopol, CA
95472.
O’Reilly books may be purchased for educational, business, or sales promotional use.
Online editions are also available for most titles (http://safaribooksonline.com). For
more 
information, 
contact 
our 
corporate/institutional 
sales 
department:
800-998-9938 or corporate@oreilly.com.
Editor: Courtney Allen
Production Editor: Nicholas Adams
Interior Designer: David Futato
Cover Designer: Randy Comer
Illustrator: Rebecca Demarest
March 2016:
 First Edition
Revision History for the First Edition
2016-03-08: First Release
 
The O’Reilly logo is a registered trademark of O’Reilly Media, Inc. Who Are the Bad
Guys and What Do They Want?, the cover image, and related trade dress are trade‐
marks of O’Reilly Media, Inc.
While the publisher and the authors have used good faith efforts to ensure that the
information and instructions contained in this work are accurate, the publisher and
the authors disclaim all responsibility for errors or omissions, including without
limitation responsibility for damages resulting from the use of or reliance on this
work. Use of the information and instructions contained in this work is at your own
risk. If any code samples or other technology this work contains or describes is sub‐
ject to open source licenses or the intellectual property rights of others, it is your
responsibility to ensure that your use thereof complies with such licenses and/or
rights.

Table of Contents
Who Are the Bad Guys?. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  1
Cyber Crime Has Many Faces; Understanding Risk is Critical to
Implementing Effective Defensive Strategies                                    1
Labels Obscure Intent                                                                               3
Accidents Happen                                                                                     6
50 Shades of Cyber Crime                                                                       6
The Soft Underbelly of Cyber Security                                                  7
Models for Change                                                                                    9
Designing Security Into Software and Systems                                  10
Hacking the Internet of Things                                                             11
Slippery Slopes                                                                                        13
iii


Who Are the Bad Guys?
Cyber Crime Has Many Faces; Understanding
Risk is Critical to Implementing Effective
Defensive Strategies
In the 1937 movie Pépé le Moko, the title character is a Parisian
gangster hiding in the Casbah, a “city within a city” in Algiers. For
Pépé, the Casbah offers many advantages. Its narrow winding streets
look eerily similar, making it difficult for his pursuers to find him.
The streets have no names and his pursuers have no accurate maps,
a situation that Pépé exploits to elude capture.
Pépé’s strategy has become the model for modern cyber criminals.
Sometimes their Casbahs are real places, such as Ukraine or Taiwan.
Many hide in the Dark Net or behind vast robot networks of hacked
computers loaded with malware.
Sometimes, they hide right under our noses: a coworker at a nearby
desk, a high school student, or just some random person with a lap‐
top at the local coffee shop. Although most cyber crime is inten‐
tional, it’s often committed accidentally. Clicking on what appears to
be an innocuous link in an email from a friend or simply failing to
exercise good password discipline can open doors for cyber crimi‐
nals and their associates.
Cyber crime and cyber espionage cost the global economy between
$375 billion and about $575 billion annually, according to a report
issued by the Center for Strategic and International Studies, a Wash‐
ington think tank. As noted in a Washington Post article, that’s far
1

1 The APWG, a worldwide coalition of more than 2,000 member organizations, reported
197,252 unique phishing attempts were made in the fourth quarter of 2014, up 18 per‐
cent from the previous quarter.
less than the estimates offered by some politicians, but it’s still hefty
enough to account for roughly 1 percent of global income.
In addition to its economic impact, cyber crime has become a
weapon of terrorist groups and nation states, raising the potential
danger to truly nightmarish levels.
Brian Krebs, author of Spam Nation and editor of KrebsOnSecur‐
ity.com, paints a frightening portrait of organized international
cyber crime gangs operating with a sense of entitlement and impun‐
ity that would make Al Capone jealous.
Part of the problem stems from what former FBI Assistant Special
Agent in Charge John Iannarelli called “breach fatigue” and the gen‐
eral sense that cyber crime is “someone else’s responsibility.” Iannar‐
elli, who now runs a cyber security consultancy, said the readiness of
banks and credit card companies to limit losses for consumers hit by
fraud creates a false sense of security.
“As a result, most people think that cyber fraud is not a big deal,” he
said. “The losses are enormous, but they’re passed along. All of us
are paying for them, whether we realize it or not.”
Since the media tends to focus on the most exotic or outrageous
forms of cyber crime, most people are unaware that cyber criminals
rely heavily on spam to mount successful attacks. Many attacks
come in through the front door, in the form of spam disguised as
legitimate email.1
“For most companies, the best defense is training employees to rec‐
ognize cyber threats,” said Iannarelli. “People need to learn to spot
phishing, whaling, and ‘social engineering’ attacks in which cyber
criminals attempt to gain confidential information such as pass‐
words by posing as friends or colleagues.”
Training, however, costs money, and most businesses are reluctant
to spend money on activities that don’t help the bottom line. “We’re
not all singing from the same sheet of music yet,” he said. “People
need to understand the value of protecting themselves from cyber
crime. There was a time when people didn’t have locks on their
2 
| 
Who Are the Bad Guys?

doors. Then they realized locks would protect them and they began
buying locks. We’re rapidly approaching a similar stage with cyber
crime.”
Labels Obscure Intent
Seeing the issue as a binary conflict between “good guys in white
hats versus bad guys in black hats” can obscure the depth and vari‐
ety of cyber crime. Richard Moore is managing director at Alvarez &
Marsal, a global professional services firm. Prior to joining A&M, he
served as head of information security at the New York Life Insur‐
ance Company.
From Moore’s perspective, applying the “bad guy” label too broadly
can lead to oversimplifications, which in turn lead to false assump‐
tions that actually impede or derail investigations. “When we
remove the labels, we can see the intent more clearly,” he wrote in an
email.
Sometimes the intent is reducing the time it takes to conduct
research. Other times the intent is revenge. In some instances, the
intent is old-fashioned greed. In many cases, however, there is no
intent. Some cyber breaches result from accidental errors—the so-
called “fat finger” mistakes in which someone types the wrong com‐
mand or enters the wrong data into a field.
Understanding the intent—or lack of intent—behind a cyber crime
is essential to preventing it. Indiscriminately using the “bad guy”
label generates F-E-A-R, which stands for “false evidence appearing
real,” Moore wrote.
In cases of industrial espionage, for example, the actors can be insid‐
ers with a grudge or criminals with clients seeking a competitive
advantage. Since criminals often rely on insiders, many cyber crimes
involve combinations of actors. Terror groups might rely on ad hoc
combinations of hackers, insiders, criminals, and even state-
sponsored organizations.
Table 1-1 shows the variety of actors, risk vectors, and targets
involved in modern cyber conflict.
Labels Obscure Intent 
| 
3

Table 1-1. Cyber conflict taxonomy
Types of
Actors
Examples
Scale of Operations
Intent and Objectives
Scale of Potential
Damage
Likely Risk Vectors
Likely Targets
Hacktivists
Anonymous,
WikiLeaks,
CyberBerkut,
Chrysler-Jeep hack
Individuals and small
groups
Social/ economic/political change,
revenge, greed, sabotage,
propaganda, amusement
$ thousands to low
millions
DDoS, broken and/or
insecure software, insiders
Corporations, schools,
government agencies
Insiders
Snowden, Manning
Individuals and small
groups
Theft and/or exfiltration of IP,
sabotage
$ thousands to high
millions
Internal systems (i.e.,
financial, HR,
manufacturing)
Corporations, schools,
government agencies,
financial institutions
Criminals
Condor, Coolio,
T33kid, Kwyjibo
Individuals, small
groups, organized
gangs and syndicates
Extortion, theft and/or exfiltration
of IP (PII, PHI, clickstream data),
sabotage
$ millions to low
billions
Email phishing, SQL
injection, DDoS, broken
and/or insecure software,
insiders
Corporations, schools,
government agencies,
financial institutions
Terrorists
ISIL, al-Qaeda
Small groups,
organized gangs, and
global networks
Propaganda, relay instructions to
field operatives, extortion, monitor
enemies
$ millions to high
billions
Social media, insiders
“Soft targets” (e.g., schools,
public spaces, sports arenas,
transportation hubs, airlines)
Nations
US, China, Russia,
Israel, Iran, France
Specialized teams,
military units, and
government agencies
Destabilize/destroy military and
civil infrastructure control systems,
monitor, and/or disrupt enemy
communications
$ trillions and
upwards
Broken and/or insecure
software, insiders, spies
Critical infrastructure, (e.g.,
roads, bridges, airports,
hospitals, utility grids, water
systems), military
installations
4 
| 
Who Are the Bad Guys?

The landscape of cyber conflict is complex and varied. Moreover,
the relationships between actors, operations, scale, and risk vectors
aren’t linear. Amateur hackers are capable of inflicting as much—
and sometimes even more—damage than professionals. Many hack‐
ers now consider themselves “security researchers” whose work is
essential to the continuing health of the cyber economy. Some argue
that it’s important to make a distinction between “cyber hackers”
and “cyber attackers.”
Although the table suggests an orderly hierarchy within a stable
community of cyber combatants, the real-world relationships are
less like rigid hierarchies and more like networks or ecosystems as
in Figure 1-1.
Figure 1-1. In cyber crime, relationships between various actors are
more like networks than structured hierarchies
The good news is that no single country or gang can lay claim to
being the most powerful player in 21st century cyber conflict—at
least not yet. The bad news is that because cyber criminals don’t
have capitals or headquarters, they are hard to eradicate.
Labels Obscure Intent 
| 
5

Accidents Happen
As mentioned earlier, many cyber incidents result from accidents—
so essentially, they are part of human nature. In some instances,
hackers manage to damage systems and corrupt data without realiz‐
ing the extent of the harm they’ve caused. That said, there’s a sub‐
stantive difference between teenagers hacking for kicks, criminals
hacking for money, and spies hacking for foreign governments.
“Today’s kids grow up with computers and they develop hacking
capabilities,” said Pete Herzog, cofounder of the Institute for Secu‐
rity and Open Methodologies (ISECOM) and cofounder of Hacker
Highschool, which provides teens with hands-on lessons designed
specifically to help them learn cyber security and critical Internet
skills.
When teens are frustrated and lash out, they often turn to the closest
tools available—which in many cases are PCs or laptops. “If they’re
caught breaking a window or knocking over a mailbox, they get a
warning. But if they’re caught hacking, we send them to jail. That
makes no sense to me,” Herzog said.
Not all cyber attackers have malicious motivations, said Justine
Bone, a cyber security consultant. “More often than not, hackers are
driven by curiosity, a desire to learn more about how a system
works. Usually this involves subverting the intended behavior of a
system.”
Bone has been described as “classical ballerina-turned hacker-
turned CISO.” She is currently executive director of Secured World‐
wide, a “stealth startup” focused on wireless encryption and
packaging technology used for decentralized global trading.
Most hackers are not driven by the urge to steal data or damage sys‐
tems, she said. “It’s the folks with malicious motivations who are the
real bad guys ... the people who want power, money, or inside infor‐
mation ... or who want to create chaos and are prepared to go to any
lengths to achieve their goals.”
50 Shades of Cyber Crime
Cyber crimes are committed by a broad range of people and organi‐
zations, which makes it difficult to offer a uniform description of a
6 
| 
Who Are the Bad Guys?

“typical” cyber criminal and virtually impossible to concoct a “magic
bullet” that would work effectively in a variety of situations.
“The real answer is the bad guys are going to be different according
to who you are and what you’re trying to protect,” said Gary
McGraw, the chief technology officer at Cigital, a software security
consulting firm. For example, cyber criminals who target financial
services companies operate differently than cyber criminals who tar‐
get industrial companies. “You need to consider all the categories of
cyber crime and determine how they impact you. Everybody may
have a different set of threats they have to deal with. Effective secu‐
rity is a very context-sensitive set of decisions.”
McGraw sees cyber security as a risk management problem. Instead
of grasping for technology solutions, organizations should take the
time to qualify and quantify the cyber security risks facing them,
and then devise specific policies and processes for eliminating or
mitigating those risks.
He is also a true believer in the concept of maintaining a strong
defense against cyber criminals. Too often, he said, cyber offense
takes precedence over cyber defense. That’s natural because playing
offense always seems more exciting and generates more attention
than playing defense. But cyber crime isn’t like sports. Despite the
attention garnered by successful offensive tactics such as the Stuxnet
virus, which slowed down the Iranian nuclear program, a solid
defense is the best strategy for thwarting cyber “bad guys”—at least
for the foreseeable future.
“The NSA (National Security Agency) is pretty good at playing
offense,” said McGraw. “But the notion of throwing rocks seems
great until you realize those rocks can be thrown back at you. We
live in glass houses, and people who live in glass houses shouldn’t
throw rocks.”
From McGraw’s point of view, the underlying challenge is building
better and more secure software. “The biggest risk vector is soft‐
ware. Broken software is our Achilles heel,” he said.
The Soft Underbelly of Cyber Security
If software itself can be considered an attack surface, then we’re all
in trouble. Achilles’ heel was his only weak spot; the rest of him was
invulnerable. Software, on the other hand, is everywhere.
The Soft Underbelly of Cyber Security 
| 
7

“Software vulnerabilities are an arms race. Bugs are found, bugs are
exploited, bugs are fixed, repeat. No software is written perfectly,”
said Bone. “In addition, changing approaches to software develop‐
ment practices such as Agile and DevOps have raised the bar for
security engineers. Automated security assessment has not kept pace
with automated software development and deployment practices,
and the delta is dangerous. Technology risk managers must be care‐
ful to understand and communicate the impact of this issue as those
software development philosophies become more widely adopted.”
Bone also sees cyber security as “a risk management issue, and risk
management is an art. This is beginning to be recognized at more
progressive companies, where we see changing security governance
models.”
Generally, however, those governance models tend to change slowly.
“Once upon a time, information security was considered a subset of
the overall technology program, and your security head reported
into the CTO or CIO’s organization,” she wrote.
But the security heads—also known as chief information security
officers or CISOs—had limited insight into the businesses they
worked for. As a result, according to Bone, “the business gets frus‐
trated by unrealistic demands from the CISO that negatively impact
business processes and opportunities ... and the CISO, who is pri‐
marily a technology expert, gets frustrated because he or she doesn’t
understand the business priorities.”
In the eyes of some experts, effective cyber security requires a new
cultural mindset. Companies need to accept and embrace cyber
security as a strategic competency, much as they have learned to
accept and embrace the concept of customer-centricity, an idea that
was initially ridiculed but is now considered an essential component
of business strategy.
“Cyber security involves people, process, and technology. We need
to address key areas of each of those categories in order to create a
secure environment and maintain a secure environment,” said Nate
Kube, chief technology officer, cyber security at GE and founder of
Wurldtech Security Technologies, a GE subsidiary. “We need educa‐
tion for people, strong processes around password management ...
and technologies that are updatable for security risk.”
8 
| 
Who Are the Bad Guys?

Models for Change
A body of work focused on establishing common language and
defining new models for managing cyber security is emerging from
the chaos. Working with the Carnegie Mellon University Software
Engineering Institute, the US Department of Energy (DOE) has
developed the Cybersecurity Capability Maturity Model (C2M2).
The C2M2 is based on Electricity Subsector Cybersecurity Capabil‐
ity Maturity Model (ES-C2M2) developed “in partnership with the
Department of Homeland Security, and in collaboration with
private- and public-sector experts,” according the DOE.
McGraw, with coauthors Sammy Migues and Jacob West, have writ‐
ten Building Security in Maturity Model Version 6 (BSIMM6), a
document based on a multiyear study “built directly out of data
observed in 78 software security initiatives from firms including:
Adobe, Aetna, ANDA, Autodesk, Bank of America, Black Knight
Financial Services, BMO Financial Group, Box, Capital One, Cisco,
Citigroup, Comerica, Cryptography Research, Depository Trust and
Clearing Corporation, Elavon, EMC, Epsilon, Experian, Fannie Mae,
Fidelity, F-Secure, HP Fortify, HSBC, Intel Security, JPMorgan
Chase & Co., Lenovo, LinkedIn, Marks & Spencer, McKesson,
NetApp, NetSuite, Neustar, Nokia, NVIDIA, PayPal, Pearson Learn‐
ing Technologies, Qualcomm, Rackspace, Salesforce, Siemens, Sony
Mobile, Symantec, The Advisory Board, The Home Depot, Tom‐
Tom, Trainline, U.S. Bank, Vanguard, Visa, VMware, Wells Fargo,
and Zephyr Health.”
BSIMM6 is intended as a “measuring stick for software security,”
according to its authors. Additionally, it shows “how mature soft‐
ware security initiatives evolve, change, and improve over time.”
Indeed, one of the key takeaways from the BSIMM6 is the evolving
nature of the risk landscape. Perhaps that’s one reason why McGraw
emphasizes the need for strong defenses. “We don’t know who does
what on the Internet,” he said. “There is a real attribution problem.
We cannot say precisely who is behind every cyber attack ... Our vul‐
nerabilities are pervasive.”
In a recent article, Herzog described the dilemma facing all cyber
security professionals: “One day, you’re reading the news ... and you
find an article on how to perfectly secure your data in three easy
steps. It says put up a firewall, install antivirus on all your machines,
Models for Change 
| 
9

and use 24/7 automated updating and patching. You laugh out loud
and water comes out your nose.”
Designing Security Into Software and Systems
How useful is cryptography in solving cyber security issues? Most
experts agree that while it can be highly useful, it’s not the complete
solution.
“The idea that you can sprinkle magic crypto fairy dust liberally
around your software and it will be secure is wrong on many levels.
First of all, security is a system property, not a thing. So adding a
thing to your code is unlikely to make it secure. Secondly, cryptogra‐
phy is mind bogglingly hard to get right. Not only is the math diffi‐
cult, applied cryptography is riddled with massive sneaky pitfalls
that are easy to get wrong,” McGraw wrote in a post titled “Seven
myths of software security best practices.”
McGraw’s main message to developers is simple: Build security into
software from the get-go. “Software security is about integrating
security practices into the way you build software, not integrating
security features into your code,” he wrote.
“You need to start thinking about security when you’re in the early
design stage, before you write a single line of code, when you’re
architecting the system,” said Kube. “You have to take into consider‐
ation where the software is going to be installed and what the use
cases are. Then you need to look at the exposures for those particu‐
lar use cases from the standpoint of physical, digital, and network
access.”
Even if every line of code could somehow be made secure, there’s no
guarantee that cyber crime would simply vanish. “There’s always
another way to breach a network,” said Jeffrey Carr, a security con‐
sultant specializing in cyber warfare strategy and tactics. “The surest
and easiest ways are through supply chains and employees.”
Carr is the author of Inside Cyber Warfare: Mapping the Cyber
Underworld (O’Reilly) and numerous blog posts on cyber topics. “I
don’t like to use the term ‘bad guys,’ since good and bad are relative
and easily interchangeable among actors, including us. I prefer
‘rivals’ or ‘adversaries’—and they could be anyone,” said Carr.
10 
| 
Who Are the Bad Guys?

Hacking the Internet of Things
Whether you call them “good guys” or “bad guys,” this much is cer‐
tain: For hackers, the best days are ahead. The expanding Internet of
Things (IoT) offers vast opportunities for hackers bent on making
mischief. At least in the past, hackers were relegated to operating
within computer systems and data networks. When the IoT kicks
into high gear, determined hackers will have access to billions of
connected devices at all levels of society.
“You can tell when someone in their home takes a bath or a shower,
or goes to the bathroom, simply by monitoring a single pressure
measurement device,” said Augustin Chaintreau, an assistant profes‐
sor in the Computer Science Department at Columbia University
and a member of the university’s Data Science Institute. “It’s amaz‐
ing how much can be learned about someone’s lifestyle by mining
information on energy consumption and movement.”
As the IoT permeates more areas of daily life, Chaintreau and his
colleagues are concerned about “information leakage” from seem‐
ingly “benign monitoring” of physical systems such as water tanks,
air conditioners, and heating plants.
The potential for harm grows enormously as the IoT penetrates
industry, manufacturing, and utilities. Although a handful of cyber
security firms have turned their attention to the IoT and its larger
cousin, the Industrial Internet, an unhealthy schism has developed
between the cultures of information technology (IT) and opera‐
tional technology (OT).
The OT community doesn’t trust the IT community to provide gen‐
uinely secure solutions. The common OT argument goes something
like this: “If IT can’t protect credit card information from hackers,
how can we expect it to protect real assets such as power grids,
energy plants, municipal water systems, and transportation net‐
works?”
The IT community, on the other hand, argues that its experience
managing highly complex enterprise systems creates a major advan‐
tage that can be used to fight a wide variety of cyber criminals.
“The trust gap between IT and OT can be enormous,” said Francis
Cianfrocca, founder and chief executive officer of Bayshore Net‐
Hacking the Internet of Things 
| 
11

works, a firm specializing in cyber security for the IoT. “It’s a serious
problem we have to solve.”
A common misconception among OT is that their facilities are
immune from Internet hackers. With the exception of the nuclear
industry, which has taken extreme measures to isolate its systems,
most of the world’s industrial and manufacturing facilities are
already connected to the Internet. “Every place you go, you will find
wireless access points, which are the easiest targets for hackers,”
Cianfrocca said. “So the bottom line is many facilities are vulnerable,
and their operators aren’t admitting it, or they don’t know.”
IT people and OT people look at the world differently, said Jesus
Molina, a security consultant for Fujitsu. IT people focus on secu‐
rity, which they define as protecting systems from the environment.
OT people focus on safety, which they define as protecting the envi‐
ronment from systems, he said.
“With OT, the first priority is safety and the second priority is relia‐
bility,” he said. As a result, OT practitioners often resist shutting
down systems, even when the software in those systems requires
upgrades or patches.
The divergent philosophies of IT and OT make it difficult to simply
“merge” cyber security solutions and to create practical integrated
strategies for managing risk. “Complex software can never be
entirely free of errors,” Kube said. “How do you manage the risk
without taking systems offline?”
Cianfrocca sees an emerging field of “cyber hardening,” in which
military and industrial assets are designed to be more resilient to
cyber attacks. Defense contractors such as Raytheon, for example,
are building anti-hacking systems into connected devices that would
prevent them from being commandeered by unauthorized opera‐
tors.
Raytheon recommends four basic steps that any organization can
take to protect assets from cyber attackers:
1. Conduct vulnerability assessments and penetration testing of
hardware and software;
2. Update outdated and unpatched software, remove unnecessary
software, and delete old user accounts;
12 
| 
Who Are the Bad Guys?

3. Set up intrusion detection, intrusion prevention, and tamper
resistant protections;
4. Make sure supply chain partners employ strong cyber harden‐
ing practices.
“Cyber hardening helps reduce a system’s vulnerability surface. In
other words, it can limit or eliminate security holes hackers could
use to penetrate systems and cause harm,” according to Raytheon’s
website.
Slippery Slopes
Walt Kelly, the creator of “Pogo,” famously wrote, “We have met the
enemy and he is us.” Several of the experts interviewed for this
report said increasing levels of surveillance and interference by gov‐
ernments and their agencies pose far deeper threats to modern soci‐
ety than haphazard acts of hacking committed by terrorists or
criminal gangs. Some governments already make a practice of
restricting Internet access during times of civil unrest. That hasn’t
happened in the United States—yet.
“I trust the people leading the NSA and US Cyber Command today.
But those people won’t be there forever and there’s no guarantee
their successors will have the same commitment to protecting our
freedoms,” Cianfrocca said. “The challenge for us is discerning
whether the government is acting to protect us or to protect itself.”
Since governments “are very good at keeping secrets,” he said, it will
be hard for ordinary citizens to know when the line has been
crossed.
As our lives become a blend of physical and digital experiences,
cyber crime has emerged as a new kind of social disease. We don’t
know yet whether this disease is chronic or acute, but there’s no
denying its existence. Rather than labeling one set of hackers as
“good guys” and another as “bad guys,” we should focus on devising
the best strategies for managing risk over the long term and defend‐
ing ourselves against outright harm in the short term.
“Cyber risk management” might not sound as cool as “cyber war‐
fare,” but it might be the best way for treating a disease that isn’t
likely to go away anytime soon.
Slippery Slopes 
| 
13

About the Authors
Greg Fell is a general partner in The Investors Collaborative, a
Boston-based venture capital group. He is the former chief strategy
officer at Crisply, an enterprise SaaS company that pioneered the
algorithmic quantification of work. Previously, he served as vice
president and chief information officer of Terex Corp., a global
manufacturer of industrial equipment.
Before joining Terex, Fell spent nearly 20 years with Ford Motor
Company. He started as a developer, and worked his way through a
variety of management roles supporting the global Engineering and
Manufacturing functions of the company. He has domain expertise
on CAD/CAM/CAE systems, lean manufacturing, and control sys‐
tems.
Fell is a graduate of Michigan State University, and spent several
years on staff in the College of Engineering as a Senior Research
Programmer and Instructor.
Fell is active in the CIO community. He is the former Chairman of
the Fairfield Westchester Society of Information Managers, a former
Board Member with Junior Achievement, and has mentored high
school students through the First Tee Program.
His book, Decoding the IT Value Problem (Wiley, 2013), is used
widely by CIOs to calculate the economic value of IT projects.
Mike Barlow is an award-winning journalist, author, and communi‐
cations strategy consultant. Since launching his own firm, Cumulus
Partners, he has worked with various organizations in numerous
industries.
Barlow is the author of Learning to Love Data Science (O’Reilly,
2015). He is the coauthor of The Executive’s Guide to Enterprise
Social Media Strategy (Wiley, 2011) and Partnering with the CIO: The
Future of IT Sales Seen Through the Eyes of Key Decision Makers
(Wiley, 2007). He is also the writer of many articles, reports, and
white papers on numerous topics such as collaborative social net‐
working, cloud computing, IT infrastructure, predictive mainte‐
nance, data analytics, and data visualization.
Over the course of a long career, Barlow was a reporter and editor at
several respected suburban daily newspapers, including the Journal

News and the Stamford Advocate. His feature stories and columns
appeared regularly in the Los Angeles Times, Chicago Tribune, Miami
Herald, Newsday and other major US dailies. He has also written
extensively for O’Reilly Media.
A graduate of Hamilton College, he is a licensed private pilot, avid
reader and enthusiastic ice hockey fan.

