 
WHY STARTUPS FAIL 
AND HOW YOURS CAN SUCCEED 
 
 
 
David Feinleib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
ii 
Why Startups Fail: And How Yours Can Succeed 
Copyright © 2012 by David Feinleib 
This work is subject to copyright. All rights are reserved by the Publisher, whether the 
whole or part of the material is concerned, specifically the rights of translation, 
reprinting, reuse of illustrations, recitation, broadcasting, reproduction on microfilms or 
in any other physical way, and transmission or information storage and retrieval, 
electronic adaptation, computer software, or by similar or dissimilar methodology now 
known or hereafter developed. Exempted from this legal reservation are brief excerpts in 
connection with reviews or scholarly analysis or material supplied specifically for the 
purpose of being entered and executed on a computer system, for exclusive use by the 
purchaser of the work. Duplication of this publication or parts thereof is permitted only 
under the provisions of the Copyright Law of the Publisher's location, in its current 
version, and permission for use must always be obtained from Springer. Permissions for 
use may be obtained through RightsLink at the Copyright Clearance Center. Violations 
are liable to prosecution under the respective Copyright Law. 
ISBN-13 (pbk): 978-1-4302-4140-9 
ISBN-13 (electronic): 978-1-4302-4141-6 
Trademarked names, logos, and images may appear in this book. Rather than use a 
trademark symbol with every occurrence of a trademarked name, logo, or image we use 
the names, logos, and images only in an editorial fashion and to the benefit of the 
trademark owner, with no intention of infringement of the trademark. 
The use in this publication of trade names, trademarks, service marks, and similar terms, 
even if they are not identified as such, is not to be taken as an expression of opinion as to 
whether or not they are subject to proprietary rights. 
While the advice and information in this book are believed to be true and accurate at the 
date of publication, neither the authors nor the editors nor the publisher can accept any 
legal responsibility for any errors or omissions that may be made. The publisher makes 
no warranty, express or implied, with respect to the material contained herein. 
President and Publisher: Paul Manning 
Lead Editor: Jeff Olson  
Editorial Board: Steve Anglin, Mark Beckner, Ewan Buckingham, Gary Cornell, 
Morgan Ertel, Jonathan Gennick, Jonathan Hassell, Robert Hutchinson, Michelle 
Lowman, James Markham, Matthew Moodie, Jeff Olson, Jeffrey Pepper,  Douglas 
Pundick, Ben Renow-Clarke, Dominic Shakeshaft, Gwenan Spearing, Matt 
Wade, Tom Welsh 
Editorial Assistant: Rita Fernando 
Copy Editor: Tiffany Taylor 
Compositor: Apress Production 
Indexer: SPi Global 
Cover Designer: Anna Ishchenko 
Distributed to the book trade worldwide by Springer Science+Business Media New York, 
233 Spring Street, 6th Floor, New York, NY 10013. Phone 1-800-SPRINGER, fax (201) 348-
4505, e-mail orders-ny@springer-sbm.com, or visit www.springeronline.com.  
For 
information 
on 
translations, 
please 
e-mail 
rights@apress.com, 
or 
visit 
www.apress.com.  
Apress and friends of ED books may be purchased in bulk for academic, corporate, or 
promotional use. eBook versions and licenses are also available for most titles. For more 
information, reference our Special Bulk Sales–eBook Licensing web page at 
www.apress.com/bulk-sales. 

 
 
 
 
 
To the entrepreneurs, 
 investors, 
 and friends 
 who made this book possible 
 
 
 
 

 
v
 
Contents 
About the Author ................................................................................................................ vi 
Introduction  ........................................................................................................................ vii 
 
Part I—Market, Product, and Entrepreneur ................................................ 1 
Chapter 1: Poor Product-Market Fit ............................................................................. 3 
Chapter 2: Bad Products ................................................................................................ 15 
Chapter 3: The Missing Entrepreneur ......................................................................... 29 
Part II—Sales and Marketing ........................................................................ 43 
Chapter 4: Investing in Sales and Marketing Too Early ............................................ 45 
Chapter 5: Losing Money on Every Sale ..................................................................... 57 
Chapter 6: Invisible Startups .......................................................................................... 71 
Part III—Execution ........................................................................................ 85 
Chapter 7: Failing to Communicate  ............................................................................ 87 
Chapter 8: Not Getting Started .................................................................................... 99 
Chapter 9: Failing to Execute ..................................................................................... 111 
Part IV—Capital and Liquidity ................................................................... 133 
Chapter 10: Pitches That Fail ...................................................................................... 135 
 
Chapter 11: Managing Liquidity .................................................................................. 153 
 
Chapter 12: From Failure, Success ............................................................................ 165 
 
 
Index  .................................................................................................................................. 177 

 
vi
About the Author 
David Feinleib is an investor, adviser, and serial entrepreneur. As an en-
trepreneur and venture investor, he has been responsible for investments 
totaling more than $100 million. His passion for entrepreneurship goes back 
to his childhood when he started writing and selling software programs at 
age 12. Feinleib later joined Microsoft, where he became the company’s 
youngest technical evangelist. He started four companies between 2000 and 
2005. One was acquired by Hewlett-Packard, another by Keynote Systems. 
After joining venture-capital firm Mohr Davidow in 2006, he became a gen-
eral partner in 2009, where he led investments in consumer Internet and 
software companies. In 2011, Feinleib’s love for entrepreneurship took him 
back to starting his own companies, while continuing to advise and invest in 
others. Feinleib holds a master’s in business administration from the Stan-
ford Graduate School of Business and a bachelor’s degree from Cornell 
University, where he was a Kodak Scholar. He is also an avid triathlete and 
violinist. 
 
 

 
vii 
Introduction 
 
Some eight of ten new businesses fail within their first three years. Nine of ten 
venture-backed startups fail to generate meaningful returns. Venture capitalists 
turn down 99% of the pitches they see. The odds appear to be stacked against 
you!  
But entrepreneurs often make the same avoidable mistakes over and over. 
Why Startups Fail can help you beat the odds and avoid the pitfalls and traps 
that lead to early startup death.  
Numerous books have been written about winners like Apple, Google, and 
Facebook. Few, however, capture the mistakes: the key decisions that led to 
running out of cash and early startup failure. Some startups spend millions 
building products the market doesn’t want, others spend too much too early 
on marketing and sales, and still others hang on too long without pivoting out 
of bad markets. Knowing how to avoid these mistakes doesn’t guarantee start-
up success. But it certainly increases your chances. 
Whether you are a soon-to-be entrepreneur thinking about taking the leap, a 
bootstrapped entrepreneur trying to energize a business three or four years 
in, or a venture-backed entrepreneur trying to scale, Why Startups Fail shows 
you the key mistakes that cause new ventures to fail—and how to avoid them.  
As a serial entrepreneur and venture capitalist, I’ve been part of or witnessed a 
fair number of startup successes and failures, some of which you read about in 
this book. In some cases, I disguise the companies and players involved or use 
composites, but the essence of each story contains a powerful kernel of wis-
dom—or point of caution. 

Introduction 
viii 
Most recently, I was a general partner at Mohr Davidow, a Sand Hill Road (Sili-
con Valley) venture capital firm with $2B under management, where I worked 
from 2006–2011. Before Mohr Davidow, I started four companies, two of 
which were acquired. I’ve bootstrapped and raised venture capital. I’ve expe-
rienced both sides of the fundraising process: raising money and investing it. 
I’ve bought and sold companies, and I worked at a big software company—
Microsoft—in the 1990s.  
Expanding on my popular VCDave.com blog post Why Startups Fail, I use short, 
powerful chapters to reveal the keys to successful entrepreneurship: excellent 
product-market fit, focus, superb execution, the ability to pivot, stellar teams, 
and wise spending. In Why Startups Fail, you learn from the mistakes I’ve seen 
made over and over and find out how to position your startup for success. 

P A R T 
I 
Market, 
Product, and 
Entrepreneur 
 
 
Investors are fond of debating which they care about more: the market or the 
entrepreneur. Some argue that given a great market, they can replace the team 
in order to execute on and capture that market. Others invest in great teams.  
The reality is, great entrepreneurs find great markets. They build world-class 
products for those markets. They create efficient organizations that can deliver 
those products to market—execution machines that outrun the competition. 
What’s more, many successful entrepreneurs are not necessarily first to 
market with their products. Rather, they build products that better meet the 
needs of their users.  
In Chapter 1, I’ll discuss how to avoid bad markets. We’ll take a look at how 
some very successful companies pivoted from bad markets into good ones and 
how you can do the same.  

PART I: Market, Product, and Entrepreneur 
2 
No one sets out to build a bad product, yet it happens all the time. In Chapter 
2 we’ll talk about the reasons bad products happen to good entrepreneurs. I’ll 
explain how you can avoid building products people don’t want, reduce adop-
tion friction, and gain rapid adoption. 
Believe it or not, a lot of companies are missing an Entrepreneur with a  
Capital “E”—a market visionary and product picker. I’ll talk about what to do if 
you’ve lost your edge as an Entrepreneur and how to get it back. We’ll 
explore how to fail fast—since it’s not failure itself that will kill your company 
but failing slowly that will do you in.  
In Part 1, then, we explore three of the key ingredients for a successful start-
up: a great market, a great product, and a world-class Entrepreneur. You’ll 
come away with the knowledge to identify if any of these ingredients are 
missing—and how to remedy the situation. 

C H A P T E R 
1 
Poor Product-
Market Fit 
Pivot Your Way to a Successful Launch 
It may seem obvious, but building a product the market wants is critical to 
keeping your startup from running out of cash. It’s all too easy to keep your 
product in the back room, iterating on it for months or years, only to find out 
no one wants to use or buy it. Products the market doesn’t want not only 
waste valuable capital, but also waste your time as an entrepreneur. Finding the 
right balance between customer feedback and staying true to your change-the-
world vision is hard, but it’s critical to all that follows: recruiting with a great 
team, raising capital, and selling your product.  
Product-Market Fit 
Many startups never achieve the elusive product-market fit. Once found, 
product-market fit transforms a startup’s trajectory. Before a company finds 
product-market fit, nearly everything the company does (or should do) is 
about the search for product-market fit. After the company finds it, everything 
is about scaling: ramping up operations to accommodate a rising number of 
customers. You want to scale users/customers, team, and infrastructure.  
Some companies—Facebook and Zynga, for example—find product-market fit 
right out of the gate. Or at least they appear to. Others, like Intuit, go along 
for years, sometimes teetering on the brink of bankruptcy, until they crack the 
code.  

Chapter 1 | Poor Product-Market Fit 
4 
The best entrepreneurs are relentless in their pursuit of big markets and prod-
ucts to fit those markets. So why do so many startups never achieve the fit?  
Some spend too much time on technology. They keep building without getting 
user or customer feedback. All too often, this happens with purely technical 
founders building product for product’s sake. Some fear rejection: they take it 
personally when others don’t want their product.  
Others fail to face the reality of what the data tells them. They refuse to con-
front the tough questions: was my thesis incorrect? If so, what should I do?  
Still more never find a way to reach their market. The market need is there, 
the product is compelling, but they can’t reach their customers. Many compa-
nies trying to target the small-business segment have failed because of this. In 
such scenarios, a startup’s success becomes a lot less about building great 
product and a lot more about efficiently reaching the potential customers. 
But worst of all is achieving product-market fit only to discover that the actual 
market is very, very small.  
Big Markets 
Companies targeting small markets are more susceptible to failure than their big-
market counterparts.  
These companies can still be rewarding businesses—for a time. Some entre-
preneurs don’t have the aspiration to go after big markets or build big busi-
nesses, or they have a desire to build something small and boutique-like—a 
bed and breakfast, for example, or a local restaurant.  
But when it comes to the most successful tech startups—Apple, Facebook, 
Google, Salesforce.com, to name just a few—great markets are synonymous 
with big markets. Companies with big markets benefit from economies of 
scale. They can spend more on customer acquisition and be more cost-
effective on distribution, and, simply put, they have a lot more potential users 
of their product or customers to sell to. Amazon commoditized local book-
sellers; Walmart commoditized local retailers. Time and again, those going af-
ter big markets dominate those going after small ones.  
As an entrepreneur, your goal is to find a big-market opportunity and deliver a 
product that captures it. Going after a big-market opportunity vastly reduces 
your chances of failure. To capture a big-market opportunity, you must start 
off with a big market.  

Why Startups Fail 
5
No doubt that seems obvious, but I repeatedly see entrepreneurs start in small 
markets. It’s just as hard to execute on a big-market opportunity as on a small 
one—sometimes harder. Yet entrepreneurs continue to target small markets. 
Why? 
Often, big markets appear unassailable. For years, Electronic Arts (EA) domi-
nated the software market for games. At one point, the company had a market 
cap of more than $17 billion. Yet in just a few years, Zynga, a new tech startup, 
swooped in and dominated a new area of gaming: social gaming. This was a 
market that EA should have dominated but failed to. That’s because EA was 
trapped by its legacy model, whereas the founder of Zynga recognized a dis-
ruptive wave and seized it. 
EA’s games were expensive to produce. Its distribution model of putting soft-
ware on retail-store shelves was both costly and outdated. It had to spend tens 
of millions of dollars on marketing to drive awareness of new games. Even for 
existing games, the company had to spend heavily on marketing to drive de-
mand for new versions. And many of its games appealed only to a niche of 
hard-core gamers.  
For all these reasons, many venture capitalists steered away from investments 
in the gaming market. They worried about the costs of content creation, mar-
keting, and distribution. EA’s competition came only in the form of other well-
established players who could afford similar investments in development and 
distribution, such as Microsoft and Sony. 
Ride the Wave 
If you want to be a great surfer, you’ve got to find a great wave to ride.  
Zynga founder Mark Pincus recognized that new social platform Facebook 
could provide an incredibly efficient way to deliver and market games. Zynga’s 
social games used Facebook for initial distribution. They also incented existing 
users to get new users to play by making the participation of other users a 
core part of every game. In just one example, to build bigger and bigger cities 
in the Zynga game CityVille, users had to invite their friends to staff various 
functions in their city, such as the Town Hall.  
Because they relied on lower-quality graphics, Zynga’s games were far less 
costly to produce. Their relative simplicity and the fact that it was free to start 
playing made them appealing to a much broader audience. Zynga made sure 

Chapter 1 | Poor Product-Market Fit 
6 
there was zero friction to adoption: that is, nothing was standing in the way 
between them and their potential users.  
Zynga stole what’s called timeshare: it gave people an alternative place to spend 
their time during the day. Instead of consuming soap operas, they could now 
consume Zynga games and gain a sense of fulfillment—building a virtual city, 
for example—in the process.  
The company also introduced innovative new adoption and monetization mod-
els. The games were free to play but required users to purchase virtual goods 
if they wanted to move up more quickly. Virtual goods were not a new con-
cept—they had been available in Asia for years, and many skeptics of social 
gaming argued that such goods would never be adopted outside Asia.  
But by making them easily accessible and a core part of the games, Zynga 
brought them to the mainstream. In part, this was because users felt they were 
getting the game for free to begin with, so they had less of an issue paying for 
items later. It was also possible because Zynga capitalized on social dynamics: 
players felt competitive pressure to buy virtual items that would help them win 
the friendly yet competitive games among their circle of friends. This coupled 
with addictive design and gameplay dynamics turned the games into cash 
machines.  
Some of today’s most successful tech startups have come about because their 
entrepreneurs recognized a market opportunity or disruptive wave and de-
signed products to take advantage of those waves, introducing even greater 
disruption in the process. Zynga capitalized on the opportunity presented by 
Facebook and then introduced more disruption through low-cost games, new 
monetization models, and a zero barrier to adoption. Zynga is just one exam-
ple of a company that was hugely successful in finding product-market fit in this 
manner.  
Great Product, Bad Market 
A talented investor once told me, “A great market and a bad product is better 
than a bad market and a great product.” All too often, entrepreneurs target 
small markets. Although targeting a big market might seem close to impossible 
due to the gorillas already in that market, the reality is that attracting capital 
for businesses targeting small markets is a lot harder than raising capital to go 
after big-market opportunities.  

Why Startups Fail 
7
Often, entrepreneurs are ahead of their time. Customers aren’t ready to 
spend money on or change habits for unproven benefits. The company runs 
out of money waiting for the market to develop; or it tries to start over, but 
it’s too late. 
Company R (a composite) had a compelling concept, but customers weren’t 
ready to buy in. CEO R proposed a restart: rather than sell to the market 
segment he was in, he would target a different market segment. As a result, he 
would significantly reduce Company’s R’s sales and marketing expenses. Com-
pany R was mildly successful with its new plan but burned through lots of cash 
before it reconfigured.  
If you have a great team executing flawlessly, but there just aren’t that many 
potential users or customers for your product, your team’s potential is re-
stricted. Many market opportunities simply aren’t worthy of the teams that go 
after them. Conversely, teams that stick around in bad markets too long have 
to find out the hard way that the market always wins. 
Product limitations can also restrict potential market size. Some products, for 
example, require significant customization and correspondingly high setup 
costs. That means it’s expensive and time-consuming to extract value from 
them. Thus, the product becomes limited to those customers or users willing 
to make the time and capital investment to use the product—likely a lot 
smaller than the total market size originally envisioned for the product.  
Company W had a product that should have appealed to the owner of every 
web site on the planet. But it took three to six months to customize the prod-
uct and have it start working. Those customers willing to pay the price of im-
plementation in both time and dollars saved tens of millions. Unfortunately, 
only a few were willing to make that kind of upfront investment, ruling out all 
but about 1,000 customers in the world.  
The trickle-down effect was immense: the sales organization was structured 
for heavy, long-cycle selling. The product was designed to be customized, so 
getting to a self-serve model, although always a goal, never became a priority. 
When it came to sales, other companies couldn’t compete directly on tech-
nology. But they came close by offering different solutions that solved the same 
problem. Those solutions weren’t as effective, but they were good enough. 
Although the company had an incredible team, the true market—as restricted 
by the reality of the product—held them back. 

Chapter 1 | Poor Product-Market Fit 
8 
Structural Issues 
Some markets come with structural issues that can make achieving product-
market fit extremely difficult. Life-science companies, for example, frequently 
face regulatory hurdles (for example, FDA compliance) that are specific to 
their market.  
Markets like these often have existing monetization models—ways they turn 
their efforts into money—that companies must live within as well. When it 
comes to monetization, your users can pay, or a third party can pay you. Third 
parties can be advertisers, in the case of ad-supported businesses. Or they can 
be other large companies, such as healthcare insurers reimbursing patients for 
healthcare costs. One big mistake startups make is assuming people will pay 
when they won’t. 
It’s very hard to change human behavior. That’s especially true when it comes 
to trying to convince people to pay for something they’re used to getting for 
free. Consider the case of healthcare startups. The widespread adoption of 
smartphones and iPads coupled with rapidly rising healthcare costs has encour-
aged many entrepreneurs to go after massive healthcare IT opportunities with 
innovative new software and hardware. Many assume that consumers will pay 
for these applications, yet consumers are used to employer-provided insurance 
covering their healthcare costs. As a result, these startups have to be extra 
savvy not only about finding the right product-market fit but also when navi-
gating the structure of their market. 
Finding Fit 
As legendary entrepreneur Steve Blank once said, the best way to find 
product-market fit is to “get out of the building.” Users and customers can’t 
define your vision for you—nor should they—but they can inform it. Today 
you can get out of the building physically and go visit users or customers, or 
you can do it virtually. 
Virtually getting out of the building can be as easy as putting up a landing page 
(that is, a one-page version of your product or service) and buying Google ads 
to drive traffic to it. Or you can release a beta of your product and drive orga-
nic growth.  

Why Startups Fail 
9
It can mean building a version of your app and putting it in the app store to see 
if people will use it. It can also mean talking to customers and getting a few of 
them to commit to be early users of your product, if you build it.  
Whatever your approach, these days there is no excuse for not getting out of 
the building. And certainly in the software world, there is no excuse for not pi-
voting repeatedly, and inexpensively, until you find product-market fit.  
Reaching Your Market 
Great product-market fit means having not only a product that matches the 
market, but also a way to distribute that product efficiently. As the old joke 
goes, you lose money on every sale, but you make it up in volume. Unfortu-
nately, that model doesn’t last long.  
Small businesses have always been the siren song of target markets due to the 
immense number of them. But startups that go after small businesses find out 
the two painful truths of this market: the customers have little money and are 
very hard to reach.  
When it comes to reaching customers, some markets hold you hostage. Com-
pany M, which was started long before Apple introduced the iPhone and 
Google introduced Android, had an innovative mobile product for consumers. 
However, the product had to be integrated with the wireless carriers (AT&T, 
Verizon, and so on) to work. Not only did the company have to negotiate 
business deals with the wireless carriers and get those carriers to certify its 
applications; it also had to develop, test, and integrate its software with every 
phone vendor on whose phone the software was to ship.  
After several years, the company got its software deployed and started gene-
rating revenue for the carriers. Every time a phone shipped, the company 
made money. Then a not-so-funny thing happened: the carriers decided they 
didn’t like the revenue split they had negotiated with the company, and they 
put a ceiling on the amount of revenue Company M could make. While still 
generating tens of millions of dollars in revenue, the lucrative contracts now 
had a limit. The company’s revenue potential was restricted, as was its 
potential value.  
The company had little recourse. The carriers controlled the distribution 
channel—each carrier had tens of millions of subscribers, and there was vir-
tually no other way to reach them. The choice of target market limited the 

Chapter 1 | Poor Product-Market Fit 
10 
company’s upside. “One thing’s for sure—I’ll never build a business like that 
again,” the founder often said when asked about what he was going to do next. 
Of course, partnering with big industry players that have existing distribution 
offers one huge advantage: you get to leverage their distribution. That works 
great as long as the value equation is relatively equal: your partners value your 
product, and you value their distribution. But if you end up with only one part-
ner, or your partners can get a similar product somewhere else, watch out. 
You soon find your market holding you hostage. 
When to Pivot and How 
Changing direction is one of the biggest strategic decisions a founder ever has 
to make. Change course too early, and you never see an idea through long 
enough to understand whether the market will accept it. Wait too long, and 
you risk running out of cash. Change direction frequently, and you lose the 
confidence of your team and investors in your ability to lead. How then should 
an entrepreneur decide how and when to pivot? 
Knowing when to pivot is what makes entrepreneurship an art and not a 
science. But the first step is to confront the data. Most entrepreneurs start 
with a thesis, whether they articulate it or not. They believe that if they build 
X, then Y will happen. More often than not, their thesis is incorrect. 
The founder of Company B believed he could reach the market by signing up 
small businesses as customers and giving away the company’s service for free 
to consumers. It turned out that the small businesses wanted the company to 
have millions of consumers using its service before they would sign on as cus-
tomers. Although the founder eventually pivoted, it took him more than 24 
months to make the change, wasting valuable time in the process. He went 
through multiple sales and marketing executives before admitting that although 
he was right about being in a big market ripe for disruption, his approach to 
taking his product to market simply wasn’t going to work.  
“What is the data telling me?” is critical question to ask yourself; being honest 
with yourself about the answer is even more so. When there is a difference 
between your thesis and the reality of the data, it’s time to think hard about a 
pivot.  
Data can make a potentially tough discussion with management, investors, and 
board members a lot easier. Although sunk cost logically shouldn’t factor into 
what you do going forward, the reality is that sunk cost weighs heavily on both 

Why Startups Fail 
11
management’s and investors’ emotions when making decisions. Discussions 
about pivots may still be emotional and challenging, but when you use the data 
to frame them, they become a lot more productive.  
Pivoting can be tough. But staying in a bad market is even tougher; and, ulti-
mately, the market will eat up all your capital and beat you. Iteration is great 
for perfecting a product once there’s demand, but more often than not, radical 
change is required—either in product or market—to achieve product-market 
fit. 
Capitalizing Too Early 
Raising too much capital too early can make pivoting even harder. The vast 
majority of investors prefer to invest in a strategy that’s already working, when 
a company is at a key inflection point and needs capital to scale.  
Some companies have to raise large amounts of capital even to have a shot at 
achieving product-market fit—those building hardware, for example. But out-
side of those companies, it’s best not to raise too much capital until you’ve 
achieved product-market fit and are ready to scale.  
Ironically, raising too much capital too early reduces your options more fre-
quently than it expands them. Most investors expect companies to spend the 
money they raise in support of growth, not keep it for a rainy day. Whether 
they admit it or not, founders who raise a lot of money feel intense pressure 
to spend it.  
Moreover, with big capital comes big expectations. The founder of Company E 
raised tens of millions of dollars based on his reputation as the former head of 
a very well-known tech company and the size of the market he was targeting. 
He marketed his deal exceptionally well and raised more than twice as much 
money than he had planned. He promised his new investors exceptional 
growth: growth that never came because he never achieved product-market 
fit. Thinking it was just a matter of getting the word out, he spent exorbitantly 
on marketing that never paid back with results, instead of focusing on product.  
His competitor, Company C, came from behind and achieved ten times as 
much annual revenue in 24 months, starting from nothing. Company C ulti-
mately became the market leader.  
What did the two teams do differently? Company C’s team focused ruthlessly 
on building just enough product to satisfy the company’s target market, and 

Chapter 1 | Poor Product-Market Fit 
12 
then spent aggressively on sales and marketing once they saw that customers 
loved what they had built. In contrast, the founder of Company E painted a 
great vision, but having promised so much, never faced up to the fact that the 
market didn’t want the product he’d built. After spending some $40 million, 
the company was recapitalized, and the investors brought in a new CEO to try 
to turn the company around.  
Pivots That Worked 
Many very successful companies started out doing one thing but had to change 
their target market in order to be successful. Microsoft began by building 
software-development tools but seized on the opportunity to sell the operat-
ing system software (DOS) that went with the new (at the time) personal 
computer IBM was introducing. In fact, Microsoft licensed the first version of 
the software from another company so it could ship the software. 
Payments company PayPal started out as a service for beaming payments be-
tween Palm Pilots; it wasn’t until the company focused on e-mail–based pay-
ments—and rode the huge wave of Internet auctions taking place on eBay—
that the company became a runaway success.  
Intuit was started in 1983, but it took years for the company to get significant 
traction in its market. The company teetered on the edge of bankruptcy be-
fore its marketing campaigns and the launch of Windows 3.0 made it 
successful.  
In all three cases, although each company stayed true to its vision, each pivoted 
to capitalize on a large underlying wave.  
Summary 
Product-market fit is that often-elusive but critical success factor for every 
startup. Companies targeting big markets beat out those targeting small ones. 
Bad markets kill potentially great startups.  
Failure comes from 
• 
Starting with a small market 
• 
Not confronting the data 
• 
Holding onto an incorrect thesis too long 

Why Startups Fail 
13
• 
Having to spend too much to reach your market 
• 
Lack of an underlying wave  
 
Market success comes from 
• 
Going after a big market 
• 
Building a product the market wants 
• 
Pivoting until you reach product-market fit 
• 
Efficiently reaching your market 
• 
Riding a huge wave 

C H A P T E R 
2 
Bad Products 
Less Is More 
Many potentially great companies fail because they deliver bad products to 
market. Not because the product doesn’t fit the market, but because the 
product doesn’t work. It’s hard to use, it breaks, or it doesn’t do what the 
user thought it would.  
To get people to buy or use something you’ve built, it has to be truly great. 
Large, established companies can get customers to buy bad products. But the 
tactics they use don’t work for startups. Building a house of cards doesn’t 
work either. Sure, you can spend a lot on sales and marketing to drive rapid 
customer adoption; but ultimately, those customers won’t stick around, and 
neither will your company.  
That’s why customers and users have to love your product. Not only will they use 
it, but they’ll get others to use it too.  
No one sets out to build a bad product. So how do bad products end up get-
ting built, and what can you do to make sure yours isn’t one of them? 
Falling Victim to Product Blindness 
There is no substitute for building a product you love to use. When you use 
your own product, you experience first-hand the rough edges, the details, and 
the bugs that separate great products from bad ones.  
Yet even those who use their own products deliver bad products to market. 
That’s because everyone suffers from product blindness. Product blindness 
occurs when you use your product so much that you subconsciously work 
around the difficulties. Too hard to sign up? No problem—use an existing 
account for testing. Trouble finding your site on the Web? Not a big deal—you 

Chapter 2 | Bad Products 
16 
already know your site’s address! Occasional data-reliability issues? Not an 
issue for your test account, because you just reload the data.  
Using a product means really using it. Not for testing, not with test data or test 
accounts, but using it day to day. If you’re building a game, that means actively 
playing the game, not just watching from the sidelines. If you’re creating a 
product that serves businesses, it means running your own business using your 
product.  
What should you do if you’re not building a product you would use every day? 
Think twice about whether to build that product!  
If you’re still intent on building that product, either find at least one use case1 
in which you can use your own product, or partner with a customer to find 
that use case. Most often, this challenge arises in a business-to-business com-
pany that is building a product for other companies to use. Examples include 
applications such as HR, accounting, and inventory-tracking systems built for 
large organizations, as well as infrastructure products like storage systems. In 
these cases, it behooves you to build a key application you can use daily to test 
out the system, or to partner with a customer to build that application to ad-
dress a key use case for them.  
Consider the case of Company S (a composite), a storage company. The op-
erations of the company weren’t dissimilar from those of other startups—
storing files such as customer presentations and product specifications. Yet the 
company was building a high-performance storage product for large amounts 
of data, intending for the product to be faster than any other on the market.  
What did the company do? It partnered with a large customer that had years 
of data to work with.  
Company S’s engineers spent months working on-site in the customer’s labs, 
using actual customer data to test the performance of the storage system. 
Members of the customer’s team worked alongside Company S’s engineers 
testing the product. Before the product was released to the broader market, 
Company S worked closely with the customer and a handful of other early-
adopter customers to deploy the product in those customers’ production 
environments.  
                                                 
1 A use case describes a specific scenario in which a user uses a product. Ideally, use cases 
model an entire scenario end to end, including the outcome, actual user (what they do, 
who are they, and so on), and detailed steps in which that user interacts with the product.  

Why Startups Fail 
17
It wasn’t the same as every employee at Company S using the product daily, 
but it was a close second. As a result, when Company S delivered its products 
to market, they had already been tested in real customer environments.  
Why did these customers agree to let Company S use their resources, which 
included space, infrastructure, data, and people? Because Company S created 
an exclusive early-adopter program, which provided access and discounted pric-
ing to its upcoming product. But that alone wasn’t enough. The real secret was 
that Company S was building a product that—if it worked—solved a very real 
pain point2 for Company S’s customers.  
Had Company S’s engineers built the product in the absence of the early-
adopter customers, they would have become highly susceptible to product 
blindness. In comparison, the early adopters had no problem being incredibly 
blunt with Company S about key product issues. After all, they were consum-
ing valuable time and resources working with the early versions of the product. 
The engineers at Company S fixed the product issues as a result.  
How Bad Products Get Built 
Now consider the case of Company T (also a composite). Company T spent 
years building incredible technology. The concept was powerful. Both investors 
and customers loved the promise of the product.  
The reality, however, was another story. In practice, Company T’s product 
failed to deliver on its promise. The product worked flawlessly for a very nar-
row set of use cases. But it didn’t fare so well when faced with the breadth of 
use cases thrown at it by millions of users.  
The company had unparalleled technology but couldn’t make it accessible to 
users. The founder of Company T was an excellent technologist. He later said 
that he wished he had focused on real-world use cases sooner. Instead, like a 
moth to a flame, he was drawn to ever-newer innovations.  
When the technology was 80% complete, for example, he moved on to the 
next problem. That by itself might not have been an issue—every organization 
needs forward-thinking technologists—but it set the tone for the rest of the 
                                                 
2 Pain point is VC speak for the problem a product or a company successfully solves—
usually something so painful that customers rush to buy the solution and make the startup 
successful. 

Chapter 2 | Bad Products 
18 
organization that fit and finish weren’t important. Unfortunately, customers 
thought they were important. 
This is just one example of how bad products get built. To be fair, the 80% of 
the product that was built was incredible. It was the remaining 20% that failed. 
The products that Company T delivered never lived up to their promise.  
Successful startups continually walk the fine line between delivering on the 
bleeding edge to get product into market, and sweating the details. Plus, it’s no 
easy feat to stay focused on delivering great product while operating your 
business. Fit and finish require a lot of attention to detail. If you don’t find 
those details interesting, hire or partner with someone who does.  
Failure to Focus 
As legendary football coach Nick Saban put it, the key to focus is to “eliminate 
the clutter.”  
One of the biggest challenges I see in venture-backed companies is a desire to 
build more-more-more. When companies are flush with capital, the hard 
tradeoffs are easier to avoid.  
The same phenomenon occurs in many bootstrapped startups under the guise 
of not committing to a single strategy. It’s good to change your strategy when 
it’s not working. But you have to commit to a strategy first—even if only until 
you prove that it doesn’t work. Some startups try so many different things in 
an incomplete way that they never truly get to test their product concept. 
Other startups simply don’t have a clear vision of what they’re trying to build. 
The key to focus is to articulate succinctly what you’re trying to accomplish. 
Facebook connects people. Google lets you search. Amazon is the place to buy 
anything online. If you can’t make a similarly succinct statement about your 
mission, you’re not focused enough.  
You may argue that mission statements are a load of BS for big companies and 
big organizations. There’s some truth to that—the mission statements on 
those big company web sites—“We strive to decrease the inefficiencies asso-
ciated with…” are consensus-written hogwash that started out as good ideas 
but ended up badly.  
When it comes to startups, however, a mission statement captures in a sen-
tence or a phrase what it is you’re trying to do. It’s a rallying cry for your 

Why Startups Fail 
19
team, whether that team is 1 person or 100. It informs product tradeoffs, mar-
keting messaging, and sales strategy. 
Failure to focus comes in many different forms. When people talk about prod-
ucts that are too complex, have too many features, or—trying to be polite—
do many things well, what they’re really talking about is a lack of focus.  
Companies that fail to focus do so because they haven’t yet found their market 
sweet spot, their founders enjoy building product for product’s sake, or 
they’re not willing to let go of a product that is no longer core to the business. 
Like many startups, after a few years in business, Company Y ended up with 
two main product lines. On the face of it, this was not a bad thing—the com-
pany was generating revenue from both. The products started out as one and 
then later split into two because a group of customers were interested in a 
subset of features from the original product.  
Over time, the customer bases for the two products became more and more 
distinct, creating a real challenge for Company Y. The sales strategies and sales 
people were completely independent, as were the product teams. In reality, 
the startup was two startups in one.  
Company Y’s competitors for the second product gradually and then more 
rapidly began beating Company Y to market. Although Company Y kept win-
ning customers, the competition seemed to be a step ahead on feature set and 
sales. Engineers became frustrated as they were pulled back and forth between 
the two product lines. Company Y’s management team agonized for months 
about what to do—they didn’t want to “put the wood behind the arrow” of 
one product or the other; they still believed their original product was the 
bigger market opportunity, yet they couldn’t get themselves to give up the 
revenue from the second product.  
The turning point came in the form of a 1-2-3 punch. The first punch was 
when a huge deal for Company Y to be acquired fell through because the 
acquiring company was only interested in the first business, not the second.  
Punch number two came during an embarrassing board meeting in which the 
CEO indicated that both businesses were struggling. The mood in the room 
was grim.  
Then came the third punch: another industry player eagerly wanted the second 
business, but not the first. The message to Company Y could not have been 
clearer: the two businesses together were worthless. Separate, they were 
incredibly valuable. The management team sold off the second business and 

Chapter 2 | Bad Products 
20 
went on to build a much more valuable company, but not before wasting a 
year of cash trying to keep both businesses afloat.  
The lesson? Quickly take the actions that the market is eventually going to 
force you to take anyway; don’t want for external pressures to force decisions 
on you. Force them on yourself. 
Whether you have too many product lines or too many features, it’s easy to 
deceive yourself into thinking that if your product or your company does many 
things, at least one of them will appeal to potential users.  
The reality is, users don’t use a product for its breadth of features. They use it 
or buy it because it does one thing really well. It solves one huge pain point. 
When that pain point or unfulfilled need is the same for thousands of custom-
ers or millions of users, it creates the potential for a very successful startup.  
Too Much Friction to Achieve Adoption 
Frequently, companies build products that have the potential to offer tremend-
ous value—if only their users could get started using the products! Consider 
all the web sites with long sign-up forms, or sites that require users to enter 
lots of information manually before they can derive value. In contrast, consider 
a site like Facebook, where a simple address-book import unlocks the majority 
of the site’s value. Once connected to their friends, users can see a steady flow 
of photos and updates; only later do they need to start making their own posts 
and uploading their own photos. 
For startups selling to businesses, many products require so much setup and 
customization that potential customers simply aren’t willing to make the 
required up-front investment. Compare Siebel—a sales-management system 
that required on-premises installation and significant customization—and 
Salesforce.com, now the dominant sales-management system, which requires 
no installation and comes preconfigured.  
If it takes a long time or a big investment of people or capital to derive value 
from your product, you need to rethink your product strategy. No amount of 
marketing and selling can take the place of an easy-to-adopt product that 
delivers value quickly. 

Why Startups Fail 
21
Products That Don’t Acquire More Users 
In Web 1.0, marketing and sales were almost completely independent of 
product. Products were built, marketed, and sold—although not necessarily in 
that order. Some companies pre-marketed their products long before they 
were available to the public, generating demand. But product was its own 
thing; sales and marketing were “those people over there.” Engineers didn’t 
want to have much to do with marketing and sales, and vice versa. In Web 3.0, 
product, sales, and marketing go hand in hand. 
Today, product innovation is critical to your acquisition strategy. The dawn of Web 
3.0 has made designing user acquisition into your product from the get-go 
paramount. This book digs deeper into how sales and marketing relate to 
product later on.  
Companies have long spent the vast majority of their money getting the word 
out. The Internet opened an incredible new path to the consumer, and 
although advertising became much more targeted, the value exchange re-
mained the same: spend money to drive brand awareness or to acquire indi-
vidual customers. 
With the advent of the social web, things changed. No longer were marketing, 
sales, and product separate. Facebook (the product) sold itself—existing users 
invited new users, creating a new zero-cost user-acquisition model. Gaming 
company Zynga lets users choose between paying actual money for items and 
inviting friends in order to obtain those items. 
Obviously, not every company can benefit from this kind of pure network 
effect.3 But there are many product lessons to be learned from these compa-
nies, and this one is the key: today, great products market and sell themselves. 
A truly great product isn’t just one that people want to tell their colleagues 
and friends about; the product also makes it easy to do so.  
Later in the book, I get into some specific tactics for making products of any 
kind more viral—moving through the market in a way that increases the cus-
tomer base dramatically. But the core point is that your product not only has 
to be designed from the outset with marketing and sales built in, but it also has 
                                                 
3 With network effects—when they work well—the more users there are of a product, the 
more valuable the product becomes for those users. Examples include the telephone, 
Facebook, PayPal, and LinkedIn. Each additional person joining the network makes the 
network more valuable, and each person derives more value as a result.  

Chapter 2 | Bad Products 
22 
to incent existing users to market your product actively to other users 
because they derive real benefit from doing so.  
Simple, Universal, and Viral 
Great products are simple, universal, and viral. This applies to consumer prod-
ucts and to business-to-business ones as well: 
• 
Simple: The product is easy to use. Its functionality is 
accessible. It may have lots of features, but they’re under 
the covers, discoverable by users later.  
• 
Universal: Whatever you’re building is broadly applicable. 
You can build a good product that only a few people use, 
but the definition of a great product is one that’s adopted 
by many.  
• 
Viral: Your product markets and spreads itself. 
Consider Twitter’s 140-character limit. Users don’t have to think too much 
about what to do because they’re limited to 140 characters. A link is a very 
easy way to share something you’re interested in with others. The product is 
incredibly easy to use. And users see other users using it, producing a network 
effect.  
Pandora is another great example of sheer simplicity: the Thumbs Up / Thumbs 
Down buttons as a way to indicate what you like and dislike are brilliantly sim-
ple. The rest happens under the covers based on that simple action.  
What’s an equivalent in a business context? Anti-spam products. Such products 
of course rely on lots of complex algorithms, models, and data. But they also 
rely on another very simple action: the Delete key. Delete a message without 
reading it, and chances are, it’s spam.  
How can you implement viral marketing in a business product? Granted, it’s 
harder for business products and even more difficult for infrastructure 
products—products that aren’t visible to end users, such as storage and net-
working gear.  
Dropbox is one company crossing the consumer/business divide with its file-
storage and -sharing offering. Not only is the product simple to use, but it also 
gets users to spread the word, both by sharing files and by encouraging users 

Why Startups Fail 
23
invite their friends to get more storage space. Dropbox also fits a universal 
rule: everyone needs to store and share files.  
What about infrastructure companies? Certainly viral isn’t easy to implement 
when end users aren’t involved. But Intel came as close as possible to viral for 
an infrastructure product—a hardware chip—through its “Intel Inside” 
campaign. It was by no means zero-cost user acquisition: Intel had to spend 
millions of dollars on the campaign. But it paid off.  
When it comes to infrastructure, the proxy for viral is social pressure: thus you 
see ad campaigns like “9 out of 10 Fortune 100 companies use X.” These are 
what I call assisted-viral. The products themselves are by no means viral, but the 
companies running these campaigns take advantage of existing customer adop-
tion to drive social pressure and thereby further adoption.  
What’s more, product reviews are readily accessible online, and business col-
leagues are connected via networks like LinkedIn. As a result, the word on 
products—both good and bad—spreads like wildfire. It’s easier than ever to 
get the word out, but it’s also harder than ever to escape a bad review. 
Whatever your business, make your product incredibly simple to use. The old 
saying “less is more” could not apply more strongly than to product design. 
The Magic of Product Chemistry 
The secret sauce of great products is product chemistry. Product chemistry is 
when all the ingredients of a product—all the features—work well together. It 
takes a lot of trial and error to get there. This seems obvious, yet it’s often 
overlooked. Far too many products consist of interesting features that fail to 
deliver a “sum is greater than the parts” experience. 
When you have chemistry, you know it. You feel it—in your product, in your 
team, and in the entire execution of your company. If one company epitomizes 
product chemistry today, it’s Apple.  
In contrast, the Apple Newton, an early personal digital assistant, was an exam-
ple of a product that didn’t quite have chemistry. Although Apple invested 
some $100 million in Newton development, the product never took off due to 
delays, feature creep, and other issues. It was a visionary product that presaged 
what became today’s iPhone and Android devices, but it failed because it 
lacked product chemistry. 

Chapter 2 | Bad Products 
24 
If you’re two or three years into the business, growing, but not where you 
want to be, it may be because you’re missing product chemistry. Perhaps 
you’ve built out a lot of features to meet the demands of users or customers, 
or you’ve wandered around in search of product-market fit. Regardless, to gain 
widespread adoption, you have to create the kind of chemistry that early adop-
ters were willing to live without.  
Just because you’re a product and market visionary with an incredible nose for 
finding product-market fit doesn’t mean you’re a great product designer. Great 
product design is about all the pieces fitting together, about style, about ease 
of use: bringing the core to the forefront while making more advanced features 
accessible but not intrusive. Product chemistry requires all the features not 
just to be designed well individually, but to be designed to work well together. 
How do you know a great design? It just feels right. A great design is like a 
work of art; you can break it down into its parts and analyze what makes it 
great, but it can’t be reconstructed simply by putting all those components to-
gether. Great designs come from great designers.  
If you’re a few years into your company, and you’re seeing adoption of your 
product, but it’s slow going, stop and ask yourself if your design is truly great 
enough to gain widespread adoption. If it’s not, hire a designer—and keep in 
mind that great design doesn’t come through consensus. People frequently 
comment about the elegance and simplicity of Apple products. That is a core 
part of the product focus and key to the greatness of the experience.  
What’s more, in today’s market, product chemistry is expected. Apple has set 
the bar for well-designed products; and consumers, even when they’re in 
business situations, expect great design. They expect products to look and feel 
good and all the features to work well together. When it comes to gaining 
widespread adoption, don’t underestimate the importance of ease of use, great 
design, and the pieces all working well together.  
Don’t Ship Too Early or Too Late 
There are two schools of thought on product delivery. One is “Ship early, ship 
often.” The other is, “Don’t ship until it’s ready.” Both are right. Like so many 
things in startups, the challenge is finding the balance that works for you. 
On the one hand, if you release a product to market too early—if it’s buggy or 
lacks critical features—potential users won’t use it. But if you wait too long, 
you may discover no one wants to use your product or that a competitor has 

Why Startups Fail 
25
emerged and taken the market lead, and you’ve consumed all your capital in 
the process.  
This is why you must have at least one user for your product. Sounds simple: 
one user! That user can be either you or someone else. If you’re building for 
yourself, of course, the process is a lot easier. You know what you want. The 
question is whether anyone else wants the same thing. But if no one is using 
your product—if it stays in the back room too long—you risk ending up with a 
lot of technology that no one really wants.  
It hardly seems possible, but Startup A suffered from shipping both too early 
and too late. Startup A’s founder built the company’s initial product over a 
weekend. It was the classic Silicon Valley story. The product solved a personal 
problem for him. It turned out much later that millions of people had that 
same problem and were willing to spend money to solve it.  
Unfortunately for the founder of Startup A, he wasn’t the one to benefit. 
That’s because his company never built a product that many other people 
could use. Startup A’s product had so many rough edges that although users 
were willing to try it—based on the promise that it would solve their 
problems—they weren’t willing to stick with it. Using the product was too 
difficult. By the time the founder of Startup A admitted this was an issue, the 
market had passed him by—he was too late. One of Startup A’s competitors 
grew to more than $100 million in revenue and recently filed to go public. 
Startup B built software that worked with some of the largest hardware manu-
facturers on the planet. Unfortunately, Startup B was in such a rush to get its 
product out that when it landed its first big customer, the customer discov-
ered tons of bugs in the product. To be fair to Startup B, the hardware partner 
didn’t commit sufficient resources to integrating the hardware and software—
but the blame fell on Startup B regardless. How could Startup B have avoided 
the problem? By working a lot more closely with its big-brother partner to 
begin with.  
Then there is the story of Startup C, which started out doing one thing, put it 
out there early, and realized very few people would use the product. The 
founders rapidly reframed the same basic product offering but with a different 
message and market. The result was tens of millions of very happy users. Had 
the founders waited, they might have missed the market completely.  
If there is one company that represents perfection in products, it’s Apple. In 
reality, however, Apple has had years to test what works—and what doesn’t—
from the original Mac to the Apple Newton.  

Chapter 2 | Bad Products 
26 
When it comes to startups, it’s better to ship earlier than later. Once you’ve 
gotten market feedback, however, you must be willing to invest the time to 
take what is most likely an 80% offering (at best) and redesign it until it “just 
works.” Fail to tackle the remaining 20%, and the market will pass you by and 
adopt other products. 
Products That Don’t Scale 
Some products that appear ready for production are, in reality, prototypes. 
They were never built to support large numbers of users, the source code is 
hard to maintain, and they contain inherent design flaws that make them slow 
at scale. Yet designing and implementing for scale takes time and costs money. 
How do you avoid over-designing your product so that you can release it 
quickly and get real-world feedback, while still making sure the product can 
support millions of users if you attain the success to which you aspire? 
Accept that your product will be rewritten at least once. I used to believe 
products could be and should be built properly from the ground up. But nearly 
every early-stage entrepreneur tries multiple product concepts before finding 
the one that works. If these entrepreneurs had over-invested in scale from the 
beginning, they would have run out of money before they had a chance to test 
the market for their product.  
The challenge is that when a product takes off, it’s extremely hard to put the 
brakes on mid-scale. Friendster, one of the pioneers of the social-networking 
space, lost its market lead in large part because it failed to scale. Performance 
issues caused pages on the site to take so long to load that users abandoned 
the site. The company had clearly found a market need, yet it focused on 
adding new features rather than revisiting its foundation and architecture. The 
company also faced a challenge similar to that faced by other pioneers; not 
only did it have to find product-market fit and build its product, but it also had 
to build core infrastructure to support its product.  
The answer to product scaling, then, is to design first for the fast discovery of 
product-market fit and then be not only willing but adamant about focusing on 
the design and architecture required to scale. The good news at least for web-
based startups is that much of the infrastructure and expertise required to 
scale are available. The decision to stop adding features and invest in scale, of 
course, is one only you can make. 

Why Startups Fail 
27
Summary 
Great products are at the heart of today’s leading startups. No longer is 
product independent of sales and marketing. And well-designed consumer-
technology products have raised the overall expectation of product simplicity, 
both at home and at work. 
Bad products get built due to lack of 
• 
Product vision 
• 
Focus 
• 
Users 
These problems are solved through 
• 
A succinctly articulated goal 
• 
A great product that is broadly applicable 
• 
Using your own product (or finding a close equivalent) 

C H A P T E R 
3 
The Missing 
Entrepreneur 
Market Visionary and Product Picker 
Missing entrepreneur? I know what you’re thinking: “Every startup has an en-
trepreneur.” What I mean is an entrepreneur with a capital E. Let me explain: 
a lot of people have good ideas, and some are even able to execute on them. 
But rare is the man or woman who can take an idea and transform it into a 
sharply defined product and then sell it to top-level prospective hires, inves-
tors, and customers. An Entrepreneur, as opposed to their lowercase coun-
terpart, is a product picker and a market visionary. A great Entrepreneur seeks 
out a great market. A little e entrepreneur, lacking strong product and market 
vision, burns through cash as the team struggles to define its position. 
An Entrepreneur with a Capital E 
A colleague once told me that making successful investments is much like going 
to the horse races. To win, you’ve got to pick the right race, the right horse, 
and the right jockey. I’ve never been to the horse races, only the startup races, 
but I still love this analogy when it comes to thinking about how to build a suc-
cessful company.  
I’ve talked at length about the race and the horse. And later in the book, I get 
into the gory details of teams and how to overcome the challenges of execu-
tion and scaling. But in this chapter I want to focus on the Entrepreneur with a 
capital E because without this individual, startups simply wouldn’t exist.  

Chapter 3 | The Missing Entrepreneur 
30 
An Entrepreneur with a capital E is a market visionary and unparalleled prod-
uct picker. The best Entrepreneurs seek out large markets—to create or dis-
rupt them—and then iterate the product to find product-market fit while not 
running out of cash. Sometimes they find it out of the gate; other times it takes 
years.  
Entrepreneurs with a capital E often have very wide apertures as they cycle 
through new idea after new idea; but once they latch onto the right idea, they 
become ultra-focused. Some entrepreneurs get stuck in iteration mode, jump-
ing from one feature to the next or one idea to the next. Others latch onto an 
idea too soon, and get stuck at a local maximum—a small market they can 
never execute their way out of.  
Entrepreneurs with a capital E tend to have at least a few other characteristics 
in common. Many are natural promoters. They’ve had to hustle and sell all 
their lives, they crave attention, or they have a desire to see the world operate 
according to their vision of it. Others may not start out as promoters—many 
entrepreneurs are actually introverts—but ultimately become promoters ei-
ther out of necessary or because they’re forced into being the visible face of 
their successful companies. Michael Dell is one famous example. 
Finally, Entrepreneurs with a capital E have incredible self-determination. They 
have a need to challenge themselves and grow, and they’re frequently unwilling 
to settle. They’re hungry: hungry to prove they’re right, hungry for success, 
and hungry to disrupt and transform big markets. They don’t stop at being vi-
sionaries—they execute on their vision by signing up other people to turn 
their vision into reality. 
Where’s Marc? 
Marc Benioff, Bill Gates, Steve Jobs, Larry Ellison, Larry and Sergey, Mark 
Zuckerberg, and Jeff Bezos, to name a few, are all clearly Entrepreneurs with a 
capital E. They were instrumental to the creation and success of their 
companies.  
Without Benioff, for example, Salesforce.com wouldn’t have become the cate-
gory-defining company that it did. So when an entrepreneur starts an invest-
ment pitch with a statement like, “We’re like Salesforce.com except for…” the 
number-one question in the audience’s mind isn’t “How similar is this company 
to Salesforce.com?” Rather, it’s “Is this entrepreneur the next Marc Benioff?” 

Why Startups Fail 
31
Some might minimize the impact of this missing factor on the potential success 
of their business. But if you look at the most successful tech companies of the 
last 20 or 30 years, there are almost always one or two key people you can 
point to who made the company. Conversely, few people remember who was 
at the head of the failures. Don’t just ask yourself what it takes to pitch like an 
Entrepreneur with a capital E. Ask yourself what it takes to be one.  
An Entrepreneur’s Quest: The Big Idea 
If one thing separates big E Entrepreneurs from little e entrepreneurs, it’s The 
Big Idea. The Big Idea describes the way the Entrepreneur’s company will trans-
form The Big Market. The Big Idea isn’t about the details, the features, or the 
practicalities of today. It’s about how the world will be tomorrow, after the 
Entrepreneur’s vision/dream becomes reality. 
Some Entrepreneurs set out with The Big Idea, but not all do. Sometimes, en-
trepreneurs start building product and only later realize they have a vision for 
something big—something game-changing. That is the moment when they go 
from being entrepreneurs to being Entrepreneurs. They have The Big Idea, 
they articulate it, and they do everything in their power to make it a reality.  
The Big Idea is what potential employees and investors fall in love with. It’s 
what motivates them to invest their time and money. It’s what keeps them 
going even when the day-to-day is a brutal challenge. The product is the im-
plementation of The Big Idea. When people use the product, that is the reali-
zation of the Entrepreneur’s dream: the Entrepreneur’s vision has become 
reality.  
Picking the Right Product for Your 
Market 
Big E founders have an excellent sense of the market they intend to dominate. 
There are many different ways to find your market. Some entrepreneurs have 
an experience with one way of solving a problem and decide that problem 
should be solved in a different way. Marc Benioff started Salesforce.com for 
that very reason.  
Often, entrepreneurs start with a big market and then stumble around in 
search of the right opportunity. In reality, that stumbling around is a fundamen-
tal part of finding product-market fit.  

Chapter 3 | The Missing Entrepreneur 
32 
I remember when my co-founders and I were starting our first company. Our 
excitement about starting something new was surpassed only by our naiveté. 
We spent a few months—which at the time seemed like an eternity on the few 
hundred thousand dollars in capital we had raised—doing what seemed like 
floundering around.  
Finally, we built a system for sending text messages over wireless networks. 
We went out and talked to customers to see if they’d buy it. Sometimes our 
text messages went through, other times they didn’t. We were we having a 
hard time getting customers to buy our product, but we were having an even 
harder time getting the messages to go through reliably! When we tried to do 
a demo with a customer and our messages wouldn’t go through, naturally they 
assumed our product didn’t work.  
To address the issue, we built a service to measure whether messages were 
being sent and received properly. Customers weren’t buying our real product, 
but one day we happened to mention our measurement system. “We have 
that exact problem!” the vice president we were talking to exclaimed in front 
of his team. We had never heard that before, and when we got back to the of-
fice we agonized over what to do. We didn’t have enough resources or capital 
to deliver both systems simultaneously. We had to pick one or the other. We 
went with the measurement service. 
I used to wish I could say we had the foresight to build the measurement serv-
ice from the beginning. The reality was that we chose an interesting and rapidly 
growing market. We made an initial assertion about what product to build. It 
wasn’t what the market wanted, but it was adjacent to what the market 
wanted.  
As a result, we were there to capture the opportunity when it arose. The in-
sight was to take what seemed like our side product and make it what the 
business was all about. What felt at the time like floundering around was in 
reality the natural process of finding our product-market fit. 
Teams Without a Clear Vision Fail 
Small e founders often lead teams that execute without a clear vision. As the 
old saying goes, if you don’t know where you’re going, any road will get you 
there. You may wonder how this can possibly happen. 
There’s the romantic notion of starting something—be your own boss, run 
your own show, and build what you want to build. The reality can be some-

Why Startups Fail 
33
what different. A team can start out with a clear vision. But after discovering 
that people either don’t want to use what they’ve built or want to use it but 
don’t want to pay for it, the team loses its way. Team members get stuck in a 
sort of no-man’s land with an existing product and some users, but no bigger 
picture vision of how they want to transform the market and what they need 
to build to do so. Some founders aren’t sure what their target market is. 
They’re stuck being small e entrepreneurs. 
This was the situation of Company T, a composite, whose founder built a pro-
duct and raised venture capital. A great technologist, but not a market vision-
ary, the founder built a product that was difficult to use. He did little to pro-
mote a larger vision of how it would transform the market. The company 
added customers, but its revenues stayed more or less flat. Investors described 
the company as having gone sideways—it didn’t go out of business, but it 
wasn’t growing.  
At the same time, the founder of Company T didn’t have a clear vision for 
himself—he vacillated between wanting to raise a lot of capital to grow and 
staying small so that he could remain in his comfort zone. Meanwhile, his fixed 
costs (the costs of paying for employees, rent, hosting costs, and the like) 
stayed the same, chewing through the small amount of capital he had raised. 
Several years later, two new companies started in the same space. Their 
founders articulated clear visions of how they were transforming the space and 
the key trends they were riding to do so. On that basis and the simplicity of 
their products, they were able to raise tens of millions of dollars in venture 
capital. 
All three companies went after the same market. The difference? The founders 
of the two successful companies had very clear visions for themselves and their 
markets. They built highly focused and elegantly simple products as a result. 
That enabled them to accomplish their goals and fulfill their aspirations.  
Money Doesn’t Help When You Don’t 
Have Users  
Big E Entrepreneurs are all about finding product-market fit. That means 
they’re experts at building something people want and driving user adoption.  
Simply put, there are two ways to make sure you have enough runway to find 
product-market fit. You can raise lots of money or spend frugally. Even if you 

Chapter 3 | The Missing Entrepreneur 
34 
can raise a lot of money, I recommend against it until you have product-market 
fit. Companies have a tendency to spend the money they raise. Lots of capital 
is critical for scaling when you’re ready to grow. But if you’re still searching for 
product-market fit, too much capital makes it easy to lose focus. It’s all too 
easy to hire more resources rather than make hard tradeoffs. In the worst 
case, it can cause a company’s founders to get comfortable, reducing their 
sense of urgency. It also makes it too simple to build up a large organization 
that’s difficult to change when you figure out you don’t have product-market 
fit. 
Entrepreneur S was an incredibly talented software engineer who worked at a 
large Silicon Valley software company. Based on the strength of his reputation 
and where he worked, when he left to start his own company, multiple inves-
tors offered him large amounts of money on great terms. In under a month, he 
and his team raised $10 million: $5 million each from two venture firms. En-
trepreneur S had joined his previous employer early enough to make millions 
of dollars, and he walked and talked with the swagger of success.  
Some investors assumed that Entrepreneur S had played a large part in the 
success of the rocket ship that was his previous employer. Others believed he 
had learned enough from working at his previous employer to be able to apply 
what he had learned at his new company.  
However, Entrepreneur S’s previous employer was already a rocket ship by 
the time he joined. It had exponential growth, users were flocking to it, and it 
quickly became the dominant market leader.  
Although Entrepreneur S led a lot of product innovation, he had not had to 
suffer through the initial stages of product-market iteration, helping the com-
pany find its first users, its first hundred thousand users, and then its first mil-
lion. He assumed that if he built a great product, users would buy it, because 
that’s what he was fortunate enough to experience in his career; he knew of 
no other kind of market.  
It turned out that Entrepreneur S told a compelling story and had great prod-
uct ideas, but he was neither a market visionary nor a better-than-average 
product picker. He was surprised when users didn’t show up, taken aback that 
he had to spend money on marketing, and ultimately—as he was forced to pi-
vot from his original business model—aghast that he had to hire salespeople.  
His investors brought in a CEO to run the company. In a rare turn of events, 
the CEO turned out to be very much an entrepreneur himself. Building off the 
same product, he moved the company up-market to where he smelled money, 

Why Startups Fail 
35
went out and got specific customer feedback on requirements, and, combined 
with some good timing and luck, was able to turn the company into a success.  
For Entrepreneur S, the result was bittersweet. The company burned through 
two rounds of funding while it was figuring out product-market fit, and his eq-
uity was significantly diluted in the process. 
Dave Duffield, founder of PeopleSoft (acquired by Oracle) and now founder 
and co-CEO of Workday, is one of the most inspiring big E customer advo-
cates around. He’s so focused on customers that he not only goes out of his 
way to use his customer’s products but also buys their stock. His mantra is 
that those companies will be more successful as a result of using his prod-
ucts—so he invests in them! In one example, he doesn’t buy shoes just any-
where: he buys them from Zappos, a Workday customer. Of course, this ap-
proach makes for great marketing and sales, too; his customers love hearing 
how he’s using their products and buying their stock. 
Hire for Operations 
Startup success comes down to right market, team, product, timing, and exe-
cution. Little e entrepreneurs miss one or more of these fundamental 
elements.  
Whether they realize it or not, the vast majority of people who work at suc-
cessful technology companies, unless they started them or joined very early, 
expect customer demand and business models to be in place already. Their 
jobs are primarily about execution for growth. They introduce product fea-
tures, implement marketing strategies, and sell to drive broader adoption 
around the existing core business, while scaling the business infrastructure to 
support that adoption. The ability to scale is critical to building a large, suc-
cessful company.  
This is not, however, the primary job of an Entrepreneur with a capital E—not 
initially, anyway. Being able to hire people who have the experience to scale is 
what separates those entrepreneurs who are able to scale with their compa-
nies from those who aren’t. But hiring those people before you’re ready for 
them limits your options and creates frustration for both you and them.  
Frequently, when investors fire entrepreneurs from their own companies, they 
cite the founder’s “inability to scale” as the reason. Sometimes this means the 
company hasn’t found product-market fit and the investors mistakenly hope 
that bringing in a professional manager will solve the problem. This rarely 

Chapter 3 | The Missing Entrepreneur 
36 
works because when it comes to startups, professional managers are best at 
helping startups scale, not doing market discovery. These companies often end 
up improving marketing, sales, and operations, all while burning through hard-
earned capital, only to discover they still don’t have a product that a large 
market wants.  
Other times, it means the company is unable to raise money, and the existing 
investors hope that potential new investors will back the new CEO—often on 
the basis of their reputation. But most often an “inability to scale” means an 
entrepreneur is unwilling or unable to hire the management team needed to 
scale the company.  
The unwilling entrepreneur keeps finding reasons to turn down potentially 
great hires. Whether they admit it or not, these little e entrepreneurs often 
feel threatened by those with significantly more experience. And conversely, 
those with more experience tend not to want to work for these little e entre-
preneurs. For other entrepreneurs, it’s a matter of control—they have trouble 
delegating responsibility to others, fearing that the job won’t be done the way 
they want.  
Then there are those who are propped up by board members just enough so 
they can get by without the key hires they should be making. This strategy 
works for a while, but ultimately these companies can’t keep up with the effi-
ciency and speed of their competition, which has the best people working on 
scaling full time. 
The best entrepreneurs attract great people, and they make it their mission in 
life to bring great people into their companies. When they meet a great per-
son, their first question isn’t “What open role do I have that this person could 
fill?” Rather, it’s “How do I get this world-class individual involved in my com-
pany?” They take great pride in attracting the most talented people and con-
vincing those people to come work at their companies. That is, they see highly 
qualified, experienced individuals as assets, not threats. 
How to Hire Great People 
Entrepreneurs often ask me how they can recognize a great executive if 
they’ve never before hired a VP of sales or marketing, among other roles. I 
remember one entrepreneur who told me it was very easy to hire engineers: 
simply give them a tough problem and see how they solve it!  

Why Startups Fail 
37
But hiring executives for other roles seems much more subjective. A lot of 
times, people who look great on paper aren’t so great in reality. This is often 
the case with executives coming from big companies who turn out not to be 
able to adapt to the realities of startups, as well as executives who have spent 
their entire careers in very small companies and don’t know how to scale any 
more than the founder does. 
This is where board members and advisors—but perhaps most critically, 
simulations—are invaluable. One of the best executives I have ever worked 
with, having narrowed the potential hires down to two, brings them both in 
for full afternoon sessions with the team. This isn’t a one-on-one interview—
that has already happened. Rather, it’s a real live discussion as if the potential 
hire already had the job. For a VP of sales, that means a full pipeline review; for 
a head of marketing, working through an actual marketing plan. Is this ap-
proach time consuming? Absolutely. But it’s far less time consuming than mak-
ing the wrong hire.  
By going through this simulation with both hires, the hiring executive and the 
rest of the team also have a live point of comparison; they’re not trying to 
make a decision in the absence of any reference point or in comparison to a 
potential hire they saw weeks before and who they therefore may be remem-
bering incorrectly. The cost to you and the organization of churning through a 
mis-hire is very high; so too is the cost to the person who is hired and then let 
go. Experienced executives know this, and many have experienced that organi-
zational cost themselves. As a result, the very best executives are no more 
eager to land in the wrong job and have to restart than you are to hire the 
wrong executive for the job. 
One of the biggest struggles I have experienced personally and have seen other 
founders go through is the challenge of hiring people outside their founding 
team when the founding team itself is unable to scale: a new head of sales, a 
more experienced VP of marketing, and so on. Entrepreneurs by nature tend 
to be incredibly loyal, and the challenge is finding a balance between that 
loyalty to the original team and bringing in executives who can help scale the 
organization. 
Before a company is scaling, the answer to most questions is, “Figure it out. 
Try something else and see if it works.” But when your company is starting to 
scale, the answer to the question “How do I do X?” is almost always “Hire 
someone who knows how to do that.” Do what you’re good at—hire for what 
you’re not. Again, this is how Entrepreneurs operate. 

Chapter 3 | The Missing Entrepreneur 
38 
Always Act Like an Entrepreneur 
At some point or another, some Entrepreneurs stop acting like Entrepreneurs. 
They stop taking the big risks because they have invested so much in the cur-
rent path that they become concerned about deviating from it. I remember a 
call from an entrepreneur who wanted my advice. He had been able to raise a 
lot of capital on the strength of his vision and his team. He was generating a lot 
of buzz, receiving a ton of PR coverage, and getting meetings with potential 
customers and partners at the very highest levels. What he was doing had the 
potential to be incredibly strategic.  
He confided in me that he had a terrible feeling that his current strategy wasn’t 
going to work. This was more than just a moment of self doubt. Founders have 
a way of knowing when something fundamental is wrong—from a bug causing a 
slowdown in their web site to their overall strategy—even if they can’t articu-
late exactly what it is. He had that feeling. 
During the phone call, he asked me questions he never would have asked 
when he was starting out. “What will people think if I totally change the strate-
gy? What will my board think?” And, of course, there was the question he left 
unasked—would his investors fire him because he had raised money on one 
strategy and now wanted to implement a different one?  
I asked him why he was hesitating, when he already knew the decision he had 
to make. By this point, the company had more than 50 employees, and he had 
just hired a senior sales executive who had relocated to close the deals he 
hadn’t been able to close himself.  
“I’d have to tell the board we were changing the strategy, fire the sales exec I 
just hired, and lay off 20 people. And I’m worried about the competition.” Si-
lence hung in the air. I had never heard so much fear and worry in this entre-
preneur’s voice before. His psyche was eating him up. It was no time to mince 
words. “It’s either that or lay off the whole company after you burn through 
your cash,” I replied. He called a special board meeting and took action.  
Focus on What You’re Great At 
Should you spend time improving your weaknesses or focus on what you’re 
great at? Although it may be deceptively appealing to try to improve the areas 
you and your company are weak at, in competitive markets, startups win on 
being better and being differentiated. You can’t differentiate by improving your 

Why Startups Fail 
39
weaknesses, either as a company or as a person. As an entrepreneur, your 
company lives or dies based on whether it can be great at one thing—not 
whether it can be good at many. Plus, you can hire to backfill your weaknesses.  
Consider Google: great at search. Facebook: great at connecting people. Be-
fore these companies were great at many things, they were great at one thing. 
They did that one thing better than any other company in the world. Later, 
they added lots of features and improved in related areas. But they first be-
came the best at one thing. 
Investors often argue that a startup that is great at just one thing is a feature, 
not a product or a company. The reality is, many of the most successful com-
panies are features, but features that address market needs so vast that huge, 
valuable companies are built around them to support that one feature.  
Starting vs. Leading 
Because you have to hold so many jobs when your company is starting out, it’s 
easy to believe that you have to improve your weaknesses to become a great 
leader. The reality is, after you’re done starting and once you find product-
market fit, you just have to be great at leading.  
That’s easier said than done, of course. Starting is about failing at lots of differ-
ent approaches quickly, until you find the right one. Leading is about taking 
what’s succeeding and growing it. Not all company starters enjoy leading.  
Starting gives an Entrepreneur a clean slate. Although the vast majority of 
people may find a clean slate terrifying, for the Entrepreneur, a clean slate is 
the great liberator. There are no legacy users to support or old features to 
maintain. There is no organizational history, layers of management, extreme 
compensation differences, or political jockeying for position.  
Leading requires getting people to set all those differences aside to work to-
gether as a team. Leaders can’t just build—they have to be available to those 
they’re leading.  
Entrepreneur E was an extrovert in the most extreme sense of the word. He 
thrived on being out with users and customers, talking to people, and selling. It 
didn’t matter whether he was selling to potential customers, hiring employees, 
speaking at conferences, or pitching investors. He loved being out there—and 
he thrived on and needed the attention that came with constant pitching and 
selling.  

Chapter 3 | The Missing Entrepreneur 
40 
Entrepreneur I was an introvert. A talented engineer, he had been head of en-
gineering at a large company where he had risen through the ranks to manage 
a large team. But he never had to set company direction; whenever questions 
came up about product or company direction, he leaned on the direction the 
CEO had laid out. 
Both Entrepreneurs E and I were terrible leaders. Both told their people that 
they were always available and people should feel free to talk with them di-
rectly at any time. But Entrepreneur E was so outwardly focused that he spent 
little time in the office. He lacked empathy, and his own people were afraid to 
work with him or bring up issues for fear that they would bruise his ego and 
he would fire them. Conversely, Entrepreneur I would sit in his office with his 
headphones on, working on the product. In their own way, each lacked en-
gagement with their companies once they started to scale, and they failed to 
be leaders as a result.  
Going from a starting role to a leadership role is one of the toughest transi-
tions any entrepreneur has to make. What if you’re not a great leader? Either 
put your mind to becoming one, or hire someone who is.  
Fail Fast 
Entrepreneurship involves repeated failure, and sometimes very public failure. 
Your response to this failure determines your survival as an entrepreneur. 
To be an entrepreneur, you must internally believe that you’re right, even in 
the face of many smart people telling you that you’re wrong. By implication, 
then, entrepreneurs must have large egos; whether they expose those egos to 
others in the form of arrogance is, of course, a separate question. For some 
entrepreneurs, because so much confidence is required to keep believing 
they’re right, confidence in one area is often accompanied by immense inse-
curity in many others.  
The challenge of being an Entrepreneur with a capital E ultimately comes down 
to managing your own ego or finding a belief system that supports it. Rather 
than seeing more experienced hires as threats, for example, those hires are 
ego builders. Bad at lots of things? No problem. Startup success is about being 
great at one thing. In large part, then, the art of being an Entrepreneur with a 
capital E is figuring out how to manage your ego not through the highs of suc-
cess but through the lows of failure. 

Why Startups Fail 
41
Failing fast is healthier for your ego, and it’s also healthier for your company 
and your wallet. I recall one company that spent more than $100 million and 6 
years before admitting its product was a failure. You may wonder why the 
company’s investors continued to fund it all that time. The simple truth: They 
didn’t want to admit failure either.  
To be an entrepreneur requires stubbornness and persistence. Sometimes, 
however, this persistence can lead entrepreneurs to try to make a bad product 
or a bad market work for far longer than they should. The faster you figure 
out what the market doesn’t want, the sooner you can figure out what it does 
want. That, of course, leads to success.  
Summary 
An Entrepreneur with a capital E is at the heart of any new company. As the 
old saying goes, if you don’t know where you’re going, any road will get you 
there. Startups that have great execution but lack a clear vision can make 
short-term progress but can never obtain long-term success. 
Be an Entrepreneur with a capital E: 
 
Be a market visionary. 
 
Disrupt and transform a big, existing market, or create a new one. 
 
Relentlessly pursue product-market fit. 
 
Deliver a product that addresses the market need. 
 
Promote your vision to support your business. 
 
Use failure to get to success. 
 
Start—and then lead. 

P A R T 
II 
Sales and 
Marketing 
 
It’s easy to take hard-won capital and spend it aggressively on sales and mar-
keting. But it’s impossible to get that money back if you invest it in the wrong 
product or the wrong go-to-market approach.  
But how do you know whether you’re ready to pour gas on the fire? In 
Chapter 4, I’ll discuss how to know whether you really have product-market 
fit, and what to do if you don’t. I’ll introduce two key tools: the Sales Learning 
Curve and Net Promoter Score, and I’ll describe how you can put them to 
work quickly and easily. And I’ll talk about the impact traction has on how in-
vestors value your company—and what you can do to influence that valuation.  
It’s not enough to build a great product—you also have to sell it efficiently. 
Ultimately, building a successful company comes down to acquiring users or 
customers efficiently. In Chapter 5, we’ll add another tool to the toolbox, Cus-
tomer Lifetime Value, which will answer the key question: how much can you 
afford to spend to acquire a customer? I’ll cover a number of avoidable yet 
common sales mistakes—from ineffective sales people to bad contracts. And 
we’ll get into some exciting new sales approaches, such as the freemium 
model, that you can use to get your sales engine humming.  
Of course, if no one’s ever heard of your company other than a handful of 
friends, you’re not going to have much success in the market. But today, mar-
keting doesn’t have to be costly. In Chapter 6 you’ll learn the seven proven 
ways to market your startup and your products. 
Part II will give you the tools you need to avoid sales and marketing failure—
and to sell and market efficiently and effectively. 

C H A P T E R 
4 
Investing in 
Sales and 
Marketing Too 
Early 
Know When to Spend—and When Not To 
Many companies move to a high burn rate too quickly, and it’s hard to go back. 
Sometimes even frugal entrepreneurs wind up spending too much either be-
cause they don’t manage the money or are tempted by having money in the 
bank. This often happens when a startup raises too much money too early. It 
also happens with entrepreneurs who are accustomed to having lots of re-
sources—for example, if they’ve spent time at big companies. Frequently it 
happens when entrepreneurs haven’t found product-market fit and believe that 
it’s just a matter of spending money to reach the right customers or users. 
The Real Cost of Spending Too Early 
For every venture dollar invested, I estimate that more than two-thirds goes 
into sales and marketing costs and only a third into product development. 
Spending on sales and marketing too early means there is no return if custom-

Chapter 4 | Investing in Sales and Marketing Too Early 
46 
ers don’t bite. These dollars, unlike those invested in product, can’t be lever-
aged if a company is trying to sell product consumers, or customers simply 
don’t want to buy. Once you up the burn rate, there’s no easy way back. 
Many startups ramp up sales before the product is ready. Of course, a lot of 
work is required to get sales early on. But a product with a truly great value 
proposition that delivers in a measurable way practically sells itself.  
The right time to invest heavily in sales and marketing is when you’ve deter-
mined that you have product-market fit. When you’ve reached that inflection 
point, then—and only then—should you spend aggressively on sales and mar-
keting to drive growth. Companies that ramp sales and marketing too soon 
waste a lot of money. That problem compounds itself, leading to wasted fi-
nancing rounds, dilution of equity, and, often, loss of your own job. 
Sometimes, even when you have a great product, you don’t understand the 
sales process well enough to scale it. You need to know who you’re selling to, 
how much they will really spend, and what kind of salesperson the company 
needs to hire who can succeed at selling that particular product to those peo-
ple. All of this must be understood before sales can efficiently scale. 
Of course, some startups don’t need to spend heavily on sales and 
marketing—their products are designed to market themselves. The next two 
chapters get into that in more detail. 
CEO X, an incredible promoter, naturally got investors excited about his com-
pany. In two years, he raised three rounds of funding with just a few million 
dollars in annual revenue—most of which came at a loss. That is, he was 
spending so heavily on acquiring new customers that the company was far 
from profitable. Both he and his investors interpreted the revenue as an indica-
tor of having found product-market fit and concluded that if they spent more 
on marketing, they could drive a lot more revenue.  
No one wanted to believe, given the amount of capital raised and the associ-
ated valuation, that the company was still pre-product-market fit. Moreover, 
CEO X’s investors weren’t on the same page. The early investors helped con-
vince the later ones that the company was ready for a growth round; the later 
investors—having invested on the belief that the company was ready to grow 
quickly and having promised that to their partners and their own investors—
didn’t want to admit that the company wasn’t ready to scale. This is another 
reason not to raise too much capital too early: not only does doing so create a 
lack of alignment, but it’s also very hard to live up to the expectations that 
come with that capital and the associated valuation.  

Why Startups Fail 
47
When the company failed to achieve its projected sales two quarters in a row, 
the board gave CEO X feedback that he should replace the head of sales. He 
did. The new head of sales turned over the entire sales team but told the 
board it would take as much as two full quarters for each new sales represent-
ative to become fully productive.  
With the burn still incredibly high and sales limping along, the board and man-
agement team finally concluded that the company hadn’t found product-market 
fit. Total time consumed (or, more accurately, wasted): four quarters.  
The real measure of whether a startup is ready to invest in growth is if it’s 
clear that the company can acquire users or customers in a repeatable and effi-
cient manner. Ultimately, of course, that acquisition has to be both efficient 
and profitable. 
Ratcheting Up the Burn Is Easy—Bringing 
It Down Is Difficult 
It’s easy to spend money on marketing quickly. Open a Google AdWords ac-
count, put in your credit card, and set the budget to a few thousand dollars 
per day. Combine that with hiring like there’s no tomorrow, and you’re off to 
the races. If the condition of the United States economy is any indicator, it’s 
easy to spend money—but not so easy to save it.  
In an ideal world, companies would be able to scale their organizations up and 
down just as they do their computing resources. The difference is, there is a 
hidden cost to scaling down organizations. The negative impact on the organi-
zation is expensive.  
As anyone who has managed an organization can attest, organizations don’t 
operate one person at a time. There are teams and groups. It may be easy for 
investors to tell a company to “cut the burn,” but the human beings that make 
up organizations are slow to recover from these sorts of cost-cutting 
exercises.  
The cost also affects founders/employees disproportionately as compared to 
investors. Professional investors can keep writing checks to buy more equity, 
but founders and employees can’t create more equity. Thus, burning through 
capital unnecessarily tends to hurt founders and employees more than it hurts 
investors.  

Chapter 4 | Investing in Sales and Marketing Too Early 
48 
But if you’ve scaled your company prematurely, you must cut the burn. These 
cuts take a long time to heal. We’ve all heard stories of companies making re-
peated cuts. Company leadership is trying to “do the right thing” by keeping 
people in their jobs, yet employees live in fear that they may be the next to go. 
Better to cut too deep than too shallow. 
Investors may seem schizophrenic, sometimes encouraging you to cut the burn 
while at other times suggesting you spend aggressively. This is because inves-
tors have very few levers once they have invested. They can push you to spend 
less, they can invest more, or they can fire you and hire someone else.  
Of course, investors perform many other activities: making introductions to 
customers, potential employees, and other investors. They can also help you 
make strategic decisions and, of course, ensure a company’s ultimate liquidity. 
But when it comes to day-to-day operations, there is very little they can do. At 
the same time, they may feel intense pressure to do something when a com-
pany appears not to be working.  
When a company hits its growth inflection point, it should raise as much capi-
tal as it can and grow as quickly and aggressively as possible. Scaling pre-
maturely, however, is incredibly costly—not just in terms of capital but in 
terms of organizational health as well.  
Don’t Mistake a Lack of Product-Market 
Fit for Poor Execution 
All too often, people confuse a lack of product-market fit with a failure to ex-
ecute. Experienced operating executives often believe that if they can get the 
right team in place—in particular, the right lead-generation and sales opera-
tions—they can solve what appears to be an execution issue.  
They get things running smoothly, only to discover that the product still isn’t 
selling. Perhaps customers seem interested, but they just aren’t buying.  
Common refrains include, “We need a different go-to-market strategy,” “We’ll 
get a new VP of sales with a team who can actually sell,” and “We haven’t been 
trying this approach long enough to know if it works.” Or, in the case of con-
sumer startups, “We just need to get this in front of more users.” 
Management and board members alike simply don’t want to believe—especially 
after ratcheting up the burn rate—that the product doesn’t meet a market 

Why Startups Fail 
49
need. Or, if it does meet a market need, they don’t want to accept that it has 
too much friction to gain adoption—it’s too difficult for people to use or buy.  
How can you tell which problem you have? Find out how happy your existing 
customers are. If they’re happy, and a lot of other potential customers could 
derive the same value, then you have a go-to-market/execution problem. If 
they’re happy, but it’s because of something unique to their business, you have 
a product-market fit problem. If they’re unhappy, you have a product problem.  
Granted, it’s not a question of product-market fit or execution. Great startups 
get both right. What’s critical is not to confuse a lack of one for a lack of the 
other. 
Understand the Traction Curve 
How do you know when you’re ready to invest aggressively in sales and mar-
keting? Mark Leslie, former CEO of storage-management company Veritas 
Software and now a lecturer at the Stanford Graduate School of Business, first 
introduced me to the Sales Learning Curve (SLC) when I took his sales opera-
tions course at Stanford. Although it’s primarily business (not consumer) fo-
cused, it’s one of the best tools available for figuring out when you’re ready to 
invest in scale.  
In the past, one of the biggest questions startup founders faced was whether 
they could build the product. That is still an open question outside of informa-
tion technology. For example, biotechnology companies face fundamental sci-
ence risks, and clean-tech companies face questions about whether they can 
convert from prototype scale to production scale. But for the vast majority of 
business and consumer software companies, the question isn’t whether they 
can build the product but whether people will use it once it’s built—and 
whether the companies can develop an efficient approach for reaching their 
potential customers. 
Many companies can now rely on open source software and cloud-based infra-
structure like Amazon Web Services to provide the basic building blocks for 
their products. Even today’s hardware companies are in large part software. As 
a result, startups can and must spend more of their time and capital engineer-
ing efficient customer adoption into their products and honing their go-to-
market strategies. 

Chapter 4 | Investing in Sales and Marketing Too Early 
50 
Leslie describes three distinct phases of the SLC:  
• 
Initiation phase: A startup is trying to get customers. The 
company is still very much in a period of discovery and 
learning, refining both its product and its approach to sell-
ing that product.  
• 
Transition phase: Sales are beginning to accelerate. The 
company has real market traction.  
• 
Execution phase: The company is ready to invest 
aggressively.  
One key insight from the SLC is that the slope of the customer-adoption curve 
steepens rapidly as companies move through the transition phase. Thus, before 
you start spending aggressively on marketing and hiring lots of sales people, ask 
yourself whether your adoption curve is really steepening. If it’s not, you’re 
still in the initiation phase.  
Company X hired an extremely experienced VP of sales who then hired a 
complete team of sales reps to sell the company’s product. But the company—
which had very complex technology at its core—hadn’t yet figured out how to 
package its offering so that customers could see a clear value proposition that 
was easy to buy into.  
Although customers expressed a lot of interest in solving the pain point that 
Company X’s product addressed, few actually purchased the product. All the 
while, the company kept burning through cash and missing its numbers. It was 
another year before the company figured out how to package its product in 
such a way that it was easy for customers to buy. In reality, the company was 
still in the initiation phase. It shouldn’t have ramped up sales until it figured this 
it out.  
Where business startups must prove a repeatable sales model, consumer start-
ups must prove a repeatable user-acquisition model—and they must continue 
to maintain their growth. Yet the principles of the SLD still apply: the slope of 
the net adoption curve—the number of new users minus those who leave—
must steepen aggressively to justify spending aggressively on sales and 
marketing.  
I emphasize net adoption curve because many consumer startups have been 
known to spend aggressively on acquisition in support of growth only to have a 
large percentage of their users churn out and the curve eventually flatten. It 

Why Startups Fail 
51
doesn’t help to acquire a lot of users if your product isn’t sticky enough to get 
them to continue using it. 
Create Unique Value 
There are examples of creating value without following the SLC, of course. 
Some companies spend aggressively on sales and marketing before they have 
figured out how to make those sales profitable—and their founders and inves-
tors make lots of money in the process.  
But these companies require very unique market and capital environments to 
support their growth. Daily deal site Groupon is one example. The company 
has seen incredible sales growth, going from $30 million in 2009 to $313 mil-
lion in 2010 to $430.2 million for the third quarter of 2011. Yet during that 
same record third quarter, the company accrued expenses and payables of 
$622 million to merchants. 
The company’s recent IPO valued it at more than $17 billion. Whether the 
company’s model is sustainable is an open question. But the founders made a 
lot of money in the process, and so did investors. The founders took hundreds 
of millions of dollars off the table as part of a previous (private) round of fund-
ing. And on paper, at least, the ownership positions of both the founders and 
investors are now worth billions. Clearly, value was created—but again, it 
required a very unique market and capital environment. 
A key question to ask yourself is what kind of company you want to build. 
Many companies lose money for years; some are even unprofitable after they 
go public. Although investors may claim to want to build stand-alone compa-
nies that will be around for a long, long time, the primary goal of most is to 
make large amounts of money for themselves and their investors.  
Founders often put a lot of emphasis on reaching break-even. I commend this 
goal. It’s an absolute necessity in tight capital markets or if you don’t want to 
rely on outside capital. But reaching break-even by itself doesn’t make for a 
high-growth company; as a result, it doesn’t, by itself, make a company a 
venture-worthy investment.  
If your aspiration is to raise venture capital, the primary question for new in-
vestors isn’t when you can reach break-even. The primary questions are 
whether you’re in a big market and how you can ramp growth (be it revenue 
or users) more aggressively to capture that market. Don’t confuse the desire 
to raise money with the ability to spend it effectively. 

Chapter 4 | Investing in Sales and Marketing Too Early 
52 
Too Late for Hope, Too Early for 
Traction 
At their core, investments are about opportunity and risk. How big is the op-
portunity, and how well is the company set up to capture it? What are the 
risks to capturing that opportunity, and how can they be mitigated? And, in the 
case of follow-on financings—those financings other than the first one—how 
much risk has been taken out since the previous financing? 
Companies may ultimately raise numerous rounds of funding, both private and 
public. These rounds fall into three buckets, roughly paralleling the three stages 
of the Sales Learning Curve. If you find yourself stuck going more or less side-
ways a few years into building your company, understanding how startups are 
valued is key to understanding where you need to focus if you’re to raise capi-
tal to grow your business. It’s also an important consideration should you de-
cide to sell instead, so you know how potential acquirers are likely to value 
your company. 
People often bitterly complain about how seemingly arbitrary company valua-
tions are. The markets reward consumer companies for user growth without 
meaningful revenue, while they typically measure business companies on reve-
nue. Why is this the case? The simple answer is that the market values con-
sumer and business startups very differently. Moreover, when it comes to ac-
quisitions, external dynamics—such as an acquirer’s need for a particular tech-
nology to fill a gap in their product line or strategy—can have a huge impact on 
a company’s valuation.  
Startups begin life with their value based on a combination of market demand 
for the deal, the pedigree of the team, and the potential market opportunity. 
Their founders sell the dream, and the companies are valued on hope. I recall 
the very first time I raised venture capital—I asked a potential investor how his 
firm had decided on the valuation for our company. Only half joking, he told 
me that because there were three of us, he estimated our individual values at 
about a million and a half dollars each and then threw in another half million 
because we were working together.  
After the initial phase, companies go through a period of indeterminate value. 
They have some product and market traction, but they haven’t taken out sig-
nificant adoption risk. For the potential investor, the price of the investment 
may be significantly higher (based on management team expectations or mar-

Why Startups Fail 
53
ket interest) but not priced commensurately with the lack of risk taken out of 
the investment.  
Many have just enough traction that potential investors would rather wait until 
that traction is proven (and the associated risk taken out) than invest when no 
significant adoption risk has been removed. These startups are too late for 
hope but too early for traction.  
Some companies go through repeated rounds of funding in this stage. Their 
traction curve is steepening, but the actual numbers are still too small or the 
curve too flat to change investor perception.  
In the second stage, startups are valued on traction. For consumer companies, 
that means their ability to attract users, the number of those users, and the 
rate at which that number is growing. For the vast majority of business start-
ups, it’s the total size of the market opportunity and their revenue growth 
numbers in that market.  
Consumer companies are valued differently because of the three M’s:  
• 
Mass market: Their markets are huge because potentially 
everyone on Earth could use their product.  
• 
Monetization: All those users can consume ads, pay directly, 
or do both. 
• 
Main Street: Many people have first-hand experience with 
the company’s products or know about the company and 
are therefore more likely to want to buy the company’s 
equity.  
What’s more, investors, from individuals to professionals, want to say they’re 
in well-known, celebrity deals—they want hotness by association. The only 
question for these companies is whether they can get millions of consumers to 
use, and keep using, their product. When they can, they are, by definition, val-
uable, because relatively few companies are able to build something that mil-
lions of people want. 
When it comes to getting out of the transition phase, your entire focus should 
be on changing the steepness of your traction curve. If you’re building a con-
sumer company, that means figuring out how to add users more quickly, and 
ideally reaching an exponential growth curve. If you’re building a business-to-
business company, it means changing the slope of your revenue curve— 
demonstrating that you can sell efficiently. 

Chapter 4 | Investing in Sales and Marketing Too Early 
54 
Are You Ready to Throw Gas on the Fire? 
The Net Promoter Score1 (NPS) measures the answer to the question: “How 
likely is it that you would recommend a company to a colleague or friend?” 
This is a great indicator of whether you’re ready to throw gas on the fire. 
The answer is given on a scale of one to ten, with respondents grouped into 
promoters, passives, and detractors. Companies with higher Net Promoter 
Scores have been shown to have faster, more efficient growth. Improving your 
score boils down to having more promoters and fewer detractors.  
Companies with higher NPS values have more efficient growth engines because 
their customers are more likely to recommend their products to new custom-
ers. Not only is a high NPS a great indicator that customers like your product, 
but it also means they’re providing you with free marketing! In addition to any 
marketing you do directly, a high NPS means you’re leveraging your customers 
to help you acquire new ones—making your growth engine highly efficient. 
Asking people whether they’d recommend your business to someone else is a 
lot different than simply asking them if they like your product. For one thing, 
people are often embarrassed to admit they don’t like a product they 
bought—it makes them appear to have bad judgment. But to recommend that 
product to a friend, they really have to love it; few people want to be known 
to their friends or colleagues for recommending a bad product.  
Putting NPS to work at your company doesn’t mean you have to hire expen-
sive consultants or spend a lot of money on surveys. It’s easy to use tools like 
SurveyMonkey to ask your users or customers questions and tabulate the an-
swers. And having a single metric like NPS is very useful—it’s a straightforward 
measure you can watch over time. 
A corollary to NPS is tracking how new customers find out about you. That 
way, you can invest more time and money in the channels that are working—
and less in those that aren’t. Tools like Google Analytics are important for 
tracking, but so is asking new users and customers, “How did you find out 
about us?” 
If your NPS is high and you believe you have a big market opportunity—that is, 
the market is big, and a lot of other users or customers can derive the same 
                                                 
1 Net Promoter is a registered trademark of Fred Reichheld, Bain & Company, described in 
his book, The Ultimate Question. 

Why Startups Fail 
55
value as your existing base—then it’s time to throw gas on the fire. Raise as 
much capital as you can, and invest in growth. 
Get Out There and Sell 
Even introverts who don’t think of themselves as promoters are promoters. If 
you’ve ever raised a dime from someone else—be it a family member, a friend, 
or a professional investor—convinced a customer to buy your product or hear 
your pitch, or gotten someone to invest time working on your product in their 
off hours, you’ve been a promoter.  
I used to think of sales in a very negative light. It was something other people 
did. I held onto that belief until I had to get out there and sell in order for my 
company to survive. I had to meet with customers, pitch investors, and recruit 
employees. It was humbling and exhilarating. Having had to sell my ideas, prod-
ucts, and companies over and over again, I now believe promotion is funda-
mental to the survival of any business—and you should, too. 
When it comes to startups, you are just as much the product as your web site, 
software, or hardware. Potential users, customers, employees, and investors 
aren’t just deciding to use your product—they’re deciding to make an invest-
ment in you.  
Some entrepreneurs mistakenly think that getting out there and promoting 
their products is something only non-tech-based companies need to do. After 
all, in an age where technology is everywhere, why would you need to have 
humans involved? This is a mistake.  
There may have been a time when the Web was all about technology, but to-
day’s Web is all about being social—just look at Facebook and Twitter if you 
have any doubt. That means you need to be visible. As much as it might be nice 
if they did, products don’t speak for themselves—entrepreneurs do. And with 
all the media available today—blogs, tweets, posts, not to mention numerous 
startup conferences that are always looking for entrepreneurs as speakers—
there’s no excuse not to be out there. 
Being visible is no substitute for having a great product that people want to use 
and spend money on, or for working your way up the traction curve. But in an 
age when brand matters more than ever, raising your profile—if you do it in a 
positive way—can have innumerable benefits, from helping get you more users 
to helping you recruit employees and attract investment. Plus, being visible is 

Chapter 4 | Investing in Sales and Marketing Too Early 
56 
incredibly cost-effective. It’s a form of sales and marketing you can invest in 
without spending any financial capital. 
Summary 
Investing in sales and marketing too early can kill your company. It can burn up 
your hard-won cash. Yet not investing when you’ve got serious market trac-
tion can have equally disastrous effects. Although figuring out when you have 
the right amount of traction to invest more aggressively is very much an art, 
the tools presented in this chapter can add a little more science to your 
decision. 
Failure comes from 
• 
Investing in sales and marketing before you have product-
market fit 
• 
Insufficient experimentation 
• 
Investing too late 
It’s time to spend on sales and marketing when 
• 
You’ve found product-market fit. 
• 
Users or customers are referring you to other customers. 
• 
You’re rapidly, measurably moving up the traction curve. 
 

C H A P T E R 
5 
Losing Money 
on Sales 
Put Sales Leverage to Work for You 
Companies live or die on whether users invest with their time and customers 
invest with their wallets. We’ve all seen companies that spend more on every 
sale than they make. Their refrain, as the old joke goes, is, “We’ll make it up in 
volume!”  
It’s funny to read about but no laughing matter when it’s your own bank ac-
count. Rare is the entrepreneur who has profitable sales out of the gate. But 
the successful entrepreneur turns the model around and makes its scalable. A 
scalable sales model depends on sales that are profitable, repeatable, and effi-
cient. Profitable, efficient sales come from knowing how much a customer or 
user is worth combined with a highly leveraged way to reach them. Repeatabil-
ity comes from users or customers buying the same thing from you over and 
over again. How do you turn your sales model around and really make the en-
gine hum? 
When Customers Cost More Than 
They’re Worth 
Company M targeted small businesses with its content-hosting solution. The 
company acquired customers primarily through online advertising and search-
engine optimization. I’ve changed the details, but the numbers are illustrative of 
the acquisition cost versus customer value challenge Company M faced.  

Chapter 5 | Losing Money on Sales 
58 
Each month, the company spent about $21,000 on online advertising through 
Google AdWords. The company’s cost per click (CPC) ranged from $3.73 to 
$4.56, with an average CPC of about $4.15. The company was able to convert 
around 1% of potential customers that clicked its ads, resulting in a cost per 
acquisition (CPA) of $415 per customer. (Out of 100 people who clicked at 
$4.15 per click, one converted to become a paying customer. Thus it cost 
$415 to acquire a customer.)  
The founder of Company M was excited. He had found an acquisition channel 
that appeared to scale. He started spending.  
Company M sold its product at multiple price points, but the most popular was 
its $19.95 per month Bronze offering. At that price, it would take about 21 
months for the company to break even on its CPA. The company would have 
to lay out $415 up front and wait 21 months before it started making a profit 
on that customer—and that was to cover its marketing costs, not taking into 
account other costs such as hosting and customer support. What’s more, each 
customer would have to continue using Company M’s product for more than 
21 months—if any churned out, Company M would lose money.  
Some customers did churn out. In fact, some 20% of Company M’s customers 
churned out—many liked the product, but, being small businesses, they simply 
went out of business.  
After more than a year of spending, watching his customer churn rates, and 
managing down the CPA, the founder of Company M realized the two lines—
his CPA and his customer lifetime value (CLV) weren’t going to converge 
quickly enough. He laid off most of his staff and reduced his marketing spend. 
Only time will tell whether he can rebuild the business.  
Ultimately, It’s About Acquisition 
If you can’t acquire users or customers profitably and repeatedly, you may be 
able to survive for a long time on capital from investors, but ultimately you 
can’t build a sustainable business. Frankly, as heretical as it may sound, you may 
be able to make a lot of money building an unprofitable business. Many entre-
preneurs and investors have made plenty of money building businesses that 
lost money hand over first and weren’t sustainable.  
That’s because when it comes to tech companies, the capital markets tend to 
reward growth, and sometimes even just the potential for growth, over profit-
ability. Alternatively, a startup that is unprofitable may be profitable when 

Why Startups Fail 
59
rolled into a larger company that has a more efficient way to reach the market. 
Or a larger company may simply want to acquire a startup for its people or 
technology, netting the founders and investors a handsome profit in the 
process.  
Of course, far more of these unprofitable companies go out of business along 
the way. If you want to build a sustainable business or control your own des-
tiny, you have to figure out how your company can make money. Making 
money requires you to acquire users profitably. Simply put, that means mone-
tizing users or customers for more than it costs you to acquire and serve 
them.  
Understand Customer Lifetime Value 
CLV measures how much revenue a customer generates over the time they 
remain a customer of your company. Revenue can come directly from the 
customer, but it can also come from third parties; this is common for busi-
nesses that monetize via advertising. By determining CLV across a number of 
customers, you can figure out how much you can afford to spend to acquire a 
customer.  
For example, if a customer is expected to generate $100 in revenue over their 
lifetime, you can in theory spend up to $99.99 to acquire and serve that cus-
tomer and still be profitable on each customer. Of course, you’re generating 
only one cent in profit for every customer! That likely isn’t enough to pay for 
all your other costs—your own salary, that of your management team, and the 
costs of software development, for example.  
However, if it costs you $10 to acquire and serve a customer, and you can 
monetize that customer for $100, you make $90: a far more appealing propo-
sition. That should be more than enough to cover all your other costs and 
leave you with a nice profit.  
What if you have to spend the $10 up front, but you collect only $1 each year 
for 10 years? That situation creates a cashflow problem. That is, you don’t 
have enough cash to spend on acquiring new customers because you’re being 
paid back far too slowly. Clearly, to become a profitable company, you must 
not only be able to acquire customers profitably but also do so in a timeframe 
that supports your cashflow requirements and growth objectives. 
When companies start out, the amount they spend to acquire a customer 
often far exceeds the amount for which they can monetize that customer. That 

Chapter 5 | Losing Money on Sales 
60 
is the nature of new companies—while they’re figuring out the most efficient 
way to acquire customers, every new customer is a learning experience. That 
learning is expensive but pays back its cost many times when you determine 
how to acquire customers or users in a repeatable and scalable manner.  
Many startups get trapped in continuing to invest large amounts in customer 
acquisition, only to discover that they can’t get the cost of acquisition down. 
Every “sale”—that is, a new user or a new paying customer—is a one-off. 
These companies are unable to move from learning to scalable execution.  
Churn is another common challenge that companies face. When companies 
have high churn, it means customers or users are showing up to use the prod-
uct—and then going away. Having high churn is like trying to fish with a sieve: 
you may occasionally catch a fish, but most of them swim on through.  
If you have high churn, it may appear that your company is growing rapidly, 
especially if you can generate new users or customers more quickly than you 
lose them. But because those new users don’t stick around, you’re fighting a 
constant battle; ultimately, your apparent growth falls off, and you haven’t built 
a growth engine that can truly scale.  
Users and customers leave for a variety of reasons. If you’re selling to small 
businesses, given their high failure rates, a lot of them simply go out of busi-
ness. If you’re building a consumer product, users may like the promise of your 
offering, but once they try it, see no reason to continue using it. You’re failing 
to engage your users, so you can’t retain them. 
And in all cases, if you don’t have a compelling and sticky offering—an offering 
that locks in the customer and makes it hard to switch while solving the cus-
tomer’s needs—a competitor can swoop in and take your customers. In that 
case, you’re spending a lot of marketing and sales dollars educating customers, 
only to have someone else monetize them. 
Remember: Products Are Bought, Not 
Sold 
People are fond of talking about selling, but really we should all talk about 
buying. That’s because your product is bought, not sold. Of course, you’ve 
probably let yourself be talked into buying something you didn’t need or made 
an impulse purchase because an item seemed like a good deal. But when it 
comes to the very best products, people want to buy them.  

Why Startups Fail 
61
Consider the lines in front of Apple Stores the day before a new iPhone goes 
on sale. Think about concerts that are so popular they not only sell out but 
have scalpers selling tickets for far more than they originally cost. Or recall the 
last time you tried to go on vacation during a holiday season, and the asso-
ciated cost of airfare and hotel rooms. 
What do all these products have in common? They’re in demand, and they’re 
scarce. Scarcity and demand obviously go hand in hand. More often than not, 
they don’t come about naturally: they must be created. This is why so much 
marketing today refers to demand generation rather than sales.  
Certainly, the sales pitch, nowhere more artfully demonstrated than in epi-
sodes of Mad Men, still exists. But with the amount of information now avail-
able on the Internet, transparency around price and quality has increased sig-
nificantly. From sites like Yelp and TripAdvisor for restaurant and hotel re-
views to Amazon for product reviews, information about products is widely 
available. As a result, great products are a must.  
So is demand creation—because if your product seems undifferentiated, 
people will simply go for the lowest price. And there are many ways to 
differentiate—from the product itself to how you position and deliver it. Great 
service is a differentiator too. 
Fight Inherent Bias 
Ask an enterprise sales executive how they would solve a sales-execution 
problem, and the answer will most likely be, “Put in place a sales methodology, 
set a quota, and hire the right sales people.” 
Ask a product person how they would solve a sales problem, and the answer 
will most likely be, “Remove any friction in the way of product adoption, and 
make it easier to buy.” 
Ask someone who’s been 100% focused on online marketing, and the answer 
may well be, “Spend money on Google AdWords and a variety of other online 
lead-generation mechanisms.” 
Ask a consumer Internet entrepreneur, and the answer will be, “Go viral.” 
Which of these answers is correct? They all are—from the point of view of the 
person answering the question! They may not be the right answer for your 
startup, however. The issue you face is that people bring inherent biases with 
them. They tend to go with what they know and with what has worked for 

Chapter 5 | Losing Money on Sales 
62 
them in the past. Big enterprise sales execs go with big enterprise sales mod-
els. Online marketers go with online marketing. Those who have built brands 
for big companies in the past want to spend lots of money on marketing and 
brand building.  
Everyone is susceptible to this kind of bias—even your most experienced 
board members. They may be the most susceptible, because they’re using 
pattern matching as the basis for their advice based on companies they 
previously invested in that worked (or didn’t work).  
But what worked in the past may have depended as much on a particular 
market or market conditions as on the startup itself. What’s more, if you push 
someone to market and sell in a way that’s not natural to them—say, suggest-
ing that an enterprise sales executive market and sell only via a light-touch 
Internet approach—you set up that person to fail. 
How do you fight bias like this? Although it’s difficult, the best solution is to 
look at the data. But realistically, no matter how much you do that, you’ll prob-
ably turn over your sales team a few times before you get one in place that 
works. It may feel like a bad thing when it’s happening—and it certainly feels 
painful to the organization—but it’s the nature of a startup’s evolution.  
Reduce Sales Team Turnover 
It’s almost a given that in every startup, sales executives are turned over more 
than just about anyone else in the company. That was the case with Company 
X, which went through three VPs of sales in 12 months. The first head of sales 
was a channel executive who knew a lot about setting up partnerships but very 
little about running an actual sales organization and “owning the number.” He 
lasted almost two quarters before the board leaned on the CEO to fire the 
exec and get someone more familiar with direct sales. 
The second head of sales was the real deal. He had a track record of helping 
companies grow from the low millions of dollars in revenue to $50 million, 
$80 million, and over $100 million in revenue. Sales model discovery followed 
by scaling was his sweet spot. He didn’t enjoy working in really big organiza-
tions, but he did enjoy tuning the sales model and then putting a team in place 
to execute on it.  
Although Company X was, as he put it, “a little earlier” than he was used to, 
he joined because a good friend of his was on the board and encouraged him 
to take the job. He was at one board meeting and gone before the next. A 

Why Startups Fail 
63
savvy individual, he quickly figured out that the company wasn’t a little earlier 
than he was used to—it was a lot earlier. In fact, Company X was still a long 
way from finding product-market fit. Of course, the CEO of Company X 
blamed the sales executive, saying he had turned out not to be a good fit for 
the company.  
The third sales executive went through a number of lengthy interviews with 
the board members, all of whom had previous operating experience. Having 
been through two sales executives in rapid succession, neither the CEO nor 
the board was eager to hire another mismatched executive. The decision to 
hire the third sales executive was unanimous—as was the decision to make 
him CEO a few months later.  
He came right out and said the one thing no one else had been willing to: it 
wasn’t a question of sales execution that was killing the company. It was a lack 
of product-market fit. While other companies in the space were having great 
success, Company X continued to struggle. Perhaps the third sales exec had 
more on the line than the second one, or perhaps he wanted to prove he 
could make it work—as CEO. Given the choice between him becoming CEO 
and losing sales executive number three, the board decided to make him CEO.  
Failing fast is one mark of a great startup. But making the same mistake repeat-
edly isn’t. Don’t hire senior executives and staff up before you’re ready for 
them. Doing so just wastes time and capital. And, as I talked about in the last 
chapter, great sales operations are no substitute for product-market fit.  
Get Sales Leverage 
Sales leverage is all about reaching customers efficiently. Pivoting doesn’t just 
apply to your product strategy; it also applies to your go-to-market strategy. If 
you feel you have product-market fit, but you’re not reaching your potential 
customers and your business isn’t growing the way you want it to, it’s time to 
pivot your model. 
The Traditional Way 
The most cost-effective way to get new customers or users, of course, is for 
your existing customers or users to recruit them for you.  

Chapter 5 | Losing Money on Sales 
64 
Historically, companies run advertisements, do PR campaigns, and then put 
“feet on the street” to sell their products. Drug company representatives go 
door to door to meet with doctors and educate them about new products.  
Traditional software companies have account executives (AEs) who meet with 
big customers in person. Sales engineers (SEs) then install the software and 
perform any configuration—and sometimes, costly customization—of the soft-
ware for the customer’s environment. Some software products are so com-
plex or need to be customized to such an extent that the customer pays pro-
fessional service fees on top of the cost of the base product. Teams from the 
software maker itself or from a third party install and customize the software.  
Enter the Cloud 
Today, most software is in the cloud. This means instead of the product being 
installed on premises—that is, on the customer’s servers at the customer’s 
location—and managed by the customer’s employees or a designated third 
party, the software is run at a data center external to the customer. The ven-
dor manages and updates the software. Although this model existed before 
Salesforce.com, that company was the first to make Software as a Service 
(SaaS), software delivered via the cloud, a widely accepted practice. 
Delivering software this way has transformed the way software is sold, en-
abling a variety of innovative new business models.  
The Freemium Model 
Well-known tech companies like Dropbox, Evernote, LinkedIn, Skype, and 
others have implemented the freemium model with much success, and you can 
too. In this model, a company gives away the basic product for free and then 
charges for premium services.  
Business-to-business (B2B) companies are using this innovative model to dis-
rupt classic business software models. With freemium, your customers don’t 
pay you up front—they get to try the product for free. The idea is to get them 
hooked, so that they decide to pay to keep using the product or to take 
advantage of premium features. 
To be clear, the freemium model comes in two flavors. In one case, customers 
get to use the complete product free of charge during the trial period, and 
then they must convert to paid to continue their usage. In the second case, 

Why Startups Fail 
65
your base product (perhaps a personal edition to be used by one or two users 
only) is free, but customers pay for premium features or higher-end packages 
that include business capabilities like more storage, more email, or multiple-
user support.  
The freemium model itself isn’t new—shareware programs of the 1980s and 
1990s used a similar model, where customers could use the product for free 
and then pay if they wanted to continue to use the app. These applications 
came in the form of installed software, with the user bearing any associated 
computing and storage costs. With hosted, web-based services, the costs of 
bandwidth, storage, and processing are borne by the company. Historically, this 
was expensive, and it meant that supporting a user for free was equally expen-
sive, preventing freemium from being a viable approach for hosted services. 
But the decline in the costs of these infrastructure services, and the ability to 
rely on them being delivered by Amazon Web Services, for example, means 
that the incremental cost of supporting an additional user is very low. As a 
result, many companies have been able to implement the freemium model 
successfully. They can afford to take on new users for free, and they view the 
costs of supporting such users as their marketing cost—and frequently that’s a 
lot more cost-effective than paid marketing.  
Although the model can be used for all kinds of services, it’s especially useful 
when users create or upload their own content, as is the case with Dropbox, 
Evernote, and others. Once users upload their content, they want ongoing 
access to it. This makes them more likely to convert to paying customers and 
stick around, because although it’s possible for them to switch to another ser-
vice, transferring their content requires a significant investment of time and 
energy. 
The risk with freemium is that customers may decide your product is nice to 
use if it’s free but not worth paying for if it isn’t. You may end up with tons of 
users using the free version of your service but have limited success converting 
them to paying customers. Users who abuse the service or fail to convert cost 
you money and hurt your margins. Supporting them also costs time and 
money. If there are too many of them, you have implemented the dreamium 
model, not freemium. 
Given that freemium plans typically see a conversion rate of 1% to 5% from 
free to paid (with 5% being incredibly high), you must have a lot of users for 
freemium to work. Looking at Evernote, Dropbox, LinkedIn, and others, the 
common theme is that they all have millions, if not tens of millions of users.  

Chapter 5 | Losing Money on Sales 
66 
Their products appeal to a very broad base of potential users, who are all sign-
ing up for their products individually. Although businesses or employees may 
ultimately pay for products like LinkedIn and Dropbox, it’s millions of individ-
uals who sign up for the service. If your service doesn’t potentially appeal to 
millions of individuals, freemium probably won’t work for you. It may look 
good at the outset, but there won’t be enough users for it to work at scale. In 
that case, you should turn off your free option and charge for your product.  
Zero-Cost User Acquisition 
Pioneered by consumer Internet companies, especially social networks like 
Facebook, zero-cost user acquisition is literally just that: it costs nothing to 
acquire another user. It’s the most highly leveraged and efficient model of all.  
Zero-cost user acquisition is easiest when your users are your content—their 
pictures, words, files, and activities are what make your product what it is. 
Your product provides the framework for them, but they (and their associated 
digital media and actions) are the content.  
The more your users are the content, and the more the benefit of the product 
is a result of them sharing their content and actions with others, the closer 
you are to zero-cost user acquisition. That’s because your users will naturally 
want to invite friends and colleagues to the site, because the more friends and 
colleagues are on the site, the more benefit the original inviter derives from 
the service.  
Word of Mouth 
But you don’t have to be building a social network to implement some of the 
approaches of zero-cost user acquisition. Zero-cost user acquisition also 
comes in the form of word of mouth. This is perhaps one of the most power-
ful forms of marketing (and sales) ever. 
Consider online shoe seller Zappos, known for its excellent customer service. 
Other companies sold shoes on the Web for years before Zappos showed up. 
But Zappos introduced free two-way shipping and incredible customer service. 
Customers loved it—they reviewed the company positively online, and they 
told their friends. Word spread like wildfire, and Zappos became so successful 
that it was acquired by Amazon for more than a billion dollars. 

Why Startups Fail 
67
Of course, Zappos spent money on advertising. But more important, the com-
pany became known for one thing: its industry-leading customer service. Peo-
ple loved talking about their Zappos’ experience. By developing a reputation for 
doing one thing—customer service—better than any other company, Zappos 
revolutionized its category and became successful through word of mouth.  
Figure out the one thing you can be better at than any other company in your 
category, become known for that, and you can put word of mouth to work to 
grow your business, too.  
Partnering 
One often overlooked path to sales leverage is via partnering with a larger 
company that already has an efficient channel to the market. Of course, this 
approach comes at a cost: partnerships are notoriously difficult to come by, 
plus you give up a portion of your revenue to the partner.  
The risk with partnering is that you become so dependent on the partner that 
you can’t acquire customers without them. But some companies and their plat-
forms have so much reach that paying them the tax to acquire customers may 
well be more effective than trying to acquire those customers directly.  
Many companies are acquiring users by developing mobile applications and list-
ing them in the Apple App Store or working with partners like Salesforce.com 
that already have large and efficient customer reach. When you consider that 
ultimately you need to spend money on customer acquisition one way or 
another, these kinds of relationships can be an important component of a 
broader acquisition strategy.  
Repeatedly Monetizing Your Users 
One of the best sources of revenue you can come by is revenue from existing 
users. If someone is using your product, you’ve already paid the cost to acquire 
them. As a result, any more money you can get them to spend with you is 
revenue that goes straight to your bottom line. 
This is called farming your existing user base. The reality is, existing, satisfied 
users want to spend more money with you! You just have to give them a way 
to do so. You can upsell them on a more expensive offering, sell them new 
features, or charge them for usage (of storage, for example). Or, in the case of 

Chapter 5 | Losing Money on Sales 
68 
ad-supported businesses, you can get them to spend more time on your site, 
which should result in them seeing, and ultimately clicking, more ads.  
Of course, it’s also possible to over-monetize your users. Web sites that put 
too many ads in front of their users, for example, can detract from the core 
user experience. Social network MySpace suffered from ad burnout—users of 
the site saw so many ads that they tuned them out. Finding the right balance is 
key. 
Making the Engine Hum 
There are plenty of tactical items that, when all put together, can clog up a 
sales engine. Ineffective sales people, bad contracts, pricing that’s a complete 
mismatch for the value customers perceive they’re getting, lack of good pro-
cess, and a sales funnel that acts more like a leaky bucket can all destroy sales 
execution. Let’s take them in order. 
Ineffective Sales People 
Ineffective sales people are a form of lack of product-market fit. Instead of the 
product being your actual product, the product is the sales person, and the 
market is the individual customer looking to make a purchase. I recall a sales 
team where calls were routed randomly to the inside sales representatives. 
They didn’t get to choose which customers they talked to; they simply picked 
up the phone when it rang. Yet in one month, the best performer sold five 
times more than the worst performer.  
The CEO, who was new to managing a larger sales operation, figured that his 
VP of sales could coach the worst performers to do better. The company and 
the worst performers both invested many months, yet the resulting improve-
ment was minimal. Ultimately the CEO decided to focus the company on its 
strengths.  
After moving the VP of Sales to another role and taking over the job himself, 
the CEO laid off his worst-performing sales people and hired more people like 
those who were successful. The strategy worked—and the rest of the organi-
zation was overjoyed. Having the non-performers on the team for so long had 
started to take its toll and demoralize the other employees.  

Why Startups Fail 
69
Bad Contracts 
Bad contracts can limit a company’s upside and cost you a lot of money. Pres-
sured to get deals done by its board, Company Z cut sweetheart deals with its 
customers. Although the deals looked great on paper, they restricted Com-
pany Z’s ability to get more revenue from the customers as the company ex-
panded its product’s reach in its customers’ organizations. You often need to 
discount aggressively to get early customers. But contractually limiting your 
upside can come back to bite you later. 
Painful as it was, ultimately Company Z had to go back to these customers and 
tell them it couldn’t afford to service them as customers under the agreed-on 
contracts. Some customers reacted very negatively. Many, however, responded 
with, “We couldn’t understand how you could afford to charge us this little.” 
Were they happy about renegotiating? Certainly not. But they needed the pro-
duct enough that they didn’t want Company Z to go out of business. 
Mismatched Pricing 
Pricing that is a mismatch with a customer’s expectation of value can also kill a 
company. This frequently happens when startups introduce products that com-
pete with those from larger companies. I have heard the refrain, “But [big 
company X] charges tens of thousands of dollars for a product like ours, and 
our product is a lot better” more times than I care to remember. Yes—but 
you’re not big company X.  
Bad Sales Process 
Bad sales process and a leaky funnel go hand in hand. Many startups have po-
tential customers or users coming in that they aren’t taking care of. In an ideal 
world, every sale would be a self-serve sale. Customers would come to your 
web site, put in their payment info, and buy your product. Or, in the case of a 
consumer web site, they would register and become ongoing, active users. The 
reality is often quite different.  
Hard as it may be to believe, your site may make it too difficult for customers 
to sign up and pay you. Customers may have questions about your product 
because you haven’t refined the information on your site to the point that they 
can find the answers. Or, they may want to speak to, chat with, or email a 

Chapter 5 | Losing Money on Sales 
70 
human being just to make sure you’re “real.” This is especially true in the early 
days of a startup.  
The bad news about a clogged engine is that missed opportunities may be 
chewing up your potential profits—and your reputation, if word spreads that 
you’re unresponsive to your customers. 
The good news is that you can solve the leaky-bucket problem with data and 
attention to process. For web sites, you can instrument your site and know 
exactly how many people who come to the site convert into leads and paying 
customers. Consumer companies can track how many users turn into regis-
tered users and then remain as active users. They can figure out the specific 
actions taken by users who stick around, and then focus on getting more new 
users to perform those same activities. 
Summary 
Pivoting doesn’t just apply to your product strategy. It applies to your go-to-
market strategy too. Keep refining your go-to-market strategy until you have a 
highly leveraged model: 
• 
Develop a reputation for being better at one thing than 
any other company in your category. 
• 
Use innovative new sales models to accelerate your 
growth. 
• 
Figure out how much your users or customers are worth 
to you, and then run the numbers to determine how much 
you can spend to acquire and serve them. 
• 
Sales team turnover is a natural part of company evolution. 

C H A P T E R 
6 
Invisible 
Startups 
Market Your Startup Without Incinerating Cash 
So you’ve got a great market and a great product. A few select people know 
about your product, they use it all the time, and they love it. Problem is, 
they’re all friends of yours! Like the tree falling in the empty forest, thousands 
of great products have gone unused because no one knew they existed. You’re 
not just unknown—you’re invisible. 
But how do you get the word out in a crowded market? How do you stand 
out from the crowd without mortgaging your house or burning through your 
hard-won venture dollars? No longer is it sufficient to do basic search-engine 
marketing and optimization. Just buying keywords, putting up landing pages on 
your web site, and doing PR won’t cut it. Avoid getting lost in the noise and 
stand out from the crowd using these seven proven ways to market your 
startup. 
Startups You’ve Never Heard Of 
Investors lump failures into one of two categories.  
Some companies struggle in a market where everyone fails. Things look good, 
but ultimately mainstream customers or a large volume of users are unwilling 
to take a chance on a new concept. Skilled execution and a reasonable backup 
plan don’t compensate for a market that fails to develop as quickly as originally 
anticipated. Some entrepreneurs are able to switch markets completely early 
on—if they haven’t raised and spent too much cash. But typically in this scena-

Chapter 6 | Invisible Startups 
72 
rio, all companies in the given market flounder or fail. It isn’t a desired out-
come, but it’s not for lack of trying. It’s often the nature of creating new 
markets.  
Then there are the really painful failures—those that keep me and other inves-
tors I know up at night. Some investments fail due to self-inflicted wounds. A 
competitor winds up owning what turns out to be a very large market. The 
other company moved faster and out-executed. Often, they did this by having 
a better product and by out-acquiring users or customers. Here’s a good ex-
ample. 
The file-sharing market has existed for a long time. For as long as computers 
have been around, people have needed to move files from one place to an-
other. Yet we’ve all experienced attaching a large file to an e-mail message only 
to find out that the file was too big to send or get a bounce-back message indi-
cating it was too large for the recipient to receive. And the problem has only 
gotten worse as people have started creating, capturing, and sharing more and 
more high-resolution media.  
From product-design files to project documents, from high-resolution photo-
graphs to video, everyone needs to move more and bigger files, and share 
them not just with one person but with friends and large teams. Although high-
speed broadband seems as though it could have made this problem virtually 
disappear, it’s had the opposite effect—now that many people have a high-
speed connection, they expect to be able to move large files quickly and easily. 
They often need to share media with others or want to back up all those 
documents, videos, photographs, and other important files.  
Recognizing the increased adoption of high-speed broadband and the creation 
of larger files, a number of companies developed file-sharing products early on. 
But they faced some significant challenges to adoption. 
Some of the companies were simply too early to market. People had relatively 
high-speed Internet, but it wasn’t yet fast enough to support rapid transfer of 
large files. It might be okay for an upload to go on for hours or days in the 
background, but if took that long to retrieve a file, forget it. What’s more, 
storage and bandwidth costs were prohibitively high—the companies couldn’t 
offer storage at a price that customers were willing to accept and still make 
money. They failed because they were too early.  
Later, the gorillas entered the market—Amazon, Apple, Google, and Micro-
soft—primarily by acquiring companies in the space, integrating, and rebranding 
their products. Yet all the gorilla and stand-alone product offerings had critical 

Why Startups Fail 
73
shortcomings: restrictions on uploading or sharing of larger files, really slow 
upload speeds, and/or hard-to-use user interfaces.  
Some lacked a desktop component, so users had to drop large files onto a 
browser and then leave the browser window open while waiting for the up-
load to complete—which could take hours and made it very difficult to syn-
chronize files across different devices. These products failed because they 
weren’t great products and they didn’t live up to users’ expectations. 
Enter the cloud. Lots of products existed in the space, but none truly solved 
the problem: making it easy to share and synchronize files across any device, 
privately or with others. Two companies emerged as the market leaders: 
Box.net and Dropbox. Box targeted the enterprise, and Dropbox the 
consumer.  
These companies did two things well that differentiated them from the failures. 
They built exceptionally easy-to-use products that solved the problem and 
“just worked,” and they transformed the way file-sharing products were mar-
keted. In doing so, they transformed the market.  
Instead of talking about file sharing or backup or moving bits around, they 
talked about access on any device. They talked about simplicity. They talked 
about transforming your data. And it wasn’t just talk; their products matched 
their marketing promise.  
In fact, they became marketing machines. They used many of the tactics de-
scribed in this chapter to become the well-known technology leaders they are 
today. So can you. 
Product Innovation 
Product innovation may be your best marketing and acquisition strategy.  
The number-one factor in marketing success is a great product. Deliver a bad 
product, and people will write and talk about it. Today, there is no hiding from 
bad product. Customers don’t just call customer service to complain—they 
post, tweet, and create YouTube videos like the well-known “United Breaks 
Guitars.” 
A great product is one that is easy to use, is self-explanatory, and delights your 
customers and users. Apple has a great brand because the company has com-
bined best-of-breed product with brilliant marketing. Fundamentally, the com-
pany’s products are intuitive, well designed, and pleasing to the user from start 

Chapter 6 | Invisible Startups 
74 
to finish. From purchasing to unwrapping to using to doing more purchasing, 
Apple delivers an excellent user experience. 
What’s more, Apple’s products grow with you. A new iPad user might not 
realize that swiping left brings up search, but over time they figure it out. 
Seemingly small things like making more advanced features discoverable pro-
vide a great experience. But they also incent users with a reward: that “ah hah” 
moment when they discover a new feature themselves, which in turn releases 
dopamine, a chemical that controls the brain’s pleasure and reward systems.  
Product matters more now than ever before. The Internet has increased the 
speed at which word of mouth spreads. Entrepreneurs are creating new prod-
ucts at unprecedented rates due to the declining cost and broader availability 
of infrastructure needed to build and deliver products to market. This means 
consumers and business users alike have more alternatives.  
Design matters more now than does technology alone. Information technology 
has achieved mass adoption. Even the most technology-resistant people now 
text, check e-mail, and browse the Web at home, at work, and on their 
phones. It’s no longer sufficient just to build a product of features.  
It used to be so fundamentally difficult to build product that vast amounts of 
engineering time and capital were consumed getting the product to work. 
Nearly everything had to be built from scratch. Today, however, you can leve-
rage a lot of existing building blocks; and, just as critically, you can get your 
product into the hands of potential users for feedback much more quickly and 
easily.  
That doesn’t mean all the hard technology problems have been solved, nor 
that products must be perfect before you release them to the market. But it 
does mean you can’t just cough up new products and expect users to use 
them. New products must have the design, integration, and ease of use today’s 
savvy consumers have come to expect.  
More products are becoming platforms. Some of the most interesting product 
innovations don’t come from your own product team but from other people 
leveraging your product as a platform. Of note in recent years was social gam-
ing company Zynga’s ability to tap into the inherent virality of Facebook to ex-
pand its user base rapidly.  
Opening up your product to integration with others not only drives faster 
adoption but also spurs new innovations. In the past, only the very largest 
companies could be platforms—Apple and Microsoft, for example. Because 

Why Startups Fail 
75
many applications are now delivered over the Web, however, opening up an 
interface that allows third party developers to integrate with your product is 
not only straightforward, it’s expected.  
That said, with rare exceptions, products come first, and platforms come 
second. Companies ultimately recognized as platforms don’t typically start out 
building platforms—they build applications that gain widespread adoption first, 
and then they open up to become platforms. Amazon, Salesforce, Facebook, 
Google, and others that have emerged to become platform companies, were 
successful as application companies first.  
But opening yourself up and defining yourself as a platform—once you’ve 
achieved application success, of course—does one other incredible thing for 
you from a marketing perspective: it puts you in the center of the ecosystem 
rather than on the edge of the circle. That means you get to define your mar-
ket position rather than have others define it for you. It puts you at the center 
of activity rather than at the periphery. The more you define your ecosystem, 
the more control you have over your own destiny—a good thing for any 
startup. 
Viral Marketing 
To make your product viral, make viral your product. Imagine Facebook or 
YouTube without user-uploaded photos and videos and the ability to share 
them easily. Unlike other marketing techniques, viral is built-in and free. With 
viral acquisition, your users acquire you more users just by using your product. 
Some products are inherently viral—Facebook and LinkedIn, for example. At 
their core, they’re frameworks for letting people share their own content. In 
the case of Facebook, that’s personal content like photos and updates on what 
people are up to. In the case of LinkedIn, it’s professional networking informa-
tion.  
Not all products are naturally viral from the ground up, but by giving your 
users the ability to invite their friends, make money, get a discount, or obtain 
capabilities such as free storage for every user they refer, your site or app can 
take advantage of viral marketing. You can go one step further by adding spe-
cial features only available to those who get their friends to sign up. Viral mar-
keting, executed well, delivers near zero-cost user acquisition. A big part of 
that efficiency is that viral marketing leverages existing user-acquisition and 
communication mechanisms like e-mail and social networks. 

Chapter 6 | Invisible Startups 
76 
One compelling form of viral marketing is media sharing. If your product re-
quires users to share what they’re doing (documents, images, or links, for ex-
ample) with others, that drives adoption. Every time an existing user shares a 
piece of media with a friend or colleague, your product has been exposed to a 
potential new user.  
Part of what makes viral adoption work so well is its personalized nature. As 
Robert Cialdini pointed out in Influence: The Psychology of Persuasion (Harper, 
2006), people trust recommendations from those they already trust. So when 
your friend Joe says he’s using a new application and suggests you use it too, 
that’s likely to carry more weight than randomly hearing about the application. 
Although you may not be able to turn your application into a viral-content 
container like Facebook or LinkedIn, you can certainly incorporate some basic 
viral elements along these lines. “Joe is using Application X,” and “Joe shared a 
document with you,” both carry a lot of weight because they’re coming from a 
trusted source—Joe.  
Nearly every product today should have at least the most basic of viral ele-
ments built in. Ideally, it should also incorporate virality in a much more fun-
damental way into core product design so that it uses e-mail, social networks, 
and other mechanisms to get the word out. 
Hand in hand with building in viral features, of course, is testing their impact 
and making changes based on the data. Everything about a viral feature can be 
measured, tested, and iterated on, from senders to receivers to the content of 
the message itself. For example, what are the characteristics of senders whose 
invites are most frequently accepted? How about those of recipients who ac-
cept invitations? What about the content of the invitation?  
Users and potential users provide huge amounts of signaling data through their 
actions—you can make this data actionable by measuring it. 
Viral marketing works best when coupled with gaming dynamics. File-sharing 
company Dropbox calls its free space a bonus. It’s not just free space: “You’re 
2 steps away from a 250MB bonus.” And it couples that with quests, much like 
a game: “Complete these quests and become a Dropbox guru!”  
The product seamlessly introduces rewards in the form of bonuses, quests to 
complete, and status levels like guru. These incent user behavior and drive 
adoption. They also make the product fun, adding excitement to potentially 
mundane steps like putting files in a folder and installing an application on your 
mobile device.  

Why Startups Fail 
77
Social Media 
People often lump viral marketing and social media together. In reality, viral 
marketing and social media are very different. Social media (or social) can help 
get the viral-marketing flywheel spinning, but at its core, social is about pres-
ence, credibility, and visibility. 
Social is pages, likes, tweets, posts, blogs, answers, comments, and word of 
mouth. Inexpensive e-mail newsletter tools are available to help you communi-
cate with users, and they can be a very effective way to re-engage those who 
have tried your product in the past. You can bring social directly into your ap-
plication by combining viral and social, social and mobile. More on that later. 
Fortunately, it’s easy to use social media these days. Post regularly on your 
site’s blog. Tweet about new features, customers, and users multiple times per 
day. Social means being part of the conversation. So don’t just do it yourself—
enlist your customers, fans, and friends to leave comments, write, and tweet 
about you and your products.  
Create videos and podcasts, and publish those on your web site as well as on 
destinations like YouTube and other web sites. This is an excellent and low-
cost form of marketing that takes advantage of the great asset you have in your 
users and customers. Don’t just make the videos about your product—enlist 
your users and customers to make the content more personal and applicable. 
You can also create online communities for your users. Not only a community 
for discussion or help about your product—although that is certainly a must—
but also a destination where users can share their stories and connect emo-
tionally with you and your product.  
Consider a company that provides web-based customer-support software. 
Although the product itself may not be viral, the company can create a social 
destination, something like CustomerServicesReallySuck.com1. Everyone has 
had a bad customer-service experience at one time or another and wanted to 
share their pain and frustration by telling someone else about that experience. 
A web-based customer support company can easily tap into that pent-up cus-
tomer anguish by providing an outlet for it—and, of course, the solution. 
What do you do if you’re bootstrapped and find yourself without the time (or 
interest) to tweet, blog, and comment? Either make the time or do what many 
                                                 
1 A name used for illustrative purposes. 

Chapter 6 | Invisible Startups 
78 
other companies do: hire someone to do these activities for you. Think you 
can’t afford to? The real question is whether you can afford not to. Plus, with 
recent college graduate unemployment rates at their highest in decades, you 
should be able to find someone highly educated and Internet savvy who is 
looking for experience and income. Put that person to work as your social 
media expert.  
Buzz 
Closely related to social is buzz. Buzz means your company is visible—highly 
visible. To get buzz, you need to take advantage of that other four-letter word, 
hype. To generate buzz, it’s not enough to tweet, post, and blog. You have to 
be visible: on Internet TV shows, in blogs, at big events. You have to be seen as 
a leader in your space, often slightly controversial or edgy. Get people talking 
about your company, your product, or you. Today, success begets visibility, 
and visibility begets success. 
I grew up in the school of thought best articulated by Steve Jobs in 2003: “Our 
belief was that if we kept putting great products in front of customers, they 
would continue to open their wallets.” I still agree with that statement. But 
don’t forget the 1984 Apple Super Bowl commercial: not only did it create 
buzz, but it also created an emotional connection. Fortunately, these days, you 
don’t need to spend millions of dollars on a Super Bowl ad to generate buzz. 
Prior to the late 1990s, few had heard of an individual who had been a vice 
president at Bankers Trust and a computer scientist at D. E. Shaw & Co. This 
individual went on to make the—at the time—outrageous claim that he was 
building the world’s largest bookstore. Of course, everyone now knows the 
name Jeff Bezos and the company Amazon.com.  
Being unique, social, and personally visible is critical to generating buzz. But it’s 
not sufficient. To stand out from the masses, you must go one step further. 
You must have and communicate a transformative vision, also known as a 
BHAG—a Big Hairy Audacious Goal—coined by Jim Collins and Jerry Porras in 
their book Good to Great (HarperBusiness, 2001). 
Some may consider BHAG a cliché. After all, what startup really needs to deal 
with things like vision and mission? But consider the difference between “a set 
of web pages for displaying customer information stored in a database” and 
“the end of software.” Both statements describe the world’s largest customer 

Why Startups Fail 
79
relationship management (CRM) company, Salesforce.com. But it’s clear which 
statement is more proactive, visionary, and buzz-worthy.  
To be worthwhile, buzz must translate into value. In its most extreme form, 
buzz may appear purely superficial. But not only did “the end of software” 
statement serve Salesforce.com’s marketing purposes, it also served as a clear 
point of differentiation, a focus, and as a rallying cry for the company.  
Done right, buzz is more than skin deep. It’s the articulation of a vision that 
comes from your company’s very core. That helps you sell product, drives 
user awareness, and helps with financing activities and, ultimately, liquidity. 
Moreover, in crowded spaces, a big, transformative vision combined with a 
powerful articulation of that vision lets one company break out from the pack.  
Search 
With Facebook accounting for some 25% of U.S. Internet traffic, it might be 
tempting to discount traditional online acquisition mechanisms such as search. 
But search, in the form of search engine optimization (SEO)2 and search engine 
marketing (SEM), generates a lot of users. According to some estimates, 
Google handles about three billion searches per day. The challenge is making 
search cost-effective as a way for your company to acquire customers. With 
patience, effort, and the right analytics tools, however, search pays off.  
Test, measure, and repeat. Nothing is too small to be tested, from pricing 
plans and ad copy to layouts, colors, and animated buttons. Ask every cus-
tomer to link back to you from their web site—consider offering discounts to 
those that do. Not all of them will do it, but enough will to drive up your rank-
ings and traffic. Get the details right, such as anchor text, so you rank high in 
search results for the terms you care about. Plus, referral traffic alone boosts 
sales. Add an affiliate program to reward your customers and partners for 
sending people your way. 
Defining your goals and tuning your conversion flow before spending too much 
money is critical. The right product-market fit—a product and price point that 
                                                 
2 Search engine optimization (SEO) is the practice of optimizing the content on your web 
site and the inbound links from other sites pointing to your site to increase your ranking in 
a search engine. Search engine marketing (SEM) deals with managing the advertisements 
displayed above and to the side of Google search results and on sites that display Google-
served ads.  

Chapter 6 | Invisible Startups 
80 
a very large number of people want—is paramount. When it comes to search 
marketing, the sheer volume of searches means it’s easy to spend a lot of 
money and produce very little in the way of results.  
Company X decided to invest in Google AdWords as a way to acquire cus-
tomers. However, the company didn’t define goals for the campaigns ahead of 
time, nor did it give much thought to the rest of the flow, such as landing pages 
and what to do when customers indicated their interest. This may seem unfa-
thomable—why spend money before you know what you plan to do with the 
results? But it happens in startups all the time. 
In contrast, Company Y, which was targeting small and medium businesses 
(SMBs), set clear goals for its online marketing campaigns and was even show-
ing good progress—but it couldn’t find a path from generating a few customers 
a day to generating thousands of them. This is mission-critical in the SMB 
space. So although it won the battle on AdWords, it lost the war on scaling 
the overall business.  
Company Z was very successful at buying AdWords that converted people 
into customers, but it had a leaky-bucket problem. Customers came, tried the 
product, and then left. It appeared for a period of time that the company was 
making progress, but it wasn’t. The company had found half of the product- 
market equation: the market. But it hadn’t yet discovered product fit for that 
market; users either weren’t getting what they expected or weren’t getting 
enough value. Either way, they weren’t sticking around.  
The management of Company Z, feeling pressure to grow, continued to spend 
without pausing to refine the product. The decision to keep spending seemed 
like the right one—customer acquisition appeared to be working. Yet the team 
didn’t want to admit that half the equation wasn’t right and adjust course 
accordingly.  
If any of these sounds like your business, then before spending another penny 
on online marketing, ask yourself two questions. First, what is your online 
marketing goal? It’s most likely not one goal but a series of milestones. It’s fine 
for your first goal to be, for example, “Let’s learn whether we can acquire cus-
tomers via AdWords.” The next goal might be, “Let’s determine the cost of 
acquisition and whether it will be profitable for us.” And finally, “How much 
can we spend, and how fast?” In other words, get a sense of whether a partic-
ular acquisition channel will work at all, and then refine and optimize. Second, 
keep asking yourself whether you have product-market fit—are you able to get 

Why Startups Fail 
81
customers to come to the well (market) and to keep drinking from it (prod-
uct)?  
Finally, there are some very low-cost yet innovative ways to drive search (and 
word of mouth) traffic. One example is to create compelling content to which 
people want to refer. Infographics are a great way to do this. With relatively 
little effort, crowd-sourced work company oDesk created such a graphic to 
represent reaching more than one million hours of work done per month. 
Numerous people linked back to, commented on, and shared the graphic be-
cause it provided interesting data in an informative and unique format. The 
result was more links back to the company’s web site, which both improved 
the site’s rankings in search results and drove traffic directly to the site. 
Mobile 
According to an article in the New York Times, the average smartphone user 
spends 667 minutes each month using mobile apps.3 That’s more time than 
those users spend talking on the phone. To reach your potential users where 
they are, you need to have a strong mobile presence. 
Plus, many compelling features are only enabled on mobile: photos and video 
on the go and, of course, location. In addition to providing great marketing, 
developing a mobile version of your application is sure to be a great source of 
product innovation, as your users unlock new and exciting use cases for your 
product, leading to new market and revenue opportunities for your company.  
Of course, some applications are mobile in and of themselves. The primary use 
case for photo apps, video apps, and many games is a mobile one. Other appli-
cations aren’t inherently mobile or weren’t originally designed to be mobile but 
have added compelling mobile apps. Review and travel-reservation web sites 
are good examples. Not only may users want to access your offering on the 
go, but a mobile app can also be a great promotional vehicle. As users search 
and browse through app stores, it’s just as important to be there as it is to be 
highly ranked in Google search results. 
Today, having a mobile interface has become a competitive imperative, much 
like having a web site was a few years ago. Users comparing functionality 
                                                 
3 www.nytimes.com/2011/03/07/business/media/07drill.html. 

Chapter 6 | Invisible Startups 
82 
across products see mobile as a big gap if a competitor has an offering and you 
don’t.  
Getting a mobile application built may not be as challenging, time consuming, 
or expensive as you think. To get your iPhone or Android application built re-
quires just three things. First, create a design for your application. Second, you 
need a set of application programming interfaces (APIs) to which the applica-
tion can connect: for example, to upload files or download messages. Third, 
you need a developer or developers who can build the app. Online market-
places like oDesk and vWorker.com make it possible to find developers who 
charge on a low-cost hourly or per-project basis.  
Brand 
Building a great brand is about being known for one thing. Lots of other web 
sites sold shoes, but online shoe retailer Zappos became known for its in-
credible customer service—people developed an emotional connection with 
the company and raved about it.  
Your brand identity is critical as well—name, logo, icon, and even a single let-
ter. F for Facebook. P for Pandora. Easiest and most powerful is to have the 
same company and product name. In a crowded world, there is little benefit in 
trying to market two brands—it’s challenging enough to market one. 
Things get exciting when you bring it all together. Delivered an order or a 
product? Ask your users to help spread the word by typing in a one-sentence 
description of why they loved your service and posting it to your web site and 
on their Facebook wall. That means more content for the search engines and 
more visibility for you, all driving more potential users to your site. 
When one user invites another to use your application, support the integrated 
ability for both users to post that to their wall or tweet it. “I just started us-
ing…” might sound corny, and some users may opt out, but many participate. 
That drives up your visibility. Integrate the Facebook Like button directly into 
your product experience; don’t just think of it as a piece of marketing. 
Take a page out of today’s social games. Reward your users with gifts such as 
free storage, discounts, and more, and then ask them to reciprocate by spread-
ing the word about your product. Don’t relegate ways for users to tell other 
potential users about your product to the marketing section of your web site. 
Instead, build those mechanisms directly into your product experience. At the 

Why Startups Fail 
83
time of upload, purchase, or in e-mails you send your users, give them quick 
and easy ways to share your product with the world. 
Protect your brand. If you get a reputation for having a great product and 
treating customers and users well, you develop a great brand. Fail to fulfill your 
brand promise, however, and users will communicate that failure to others 
faster than you can tap out a tweet.  
Summary 
The seven ways to market your startup described in this chapter may seem 
overwhelming. It might appear that you have to be everywhere at once. But by 
engineering viral, mobile, and social capabilities into your product, you don’t 
have to be—your marketing is an integrated part of your product, and vice 
versa.  
What’s more, with this approach and the marketing channels available today, 
you don’t have to incinerate your hard-won cash to promote your company. 
By combining product investment that you need to make anyway with free and 
low-cost marketing mechanisms, you can achieve huge leverage on your mar-
keting time and dollar investment. Through smart spending, testing, and itera-
tion, you can then accelerate your marketing machine. Unsure how best to 
market your startup? Get help from someone who’s been there and done it 
before.  
Ultimately, great marketing means an incredible product combined with a 
clear, memorable message. What’s so powerful about marketing today is that 
you can easily enlist your users in your success. To paraphrase Jerry Maguire, 
help your users help you. 
To succeed, put the seven marketing approaches to work for you: 
• 
Product innovation 
• 
Viral marketing 
• 
Social media 
• 
Buzz 
• 
Search 
• 
Mobile 
• 
Brand 

P A R T 
III
Execution 
 
 
Execution failure happens for all kinds of reasons—from failing to communicate 
effectively to never getting started, and from scaling too quickly to never 
scaling at all. Fortunately, you can avoid many kinds of execution failure. 
If you’ve ever wondered how to communicate more effectively with your em-
ployees, customers, and investors, Chapter 7 holds the answers. Whether 
you’re delivering good news or bad, choosing your words matters. And then of 
course there is that communication meeting that entrepreneurs spend hours 
both in and preparing for—the board meeting. You’ll learn how to make board 
meetings productive for you, your team, and your board members. And you’ll 
discover the most common communication failures that befall entrepreneurs, 
including failing to set expectations and not communicating at all—and how to 
avoid them. 
In Chapter 8, I’ll talk about one of the most common reasons potential 
entrepreneurs fail: they never get started. For those who have created multiple 
companies, starting a new venture may seem relatively straightforward. But if 
you’ve never quit your job, built a product, assembled a team, or raised capital, 
here’s how—and why—you should start your company. 
Time and again, companies fail as they try to scale because they don’t focus. 
They don’t attack their market effectively, they become complacent, they fail 
to hire to support growth, and they mismanage their cash. As you’ll see in 

Part III: Execution 
86 
Chapter 9, execution failures compound quickly in terms of time and cost. 
Once you have an organization in place, it’s hard to change direction. Big or-
ganizations cost big money, and when you don’t manage your capital properly, 
you can rapidly burn through tens of millions of dollars—and equity you can’t 
recover—fast.  
Great organizations can outrun the competition to become the market 
leaders, creating immense value for their founders, teams, and investors in the 
process. In Part III you’ll come away with the knowledge you need to 
communicate your vision and your progress. You’ll learn how to make the 
leap—and how to execute your way to scale once you do. 

C H A P T E R 
7 
Failing to 
Communicate 
Words Matter 
Communication can make or break a startup. From board meetings to em-
ployees, from delivering good news to bad, communicating effectively can help 
make sure all the hard work pays off. Communicating ineffectively can infect an 
organization and waste incredible amounts of time and capital: developers build 
the wrong features while marketing prepares the wrong messages.  
Bad communication often comes from failing to set expectations or not com-
municating at all. That can result in tough board meetings. Or, even worse, you 
can lose customers or users to the competition. People will forgive failure—
but only if you communicate transparently with them about what’s going on 
and right any wrongs. So why do so many leaders communicate so poorly, 
causing startups to fail, and how can you do it better? 
Communicating Your Vision 
Entrepreneurs are in the business of setting larger-than-life expectations. 
When you’re creating something from nothing, you have to be. You have to 
wake up every morning believing in yourself and your vision—in the face of 
numerous potential investors, employees, and users all telling you that no, 
you’re wrong. Your approach to the market won’t work, your product won’t 
work, your capital model is wrong, or they’re just plain not interested in what 
you’re doing. Up against all that negativity, entrepreneurs must continue to 
believe—and they must communicate that belief. 

Chapter 7 | Failing to Communicate 
88 
One of the biggest challenges entrepreneurs must address is balancing the day-
to-day challenges of running the business while painting the picture of the big, 
transformative nature of their vision to investors, potential employees, and the 
public.  
I recall one time when I was pitching my very first company to investors. It was 
the dark days of 2001, and not only were we on the road all the time talking to 
potential investors and customers, but when we were in the office, we were 
there until one or two in the morning and often later. Then we were back at it 
as soon as we woke up. To add even more stress, we were angel- and self-
funded and had the fear of an impending empty bank account bearing down on 
us. An experienced investor who was a former entrepreneur met with us and 
listened to our pitch. He was, as they say, a serious guy, not one to mince 
words or use a lot of them.  
I’ll never forget what he told us. “You guys are back on your heels,” he said. 
“I’ve been where you’re at.” We looked at him with raised eyebrows, skep-
tical. “You need to take a break, get some rest, and come back when you’re 
fresh.” It was the best piece of advice we had received in a very long time. 
It also forced a very important issue. We were doing too much, and we 
couldn’t do it all. We had to divide up our responsibilities and trust that they 
would get done; and we also needed to focus on what mattered. We couldn’t 
continue to take meeting after meeting; we had to be more selective. As great 
as it was for relationship-building to meet someone in person, we had to start 
qualifying people first. And we had to narrow the scope of what we were 
building and get the core functionality right before we added more features. 
Being frazzled meant that we weren’t communicating well. We needed to refo-
cus so that we could communicate our vision in a way that led to successful in-
vestment pitches and customer meetings. We stopped getting lost in the 
weeds when we were pitching because we weren’t lost in the weeds in the 
day-to-day business.  
It didn’t mean we paid less attention to detail—if anything, we paid more atten-
tion. But by doing less, we were able to get more done, more successfully. And 
just as important, when we met with investors and customers, we focused on 
what mattered to them—not the minutiae of the day-to-day issues and details, 
critical as they were, that were very literally keeping us up at night. 

Why Startups Fail 
89
Setting Expectations 
Should you shoot for the stars and try to accomplish the seemingly impossible? 
Absolutely—that is what great startups are all about. That is your BHAG—
your Big, Hairy, Audacious Goal. But never confuse your BHAG with what you 
need to accomplish day to day and the milestones you’ve promised to deliver 
on.  
Identifying and communicating your BHAG and milestones separately makes 
everything easier and clearer: here’s what we’re shooting for, and here’s 
where we are on the path to accomplishing that goal. That enables you to re-
main visionary while communicating actual progress and metrics. 
To be an entrepreneur, you have to be somewhat irrational. The odds of fail-
ure are high. Yet the challenge of beating those odds, and the potential re-
wards, both personal and financial, are a big part of what makes entrepreneur-
ship the calling that it is.  
Hand in hand with that irrationality, however, go irrational expectations for 
yourself and your team. As a result, it’s easy to fall into the trap of promising 
growth goals, such as revenue, profits, or users, which are wildly unrealistic.  
The CEO of Company E was an incredible saleswoman. She had great success 
during the dot-com bubble, making hundreds of millions of dollars for her in-
vestors and herself. She was charismatic, and people were impressed with her 
from the moment they met her. She told investors what they wanted to hear: 
that her company was going to transform the industry by delivering a product 
that was 10 times more efficient than existing offerings. Not only that, but due 
to her relationships in the industry, she would be able to secure customer 
deals that others would only dream of. It seemed too good to be true—and it 
was. 
Yet based on a combination of her past performance, her charisma, her rela-
tionships, and the vision she painted, investors flocked to her like moths to a 
candle. Having been through the fund-raising process many times before, she 
knew exactly how to manage it for an optimally priced capital raise. Once in-
vested, investors became believers. They had to; after all, they had committed 
tens of millions of dollars to the endeavor, and to admit that the company was 
going to fail was to admit that they had made a very poor investment. With so 
many people saying it was a good investment, the company created a sort of 
frenzy, raising more and more capital, and making bigger and bigger promises. 
Of course, people from investors to employees had their doubts, but few 

Chapter 7 | Failing to Communicate 
90 
wanted to question a CEO who could raise money so effectively and who 
seemingly carried so much weight in the industry. 
CEO E didn’t fail to set expectations. She overset them by miles. She lost track 
of the difference between her BHAG and the reality of where Company E’s 
product and execution really were. In her mind, vision and reality became one 
and the same, and it was impossible, when she was communicating, to tell what 
was real and what was vision; the future and the present merged in her mind 
and in her communication. After spending more than $80 million in investor 
capital, CEO E’s board replaced her, the company cut more than half of its 
staff, and the product remains a mirage.  
CEO F, on the other hand, didn’t overset expectations—he failed to communi-
cate at all. After figuring out that his market was large but too early for his 
product, he withdrew behind his computer screen. Previously he had been a 
vice president at a large, public software company. He was used to things being 
a lot easier, and he was accustomed to pre-existing demand for a product.  
As a vice president, his role was to iterate on a market-leading product that 
customers already wanted. Although managing a large team and working tire-
lessly to understand and prioritize new customer requirements was hard, it 
paled in comparison to the struggle he faced in finding product-market fit as 
head of his own company.  
He faced a challenge he was unsure how to tackle, and he was too proud to 
admit that his original product-market thesis was incorrect. The struggle con-
sumed him. He stopped communicating with the company and his management 
team. The last weeks of the quarter often found him on vacation. Meanwhile, 
he continued to promise unrealistic revenue and customer goals to his inves-
tors, even after his board gave him strong feedback to re-plan.1 
Ultimately, faced with an unresponsive leader and still believing in the market 
opportunity, the board hired a Chief Operating Officer to run all of product, 
operations, and sales, leaving the founder as CEO in title only. Ironically, his 
board members were very successful entrepreneurs in their own right. Had he 
found the courage to ask them for help and had the willingness to receive it, 
they surely would have been happy to provide it.  
                                                 
1 Replanning means revising an existing financial plan (often downward) based on new 
market or customer data. 

Why Startups Fail 
91
Managing Board Meetings 
If you’ve been a founder or executive at a company that’s taken external fi-
nancing, chances are you’ve been to a board meeting. Some people look on 
board meetings as a time suck—CEOs and their management teams spend 
days preparing for them and then sit through three or four agonizing hours of 
the meeting while board members often send and receive e-mails on their 
Blackberrys or iPads. Each month, these management teams look to the board 
calendar not as an opportunity but as a cost of having taken capital. There’s a 
sentiment that’s not all that uncommon: “If only my investors would leave me 
alone, I could actually get some work done.” 
A board meeting done right can be an opportunity not only to communicate 
important company information to the board—progress, challenges, key hires, 
financial metrics, and the like—but also to have real and valuable strategic dis-
cussions. It all comes back to expectations. 
I don’t have enough fingers and toes to count the number of founders and 
CEOs who have confided in me that they’re worried about offending person X 
or a colleague of person X by calling that person out on something—their tar-
diness, their Blackberry use, or even a lack of expertise as it applies to the is-
sues of the company. It’s the founder or CEO’s job to set expectations for 
board meetings, solicit input on what board members would like to have cov-
ered, and direct the meetings so they can be productive and efficient. 
Toward that end, it’s never too late for you to sit down with individual board 
members to communicate your expectations around the board meeting and 
understand what they would like to cover. Not having seen a board slide deck 
before isn’t a problem—failing to ask for help is. Your board members and 
other CEOs are usually more than willing to share what has worked well and 
what hasn’t.  
Intimidated by the decades of experience some of your board members have? 
Don’t be. Spending four hours accomplishing nothing is as much a waste of 
their time as it is yours. 
Do board members consistently show up late? Talk to them offline, and then 
always start on time. Set a schedule for every meeting, and stick to it. Include 
specific times for breaks so people know there’s one coming up and can plan 
their biological, e-mail, and telephone needs accordingly. 
It may seem obvious, but make water and coffee readily available during the 
meeting, and provide snacks during the breaks. Staying focused during long 

Chapter 7 | Failing to Communicate 
92 
meetings requires hydration and energy. Both are required to ensure the 
meeting keeps progressing. Avoid having a board meeting run through lunch if 
at all possible—the eating and noise will distract you and your board members. 
If you want to eat a meal with your board members, do so—just make it a 
separate event. 
Send out board-meeting materials ahead of time so people have time to review 
them, and don’t be shy about reminding them to review the materials before 
the meeting. Always include details like the start time, duration, and location of 
the meeting, and dial-in information even if no one has said they will be dialing 
in. Put simply, square away as many of the logistics as possible so you can make 
the time productive for yourself and everyone involved. 
Tell your executives how much time they have, and get them to stick to it. 
Sloppy board meetings that start late and run late are often a sign of sloppy 
companies. Getting bogged down in an issue that clearly requires further dis-
cussion? Suggest a separate follow up. Is there a big issue on the table that no 
one is taking the initiative to discuss? Get it out of the way first; avoid letting 
the issue remain the elephant in the room and thereby causing the board 
meeting to fail.  
Cover less material. Some CEOs feel it necessary to drill down in gory detail 
on every section. The reality is, it’s not the job of your investors to critique 
the nitty-gritty details of your marketing programs, sales approach, or product 
features. They may have experience and opinions in some or all of those areas, 
but they invested in you because of the promise that you would innovate, 
manage, and lead.  
Be your own toughest critic. Ask yourself the hard questions, instead of wait-
ing for others to do so. If an area of your company is operating poorly, deal 
with the issue or hire someone to own it, rather than looking to your board to 
solve it for you.  
Some CEOs shy away from giving details. By sticking purely to the big picture, 
they believe they can avoid being held accountable. Although this may be a 
strategy for raising money, it isn’t a long-term strategy for success. Ultimately, 
many companies operated by these kinds of leaders suffer sudden and painful 
deaths or restarts.  
In the case of Company B (a composite), the founder loved to talk about the 
product. He spent much of his time discussing the product, which was consis-
tent with how he spent most of his time day to day. He did little else. Investors 
avoided confronting him about this but were a lot more interested in whether 

Why Startups Fail 
93
the product worked than in the details of how it worked. Unfortunately for 
the company, a lot of promises the founder made about what the product 
would do and how much revenue it would generate did not materialize. The 
product kept slipping as the company introduced ever-newer features. 
No one wanted to be the bad guy. The founder was a temperamental individ-
ual who would surely hold a grudge. Moreover, none of the board members 
wanted to suffer the potential reputation cost of delivering bad news. 
The investors had backed the entrepreneur and his vision, and they believed 
their only options were to fire him or give him more money. And the entre-
preneur was very good at raising money, so there was a limited sense of ur-
gency around forcing the discussion. The board members were worried that 
without the founder, other investors wouldn’t back the company, employees 
would leave, and the company would be sold for pennies on the dollar.  
The story didn’t end well. A new investor, who believed in the market but had 
other ideas for the team, came in and recapitalized the company. The entre-
preneur was offered an advisory position and remained on the board, but with 
no real input into product or strategy. Had the entrepreneur confronted the 
issues sooner, the story might have ended differently.  
Delivering Bad News 
Some founders—and even many experienced executives—shy away from deli-
vering bad news. The best advice I ever received when being coached on how 
to communicate was, “Just say it.” Not going to hit the numbers? Just say it. 
Hired someone who isn’t going to work out? Just say it. But don’t leave it 
there. Articulate your plan—what you’re going to do about the issue.  
What if you don’t yet have a plan? Just say it. “We have this issue. We don’t 
yet have a plan, but we’re working on one, and we’d like to do a follow-up 
on—give your board members a specific date—to discuss the plan.” It’s a dis-
tant second to having a plan, but it demonstrates your leadership to your team 
and your board. Plus, the question is bound to be asked, so don’t wait for it. 
Ask it yourself, and then answer it. 
The other kind of bad news many people dislike giving is firing someone. I re-
member the very first person I ever had to fire. I agonized over it for weeks. 
How was I going to do it, and when? How would the team react?  

Chapter 7 | Failing to Communicate 
94 
Over and over again, founders have told me they’ve had the same experience: 
the team already knows that someone isn’t working out and is waiting for you 
to take action. As much as you may agonize over letting someone go—perhaps 
that person was even introduced to you by an investor or a board member—
your team is agonizing even more. Your team is working around that person, 
making up for issues, and expending effort to overcome a lack of chemistry. 
It’s one thing to talk about treating people with respect and another to do it. 
We’ve all read the cliché: firing someone–or getting fired—is really doing that 
person a service so they can go find what they’re good at. There is some truth 
in that. But the key questions when delivering bad news are: Was it a surprise? 
Did you take action quickly? Did you deliver the news humanely? If the news 
came as a surprise—and it’s critical to separate a person’s emotional reaction 
to the news from the news itself—that is a failing on your part as a manager 
and leader. Again, it all comes back to setting and agreeing on clear expecta-
tions. 
Delivering Good News 
Suffice it to say that good news should be delivered far and wide. People like 
feeling appreciated, and when most people leave a job voluntarily it isn’t be-
cause they were dissatisfied with their compensation but because they felt un-
derappreciated.  
Of course, great leaders set the bar high and have incredibly high expectations 
of their people. But they also communicate their appreciation when a team 
member goes above and beyond.  
Recognition and appreciation are the most inexpensive yet most underutilized 
forms of compensation available. Don’t give them out unless they’re earned; 
but when they’re merited, be generous with them.  
Communicating with Your Team 
One founder I know had to go away for two weeks due to a personal matter. 
He got back to discover that his small team of five engineers had all been hard 
at work—but on different features than they had talked about working on! 
When he asked them about this, each told him their version of what they 
thought they had agreed to work on. Of course, every developer had inter-

Why Startups Fail 
95
preted their work items through their own personal lens, interests, and sense 
of priorities.  
An experienced executive shared with me a simple tactic he used for address-
ing a similar issue. He communicated key goals and then asked his team to 
write down the goals they had heard. He read what they had written down, 
they discussed it and had a good laugh about it (often what they had written 
was far different than what he said, or what he thought he said)—and then he 
communicated it again.  
Team communication needs to be simple, clear, and frequent. It’s not sufficient 
to follow the old rule: Tell ’em what you’re going to tell ’em, tell ’em again, and 
then tell ’em what you told ’em. Communication can’t be one-way—it has to 
be more interactive. 
E-mail and social networks have revolutionized personal communication, mak-
ing it much more frequent and interactive. When communicating with your 
business team, the same principles apply. As a result, the old rule, updated and 
adapted for startups, is as follows:  
• 
Communicate your BHAG.  
• 
Enlist your team in developing sub-goals and milestones. 
• 
Communicate those goals to everyone clearly and concisely.  
• 
Ask them what they heard.  
• 
Repeat. 
In other words: Tell ’em, ask ’em, repeat. Do more than tell—engage and 
interact. 
Communicating with Customers 
Communicating about events like new product releases is relatively easy. It’s 
the crises that really test a startup.  
At some point in its life, every startup faces a major product or customer fail-
ure. Intel, the chip manufacturer, faced such an issue in 1994 when a bug was 
discovered to be causing numerical calculation errors in its Pentium chip. The 
company initially decided to replace processors on the basis of need rather 
than request. Although the bug impacted very few people, the company was 
criticized for the way it handled the situation. 

Chapter 7 | Failing to Communicate 
96 
Legendary CEO Andy Grove later issued a full apology, saying that Intel’s pol-
icy, “seemed arrogant and uncaring. We apologize. We were motivated by a 
belief that replacement is simply unnecessary for most people. We still feel 
that way, but we are changing our policy because we want there to be no 
doubt that we stand behind this product.”  
While it was late in coming, the Grove apology had a very positive impact on 
the company. Some marketing experts have even suggested that although the 
company had to take a short-term financial hit to reserve against possible 
product returns, the company’s brand ultimately came out stronger than it 
began.  
More recently, Airbnb, a web site that helps travelers find homes for rent, 
apologized publicly to a woman who rented out her home and then returned 
to find she had been robbed. Unlike the Intel blow-up, which took time to 
build, the Airbnb crisis came to a head virtually overnight.  
Communication on the Web is near-instantaneous, and it means that once a 
negative story hits, it’s all over the Web, all at once. People circulate stories in 
e-mail; they post, comment and tweet about them; and then they re-tweet and 
repost some more. That makes it more important than ever for startups to 
take the high ground and respond quickly when customer issues arise.  
For Airbnb, the process was stressful for the company’s management team and 
very painful for the woman whose home was robbed. It forced the company 
into action and produced a good outcome. The company created a new Trust 
and Safety Center and added an insurance policy for all those who rent out 
their homes.  
Customer crises happen to every startup. In today’s ultra-connected world, 
bad news spreads fast. Whatever the mistake, apologize to your customers 
and do it quickly. More often than not, you’ll come out ahead.  
Communicating Your Story 
Some entrepreneurs are natural promoters. They have an inherent desire to 
be at the center of attention. Without delving too deeply into the psychology, 
the motivations are often simple: insecurity, narcissism, and/or a need for ex-
ternal affirmation. The result quite often is immense publicity for anything with 
which the entrepreneur is associated. Of course, when those same companies 
fail, the craters they leave behind tend to be big ones. 

Why Startups Fail 
97
Other entrepreneurs are more inwardly focused and less promotional as a re-
sult. Some don’t like the spotlight at all; others believe, as the old saying goes, 
that if you build a better mousetrap, the world will beat a path to your door. 
The reality is, promoters often have an easier time raising money, recruiting 
people to their cause, and getting user or customer adoption.  
If you’re not a natural promoter, hire someone who will work with you to get 
your story out, and commit to becoming a promoter yourself. Often the best 
promoters have a support staff behind the scenes booking them speaking en-
gagements, getting them article placements, and helping them tweet and post.  
Getting your story and point of view out is different than marketing your com-
pany’s products. Communicating your point of view is about telling a much 
more personal story—it’s about you and your vision of how you intend to do 
something transformational through the company you’re building. 
If you’re three or four years in and you find yourself going along linearly, with 
no signs of increased growth, ask yourself if there’s a way to reframe and posi-
tion your story in a much more game-changing and human light. Become the 
go-to expert in your space. If you’re intimidated or embarrassed by the 
thought of speaking at conferences, appearing on television, or being quoted, 
remind yourself of the upside: free marketing and publicity for your startup, 
which will create more customer demand, thereby reducing your chances of 
failure. And get some coaching; it may seem expensive if you’re boot-strapped, 
but it will pay for itself many times over. 
Summary 
With the technology available today, communication is expected to be fre-
quent and interactive.  
Failure comes from 
• 
Confusing your ultimate goal with your actual progress 
• 
Mis-setting expectations 
• 
Not apologizing for mistakes 
• 
Poor management of communication logistics 
• 
Failing to communicate interactively 
• 
Not verifying that people heard what you said 

Chapter 7 | Failing to Communicate 
98 
To succeed: 
• 
Separate your ultimate and short-term goals. 
• 
Communicate frequently, especially during tough times. 
• 
Set expectations. 
• 
Apologize for mistakes, and make things right. 
• 
Hold productive meetings with your board. 
• 
Make communication interactive. 
 

C H A P T E R 
8 
Not Getting 
Started 
How to Get Your Company Off the Ground 
Many entrepreneurial dreams remain just that—thoughts on paper or in the 
mind of the would-be founder. And it’s no surprise, because starting a com-
pany is among the most difficult and time-consuming tasks you’ll ever under-
take. But there are steps you can take to ease the mental burden and create 
the time you need to pursue your vision. 
I spend so much time working with entrepreneurs on finding product-market 
fit, honing go-to-market strategies, and scaling their businesses that it’s easy to 
forget that getting a startup off the ground can be equally daunting. I was re-
minded of this when an entrepreneur came to me with a compelling idea tar-
geting a big market and then asked how she would go about getting started. 
For those of you who have already been through the team-recruiting and fund-
raising process, this may be old news. But for those who aspire to make the 
big leap and start their own business, this chapter should serve as a helpful 
guide on what to do—and what not to do. 
Making the Leap 
More startups fail due to people not taking the leap than for just about any 
other reason. Deciding to quit a steady job is hard, especially if you have a 
family, a mortgage, or other obligations. If you’re not in or fresh out of college, 
one of the best ways to get a taste of what a startup is like is to join an existing 
one.  

Chapter 8 | Not Getting Started 
100 
Big-company employees and executives often have the most difficult time ad-
justing to the reality of a startup.  
Entrepreneur A always wanted to start his own company. He was often de-
scribed by peers and managers as one of the most entrepreneurial people they 
had worked with. But something held him back. As a child, his family had strug-
gled to make ends meet, and his parents had indoctrinated into him that get-
ting a good-paying job at a large company was the way to go. After college, he 
immediately went to work for a big, established tech company where the sal-
ary was good but the upside was limited. He kept thinking about starting a 
company, but each time he almost made the leap, something prevented him: a 
tumble in the stock market, discouragement from his family about pursuing his 
dream, the pull of obligations and comfort of a steady salary, or the promise of 
promotion at work that he used as a justification to stay put.  
Some years later, Entrepreneur A, now supporting a family and paying a mort-
gage, finally made the leap to start his own company after the big tech com-
pany where he had worked for so many years was reorganized. He agonized 
that he wouldn’t be able to pay the bills and support his family, and yet this 
change had an incredible effect on him. He pursued his dream with absolute 
focus and the determination to make it a success. Not raising money, recruit-
ing a team, and acquiring customers simply wasn’t an option—he had to make 
his startup a success. As a result, he did.  
There is nothing like self-motivation when starting a new venture. I wouldn’t 
wish being broke on anyone, but from the perspective of someone starting a 
new company, if you’re broke, you’ve got nothing to lose and infinite necessity. 
As a result, you’re willing to take all the risk in the world. If you’re rich, you 
can invest your own capital and probably convince other people with capital to 
put in money alongside you. Some investors will question your drive or ambi-
tion. The flip side to that, of course, is that having made some money, there’s a 
good chance you want to make more.  
Being neither rich nor poor may be the hardest starting point of all. A steady 
income and a comfortable lifestyle, combined with ongoing obligations, may 
make the prospect of ultra-high risk-taking daunting.  
And then there is the prospect of a long period of time without work-life bal-
ance. People ask me about work-life balance and startups. They don’t go to-
gether. There are jobs that can support work-life balance, such as lifestyle 
small businesses. But doing a startup isn’t one of them. 

Why Startups Fail 
101
I grew up working and helping to pay my family’s bills. I shoveled snow in the 
winter, cleaned the school pool in the summer, and started writing software 
programs because it was a lot more fun and paid better than either of those 
other activities.  
Even when I’m “not working,” I’m working. Perhaps it runs in my family. My 
grandparents immigrated to the United States—they had no choice. When 
they got here, they were flat broke. Starting a business was their only option. 
They worked all the time to make ends meet and create a life for themselves 
and their family. Against the odds, all of their children went to college, and 
most of them went on to graduate school. Three of them became entrepre-
neurs in their own right. 
Entrepreneurs are workaholics. They’re obsessive about their products, users, 
and customers, and they work to fulfill that obsession. Those who are rich 
enough to retire build more products, start new ventures, and continue to try 
to change the world. Just look at Elon Musk, founder of PayPal, electric-car 
company Tesla Motors, and space exploration company SpaceX. Or consider 
Steve Jobs, founder of Apple, NeXT, and Pixar.  
If this isn’t your frame of mind—work as long as it takes and succeed at all 
costs—you should seriously reconsider launching a startup. You’re likely to get 
part way into the endeavor and then fail for lack of desire to out-odd the odds. 
But, that said, there is no better time to start a new company than right now. 
Dozens of people, when I asked why they decided to start something new, 
gave me the same straightforward answer regardless of age: “I realized if I 
didn’t do it now, I’d never be able to do it.”  
Build a Big-Idea Company—Not a 
Company of Ideas 
Before starting my first company, I spent a lot of time at Starbucks with my 
soon-to-be cofounders, brainstorming possible ideas. It was 2000, and although 
we knew mobile was going to be big, we weren’t sure what we could build that 
would take advantage of the market trend. The devices of the time were ar-
chaic compared to today’s smartphones, and we felt extremely limited by them 
as a result. We knew we wanted to build something on the device, but we 
weren’t sure what.  

Chapter 8 | Not Getting Started 
102 
Every month, and sometimes every week, we tried a new idea. In some sense, 
this was good, because it enabled us to test a lot of ideas quickly without get-
ting overly invested in any one of them. We pitched our company at angel 
events and to various investors, but we didn’t yet have the big idea—the cata-
lyzing vision, articulated clearly and succinctly. We knew it, and they knew it. 
As we were building our mobile web pages and applications for sending mes-
sages, however, we started to notice a trend. The pages weren’t displaying 
consistently, and the messages weren’t going through reliably. For a while, we 
were convinced the issue was our software.  
To figure out what was going on, we built an automated service for sending 
and receiving text messages and checking the validity of mobile web pages. It 
turned out it wasn’t our software that was the problem—it was the wireless 
networks and issues with the devices themselves. A lot of other people were 
experiencing the same issue and were willing to pay us for the monitoring and 
data our rudimentary service provided. Finally we were no longer a company 
of ideas, but a big-idea company. That project became the company, and the 
solution we built ultimately became Keynote Mobile Solutions. 
Many people find coming up with new ideas for companies challenging. Faced 
with a blank sheet of paper, they realize they’d rather be iterating something 
that already exists. Coming up with the one right idea can be even more of a 
challenge.  
Big ideas come from a founder’s personal need to solve a problem, a wish to 
generate income, an overwhelming desire to transform a large market, or all 
three. Jeff Bezos is said to have written the business plan for Amazon.com on a 
cross-country drive to Seattle after worrying that he had missed out on the 
Internet gold rush. Pierre Omidyar created eBay after experiencing first-hand 
the inequalities of financial trading markets. Marc Pincus started gaming giant 
Zynga after playing video games and becoming frustrated that they weren’t 
more social.  
People have told me over the years that they would start a company if only 
they had a great idea. My response to them remains the same. Great ideas are 
right in front of you. If you don’t have one, partner with a cofounder who has a 
great idea, or join an existing company. Many great operating executives would 
readily admit they’re far better at scaling up companies than brainstorming new 
ideas from scratch.  
A startup is a highly passion-driven and irrational endeavor. If you feel no pas-
sion for an idea or market, no overwhelming sense of desire to find a solution 

Why Startups Fail 
103
to a problem you’re facing or to transform a market or the entire world, don’t 
start a company.  
Most company ideas are simply not big ideas. They’re lifestyle businesses or 
small businesses. They can satisfy your personal lifestyle needs or generate an 
income, but they won’t scale into big companies. The difference often comes 
down to goals and ambition: the desire to run your own scuba-diving school 
versus creating the leading dive school with franchises around the world; run-
ning a local bed-and-breakfast versus starting Hilton hotels; opening a local café 
versus creating Starbucks.  
Big businesses start out as little businesses. The difference between those that 
scale and those that don’t often depends on market opportunity and personal 
ambition. 
If you’re a technologist, perhaps you just want to build a piece of technology 
and flip it to Google or Facebook. That may be good for your bank account, 
but it won’t result in a large company. It takes the same amount of work to 
build something big that it takes to build something small; the level of ambition, 
types of personal fulfillment, and skillsets required, however, are different. 
What is clear is that although it’s possible to start a company when you have 
lots of ideas, building a great company requires a single overarching idea: the 
big idea. Pierre Omidyar was working on multiple projects before eBay became 
the project. Marc Pincus started several other companies before finding his 
calling as an Internet entrepreneur.  
Keep searching until you find the big idea. 
Surviving a Lack of Capital 
If you’re trying to capitalize your new idea, and you’re having trouble raising 
money, there are two possibilities. It’s you or the investors. This can be a 
tough reality for the new entrepreneur to face.  
When I started my first company, we invested our own savings and raised 
money from a few angel investors who knew us from our past jobs. It helped 
that we were incredibly naïve. Had we fully appreciated what we were getting 
into, it’s likely we would never have left our comfortable jobs and started a 
company to begin with. 
We pitched dozens of venture capitalists on that first company. At the time—
late 2000 and early 2001—we also had no appreciation for financial markets 

Chapter 8 | Not Getting Started 
104 
and what these investors must have been experiencing as they watched their 
portfolios go from the highest highs of the bubble to the equally lowest lows of 
the bust.  
The private markets, which include venture and angel investments in privately 
held companies, typically aren’t as volatile as the public markets (such as 
NASDAQ and NYSE). However, the public markets and macroeconomic 
changes heavily influence private-market investors. These investors are influ-
enced emotionally and psychologically as they watch their personal portfolios 
move up and down; they also take into consideration potential lack of down-
stream capital—that is, the ability of companies to raise more money later. If 
markets are down, that can reduce the ability of these private investors to 
make their companies liquid, get returns out, and raise additional capital. This 
leads to very specific “open” and “closed” windows when it’s relatively easier 
or harder to raise venture capital or other sources of private financing for 
your company. 
As a result, raising money isn’t just about you and your idea—although that is 
certainly a big part of it. Raising money is about finding a match between you 
and your vision, and investors who not only buy into you and your vision but 
are capable of funding that vision as well. 
Most new businesses aren’t suitable for venture capital. And venture-capital 
firms can only invest in a relatively small number of new opportunities each 
year. Statistics indicate that of the millions of businesses created annually in the 
United States, fewer than 1,000 receive venture funding. 
But there’s more to it than that. Although most investors claim to be actively 
investing, many aren’t. Timing may be bad. An investor may have just done a 
deal or a series of deals and as a result doesn’t have the capital or bandwidth 
available to make another investment right away. Others are busy putting the 
capital and time they have into supporting their existing investments.  
Investors who are part of partnerships may not have the ability to get a deal 
done—there may be partnership dynamics that prevent a particular partner 
from making an investment even if that partner wants to make one.  
And some people who refer to themselves as investors may not really be what 
they claim to be! Before I knew much about raising money, I took it at face 
value that if someone was referred to us an investor, that’s what they were.  
It turned out that any number of funds and angel investors we pitched early 
on, before we knew what questions to ask and how to filter, were simply going 

Why Startups Fail 
105
through the motions—some people did it for social reasons, others did it be-
cause they were getting paid to look at new deals. When we raised money for 
our first company, a lot of the investors we talked with were in triage mode, 
trying to work their way out of the bust. Looking at a new deal—even without 
any intent to invest—may have been a welcome break from the reality of their 
portfolios. 
There are dozens more reasons investors don’t invest that have little or noth-
ing to do with you. Some investors only invest in tech businesses; others only 
invest in non-tech businesses. Certain investors make only early-stage invest-
ments, whereas others make only late-stage investments. Investors may have 
minimum ownership requirements, amounts of capital they have to put to 
work, or return requirements to satisfy the expectations they set for their 
funds.  
Others may already have a company in their portfolio that competes with 
yours. Conversely, some may be looking for a specific kind of investment—in a 
certain sector or at a particular stage—to fill out their portfolio. For example, 
a fund with a lot of earlier-stage investments might make a handful of late-stage 
investments to speed up the fund’s time to liquidity (how quickly the fund can 
return money to its investors) to help with fundraising for future funds.1 
And although it’s easy to think of the investors you’re talking with as the 
source of money, many investors—even some individuals—get their capital 
from other investors. Venture funds raise money from university endowments, 
large pensions, and funds of funds. Just as you make tradeoffs on how to spend 
your own money, institutional investors are constantly making tradeoffs on 
how to allocate their capital; these tradeoffs have little or nothing to do with 
your company.  
Becoming disillusioned by repeated rejections is one of the shortest paths to 
failure. Keep in mind that numerous investors passed on Apple, eBay, Google, 
and Facebook, to name just a few well-known successes.  
When I started investing, entrepreneurs would approach me about how they 
needed capital. As the old saying goes, the best time to raise money is when 
                                                 
1 A venture capital firm typically consists of a managing entity/company that manages 
multiple funds. Funds are usually labeled sequentially, such as Fund I, Fund II, Fund III, and so 
on. Returning capital in one fund helps investors when they go out to raise money for a 
subsequent fund. Firms also create specialty funds targeted at specific technologies, sectors, 
or stages—such as seed or growth—to supplement the core funds.  

Chapter 8 | Not Getting Started 
106 
you don’t need it. Investors flock to you when your business is going gang-
busters. Most run as quickly as possible in the other direction the minute they 
smell fear or desperation. This may seem counterintuitive—after all, Warren 
Buffet and others made their fortunes by finding companies that the market 
mispriced (that is, underpriced) and investing in them. But most people want 
to go with the flow, not against it. They want to join success, not create it.  
Venture investors are by definition not value investors. Value investors look 
for fundamentals they understand combined with great-deal economics when 
they buy. In contrast, venture investors look primarily for companies that will 
grow quickly and become big, and that they can market to others once that 
happens.  
Control Your Own Destiny 
Keeping in mind that your business may not be suitable for particular investors, 
or investors may not be able to invest, it’s still your job to finance your start-
up. To do that, you have four non-exclusive options through which you can 
control your own destiny. And controlling your own destiny is critical to start-
up success.  
Rent and Ramen 
The first option is to go on the “rent and ramen” plan. Cut your expenses 
down to the absolute minimum, and spend all your time validating the market 
need for your product. One way to do this is to create a few web pages and 
buy some ads to see if there is demand for your concept. Another way is to 
create mockups and show them to people. Or, you can build an ultra-simple 
version of your product and release a beta.  
If you’re not a developer, become one, or consider hiring some developers via 
an online development marketplace like oDesk or vWorker, programmers 
from a local university, or a friend of a friend. Of course, it would be ideal to 
build your product “right” from the get-go, but the reality is that you may have 
to plan on throwing that first version away and rebuilding it once you have 
enough capital to do so. 

Why Startups Fail 
107
Nights and Weekends 
A second option is the “nights and weekends” plan, where you keep your day 
job and fit your startup in around the edges. Although this plan is great in 
theory, in practice it’s very difficult to make work. It can be useful for solidi-
fying your idea, doing market research, or figuring out key unknowns, but it’s 
hard to scale a business by building it nights and weekends. 
Investors 
A third option is to raise some money. Talk to angel investors, ask your 
friends, and pitch former colleagues. It helps if you’ve worked at a big tech 
company that has a bunch of wealthy current or former employees. Family 
members or others in your network can provide capital as well. Obviously, 
you can’t go back and change your family history, but you can make use of 
every node in your network, every resource available to you. Getting into one 
of the well-known incubator or quick-start programs like Y Combinator or 
TechStars can be a great way to go. Put all these approaches together, and 
then make the funding last until you can raise more money.  
Jeff Bezos was turned down by dozens of people, as was Scott Cook, founder 
of Intuit. If you’ve never raised money before—let alone asked people for 
money—the task can seem daunting.  
Just remember, Girl Scout cookies are sold one box at a time, door to door. If 
the Girl Scouts can raise money for their cause, you can raise money for 
yours. Granted, the Girl Scouts have a great pitch, a great product, and a great 
brand. Make sure you have the same key ingredients. 
Customer Financing 
The fourth option, of course, is to build a profitable enterprise from the get-go 
by having your customers finance your company. If you know a customer, get a 
contract to fund the development of your product. Or, create something that 
generates revenue immediately.  
While in business school, I spent a couple of hours in the library every day 
building web pages and buying traffic to send to those pages. Every time a user 
clicked an advertisement or filled out a lead form on one of my web pages, I 
made money. I started out making just a few dollars a day. Before I knew it, I 

Chapter 8 | Not Getting Started 
108 
was managing a team of outsourced ad buyers and had a $750,000 run-rate 
business on my hands, more than enough to pay for school. 
Building the Team 
Some days it may feel nearly impossible to pull a team together and even 
harder to keep one together once it’s assembled.  
Ideally, there are some people you’ve known for a while with whom you’d like 
to start a company, and whose skills are well matched to the company you 
want to start. Perhaps you knew them in your last job, in school, or through 
some other work connection. Regardless, you won’t really know what they 
(and you) are like to work with as cofounders until you actually are cofound-
ers. It’s one thing to talk about starting a company and another altogether to 
work together day and night for months on end. Keep in mind, you’re not 
looking for your whole team at once. You’re looking for one or two cofound-
ers with whom you want to work.  
You can also go it alone. The common wisdom goes against this approach, but 
it has advantages. You set the direction and decide how to spend the money 
and what to do. Not a lot of meetings or disagreements—unless you like ar-
guing with yourself, of course!  
What about hiring? Your first few hires will be difficult. There is no way 
around it. In Silicon Valley, at least, talent is in demand, and people have the 
option of starting their own companies versus coming to work at yours. So it’s 
paramount that you have something compelling, exciting, and game-changing to 
work on. Otherwise, there is no way for you to stand out from the crowd. 
Even the highest-profile, best-backed companies face challenges when it comes 
to hiring. Start with a great story, and work your network. Ask everyone you 
meet—lawyers, VCs, angel investors, and friends—if they know of great 
people looking to do a startup.  
Users and Customers 
Getting your first user or customer can seem like the hardest thing in the 
world. Some products lend themselves to early adoption by people you know. 
For example, if you worked in the storage industry and have been selling stor-
age products, you probably can work your existing network and relationships. 
Or, if you’re building, say, a consumer-facing mobile photo application, you can 

Why Startups Fail 
109
use the app yourself and tell your friends to try it. In both cases, you have a 
ready-made, easy-to-access user base.  
The alternative is to try to get people you don’t know to use your product. 
That can work—but it tends to be a lot more difficult.  
If you’re building a business application, call someone you know and ask them 
for some business, or advertise online. If you’re building a consumer product, 
send invites to friends or generate scarcity, by, for example, creating the ap-
pearance of a limited number of available invitations. One way or another, you 
have to get the word out and test the waters.  
You want visceral reactions. If people love the product, that is success. If 
people hate it, that is a form of success as well. Either way, you can take action 
on those reactions and avoid failure.  
What you don’t want is for people to be ho-hum about whatever you’re 
doing—polite yeses will kill your company. You want to strike a nerve. You 
want whining and complaining. “If only it did this” is gold you can act on. 
“Seems interesting,” however, is fool’s gold.  
Location, Location, Location 
I founded my first three companies outside Silicon Valley. The San Francisco 
Bay area is prohibitively expensive, the competition is fierce, and talent is hard 
to come by. Yet there is no place like it. Successful, large tech companies have 
been built in other places—Microsoft, Amazon, and aQuantive in Seattle, for 
example—but the list is short.  
The Bay area promotes a different level of risk taking and a very different view 
of failure than anywhere else. Starting a new venture or joining one is looked 
on positively even if the company ultimately fails. Experience with failure is an 
asset—you’ve learned on someone else’s dime. Dozens of larger tech compa-
nies are looking to hire people with entrepreneurial experience to help them 
keep their organizations innovative.  
The flip-side of the Bay area, however, is that loyalty is a lot harder to come 
by. People jump around more and are on the lookout for the next hot start-
up—which may be their own.  
In the Bay area, practically everyone knows what “doing a startup” means. 
There is a lot you don’t need to reinvent—legal paperwork and fundraising ap-
proaches, for example. You can spend your time focusing on your competitive 

Chapter 8 | Not Getting Started 
110 
advantage: that which differentiates you. You also gain the benefit of cofound-
ers and employees who have started their own companies or worked at other 
startups. 
The Bay area also has a very positive energy. Despite the vast number of start-
up failures, it has the bright outlook of constant reinvention that is infectious in 
its ability to help you succeed. 
Of course, moving to the Bay area is not always an option or desirable. What’s 
critical is to be able to recruit a team, acquire customers, and raise sufficient 
capital to build your company. It’s easier to do that where there’s already 
some startup infrastructure. If not Silicon Valley, consider a hub like New York 
City, which has a number of startups and early stage investors, or cities like 
Austin, Seattle,  Boulder, Boston, or Chicago. 
Summary 
The biggest obstacle in the way of you starting a new company is you. To be an 
entrepreneur, you must be both idealistic and realistic. You have to believe the 
illusion that you’ll succeed even in the face of hundreds of naysayers and sta-
tistics that indicate high odds of failure, while addressing the day-to-day reali-
ties of your business. This is what creates the emotional rollercoaster ride en-
trepreneurs so often talk about.  
To avoid the failure of never getting started at all: 
• 
Get started! There’s no time like the present. 
• 
Control your own destiny by controlling your sources of 
capital. 
• 
Go out and get users or customers—get real-world 
feedback. 
 

C H A P T E R 
9 
Failing to 
Execute 
Lessons on Growth 
One investor I know repeats the same refrain to every startup he works with: 
focus wins. The advice is as sound today as when he first gave it to me, along 
with a check, ten years ago. That’s because without focus, it’s impossible to 
lead, allocate resources, or define what winning means. Without focus, a com-
pany can’t grow. Are your resources spread too thin? What do you do if 
you’ve lost focus? When should you hit the accelerator? How do the most 
successful companies execute at scale? 
Lack of Execution 
Listen to investors talk about a company that’s not going the way they thought 
it would, and you hear one of two things. They either say the market isn’t 
there, or they talk about execution failure. Statements such as, “Those guys 
couldn’t execute their way out of a paper bag,” “It’s an A opportunity but a B 
team,” and “We need to get someone in there who knows how to scale,” are 
all too common.  
If you’ve got a great market but you’re failing to execute, admit you’re wrong. 
It’s not that great entrepreneurs don’t make mistakes—they make tons of 
them. But they adjust quickly to correct them. 
Sometimes execution failure occurs because people don’t get along. There’s no 
chemistry, people get on each other’s nerves, they find they don’t have enough 
common ground to make it work, or they can’t agree on who’s going to do 

Chapter 9 | Failing to Execute 
112 
what. They step on each other’s toes. There is no easy solution to this kind of 
execution failure—the answer frequently is that someone stays and someone 
goes. But communicating about who’s doing what—through both one-on-one 
meetings and weekly team meetings, not just casually—can help a lot. Success 
comes from tackling the big issues head on, not letting them linger.  
Startups Are Fluid Organizations 
Entrepreneur A interviewed more than a dozen candidates over the course of 
five months before deciding to hire one as his VP of sales. His board members, 
a number of them former operating executives, met with most of the candi-
dates, some spending as much or more time with the candidates as Entrepre-
neur A himself. Yet the newly hired sales executive left the company after just 
three quarters.  
The board and CEO conducted a post-mortem to try to understand what had 
happened. Three possible reasons were put forth: 
• 
The company hadn’t achieved product-market fit. Although 
there was some early traction with customers, even the 
most talented sales executive couldn’t sell customers a 
product they didn’t need.  
• 
Although the VP of sales had been successful in previous 
jobs, he had been selling products that were very different 
than the one the company was building.  
• 
Either the VP of sales didn’t know how to build the kind of 
sales organization required to sell this product, or the 
right approach to selling the product hadn’t yet been 
found. 
One board member suggested organizational issues—that Entrepreneur A 
hadn’t managed the VP of sales effectively and had, as a result, set up the VP of 
sales up to fail. As it happened, the VP of sales had run sales at one of the 
board member’s other portfolio companies previously and had grown sales 
from $7 million to more than $50 million.  
What really caused the VP of sales to fail will never be known for sure. Per-
haps he was a decent sales executive but had lucked into a great opportunity 
at the previous company—a product that virtually sold itself. He put the right 
process and people in place, but the product filled such a critical market need 

Why Startups Fail 
113
that he didn’t need to do all that much selling. Others argued that the VP of 
sales had implemented an innovative selling model at his previous company 
that caused the product to be successful.  
Regardless of which factor caused the failure, what is certain is that it cost the 
company a lot of time and at least one additional round of funding. The VP of 
sales was in place for three quarters, and the search leading up to the hire 
took two quarters, counting the time the company spent deciding to start the 
search.  
What’s also clear is that no one—neither Entrepreneur A nor his board mem-
bers—wanted to admit that something was very wrong. They preferred to let 
the illusion of “a little more time” deceive them, rather than face reality.  
When it comes to human resources, startups must be incredibly fluid organiza-
tions. Although there may be some short-term public embarrassment when a 
high-profile executive leaves, the cost of keeping the wrong person in place or 
not figuring out the root cause of a company issue is far greater.  
Startups by their very nature must be nimble and move quickly. It’s one of the 
key advantages they have over their slow-moving, well-established, big-gorilla 
brethren.  
As startups go through different phases, they need different people, and people 
with different skillsets and amounts of experience. Startups doing market dis-
covery must optimize for trying a lot of things, failing quickly, and repeating 
until they find product-market fit. Startups that are scaling optimize for growth, 
and they frequently benefit from experience on the team in order to do that. 
That means the best startups are fluid organizations.  
A startup should hire people who can address its immediate needs and its 
needs on a two-year time horizon. Some of those people will grow with the 
company and stay. Others will leave either because the startup doesn’t 
progress the way they expect it to or because they find themselves unable to 
progress with it. In either case, startups that have static organizations fail. 
Those with fluid organizations succeed.  
Under-Resourced or Over-Resourced? 
It has been argued that a startup can never have too much cash. But surprising 
as it may seem, startups can fail both from over-resourcing and under-
resourcing. 

Chapter 9 | Failing to Execute 
114 
Startups spend the money they have. Teams that have too much cash early on 
don’t force themselves to make the tough tradeoffs. They hedge their bets, fail 
to focus, and throw in features that aren’t core to product success. They 
overhire and tend to spend too aggressively on acquisition, assuming they al-
ready have product-market fit or that they can solve problems through more 
aggressive sales and marketing, rather than a better product. 
Startups that are under-resourced face the near-constant threat of going out of 
business or having to raise more money. Having bootstrapped multiple com-
panies, I’ve experienced first-hand the agonizing decisions that have to be made 
when resources are scarce.  
I remember several times when I wasn’t sure we would make payroll—either 
because we were still negotiating a customer contract or because our funding 
had yet to close. Employees were depending on us to pay them so they could 
pay their bills—it was a heavy feeling of responsibility. 
That lack of resources forced us to focus and make decisions quickly. Discus-
sions about priorities became a lot easier. When it came to product features, 
we asked ourselves the following questions. If the answer was yes, we made 
including the feature a priority: 
• 
Will this feature cause a customer to buy the product? 
• 
Will not having this feature prevent a customer from giving 
us money? 
• 
Will this feature help us acquire more users/customers? 
We became brutally focused on product capabilities that would generate cus-
tomers and revenue.  
We found ourselves spending a lot more time thinking about user acquisition 
and how to create a great on-boarding experience. We agonized over the de-
tails of reducing friction between our product and our customers. We didn’t 
want anything to stand in the way of someone using our product. And we de-
voted much more time to getting the word out, promoting our product, and 
figuring out new and innovative ways to market and sell. Ultimately, that focus 
on customer acquisition and revenue defined our company culture and ap-
proach.  
Two incredibly successful entrepreneurs I know take this approach to an ex-
treme. They’re known for selling what they don’t have. Given the choice be-

Why Startups Fail 
115
tween spending a dollar acquiring more users or a dollar on product, they 
spend on acquisition. 
On the surface, they appear to be in grave violation of the mantra “under-
promise and over-deliver.” Products they’re involved with take longer to build 
and have fewer features than promised. Yet when they do arrive, the products 
address very real market needs. What they lack in precision, they make up for 
in accuracy. These entrepreneurs know they can improve quality and add fea-
tures as time goes on. 
Because these entrepreneurs invest ruthlessly in customer over product, 
people question whether they’re building companies for the long term. Their 
product teams often have to be overhauled with new heads of product and 
engineering. Yet they’re masters at the product-market fit discovery phase so 
critical to startup success. Once they achieve product-market fit, they re-
engineer their organizations and products. 
Failing to Manage Cash 
What’s the main reason startups fail? It’s axiomatic: They’re undercapitalized. 
Or their burn rate is way too high. Or their financial recordkeeping is shoddy. 
Whatever the underlying reason, they go to write a check and find the bank 
account empty. 
When it comes to spending, there is no single path to success. Some entre-
preneurs swear by the “run at the wall, and the wall will move” strategy. This 
can and does work—but it tends to work best for venture-funded startups 
with multimillion-dollar checkbooks behind them. Conversely, any boot-
strapped entrepreneur worth their salt has looked over the precipice of the 
zero-balance bank account and stared it down. It’s easy to let yourself believe 
that investors are your only source of capital. They aren’t. Customers can fund 
you, too. But the real question you must ask yourself is, “Why am I running 
out of capital?” The answer is where you started: product-market fit.  
One of the biggest reasons companies run out of money is that they spend far 
too much before they’re ready to scale. Until a company finds product-market 
fit, it’s fine to run some low-cost user-acquisition experiments, but there is 
little point in spending huge amounts of money on acquisition.  
Venture-backed entrepreneurs often assume that if they can’t figure out their 
business with the current round of funding, they can get their current 

Chapter 9 | Failing to Execute 
116 
investors or new investors to invest more capital. They’re exactly right until 
they’re wrong.  
Entrepreneur B had an unparalleled ability to raise money—investors loved his 
vision. Even when it costs tens of millions of dollars more than anticipated to 
fund his vision, he was able to raise the money. Investors overlooked the 
warnings signs that he was spending far too much while the economics of his 
market were changing. The prices of competitive products were coming down 
faster than he had anticipated, and it was taking him far longer than expected 
to get his product to market.  
For a long time, investors disregarded this core issue, but eventually, after 
raising series D, E, and F rounds of funding, he met some investors who 
pushed hard on the crux of his business: would he be able to ship his product, 
and would it be at a price point that was competitive in the market? 
Even though the existing investors wondered too, they held off on asking—
because Entrepreneur B was such a great fundraiser. The conversations were 
short: “The guy just raised $50 million. How can we fire him?” But fire him 
they did, when he could no longer raise money.  
The investors brought in an operational CEO who was the opposite of the en-
trepreneur. He replaced nearly the entire management team, got costs under 
control (that is, cut them almost in half), and restructured the company’s debt. 
But the company had gone from being a rising star to a turnaround. Time will 
tell whether the turnaround is a success. 
Bootstrapped entrepreneurs, conversely, have no one to rely on for capital but 
themselves, and potentially their angel investors, if they have them. I remember 
that when we bootstrapped our first company, we naturally went out of our 
way to save money. When we travelled, we looked for the best deals and 
stayed at the cheapest places we could find. We paid our bills on time, but we 
waited until they were due to send the money. We were frugal, and we nego-
tiated hard.  
I credit our upbringing for that—we all came from families where money was 
treated with respect. We were raised to make money and save money. As a 
result, it wasn’t hard to act similarly when we started our company. But we did 
face some significant challenges. Being bootstrapped meant we were con-
strained. Once we had paying customers, we couldn’t keep up with their de-
mands because we were constantly making tradeoffs on what to build. But that 
also meant we were extremely focused.  

Why Startups Fail 
117
If you’re venture-backed, it’s easy to get sucked into the false security of having 
what is, by any measure, a lot of money in the bank. The problem is that the 
more money they have, the more companies spend. Salaries go up, costs go 
up, and people become less frugal. Managed properly, these companies can po-
tentially grow much faster, leading to greater successes—or bigger craters.  
Debt 
Debt can compound cash mismanagement. Some venture investors character-
ize debt for startups as “the banks loaning us our own money.” This is because 
debt for startups often isn’t backed up by receivables or revenue, but by the 
venture investors and the capital they’ve invested.  
In my corporate finance class at the Stanford Graduate School of Business, a 
legendary finance professor once opened a door on the stage of the audito-
rium in which he was teaching.  
“Do you hear that?” he asked us. All we heard was silence. We looked at him 
like he was crazy. He slammed the door shut. The room went from silent to 
deathly silent.  
“That’s the sound of the debt monster.” Debt can provide great leverage on 
existing capital to accelerate a business. It can also devour a business as quickly 
as our professor slammed that door shut. For early-stage startups, debt can 
seem wonderful when things are going well. But when they aren’t, the com-
pany still has to make payments. Even as you’re producing revenue, a chunk of 
that revenue goes to pay off your debt every month. Even though you’re 
working hard, debt can drown you.  
Entrepreneur C nearly drowned not because of debt but because of his lease. 
Long-term leases have proved very difficult to get out of. It’s possible to sublet 
space, but doing so typically requires approval of the landlord. And if you’re 
already subletting, you have multiple levels of approval to contend with. Entre-
preneur C signed a long-term lease for a lot of space at the height of the Inter-
net bubble.  
When the bubble crashed, the loss of numerous customers was compounded 
by the large amount his company had to pay every month for its lease. No 
matter how hard the company tried, it was impossible to break even because 
the lease payments were so high. It took the company years to become 
profitable.  

Chapter 9 | Failing to Execute 
118 
When you have a lot of cash, problems seem small, right up until there’s not a 
lot of cash—and then they seem really, really big. Failing to manage cash, 
whether it’s a lot or a little, is one sure way to make your company fail. 
Cash Flows from Product-Market Fit 
You can’t fake product-market fit. Sometimes you can use vast amounts of 
capital to cover up core business problems. But in the end, you must achieve a 
match between a great product, a big market, and the ability to reach that 
market efficiently. Ultimately, the truth will out, and you have to build some-
thing people want. Otherwise, you’ll run out of cash.  
Many execution reasons can cause you to run out of cash—cash mismanage-
ment, bad collections (customers who don’t pay), fraud, theft, ignoring prob-
lems, and not watching the numbers. Getting these elements of a startup right 
requires experience and skill, and you can often hire to manage them.  
Product-market fit requires deep knowledge of your domain. That can be your 
own needs if you’re building a consumer product for yourself. Or it can be 
deep knowledge of a customer or market need if you’re building something for 
others. Either way, you can’t hire to find product-market fit—you must find it 
yourself.  
Executing Early vs. Executing at Scale 
During the product-market fit discovery process, you should expect to get a 
lot of things wrong, as long as you get the product-market fit discovery 
process right. If you don’t bring the discovery process to a successful conclu-
sion, the rest of the items don’t matter.  
Perfection is your enemy when you’re executing early. Get your product out 
fast, and ask for feedback. Get some money in the bank, even if it’s not on 
your ideal terms or the exact amount you wanted to raise. Be flexible about 
everything—but don’t compromise on finding product-market fit.  
Finding product-market fit requires either being right out of the gate—possible 
but rare—or trying a lot of different things and failing at them quickly until you 
discover what works.  
In contrast, executing at scale means optimizing for growth. Instead of trying 
many different things, growth-stage companies attempt to replicate what’s 

Why Startups Fail 
119
working. Entrepreneurs who are great at the product-market fit discovery 
process may or may not be great at scaling up.  
Some entrepreneurs fail at this transition because they stop focusing on deliv-
ering great products. Other entrepreneurs focus on product to the exclusion 
of all other company functions: they’re unable, in particular, to hire people to 
manage functions like finance, sales, and human resources.  
One entrepreneur I know is amazingly detail-oriented. This level of detail ex-
tends to all areas of his life. Even though his personal net worth is in the tens 
of millions of dollars, he still does his own taxes. He excels at operational 
detail. 
Conversely, speed isn’t his strong suit. When he first became an entrepreneur, 
he struggled with this conflict. After many years, however, he learned to hire 
to backfill his weaknesses. He spends his time focused primarily on technical 
and process aspects of his business that require intense rigor and attention to 
detail.  
Many creative entrepreneurs find the process of scaling up tedious and boring. 
Or scaling up is so foreign that they stop trusting their instincts. One solution 
to this problem, articulated by serial entrepreneur Niel Robertson, is to look 
for hires from companies that are 12–36 months ahead of where you are. 
Don’t hire for the needs of your business today; instead, hire for where you 
need to be 24 months from now.  
Also consider hiring from companies that are ten times bigger than yours. If 
you hire people from organizations much, much larger than yours—say, 100 
times bigger or more—you run the risk they’ll be too “big company” for your 
startup. And if you hire people from companies that match where yours is to-
day, you risk outgrowing them quickly. You want to gain the benefit of expe-
rience but not have that experience be more than two years out. The key is 
hiring at the middle of that experience curve. 
Hiring Help to Scale 
A famous venture capitalist once reportedly said, “I never fired a CEO too 
soon.” Although this may be the classic wisdom, another famous investor said, 
“[Running the company] is the founder’s job to lose.” In other words, inves-
tors shouldn’t back founders who they don’t think can lead their own compa-
nies, and founders shouldn’t start companies they don’t think they can lead. It’s 
the founder’s job to run the company until they prove they can’t do it. 

Chapter 9 | Failing to Execute 
120 
How do you choose a great founding team? What works and what doesn’t? 
How do you know when you’re not scaling as fast as your company—and what 
do you do about it? Should you ever fire yourself? 
It’s rare to find an entrepreneur who is both a great product visionary and a 
fantastic operator. By definition, product visionaries see how their product and 
the world should be; great operators are pragmatists who see the world pri-
marily as it is. A few rare people are able to work at both ends of the vi-
sionary/operator spectrum simultaneously, or at least easily switch between 
them.  
But many of the most successful tech companies have separate people in these 
roles. Mark Zuckerberg is the product visionary at Facebook; Sheryl Sandberg 
is the operator. Larry Page and Sergei Brin were the product visionaries at 
Google while Eric Schmidt, until recently, was the operator. Bill Gates had 
Steve Ballmer, and Steve Jobs had Tim Cook.  
What worked so well with these partnerships was that the founders main-
tained their roles within the company—setting product direction—while the 
operators managed the operations. Yet sometimes this simply isn’t possible.  
Entrepreneur D was a big fan of hiring a COO. Inexperienced at operations 
but a world-class product visionary and promoter, he raised tens of millions in 
venture capital and scaled his business quickly. But the details of finance, sales, 
and legal issues frustrated him. His board members suggested that he hire a 
COO, and he agreed. Yet he faced numerous challenges in making the hire. 
Entrepreneur D mostly delegated the hiring process to his board members—
not because they asked him to but because he didn’t want to deal with it. The 
board spent several months interviewing candidates, and the same thing hap-
pened on each potential hire: the candidate talked politely with the board 
members but wanted to talk with Entrepreneur D to understand what he was 
like to work with.  
The entrepreneur, who kept himself extremely busy, didn’t make time to meet 
with the candidates. Weeks passed between the initial meeting with a board 
member and the follow-up meeting with Entrepreneur D—and then he would 
often cut the meeting short because he had other meetings to go to that he 
felt were equally, if not more, important. Candidates came away with the im-
pression that Entrepreneur D wasn’t interested in hiring them. They were 
right—he wasn’t. 

Why Startups Fail 
121
Entrepreneur D faced another challenge. His standards were high—a great 
thing. But he had a vision of what his ideal COO was like, and each time he 
met someone, he found several things wrong with the candidate. Although 
some of the people he interviewed went on to become successful COOs at 
other high-profile startups, none of them matched his requirements on all di-
mensions—none of them were perfect.  
The final challenge Entrepreneur D faced was that of the few candidates whose 
failings he could look past, none wanted to work for him. The truth was that 
even though Entrepreneur D recognized he wasn’t properly managing the op-
erational aspects of his business, he didn’t want to give up the control that 
bringing in a COO entailed; and he didn’t really want a partner in the business, 
even though that partner would be operationally focused while Entrepreneur 
D would continue to be the external face of the company and drive all product 
direction. 
One board member only half-joked that Entrepreneur D liked the operations 
of the company being slightly sloppy and remaining as they were when the 
company was smaller, because even though the company wasn’t operating op-
timally, it allowed the entrepreneur to maintain complete control. In fact, be-
cause Entrepreneur D’s board members had no way of fully knowing what was 
going on inside the company, they had little choice but to go along for the 
ride—or fire Entrepreneur D. 
After a year of conducting the COO search, that is exactly what they did. It 
wasn’t smooth, and the company lost its product visionary—and its way. Later, 
it came out that numerous business-development deals the company had en-
tered into jeopardized the core of the company’s business. Only after two 
years and an additional round of funding did the company find its legs again and 
get back on track. Whether it will be a success is yet to be determined.  
Entrepreneur E faced a different problem. He hired a COO quickly, but the 
COO turned out to be a terrible hire for the company. Although the COO 
acted knowledgeable and had a great resume, he wasn’t very good at his job. 
Put another way, he “talked the talk” but didn’t “walk the walk.”  
The company could have avoided this problem by taking more time to meet 
with multiple candidates. Although the company desperately needed an expe-
rienced executive to help it scale, Entrepreneur E rushed into the hire and re-
gretted the result. “If we don’t get someone in here quickly, it’ll cost us,” is a 
difficult statement to disagree with. But the counterargument holds more 
weight: getting the wrong person costs more. 

Chapter 9 | Failing to Execute 
122 
As one investor I know is fond of saying, if a company that’s in a great market 
with a great product that’s selling is struggling, the answer is almost always 
“hire.” If you’re a product visionary, team up with a great operator. It’s rare 
that this happens at the founding stage of a company, because great operators 
need something on which to operate! They also tend to operate at scale—in 
the growth phase of a business—not in the product-market fit discovery phase. 
If you’re a great operator, find an incredible product visionary. And if you think 
you’re both, ask yourself how you can have the biggest, most highly leveraged 
impact on your business. Then hire an all-star management team to handle op-
erational functions such as customer service, sales, finance, marketing, and 
legal.  
Know Your Numbers 
As the Cheshire Cat said in Alice in Wonderland, “If you don’t know where 
you’re going, any road will get you there.” If you don’t know your numbers, it’s 
very hard to predict when you’ll need more capital and which of your activities 
is having an impact on your business. How can you know where to invest if 
you can’t measure what’s working and what’s not? 
One CEO I know always hesitates slightly before he talks about the “cash out” 
date of his company—that is, the date his operating plan indicates his company 
will run out of money, not the day he gets to cash out his stock for millions of 
dollars. He views any discussion of running out of money as a negative. He 
used to put this number at the very end of his board-meeting presentations. 
One day I suggested he put all the numbers up front. Just put it all out there—
the good, the bad, and the ugly. He asked me, “Won’t my investors find that 
disturbing?” 
“I doubt it,” I told him. After all, for angel and venture investors, most of their 
companies are always running out of money! The time a company has the most 
money is the millisecond after a new round of funding closes. After that, the 
company’s cash balance gets lower and lower right up until more funding 
closes or the company becomes profitable. During portfolio reviews, investors 
spend a lot of time on capital planning, cash positions, and the future cash 
needs of companies. That’s because understanding and managing the capital 
needs of their portfolio companies is a big part of an investor’s responsibilities. 
Board members find it disturbing when CEOs miss their numbers when they’re 
supposedly in the scale-up stage of their business. But they find it really dis-
turbing when CEOs don’t present critical information up front—or at all. 

Why Startups Fail 
123
Waiting makes people think you’re hiding something, reduces your credibility 
as a leader, and takes focus away from the most important challenges a busi-
ness faces. Changes and unexpected events are to be expected at a startup.  
Knowing your numbers is critical to operating your business: 
• 
What is the slope of the growth of your business? That is, 
how fast is your business scaling? 
• 
Which activities and features result in customers or users 
sticking around? 
• 
Which areas of marketing activity and spending produce 
the most results? 
• 
How much is a user worth to you? 
• 
How much money are you burning every month?  
• 
If you had more money, what would you spend it on? In 
other words, is what you’re doing to acquire users and 
customers repeatable, and just a question of capital and 
people constraints? 
As it happens, these are the very same questions investors will ask you when 
you go to raise money. 
The Goal: Repeatable, Profitable 
Acquisition 
Knowing your numbers tells you whether you’ve built a repeatable, profitable 
acquisition mechanism. You know how much it costs to acquire and serve a 
user or customer, and how much that user is worth to you, during the lifetime 
they’re a user of your product. Everything in a scaled-up organization is in sup-
port of building a great product and then feeding and optimizing the machine 
that attracts, retains, and monetizes the users of that product. 
If you try to create the machine before you have product-market fit, you waste 
a lot of time and capital. That’s why, according to the Startup Genome Project, 
the number-one cause of startup failure is premature scaling. Premature scaling 
means spending money too quickly, which causes startups to run out of money 
before they have a chance to iterate their way to product-market fit. It also 
means startups that suffer from premature scaling lose the nimble approach 

Chapter 9 | Failing to Execute 
124 
that is core to being a startup. They’ve overcommitted to an organization and 
approach before they know what organization and approach they really need. 
Although business schools teach over and over the importance of treating sunk 
costs—money that is already spent—as irrelevant to future investment deci-
sions, the reality is that sunk costs play a strong psychological role in both in-
vestor and entrepreneur decision making. By scaling prematurely, not only do 
you have a physical organization and associated high burn rate in place, but you 
also have a larger psychological hurdle to overcome if you want to change di-
rection. Early-stage startups that haven’t yet found product-market fit are all 
about preserving optionality. Startups that have entered the growth phase are 
primarily about optimizing for scale while introducing relevant features and 
updates to keep the core product attractive and competitive. 
The Myth of First-Mover Advantage 
Investors are fond of talking about first-mover advantage, which is the apparent 
advantage gained by the first entrant in a new market. Some first-movers are 
able to capture the market and create monopoly or near-monopoly-like busi-
nesses.  
Many of today’s market leaders, however, didn’t have first-mover advantage. 
Facebook wasn’t the first social network, the Apple iPod wasn’t the first port-
able digital music player, and Google didn’t create the first search engine. 
Quite often, pioneers end up with arrows in their backs, while one of the later 
movers learns from the pioneers, executes better, and takes the market-
leadership position. 
Numerous entrepreneurs and CEOs have claimed that their companies were 
“a little too early” for the market. Investors just needed to be patient. Yet 
even having admitted that the market didn’t exist or that they hadn’t figured 
out a way to reach the market, they chose not to cut their burn rates to 
match their scaled-back revenues, switch go-to-market strategies, or change 
markets.  
Many of them were too heavily invested in their existing plans, were convinced 
it was a matter of executing better than they had been, or put ego ahead of 
reality. As a result, they ran out of money and failed. 
These companies didn’t cut back their burn rates, so they needed more capital. 
They couldn’t raise that capital not because they lacked vision or execution—

Why Startups Fail 
125
many of them had both. Rather, they took too long to match vision to reality. 
Investors will suspend disbelief for some period of time. But ultimately, they’d 
rather put their money into companies that are growing than ones that aren’t. 
How the Late Entrants Won 
How did Facebook beat early market leaders MySpace and Friendster? How 
did Apple beat the existing digital music players? How did Google beat the 
other players in search, including Excite, which started long before, in 1993?  
Unlike its competitors, Friendster and MySpace, which focused on helping 
people meet new people, Facebook focused on keeping people connected with 
those they already knew. People feel more comfortable connecting on a social 
network with those they already know than with people they don’t,1 and that 
that was a much bigger need than meeting new people.  
In terms of its go-to-market strategy, Facebook started with a niche—universi-
ties—and used that to make real identities and authenticity a core value, 
whereas profiles on MySpace and Friendster were much more likely to be ex-
aggerated or made up. Although anyone can now join Facebook, Facebook 
originally gave the site exclusivity by limiting who could join. That drove de-
mand for the site. 
Facebook did nearly everything a startup is supposed to do right: it was nimble, 
reacted quickly, and got the product right. In contrast, its biggest competitor, 
MySpace, was mismanaged as part of the larger organization of News Corp. 
Describing its handling of MySpace, News Corp. CEO Rupert Murdoch said, 
“We … proceeded to mismanage it in every possible way.”2 
Google won because the company focused on search to the exclusion of all 
else. By implementing a new approach to generating search results based on 
the relationships between web sites, Google delivered more relevant results 
than any other search engine.  
Even Google’s closest competitor, Yahoo!, switched from serving its own 
search results to using Google’s. And as the number of web sites and pages 
                                                 
1 How Facebook Won the Battle of the Social Networks, Innosight, November 16, 2010. 
www.innosight.com/blog/564-how-facebook-won-the-battle-of-the-social-networks.html. 
2The Guardian, October 21, 2011. www.guardian.co.uk/media/blog/2011/oct/21/news-
corporation-annual-meeting-live#block-33. 

Chapter 9 | Failing to Execute 
126 
Google indexed grew exponentially, it continued to deliver a better product 
experience, driving down the time required to deliver search results.  
Although other companies developed MP3 players before Apple, Apple was 
the first to get the end-to-end consumer experience right, from the design of 
the device to the software for loading music. And like Google and Facebook, 
Apple won by selling benefits—a better experience—not features.  
Apple coupled the sleek iPod device with an equally sleek marketing campaign. 
The iPod was easily recognizable, from the device to the white earplugs. Apple 
and the iPod became a statement, not just a functional device.  
Become the Market Leader 
What if you’re not the market leader? It’s the elephant in the board room, the 
difficult question no one really wants to ask: “We’re #2. How do we become 
#1?” If you don’t answer the question, #1 will answer it for you.  
The advantages of market leadership are obvious. Investors (private and, later, 
public) want in and are willing to pay for the privilege. As a result, market lead-
ers can raise more capital on better terms than any other player. 
They have pricing power. Because they’re #1, customers and users want to go 
with them, so they can charge a premium. And their brands are the best 
known, so user and customer acquisition costs are lower. 
Becoming the leader may seem like a daunting task, but there are some proven 
ways to succeed: 
1. Decide to win: Deciding you want to be #1 is probably 
the most important part of becoming #1. If you’re 
comfortable at your company and things seem to be 
going okay, you’ll never become #1. 
2. Build great product: As you’ve seen with the examples of 
late-market entrants, focusing on the right product and 
the right way to deliver that product to market can en-
able you to beat out the other players. 

Why Startups Fail 
127
3. Move faster than the market: Many startups give up the 
agility that is a startup’s inherent advantage in favor of 
overly long-term planning and slow execution. They 
take too long to hire, agonize over strategy changes, 
and reduce their appetite for risk, nervous about how 
investors will respond to radical changes.  
Yet risk-taking, innovative approaches, and moving 
quickly are what make startups succeed. If you’ve set-
tled into a comfortable existence at your startup, shake 
it up so you can move faster than the market. 
4. Shatter the myth: In some cases, #1 by all measurable ac-
counts (revenue, market position, number of users, or 
capital raised) is #1. But in less-developed markets, it’s 
often more marketing than reality. Don’t be “all steak 
no sizzle” and let yourself get outmaneuvered by com-
panies that have great marketing but less-worthy 
products.  
Up your profile, get visible, and market like crazy. Every 
time #1 is mentioned, you want to be mentioned. Shat-
ter the myth through marketing, PR, and customer ac-
quisition. Implement a partner strategy to make your-
self bigger than you are alone. Make your reality the 
market perception. 
5. Make being #2 an asset—until you’re #1: This is the Avis 
“We Try Harder” strategy. Organizations with existing 
products simply can’t move as quickly. They have to 
consider their existing user, product, and cost invest-
ments when making changes. This is the quintessential 
startup strategy: be more nimble than #1. 
 
Some companies take a fast follower strategy as the #2 
players in a market. They copy many of the product 
and go-to-market strategies of the #1 player, and then, 
if #1 stumbles, they leapfrog ahead. 

Chapter 9 | Failing to Execute 
128 
6. Make it easy to switch: A trail first blazed by Excel/Notes 
and Word/Wordperfect, these products made it easy 
to switch by implementing the same keyboard short-
cuts as existing products. With little to no behavior 
change, users were able to do everything they’d always 
been able to do and take advantage of a host of new 
features as well.  
More recently, this has happened in the form of e-mail 
and contact importers, which make it nearly friction-
free for users to take their contacts with them. Fea-
tures like importers and migration tools may seem un-
glamorous to build, but they’re pivotal in getting users 
to switch. 
7. Be open when others are closed, and closed when others 
are open: This is the strategy Google took with Android 
(open) in the face of Apple (closed). Google, with An-
droid, gave the other players in the market (that is, the 
other phone manufacturers and wireless carriers) a via-
ble alternative to the Apple iPhone. This works excep-
tionally well in markets where the existing ecosystem 
feels threatened. 
8. Roll up the market: With the right capitalization strategy, 
you can go on the offensive, acquire some subset of the 
#3 through #10 players (by market share), and become 
#1. Vacation-rentals site HomeAway (which went pub-
lic in June, 2011) applied this approach very success-
fully—it rolled up a market of smaller players to be-
come the big kahuna.  
Proper investor backing and valuation are critical to this 
strategy, along with an organization that can execute on 
it. When executed well, acquiring your next-largest 
competitor is a time-proven way to accelerate cus-
tomer adoption, revenue, and growth. Just make sure 
your organization doesn’t die of indigestion. 

Why Startups Fail 
129
9. Use white-space innovation: Some companies are so 
caught in their legacy businesses or existing approaches 
to the market that they find themselves unable to avoid 
a decline into oblivion. Most people think this only hap-
pens in big companies, but it happens to startups that 
have been around for a while as well.  
A product has been selling, but relatively slowly. The 
startup may be profitable, but it’s the law of small num-
bers—the company stays in business but has reached a 
local maximum, and rapid growth seems near impossi-
ble. The company exists in the shadow of much larger 
players that are dominating its market or an adjacent 
market. 
Taking a white-space approach can free a company to 
go from laggard to leader. It requires a team that is 
empowered to build the best product, free from the 
legacy obligations of the existing business, and not held 
hostage by the existing organization. 
10. Pour on the gas once you have product-market fit: When 
you have product-market fit, you know it—you can feel 
it. Things are on fire. Users are signing up in droves. 
Sales people aren’t just saying things like, “This product 
sells itself!” they really mean it. It’s time to scale up. Fo-
cus on organizational growth combined with ramping 
user growth, for consumer companies, or customer 
growth, for business companies—as fast as you possibly 
can. 
When the Market Outruns You 
Startup founders often find they’re too early to a market or that their product 
isn’t a fit for what the market wants. Sometimes, however, the market outruns 
you.  
Later entrants can enter a market in which you were an early player, quickly 
understand the core features that users or customers want, and focus on 
those. They aren’t weighed down by the baggage of trying lots of different ap-
proaches—instead, they can see what works and perfect just that.  

Chapter 9 | Failing to Execute 
130 
Entrepreneur X set the vision for his startup based on trying to address his 
own needs as an executive at a large company. An ahead-of-his-time thinker, 
when he developed his product, it addressed his needs but was so far ahead of 
what the market was ready for that adoption was very slow.  
However, Entrepreneur X was an evangelist. He educated the industry on the 
need for his approach. Meanwhile, in an attempt to get customer adoption, 
Entrepreneur X’s team added more features and changed the company’s prod-
uct focus. Entrepreneur X kept promoting his vision, but his product no longer 
matched that vision.  
Competitor Y entered the market two years later. The company focused on 
the core functionality Entrepreneur X had promised and delivered a very com-
pelling, easy-to-use product. Other entrepreneurs, seeing the success 
Competitor Y was having, entered the market as well.  
Practically overnight, a market that had been moving slowly erupted with a 
frenzy of activity. The market became crowded with products and noisy with 
marketing messages. Company Y stayed focused, whereas Entrepreneur X’s 
company spent months pivoting back to its original plan. Of course, by the 
time his company did that, it was game over—Competitor Y had a huge lead in 
customers, revenue, and mindshare.  
Coming from behind after another company has passed you is very difficult. 
You need the leader to stumble or become complacent, you need a must-have 
innovation that leapfrogs the leader, or both. There is incredible momentum in 
being the leader; that momentum is difficult to regain once you lose it. 
It can be done, however. Apple regained its momentum, but it took the return 
of its founder, years, and a new product line to do it. IBM regained much of its 
momentum, but it took a new CEO—Lou Gerstner—a new strategy, and a 
shift in culture. GE got its mojo back, but it required a new CEO—Jack 
Welch—who implemented radical restructuring and the “Be #1 or #2” 
mandate.  
Regaining market leadership, unlike getting it in the first place, is a turnaround 
situation. Turnarounds, by definition, are difficult. And although they might 
seem toughest for large organizations, they’re doubly hard for small ones. 
When big companies are on the verge of going out of business, a lot of people 
and institutions have a vested interest—customers, investors, shareholders, 
suppliers, employees, even the government. When small companies are on the 
verge of going out of business, a few people care deeply, but the vast majority 
do not. You must save yourself. 

Why Startups Fail 
131
Your options are as follows:  
• 
Bring in a new leader: Although it may seem unlikely that a 
new leader would want the job, there is a set of people 
who enjoy the unique challenges of a turnaround. 
Investors are often willing to provide more capital behind 
a new leader. Like organ transplants, new-leader 
transplants can face a host of complications, including 
rejection. An experienced investor once told me that 
bringing in a new CEO is a 50/50 proposition at best. But 
sometimes an injection of new leadership—regardless of 
the leader—is what a company needs to regain its footing. 
• 
Sell the company: Of course it’s better to sell when you 
don’t need to than when you do. But this must be consi-
dered as an option. 
• 
Focus, focus, focus! Companies that need to regain a mar-
ket-leadership position have often lost their way and lost 
their focus. They have too many products, they lack a clear 
vision, and they struggle due to poor execution. The ad-
vice I was given by an investor ten years ago is as applica-
ble to turnarounds as it is to new investments. Focus wins. 
Summary 
Great execution can’t deliver product-market fit, but a lack of great execution 
can kill a company that has found product-market fit.  
When it comes to execution, one of the biggest challenges entrepreneurs face 
is organizational—hiring for growth.  
Startups that have been around for a while and that haven’t hit the growth 
curve they desire are often hesitant to shake things up due to the emotional 
and psychological investment in sunk cost. To succeed, leaders of stagnant 
startups must fight the siren song of sunk cost, while leaders of high-growth 
companies must scale their organizations to support the growth. 
Market leaders have proven time and again to deliver the most value for inves-
tors and entrepreneurs alike. Great product-market fit combined with unpa-
ralleled execution will move a company from market laggard to market leader. 

P A R T 
IV
Capital and 
Liquidity 
 
Startups live and die by whether they have enough money in the bank. In this 
part of Why Startups Fail, you’ll earn about a different kind of product-market 
fit: when you are the product and investors are the market; and when your 
company is the product and larger companies interested in buying yours are 
the market.  
Whether you’re looking for an angel round of funding, or raising tens or hun-
dreds of millions, how you pitch can have just as big an impact as what you’re 
pitching. In Chapter 10 we’ll explore the motivations that drive investors: 
greed and fear. I’ll talk about the key reasons so many pitches fail—and how to 
avoid them. You’ll come away equipped with the ability to frame properly and 
connect with your audience. And you’ll understand that all-to-obscure entity, 
the investment partnership, and how to put it to work for you.  
Having built their companies for years, far too many entrepreneurs leave 
money on the table when it comes time for a “liquidity event”—selling or 
merging the business. They get outmaneuvered by experienced investors or 
corporate development teams. In Chapter 11, you’ll learn how to get paid for 
your work. Many potential merger and acquisition transactions (which account 
for some 90 percent of liquidity events) that seem promising at the outset end 
up failing. You’ll learn the common reasons why and how to avoid them—
starting with planning long before your company approaches a liquidity event.  

Part IV: Capital and Liquidity 
134 
In Chapter 12, we’ll see how focus combined with failing fast leads to success. 
I’ll cover some of the rewards and tradeoffs involved in doing a startup—
including the myth of working for yourself. It has been said that success has 
many parents while failure has few. I’ll conclude with a summary of the key 
reasons for startup failure and how you can learn from them to make your 
startup a success. 
 
 

C H A P T E R 
10
Pitches That 
Fail 
Perfect Your Pitch 
Many an entrepreneurial dream has failed because the founder got in front of 
the right people with access to capital but failed to woo the audience success-
fully. This chapter is about how to succeed when pitching your idea. 
There is no perfect pitch. When I was raising money, every investor re-
sponded to something slightly different. Ultimately, nothing speaks louder than 
a big market, a disruptive product, and an incredible team. But a great pitch 
can really help you tell your story. And telling your story well is just as critical 
in getting potential employees to come work for you as it is in raising money 
and getting users. What has caused entrepreneurs to fail in raising money? 
Why do some entrepreneurs raise millions while others can’t attract any out-
side capital at all? How and when should you pitch? How can you transform 
your pitching approach? 
Pitch the Right Investors 
One major reason pitches fail is that entrepreneurs pitch the wrong investors. 
Most startups, even technology startups, aren’t good candidates for venture 
capital. And as I’ve discussed previously, there are many reasons an investor 
may not invest—timing may be off, investors may be short on funds or looking 
for specific kinds of investments, or they may just be bad at picking good deals. 
Many investors passed on great opportunities like Apple, Google, Facebook, 
and others, to name just a few. 

Chapter 10 | Pitches That Fail 
136 
Conversely, some investors will be deeply knowledgeable about your market 
or approach because of previous experience in the space or a strong belief or 
investment thesis about a particular market opportunity. These investors are 
ideal—you don’t have to convince them of the opportunity, only that you’re 
the likely winner in the space. By any measure that is still a tall order, but it’s a 
much easier one to get.  
Some investors are momentum investors—they invest primarily in companies 
they believe are already rising stars. Others are marquee investors—they want 
to invest in people who are big names or who come from large, well-known 
companies. Certain investors prefer to invest only in people they know.  
Before you pitch, figure out who you’re pitching and what their style is. How 
can you find out if an investor likes a space and what their investment thesis is? 
Ask! Look at their portfolios. Talk to the founders of companies they’ve 
backed. Read blog posts they’ve written, articles they’ve been quoted in, and 
their career history on sites like LinkedIn. 
Pitching Isn’t Free 
Because investors see a lot of opportunities, they can look for familiar patterns 
across them. When you pitch a knowledgeable investor, if nothing else, you 
come away with some provocative questions and great insights. But you can 
also waste a lot of time pitching investors who aren’t a good match for your 
business. Pitching isn’t free: it costs you time. What’s more, if you pitch too 
many investors, your deal becomes “shopped” and thus hard to sell.  
I remember that when we were fundraising for our first company, we spent 
countless hours pitching venture investors. After a while, the questions the 
investors asked and the feedback we received were more or less the same. 
Although it was critical that we raise capital, we weren’t spending that valuable 
time in the office working on the product or talking to customers.  
All that pitching was exhausting! It reinforced for us the key challenges we 
faced and reminded us where we needed to focus. But it didn’t provide insight 
into ways to build a great product, nor did it help solve any of the difficult 
questions we faced. Given our stage, the best source of capital for us was angel 
investors—investors who were betting primarily on us as a team that could 
figure out the business. And given our resources, the best use of our time was 
to pitch a few people and then get back to focusing on building the business 
and getting those tough questions answered. 

Why Startups Fail 
137
I’ll never forget the day we met with a potential partner in between a bunch of 
investor meetings. We started to give the product demo, and it didn’t work. 
We’d been so busy meeting with investors that we had completely neglected 
the product. Had we not reset our priorities and gotten back to product focus, 
our time mismanagement could easily have caused our company to fail. 
Investor Motivations: Greed and Fear 
A huge part of pitching comes down to psychology and emotion. Investors are 
primarily motivated by two emotions: greed and fear. An investor who has 
access to invest in a hot company wants to buy as much of that company as 
possible. That investor is motivated by greed. Another classic example of the 
greedy investor is one who votes to turn down a big acquisition offer because 
the investor believes the company can be even more valuable. Of course, 
greed-based gambles sometimes pay off.  
Investors operating out of fear worry they’re going to lose a great deal or that 
a company they’ve already invested in will go out of business.  
When you’re pitching investors, it’s easy to fall into the trap of selling. You’re 
selling your company, your vision, and the opportunity to invest. The investor 
decides when and where to meet and may seem unmotivated by time. Mean-
while, you’re trying to pay the bills, hire people, and generate revenue. 
In fact, you want to be buying. Viewed through an extreme lens, you have a 
highly differentiated product—your company. All the investor has to offer is 
capital. If you’ve ever compared two $20 bills side by side, you can see how 
undifferentiated that capital is. Other than a difference in dates and serial num-
bers, those bills are just about the same! 
Of course, investors are very different. They can offer access to a network of 
future capital, employees, and potentially better liquidity options down the line. 
But when pitching, it’s easy to fall into the trap of only selling. Make sure 
you’re buying good investors as well. 
What does it mean to be buying? It means qualifying your investors. Investors 
are in the habit of asking lots of questions. You should ask qualification ques-
tions to get your investors to pitch you.  
You must do this for several reasons: 

Chapter 10 | Pitches That Fail 
138 
• 
The answers are important: Without asking questions, it’s 
hard to disqualify investors as potentially wrong for your 
startup.  
• 
It frames the discussion: It puts you on equal footing with 
your investors; instead of one-way communication with 
you pitching and answering questions, you have a conver-
sation, a dialog in which both parties are deciding whether 
to work with each other.  
• 
It plays to the emotional and psychological needs of your inves-
tors, not just the logical ones: You want to motivate your in-
vestors through emotion. Greed drives up the price of 
your deal. Fear of losing the opportunity to invest incents 
investors to move quickly.  
If these tactics seem artificial, they’re not. They’re a very real part of raising 
money for your company. They’re the same tactics other successful entrepre-
neurs use to raise money. They’re the tactics existing investors use to get fu-
ture investors to invest. Without them, you won’t be able to fund your com-
pany, and your company will fail. They’re not just tactics—they’re a key part of 
the strategy for making your company a success. 
Process Matters 
When it comes to pitching, it’s important to manage the process, not just the 
product. If you line up one investor meeting for the beginning of April and 
another one for the beginning of May, you’re not optimizing your investment 
process. Due to the amount of time between the meetings, you can’t create a 
competitive situation between the investors. Nor can you easily pull them to-
gether if you want them both to invest. And it’s difficult to compare them—
you’ll be well down the path or finished with one before you meet with the 
other. Line up investor meetings as close together as possible.  
Entrepreneur X managed the investment process well. He had previously 
raised a small amount of money from some investors who backed him before. 
Having made some progress in the business, he went out for a full venture 
round, raising $10 million. Most considered the price guidance the entrepre-

Why Startups Fail 
139
neur was giving for the deal—a pre-money1 valuation of $50 million—to be 
extremely high.  
Yet Entrepreneur X ran a great process. He lined up nearly all of his investor 
meetings during a two-week period. For those who came later, he specifically 
went out of his way to tell them that they were running behind—feeding their 
fear that they might lose the deal before they had even figured out whether 
they wanted to invest. 
His approach injected a lot of emotion into the process. Investor conversa-
tions around the merits and drawbacks of the deal took a back seat to discus-
sions of how to win the deal. Entrepreneur X also masterfully started and fi-
nished every discussion with a potential investor with a statement about what 
he was looking for in an investor. He framed every conversation so that he 
was buying—not selling. Not only did Entrepreneur X get his deal done, and 
done quickly, but he got an even higher price than he wanted: a $58M pre-
money valuation, raising $12M from investors. 
Another reason to make your pitch process short and sweet is to prevent a 
shopped deal. Even though you may not have pitched a particular investor be-
fore, if you’ve pitched a lot of people, the investor has likely heard about your 
opportunity through a colleague or friend. That investor is already biased by 
whatever their colleague told them, even if they try not to be.  
What’s more, deals that have been around a long time feel tired. They get the 
taint of not being able to raise money, a taint that is very, very hard to remove. 
Because venture investors invest primarily in hope, not value, if a deal is 
shopped, it loses that shiny gleam of hope. Having an old and tired deal is a 
surefire recipe for pitching failure. 
Vision First, Execution Second 
Some early-stage investors look for vision. When they hear your pitch, they 
think even bigger, imagining what your company could become or how it could 
transform an industry. They immediately begin generating new ideas and talking 
about how big your opportunity could be.  
                                                 
1 The pre-money valuation refers to the value of the company prior to the money (the 
investors’ capital) being invested. 

Chapter 10 | Pitches That Fail 
140 
Other investors focus on operational excellence. They’re all about the num-
bers. They want market data, acquisition metrics, and conversion rates.  
Some of this is a factor of the stage of your business; the more revenue you 
have, the more likely it is that investors will focus on operational metrics over 
vision. But much of it depends on the personality of the investor.  
Investors come with biases. All too frequently, experienced investors have 
been burned on an investment that appears similar to yours, which colors their 
view of your company. Alternatively, they may have missed an investment and 
spent years beating themselves up about it; when you arrive, they see not just 
your company, but a chance to redeem themselves for the investment they 
missed all those moons ago. 
In the same week, I have pitched investors who were all about vision and 
others who were all about operational metrics. It’s not that the operational 
investors didn’t care about our vision—they did, at least to some extent. They 
simply were far more practical and, by their own admission, lacked the imagi-
nation of the vision-oriented investors. They had a much harder time en-
visioning a world-changing play and tended to make investments based on met-
rics.  
Conversely, it’s not that the vision-oriented investors didn’t care about our 
operating metrics. They did. In fact, at least one of them was a previous serial 
entrepreneur and proven operating executive. But the vision investors cared a 
whole lot more about the market opportunity and were betting on us as a 
team to “figure it out.”  
Their biggest questions were around whether we had inherent biases that 
would prevent us from trying out diverse experiments on the path to scaling 
user and customer acquisition. In other words, were we willing to try many 
different approaches aggressively, some of them radical, until we figured out 
the ones that worked?  
Of course, all vision with no metrics means you’re building a house of cards. 
All metrics with no vision, and you may build a good business, but you won’t 
get paid well for building it.  
Investors want you to paint a picture of how you’ll scale efficiently—that is, 
acquire and delight lots of users or customers. Or they want to know that 
you’re already scaling, and that the invested capital will help you grow faster.  
They need to convince themselves that you can, at some time in the future, 
extract more value from your users or customers than it costs you to acquire 

Why Startups Fail 
141
them. Note that I say “at some time in the future.” Early-stage investors rec-
ognize that it may take a long time and a lot of capital before you reach profit-
ability—in fact, they may no longer be investors in the company by the time 
that happens. But they need to be able to convince themselves (and others) 
that there is a path to get there. 
Spell It Out 
Many pitches fail because they leave big chunks of the pitch as an exercise for 
the reader. Don’t expect your investors to reach the same conclusions you 
would based on your data, analysis, or a product demo. Instead, draw the con-
clusions for them.  
If you tell potential investors your market is really big but you don’t tell them 
how you’ll reach that market, they may come away believing your market is 
really big. But they’re left wondering how you’ll reach it efficiently.  
Addressing key issues like this not only requires that you think about them, 
which is a good thing, but also demonstrates that you have done so. Investors 
tend to assume the best about opportunity and the worst about risk.  
Show them a big market opportunity, and they will think even bigger. Fail to 
show them how you’ll reach that market, and they will assume the worst—
that the market is unreachable or that you have no idea how to reach it. 
You Are the Product 
When you’re pitching to customers, your product is a piece of software or 
hardware, a service, or a web site. When you’re pitching investors, you are the 
product. And just as you need to find product-market fit for the software, 
hardware, or service you’re building, you also need to find product-market fit 
when you are the product. 
It may seem obvious, but a pitch isn’t just about the content. You’re evaluating 
your potential investors based on the questions they ask, the knowledge they 
demonstrate about your space and approach, and their networks. Meanwhile, 
your investors are evaluating the entire product that is you: the market oppor-
tunity, your strategy for capturing that opportunity, and you and your team. 
Many entrepreneurs fail at pitching because they make incredibly basic mis-
takes. They don’t demonstrate knowledge of what they’re doing and confi-

Chapter 10 | Pitches That Fail 
142 
dence when pitching. As Admiral Greer told Jack Ryan in The Hunt for Red Oc-
tober, “No one understands this material better than you do.” 
When investors evaluate you, they’re evaluating whether you 
• 
Present effectively 
• 
Can recruit, sell, and communicate a big vision 
• 
Know more about your domain than anyone else 
• 
Think strategically 
• 
Have ambition (are you building something big or small?) 
• 
Are a great fundraiser 
That last bullet may seem a little bit of a chicken-and-egg problem. But part of 
what investors are evaluating is whether they think other investors will want 
to give you more money in the future.  
Investors know that most businesses ultimately require more capital. They 
don’t want to be in it alone and are already thinking about how the market will 
view you the next time you go out to raise money. 
Saying things like “this is the last money we’ll ever need,” when you’re not 
doing tens or hundreds of millions in revenue demonstrates ignorance.  
Perfect Your Pitch 
Not only are you a product, your pitch is a product too. Although every pitch 
is different, there are five key elements to focus on when you pitch: 
1. Framing and personal status 
2. Your vision 
3. That your category will be big, and the time is now 
4. How you’ll reach the market, scale, and become the 
leader 
5. Why what you’re doing is valuable and strategic 

Why Startups Fail 
143
Framing Sets the Context 
Tons of pitches fail every day due to bad framing. Fundraiser and author of 
Pitch Anything, Oren Klaff, writes that “framing” is one of the most important 
activities that separates good pitches from bad ones. With good framing, you 
set the right context for your interactions with potential investors and create 
equal status for your discussions. 
You don’t need to be arrogant about your approach, but a little hotness goes a 
long way. Like it or not, raising money can be a bit of a high-school popularity 
contest, and status plays a big role. As one investor friend of mine is fond of 
saying about pitching, it often comes down to, “I’m hot, you’re hot, let’s be hot 
together.” 
Cliché as it may sound, pitching is a lot like dating. One amazing fundraiser 
once said (he was European), “We will romance them.” And it was true. He 
did romance investors, and they fell in love with his vision and dream.  
Framing starts long before your meeting. It starts with how you handle your 
availability and communication with potential investors. You cannot—you must 
not—be needy. If you’re sitting in a meeting room and your investors are run-
ning late, giving them a few minutes is no big deal. But don’t sit around waiting 
for more than 15 minutes.  
Be polite about it, but reschedule. Ask yourself if you really want to be in busi-
ness with someone who starts off treating you with that kind of lack of re-
spect. I know the feeling—it was incredibly hard to secure that meeting, and 
it’s been rescheduled. But you must drive respect. People are on time for 
things that are important to them. 
Similarly, don’t overstay your welcome. Set the expectation at the beginning of 
the meeting that you need to leave a few minutes early for another important 
meeting. Of course, you would be happy to schedule more time if that makes 
sense after the initial meeting.  
This does two things. First, it sets the right tone for the meeting—your time is 
important, and you’re in demand. Second, it lets the investor respond with 
their availability as well; perhaps their schedule has changed.  
As the old saying goes, don’t sell past the close. You have a lot of work to 
do—recruiting, building great product, acquiring users or customers, market-
ing, and so on. Your time is critically valuable.  

Chapter 10 | Pitches That Fail 
144 
If you have an hour scheduled for your meeting with an investor, prepare to 
leave ten minutes before that hour is up. If you want to spend more time and 
they want to spend more time, don’t worry—there will be plenty more meet-
ings to come.  
Avoid that all-too-frequent awkward moment when the investor’s assistant 
walks in and tells the investor, “Joe is on the line,” or “Your next meeting is 
here.” Be the first to stand up and make ready to leave. And then do just 
that—leave! Again, there will be more meetings if you intend to do business 
together.  
I have had entrepreneurs ask me, “So, what are the next steps?” and, “Tell me, 
honestly, what do you think?” In many business meetings, the goal is to get to 
action items so the meeting will have been productive. That is not the goal of a 
pitch meeting. It isn’t a mystery what the action items and next steps are from 
a pitch meeting: more meetings, then a term sheet that spells out the terms of 
the deal, and then a wire transfer to your bank account. 
Moreover, it may be OK to ask for direct feedback one to one. But if you’re in 
a group setting, where you’re pitching multiple people in the room, you intro-
duce an unnecessary risk of failure when you ask for immediate feedback. Not 
only do you appear needy, but you also throw yourself into the deep end of a 
pool of group dynamics with which you’re completely unfamiliar.  
You have very little idea what the relationships are among the people on the 
other side of the table and what the dynamics of the investment firm are. Who 
carries weight on investment decisions? How does the group handle disagree-
ments about deals and associated feedback? Are there portfolio management 
issues that could impact investing in your deal? 
Are the people on the other side of the table comfortable giving candid feed-
back in a group setting? Or would your contact prefer to talk with you one to 
one? The level of variability is incredibly high and something you have little visi-
bility into and control over.  
I have sat through pitch meetings where entrepreneurs mismanaged their time. 
They spent too much time on things that weren’t relevant to a decision about 
whether to have a second meeting, such as minute details of a product or fi-
nancial plan. They simply ran out of time.  
In cases where I or other investors tried to alert entrepreneurs that they were 
running out of time, many have tried to go faster but kept the same level of 

Why Startups Fail 
145
detail. This is a sure-fire recipe for failure. Instead, bump up a level and cover 
the important points. Save the rest for a second meeting. 
Investors who are interested follow up. They make introductions, connect you 
with people, and generally try to act helpful. An investor who is really inter-
ested tries to suck up all your available time. That way, no other investors can 
spend time with you until the investor decides whether to do the deal. And if 
your deal is really hot, you may even experience that rare phenomenon, 
“Don’t let that guy leave the building.” 
The negotiation for your deal starts long before you talk terms. How you 
frame from the very beginning impacts the tenor of your negotiation. Act 
needy and reschedule your life around potential investors, and you indicate 
low status in the relationship. In the remote chance that they still want to do 
your deal, they know they can not only beat you up on price; they can control 
your company as well. 
Presentation Failure 
Whether or not the oft-quoted statistic that 93% of communication is nonver-
bal is accurate, how you communicate during a pitch, both verbally and non-
verbally, matters a lot.  
Just the other day, a few entrepreneurs were running through their presenta-
tion with me. They had a great pitch, a great team, and a big market. The only 
problem was, they didn’t look at me while they talked. I remember another 
pitch where an executive spent the entire presentation looking down at the 
conference table. It was very awkward.  
If you pitch poorly, potential investors ask themselves: if you can’t communi-
cate your vision clearly to me (the investor), why would I think you’ll be able 
to communicate it to your own team? And if you can’t communicate with your 
own employees to set direction, how will you get anything done? The answer 
is—you won’t.  
Many entrepreneurs face two key challenges when presenting. First, they have 
trouble making and holding eye contact. Second, they have trouble being suc-
cinct. 

Chapter 10 | Pitches That Fail 
146 
Connect With Your Audience 
Having trouble connecting with your audience is understandable. Many product 
people spend a lot of time in front of their computers. Computers don’t stare 
back, move around, grimace, smile, go in and out of the room, check their mo-
bile devices, or get distracted. In fact, they don’t respond much at all (except 
occasionally to let you know they’ve crashed and need to restart). It’s for this 
very reason that, consciously or subconsciously, many entrepreneurs with en-
gineering and product backgrounds have chosen to work with computers.  
As a result, communicating a vision in person, one to one or in a group, may 
not be second nature. Some entrepreneurs fail to make eye contact with their 
audience while pitching. They look down, they look away, they do just about 
anything but communicate with their audience. 
Others suffer from what I call the “warm coffee comfort” problem. It’s one 
thing to take a sip of water so your throat doesn’t dry out. It’s another to 
coddle a warm cup of coffee or tea, in what is clearly a comfort mechanism. 
You’d be surprised how many people do this—it’s both distracting and confi-
dence reducing. 
Instead of looking at their audience, some people look at their slides, projected 
or displayed on a screen behind them, while they present. They talk to the 
screen instead of to the people in the room. Some go so far as to turn their 
back on their audience, and a few stand with the projector light beaming di-
rectly into their eyes.  
People who are great at presenting become that way by practicing. But in the 
absence of having years to practice, following a few simple presentation rules 
can go a long way. These are rules you can easily see in action in YouTube vid-
eos on presenting: 
• 
Make eye contact: Not short and sudden, but steady. Don’t 
jump around the room. Some people find making eye con-
tact uncomfortable. It makes them feel awkward, or they 
worry about coming across as intimidating or staring. 
Whatever the reason, if you find making eye contact un-
comfortable, use the old trick of looking at people’s eye-
brows or just above their nose. It’s not perfect, but it’s a 
very functional quick fix. 
• 
Keep your eyes in the horizontal plane: Look around, not 
down.  

Why Startups Fail 
147
• 
Face the person you’re addressing with your body: Talking to 
someone isn’t just about making eye contact—it’s about 
facing them with your body. 
• 
Stand up: It’s hard to pitch seated. It contracts your lung 
capacity and makes it more challenging to be expressive. 
• 
Don’t pace, and don’t lean on chairs: It’s distracting.  
• 
Use humor: You don’t need to be a comedian, but if people 
laugh because you’ve said something funny, enjoy the mo-
ment. A little humor builds a lot of rapport. 
• 
Breathe: Take a breath. Many entrepreneurs rush through 
their pitches, and when they run short on time, they talk 
even faster. Breathe more, say less.  
• 
Know your material and the messages you want to leave people 
with: You don’t need to read your slides if you know 
what’s on them.  
• 
Acknowledge your co-founder or other executives, and hand off 
to them: It’s often hard for people to introduce themselves 
in a big room. Instead, demonstrate you’re a team with the 
simple words, “And now I’d like to hand things off to my 
co-founder…” or words to that effect. If it helps, visualize 
the hand-off as passing the football—you’ve made the pass, 
your partner has received it, and now you can continue to 
move the ball down the field.  
Employing a speaker coach can help a lot. However, coaches often focus on 
details. Don’t try to change who you are. Instead, practice facing people, look-
ing at them, breathing, handing off to your colleagues, and coming back to your 
concise, key messages. Minimize distractions. Do that, and you’ll be 90% of the 
way there.  
Be Succinct 
Now for the other 90%. Be succinct. When investors, potential board mem-
bers, or people you’re talking to ask you a question about your business, pro-
vide a crisp, direct answer.  

Chapter 10 | Pitches That Fail 
148 
Engineers, especially, have a tendency to go deeper and give more detail rather 
than bumping up a level and talking about the big picture. Quite often when 
investors ask questions they’re not looking for long, drawn-out explanations. 
They’re evaluating how you respond as much as the specific content of your 
answer. In a group of people, if you dive into a lengthy explanation of how 
your product works, for example, you may connect with one person, but you’ll 
likely lose the interest of others. 
Many presenters tend to provide a long explanation and then provide the an-
swer. Just give the answer right away—you may as well, since you’re going to 
give it anyway. Then explain. Spend time with the best executives and leaders 
and you’ll notice they excel at “netting it out.” They cut to the core of big is-
sues. Do the same and you’ll come out ahead.  
Back to our entrepreneurs. While they started out seeming nervous and a bit 
disconnected, after working on connecting with their audience and being suc-
cinct they came across as a confident team. They aced their pitches. So will 
you.  
Expect Due Diligence 
Due diligence is the process during which investors dig into the details of your 
opportunity—the market, the competition, your metrics, and your team.  
I remember one diligence call that was a reference on the founder of a com-
pany. The person I was calling was genuinely surprised to hear from me. 
Granted, I made the call the same day I got the reference list from the founder. 
But the founder had neglected to tell him that investors might be calling. That 
wasn’t a reason not to do the deal, but it certainly felt odd. 
Contrast that with the entrepreneur who had been well-coached. He offered 
to provide references, but only after I’d made some progress on other dili-
gence aspects like market and competition. I took no offense at this. Rather, it 
demonstrated that he valued his references and didn’t want to overuse them, 
and also that he was testing me to see how serious I was about investing. 
There is a saying among investors that during diligence, a deal loses altitude, 
and the question is whether it will regain it. During diligence, investors come 
face to face with the incredible number of risks associated with a deal. They 
have to overcome those risks and potentially convince their partners, if they’re 
part of a larger fund, that they and the company have an approach to mitigating 
those risks.  

Why Startups Fail 
149
Support Your Sponsor 
To get through due diligence, it pays to get on the same side as your sponsor. 
Your sponsor, at any investment shop bigger than one individual, is the cham-
pion who shepherds you through the firm and “owns” the deal. No matter 
how in-demand your deal is, you want to help that person execute an invest-
ment in your company. After all, you never know when you’ll need a stalking 
horse. 
That means helping your sponsor pull together the investment memo, slides, 
and diligence materials. It doesn’t mean bending over backward or in any way 
compromising the mutual respect that goes into the best entrepreneur-
investor partnerships. 
The most effective way to do this is to sit down with your sponsor and have a 
candid discussion about how the process works at your sponsor’s firm. This 
isn’t a discussion of the details of your opportunity. Rather, it’s a brief discus-
sion about the investment process—on your side and theirs. 
How are investment decisions made? What materials will the sponsor be pull-
ing together? This brief process discussion is yet another opportunity for you 
to frame and reframe your relationship and the potential partnership you’re 
entering into with the investor. In addition to asking questions, you should take 
the opportunity to talk about activities that need to take place and are taking 
place on your end.  
One major item is to begin speaking with CEOs of the investor’s portfolio 
companies to get a sense for how the firm interacts with its founders and 
CEOs. Among other things, you want to know how the firm deals with follow-
on investments and handles companies that need more capital to reach their 
objectives. This is useful and valuable information.  
You can also communicate—even if unasked—where you are in the process 
with other investors. Assuming that multiple investors are actively in diligence, 
you want to make sure those who are genuinely interested have time to do 
the work they need to do; but you also want to communicate that your deal is 
in demand.  
By having these kinds of discussions, you continue to frame your relationship. 
Your message is that it’s not just a question of whether the investor wants to 
invest in you. It’s equally a question of whether you want to take that inves-
tor’s money.  

Chapter 10 | Pitches That Fail 
150 
Understand Partner Meetings 
If you’re raising venture capital, at some point you’ll come in contact with a 
Monday partner meeting. Partner meetings typically take place on Mondays at 
just about every venture-capital firm (although some firms are known for 
holding Sunday night partner meetings to preempt the competition when there 
is a hot deal to be won). A partner meeting is when all the partners at a firm 
get together to discuss firm business and ongoing financings, and hear the 
pitches of new companies as a group.  
When a company comes in to present, the sponsor typically has already circu-
lated a deal memo, a capital planning model (CPM), a copy of the presentation 
the entrepreneur will present, and relevant diligence notes and industry ma-
terial. Depending on the stature of your sponsor, you can expect more or less 
process, preparation, and material. 
The deal memo describes the opportunity, risks, team, and financing in detail. 
The CPM models capital needs of the company and expected return. The 
other information provides additional context. The sponsor may give a brief 
presentation or overview before the company presents.  
A partner meeting isn’t the time to get bogged down in gory details. It’s an op-
portunity to paint your vision, get people excited, and demonstrate complete 
command of what you’re doing, from market to execution. The most impor-
tant thing you can do in a partner meeting is to be highly engaged. Give your 
pitch, and don’t overstay. Demonstrate that yours is a deal people should be 
excited about. Show that although you’re excited about the prospect of work-
ing with the firm in question, yours is a deal they need to win if they want to 
work with you. 
A friend of the firm may sit in on your presentation and provide the partner-
ship with a perspective on your deal and on your market. In most cases, you’ll 
have met that person during diligence. Don’t sweat it.  
After you leave the room, your sponsor will talk about the opportunity, risks, 
risk mitigation, and financing. The partnership will discuss the opportunity.  
Partnerships have different structures for deciding how deals get done. Some 
follow a sponsor/devil’s advocate model, where one partner is the champion 
and another is the designated devil’s advocate. Other partnerships require a 
sponsor and co-sponsor. Some require unanimity or the vote of at least one 
managing partner.  

Why Startups Fail 
151
In some partnerships, it’s a foregone conclusion that a deal coming into a 
Monday partner meeting will get done. Other partnerships may see two or 
three new deals on a Monday and choose to do only one—or none—of them. 
What’s important is to be focused, engaged, in control of your material, and in 
demand. Remember, you’re not just selling; you’re buying. 
A recipe for failure is to bring your whole team with you, mismanage your 
time, and demonstrate a lack of command of your material. You should bring 
at the very most three people, in the case of a multifounder company.  
Think big. Be succinct. Get to the point when answering questions. And, be-
cause you’ve managed the investment process to perfection—get on over to 
your next Monday meeting! 
Summary 
Pitching investors takes a lot of time and energy. To succeed at pitching you 
need to: 
• 
Pitch investors that are appropriate for your business. 
• 
Get investors excited about what you’re doing and your 
ability to transform, recruit, and raise capital. 
• 
Be in command of your material. 
• 
Not need the money, or at least credibly give the impres-
sion that you don’t need the money. 
Buy, don’t just sell. The right entrepreneur-investor combination can truly be a 
partnership. You’ll be in business with your investors for a long time. Find the 
partnership that’s right for you. 

C H A P T E R 
11
Managing 
Liquidity 
Get Paid for Your Work 
Inexperienced sellers leave money on the table all the time. One investor I 
know once told me, “We’re going to get the vacuum cleaner out and suck all 
the money off the table. Then, we’re going to stick that vacuum into their 
pockets and make sure we’ve got every last cent.” Needless to say, his words 
left a lasting impression. Although you may not come from the Vacuum 
Cleaner Investor school of deals, there’s no reason not to get paid for your 
work.  
Liquidity Events 
When I was first starting out, I met a very successful entrepreneur who told 
me, “I never met an acquisition offer I didn’t like.” I thought this guy was nuts. 
What was the point of starting a company if we were just going to be bought? 
We were going public, and that was the end of that. Of course, it was late 
2000, and the public markets had all but completely dried up.  
The reality is, 90% of liquidity events are acquisitions, not IPOs. For a tech 
company to go public, the IPO window has to be open, institutional buyers—
known as the buy side—have to be interested, and the company must meet key 
metrics, such as specific revenue levels and sustained growth rates. The man-
agement team has to be able to credibly sell the story. And the company must 
have avoided being acquired along the way. After all, many of the same charac-
teristics that make a company attractive to the public markets also make it at-

Chapter 11 | Managing Liquidity 
154 
tractive to other, larger companies. Those companies often seek to augment 
organic growth with growth via acquisitions. 
You put all the hard work into your startup well before a liquidity event takes 
place. But how you manage the liquidity process can have a dramatic effect on 
how others value all that hard work. Just as with private fundraising, the envi-
ronment surrounding the liquidity event can have a significant impact on your 
company’s valuation as well.  
Big companies are experts at buying smaller companies. That doesn’t mean 
they’re always (or even often) wise at choosing those acquisitions or good at 
integrating them once acquired.  
But it does mean they’ve been through the process hundreds, if not thousands, 
of times. Some acquisitions are tiny—say, a small group of engineers bought 
for their team and technology. Others are huge mergers of near-equals. Big 
companies have in-house legal teams, in addition to outside counsel; corporate 
development departments responsible for deal execution; and, typically, a busi-
ness owner who drives the desire for an acquisition to occur.  
The art of the deal is to know when to say “no” and when to say “yes.” Sell 
too easily or to the wrong buyer, and the value of years of hard work can 
evaporate in an instant. But the first question you should ask yourself is: do 
you want to be bought? 
Don’t assume that your potential acquirers know your company—especially if 
your company is smaller. The delicate art of getting bought is that you’re not 
for sale. But you do need to be visible—highly visible. You need to be on the 
radar of potential acquirers. That means being visible in the press and at con-
ferences, spreading the word about your company through your network, and 
personally getting to know people at those companies that might acquire you.  
One entrepreneur I know took a strategic investment from a much larger 
company. Although it prevented him from running out of money and gave him 
a partner to work with, other potential acquirers viewed the startup as already 
spoken for. That is, by investing a relatively small (for them) amount of money 
in the startup, the big company effectively owned the startup without having to 
buy it outright.  
The entrepreneur and his team kept having to deliver on the demands of their 
strategic partner to such an extent that they didn’t have the bandwidth to 
serve the rest of the market.  

Why Startups Fail 
155
The entrepreneur considered breaking the contract with the larger company 
multiple times, but the startup had become so dependent on the larger com-
pany that changing course was impractical. One of the startup’s competitors 
eventually acquired it, providing little return.  
Another entrepreneur took a much different approach. He started with a 
business partnership with a potential acquirer that involved marketing their 
products together. It took a lot of effort on the startup’s part to make the re-
lationship productive—the bigger company had lots of other partners.  
Ironically, the first partnership led to partnerships with other large companies 
in the industry, one of which eventually bought the startup. By managing and 
finessing these business relationships, the entrepreneur was able to capitalize 
on them from a marketing perspective without becoming encumbered by 
them.  
Why Acquisitions Fail to Go Through 
There are a number of reasons acquisitions fail to go through, many of which 
can be avoided with proper planning. Becoming visible, building relationships, 
and engaging with multiple potential acquirers are all activities that take time 
and preparation.  
Selling, Not Buying 
As with many of the other business transactions discussed earlier in the book, 
the best deals are those in which you’re buying, not selling. That means the 
best acquisitions occur when someone wants to buy you when you aren’t ac-
tively selling.  
But often, companies that are short on capital are trying to sell. Investors, 
management, or both may be tired. Many deals fail to go through because the 
CEOs are trying too hard to sell the deal. They may end up with a sale, but it’s 
frequently for a low-ball price that could have been avoided. 
Not Being on the Radar 
One CEO had the networking skills of a hermit. A talented inside guy, well-
liked and respected by his team, he didn’t excel at networking. As a result, his 

Chapter 11 | Managing Liquidity 
156 
company didn’t get the call when larger companies pursued acquisitions in his 
space. His potential deals failed because they never got started.  
The reality is that he didn’t want to sell. Although his company was growing 
very slowly and not becoming more valuable, he enjoyed the relatively com-
fortable position the company was in and his role as CEO. He had previously 
been a senior executive at a large, public tech company and wasn’t eager to 
take on a similar role.  
Lack of Relationship 
Not dissimilar from this was another CEO who, although a great product guy, 
was so disinterested that he failed to connect with the teams at potential ac-
quirers. He entered into multiple potential acquisition discussions, but was 
outmaneuvered twice by other CEOs who had better relationships.  
There is no substitute for having a longstanding business relationship with 
someone, but relationships are built over time. You may have worked with 
someone in a previous job or gone to school together, or you may be neigh-
bors. The relationship-lacking CEO placed very low value on relationships and 
as a result failed to get engagement with potential acquirers, even though some 
of them were genuinely interested in buying his company.  
Acquirer Strategic Shift 
One CEO’s deal was put on hold when the Senior VP sponsor at the company 
that was going to acquire him changed roles. In a cliché blame game, investors 
argued that the CEO should have had his finger on the pulse of the acquirer so 
he wasn’t blindsided by the change. 
Although they’re often slow to move, large companies change strategies and 
reprioritize frequently. They defund projects and reorganize departments and 
divisions. Sometimes sponsors are blindsided by CEO or board-level directives, 
other executives, or market changes. Other times, they either don’t have their 
ducks in a row or don’t command sufficient influence to get a deal done.  
That said, it pays to get to know all the potential players at an acquirer, not 
just your direct sponsor. Other groups or executives may feel threatened by 
the prospect of their company acquiring yours, or they may suffer from NIH—
not invented here syndrome—in which they believe they can do whatever 
you’re doing better by building it internally. Ultimately, however, it’s your re-

Why Startups Fail 
157
sponsibility to know as much as possible about what’s going on with your 
sponsor, other players, and your potential acquirers. 
Expectation Mismatch 
The CEO of Company X repeatedly turned down offers because management 
and investor expectations about price and deal terms didn’t match those of 
potential acquirers. The CEO of the company was operationally excellent but 
didn’t paint a strategic vision that an acquiring team could buy into to justify his 
and his investors’ lofty valuation expectations. As a result, the company was 
valued purely on a multiple of its revenue rather than viewed as a critical, 
must-have, strategic acquisition.  
In particular, the CEO of Company X failed to help each potential acquirer un-
derstand why his company was a possible cornerstone of an existing strategic 
initiative the larger company had underway—one of the best ways to get a 
higher-value outcome. The CEO failed to frame discussions properly from the 
beginning because he focused purely on the numbers rather than on the stra-
tegic needs of potential acquirers.  
As much as executives feel pressure to beat the numbers, many feel just as 
much pressure to “be someone.” CEOs of companies, large and small, want to 
be successful and want to be known for that success. It’s not only about 
money. It’s also about power and ego. No CEO wants to go down in history as 
an unstrategic, failed leader. Most want to be recognized not only for having 
driven growth but also for having been great leaders. Not only did the CEO of 
Company X fail to invest in the strategic vision of his potential acquirers—he 
also failed to understand how he could help his sponsors and their CEOs be 
stars.  
In contrast, the CEO of Company Y, with just a few million in revenue, was 
able to sell his company for hundreds of millions of dollars. Both companies 
were in spaces where larger companies were incredibly acquisitive, but the 
more-strategic CEO went to great pains to understand the strategies and initi-
atives of his potential acquirers. When he met with executives at a potential 
acquirer, he didn’t only talk operations—he talked about the acquirer’s key 
strategic needs. What’s more, acting as a peer, but without being arrogant, he 
had candid conversations with senior executives about their challenges in the 
organization. He knew so much about his potential acquirers’ businesses and 
about the executives themselves that they asked him for his input on their 

Chapter 11 | Managing Liquidity 
158 
plans. When one of the companies decided it needed to make an acquisition, 
he was the first person they called. 
Lack of a Competitive Bidding Situation 
This is by far the most painful cause of deal failure and nearly ensures you 
won’t get an optimal price. It also makes it regrettably easy to become emo-
tionally attached to a particular acquirer. If things are going well and a company 
is in high demand, getting into a competitive bidding situation is easy.  
The challenge, of course, is getting a competitive bidding situation going when 
a company is running short on cash and needs money quickly. Big companies 
are always sniffing around for technologies and teams they can acquire on the 
cheap. If they sense tired capital or tired management, they’ll toss in a lowball 
offer on the off chance it will be accepted.  
Tired investors and management, operating in fear mode, are eerily susceptible 
to low-ball offers. If you have investors, the dance is an especially delicate one. 
Some investors may be willing to chip in more capital to help buy you time un-
til you get a deal done. Others may have already written off your company. 
Find out where they are early in the process so you’re not surprised. 
Lack of Chemistry 
The CEO of Company Y had a personality issue. Although multiple larger 
companies wanted to buy his company for hundreds of millions of dollars, his 
personality got in the way of the deals getting done. Some people called him 
antagonistic; others described him as always having to be the smartest guy in 
the room. He never failed to show up the employees and executives of poten-
tial acquirers. Although acquiring his business made sense from a business 
perspective, acquirers decided they couldn’t work with the CEO. Failing to 
swallow his pride personally cost him tens of millions of dollars. After three 
such failed acquisition discussions, his investors brought in a new CEO.  
Hiring Employees Instead 
This is an age-old tactic of ruthless acquirers: rather than buy the company, 
hire some of the key employees. More than one CEO has been known to say, 
“These guys would never do that,” only later to come to a board meeting say-
ing, “Those bastards! They’re trying to hire my best people!” If you’re entering 

Why Startups Fail 
159
into serious discussions, it isn’t unusual to specify a no-hire provision in your 
memorandum of understanding (MOU) with the potential acquirer.  
Granted, the provision may not be enforceable, and it’s not likely you’ll spend 
the time or money to take serious legal action. However, it allows you to have 
the discussion and set the expectation up front that you won’t tolerate bad 
behavior. It also gives you strong moral high ground to fall back on, should 
your acquirer try to hire any of your employees while you’re engaged in dis-
cussions or shortly thereafter.  
Due-Diligence Issues 
Some acquisition discussions fall apart during diligence. In exchange for capital 
very early on, the founder of Company Z entered into a license agreement 
with another company that gave that company the right to use Company Z’s 
technology in a different market segment. As it was structured, the business 
partner had rights to all future versions of Company Z’s technology. Although 
Company Z was almost acquired, the deal failed because more than one po-
tential acquirer didn’t want to take on the obligation of having to provide up-
dates to the business partner.  
Over the next year, the founder of Company Z restructured the contractual 
relationship with his business partner. He convinced the partner that encum-
bered by the unlimited license agreement, Company Z might not be able to 
sustain its business, and so it was in the business partner’s best interests to 
restructure the relationship. That, combined with some financial incentives the 
founder put in place to compensate the business partner in the event Com-
pany Z was acquired, enabled Company Z to restructure the contract. Free 
and clear to operate, the founder of Company Z decided not to sell. Instead, 
he raised an additional $14 million in venture capital to scale the business. 
Getting the Deal Done 
Anyone who has been through an acquisition (or acquisition discussions) has 
been faced with more than a few roomfuls of the acquirer’s people—
sometimes a roomful of executives, other times a roomful of engineers, 
finance, or legal people—or a mix of all of the above.  
Many acquirers try to extract as much information as possible from you and 
your team during acquisition discussions. Some are on fishing expeditions, try-

Chapter 11 | Managing Liquidity 
160 
ing to pick your brain to inform their strategy. Others know they want to 
make an acquisition in a particular space but don’t know which company or 
companies they want to buy. Although you’ll ultimately end up disclosing a lot 
of information if things get serious, it’s critical to have checkpoints at every 
step of the way.  
As with investment discussions, framing is crucial in acquisition discussions.  
Don’t just ask how things are looking on the acquirer’s end—if you do, you’ll 
be selling, not buying. Instead, let them know how things are looking on your 
end and that you have some concerns—now you’re buying, and getting the 
acquirer selling you on why they’re the right buyer for your company.  
Although it can feel flattering to have a big company approach you and to be in 
meetings with employees of that company, there is no need to divulge too 
much detail before both sides are ready to engage in serious discussions.  
Understand the players, what their goals are, and what your goals are, for 
every meeting and every communiqué. Think of every interaction as both con-
tent (what are you learning, and what are they learning?) and signaling (what 
messages are they sending you, and what messages are you sending them?). 
Silence, of course, can be a very powerful message. You can also leverage your 
board, as in, “Joe, our board won’t budge on that issue.” However you pursue 
a deal, figure out what you care about. Don’t be deceived by the offer of a big 
title, flattery, or wining and dining. 
Understand who the key decision-makers are, and get to know all of them. 
Get clarity on the acquisition process. Whether that turns out to be the actual 
process or not, it gives you something you can hold the acquirer to when dis-
cussions speed up, slow down, or stall.  
Failing to Get Paid 
Given the right situation, everything about a liquidity event is negotiable. When 
it comes to an acquisition, the purchase price itself, the deal terms, your earn-
out, your compensation (and termination) package, and benefits at the new 
company are all up for discussion. You can even carve out technology or in-
tellectual property that may not be relevant to the acquirer so you can do 
something else with it in the future. On the other hand, getting too fancy can 
kill a deal. 
Earn-outs are compensation that management and employees receive separate 
from the purchase itself. They’re frequently based on hitting specific future rev-

Why Startups Fail 
161
enue or profitability targets. They can also be very deceiving. More than one 
management team has taken what seemed like a huge earn-out, only to find 
out later that they and their acquirer had different understandings of how the 
earn-out would be calculated.  
Take, for example, an earn-out based on hitting certain revenue targets. The 
first question to consider is how those revenue targets were set. In all likeli-
hood, the acquirer asked you for three- or five-year financial projections. The 
minute you handed those over, you were setting—perhaps unknowingly—a 
critical component of your earn-out.  
The second question is how much control you’ll have over hitting your reve-
nue goals, after the acquisition takes place. Your product might depend on di-
rect sales. Suppose that all post-acquisition sales must be made by the ac-
quirer’s existing sales force. That sales force must be educated about your 
product, learn how to sell it, and be incented to sell it—assuming they’re 
equipped to sell it at all.  
Profit-based earn-out goals are even more challenging. Until you spend signifi-
cant time with a company’s CFO, you don’t know for sure how expenses are 
allocated across the organization. You may also find that the cost of salaries 
and benefits the acquirer pays are significantly higher than what you were pay-
ing as a startup—thereby driving up all the costs that go into your profitability 
metrics. 
Although you may be on the same page as your acquirer during the deal 
process, things can change quickly post acquisition. Prior to being at a com-
pany, you have relatively limited visibility into what the company is really like, 
no matter how much time you spend with executives and employees there. 
What’s more, big companies go through reorganizations and restructurings all 
the time. The business owner who did your deal may switch roles or go work 
somewhere else. The CFO who talked you through the numbers may be fired. 
The CEO who told you everything you wanted to hear while the deal was get-
ting done may be a completely different person to work for.  
Many seemingly successful acquisitions have turned into financial failures for 
entrepreneurs after the deals were consummated. The best way to avoid that 
kind of failure is by working out the specifics, in detail, before your deal closes. 

Chapter 11 | Managing Liquidity 
162 
Secondary Markets and Interim Liquidity 
Liquidity can and does occur before a company goes public or is acquired by 
another company. Sometimes, some portion of newly invested capital goes out 
the door. It’s not used to fund the capital needs of the company but rather to 
provide liquidity for existing investors, founders, and employees. This kind of 
founder liquidity often occurs as part of a larger financing, but it can happen 
separately.  
Proponents of founder liquidity argue that it helps entrepreneurs continue to 
take extreme risk because they have a nest egg. Opponents argue that it 
makes entrepreneurs less hungry and reduces alignment with investors. In-
vested capital should be used to fund the growth of the business, not line 
pockets. Regardless, this kind of liquidity occurs in some deals because the 
deals are so hot that founders can make participation in the financing con-
tingent on them taking out some cash—in some cases, very significant 
amounts. 
Secondary transactions have existed for years, but they have gained significant 
visibility recently due to the emergence of secondary marketplaces like 
SecondMarket and SharesPost. In these cases, the marketplace acts as an in-
termediary, lining up buyers and sellers. However, unlike public-market stocks, 
such transactions are only available to accredited investors (that is, investors 
who meet certain income or net worth requirements) or institutional funds. 
Although the number of transactions has grown, they occur in a relatively small 
universe of companies, typically those that are very well-known, such as 
Facebook. 
People often ask why existing investors (also known as insiders) sell a portion 
of their ownership if they’re still bullish on a company. A lot of it comes down 
to portfolio and fund management. By getting some early liquidity, an investor 
can reduce risk—although the upside is somewhat reduced, taking a small 
amount off the table mitigates the downside.  
In addition to reducing risk, general partners in venture-capital funds derive 
some big benefits from small amounts of early liquidity. Whether they can re-
cycle (that is, reinvest the capital) depends on the stage of the fund. But the 
bigger benefit is that they can return capital to their limited partners—those 
investors who invest in venture-capital funds. They can raise more money 
based on having already returned money, as in the old saying, “Success begets 
success.” And, they can take some gains off the table.  

Why Startups Fail 
163
IPOs 
I won’t spend a lot of time on initial public offerings (IPOs). If you’re consider-
ing an IPO, you’re surrounded by advisors, board members, bankers, and 
others who can help manage the process and coach you through it.  
The CEOs I know who have gone from being private to public company CEOs 
consistently complain about one thing: the focus on short-term results. They 
may have new ideas or want to make major strategic changes, but the pressure 
to hit the number every quarter makes making big changes challenging.  
Some of them, of course, use this as an excuse for not being able to hit the 
numbers they promised. But many are frustrated—not only do they have to 
contend with a large organization that has evolved over time, but they also 
must deal with public-market individual and institutional investors. Although it 
may sometimes not seem that way, private companies and their management 
teams have a lot more flexibility.  
When Your Company Is the Product 
Ultimately, great liquidity events are built on product-market fit. By this I don’t 
mean building a technology product that users want to use or customers want 
to buy, although that, of course, is critical. I mean your company is the prod-
uct, and the market consists of potential acquirers and the public markets.  
A great liquidity event occurs when the product you’re marketing—your 
company, with its vision, team, products, customers, revenue, growth trajec-
tory, and other assets—matches the needs of a buyer who wants the product 
that is your company.  
Summary 
To achieve a great outcome: 
• 
Plan your way to liquidity. 
• 
Be bought, not sold. 
• 
Get paid for your work. 

C H A P T E R 
12
From Failure, 
Success 
Mistakes: The Stepping Stones to Startup Victory 
Entrepreneurs start companies for many reasons. They can’t or don’t want to 
work for someone else. They enjoy the rush of knowing there’s no one to 
point the finger at but themselves. They crave the attention. They want to be 
rich. Or they want to change the world. This chapter presents some key con-
siderations to think about along the way and inform your decision whether to 
hold or sell. But ultimately, your personal aspirations determine what you 
should do. It’s one thing to read about how to turn failure into success and 
another to experience it first-hand.  
Many Motivations Fuel Entrepreneurship 
The sacrifices involved in doing a startup are significant—long hours, high rates 
of failure, uncertainty about the future, and an extreme emotional roller-
coaster ride. But the rewards are also significant and not just financial. There 
are lots of reasons to start a company. 
You have a personal need you want to solve. You see a gap in the market. You 
want to have an impact. You like building products. You thrive on the dopa-
mine rush when a user or customer tells you about a great experience with 
your product—and you know you personally made it happen.  
You want to understand all aspects of business, from product to user acquisi-
tion to finance. You want to build your own team. You want more control 
over your future. You want to see your name on an IPO prospectus. 

Chapter 12 | From Failure, Success 
166 
You want to be rich. You want to be famous. You can’t get a job. You don’t 
want to work for someone else. You want to get revenge on a previous com-
pany or boss. You hate big-company politics. You find making decisions and 
feeling their immediate impact rewarding. You thrive on challenges. You idolize 
Steve Jobs, Marc Benioff, Bill Gates, and Mark Zuckerberg, to name just a few. 
You’ve always been an entrepreneur and know no other path. 
By building a consumer product, you can solve a problem you face and address 
a personal need—a need you may find that millions of other people have as 
well. If you build a business product, you can solve key customer problems, 
and you have the opportunity to transform and disrupt huge industries.  
It’s incredibly rewarding to build and sell something of value. When I was in 
middle school, I developed shareware programs. These were software pro-
grams that were free to use but required a nominal registration fee to get rid 
of annoying “Please register” reminder messages. I’ll never forget the day I re-
ceived my first check in the mail for $10.  
On a Wednesday evening, after school, my Dad said, “There’s an envelope 
here for you.” He did his best to hide his concern. I opened the envelope.  
“It’s a check! A check for $10!” I exclaimed.  
“For what?” His concern had shifted to surprise. 
“For this software program I wrote!” 
Someone—a person I had never met—considered the software program I built 
useful and sent me money for it. I was beyond elated. The checks started roll-
ing in, first one a week, then two. I deposited them at the bank into my pass-
book savings account. This was a little book the size of a passport where the 
bank recorded every transaction—on paper!  
One day, a few months later, I recall going to the bank with lots of checks in a 
manila envelope. I walked right up to the teller and emptied the checks onto 
the counter, dozens of them for $10 and $12—I had started raising prices 
when I realized I had a good thing going. The teller explained to me that my 
savings account had a limit on the number of transactions I could make per 
month. She sent me over to one of the bank managers (it was a small branch), 
who looked at me with a bemused smile.  
“How can I help you, young man?” 
“I want to deposit these checks.” I once again emptied out the checks, this 
time onto the mahogany desk between me and the manager. 

Why Startups Fail 
167
“Where did you get these?” 
“From the people who sent them to me,” I replied, rather taken aback. It 
seemed obvious to me.  
“And what are they for?” 
“For these software programs I wrote,” I responded, motioning with my hands 
to indicate the (invisible) software programs. I got a highly skeptical look in 
reply. The manager stared at me as if trying to see the software programs.  
Mysterious as the invisible software was, the manager wasn’t about to break 
one of the cardinal rules of banking. If a customer has money to deposit, take 
it!  
“Well, son, if you have checks to deposit, we need to get you set up with a 
checking account.” And the rest, as they say, is history.  
I had made money before, for shoveling snow and doing yard work. But I had 
never been paid repeatedly without having to do more work and with almost 
no physical goods or labor involved. Only years later would I come to appre-
ciate how that translated into high margins, which translated into building a 
valuable business. 
The Myth of Working for Yourself 
I’ll never forget the time one of my employees told me about his wife and his 
mortgage. He was a risk-taker, willing to work at a startup for below-market 
pay for the chance to do something big and game-changing. He put in 14-, 16-, 
and 18-hour days at work. But he was depending on us—the founders—to 
make the right decisions, both strategically and tactically, to build our little 
company into something big.  
Until that point, I had seen startups as a romantic undertaking where we 
worked for ourselves. At that moment I realized we didn’t work for ourselves 
at all. In fact, the bigger our company got, the less we worked for ourselves 
and the more we worked for other people.  
We got to set our own direction, decide what to build and who to build it for, 
and operate out of self-motivation. People are fond of saying that entrepre-
neurs start companies so they can work for themselves. The reality is that as 
entrepreneurs, we don’t truly work for ourselves. We work for our users and 
customers, our employees, and our investors.  

Chapter 12 | From Failure, Success 
168 
Many entrepreneurs become disillusioned about their companies when they 
realize that not only don’t they work for themselves, but they actually have 
many bosses.  
Entrepreneur Y built a web site over a weekend. In a matter of months, he had 
hundreds of thousands of users. Many of his users loved the product, but he 
faced three big challenges.  
First, most users loved the idea of the product, but once they started using it, 
they found it too difficult to use. They stayed for a few days and then disap-
peared. Entrepreneur Y had built the product for himself, was excited by all 
the users coming to his site, but was frustrated by the fact that he now served 
a new master: his users. They didn’t require a lot of the advanced features he 
wanted to build. They wanted a product with fit and finish, a product that was 
polished and easy to use. They wanted someone to respond to their e-mail 
inquiries quickly when they had a question.  
Second, his users didn’t want to pay for the product—but he didn’t want to 
display ads on the site.  
The third challenge Entrepreneur Y faced was that he refused to change how 
the company made decisions. When the company was just a few of people, it 
worked reasonably well for everyone to participate in every decision. But as 
Entrepreneur Y added more engineers, the pace of change ground to a halt 
because decision making was too hard and time-consuming. Every employee in 
the company became Entrepreneur Y’s boss. 
A year later, his company was still in business, but users were struggling with 
the same product issues while the company struggled to put out a new release. 
Entrepreneur Y had always wanted to work for himself—right up until the 
moment he realized that wasn’t as easy a prospect as he’d imagined it to be. 
Friction Leads to Failure 
Many people and their careers suffer from drag—friction that slows them 
down. This is the intangible sense that something isn’t quite right, but they 
aren’t sure what. Friction at work bleeds into other areas of your life, de-
creasing your overall happiness and productivity. You only appreciate how 
much after you begin working on something you really enjoy. As Steve Jobs 
said in his famous Stanford graduation speech, “Don’t settle.” 

Why Startups Fail 
169
Everyone has bad days. But doing unfulfilling work week after week or year 
after year drags you down and prevents you from achieving your potential. 
That seems obvious, but according to a survey by the Conference Board re-
search group, in 2009, only 45% of Americans were satisfied with their jobs. 
What’s more, that satisfaction level has been declining for decades.  
Investors are fond of analyzing the motivations and aspirations of entrepre-
neurs. Venture investors want to believe that an entrepreneur has the aspira-
tion to build a billion-dollar (or bigger) company. But the only thing that really 
matters is your personal aspiration. 
Being an entrepreneur is one of the most fulfilling ways you can spend your 
life. According to Professor of Entrepreneurial Studies Scott Shane at Case 
Western Reserve University, research indicates that “you would have to pay 
an entrepreneur 2.5 times as much for that person to have the same job satis-
faction as an employee that he or she has as an entrepreneur.”1 
Bridge the Value Chasm 
The value chasm is the difficult challenge that founders and CEOs face when 
deciding whether to hold or sell. Is it worth the significant additional risk, time, 
and ownership dilution (due to added capital) required to grow the business, 
or is it better to sell, make potentially life-changing money, and move on? To 
use the language of financial advisors, on a risk-adjusted basis, it makes more 
financial sense to sell.  
Imagine you’re an entrepreneur who has been working on your business for 
three years. You and your two co-founders each own 20% of the company. 
You’ve raised $5 million in venture capital. You have the option to sell today 
for $50 million in cash. To keep things simple, assume $5 million goes to your 
investors first, and the rest is divided up according to ownership. So, you get 
20 percent of $45 million, or $9 million, before taxes. 
Suppose that your alternative is to raise another $95 million and invest 
another 7 years building the business. After raising the $100M total, you and 
your co-founders are left with 5% ownership each. At the end of 10 years, to 
                                                 
1 According to “Why Do People Become Entrepreneurs?” a post by Scott Shane, January 
12, 2009. Shane is a professor of entrepreneurial studies at Case Western Reserve 
University. http://money.usnews.com/money/blogs/outside-voices-small-
business/2009/01/12/why-do-people-become-entrepreneurs. 

Chapter 12 | From Failure, Success 
170 
make the same amount of money, using the same math, your company must be 
worth $280 million, not taking into account the time value of money.2 What’s 
more, during the 7 years, you have to take the risk that the $9M you could 
have taken off the table may go to zero as the market changes, your company 
evolves, or your ownership stake is diluted. Plus, who knows what else you 
could do during those seven years? Perhaps you could build something even 
more valuable or impactful. 
On a risk-adjusted basis, from a purely financial perspective, it makes more 
sense to sell. Granted, you’re giving up the opportunity to make even more 
money if your company goes on to become worth billions. But by selling, 
you’re taking potentially life-changing money off the table. 
Starting a company isn’t an inherently rational exercise! You have to be more 
than a little crazy to start a company, given the odds, challenges, and alterna-
tives. You must, as one investor friend of mine likes to put it, “suspend 
disbelief.” 
That’s why, when entrepreneurs and CEOs ask me for input on whether they 
should hold or sell, I tell them it’s an intensely personal decision. It all comes 
back to your motivation and aspiration, to the heart of why you decided to 
become an entrepreneur to begin with—to run your own company, to change 
the world, and to realize your vision.  
Personal Health 
No book on startup failure would be complete without at least a few words 
on entrepreneur health. At my first startup, we had what we referred to as 
“the startup diet.” This entailed ordering in pizza or grabbing takeout night af-
ter night, working out rarely if ever, and getting minimal sleep. Our poor 
health management took a toll in terms of both our personal health and prod-
uctivity. We would find ourselves in meetings too exhausted to be productive.  
Entrepreneur health deteriorates physically, emotionally, and psychologically. 
Long hours, constant stress, and poor dietary and sleep habits will wear any-
one down. It may not seem as though taking time out for a run, gym session, 
                                                 
2 The time value of money takes into account how much that money would have been 
worth had you been able to invest it over the same period of time—in this case, the cost of 
not having been paid the $9M seven years earlier, which you could have then invested to 
make more money. 

Why Startups Fail 
171
or walk is the best use of time when customers are e-mailing, the phone is 
ringing off the hook, and a product update needs to be deployed.  
But taking time out—even briefly—for physical and psychological fitness is 
critical to startup success. Not only do you end up feeling good, but a clear 
mind also leads you to better insights and better decisions. As legendary 
mountaineer Lou Whittaker once put it, investing in health and fitness is like 
making a deposit at the bank—you have to do it early so you can withdraw 
later when you need it.  
Ways to Avoid Failure 
This book has explored many of the reasons for startup failure. In the process, 
you’ve gone from taking the big leap, to building a great product and finding 
product-market fit, to scaling your company.  
As you think about taking the leap or try to figure out how to change so you 
can scale your company after having been at it for a few years, here are some 
of the key questions to ask yourself. 
Do You Deeply Understand Your Target 
Market? 
Your target market can be yourself—especially if you’re building a consumer 
product—or it can be a specific industry if you’re building a business-to-
business (B2B) product. Of course, one of the great appeals of building a con-
sumer product is that you know the target market intimately!  
If you’re building a B2B product, you must know the target market equally 
well—either because you’ve come from the industry or because you’ve studied 
it. Often, coming from outside the industry makes it easier to be disruptive and 
transformative. But that means you need to understand the existing market 
limitations, customer requirements, and ecosystem.  
Lots of entrepreneurs have failed because they didn’t understand their mar-
kets. Some could never get traction because gorillas—behemoths who had 
been around for years—stood in their way, and they failed to find ways to dis-
rupt them. The entrepreneurs didn’t understand the strengths and weaknesses 
of existing players, both from a product and a go-to-market standpoint. Others 
never figured out what would make their product a must-have.  

Chapter 12 | From Failure, Success 
172 
How Large Is the Market?  
You may be perfectly happy building a product for a market of one—yourself. 
But if you want to have a bigger impact, need to generate revenue (directly or 
through a liquidity event), or both, this question matters.  
For consumer Internet companies, the market is, by nature, big—potentially 
every person on Earth. The challenge is building something a very large 
number of people want and then reaching them. Consumer companies tend to 
be binary—lots of people love the product, or they don’t.  
For B2B companies, market evaluation and segmentation matter much more. 
It’s easy to throw around big numbers, but the reality is that in a big market 
you have to start somewhere specific. “We’re going to disrupt a $20B market” 
is a nice concept, but it’s not actionable. You need to have specific segments in 
mind and understand them in detail.  
Can You Reach the Market Efficiently?  
Or, put another way, “What’s your go-to-market strategy?” As I’ve discussed, 
in the end it all comes down to profitable acquisition and retention.  
You may have a big market, but if that market is millions of small businesses 
with limited budgets, for example, you must have a strategy for reaching them 
efficiently—unless you plan to knock on 10 million doors yourself!  
Your approach can be purely viral or word of mouth—get existing users to 
recruit new ones. Or you can buy ads or hire a huge telesales force. Whatever 
the case, having a plan for how to reach the market is critical, as is a way to 
measure what’s working and what’s not. 
Do You Control Your Destiny?  
I have met with countless entrepreneurs who talked about needing just one big 
deal for their company to work. Often that deal is with another large com-
pany, typically one that already has an efficient way to reach the market. Those 
entrepreneurs end up waiting a very, very long time. Plus, those who do get 
the one big deal frequently end up so dependent on it that they have difficulty 
broadening and scaling their businesses.  
Entrepreneur X spent months trying to having meetings with the executives at 
a key partner. He believed that eventually the big company would begin work-

Why Startups Fail 
173
ing with him. The partner’s employees took meetings and picked his brain, but 
he never made any business progress.  
Eventually, the partner inked a big distribution deal with another company—
headed by a friend of the partner’s CEO. Entrepreneur X was incredulous. But 
to his credit, after recovering from his surprise, he admitted that the partner 
wasn’t going to establish a business relationship with his company any time 
soon. He changed his distribution strategy. Had he not done so, his company 
would have gone out of business. 
Do You Have Product Vision?  
Some entrepreneurs start out with a product vision and then, when they real-
ize no one wants their product, they fold like cheap lawn chairs. Some compa-
nies lose their product vision when their founders leave or are fired. You can 
hire for almost every other function—but not product vision. 
Can You Build a Great Product?  
Many products fail because they’re terrible. They’re designed poorly. They’re 
too hard to use. They break. They’re not self-explanatory. They’re so complex 
that they’re difficult to build and maintain.  
Fortunately, today it’s easy to get user feedback on your product. Internet 
services exist that for a few bucks let you have a user try your product and 
provide recorded feedback as they do so. There is nothing like seeing some-
one else try to use a product you’ve built. Over time, we all find workarounds 
for little things that don’t work in our own products. But new users don’t. 
They’re honest about their product experience—and watching them use your 
product will cause you to be honest with yourself. Have strong opinions about 
what makes products great. Use those products, and internalize what you love 
about them.  
Are You Relentless in Your Pursuit of Product-
Market Fit?  
This means not spending money, not scaling up, and not growing your organi-
zation and getting set on a certain path until you have product-market fit. If 
you’re three or four years into building your company and things seem to be 

Chapter 12 | From Failure, Success 
174 
stagnant, chances are you don’t have product-market fit. You may have some 
users, but you haven’t found a big market that must have your product.  
If you’ve turned over your management team several times and still aren’t 
growing the way you want to, there’s a chance it could be execution failure. 
But it’s more likely a lack of product-market fit. Impatience is often an asset for 
startups—but not when it comes to scaling before you have product-market 
fit. Find product-fit before all else. 
Can You Execute?  
A lot of people have ideas for what they want to build. Few turn those into 
reality. Most people fail to get started. Of those who do begin, many grow 
bored or frustrated with the details required to succeed.  
Executing means building. It means recruiting a team, putting together enough 
capital to build something, and selling your vision to others. It means scaling up 
personally and organizationally as your company grows. It means a relentless 
focus on delighting users and customers. It means not losing sight of product 
greatness even as sales, marketing, and finance become bigger and bigger parts 
of your business. 
Are You Persistent?  
When I talk with investors about the common characteristics that make up 
winning companies, time and again I hear, “great teams.” When I press on what 
makes a great team, I consistently hear two things. First, great teams find great 
markets. And second, even—or especially—in the face of great adversity, 
problems, and challenges, great teams are persistent in their quest for success. 
Are You Willing to Change Your Mind?  
At the same time, the art of being an entrepreneur is all about having a thesis, 
testing that thesis, and then being willing to change your mind if your thesis is 
wrong. Persistence is critical to entrepreneurial success, but stubbornness can 
kill you. Finding the balance is what makes entrepreneurship an art, not a 
science. 

Why Startups Fail 
175
Are You Crazy?  
If your answer to this is “No way,” then you’re not an entrepreneur. I don’t 
mean crazy in a bad way—I mean crazy enough to start a company, to make 
decisions that fly in the face of modern economic theory about risk-adjusted 
returns, and to take actions that go against the herd and the common wisdom. 
Do You Simplify??  
Some people make things simpler, while others make them more complex. 
Great entrepreneurs simplify.  
If you can’t communicate simply and clearly, you can’t recruit, raise capital, or 
sell. Simplification leads to the best visions, the best products, and the highest 
likelihood of success. If you often find yourself being misunderstood or coming 
out of meetings thinking you could have communicated better, get help. 
Who’s Your Mentor?  
You don’t always begin with a great mentor. Many outstanding entrepreneurs 
don’t know great mentors—or even know what a great mentor looks like—
when they’re starting out. Mentors come in many different forms: other 
founders, investors, board members, business partners, and, of course, family, 
friends, and personal relationships. 
The key is to keep your eyes open along the way and acquire and surround 
yourself with great mentors as you go along.  
Fail Fast 
Most startups fail. America, and Silicon Valley in particular, is one of the few 
places where taking risk—whether it results in success or failure—is looked 
on positively. Although history is often rewritten to make it look like a suc-
cessful entrepreneur tried one thing and it worked from the get-go, most en-
trepreneurs try multiple ideas and products before they hit the right one. Put 
another way, they fail repeatedly until they succeed. The successful ones con-
serve capital and keep their organizations small until they find product-market 
fit. Then they scale.  

Chapter 12 | From Failure, Success 
176 
Most entrepreneurs have come closer than they care to admit to bankruptcy 
due to lack of product-market fit, failure to execute, or lack of capital.  
Time is limited. Get focused. Fail fast.  
Summary 
When you read in TechCrunch, VentureBeat, and other news outlets about start-
ups raising hundreds of millions of dollars at multi-billion dollar valuations, 
founders cashing out millions before their companies are acquired or go public, 
and companies getting to tens of millions of paying users in just a few years, 
keep in mind that this represents a very small minority of all startups. 
The reality is that building a company from nothing into something valuable is a 
marathon, not a sprint. During that marathon, a lot can go wrong—product 
challenges, market changes, and team issues. Fortunately, America, and Silicon 
Valley in particular, smiles on risk raking, rather than frowning on it. By learn-
ing from the lessons in this book, you can avoid the key causes of failure and 
lead your startup to success. 

I N D E X 
177 
I 
Index 
 
A 
Account executives (AEs), 64 
Acquirer strategic shift, 156–157 
Acquisitions, 58–59, 155–159 
acquirer strategic shift, 156–157 
due-diligence issues, 159 
expectation mismatch, 157–158 
hiring employees, 158–159 
lack of chemistry, 158 
lack of competitive bidding 
situation, 158 
lack of relationship, 156 
networking, 155–156 
selling, 155 
Admiral Greer, 142 
AdWords, 80 
AEs. See Account executives 
Airbnb, 96 
Amazon, 4, 18, 49, 61, 65, 66, 72, 
75 
Amazon.com, 78, 102 
Android, 9, 23, 82, 128 
Angel investment, 104 
Angel investors, 103, 104, 107, 
108, 116, 122, 136 
Anti-spam products, 22 
APIs. See Application programming 
interfaces 
Apple, 4, 9, 23–25, 72–74, 125, 
126, 130, 135 
Apple App Store, 61, 67 
Apple Newton, 23, 25 
Apple Super Bowl (1984), 78 
Application programming 
interfaces (APIs), 82 
Assisted-viral products, 23 
Audience, communication with, 
146–147 
B 
Bad communication, 87 
Bad contracts, 69 
Bad market, 6–7 
Bad news, delivery of, 93–94 
Bad products, 15–27 
building incredible technology, 
17–18 
failure to focus, 18–20 
friction to achieve adoption, 20 
magic of product chemistry, 23–
24 

Index 
178 
product blindness, 15–17 
product delivery, 24–26 
prototype products, 26 
simple, universal and viral 
products, 22–23 
users of product, 21–22 
Bad sales process, 69–70 
Ballmer, Steve, 120 
B2B. See Business-to-business 
company 
Benioff, Marc, 30, 31, 166 
Bezos, Jeff, 78, 102, 107 
BHAG. See Big Hairy Audacious 
Goal 
Bias, fighting, 62 
Big Hairy Audacious Goal (BHAG), 
78, 89 
Big Idea, The, 31 
Big-idea company, building, 101–
103 
Big markets, 4–5 
Blank, Steve, 8 
Board meetings, managing, 91–93 
Bootstrapped entrepreneurs, 116 
Box.net, 73 
Brand identity, 82–83 
Brin, Sergei, 120 
Business-to-business (B2B) 
company, 64, 172 
Buzz, 78–79 
C 
Capital, invested, 162 
Capital E, entrepreneur with, 29–
30 
Capitalization, 11–12 
Capital markets, 58 
Capital planning model (CPM), 150 
Cash management, 115–118 
debt, 117–118 
product-market fit, cash flows 
from, 115–118 
Cash out date, 122 
CEO and acquirers, lack of 
chemistry, 158 
Cialdini, Robert, 76 
CityVille, 5 
CLV. See Customer lifetime value 
Collins, Jim, 78 
Communication, 87–98 
with audience, 146–147 
bad news delivery, 93–94 
with customers, 95–96 
delivering good news, 94 
expectations, 89–90 
failure, 97–98 
managing board meetings, 91–
93 
success, 97–98 
success story, 96–97 
with team, 94–95 
vision, 87–88 
Company’s cost per click (CPC), 57–
58 
Competitive bidding situation, 158 
Consumer company, valuation of, 
53 
Content-hosting solution, 57 
COO, hiring, 120, 121 
Cook, Scott, 107 
Cook, Tim, 120 
Cost per acquisition (CPA), 57–58 
CPA. See Cost per acquisition 
CPC. See Company’s cost per click 
CPM. See Capital planning model 

Why Startups Fail 
179
CRM. See Customer relationship 
management 
Customer financing, 107–108 
Customer lifetime value (CLV), 58–
60 
Customer relationship 
management (CRM), 79 
Customers, communication with, 
95–96 
D 
D. E. Shaw & Co, 78 
Deal failure, 158 
Debt, cash management, 117–118 
Dell, Michael, 30 
Demand generation, 61 
Destiny control, 106–108 
customer financing, 107–108 
investors, 107 
nights and weekends plan, 107 
rent and ramen plan, 106 
Direction, changing, 10 
Dropbox, 22, 66, 73, 76 
Due diligence, 148, 159 
Duffield, Dave, 35 
E 
EA. See Electronic Arts 
Early-adopter program, 17 
Early execution vs. executing at 
scale, 118–119 
Earn-outs, 160 
eBay, 12, 102, 103 
Economies of scale, 4 
Electronic Arts (EA), 5 
E-mail–based payments, 12 
Employees, hiring, 158–159 
Entrepreneur(s), 29–41 
acting like entrepreneur, 38 
with capital E, 29–30 
communicating point of view, 
97 
goal of, 4 
hiring for operations, 35–36 
hiring great people, 36–37 
Marc Benioff, 30–31 
personal health, 170–171 
product selection, 31–32 
quest, 31 
repeated failure, 40–41 
starting vs. leading, 39–40 
success story, 96–97 
targetting small markets, 5 
teams without clear vision, 32–
33 
users, importance of, 33–35 
weaknesses, improving on, 38–
39 
Entrepreneurship, motivations, 
165–167 
Equivalent, in business context, 22 
Excite, 125 
Executing at scale, 118–119 
Execution, 111–131, 174 
cash management, 115–118 
debt, 117–118 
product-market fit, cash 
flows from, 115–118 
early execution vs. executing at 
scale, 118–119 
failure, 111–112 
first-mover advantage, myth of, 
124–125 
fluid organizations, 112–113 
goal, 123–124 
hiring, 119–122 

Index 
180 
knowing numbers, 122–123 
late entrants, 125–126 
market, outruns, 129–131 
market leader, 126–129 
under-resourced/over-
resourced, 113–115 
Expectation mismatch, 157–158 
F 
Facebook, 3–6, 18, 20, 21, 39, 66, 
75, 76, 79, 82, 103, 120, 
124, 125, 135 
Failing fast, great startup, 63 
Farming user base, 67 
File-sharing market, 72 
Financial markets, 103 
First-mover advantage, myth of, 
124–125 
Fluid organizations, startups, 112–
113 
Founder liquidity, 162 
Framing, 143–145 
Freemium model, 64–66 
Friendster, 26, 125 
G 
Gates, Bill, 120, 166 
Gerstner, Lou, 130 
Getting started, 99–110 
big-idea company, 101–103 
destiny control, 106–108 
location, 109–110 
making the leap, 99–101 
surviving lack of capital, 103–
106 
team building, 108 
users and customers, 108–109 
Good news, delivery of, 94 
Good to Great, 78 
Google, 4, 9, 18, 39, 72, 75, 79, 
103, 120, 124–126, 135 
Google AdWords, 47, 58, 61, 80 
Great design, 24 
Great liquidity events, 163 
Great marketing, 83 
Great operators, 120 
Great people, hiring, 36–37 
Great product-market fit, 9 
Great product(s), 27 
bad market, 6–7 
building, 173 
design, 24 
Great wave to ride, 5–6 
Groupon, 51 
Grove, Andy, 96 
H 
Healthcare startups, 8 
Hiring, from companies, 119 
Hunt for Red October, The, 142 
I 
IBM, 12, 130 
Inability to scale, 36 
Ineffective sales people, 68 
Influence: The Psychology of 
Persuasion, 76 
Infographics, 81 
Initial public offerings (IPOs), 163 
Insiders, 162 
Institutional buyers, 153 
Intel, 23 
Interim liquidity, 162 
Internet, 21 
Intuit, 12, 107 
 

Why Startups Fail 
181
Investment(s) 
decisions, 149 
opportunity and risk, 52–53 
process, 138–139 
Investor(s), 107 
lump failures, 71–73 
motivations, 137–138 
vision of, 139–141 
Invisible startups, 71–83 
brand, 82–83 
buzz, 78–79 
investors lump failures, 71–73 
mobile, 81–82 
product innovation, 73–75 
search, 79–81 
social media, 77–78 
viral marketing, 75–76 
iPhone, 9, 23, 61, 82, 128 
IPO. See Initial public offerings 
J 
Jobs, Steve, 78, 101, 120, 166, 168 
K 
Keynote Mobile Solutions, 102 
Klaff, Oren, 143 
L 
Leading vs. starting, 39–40 
Life-science company, 8 
LinkedIn, 23, 66, 75, 76, 136 
Liquidity management, 153–163 
acquisitions, 155–159 
deals, 159–160 
events, 153–155 
great liquidity events, 163 
IPOs, 163 
payment, 160–161 
secondary markets and interim 
liquidity, 162 
M 
Mad Men, 61 
Main Street, 53 
Market(s) 
efficiency, 172 
importance of, 52 
leadership, 126–129 
reaching, 9–10 
size, 172 
Marketing, spending money on, 
47–48 
Marquee investors, 136 
Mass market, 53 
Media sharing, 76 
Memorandum of understanding 
(MOU), 159 
Mentors, 175 
Microsoft, 5, 12, 72, 74 
Mobile, 81–82 
Momentum investors, 136 
Monetization, 8, 53 
Money, raising, 103–106 
Money lost on sales, 57–70 
acquisition, 58–59 
CPA, 57–58 
CPC, 57–58 
customer lifetime value, 59–60 
inherent bias, 61–62 
purchase of products, 60–61 
sales engine, 68–70 
sales leverage, 63–68 
sales team turnover, 62–63 
 
 

Index 
182 
Motivations 
fueling entrepreneurship, 165–
167 
investor, 137–138 
MOU. See Memorandum of 
understanding 
Murdoch, Rupert, 125 
Musk, Elon, 101 
MySpace, 68, 125 
N 
Net adoption curve, 50 
Net Promoter Score (NPS), 54–55 
Networking, 155–156 
News Corp, 125 
New York Times, 81 
Nights and weekends plan, 107 
NPS. See Net Promoter Score 
O 
oDesk, 81, 82, 106 
Omidyar, Pierre, 102, 103 
Online advertising, 57 
Over-resourced, startups, 113–115 
P, Q 
Page, Larry, 120 
Palm Pilots, 12 
Pandora, 22, 82 
Partnering, sales leverage, 67 
Partner meetings, 150–151 
Partnerships, 120, 150 
PayPal, 12 
PeopleSoft, 35 
Personal health, of entrepreneur, 
170–171 
Pincus, Marc, 5, 102, 103 
Pitch Anything, 143 
Pitches, 135–151 
due diligence, 148 
evaluation, 141–142 
investor motivations, 137–138 
partner meetings, 150–151 
perfection, 142 
framing, 143–145 
presentation failure, 145 
audience, connecting with, 
146–147 
be succinct, 147–148 
process matters, 138–139 
right investors, 135–136 
spell it out, 141 
sponsor, supporting, 149 
time consuming, 136–137 
vision, 139–141 
Pivoting, 10–12, 70 
Poor product-market fit, 3–13 
big markets, 4–5 
capitalizing, 11–12 
failure, 12–13 
finding fit, 8–9 
great product, bad market, 6–7 
great wave to ride, 5–6 
market, reaching, 9–10 
market sucess, 12–13 
pivoting, 10–11 
pivots that worked, 12 
product-market fit, 3–4 
structural issues, 8 
Porras, Jerry, 78 
Premature scaling, 123 
Pre-money valuation, 139 
Presentation failure, 145 
audience, connecting with, 
146–147 
be succinct, 147–148 

Why Startups Fail 
183
Pricing, mismatched, 69 
Private markets, 104 
Product(s) 
blindness, 15–17 
chemistry, 23–24 
delivery, 24–26 
innovation, 21, 73–75 
purchase of, 60–61 
scaling, 26 
selection, 31–32 
usage, 16 
users of, 21–22 
vision, 173 
visionaries, 120 
Product-market fit, 3–4, 173–174 
cash flows from, 118 
problem, 48–49 
Profit-based earn-out goals, 161 
Promoters, 55–56 
Prototype products, 26 
Public markets, 104 
Public-market stocks, 162 
R 
Real cost of spending, 45–47 
Rent and ramen plan, 106 
Repeatable, profitable acquisition 
mechanism, 123–124 
Right investors, 135–136 
Robertson, Niel, 119 
Ryan, Jack, 142 
S 
SaaS. See Software as a Service 
Saban, Nick, 18 
Sales and marketing, investment 
in, 45–56 
creating value, 51 
NPS, 54–55 
opportunity and risk involved, 
52–53 
poor execution, 48–49 
promoters, 55–56 
real cost of spending, 45–47 
spending money on marketing, 
47–48 
traction curve, 49–51 
Sales engine, clogging up, 68–70 
bad contracts, 69 
bad sales process, 69–70 
ineffective sales people, 68 
mismatched pricing, 69 
Sales engineers (SEs), 64 
Sales-execution problem, 61–62 
Salesforce, 75 
Salesforce.com, 4, 20, 30, 31, 67, 
79 
Sales Learning Curve (SLC), 49, 50, 
52 
Sales leverage, 63–68 
freemium model, 64–66 
monetizing users, 67–68 
partnering, 67 
software delivery, 64 
traditional way, 63–64 
word of mouth, 66–67 
zero-cost user acquisition, 66 
Sales team turnover, 62–63 
Sandberg, Sheryl, 120 
Schmidt, Eric, 120 
Search engine marketing (SEM), 79 
Search engine optimization (SEO), 
57, 79 
Secondary markets and interim 
liquidity, 162 

Index 
184 
SecondMarket, 162 
Self-motivation, 100, 167–168 
Selling, 155 
SEM. See Search engine marketing 
SEO. See Search engine 
optimization 
SEs. See Sales engineers 
Shane, Scott, 169 
SharesPost, 162 
Siebel, 20 
Simple products, 22–23 
SLC. See Sales Learning Curve 
Small and medium businesses 
(SMBs), 80 
Social gaming, 5 
Social media, 77–78 
Software as a Service (SaaS), 64 
Sony, 5 
Sponsor, supporting, 149 
Starting vs. leading, 39–40 
Startup diet, the, 170 
Startup Genome Project, 123 
Startup’s success, 4, 40 
Stepping stones, to startup victory, 
165–176 
failure, avoiding, 171–175 
building great product, 173 
craziness, 175 
destiny control, 172–173 
execution, 174 
great mentor, 175 
market efficiency, 172 
market size, 172 
persistence, 174 
product-market fit, 173–174 
product vision, 173 
simplification, 175 
stubbornness, 174 
target market, 171 
willingness to change mind, 
174 
fast failure, 175–176 
friction leading to failure, 168–
169 
motivations, 165–167 
myth of working, 167–168 
personal health, 170–171 
value chasm, 169–170 
Structural issues, product-market 
fit, 8 
Sunk costs, 124 
T 
Target market, 9, 12, 171 
Team building, 108 
Team communication, 94–95 
Team expectations, 89–90 
TechCrunch, 176 
Technology, building, 17–18 
Timeshare, 6 
Time value of money, 170 
Town Hall, 5 
Traction curve, 49–51 
Traditional way, sales leverage, 63–
64 
Trickle-down effect, 7 
TripAdvisor, 61 
Trust and Safety Center, 96 
Twitter, 22 
U 
Under-resourced, startups, 113–
115 
“United Breaks Guitars”, 73 
Universal products, 22–23 
Use case, 16 

Why Startups Fail 
185
Users 
and customers, 108–109 
importance of, 33–35 
monetizing, 67–68 
V 
Value chasm, 169–170 
Venture-backed company, 
challenges in, 18 
Venture-backed entrepreneurs, 
115 
Venture funds, 105 
Venture investment, 51, 104 
Venture investors, 106, 122, 169 
VentureBeat, 176 
Viral marketing, 22, 75–76 
Viral products, 22–23 
Virtual goods, purchase of, 6 
Vision 
communication, 87–88 
of investors, 139–141 
 
vWorker, 82, 106 
W, X 
Walmart, 4 
Warm coffee comfort problem, 
146 
Welch, Jack, 130 
Whittaker, Lou, 171 
Wireless carriers, 9 
Word of mouth, 66–67 
Y 
Yahoo, 125 
Yelp, 61 
YouTube, 75, 77 
Z 
Zappos, 66, 67, 82 
Zero-cost user acquisition, 66 
Zuckerberg, Mark, 120, 166 
Zynga, 3, 5, 6, 21, 74, 102
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

