Why you need
IMPROVED 
OPERATIONAL 
INTELLIGENCE 
for 
Industry Perspective

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
Today, a big data solution offers hope for governments to unlock potential from all the data they collect, 
store and manage. Through better data management, governments can re-imagine their business 
processes. At a time when public sector resources and budgets are shrinking and citizens are demanding 
improved services, big data promises much needed relief for government agencies. 
Now is the time for agencies to capitalize on their data. For years, government has been developing data 
lakes, or locations where they aggregate and store massive amounts of data they collect, all resting on 
the promise that someday the information will be valuable. 
That day is today. The technology now exists to quickly process and analyze data. Organizations can 
finally derive value from their data lakes as well as from their machine data, or data that is created 
without the intervention of humans, from transactions, APIs, call centers, sensors, and more. Machine 
data is growing at an exponential rate, and requires organizations to take a new approach to manage all 
the information and extract value. 
In this industry perspective, we will provide an overview of how big data is reshaping government, the 
challenges agencies face in extracting value from this information, and ways to work around common big 
data roadblocks. 
We will also highlight how Splunk, an operational intelligence company for government, is helping 
government organizations leverage their data in new ways. Specifically, this report will:
•	
Provide an overview of the current landscape for big data
•	
Explain how Splunk can help agencies unlock new value from their information
•	
Describe what machine data is and the role it plays for big data programs
•	
Highlight an interview with William Von Alt, Sales Engineering Manager at Splunk
•	
Show how big data can mitigate the risks of insider threats
Public sector managers now realize that their data has high potential to transform their business, and 
they are ready to turn their data into insights. 
“There is a lot of value that could be extracted from this data, and agencies are trying to figure out where 
the value is and how to gain knowledge from the information,” said William Von Alt, Sales Engineering 
Manager at Splunk.
For government to reach the goals of their complex missions, they must learn to extract knowledge from 
their data to find new trends, patterns and identify business value from information. But in order to get 
there, agencies must first understand what big data is, and how to overcome some common challenges.
Government agencies are creating more data than ever before, yet they often fail to 
capitalize on all of the information they’re collecting. A recent Forrester study found that 
organizations are only analyzing 12 percent of their data, leaving the rest to sit idle, never 
to be capitalized for better decision-making. 
1 // Industry Perspective

Understanding the 
Big Data Landscape
One of the most essential things to remember about big data is 
that the definition will continue to evolve. 
AS AGENCIES CONTINUE TO COLLECT MORE DATA, 
WHAT IS CONSIDERED BIG TODAY MIGHT BE SMALL 
TOMORROW. SO AGENCIES MUST NOT FOCUS SOLELY 
ON THE SIZE OF THEIR DATA, BUT RATHER, WHAT 
THEY CAN DO WITH IT. 
The promise of big data lies in its ability to unlock new insights, 
trends and patterns from your information to drive improved 
business and mission outcomes. In order to do that, agencies must 
overcome one of the most common barriers of big data: selecting 
the right problem to solve. 
“Sometimes governments don’t know where to begin, and how to 
use the data they have at their disposal,” said Von Alt. “Governments 
are trying to figure out how to integrate their many data sources 
and query that data to extract value. This is so they can know what 
business or mission insights they should be getting out of their data.”
Many organizations still struggle to define big data, especially in the 
context of what a big data solution can do to transform their agency. 
To make the task of characterizing data even more challenging, 
every agency, city and municipality defines big data differently. Due 
to various missions and organizational needs, how the Department 
of Defense (DoD) defines big data is different than Department of 
Commerce, and how the City of Hartford is going to describe big data 
is different than how Baltimore County will. 
But there are some commonalities across governments, like the four 
Vs of big data: 
VOLUME
VELOCITY
VARIETY
VARIABILITY
The quantity of data that your agency collects. 
The speed at which data is created.
The various data types that your agency has 
access to.
The authoritative nature of government data.
VOLUME
VELOCITY
VARIETY
VARIABILITY
Why You Need Improved Operational Intelligence for Big Data // 2

What is Machine Data?
Understanding machine data is a critical component to developing your big data strategy. Machine data 
is growing faster than any kind of data, and must be harnessed to maximize value from the information 
your agency creates. Machine data is created from the various ways you engage with citizens and key 
stakeholders. So any transactions that are made — application data, call center records or sensor data 
from systems — are all commonly referred to as machine data. 
Machine data often arrives in ways that traditional government infrastructure were not designed to 
handle. So for government agencies to leverage the information, they need a new way to collect, store 
and manage machine data. That’s where Splunk comes into play to help you understand all your data and 
drive improved processes. 
Splunk allows you to collect all your machine data, from wherever it is created. You can also query, 
monitor and conduct analysis on your information in real time. This will allow you to gain new operational 
intelligence into your business. Splunk provides a chart that highlights some of the different kinds 
of machine data. 


Every environment has its own unique footprint of machine data. Here are a few examples:
As governments continue to deploy big data, and look for new 
ways to leverage information, Von Alt believes that industry needs 
to create not just the technical components for the public sector, 
but also work diligently to educate customers on the power of 
information and lead them down a path towards success. 
 “What Splunk aims to do is to make the challenges of big data more 
manageable, helping lead the customers down the path of here’s 
what you need to do and here’s how we can help you accomplish 
that technically,” said Von Alt. 
Another important element for success in big data is that you must 
be able to collect and manage all data, regardless of format. “You 
don’t want to have a business question or a security question in 
your organization and find out after the fact that you can’t answer 
it because you have discarded the data point that contained the 
answer,” said Von Alt. 
“Often you don’t know in advance what questions you will have to ask 
of your data, so it is impossible to determine in advance what data is 
relevant to you, or which will be important later on,” he added. 
SPLUNK SOFTWARE OPERATES AS AN OPERATIONAL 
INTELLIGENCE PLATFORM, AND WITH IT, ORGANIZATIONS 
CAN BEGIN TO ASK QUESTIONS ABOUT THEIR DATA THEY 
PREVIOUSLY COULD NOT. 
However, if data is removed, deleted or not consolidated, valuable 
insights might be missed. 
 “We help our customers determine which data is very low return 
on investment, but prior to that, you shouldn’t take that data off the 
table. You just don’t know what might be valuable, and so trying to 
retain as much data as possible is key,” said Von Alt. 
DATA TYPE
WHERE TO FIND IT
WHAT IT CAN TELL YOU
User activity, fraud detection, application performance


Customer activity across channels, purchases, account 
changes, trouble reports
Billing, revenue assurance, customer assurance, partner 
settlements, marketing intelligence
Local log files, log4j, log4net, 
Weblogic, WebSphere, JBoss, 
.NET, PHP
Business process 
management logs
Call detail records (CDRs), 
charging data records, 
event data records logged 
by telecoms and network 
switches
Application Logs

Business Process Logs

Call Detail Records
3 // Industry Perspective

DATA TYPE
WHERE TO FIND IT
WHAT IT CAN TELL YOU
Usability analysis, digital marketing and general research

How an infrastructure has been set up, debugging failures, 
backdoor attacks, time bombs
How database data was modified over time and who made 
the changes
Monitoring and auditing read access to sensitive data

Management data and log events



Debug problems in complex applications and as the 
backbone of logging architectures for applications
Troubleshooting, analyzing trends to discover latent issues 
and investigating security incidents




Performance degradation, timeouts, bottlenecks or 
suspicious activity that indicates that the network may be 
compromised or the object of a remote attack

Identify trends, patterns, anomalies in the SCADA 
infrastructure and used to drive customer value
Water level monitoring, machine health monitoring and 
smart home monitoring



Troubleshooting, analysis, security auditing

Web analytics reports for marketing


Monitor and investigate terms of service and the data 
leakage incidents

Detect problems with business critical applications, 
security information and usage patterns.
Proactively monitor the performance and availability of 
applications, end-user experiences, incident investigations, 
networks, threat detection, monitoring and compliance
Web server, routers, proxy 
servers, ad servers
System configuration files

Database log files, audit tables

Sensitive data stored in shared 
filesystems
Checkpoint firewalls log via the 
OPSEC Log Export API (OPSEC 
LEA) and other vendor specific 
APIs from VMware and Citrix
JMS, RabbitMQ, and AquaLogic

CPU and memory utilization 
and status information using 
command-line utilities like ps 
and iostat on Unix and Linux 
and performance monitor 
on Windows
tcpdump and tcpflow, which 
generate pcap or flow data and 
other useful packet-level and 
session-level information
Supervisory Control and Data 
Acquisition (SCADA)
Sensor devices generating 
data based on monitoring 
environmental conditions, such 
as temperature, sound, pressure, 
power, water levels
Syslogs from your routers, 
switches and network devices
Web access logs report every 
request processed by a web 
server
Web proxies log every web 
request made by users through 
the proxy
Windows application, security 
and system event logs
DNS lookups and records, 
protocol level information 
including headers, content and 
flow records
Clickstream Data

Configuration Files

Database Audit Logs

Filesystem Audit Logs

Management and 
Logging APIs


Message Queues

Operating System Metrics, 
Status and Diagnostic 
Commands



Packet/Flow Data



SCADA Data

Sensor Data




Syslog

Web Access Logs


Web Proxy Logs


Windows Events

Wire Data
Examples cont’d.
Why You Need Improved Operational Intelligence for Big Data // 4

Mitigating Insider Threats 
With Big Data
INSIDER THREATS PRESENT A UNIQUE CHALLENGE 
TO GOVERNMENT AGENCIES, IN PART BECAUSE WHAT 
MAY BE NORMAL ACTIVITY FOR ONE EMPLOYEE 
COULD BE ABNORMAL FOR ANOTHER. 
In large organizations, this problem only grows in scope, 
making it very difficult to prevent and stop a potential threat. 
But what is common across all activities is that when an insider 
threat strikes, there was some kind of anomalous activity, 
where someone was accessing information or conducting 
activities that are outside the scope of their work. 
To help prevent insider threats, Splunk software leverages data 
from many sources — anything from server logs, files, workstation 
data, network data, and the entire universe of machine data. Splunk 
can then use that information to create a baseline of what looks 
normal within an organization. They can assess each user and 
every IP address to predict and identify events that are outliers. 
By using this technology, agencies can instantly know what activities 
are abnormal based on historical behavior. The behavior may not 
be specifically illegal or bad, but certainly something that is different 
outside normal business operations for an individual. With Splunk 
technology, this process requires no coding, and no establishing of 
pre-determined conditions to look for and report on. The software 
can provide a unique view across the data and enable the orgnization 
to spot abnormalities in behavior, providing managers new insights 
and tools they previously did not have. Once an abnormal activity 
takes place, the Splunk system automatically alerts administrators. 
This can keep agencies’ confidential data more secure, and 
mitigates the impact of insider threats with early detection. 
 “You can only address insider threats through big data, 
because otherwise you would have a traditional database 
management system that stores very specific data, and then 
determine the data needed, identify what is abnormal activity, 
and have specific rules or signatures or program language to 
look for certain events. With Splunk you avoid that process, 
because you look across all sources. Agencies are also looking 
across historical trends and norms in real time, so you will 
know right away that something doesn’t look quite right.” 
How Splunk Can Help
“Our mission for years has been to break down data silos 
and aggregate information together,” said Von Alt. 
Splunk software enables agencies to identify real-time 
insights from their machine data, and helps them to 
unlock the value of big data. Splunk also provides:
•	
Collection and indexing of machine data from any source
•	
Analysis of real-time and historical data with search 
language processing
•	
Real-time analytics and monitoring that send alerts 
when abnormalities occur
•	
Dashboards and custom views for users
•	
Role-based security and access control
•	
A platform to build big data applications
Many government agencies have data stored in a number of 
different places, and are beginning to understand that they must 
avoid creating data silos. That’s why many have looked to Hadoop, 
an open source platform designed to store the massive volumes 
of structured and unstructured data. In many cases, Hadoop has 
become synonymous with big data. However, while Hadoop is a 
solid tool for low-cost data storage, it struggles as an analytics tool. 
In order to provide the necessary analytics on data in Hadoop, 
Splunk created Hunk, an integrated analytics platform. Hunk 
allows agencies to visualize data in Hadoop and NoSQL data 
stores. “Splunk has simplified leveraging Hadoop for our 
customers by developing the Hunk product offering,” said Von 
Alt. “Hunk is essentially Splunk analytics on top of Hadoop, and 
it offers the ability to answer queries and extract Operational 
Intelligence regardless of where data is stored, whether that 
be in a Splunk index or in your Hadoop file system.”
5 // Industry Perspective

There will be more uses of big data to fight 
waste, fraud and abuse, along with the use of 
public safety data to combat crimes. 
Hadoop will continue to grow in applications 
and uses, and when used in partnership with 
Splunk, organizations can gain even more 
insight into their data.
The current trends on IoT show the 
convergence of mobile, social and sensor 
data, all creating more machine data that an 
agency can conduct analysis on. 
SECURITY USE 
CASES
LEVERAGING 
HADOOP 


INTERNET OF 
THINGS (IOT) 

Moving forward, organizations can anticipate even more 
data being created, and more value to be found by creating a 
strong data driven strategy. Von Alt believes that the industry 
is moving towards five key areas in terms of big data. 
“As far as Splunk is concerned, data is data,” said Von Alt. “We 
don’t necessarily care if it is coming from an end-user workstation, 
a GPS-enabled device on a soldier in theatre, or a back-office 
management system. Splunk can ingest it and help you leverage it.”
About GovLoop
GovLoop’s mission is to “connect government to improve 
government.” We aim to inspire public-sector professionals by 
serving as the knowledge network for government. GovLoop 
connects more than 150,000 members, fostering cross-government 
collaboration, solving common problems and advancing government 
careers. GovLoop is headquartered in Washington, D.C., with a team 
of dedicated professionals who share a commitment to connect and 
improve government.
For more information about this report, please reach out to 
Catherine Andrews, GovLoop Director of Content, at 
Catherine@govloop.com.
1101 15th St NW, Suite 900
Washington, DC 20005 
Phone: (202) 407-7421  |   Fax: (202) 407-7501
www.govloop.com
Twitter: @GovLoop
About Splunk
Splunk Inc. provides the leading platform for Operational 
Intelligence. Splunk® software searches, monitors, analyzes and 
visualizes machine-generated big data from websites, applications, 
servers, networks, sensors and mobile devices. Organizations use 
Splunk software to deepen business and customer understanding, 
mitigate cybersecurity risk, improve service performance and reduce 
costs.
www.splunk.com
Mobile devices will continue to flood the 
market and allow organizations to create 
new services and produce more data. 
Organizations will use data to create custom 
applications and create dashboards and 
tools to monitor key metrics and indicators 
at their agency.
MOBILE DEVICE

DEVELOPMENT 
AND OPERATIONS
Why You Need Improved Operational Intelligence for Big Data // 6

1101 15th St NW, Suite 900
Washington, DC 20005 

Phone: (202) 407-7421  |   Fax: (202) 407-7501

www.govloop.com
Twitter: @GovLoop

