“Edward L. Deci is one of the most incisive, insightful 
and important thinkers in psychology today.” 
—DANIEL GOLEMAN, 
AUTHOR OF EMOTIONAL INTELLIGENCE 
WHY WE 
DOZWHAT 
WE 
wD O 
Understanding Self-Motivation 
EDWARD L. DECI 
WITH RICHARD FLASTE 


PENGUIN BOOKS 
WHY WE DO WHAT WE DO 
Edward L. Deci, Ph.D., professor of psychology at 
| 
the University of Rochester, is director of its human 
| 
motivation program. 
Richard Flaste, former Science and Health Editor 
of The New York Times, led the team that won 
the Pulitzer Prize for national reporting in 1987. 

PENGUIN BOOKS 
Published by the Penguin Group 
Penguin Group (USA) Inc., 375 Hudson Street, New York, New York 10014, U.S.A. 
Penguin Books Ltd, 80 Strand, London WC2R ORL, England 
Penguin Books Australia Ltd, 250 Camberwell Road, Camberwell, Victoria 3124, Australia 
Penguin Books Canada Ltd, 10 Alcorn Avenue, Toronto, Ontario, Canada M4V 3B2 
Penguin Books India (P) Ltd, 11 Community Centre, Panchsheel Park, New Delhi — 110 017, India 
Penguin Books (N.Z.) Ltd, Cnr Rosedale and AirbornesRoads, Albany, Auckland, New Zealand 
Penguin Books (South Africa) (Pty) Ltd, 24 Sturdee Avenue, 
Rosebank, Johannesburg 2196, South Africa 
Penguin Books Ltd, Registered Offices: 80 Strand, London WC2R ORL, England 
First published in the United States of America by G. P. Putnam’s Sons 1995 
Reprinted by arrangement with G. P. Putnam’s Sons 
Published in Penguin Books 1996 
iele 2) 
Copyright © Edward L. Deci and Richard Flaste, 1995 
- All rights reserved 
4 
THE LIBRARY OF CONGRESS HAS CATALOGUED THE HARDCOVER AS FOLLOWS: 
Deci, Edward L. 
Why we do what we do: the dynamics of personal auttonomy/by 
Edward L. Deci with Richard Flaste. 
p. 
cm. 
“A 
Grosset/Putnam book.” 
Includes bibliographical references. 
ISBN 0-399-14047-6 (hc.) 
ISBN 0 14 02.5526 5 (pbk.) 
1. Autonomy (Psychology). 
2. Motivation (Psychology). 
I. Flaste, Richard. 
II. Title. 
BF575.A88D45 
1995 
95-1901 
153.8—dc20 
Printed in the United States of America 
Set in Sabon 
Designed by Ann Gold 
Except in the United States of America; this book is sold subject to the condition that it 
shall not, by way of trade or otherwise, be lent, re-sold, hired out, or otherwise circulated 
without the publisher’s prior consent in any form of binding or cover other than that in 
which it is published and without a similar condition including this condition being im- 
posed on the subsequent purchaser. 

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
Most of all, I am grateful to Richard M. Ryan, with whom I have 
collaborated for nearly twenty years. Much of the research discussed 
in this book is more his than mine. He read multiple versions of 
the manuscript and made countless important inputs. Ryan and I 
have also had several other collaborators whose contributions have 
helped to make this book possible. I am grateful to all of them. Fi- 
nally, Christopher Walsh, Jay Ryan, Betsy Whitehead, and Sebby 
Jacobson read a draft of the manuscript and made useful sugges- 
tions. 
—E. L. D. 


GON TENTS 
ONE 
PART ONE: 
TWO 
THREE 
FOUR 
FIVE 
PART TWO: 
SEVEN 
EIGHT 
' 
NINE 
Authority and Its Discontents 
THE IMPORTANCE OF AUTONOMY 
AND COMPETENCE 
I’m Only in It for the Money: Early 
Experiments on Rewards and Alienation 
The Need for Personal Autonomy 
Intrinsic and Extrinsic Motivation: 
The Yields of Each 
Engaging the World with a Sense of 
Competence 
THE ROLE OF INTERPERSONAL 
CONNECTEDNESS 
The Inner Force of Development 
When Society Beckons 
The Self in a Social World 
When Society Corrupts 
t7 
30 
44 
57 
TE 
91 
109 
124 

Vili 
; 
Contents 
PART THREE: 
HOW IT ALL WORKS 
TEN 
Howto Promote Autonomy 
141 
ELEVEN 
Promoting Healthy Behavior 
159 
‘* 
: 
TWELVE 
Being Autonomous Amidst the Controls 
7 
PART FOUR: 
CONCLUSION - 
THIRTEEN 
The Meaning of Human Freedom 
199 
Notes on Works Cited 
23 
List of Research Articles 
Day. 
Index 
a2s 


ats) 

ONE 
Authority and 
Its Discontents 
of life, many people have been pushed to the point of acting 
. 
irresponsibly. They are alienated and disaffected, and it shows 
up in countless ways. Violence has become commonplace within 
families and out on the streets. Acting out is rampant in our schools. 
Insider trading and price fixing seem to be the norm. Obesity and 
anorexia are at near-epidemic proportions. And people face crip- 
pling debt. 
, 
Surely, individuals pay dearly for their irresponsibility, but so 
also do those closest to them. The irresponsibility of parents is costly 
to their children, and the irresponsibility of managers, doctors, and 
teachers is costly to their employees, patients, and students. By fail- 
ing to deal effectively with the stresses and pressures in their own 
lives, individuals add stresses and pressures to the lives of others. 
Many people today have had enough of this. They feel like the 
world is raging out of control, and they’re fed up. They want to crack 
down, achieve discipline, make those around them behave better. 
They resonate to the writers and politicians who call for more ac- 
countability, who view the problems in terms of morality, who say 
it’s time to tighten control. 
Control is an easy answer. It assumes that the promise of reward 
| 
or the threat of punishment will make the offenders comply. And it 
sounds tough, so it feels reassuring to people who believe things have 
S 
truggling to make their way among the stresses and pressures 
1 

2 
Why We Do What We Do 
gone awry but have neither the time nor the energy to think about 
— 
the problems, let alone do something about them. 
In spite of the appeal of control, however, it has become increas- 
- 
ingly clear that the approach simply does not work. Attempts to 
apply stricter discipline have beermargely ineffectual, and the wide- 
spread reliance on rewards and punishments to motivate responsibil- 
ity has failed to yield the desired results. Indeed, mounting evidence 
suggests that these so-called solutions, based on the principle of rigid 
authority, are exacerbating rather than ameliorating the problems. 
An alternative approach begins not with blame and control, but 
with asking why people are behaving irresponsibly in the first 
place—why they are being violent, engaging in unhealthy behaviors, 
going hopelessly into debt, or ignoring their children in order to 
amass a fortune. This approach takes the individuals’ perspective, 
focuses on the motivation underlying their irresponsibility, and ex- 
plicates the social forces that influence that motivation. It then ad- 
dresses the factors that can lead people to behave more responsibly. 
an 
his book is about human motivation, and it is organized 
around the important distinction between whether a behavior 
is autonomous or controlled. Etymologically the term autonomy de- 
rives from being self-governing. To be autonomous means to act in 
accord with one’s self—it means feeling free and volitional in one’s 
actions. When autonomous, people are fully willing to do what they 
are doing, and they embrace the activity with a sense of interest and 
commitment. Their actions emanate from their true sense of self, so 
they are being authentic. In contrast, to be controlled means to act 
because one is being pressured. When controlled, people act without 
a sense of personal endorsement. Their behavior is not an expression 
of the self, for the self has been subjugated to the controls. In this 
condition, people can reasonably be described as alienated. 
The issues of autonomy and authenticity, as opposed to control 
and alienation, are relevant in all aspects of life. They are sometimes 

Authority and Its Discontents 
3 
manifest dramatically, with societal implications, and other times, 
subtly, with only personal ramifications. 
A man who resists the pressures to succumb to price fixing be- 
cause he personally believes it is wrong is acting autonomously and 
living authentically. But if he succumbs to the pressures, and in the 
process, brings serious harm to thousands and adds to the negative 
national tone, he is being controlled and inauthentic. 
A woman who 
serves on the school board with a full sense of volition because she 
believes in its importance is being autonomous and authentic. But if, 
in spite of not wanting to, she serves because she thinks it looks good 
to others, she too is being controlled and inauthentic. 
To the extent that a behavior is not autonomous it is controlled, 
and there are two types of controlled behavior. The first type is com- 
pliance, and it is compliance that authoritarian solutions hope to 
accomplish. Compliance means doing what you are told to do be- 
cause you are told to do it. I remember years ago when the television 
networks began the practice of following a Presidential address with 
the dissenting views of opposing senators or congressmen. A friend 
of mine remarked, “I don’t think it’s right for them to do that.” 
“What do you mean?” I replied. ‘Dissenting opinions deserve to 
be heard.” 
“But he’s the President,” my friend protested. 
Although such reverence for the President seems almost quaint 
today, the comment epitomizes the compliant attitude. Noted author 
Charles Reich spoke about “the nameless authority.” This was the 
authority firmly lodged in my friend’s ideology, leading him to think 
and behave compliantly. 
The other response to control is defiance, which means to do the 
opposite of what you are expected to do just because you are ex- 
pected to do it. Compliance and defiance exist in an unstable part- 
nership representing the 
complementary 
responses to control, Where 
there is one, there is also the tendency for the other, even though one 
or the other is typically dominant within an individual. Thus, we find 
some people who are highly compliant, always seeming to do what 

4 
Why We Do What We Do 
the situation demands, and we find others who seem to defy all the 
demands and prods of authorities. But even with these people, where 
one response to control dominates, the tendency for the other will 
still be there and could come out in subtle ways. A subordinate who 
is outwardly obedient to all the boss’s demands might, for example, 
engage in secret sabotage as retaliation. 
Rebellion is the outward manifestation of people’s tendency to 
defy controls, and it coexists uneasily with conformity, which is the 
expression of their tendency to comply. Authoritarians of our era 
have relied on control, and they have gotten a healthy dose of rebel- 
lion along with the conformity they had hoped for. But what is even 
worse, and what has gone largely unrecognized, is that the price of 
4 compliance is itself very steep. That price—profound alienation with 
all of its ramifications—is detailed in this book. 
yA aaa necessitates behaving autonomously, for it means 
being the author of one’s actions—acting in accord with one’s 
true inner self. The key to understanding autonomy, authenticity, 
and self is the psychological process called integration. Various as- 
pects of a person’s psyche differ in the degree to which they have 
” been integrated or brought into harmony with the person’s innate, 
ay? coreself Cnly when the processes that initiate and regulate an action 
are integrated aspects of one’s self would the behavior be autono- 
mous and the person, authentic. It is in this sense that to be authentic ~ v 
is to be true to one’s self. MTy RL OWN GAVE Worse 
An obvious and important implication of our conception of self 
as the integrated center out of which one acts freely and volitionally 
is that it is possible, metaphorically, for the cause of an action to be 
within the person but not within the self. No one would say that 
psychotic behaviors are authentic or self-determined. They are initi- 
ated by some aspect of a person’s psychic makeup, but they do not 
proceed from what we term the self. The serial killer “Son of Sam,” 
for example, claimed to have heard voices telling him to murder. 

Authority and Its Discontents 
5 
Clearly, the voices came from within him, but they did not represent 
aspects of his, 
Self. 
Less clear, but perhaps even more important, are common every- 
day instances in which people have internalized rigid controls from 
_society and respond compliantly to those forces within them. Such 
behaviors lack the qualities of freedom and flexibility that character- 
ize autonomy and authenticity. Think about the man who goes to 
church not because he wants to but because he thinks he should. He 
is being neither autonomous nor authentic when he behaves with the 
experience of “having to” rather than “choosing to.” 
, 
There are also instances where people defy internal pressures. 
Think about the young woman who internalizes her parents’ de- 
mands to become a physician, and then pressures herself to take 
premed courses in college. Not doing well, because her self is not in 
it, she eventually defies the pressures by dropping out of school alto- 
gether. In spite of enjoying learning about some subjects, she drops 
out because she is no longer willing to submit to the internal con- 
trols. She is being neither autonomous nor authentic in her act of 
defiance. 
Because integration is a defining aspect of self, it is quite possi- 
ble for behavior to be initiated and regulated by aspects of a per- 
son that are alien to the self. Taking account of such alien aspects 
— 
is necessary for gaining an understanding of autonomy versus con- 
trol, and of the rebellion, conformity, and “self-indulgence” that 
one observes every day. It is also necessary for understanding a va- 
riety of other manifestations of alienation and inauthenticity— 
behaviors such as spousal abuse and the battered wife syndrome, 
for example. 
When one understands self to be the integrated, psychological 
core from which a person acts authentically, with true volition, it is 
easy to see why so much confusion has resulted from the writings of 
scholarly social critics such as Christopher Lasch and Allan Bloom 
who claim that authenticity spawns irresponsibility. For them, self— 
the “author” from which authenticity emanates—is essentially 
os 

6 
. 
Why We Do What We Do 
equated with person, so a focus on any aspect of a person is said to be 
absorption with the self. 
Lasch, for example, describes American culture as having a 
narcissistic preoccupation with the self. He might be right about a 
narcissistic preoccupation in this culture, but it is not a preoccupa- 
— 
tion with the se/f. On the contrary, narcissism involves desperately 
seeking 
affirmation 
from others. It entails an outward focus—a 
concern with what others think—and that focus takes people away 
from their true self. The narcissistic preoccupation results not from 
people’s being aligned with the self but from their having lost con- 
tact with it. They adopt narcissistic values in a controlling society 
because they have not had the type of psychological nourishment 
they need to develop an integrated and healthy self. Narcissism is 
not the result of authenticity or self-determination, it is their an- 
tithesis. 
There is another vein of confusion that runs through the discus- 
sions of self presented by many psychologists and social critics. It 
concerns the relation of freedom or autonomy to independence or 
~ 
aloneness. This confusion is evident in Bloom’s description of au- 
thenticity as people caring about themselves rather than others, and 
in the comment by historian Loren Baritz that when people are free, 
they are radically alone and lacking in emotional warmth. These 
views come out of the misconception that when people come into 
fuller contact with themselves, when they become freer in their func- 
tioning, when they unhook themselves from society’s controls, they 
will opt for isolation over connectedness. But there is no evidence for 
that. Quite the contrary, as people become more authentic, as they 
develop greater capacity for autonomous self-regulation, they also 
become capable of a deeper relatedness to others. 
It should be clear that authenticity cannot be understood in‘ 
terms of outward behaviors alone; one must look to the motivations 
that underlie them. Some of the people who marched for civil rights 
in the sixties were being authentic; others were not. Some of the peo- 
ple who hang around health clubs in the nineties are being authentic; 
others are not. It is only by considering people’s motivation for 
or 
cgi, 
Nanny Se 
_—_— 

Authority and Its Discontents 
"4 
behaving—for going to church, doing their homework, dieting, hav-’ 
ing children, or, for that matter, stealing a loaf of bread—and exam- 
ining the extent to which it is autonomous that we can address issues 
of authenticity, and ultimately, of responsibility. 
For over twenty-five years I have been exploring the concepts of 
autonomy, authenticity, freedom, and true self, anchoring the explo- 
ration in motivational concepts. That work, which will be drawn 
upon in this book, has been done largely in collaboration with Rich- 
ard Ryan. The work itself is presented in scientific form elsewhere, 
but in this book I use the work to address some fundamental fssues 
related to the 
ie self 1 
ina 
1 
a social world. 
; 
Ryan and I are not the only psychologists who have been con- 
cerned with issues like autonomy and authenticity. Psychoanalytic 
writers Donald Winnicott and Alice Miller, for example, have also 
developed theories that emphasize the concept 
of true self. But their 
work has been done within a tradition that relies on therapeutic case 
material to provide the substance for theory development, whereas 
our work has been conducted within the so-called empirical tradi- 
tion, which relies on the application of statistical principles to data 
gathered using scientific methods. 
In using the empirical approach, we have employed concepts 
that are applicable to people’s everyday 
lives, as they go to work or 
school, as they raise children and deal with the demands of their 
home lives, as they face challenges and make policies. Thus, by con- 
ceptualizing authenticity in terms of behaving autonomously, it be- 
comes a specifiable quality of human functioning, rather than just an 
abstract philosophical concept. That has allowed it to be moved 
from the realm of reasoned speculation into the realm of psychologi- 
cal research. It has also given people a tool for reflecting on the ex- 
‘tent to which they are being authentic in their own lives. Similarly, 
the concept of alienation, which philosophically means to be sepa- 
. 
rate from one’s self, can also be investigated and explained con- 
cretely in terms of behaviors that are pressured and controlled. The 
dozens of psychological investigations we 
have 
done have given pal- 
pable meaning to these concepts. 

8 
Why We Do What We Do 
A ll of us ia ourselves in a variety of relationships with differen- 
tials in status, power, or contra|—relationships which have a 
ons structure that might be referred to as one-up/one-down. These in- 
Be clude relationships between parents and children, managers and 
>" subordinates, teachers and students, doctors and patients: In these 
relationships, one party—the parent, manager, teacher, or doctor— 
! 
can be understood as a socializing agent. As such, that person has the 
y, fob of facilitating motivation and responsibility in the other. In a 
a sense, these roles make people the embodiment of society and confer 
on them the task of transmitting its values and mores. These relation- 
ships thus play a central role in the conceptions of autonomy and 
control—and of authenticity and alienation—that are presented in 
this book. 
Most adults—as parents, community organizers, coaches, work- 
group leaders, or health-care providers—are in positions where they 
dispense advice and make demands. But they are also, at times, on 
the receiving end. Even billionaire corporate CEOs have to follow 
the orders of their physicians or spouses from time to time—as well 
as the echoes of their parents’ admonitions that also serve to control 
them. People never cease struggling to find their own voice and direc- 
tion-amidst 
the forces that operate on them in their various roles 
where others have authority over them. 
Even intimate relationships—and others where people are osten- 
sibly equal—are permeated by issues of autonomy and control. In 
those relationships, however, there exists a daunting complexity in 
which each partner not only struggles to be autonomous but also 
: 
needs to support the autonomy of the other. It is a delicate balance 
between feeling free and supporting another’s freedom, and it is a 
dynamic that exemplifies how the issue of human autonomy is. 
woven through the texture of all connectedness among people. 
To become more autonomous and authentic, people must come 
, 
to grips with their one-up/one-down relationships. In a sense, they 
- must transcend them, An examination of these relationships is par- 
ticularly instructive because it highlights how people in positions of 

Authority and Its Discontents 
.. 
9 
authority—who are pivotal in creating what we call the social con- 
text of the people over whom they have authority—can affect the 
motivation of those people. It also reveals the strategies and needs of 
people in one-down positions as they strive to maintain and nurture 
their vitality for life. It is easy to find employees who feel like 
“slaves,” but it is harder to find active workers who, in a meaningful 
sense, are their own masters. And not all managers help them. It is 
easy to find children who feel like part of “the crew,” but it is harder 
to find ones who feel like the captains of their own ship. And not all 
parents and teachers help them. These are the kinds of issues that are 
relevant to fostering the motivation of people in one-down positions 
and, more broadly, to promoting BN autonomy and responsi ibil- . 
ity within society. 
S 
Eee eae 
cittna 
M ost people seem to think that the most effective motivation 
comes ftom outside the person, that it is something one skill- 
ful person does to another. There are numerous prototypes. Think 
for example of the locker-room speech where the coach, through the 
power of his gifted tongue, coddles and urges, shames and exhorts, 
and in so doing turns wimps into champs. Or think of the orderly 
classroom where the concerned teacher, through the cunning use of 
rewards and punishments, turns little beasts into compliant learners. 
To the contrary, however, all the work that Ryan and I have 
done indicates that self-motivation, rather than external motivation, 
ing change. External cunning or pressure (and their internalized 
Counterparts) can sometimes bring about compliance, but with com- 
pliance come various negative consequences, including the urge to 
defy. Because neither compliance nor defiance exemplifies autonomy 
and authenticity, we have continuously had to confront an extremely 
important—seemingly paradoxical—question: How can people in 
one-up positions, such as health-care providers or teachers, motivate 
others, such as their patients or students, who are in one-down posi- 
‘on! 
nu 
wn 
pe= 
C 
ve 

& 
10 
Why We Do What We Do 
tions, if the most powerful motivation, leading to the most responsi- 
ble behavior, must come from within—if it must be internal to the 
self of the people in the one-down positions? 
In fact, the answer to this important question can be provided 
only when the question is reformulated. The proper question is not, 
“how can people motivate others?” but rather, “how can people cre- 
ate the conditions within which others will motivate themselves?” 
When we formulated the question in this way our investigations re- 
peatedly confirmed that the orientations and actions of people in 
positions of authority do play an important role in determining 
whether those whom they supervise, teach, or care for will effectively 
motivate themselves—and, in fact, whether they will develop greater 
autonomy and authenticity. This book lays out the way these social 
forces operate to affect motivation and development. 
Throughout life people grapple with the issue of whether they 
are making 1 
their own choices—whether their actions are self-deter- 
mined or, alternatively, are controlled by an external agent or by 
some powerful force within them. Choice 
is the key to self-determi- 
nation and authenticity, and the question of whether someone really 
chooses to do something is essential to most civil and criminal trials. 
Millions of dollars may be decided over the issue of whether a pa- 
tient really did give informed consent to a medical procedure. And 
the decision between the death sentence-and incarceration in a psy- 
chiatric hospital may depend on a jury’s answer to whether the gun- 
man chose to pull the trigger or was forced 
by some internal urge 
that could be labeled “temporary insanity.” 
The issue for society concerns the conditions—both actual and 
psychological—under which people should be held accountable for 
their actions. And of course some lawyers have picked up on this and 
worked to push the balance one way or the other. In the most ex- 
treme modern development, the criminal justice system has toyed 
with the concept of “imperfect self-defense” in which, for example, 
Lorena Bobbitt or the Menendez brothers do not deny that they 
committed terrible acts, but maintain that the commission of these 
- 
acts was not volitional, that they were driven by a personal environ- 

Authority and Its Discontents 
11 
ment so painful that they saw no alternative. They aggressed as a 
self-defense even though they were not under immediate attack. 
They acted with grotesque violence, it is argued, because they be- 
lieved they had to. 
Complex and fascinating as the issues of autonomy and authen- 
ticity may be when considered at the level of cultures or interper- 
sonal relationships, they become even richer and more stimulating 
ng eee 
when viewed solely within the individual. A-master-slave relation- 
ship exists to 
some extent within everyone. People can regulate them- 
selves in quite autonomous and authentic ways, or alternativély in 
quite controlling and dictatorial ways, pressuring and criticizing 
themselves. The extent to which it is one versus the other depends on 
the degree of resolution of that master-slave dichotomy. 
Many people find this idea easy to comprehend in the case of, 
say, an addict, who is a slave to her addiction, or of an obsessive- 
compulsive, who is a slave to his compulsions. But the dynamics are 
just as relevant for many other behaviors. The dynamics begin as 
interpersonal processes in the home, at school, and elsewhere, and. 
are taken in by people in ways that are more healthy, or less. Under- 
standing these processes—the intrapsychic processes as well as the 
interpersonal ones—allows meaningful answers to important ques- 
tions. It is an understanding that can help people maintain smoking 
cessation, nurture an unflagging interest in learning, and perform 
well in sports. It is also an understanding that is essential for locating 
and anchoring one’s true self amidst the seductive and coercive tides 
of modern culture. 
Al 
he aims of this book are simply stated: They are to use a com- 
prehensive body of motivational research to examine the rela- 
tion between autonomy and responsibility and to reflect on the issue 
of promoting responsibility in an alienating world. The book is full, 
of hope, for it speaks to what we can do for ourselves, and what we 
can do for our children, our employees, our patients, our students, 
and our athletes—indeed, what we can do for our society. The pre- 
ow 
o”
yn 
JV 
Bi 

12 
aoa 
Why We Do What We Do 
scriptions it offers are not panaceas, and they are not easy. But they 
are relevant to each of us in managing ourselves, and they apply to 
the roles of teacher, manager, parent, doctor, and coach. Indeed, 
they are relevant and important for everyone in policy-making posi- 
- tions. The prescriptions begin with an understanding of people’s mo- 
tivation—of the extent to which it is autonomous—and they involve 
using that understanding to manage ourselves more effectively, to 
relate differently to others, and to make more meaningful social pol- 
icy. 
Like the works by Lasch, Bloom, Baritz, and others, this book 
decries much of the state of things: The insidiousness of advertising 
that hooks people’s egos; the way people in dominating positions 
control and demean the people with whom they interact; the incred- 
_ ible emphasis on instrumental thinking (of seeing everything as a 
means to an end); the overvaluing of material possessions; and the 
erosion of community giving. But in this book, social criticism is 
secondary; it is more implicit than explicit. What is primary is a 
delineation of the processes through which society’s fragmentation 
affects the lives of its members and a consideration of what can be 
done about it. 
In studying authenticity and alienation, Ryan and I have used 
scientific methods to explore their motivational bases. These meth- 
ods were developed largely by people who believed in what Aristotle 
called the efficient_causation of behavior, which essentially means 
_ that antecedent events force one to behave. But there is no reason 
») why the methods cannot be applied to the study of concepts like 
© 
AN Psychological freedom that had previously been addressed primarily 
by humanists and philosophers without the aid of scientific methods. 
Although use of the empirical approach has the great advantage 
of allowing confirmation or disconfirmation of theoretical hypothe- 
ses, it also has a substantial disadvantage: It is an enormously slow 
and methodical process. For more than a quarter century, the results 
of dozens of experiments and field studies—performed in the psy- 
chology laboratory as well as in homes, business, schools, and clinics 
in this country and abroad—have accumulated. In this book, I use 

Authority and Its Discontents 
13 
the results of those studies as a basis for discussing human freedom 
and responsibility. As such, the social criticisms and prescriptions 
contained herein represent extrapolations and speculations. What 
began as statistical inferences from systematic observations is here 
used to shed light on broad human problems. 
Our study of personal autonomy—of authenticity, and responsi- 
bility—has focused on motivational processes. By examining behav- 
iors that can be properly described as autonomous and exploring the 
motivational processes through which they are regulated, we have 
been able to detail both the social-contextual antecedents of these 
behaviors and their consequences. These matters are at the heart of 
this book. They speak to why we do what we do, and they provide a 
basis for addressing concrete and practical questions such as how to 
promote responsible behaviors—like effective work performance, ef- 
ficient and enjoyable learning, and long-term healthy behavior 
change—that benefit society as well as its individuals. 


PART ONE 
_ 
The Importance 
_ of Autonomy and 
Competence 


TWO 
I'm Only in It 
for the Money 
Early Experiments on Rewards 
and Alienation 
isit any urban zoo, even a very progressive one, and you 
may well witness the familiar seal act. At the Prospect Park 
Zoo in Brooklyn, for instance, the young feeders enter the 
/seal area at a designated hour, carrying their bags of fish, and pro- 
ceed to create a spectacle that delights the youngsters and their par- 
ents who are crushed up against the fence watching. The feeders are 
not there as ringmasters to provide entertainment, but doing their 
job inevitably yields the bonus of a good show. As they drop each 
fish into the mouth of a ravenous seal, the seal will do almost any- 
thing to keep the supply coming. Clap their flippers together; wave_ 
to the crowd; arch their bodies like mermaids in a fountain. It’s all . 
there, and the spectators love it. 
: 
These feeders are extremely effective in the use of rewards to 
elicit desired behaviors, and such spectacles seem to attest to the 
power of rewards as a preeminent motivational technique. “If it 
works that well with the seals,” a person might think, “it ought also 
to work with my children, and with my students and employees.” 
The message seems simple: Reward the desired behavior, and there is 
increased likelihood that the behavior will be repeated. 
As it turns out, the issue is really not so simple. And you can get 
a glimpse of the problem even with the seals. Just as soon as the 
feeders disappear, so too do the entertaining behaviors. The seals no 
longer have interest in clapping their flippers together or waving to 
17 

« 
18 
Why We Do What We Do 
the crowd. Rewards may increase the likelihood of behaviors, but 
only so long as the rewards keep coming. 
With our children, students, and employees we typically hope 
that the desired behaviors will continue even if we are not there to 
toss them a fish. We'd like them to keep learning, to keep producing, 
to keep doing their share of housework, and the question we face is 
how to promote such persistent self-direction rather than the irre- 
sponsibility or alienation that seems so prevalent in today’s world. It 
is a big question indeed, and formulating the answer begins with an 
interesting concept from the work of Harry Harlow, a pioneering 
psychologist who spent most of his career studying rhesus monkeys. 
Monkeys are an energetic lot, frequently engaged in all manner 
of playful antics. They run around, poke each other, throw things, 
make faces, and seem to have a very good time. But not all of their 
energy and attention goes to idle play. Harlow placed monkeys, one 
at a time, in a cage that contained a kind of puzzle apparatus—a 
series of hasps, hooks, and hinges. The monkeys took great interest 
in this mechanical puzzle. They would figure out how to open it; 
then how to close it up again. And they would repeat their actions 
many times. There were no tangible rewards for the behavior, and 
yet these naturally inquisitive monkeys were focused and deter- 
mined. What’s more, they seemed to be enjoying themselves. Harlow 
used the term intrinsic motivation to explain why the monkeys had 
spent many hours working on the puzzles, where the only possible 
“reward” seemied to be the activity itself. 
3 
Although it’s important not to go too far with animal-human 
comparisons, the spontaneous, though clearly constructive, behavior 
of those monkeys inspires one to think about similar behaviors in 
young children. A child’s curiosity is an astonishing source of energy. 
Children explore, manipulate, and question; they pick things up, 
shake them, taste them, throw them, and ask, ‘‘What’s this?”? Every 
bit as interested in a cardboard box as in a gleaming new plastic 
marvel, they try things, bend things, and transform one thing into 
another. They seek the novel and they are eager to learn. Clearly, 
something in them is alive and vital; something in them wants to 

I’m Only in It for the Money 
: 
19 
master the challenges of their lives. The term intrinsic motivation 
seems to apply just as well to these children as it did to Harlow’s 
‘monkeys. 
For young children, learning is a primary occupation; it is what 
they do naturally and with considerable intensity when they are not 
preoccupied with satisfying their hunger or dealing with their par- 
ents’ demands. But one of the most troubling problems we face in 
this culture is that as children grow older they suffer a profound loss. 
In schools, for example, they seem to display.so little of the natural 
curiosity and excitement about learning that was patently evident in 
those very same children when they were three or four years old. 
What has happened? Why is it that so many of today’s students are 
unmotivated, when it could not be more clear that they were born 
with a natural desire to learn? It was this disturbing issue that 
prompted me to begin studying motivation in an attempt to under- 
stand more about the interplay of authenticity and the social world. 
After all, what could be more authentic than the curiosity and vital- 
ity of a normal three-year-old? 
In the early 1960s, I had started studying psychology as an un- 
dergraduate at Hamilton College in Clinton, New York. It was the 
alma mater of B. F. Skinner, the renowned behaviorist whose pio- 
neering work had led to the development of behavior modification 
programs and the systematic use of rewards—or, in the vernacular of 
behaviorism, reinforcements. At Hamilton, I was steeped in the prin- 
ciples of behaviorism: Deliver a reward for a specific, identifiable 
behavior and do so as soon after the behavior as possible; focus on 
rewards rather than punishments; and be consistent in delivering the 
rewards. These, of course, are precisely the principles that worked so 
well with the seals in Prospect Park. 
The principles of behaviorism appeal to many psychologists and 
laymen alike; they fit philosophically with the general idea that striv- 
ing for rewards—for financial success in particular—is the American 
way. They also fit with the increasing call for more control within 
society, and with the view taken by so many educators that the way 
to get students to learn is through the use of grades, gold stars, and 

« 
20 
Why We Do What We Do 
other rewards. Tell them what they should do and then reward them 
for complying. The answer to how to motivate children’s learning, in 
this view, is quite straightforward: Use the appropriate reward con- 
tingencies. 
‘ 
Although the fine points of the behavioral approach are some- 
what complex, 
its message, 
as behaviorist philosopher Barry 
Schwartz pointed out, is rather simple: People are fundamentally 
passive and will respond only when the environment tempts them 
with the opportunity to get rewards or avoid punishments. 
In 1969, as a doctoral student in psychology at Carnegie-Mellon 
University in Pittsburgh, I became increasingly captivated by the 
question of what happens to people’s curiosity and vitality over time. 
Although I had first formulated the question with respect to chil- 
dren’s learning, the more I thought about it the more I realized that 
the question has relevance in many other domains.as well. The be- 
haviorist’s answer to the question would be that any lack of motiva- 
tion could be attributed to inadequate reward contingencies, but I 
- found that answer noncompelling, even disturbing. 
Behaviorist dogma assumes that there is no inherent motivation 
to learn, but this does not square with the fact that young children— 
in preschools and at home—ceaselessly explore and manipulate the 
objects they encounter. They challenge themselves to become compe- 
tent, apparently just for the enjoyment of doing it. Children are not 
passively waiting to be drawn into learning by the offer of rewards 
but rather are actively engaged in the process of learning. Indeed, 
they are intrinsically motivated to learn. 
The behaviorist’s assumption 
that there is no inherent motiva- 
tion may seem to have validity in that many people act unmotivated. 
In a variety of life situations, for example, people can be found doing 
as little as they can get away with. Even in schools, many children are 
passive, lacking the interest and excitement for learning that seems 
so natural in three-year-olds. That, of course, was the very discrep- 
ancy that left me wondering about intrinsic motivation and what 
happens to it over time. 
My doubting the behaviorists’ dogma only added to my resolve 

I’m Only in It for the Money 
21 
that the questions so many people ask—namely, “How do I motivate 
people to learn? to work? to do their chores? or to take their medi- 
. 
cine?”—are the wrong questions. They are wrong because they 
imply that motivation is something that gets done to people rather 
than something that people do. A more fundamental and useful way 
to think about the issue involves accepting the concept of intrinsic 
motivation, which refers to the process of doing an activity for its 
own sake, of doing an activity for the reward that is inherent in the 
activity itself. Intrinsic motivation describes perfectly the learning 
behavior of young children, and it also seems to have relevance to the 
behavior of all of us who engage in a variety of activities (like leisure 
pursuits) simply for the feelings of excitement, accomplishment, and 
personal satisfaction they yield. Thinking about this concept then 
leads one to ask the question of what kinds of experiences affect 
people’s intrinsic motivation, often leading to its being undermined. 
Robert Henri, perhaps the greatest American art teacher of the 
twentieth century, once captured the essence of being intrinsically 
motivated when he wrote: ‘‘The object of painting a picture is not to 
make a picture—however unreasonable this may sound. The picture, 
‘if a picture results, is a by-product and may be useful, valuable, inter- 
esting as a sign of what has passed. The object, which is back of every 
true work of art, is the attainment of a state of being, a high state of 
functioning, a more than ordinary moment of existence.” Henri’s 
point, quite simply, is that being intrinsically motivated has to do 
with being wholly involved in the activity itself and not with reach- 
ing a goal (whether the goal be making money or making a picture). 
Most of the learning of preschool children is done not because it 
is instrumental for achieving something else, but because the chil- 
dren are curious, because they want to know. Clearly, their learning 
is intrinsically motivated, and their intense involvement with learn- 
ing represents a prototype of the “more than ordinary moment 
of 
existence.” 
Although the idea of intrinsic motivation for learning seems to 
capture the truth of, say, preschool children’s activity, the seeming 
fragility of this intrinsic motivation is quite haunting. And this seem- 

78 
Why We Do What We Do 
ing fragility, of course, relates directly to the question of why there is 
not more intrinsic motivation for learning in older children. In think- 
ing about it back in 1969, I had the fleeting—and surely blasphe- 
mous—thought that maybe all the rewards, rules, and regimentation 
that were so widely used to motivate schoolchildren were themselves 
the villains, promoting not an excited state of learning but a sad state 
of apathy. 
Impelled by the possibility that I was onto something, I was fi- 
nally able to formulate my question in a way so I could run an exper- 
iment to answer it. The question was this: “What happens to 
people’s intrinsic motivation for an activity when they receive an 
extrinsic reward for doing the activity that they had previously been 
quite willing to do without the reward?” I decided to use a monetary 
payment as the reward to start what would turn into a major re- 
search program. 
An appealing aspect of this inquiry, from the point of view of 
psychological science, was that I really-had no idea if my suspicion. 
about the deleterious effects of rewards was on the mark. Clearly, 
the dominant academic ‘‘wisdom” of the time was that the exact 
opposite would be true. Maybe intrinsic motivation and extrinsic 
rewards would combine in a positive and productive way, rather 
than a negative, antagonistic way. Maybe, for example, when people 
get an extrinsic reward for doing something they find intrinsically 
interesting, they enjoy the experience even more and want to keep 
doing it. If that turned out to be true, I would have to look for a 
different avenue into the issue of why so many students are not moti- 
vated to learn. 
With the help of Victor Vroom, my mentor at Carnegie-Mellon, 
I developed-a general research design—what is called an experimen- 
tal paradigm—for exploring the question of how rewards affect in- 
trinsic motivation. The work would take place in the psychological 
laboratory, which is a small, neutral room with few adornments 
where everything that happens can be controlled or manipulated by 
an experimenter. It’s an artificial environment, of course, but we psy- 
chologists believe it provides the possibility for understanding the 

I’m Only in It for the Money 
23 
real world through analogy. If we can make something happen in the 
_ lab, using stimuli (called independent variables) that occur in day-to- 
day life, we assume that the same phenomenon probably also occurs 
out there in the real world. The advantage of a lab is that it allows us 
‘to ask very specific questions and observe relatively definitive an- 
swers. Eventually, if we find interesting results in the lab, we can 
venture into the field—that is, into schools, homes, workplaces, and 
: 
clinics—to see if the findings hold up there. 
To do the experiment, I needed an experimental task, something 
that the college student subjects would surely find intrinsically moti- 
vating. Fortuitously, I wandered into the office of a fellow graduate 
student one day and discovered a set of oddly shaped blocks, a puz- 
zle called Soma, just produced by Parker Brothers. “The World’s 
Finest Cube Puzzle Game” is how it was described on the instruction 
booklet. The puzzle had seven pieces, each shaped differently, and 
when fitted together in a particular way, the pieces formed a three- 
inch cube. In addition, there were thousands of different ways the 
pieces could be assembled to form various patterns. One such pat- 
tern shown in the booklet was called “‘Sam’s Sitting Dog,” another, 
“The Couch,” a third, “‘The Airplane,” and so on. Two of the seven 
pieces and the pattern for the sitting dog are shown on the next page. 
Some of the shapes were easy, others were very difficult. The fun 
came in using the various pieces to reproduce the designs, and when 
that happened the feeling of accomplishment was quite palpable. 
Once someone gets started with the puzzles, it is tough to stop. I 
immediately found myself in the puzzles’ thrall, completing one de- 
sign after another. In fact, I started solving them in my mind. It seems 
that once you become familiar enough with them, you can actually 
assemble them in imaginary space even though on first encounter 
they may seem nearly impossible. 
Soma was perfect because it allowed so much flexibility for ex- 
perimental purposes: The same pieces could form many different de- 
signs; the difficulty level could be varied as needed; and impossible 
ones could be made to look easy. But most important, of course, they 
were challenging and interesting, and pilot testing demonstrated that 

24 
Why We Do What We Do 
students loved them and would do them just for fun. In the experi- 
ment, subjects were shown several configurations that had been 
drawn on sheets of paper, and they were asked to try to reproduce 
_ 
the designs, in three-dimensional space, using the actual puzzle 
pieces. 
| 
The paradigm called for two groups of subjects: one group 
would receive extrinsic rewards for solving the puzzles (a buck 
apiece—and a buck was still worth something in 1969), and the sec- 
ond group would receive no rewards. The central question was: 
What will happen to the intrinsic motivation of the rewarded sub- 
jects relative to that of the nonrewarded subjects? Will it increase 
while working on the puzzles for pay, will it remain unchanged, or 
will it decrease? 
Measuring the subjects’ intrinsic motivation turned out to be a 
tricky matter. Here’s how it was done: During the experiment, sub- 
jects sat at a table working intently on the Soma puzzle for half an 
hour or so. Then, the experimenter would tell them the puzzle-solv- 
ing session was over, that he had to leave the room for a few minutes 
© 
to enter their data in the computer and let the computer print out a 

I’m Only in It for the Money 
25 
questionnaire for them to complete. In actuality, the experimenter 
always departed for exactly eight minutes, and an essential part of 
the experiment concerned what the subjects did during that time. On 
the table near the students, there were some magazines intended to 
capture a variety of interests: The New Yorker, Time, and so on. 
During their time alone, the students could continue with the puz- 
zles, read a magazine, or, I suppose, daydream. After the eight min- 
utes had elapsed the experimenter returned with the questionnaire. 
The most important period in this experiment wasn’t the time 
the experimenter spent in the room, but the time he spent out of it. It 
was those eight minutes when the subjects could do as they pleased, 
waiting for the experimenter to return. As they waited, they were 
secretly observed to determine how much of the eight minutes of 
free-choice time they spent playing with the puzzles. The idea was 
that if they spent their free-choice time playing with the Soma, when 
no rewards would be forthcoming and when there were interesting 
alternative activities, then they must have been intrinsically moti- 
vated for the puzzles. 
- 
As it turned out, those students who had been rewarded 
monetarily for doing the puzzles were far less likely to play with 
them “‘just for fun” in the free-choice period. Stop the pay, and stop 
the play. It seems that once having been paid, these subjects were 
only in it for the money. And that was with an activity they had 
initially been quite willing to do without rewards. Introducing mone- 
tary rewards seems quickly to have made students dependent on 
those rewards, shifting their view of the puzzle from a satisfying ac- 
tivity in its own right to an activity that is instrumental for obtaining 
rewards. Unsettling though this finding may have been, from a scien- 
tific perspective it was very encouraging. Something important 
seemed to be emerging. 
In a follow-up, I worked with the same general paradigm, but I 
took it into the field. I persuaded the editor of the school newspaper 
to put me in charge of headline writing so I could take an interesting 
activity students had been doing for free and start paying some of 
them for doing it. Then I could measure their continuing motivation 

- 
26 
Why We Do What We Do 
when, by golly, the funds had all dried up. Happily for me, this field 
experiment showed results comparable to those from the Soma-puz- 
zle study: Once people started getting paid, they lost interest in the 
activity. Then, when the rewards-stopped, they did not perform as 
well. 
One day I excitedly told a friend about the experiments, and a 
few days later he gave me an old Jewish fable. The fable went some- 
thing like this: 
It seems that bigots were eager to rid their town of a Jewish man 
who had opened a tailor shop on Main Street, so they sent a group of 
rowdies to harass the tailor. Each day, the ruffians would show up to 
jeer. The situation was grim, but the tailor was ingenious. One day 
when the hoodlums arrived, he gave each of them a dime for their 
efforts. Delighted, they shouted their insults and moved on. The next 
day they returned to shout, expecting their dime. But the tailor said 
he could afford only a nickel and proceeded to hand a nickel to each 
of them. Well, they were a bit disappointed, but a nickel is after all a 
nickel, so they took it, did their jeering, and left. The next day, they 
returned once again, and the tailor said he had only a penny for them 
and held out his hand. Indignant, the young toughs sneered and pro- 
claimed that they would certainly not spend their time jeering at him 
for a measly penny. So they didn’t. And all was well for the tailor. 
In doing research, it is important to remember that experimental 
findings are always vulnerable to refutation, no matter how perfectly 
devised and executed the experiment and no matter how persuasive 
the results. So any time someone finds a new, counterintuitive, or 
controversial result it is a good idea to try to obtain the result again. 
After all, in using the methods of statistical inference to reach a con- 
clusion about people in general from a small sample of them there is 
always a small possibility of coming up with the wrong answer, just 
by chance, if nothing else. After I moved to the University of Roches- 
ter, I replicated the study and found the same results: Monetary re- 
wards undermined people’s intrinsic motivation. 
This finding, of course, did not go down easily in some quarters 
of research psychology. After all, the assertion that monetary re- 

I'm Only in It for the Money. 
ee 
Bene. 
wards can be counterproductive was almost brazenly iconoclastic. 
Neither was the position met with open arms by many people out- 
side psychology. Indeed, even as investigators at other universities 
replicated and extended my results using other rewards (prizes, 
good-player awards, and food treats) and other-aged subjects (pre- 
school children and high school students), sharp critiques began to 
appear in various journals and periodicals. 
; 
bviously, money constitutes a powerful force. Certainly there 
can be no doubt that it motivates. One need only look around 
(even at oneself) to see how willing people are to engage in a wide 
range of activities for money. They drag themselves to work at jobs 
they hate, because they need the money. They get hooked on gam- 
bling, sometimes losing everything they own, because of the irratio- 
nal belief that they will hit the big one. They take on extra 
assignments that unduly stress them, perhaps to the point of making 
them sick, because of the extra money. And they engage in a wide 
variety of nefarious activities that promise handsome rewards. Sure, 
money motivates, but that’s not the point. The point is that while 
money is motivating people, it is also undermining their intrinsic mo- 
tivation and, as we would later discover, having a variety of other 
negative effects as well. 
In 1968, psychological theoretician Richard deCharms had pub- 
lished a book discussing the importance of a concept he called per- 
sonal causation. He believed that the key to intrinsic motivation is 
the desire to be the “origin” of one’s own action rather than a 
“pawn” manipulated by external forces. Using his line of thinking, 
the experiments seemed to suggest that rewards had undermined 
subjects’ feelings of personal causation, and thus their intrinsic desire 
for mastery. Rewards seemed to turn the act of playing into some- 
thing that was controlled from the outside: It turned play into work, 
and the player into a pawn. 
Let’s assume for a moment that these experiments have indeed 
isolated an important phenomenon and consider how these experi- 

28 
Why We Do What 
We Do 
mental results are pertinent to the kinds of issues raised in the first 
chapter. Of course you could appropriately take exception to my 
extrapolating from a few simple experiments conducted in the psy- 
chology laboratory to speak about such problems, but let’s leave that 
objection aside for the moment because in time many other studies 
were done in many different settings that would buttress these re- 
sults. 
The experiments had shown that when subjects began getting 
paid for working on interesting puzzles, they lost interest. Although 
they would continue to do the puzzles for money—as so many peo- 
ple continue to do all manner of activities for money—their relation 
to the activity had become strained and instrumental. Think about it. 
A strained, instrumental relationship to an activity is a sure sign of 
the state called alienation. I had, in essence, promoted alienation in 
these subjects during a short and seemingly innocuous experiment. If 
that could be so, what must money be doing to people in the real 
~ world where it exerts so much power? 
People today ape long hours. According to the Economic Pol- 
icy Institute, the average work year is now 158 hours longer than it 
was when this first intrinsic motivation experiment was performed. 
An extra month has been tacked on to what in 1969 was considered 
a full-time job! It is extraordinary really. Imagine that a king were to 
tell his subjects that they had to start working an additional 158 
hours each year. Surely there would be a palace coup unless his army 
was very strong. But that increase has in fact happened in our society 
in a relatively short time, and no coup has occurred. Indeed, there 
has been barely an objection; only further alienation. 
The power that has brought this about is not coercion—it is not 
a king’s army—it is the seductive capacity of the regal dollar, along 
with the socialization processes within our society that keep the dol- 
lar enthroned. Money is indeed a seducer, and it seems to be closely 
related to the nameless authority that Charles Reich spoke about. 
_ When, for a short time during the sixties, large numbers of people 
rebelled against the traditional authority, the power of money 
seemed greatly diminished. But that era has passed, and the ex- 

I'm Only in It for the Money 
29 
panded work year has brought with it countless stresses and real 
© 
costs to the individual. 
; 
Our experiments provide a scientific means of beginning to de- 
tail those costs quite specifically. The first cost is that people lose 
interest in many of the activities they perform. They begin to see the 
activities merely as instruments for attainment of monetary rewards, 
so they lose the excitement and vitality they once had for the activi- 
ties. In an important sense, this finding is consistent with the idea 
that the people are losing contact with their inner selves when they 
become controlled by monetary rewards. Thus, these simple experi- 
ments may have begun to point to a profound phenomenon at the 
nexus between the inner person and the proddings of society. 
When people talk about control, they usually mean coercion— 
they mean controlling through power and threats. Most people find 
it easy to accept that the use of force can have a range of negative 
consequences. Dictators control, and dictators are despised. But 
money also controls. When people say that money motivates, what 
they really mean is that money controls. And when it does, people 
become alienated—they give up some of their authenticity—and they 
push themselves to do what they think they must do. One take on the 
. meaning of alienation is that it begins as people lose touch with their 
intrinsic motivation, with the vitality and excitement that all chil- 
dren possess, with the doing of an activity for its own sake, with the 
state of being that Robert Henri called a more than ordinary moment 
of existence. 
| 

Robt Ree 
The Need for 
Personal Autonomy 
Ithough the early experiments had highlighted some nega- 
tive consequences to the use of rewards as a motivator, the 
research had barely begun, for there were countless ques- 
tions remaining to be addressed by carefully designed laboratory ex- 
periments and field studies. 
To proceed, however, a fuller theoretical account of what had 
happened in the reward experiments was necessary so it could be 
used for deriving further hypotheses. Why might it be that people’s 
intrinsic motivation—the vitality, spontaneity, genuineness, and cu- 
riosity that is intrinsic to people’s nature—could be undermined by 
extrinsic rewards? 
DeCharms’s idea that people strive for personal causation—that 
they strive to feel like an origin of their own behavior—was a start, 
and the contributions of others like personality psychologist Henry 
Murray helped to fill out the conceptual picture. Murray had sug- 
gested that people have needs of the mind as well as needs of the 
body. Perhaps there is an innate or intrinsic need to feel a sense of 
personal autonomy or self-determination—to feel a sense of what 
deCharms had called personal causation. That would imply that 
people need to feel that their behavior is truly chosen by them rather- 
than imposed by some external source—that the locus of initiation of 
their behavior is within themselves rather than in some external con- 
trol. This is a rather subtle point, but its significance is quite pro- 
30 

The Need for Personal Autonomy 
31 
found. The implication of people having a need to feel autonomous 
is that failure to satisfy the need, like failure to satisfy the hunger 
need, could lead to decreased well-being—to a variety of maladap- 
tive consequences. 
. 
The hypothesis, then, is that any occurrence that undermines 
people’s feeling of autonomy—that leaves them feeling controlled— 
should decrease their intrinsic motivation and very likely have other 
negative consequences. The next step in the research program be- 
came quite clear: It was necessary to determine what other events or 
circumstances might decrease intrinsic motivation. In other words, 
what events, beyond rewards, are likely to be perceived by people as 
controlling—as limiting their autonomy? 
, 
One likely candidate, one widely used motivator that must surely 
be felt as controlling, was threat. People threaten others all the 
time—if you don’t study you can’t watch television; if you don’t get 
to work on time you will be fired—and they assume that it’s an effec- 
tive motivational strategy. A threat, of course, is not intended to 
punish but instead is meant to motivate people through their desire 
to avoid a punishment. 
Using the same general Soma paradigm as in the money experi- 
ments, we motivated puzzle solving by threatening to punish subjects 
if they failed to perform well. They did do well enough that they did 
not get punished, but the experience was a negative one nonetheless. 
In fact, threat worked much like money; it encouraged them to try to 
solve the puzzles, but it robbed them of the desire to engage in this 
playful activity for its own sake. 
Other researchers, such as Mark Lepper and his sallednues at 
Stanford University, added to the list of events that yield similar neg- 
ative consequences. Deadlines, imposed goals, surveillance, and 
evaluations were all found to undermine intrinsic motivation. That, 
of course, made sense because they all represent frequently used 
strategies for pressuring and controlling people. People experience 
them as being antagonistic to their autonomy, so these events drain 
people’s sense of enthusiasm and interest in the controlled activities. 
In one of the first seminars I taught at the University of Roches- 

32 
Why We Do What We Do 
ter, a student raised the issue of competition. Competition is cer- _ 
tainly one of the mainstays of American culture. Tens of millions of 
people crowd around TV sets on weekends to watch sporting compe- 
titions. Encouraging workers to.compete against each other to see 
who can make the most sales or get the best customer-service reports 
is a typical motivational device in our culture. Surely it is safe to say 
that competition exerts some motivating power, but how might it 
relate to individuals’ more subtle desires to motivate themselves and 
to feel a sense of personal autonomy? 
One student in the seminar suggested that competition could 
focus people on winning rather than on the activity itself, much like 
rewards draw people’s attention away from the activity itself. Fur- 
thermore, it could be that competition creates a pressure pushing 
people toward particular ends and away from the activity itself. If 
this were so, it too could undermine intrinsic motivation. Some ath- 
letes in the room thought the idea preposterous. It stimulates intrin- 
sic motivation, they said. So we decided to take the question into the 
lab. 
: 
We modified the Soma paradigm to fit the question we were ask- 
ing. Subjects worked on three puzzles in the presence of an experi- 
mental accomplice who posed as a second subject. Half the subjects 
were told that their task was to win the competition—to beat their 
opponent by solving the puzzles more quickly. The other half were 
simply asked to work as quickly as they could; there was no mention 
of competing or winning. 
The accomplice always let the actual subjects finish first, which 
in the competition condition meant that the subjects won all three of 
their competitions. Results of the study indicated that those subjects 
who had competed displayed less subsequent intrinsic motivation 
than those who had simply been asked to do their best. The experi- 
ence of competing had undermined their intrinsic motivation for the 
interesting task. Apparently, they felt pressured and controlled by. 
the competition (even though they won it), and that seemed to de- 
crease their desire to solve these puzzles just for the fun of it. 
While interesting, this whole set of findings is quite unsettling, 

The Need for Personal Autonomy 
33 
. because 
all the events that were found to undermine intrinsic motiva- 
tion are events that most people encounter regularly in their ongoing 
daily lives. These forces—the alarm clock that wakes them up, the 
pressures to get the kids to school on time and themselves to work on 
time, and the rewards, deadlines, threats, and evaluations they cope 
with while at work—are all aspects of people’s lives that can appar- 
ently leave them feeling pushed around, that can leave them feeling 
like pawns. 
At this point, an obvious question arises. Do all these research 
results imply that, in order not to weaken intrinsic motivation, peo- 
ple should be allowed to do anything they please? Fortunately, it 
does not. But before we can tackle the difficult questions of how to 
provide structures and set limits on behavior without killing a per- 
son’s spirit, we need to address the inverse of what we have just been 
reporting. We need to consider what factors might increase intrinsic 
motivation. 
It seemed that if controlling people—that is, pressuring them to 
behave in particular ways—diminishes their feelings of self-determi- 
nation, then giving them choices about how to behave ought to en- 
hance them. Some colleagues and I tested this hunch. We used a 
variant of the puzzle-solving paradigm yet again. Subjects in one 
group were offered a choice about which puzzles to work on and 
how long to spend on each. Subjects in the other group were assigned 
the puzzles and time limits selected by corresponding subjects in the 
first group. 
As expected, given that a comprehensive picture was beginning 
to emerge from all these experiments, the subjects who had been 
offered the simple choices spent more time playing with the puzzles 
and reported liking them more than the subjects not offered choice. 
The opportunity to make even these small choices had made a differ- 
ence in their experience and had strengthened their intrinsic motiva- 
tion. 
Once again, it was the issue of autonomy versus control, with its 
various shadings, that was at the heart of the matter. People who 
were asked to do a particular task but allowed the freedom of having 

. 
34 
“Why WeDo What We Do 
some say in how to do it were more fully engaged by the activity— 
they enjoyed it more—than people who were not treated as unique 
individuals. 
It is forever being said that people need to be controlled more, 
that they need to be told what to do and held accountable for doing 
it. But nothing in these experiments has given credence to that view 
as the typical condition of life. Of course, limit setting is important, 
as we will see, but an overemphasis on control and discipline seems 
to be off the mark. It represents a demeaning depiction of human 
experience, and its primary function may just be to provide certain 
people with an easy rationalization for exerting power over others. 
Providing choice, in the broad sense of that term, is a central 
feature in supporting a person’s autonomy. It is thus important that 
_ people in positions of authority begin to consider how to provide 
more choice. Even in crowded classrooms, fast-paced offices, or har-. 
ried doctors’ offices there are ways, and the more creative one is, the 
more possibilities one will find. Why not give students choice about 
what field trips to take and what topics to write their papers about, 
for example? Why not let the work group participate in the decision 
of how to allocate responsibilities? And why not let patients take 
part in planning their treatment regimen? It is not always easy to 
provide choice, but it has become increasingly clear that there will be 
positive advantages if you do. 
The main thing about meaningful choice is that it engenders will- 
ingness. It encourages people to fully endorse what they are doing; it 
pulls them into the activity and allows them to feel a greater sense of 
volition; it decreases their alienation. When you provide people 
choice, it leaves them feeling as if you are responsive to them as in- 
dividuals. And providing choice may very well lead to better, or 
more workable, solutions than the ones you would have imposed. 
omeone told me a story about his aunt who had been taking 
hypertension medication for years—or rather, she was supposed 
to have been taking it for years. But she was never very good about 

The Need for Personal Autonomy 
a) 
following the prescription, and she frequently ended up in the emer- 
gency room with fainting spells, ministrokes, and chest pains. Her 
doctor gave her a pretty hard time about it. He had prescribed the 
medication, told her that she had to take it every morning, and em- 
phasized the awful things that could happen to her if she did not take 
it as prescribed. Well, she did not take it as prescribed, and of course 
some of those awful things (though, fortunately, not the worst of 
them) did happen to her. In one conversation a few years ago, the 
nephew asked her why she didn’t take her medication each HORDE. 
She said she just never seemed to remember it. 
He saw her again not long ago, and she told him she was doing 
much better. She was taking her medication faithfully, and she 
hadn’t been to the emergency room in months. What had changed? 
Well, for one thing, she had changed doctors. And she said she liked 
this new doctor better. The interesting thing is that the new doctor 
had had a long talk with her about the medication, and during the 
talk he had asked her what time of day she thought would be the best 
time for her to take it. (Medically, it did not really matter.) She 
thought about it for a minute, and then she said, ‘““The evening, just 
before I go to bed.” If she took it then, she said, she could build it 
into her routine. She always has a glass of milk before she goes to 
bed, she said, and she could take her medication with her glass of 
milk. It all made such good sense. Her doctor had given her a choice 
‘about how to handle her own medication, and it had made a big 
difference. Now she takes it every day, and the illness intrudes less 
into her life. 
When the doctor gave this woman choice, two things seem to 
have happened that led her to follow through more responsibly. 
First, she could organize the task with respect to her own idiosyncra- 
cies (the routine of her nightly glass of milk). In other words, the 
— 
chosen schedule was a more workable one for her. And second, the 
woman felt responded to—empowered, really—by the opportunity 
to choose. Her inherent motivation had been enhanced because the 
choice supported her autonomy. Of course there are times when doc- 
tors should make the decisions, because they alone have certain ex- 

. 
36 
Why We Do What We Do 
pertise, but if they provide choice whenever it is possible, positive 
motivational effects are likely to result. 
When choice is offered, of course, it is essential that the person 
being offered choice have the information necessary for making a 
meaningful decision. An accountant who asks how you would like to 
handle a potential deduction without laying out the full array of in- 
formation you need to make a thoughtful decision is not providing 
you a meaningful choice. “‘Is it really legal, or would it be pushing the 
limits of the law?” ‘‘What are the implications for other sections of 
the tax return?” And so on. To experience a sense of choice, you 
need to know (or be able to find out) the possibilities, the con- 
straints, the hidden features. Without such information, being given 
a choice will feel more like a burden than a support for autonomy. It 
may well engender anxiety, and without adequate information, peo- 
ple are more likely to make mistakes. 
n 1977, Richard Ryan moved to the University of Rochester. His 
I 
strong background in philosophy and psychoanalytic psychology 
complemented my training in mathematics and experimental psy- 
chology. We quickly discovered that, although we were coming at 
problems from different directions, we shared a fundamental interest 
in psychological questions about human freedom and self-regula- 
tion, questions about authenticity, responsibility, and alienation. We 
soon began collaborating on research. 
In one early discussion, Ryan focused on the point that the im- 
pact of a reward should depend on how the person interprets it—on 
its psychological meaning for that person. It was clear from the ear- 
lier studies that people frequently interpret rewards as controls, as 
means of pressuring them to behave in particular ways. But it would 
seem that under the right circumstances people might experience re- 
wards simply as an acknowledgment by another that they have done 
well at something. If that were true, Ryan suggested, it ought to be 
possible to give rewards in a way that does not undermine intrinsic 
motivation. 

The Need for Personal Autonomy 
" 
By. 
One thing that Ryan thought might make a difference is the in- 
tention and style of the person who is administering the reward. Re- 
wards are often used by people to impose their power on others. 
They give the rewards with the intention to control—or, more eu- 
phemistically, “to motivate’’—so the rewards are likely to be experi- 
enced by their recipient as controlling. 
To take one unhappy example, think about the college student 
who had grown up in a wealthy family in suburban New York. Both 
his parents were attorneys and they wanted him to become a lawyer, 
as well. He began taking prelaw courses, as expected, but soon dis- 
covered that his real love was film. In.a conversation with his parents 
over a vacation break, he made clear his desire to change majors. The 
response was a decided lack of enthusiasm. ‘‘Fine,”’ they said, “but 
you’re on your own. We will no longer pay your tuition if that’s how 
you are going to waste your college years.” 
Although these parents had been giving their son a remarkable 
(and expensive) opportunity to study at an excellent university, it 
was also true that implicit in their giving was a control. These par- 
ents saw money not as a family resource to be shared, but rather as 
something that could be used to shape their son as they desired. And 
it is likely that their intentions were somehow being communicated, 
even if only subtly. The showdown over. tuition badly strained the 
relationship between parents and son, and for his own sake, the son 
emotionally distanced himself from his parents. 
Despite such examples, Ryan suggested that if instead of having 
the intention to control, the person administering rewards intends 
them simply as an acknowledgment—as an indicator of accomplish- 
ment, so to speak—it is possible that the recipient will not experience 
them as controlling. In that case, the rewards should not undermine 
intrinsic motivation. 
People’s real intentions, when giving rewards, are likely to be 
communicated by the style and locution they exhibit when dispens- 
ing the rewards. Thus, Ryan decided to do a study in which rewards 
would be administered with two different interpersonal styles. One 
would be controlling, conveyed with words like “should” and “have 

- 
38 
. 
Why We Do What We Do 
to,” while the other would be noncontrolling—more egalitarian, if 
you will. 
; 
Ryan trained experimenters in how to execute the two different 
interpersonal climates that children might encounter in homes, or 
workers in offices, and it turned out that Ryan had been right. Ap- 
proach did count. When rewards were given with a controlling style, 
they had a substantially negative effect on intrinsic motivation, and 
they left people feeling more pressured and less interested. But when 
they were given in a noncontrolling way, simply as an acknowledg- 
ment of good work, they did not have the detrimental effects. These 
results therefore seemed to be saying that it is the controlling intent 
of rewards that sabotages their attempts to motivate others, destroy- 
ing the very motivation they had been intended to promote. 
Pragmatically, this finding confirmed that it is possible to admin- 
ister rewards in ways that minimize their negative effects. When peo- 
ple proffer rewards without intending to control there is less 
likelihood that the rewards will have deleterious effects. This is a 
quite tricky issue, however, because one has to couple this finding 
with the fact that in the previous reward studies, a very neutral 
stance had been adopted by the experimenters and, nevertheless, the 
rewards were undermining. What that means is that the cards are 
clearly stacked in one direction, that rewards do tend to carry a con- 
trolling significance for people. Yes, rewards can be used in a way 
that is not detrimental to intrinsic motivation—to a person’s innate 
vitality—but the people administering those rewards have to be very 
conscientious in how they use rewards in order to counteract the 
most likely effect, which is negative. 
I have a friend, a six-year-old girl named Lisa, who has been 
taking violin lessons for nearly a year. It is the only instrument 
taught in her small urban school, and many of her friends also take 
lessons. Lisa is a perfectionist, and in spite of having very accepting 
parents, she is extremely hard on herself if she fails at something. 
When she first started lessons, she was often tense about practic- 
ing, feeling that whatever playing she did was not good enough. She 
became resistant to practicing in order to avoid the inner conflict it 

The Need for Personal Autonomy 
39 
engendered. At one point, a few months into her lessons, the teacher 
introduced a new system to motivate the students to practice more. 
They would get a star for practicing a specified amount of time each 
week, and when enough stars had accumulated they would receive a 
“treasure.” Interestingly, Lisa seemed to become less resistant to 
practice sessions. She still seemed tense about the actual practicing, 
but she was less evasive of the sessions themselves. 
- 
This turn of events intrigued me. The structure of specifying the 
amount of time she should practice, along with the promise of a 
reward for adhering, had seemed to make it easier for Lisa. When‘she 
had done the specified amount, she could stop and feel she had done 
enough. But something else began to happen during practice ses- 
sions; Lisa would watch the clock. She was no more interested in the 
violin itself, but she was a lot more interested in completing the prac- 
tice sessions. 
( 
One Sunday a couple of months later, Lisa repeatedly mentioned 
to her parents that she had to practice, but she also seemed less will- 
ing than she had been recently. At one point, her mother said, 
“Okay, let’s go practice now.” As was often the case, her mother sat 
with her while she practiced, but things did not go well. Lisa fooled 
around rather than practice seriously. She assumed sloppy positions, 
and she wanted only to play well-learned, easy pieces. Her mother, 
nonetheless, encouraged her to persist. So Lisa would try something 
new, make a mistake, and then start to cry. The tension became pal- 
pable. 
A little later, Lisa’s father went into the room to relieve his wife. 
He said to Lisa, ‘‘Let’s put the violin away for now. You can practice 
tomorrow night and I’ll sit with you then.” Agitated, Lisa said, “No, 
I have to do it now!” So she picked up her violin and started. Almost 
immediately she made a mistake and got upset. Her father took the 
violin, and put it on a shelf across the room. He let her be upset for a 
couple of minutes, and then he began to quietly talk with her about 
it. He was interested in why she was putting so much pressure on 
herself. 
“Why do you have to practice today?” he asked her. Well, it 

eh 
ies 
40 
_ 
Why We Do What We Do 
took some reassuring and talking before he finally got to the issue. 
Lisa finally revealed that if she didn’t practice she wouldn’t-get her 
star, and if she didn’t get this star, her friends would get their trea- 
sure, but she wouldn’t get hers. The intensity of the pressure this 
six-year-old had put on herself because of her teacher’s use of an 
“incentive” was nothing short of astounding. 
_Lisa’s father asked her what the treasure would be. She didn’t 
know, but he told her that whatever it was, if she did not get it from 
her violin teacher, he would get one for her. Lisa was amazed, and 
she said, “You mean | don’t have to practice to get the treasure?” 
— 
“No,” he said, ‘‘you can have it whether you practice or not.” Much 
of the tension lifted, and her practicing went more easily after that. 
Playing the violin can, after all, be fun. 
Advocates of using rewards to motivate children often tell stories 
like the first half of this one—stories about how the offer of a reward 
helps get children to practice their violins, do their chores, keep up 
with their homework, or whatever. I’m always a little skeptical even 
though I know that rewards are not all bad. I’m skeptical because it 
is clear that rewards often have negative, though unintended, conse- 
quences that the advocates are usually not willing to acknowledge. 
Rewards might ensure certain behaviors—like more regular practice 
sessions—but the behaviors they ensure may not really be what we 
are after. The example with Lisa made that point very clearly. 
The introduction of the reward structure helped her at first be- 
cause it gave her information about what would be a good amount 
of time for practice. But some discussion and structure, without the 
use of rewards, might have served just as well. In other words, a 
| 
negotiation about the amount of time could have accomplished the 
end of overcoming her initial resistance—and that would not have 
had the same negative effects. 
Offering rewards in a noncontrolling way requires a kind of deep 
honesty that often eludes people. People say they are not trying to 
mold their children, for instance, that they are simply expressing 
ap- 
preciation, leading by example, or providing the children with just 

¥ 
or 
. 
The Need for Personal Autonomy 
41 
the sort of thing the children really want or need. But thoughtful 
_ reflection often reveals that in fact the adults really are using the 
rewards to pressure the children, even though what they are pressur- 
ing the children to do might be in the children’s best interests. The 
real question that all this poses is whether pressuring children with 
rewards to do something that is good for them is the best way to 
achieve the desiredend. 
_ 
The issue of pressure and control, of course, goes far beyond the 
use of rewards. One of the important things about Ryan’s study of 
administering rewards in two different ways—one way that empha- 
_sizes pressure and control, and the other that does not—is that it 
suggests that many other events or occurrences that had been found 
to undermine intrinsic motivation, might not have to if used more 
sensitively. 
The competition study that my students and I had previously 
done had become somewhat controversial. People just did not want 
to believe that competition diminishes intrinsic motivation. After the 
profound results that emerged from Ryan’s reward study, a col- 
league, Johnmarshall Reeve, and I decided to look into the same 
issue with respect to competition. In essence, we had one group who 
won a competition after having been pressured to win—we used the 
old “Vince Lombardi tactic” of telling them that winning is every 
thing—and another group who won a competition without having 
the added pressure. Interestingly, our results paralleled Ryan’s. 
When we oriented people toward the competition by really empha- 
sizing the importance of beating the other, the competition was quite 
detrimental to their intrinsic motivation. However, when we did not 
add this pressure, but instead simply encouraged them to do their 
best and try to finish first, the competition was not detrimental. 
In this competition study, we also had a nonpressured group that 
lost the competition, and here we found an extremely low level of 
© 
intrinsic motivation. All of the findings, when taken together, indi- 
cate that competition does not necessarily undermine intrinsic moti- 
vation, but it is a quite delicate matter. Pressuring people to win, 

wy ar 
42 
Why We Do What We Do 
which seems to come so naturally in competitive situations, is likely 
to have a negative effect, even for winners. And, of course, for losers, 
the effect is worse. 
y taking a general stance against reliance on rewards, demands, 
threats, surveillance, competition, and critical evaluations as 
avenues for motivating people’s behavior, I am not. by any means 
advocating permissiveness. The use of goals, structures, and limit 
setting is often important in schools, organizations, and cultures, 
even if people cannot be expected to like them. It’s just not reason- 
able, for example, to allow children to hurl paint at each other (the 
noble savage, aside) or to allow workers to stroll into work when- 
ever they feel like it. The really important question, then, is how can 
we avoid being permissive, without creating gridlock? How can au- 
tonomy support and limit setting coexist? How can standards and 
limits be used so the person in the one-down position can live within 
the limits and still retain a feeling of self-initiation, and thus not lose 
intrinsic motivation? 
Autonomy support, which is the opposite of control, means 
being able to take the other person’s perspective and work from 
there. It means actively encouraging self-initiation, experimentation, 
and responsibility, and it may very well require setting limits. But 
autonomy support functions through encouragement, not pressure. 
Providing that encouragement without slipping over into control 
. 
would seem to be possible, but by no means easy. We already knew 
that being autonomy supportive can be more difficult—requiring 
more effort and more skill—than being coercive. 
Given what he had learned from the study of different styles of 
rewarding, Ryan decided to explore the question of whether limits 
and autonomy could coexist. He worked with Richard Koestner 
(now a professor at McGill University in Montreal) and identified a 
classic situation requiring both limits and creative autonomy: chil- 
dren’s art. The idea was to engage kids (five- and six-year-olds) in a 
creative, but potentially messy, task of painting a picture. Limits con- 

The Need for Personal Autonomy 
4B : 
‘cerning neatness were set in two different ways—the conventional, 
controlling way, and a noncontrolling, autonomy-supportive way. 
The controlling way was simple: use pressuring language (‘‘be a good 
boy/girl and keep the materials neat” or “do as you should and don’t 
mix up the colors”). 
_ 
ao 
ie 
The autonomy-supportive way, which involves minimizing pres- 
sure by avoiding controlling language and allowing as much choice. 
as possible, required more subtlety. In setting limits, there is always a 
potential conflict because you are asking people to do something 
they might not want to do. That’s the whole point of the limits. 
Koestner and Ryan thought that acknowledging this conflict might 
help because it conveys an appreciation of the children’s perspective 
and thus should lessen the extent to which they would feel externally 
controlled. In the autonomy-supportive limits group, they said, “I 
know that sometimes it’s really fun to just slop the paint around, but 
here the materials and room need to be kept nice for the other chil- 
dren who will use them.” 
Encouragingly, from the point of view of our accumulating body 
of work, the results were dramatic. Even these simple variations in 
instructions made a difference. The autonomy-supportive condition 
seemed to have a liberating effect on the children, while the control- 
ling condition had a debilitating effect. The children who sensed that 
the adults at least understood them were more intrinsically moti- 
vated and more enthusiastic than the children for whom the limits 
‘had been controlling. It was as if one could see right here both the 
power and the perils of setting rules in all sorts of life situations 
where someone in a one-up position can maximize people’s experi- 
ence or dampen it—depending on interpersonal style. 
Limit setting is extremely important for promoting responsibil- 
ity, and the findings of this study are critical for how to do it. By 
setting limits in an autonomy-supportive way—in other words, by 
aligning yourself with the person being limited, recognizing that he 
or she is a proactive subject, rather than an object to be manipulated 
or controlled—it is possible to encourage responsibility without un- 
dermining authenticity. 

yh 
a 
Intrinsic and © 
Extrinsic Motivation 
The Yields of Each 
friend had a disturbing experience recently. With his son on 
aN 
the brink of college—which, for many parents, requires 
_ 
M.such a monumental financial sacrifice that they are stunned 
when the reality of it hits them—he called in an adviser he had been 
told was in the business of assisting parents in finding college finan- 
cial aid. The pleasant, enthusiastic adviser showed up and, with an 
apparent sense of warmth and caring, began inquiring about their 
family aspirations and their available finances. Hearing the re- 
sponses, he said he was just the fellow to save them real money by 
helping them fill out all the financial forms. That way, he could get 
them what he called their “‘fair share.” 
It happens that this family is modestly affluent, with too much 
money in mutual funds to make them eligible for many kinds of aid, 
so the adviser suggested that they place it in the name of the hus- 
band’s mother. As luck would have it, because the amiable fellow 
also worked for an insurance company, he could offer them the op- 
portunity to open an annuity account for the husband’s mother and 
quickly move the funds there. Then he could fill out the forms reflect- 
ing the family’s newfound poverty. And now that he knew so much 
about them, he couldn’t resist saying, “You know you are grossly 
underinsured,” and he was in a position to provide them with the 
“appropriate amount of life insurance.” 
| 
The couple felt very uneasy about the transfer of money to the 
44 

_ Intrinsic and Extrinsic Motivation 
45 
mother. It just didn’t seem right. But with their thinking blurred by 
all the fast-talk, they wrote a check for his fee of $200. Later, when 
the fog lifted, they regretted it. He wasn’t really a college-aid coun- 
selor at all. Or, if he was, that was only a sideline. He was in fact an 
insurance salesman working for commissions, and he saw in them an 
easy mark—perfect customers. All he had to do was set the hook, 
persuade them to put themselves in his hands as he contrived to de- 
ceive the governmental and university scholarship apparatus, and he 
would make long-term buyers out of them. Ultimately, the couple 
refused to go along, and they chalked up the $200 loss to a mistake 
in judgment. 
When I heard the story, it struck me that it illustrates something 
fundamental about the use of money (in this case, sales commissions) 
as a means of motivating sales. It makes the sale become everything, 
so the temptation is there to deceive and manipulate if that’s what’s 
needed to make the sale. Extrinsic control all too often gets people 
focused only on the outcomes, and that leads to shortcuts that may 
be unsavory, or just sad. As such, they are a far cry from the uplifting 
experiences that intrinsic motivation can bring. 
here is an aspect of intrinsic motivation that sets it quite apart 
from extrinsic control. It has been implicit in the discussions 
thus far, but I want to emphasize it for a moment. It is an aspect that 
is almost spiritual. It has to do with life itself: It is vitality, dedication, 
transcendence. It is what one experiences at those times that Robert 
Henri called “more than ordinary moments of existence.” 
There is a long history of work in literature and Eastern philoso- 
phy, among other disciplines, emphasizing that such experiences— 
call them heightened awareness, even satori—are of value in their 
own right. University of Chicago psychologist Mihaly Csikszent- 
mihalyi refers to these experiences as being in a state of “flow,” 
when time seems to collapse and disappear, when intensity in the 
process takes over and the thrill is so great that one hates seeing it 
end and can’t wait to get back to it. Tennis players might feel it, and 

} 
Ghrrta 
"46% 
Why We Do What We Do 
I 
so might surgeons, writers, painters, and dancers. Intense experi- 
ences like these ennoble life, make it vastly more enjoyable and ulti- 
mately result in greater self-understanding and self-honesty. They 
give us the opportunity to observe what real, deep interest feels 
. 
like—the joy of it—as opposed to the drudgery that external control 
tends to bring. 
I have always believed that the experience of intrinsic motivation 
is its own justification. Smelling the roses, being enthralled by how 
the pieces of a puzzle fit together, seeing the sunlight as it dances in 
the clouds, feeling the thrill of reaching a mountain summit: These 
are experiences that need yield nothing more to be fully justified. 
And one might go so far as to argue that a life devoid of such experi- 
ences is hardly a life at all. 
But modern society is not very concerned about all that. Modern 
society has what philosopher Charles Taylor recently referred to as 
the malaise of ‘instrumental reason.” Everything gets evaluated in 
terms of its bottom-line yield—the cost-benefit ratio, so to speak. 
Sadly, even things that should be evaluated by other criteria, like 
personal relationships, seem to have come under the dark eye of in- 
strumental reason. 
“To feel alive, to be interested and engrossed in an activity, to be 
in a state of flow, is all well and good,” some will say, “but what 
does it get you?” These people want results. They want “noteworthy 
pictures,” and they don’t care whether the painter is in “‘a high state 
of functioning” while creating them. They want high test scores, and 
they are not terribly concerned if the students feel good or are inter- 
ested in school. They want profits, and they do not pay much atten- 
tion to the professional or personal development of the employees. 
Of course it is important to attend to the outcomes of motiva- 
tion, and although intrinsic motivation is a desirable end in its own 
right, Ryan and I have devoted considerable attention to exploring 
the concrete consequences of being intrinsically motivated versus ex- 
ternally controlled. Without verifying that it has concrete advan- 
tages, we would be on shaky grounds advocating its promotion in 
schools, homes, and offices—indeed, in society more generally. So 

Intrinsic and Extrinsic Motivation 
47 
we set out to clarify whether people, when they are intrinsically mo- 
tivated, also achieve at high levels. Robert Henri hinted at the answer 
with his powerful intuitive observation that intrinsic motivation is in 
“back of every true work of art.”’ But what does the research say? 
The arena of education seemed like ripe territory for beginning 
this research because countless people had suggested that motivation 
is the key to success in education. Certainly, learning seems to be 
great fun for some people and quite tedious for others, and it was the 
whole issue of motivation for learning that got me interested in in- 
trinsic motivation in the first place. Fortunately, the outcomes of 
education—learning, performance, and adjustment—can be reliably 
measured, which is essential for doing research. 
In education, grades (sometimes accompanied by other things 
like gold stars or dean’s lists) are the primary means of extrinsic con- 
trol. They are considered incentives, and it is assumed that people 
will be motivated to learn so they can get good grades. In one learn- 
ing experiment I did with former student Carl Benware, we consid- 
ered the issue of grades as a motivator. We had two groups of college 
students spend about three hours learning some complex material on 
neurophysiology—on the machinery of the brain. Half of these stu- 
dents were told they would be tested and graded on their learning, 
and the others were told they would have the opportunity to put the 
material to active use by teaching it to others. We expected that 
learning in order to be tested would feel very controlling to the stu- 
dents, whereas learning to put the information to active use would 
feel like an exciting challenge. After students had learned the mate- 
rial, we assessed their intrinsic motivation with a questionnaire, and 
we found, as expected, that those who learned in order to be tested 
_ were less intrinsically motivated. 
Then we took it one step further to get at the main issue—the 
actual learning that had gone on. We tested both groups, even 
though the one group had not expected it, and the results showed 
that the students who learned in order to put the material to active 
use displayed considerably greater conceptual understanding of the 
material than did the students who learned in order to be tested. As 

48 
. 
Why We Do What We Do 
the research made clear, yet again, well-intentioned people—for in- 
stance, people employing tests to motivate learning—are unwittingly 
defeating the desire to learn in those people they are attempting to 
help. 
ee 
Ryan, working with Wendy Grolnick (now a faculty member at 
’ Clark University), did another learning study, this time with elemen- 
tary-school children. Two groups of children were asked to read two 
short passages from grade-level textbooks. Some of the children 
were told that they would be tested and graded on what they read; 
others were just asked to read the material without any mention of a 
test. Those who learned the material without expecting to be tested 
displayed superior conceptual understanding relative to those who 
were expecting to be tested. 
An additional, interesting piece of information was picked up in 
this study. The children who expected to be tested displayed greater 
rote memorization than those-not expecting the test. It seems that 
when people learn with the expectation of being evaluated, they 
focus on memorizing facts, but they don’t process the information as 
fully, so they don’t grasp the concepts as well. On the face of it, this 
suggests that the type of learning context that should be created, 
depends on which type of learning one hopes to foster—rote memor- 
ization or conceptual understanding. But there’s a catch here—and a 
quite fascinating one—that was discovered in a final phase of this 
study. 
Another adult visited the classrooms of these elementary-school 
— 
children a week after they had participated in the experiment. The 
adult introduced himself and reminded the children of their experi- 
ence the week before with the woman who had given them the mate- 
rial to read. He then said he would like to ask them some questions 
about what they had read. On that test, all the children recalled less 
than they had the week before when they had just read the material, 
but that’s to be expected. Stunningly, however, those who had 
learned expecting to be tested had forgotten much more. Their supe- 
rior rote memorization was no longer in evidence a few days later. 
Evidently, they memorized the material for the test, and when the 

y 
Intrinsic and Extrinsic Motivation 
. 
49 
test was over, they pulled the plug and let it drain out. Using com- 
puter jargon, Grolnick and Ryan referred to this as a “core dump.” 
With both college students and elementary-school children, the 
research indicates quite convincingly that the strategy of giving tests 
is not necessarily productive if the objective is long-term learning. 
Recently, results comparable to these have been found in other cul- 
tures as well, even among the Japanese who, Americans suppose, 
have become such fierce economic adversaries in part because of the 
pressure exerted on them in schools. 
Masaharu Kage, a young Japanese educational psychologist, 
performed experiments in his native public schools aimed at assess- 
ing the validity of our results in his culture, and he found surprisingly 
strong support for our position. In one of the studies, he gave quizzes 
to students in several classrooms, but he did it in two different ways. 
In some classes, the quizzes were evaluated by the teacher and used 
as part of the grade for the course, while in other classes, the students 
went over their own quizzes to monitor their own performance, but 
the quizzes were not used as part of the course grading system. Kage 
found that the use of evaluative quizzes to motivate learning led to 
lowered intrinsic motivation and to poorer performance on the final 
examination than did the self-monitored, nonevaluative quizzes. In 
Japanese society, it seems, there are the same learning advantages to 
minimizing rather than maximizing the pressures. The finding may 
very well characterize people in general, not just people in America. 
So, it seems pretty clear that learning will be greater when 
prompted by intrinsic motivation rather than external controls. 
What about other qualities of human behavior? Recall the limit-set- 
ting study reported at the end of the last chapter, in which young 
children painted pictures under conditions of controlling limits ver- 
sus autonomy-supportive limits. Those who painted with the con- 
trolling limits were less intrinsically motivated than those who 
painted with the autonomy-supportive limits. Well, there was a twist 
to that study as well. 
The researchers also looked at the quality of the actual pictures 
that the children painted, using a method developed by psychologist 

_ 
=. 
50 
| 
Why We Do What We Do 
Teresa Amabile. They took all the paintings made by the children in 
the two groups and mixed them together. Then they gave all the 
pictures to half a dozen judges who rated both the creativity and the 
technical merits of each picture. [he quality score was a combination 
of these two factors. After the ratings were finished, the researchers 
separated the paintings back into the original two groups and they 
calculated the average quality ratings of the pictures in each group. 
They found that the children who had painted with the autonomy- 
supportive limits and had been more intrinsically motivated, also 
painted better quality pictures—they used more colors, more origi- 
nal designs, and more varied motifs—than did the children with the 
controlling limits. Robert Henri was right again: People who are 
more intrinsically motivated to paint not only have a heightened ex- 
perience, but they are also more likely to produce a real work of art. 
Other studies have revealed that people perform less well at 
problem solving when they are working for an extrinsic reward than 
when they are intrinsically motivated. In fact, several studies have 
confirmed that the performance of any activity requiring resource- 
fulness, deep concentration, intuition, or creativity is likely to be im- 
paired when controls are used as a motivational strategy. And, of 
course, it is also the case that people will enjoy it less—feel less good 
about the experience—when external controls are the reason for 
their behavior. 
_ There are some tasks, the simple routine ones, where rewards 
and controls may serve to speed up performance, particularly if the 
rewards are based on how many units of work are done. But it is 
important to keep in mind that improving performance in these ways 
may have other, negative effects for the individuals performing the 
task, and those effects may come out in other ways, like developing a 
tendency to do only what they are paid to do, and possibly even 
engaging in subtle sabotage. Whatever the case, you can be sure that 
these rewards won’t be engendering a deep commitment to the work 
and the organization. 
. 
So where does this leave us? What has been discovered in the 
research on the qualities of intrinsically motivated (versus externally 

Intrinsic and Extrinsic Motivation 
51 
controlled) behavior? Intrinsic motivation is associated with richer 
experience, better conceptual understanding, greater creativity, and 
improved problem solving, relative to external controls. Not only do 
controls undermine intrinsic motivation and engagement with activi- 
ties but—and here is a bit of bad news for people focused on the 
bottom line—they have clearly detrimental effects on performance of 
any tasks that require creativity, conceptual understanding, or flexi- 
ble problem solving. 
BEN 
A: we reflect on how the use of excessive control—especially 
through the use of extrinsic rewards—can undermine intrinsic 
motivation and the quality of performance, it is important to keep in 
mind that rewards and other controls do have motivating power. 
People’s behavior can, at least to some extent, be controlled in the 
sense that people will do what they have to in order to get extrinsic 
rewards, avoid punishments, or win competitions. (Remember those 
seals in the Prospect Park Zoo.) Still, there are pragmatic problems 
with relying 
on rewards and controls to motivate people that are 
important to keep in mind when you decide to use that motivational 
strategy. 
The first is that once you have begun to use rewards to control 
people, you cannot easily go back. As the experiments have shown, 
when behaviors become instrumental to monetary rewards—in 
_ other words, when people behave to get rewards—those behaviors 
will last only so long as the rewards are forthcoming. In some cases 
that may be fine, but in most cases the activities we reward are ones 
that we would like to have persist long after the rewards have 
stopped. If you ran a fitness center, for example, and you used a 
reward system to encourage people to exercise, you would want 
those people to remain active after the rewards stopped. But it is 
pretty likely that if they exercise for the rewards, they will stop exer- 
cising when there are no longer rewards. And if you offered rewards 
to your children for learning—a dollar for each A on their report 
cards, let’s say—you would want the children to remain enthusiastic 

52 
é 
: 
Why We Do What We Do 
about learning after your reward system was terminated. But it is not 
at all clear that they would. Again, remember how those seals 
stopped their delightful displays when the bag of fish disappeared. 
The second problem, which was already alluded to, is that once 
people are oriented toward rewards, they will all too likely take the 
shortest or quickest path to get them. Usually, however, the shortest 
path is not what we hope to promote. Remember how Lisa watched 
the clock and wanted to play the easiest songs. Even more troubling, 
remember how the insurance salesman deceived and manipulated to 
try to make his sale. 
I also know this to be true from one of my own early experiences. 
When I was in first grade, during the first week of school, our 
teacher, Miss Cook, told us about all the books in a bookcase at the 
back of the room. Like most five-year-olds, I was bursting to become 
a good reader, and Miss Cook warmly encouraged us to read the 
books. She explained the sign-out procedure, for it was to be like a 
library, with each book accounted for. Then, just to inject a bit of 
added incentive, she told us that the student who read the most 
books would receive a prize at the end of the year. Miss Cook didn’t 
say what the prize would be, and the end of the year must have 
seemed a long way off. But I knew I wanted the prize whatever it 
might be. And more to the point, I suppose, I wanted the approval 
that would likely accompany the prize. 
Somehow I managed to figure out that the prize would really be 
awarded to the person who signed out the most books rather than 
the person who read the most books. So I started signing out books, 
one after another. I don’t recall how many I read, but it was certainly 
fewer than the number I signed out. When the end of the year finally 
came, I had won the big box of Crayola crayons. It’s sad to look back 
on it now. The crayons were nice, at the time, but they’re long gone. 
Gone, too, is the reading that might have happened, the discovery 
that could have been mine. And how I got away with it, I will never 
know. 
I’m embarrassed as I tell the story now, feeling a bit like: the 
insurance salesman. It is as if I had sold a piece of my morality for a 

= 
- 
Intrinsic and Extrinsic Motivation 
— 
aye) 
box of crayons. But, of course, five-year-olds don’t understand much 
about morality because moral reasoning develops in systematic ways 
at predictable times in a child’s life, and it is still quite primitive for 
children at that age. 
In the last few years, many teachers have told me stories that 
remind me of my experience with Miss Cook. For example, there is 
the case of a perhaps well-intentioned program offered by a pizza 
franchise, in which students accumulated points for reading books 
which they turned in for free pizzas. The implicit message, of course, 
is that pizzas are more interesting than books, and a numbet of 
teachers have remarked that programs such as this make it harder, 
rather than easier, to stimulate students’ interest in reading. No 
doubt, these students want the pizzas, and they’Il do what they have 
to do to get them. They’ll just say they read the books if they can get 
away with it, or they’ll just read the books superficially. What’s 
more, even if the pizzas do prompt some reading, it is very unlikely 
that the students will be interested in continuing to read after the free 
pizzas are no longer available. 
The problem is in the use of reward structures to motivate some- 
thing that could be made exciting in its own right. In retrospect, it is 
easy to see that Miss Cook should have focused on the joys of read- 
ing in some informative, engaging way. But she was caught up in a 
widely held, profoundly erroneous theory of human motivation. She 
thought she was doing the right thing, but she lacked some of the 
wisdom of the Jewish tailor on Main Street. 
This same type of problem occurs in the workplace all the time, 
and we see it most keenly with respect to quality control. Pay people 
in accord with how much they produce, and they will produce a lot, 
but the quality is not likely to be up to snuff. The typical response is 
to become even more controlling, to set up elaborate policing sys- 
tems of one sort or another. But really that is just escalating the battle 
rather than solving the problem. People can be pretty creative in get- 
ting around rules, they can be pretty clever in finding the shortest 
path to a reward. The junk-bond kings and arbitrageurs of the 1980s 
could not have made this point any more convincingly. 

54 
. 
Why We Do What 
We Do 
The junk-bond kings were, of course, extreme examples. A more 
common instance is contained in a story recently told by a friend. It 
occurred in a publishing house, but it could have been any business. 
Profit and loss statements were a big deal in that company, of course. 
- 
Actually, a bit too big of a deal. It seems that bonuses, which people 
had become dependent on both for the money itself and for the ego 
. boost it provided, were awarded to each manager on the basis of the 
P & L statement for the group he or she managed. 
What often happened, and not surprisingly, is that toward the 
end of the year, editors would rush books into print that would bet- 
ter have waited until the following year. They needed the numbers, 
so they directed their creativity and resourcefulness toward getting 
those numbers, rather than toward effective performance. Obvi- 
ously, doing that is a bad business decision, but the proffered bonus 
seemed to promote a lot of that. 
ay-for-performance’is a revered concept in management circles. 
It’s classic carrot and stick. ‘‘Piece-rate payment,” which was 
the central motivational technique in the Scientific Management ap- 
proach developed early in this century by Frederick Winslow Taylor, 
is the quintessential pay-for-performance method. It involves com- 
_ pensating employees for each specific piece of work they do. Count 
the bars of pig iron a man moves in eight hours and pay him so much 
per bar. That’s his wage for today. The reasoning, of course, is that if 
he wants more money, he will move more bars tomorrow. 
: 
Sales commissions also represent an example of the pure pay-for- 
performance concept. As with the burly, immigrant worker moving 
pig iron for piece-rate payments early in the century, the well- 
groomed, verbally fluent sales rep of today can determine his own 
pay. Sell more software packages or minivans and make more 
money. Sell more insurance policies, even if you have to lie a little to 
do it, and you will become more affluent. 
At the top of the corporate world, pay-for-performance takes 
forms such as profit-sharing stock options. The rationale behind all 

Intrinsic and Extrinsic Motivation 
5S 
these motivational incentives is that “money talks.” People want 
money, so if you structure the situation correctly you can get them to 
do what you want. 
The results of the studies cast further doubt on the efficacy of 
these pay-for-performance practices, however. Of course, these prac- 
tices can motivate people, but in the process, they will likely encour- 
age shortcuts and undermine intrinsic motivation. They will draw 
people’s attention away from the job itself, toward the rewards 
it can 
yield, and that without doubt will result in less effective, less creative 
problem solving. In a time of major problems facing the business 
world, in a time when thoughtful, visionary problem solving is 
what’s needed, too many companies have taken the easy road by 
falling into a pattern of relying on glamorous incentives rather than 
promoting involvement with the job and commitment to the com- 
pany. 
Money 
is the medium of exchange in all modern economic sys- 
tems, SO monetary payments rewards have to be dispensed. But there 
are better and worse ways of doing that. It is better, for example, not 
to think about rewards as a way to motivate people. Rewards are 
part of the work contract, so you would not have workers without 
rewards. But research suggests that, to the extent that rewards are 
“used” for any function other than retaining workers, it ought be 
merely to acknowledge or signify a job well done. Rewards can be 
used as a way to express appreciation, but the more they are used as 
motivators—like the bonus plan in the publishing house—the more 
- 
likely it is that they will have negative effects. 
Treats and gifts are nice for children, and grandparents love 
being able to give them. But again, the less they are given contin- 
gently, for being a good boy or a good girl, and the less they are used 
to motivate children (to do well in school, say), the more positive (or 
less negative) will be their effects. 
Another important point about administering rewards is that 
they need, in some important sense, to be equitable. In other words, 
people need to feel that their rewards are commensurate with their 
contributions, and are equitable relative to what other people 

« 
56 
Why We Do What We Do 
around them are earning. Equitable rewards mean that people who 
give more to an organization will get more from it. But that is a 
tricky matter because the idea tempts people to use rewards to try to 
. 
motivate people to give more, which, of course, highlights the con- 
trolling aspect of the rewards. Instead, by de-emphasizing rewards as 
a motivational strategy and playing them down as an aspect of the 
work setting, they can be administered equitably simply as a fact of 
the implicit contract of work. That way, they will be less likely to 
initiate the processes that have been shown to have detrimental ef- 
fects. 

ahd 
a 
Engaging the World 
with a Sense 
of Competence 
, 
everal times prior to the demise of the Soviet Empire in 1989, 
I served as a consultant for the Council of Ministers in the 
poor and weary nation of Bulgaria. The lack of motivation 
among the citizenry was extraordinary. The society as a whole 
seemed depressed. People did what they had to do in order not to get. 
into trouble, of course, but most of them had little constructive in- 
volvement in the productive activities of the nation’s enterprises. 
Whereas in the United States, instrumentalities (or linkages) between 
people’s behavior and their desired outcomes are built into the sys- 
tem and widely used to motivate achievement, in Bulgaria they were 
remarkably absent. Simply stated, there was nothing riding on 
whether or not people were productive, so there was a bare mini- 
mum of active compliance toward productive ends. 
I remember one visit to a state-owned manufacturing company. I 
went with my interpreter, Julian Usunov (who now, under the new 
system, is a management consultant), and we were shown around by 
the general manager of the company. It was the middle of the after- 
noon, and we went into one cavernous room, with a couple of dozen 
workstations. Each station had a machine for working with metal— 
lathes, drills, presses, and so on. As we entered, we saw a few clusters 
of idle people sitting or standing around chatting: A room full of 
' Maytag repairmen. When the workers saw us (saw the big boss, that 
Ries 

sf 
* 
58 
Why We Do What We Do 
is) some of them ambled back to their workstations, others didn’t 
even bother. 
. 
For these workers, and for others in the Bulgarian system, out- 
comes such as enjoyment of their work, a satisfactory level of pay, 
and keeping their jobs were not contingent upon their work behav- 
ior, so there were no incentives for working. Certainly they would 
not have enjoyed their work in that cold, dirty room, running those 
machines, producing pieces of metal that may have had no purpose 
anyway (the storeroom was full of such things that were headed no- 
where), so there would have been no intrinsic rewards for doing 
good work. Furthermore, the meager extrinsic rewards they received 
did not serve as motivators because they were not dependent on the 
quantity or quality of performance. And there were no threats of 
punishments for failing to work effectively (although, of course, the 
very fact of being there was itself punishing). Why weren’t they just 
fired? Because under the communist system the ethic was that every- 
' 
one had the right to a job. Pay was dismal, but it was more or less 
guaranteed. The joke so often told by Bulgarians says it all: “They 
pretended to pay us and we pretended to work.” 
A few years ago, Ryan made a trip to China. While there, he was 
shown through a plant by one of the managers, and he saw behaviors 
similar to what I had seen in Bulgaria. At one point, he watched a 
group of about eight people working in a kind of supply depot, 
where parts were being organized, stored, and distributed. He 
watched the operation for a few minutes and said to his guide, “It 
seems to me that they could accomplish the same results with three 
people. They just seem to get in each other’s way.” With a tone that 
bordered on disdain, the manager replied, “Yes, but then what. 
would happen to the others?” 
Countries with totalitarian, central-planning systems have been 
remarkably ineffective in motivating their workers—in getting them 
to be productive and efficient. Indeed, their approach to motivating 
work behavior has been far less successful than that built into the 
American system. The problem is that the central-planning econo- 
- 
mies lack a fundamental element that is necessary for motivation; 

Engaging the World with a Sense of Competence 
59 
they lack meaningful contingencies—they lack behavior-outcome 
linkages. 
; 
Motivation requires that people see a relationship between their 
behavior and desired outcome, and instrumentalities are the linkages 
that allow people to see these behavior-outcome relationships. In- 
strumentalities can be created at the level of economic systems, at the 
level of an organization, and at the level of interactions between two’ 
individuals such as a parent and child. If people do not believe that 
. 
their behavior will lead to something they desire—whether the lack 
of instrumentality is the fault of the system, the organization, or an 
individual in a one-up position—they will not be motivated. The de- 
sired outcomes can be intrinsic satisfactions, or they can be extrinsic 
rewards, but people have to believe that some outcomes will accrue 
from their behavior or they will not be motivated to behave. That is 
what was generally missing in Bulgaria. People did not believe that 
productive behavior would lead to any meaningful outcomes, so 
they displayed very little productive behavior. 
Built into our system of private ownership and market forces is a 
set of instrumentalities. Efficiency is paramount, and extrinsic re- 
wards are administered in a way intended to make people efficient. 
The linkage between behavior and extrinsic rewards is an integral 
part of the system, and it is lodged in the minds of most individuals 
within the system. The system has inefficiencies, and people have 
resorted to manipulating the system as we saw in the last chapter, but 
still the instrumentalities are there and they have, according to Hong 
Kong economist Henry Woo, resulted in a remarkably efficient use 
of human capital when compared to the relative lack of instrumen- 
talities in the central-planning economies of Eastern Europe. 
The interesting points in this comparison between Bulgaria and 
America are: First, that without appropriate instrumentalities, there 
will not be productive, motivated behavior; but, second, instrumen- 
talities are a double-edged sword—they are the basis for facilitating 
' motivation, but they are also the means through which control can 
have its profoundly negative effects. 
Control, which involves using instrumentalities to pressure peo- 

wa 
a 
60 
Why We Do What We Do 
-« 
ple to behave in particular ways, is one form of motivation, and ex- 
trinsic-reward contingencies are what allow control to work moder- 
ately successfully as a strategy for motivating productivity. The 
problem, of course, is that control has a variety of substantially nega- 
tive human consequences. 
It is one of the great paradoxes of history that the central-plan- 
ning economy, which was founded as a tonic for alienation, ended 
up yielding worse results than the private-ownership system because 
it used an ineffective approach to control and it typically got coupled 
with coercive totalitarian regimes. As can be gleaned from our ex- 
periments, control itself is alienating, but when it is used ineffec- 
tively, as it typically has been by totalitarian regimes, it is utterly 
disastrous, resulting in widespread lethargy and lack of purpose. 
One of the most important points that our experiments have il- 
luminated, and the point that is the basis for hope, is that, although 
instrumentalities are all too readily used to control, they do not have 
to be. The most effective parents use reward contingencies in non- 
controlling ways, rather than controlling ways, and the results are 
quite positive when they do. The same is true for managers, teachers, 
and coaches. For example, in the more enlightened U.S. companies, 
managers understand the importance of intrinsic motivation, so they 
design more interesting jobs and allow employees the opportunity to 
participate 
in decision making—that 
is, they offer employees 
choice—so that effective behavior will be instrumental to intrinsic 
satisfaction. At the same time, they do not rely on extrinsic-reward 
contingencies to motivate behavior, but instead use rewards simply 
as a means of acknowledging accomplishment. Extrinsic contingen- 
cies do exist in such companies in the sense that people have to per- 
form effectively to keep their jobs and to get promotions, but the 
contingencies are not emphasized as a means of control. 
, 
This point is an extremely important one at the level of policy 
making as well. When decision makers understand that people can 
be motivated in either autonomous or controlled ways, and that sys- 
tems, organizations, and individuals can promote motivation in ei- 
ther autonomy-supportive or controlling ways, they can create 

7. o 
Engaging the World with a Sense of Competence 
61 
policies that are more oriented toward supporting autonomy than 
toward controlling behavior. Countless decisions get made, in the 
federal, state, and local governments, as well as in public and private 
corporations, that profoundly affect people’s lives. By thinking 
about the issues from the perspective of autonomy support rather 
than control, the decisions will be different, and the effects on eae 
ple’s lives will be different as well. 
p 
eople in the mainstream of American culture know what they 
need to do to make money, to earn a college degree, to get ap- 
proval from superiors, to feel a sense of accomplishment, and to have 
a host of opportunities for themselves and their families. The contin- 
gencies are built into our system of life, and these contingencies have 
worked to motivate a large percentage of the population. But still, in 
spite of the fact that the American system has served to productively 
motivate large numbers of people, there are some who have “fallen 
out of the system,” who have not been productively motivated by it, 
because they have not had access to ihe contingencies that are central 
to the system. 
Poor schooling provided to some of this country’s students, dis- 
crimination against some of its citizens, and a defensive indifference 
that has developed in response to such forces, are among the con- 
tributors to the system’s having failed to motivate some people— 
perhaps a quarter of the population—toward productive ends. Thus, 
although there are instrumentalities within the system, these in- 
strumentalities have failed to work for some people, because those 
people have not had access to those instrumentalities. For behavior- 
outcome linkages to serve as motivators, people must understand 
them,see them as relevant to their lives, and have the capabilities for 
utilizing them. There are densely populated areas in our inner cities _ 
that are full of people who have fallen out of the system because they 
see no possibility of operating within it. The standard instrumentali- 
ties are not relevant to their lives. Poverty, violence, a lack of realistic 
' expectations about a secure future have all left these people feeling 

es 
3 
; 
F 
va 
, 
‘¢ 
NC's Fi Oe 
Pre 
4 
4 
: 
. 
62 
| 
Why We Do What We Do 
more like the Bulgarians during Soviet domination than like the 
mainstream of American society. 
There are many tragic cases; we read about chev every day inthe 
- 
paper, and I have heard about them from friends who have worked 
in inner-city schools. I remember one case quite vividly. He was a 
smart, often charming young man who had no meaningful family 
support and no useful role model. When he was in eighth grade, he 
started dealing drugs, which meant quick money, so he began to 
wear expensive clothes and jewelry. His teacher saw his potential, 
and she tried hard to reach him, going the extra mile so to speak, but 
‘unfortunately he just drifted further away and eventually stopped 
showing up in school at all. 
From then on, his story got worse. He was involved in various 
nefarious activities, such as fraudulent telephone sales of fake gems, 
which landed him in jail for a few months. And he had a string of 
financial problems, like buying a car and wrecking it before it was 
paid for. The list of people to whom he owed money and favors was 
apparently quite long. At one point, when a car hit him on a dark 
road it nearly severed his. right leg. He believed that he had been 
struck by one of the people he owed money, and perhaps he was. 
Although his leg was repaired to the point where he could keep it, the 
limp and pain would always be a problem for him. 
The small-time drug dealer had fallen out of the system because 
he never learned to function within the contingencies of our soci- 
ety—finishing school, committing himself to work, and so on. He 
tried some easy, seductive contingencies that existed in his circles, 
but they only landed him in harm’s way. 
Of course, the lack of motivation brought on by the absence of 
effective contingencies exists at the interpersonal level, as well as the 
system’s level, and it affects everyone. A recent example I heard 
_about occurred in a middle-class neighborhood. Lisa—the six-year- 
old violin student—has a neighbor named Jennifer, who is the same 
age. The girls have been close friends since they were toddlers. Early 
on a Friday evening not long ago, Jenni’s father told her that if she 
were really good all weekend, he would take her to a toy store on 

==3 
» 
Engaging the World with a Sense of Competence 
63 
Monday night and she could have the toy of her choice. Jenni of 
course was very excited, and all through that evening she was on her 
very best behavior. She held all her feelings tight within her, so she 
would look like a good girl to her father. After all, he had empha- 
sized that she had to be really good. 
On Saturday morning, Lisa went to play with Jenni, as she often 
did. Within fifteen minutes the two girls had returned to Lisa’s 
house. What had happened was that Jenni’s mother had denied her 
something and she started to cry and shake. Everything she’d been 
holding in started to come out. Fortunately, her father was off on an 
errand, so he didn’t know what happened. Lisa, being quite astute 
about such things, invited Jenni to her house where they spent the 
rest of the day. 
What was wrong with this strategy as a means of motivating 
Jenni to be a good girl? Although the reward was salient enough, the 
requisite behavior was too vague, so Jenni did not really understand 
the instrumentality. “Being a good girl” could mean many things, 
and to Jenni it meant stifling her negative feelings, which led only to 
trouble. The feelings became too strong to stifle, and although her 
father did not know about the incident, it resulted in a very unpleas- 
ant experience for Jenni and did not lead to the kind of behavior that 
her father had wanted. 
For extrinsic motivation to work as a motivator, there must be 
clarity about what behaviors are expected, and what outcomes will 
result from those instrumental behaviors. For Jenni, the outcomes 
were clear enough but the behaviors were not, so she was not effec- 
tively motivated. In most totalitarian systems, and for some people in 
our system, the same is true; there are not clear linkages between 
understandable behaviors and desired outcomes, so there is a pro- 
found lack of motivation to be a productive member of society. 
Ithough instrumentalities are extremely important for motiva- 
tion, they alone are not enough to ensure a high level of produc- 
tive 
involvement. 
People 
must 
also 
feel competent 
at 
the 

ies 
» 
ci 
64 
Why We Do What We Do 
instrumental behaviors for the instrumentalities to be effective 
motivators. James Connell and Ellen Skinner, former colleagues in 
the Human Motivation Program at the University of Rochester, sum- 
marized these points by saying that people need to have both the 
strategies and the capacities for attaining desired outcomes. 
Feeling competent is important both for extrinsic motivation 
and for intrinsic motivation. Whether behavior is instrumental for 
extrinsic outcomes such as bonuses and promotions, or-for intrinsic 
outcomes such as enjoyment of the task and feelings of personal ac- 
complishment, people must feel sufficiently competent at the instru- 
mental 
activities 
to achieve their desired outcomes. 
Extrinsic 
contingencies typically specify competency requirements—in other 
words, people in one-up positions usually require a certain level of 
performance quality in order to give the extrinsic outcomes. With — 
intrinsic outcomes, the issue of competency is more integrally inter- 
twined with the enjoyment of the activity itself, and this issue has 
been the focus of several of our experiments. 
The “rewards” linked to intrinsic motivation are the feelings of 
enjoyment and accomplishment that accrue spontaneously as a per- 
son engages freely in the target activities. Thus, feeling competent at 
the task is an important aspect of one’s intrinsic satisfaction. The 
feeling of being effective is satisfying in its own right, and can even 
represent the primary draw for a lifelong career. People realize that 
the more they invest in a job, the better they will get at it, and thus 
the more intrinsic satisfaction they will experience. 
There is a virtually legendary rewrite man on a major daily news- 
paper (the title “rewrite man,” originally bestowed in the days of 
sexist language, designates 
a man or woman who remains in the 
newspaper’s office to write news stories from’ information provided 
by reporters out in the field and by a variety of other sources). This 
fellow was so good at what he did and derived such satisfaction from 
it that he simply had no interest in any other job. He did not mind the 
late hours. He seemed to revel in the strange rhythm of his job, play- 
ing chess with cohorts one minute and then rushing to his computer 
to tap out a story when the information about some horrifying fire or 

| a 
7 
g tat 
; 
, 
Engaging the World with a Sense of Competence 
65 
earthquake came tumbling in. No one doubted that any story he was 
assigned would turn out pristine in its lucidity. He was simply very 
good at his work, and the job provided him an enormous amount of 
intrinsic satisfaction. 
Naturally, the company regarded his talents so highly that they 
wanted to turn him into a high-paid editor and thus put him on the 
path to more “important” jobs. But he was a rewrite man! He liked 
the challenge and excitement of it, and he liked the feelings of accom- 
plishment his stellar work provided him. He refused promotion even 
when his bosses came close to demanding that he accept it. 
Decades ago, the personality psychologist Robert White wrote a 
compelling paper about “The Concept of Competence” in which he 
argued that people yearn so strongly to feel competent or effective in 
dealing with their environment that competence could be thought of 
as a fundamental human need. This was apparently true for the re- 
write man who had defined his life with work that was challenging 
and at the same time sure to leave him feeling competent. 
White’s theorizing suggests that there is a second important psy- 
chological need—beyond autonomy—that underlies intrinsically 
motivated behavior. People, impelled by the need to feel competent, 
might engage in various activities simply to expand their own sense 
of accomplishment. When you think about it, the curiosity of chil- 
dren—their intrinsic motivation to learn—might, to a large extent, 
_ -be attributed to their need to feel effective or competent in dealing 
with their world. 
At the Cobblestone Elementary School not far from the Univer- 
sity of Rochester, the motivating power of the need to feel effective is 
right out in the open to be seen. The school is in a stark, brick struc- 
ture, but it has an approach to education that begins with thinking 
about what the children need in order to learn and develop effec- 
tively. It is quite rare in this regard. 
Outside the building that Cobblestone occupies there are no jun- 
~ 
gle gyms or elaborate playthings, but any visitor on any day will see 
young children having a fabulous time. Outdoors, seven- or eight- 
_ 
year-olds might be digging in the ground for fossils—or imaginary 

- 
66 
Why We Do What We Do 
4 
fossils, anyway. Indoors, five-year-olds who cannot read might be 
playing a board game, making up the rules as they go along. 
All of this is not “unstructured” in the negative sense of children 
being ignored or set free to do whatever they please. On the contrary, 
guidance comes from teachers who encourage the children to reflect 
on what they have been doing and from older children who set exam- 
ples for the younger ones to emulate. The younger ones, of course, 
are propelled by a desire to achieve, accomplish, and learn—by the 
need for competence—and they are guided by elders who care about 
the children’s development. In these children, one sees intrinsic moti- 
vation joyfully at work—the tendency to explore and experiment, 
the desire for novelty—and the need to feel competent is an impor- 
tant energizer. 
The feeling of competence results when a person takes on and, in 
his or her own view, meets optimal challenges. Optimal challenge is 
a key concept here. Being able to do something that is trivially easy 
does not lead to perceived competence, for the feeling of being effec- 
tive occurs spontaneously only when one has worked toward accom- 
plishment. Like the children at Cobblestone School, with their 
spontaneous, inner desire to test themselves and the environment, all 
of us are striving for mastery, for affirmations of our own compe- 
tence. One does not have to be best or first, or to get an “‘A,” to feel 
competent; one need only take on a meaningful peranal challenge 
and give it one’s best. 
I 
f there really is an innate need for competence, then the feelings of 
competence should affect people’s intrinsic motivation. To test 
this, I did a simple experiment in which I arranged for subjects in one 
group to succeed relatively well at puzzle solving and those in an- 
other group to fail quite badly. I managed that by selecting puzzles 
for the two groups that were quite different in difficulty level, even 
though they appeared to be similar. As expected, those who received 
evidence of their own competence were subsequently more intrinsi- 

\ 
a 
we 
_ Engaging the World with a Sense of Competence 
‘ 
67 
cally motivated than those who saw evidence of relative incompe- 
tence. 
The fact that perceived competence is related to intrinsic motiva- 
tion leads directly to a very important set of issues about giving peo- 
ple feedback. For example, does it help people’s intrinsic motivation 
to praise their performance? Praise is an extrinsic reward, but it is a 
different sort of reward from the others that have been discussed so 
far. It’s not tangible like money and it’s not offered up front—you 
never hear someone say, “‘I’ll praise you if you do such and such.” 
Still, praise is widely used as a reward, and experts often encourage 
people to use praise as a motivator—at work, home, school, and 
throughout everyday life. People assume it works. They assume that 
if they praise someone for a worthy deed, it will make that person 
feel better and be more likely to engage in the desirable behavior 
again. 
“ 
Wayne. Cascio (now an industrial psychologist at the University 
of Colorado), Judith Krusell (now a clinical psychologist in New Jer- 
sey), and I did another simple experiment. We gave positive feed- 
back—statements like, ““Good, you solved that one faster than most 
people”—to half the subjects, but we gave no performance feedback 
to the other half. Because the task was one where people could not 
really tell how well they were doing, it was possible to give positive 
feedback that was believable no matter how well they actually did. 
Half the subjects in each experimental group were male and half 
female, and the results were quite startling indeed, so unexpected 
that, in a kind of scientific double take, we felt obliged to give the 
experiment another try. In both of these cases, the results indicated 
that praising males increased their intrinsic motivation, but praising 
females decreased their intrinsic motivation. It was apparently the 
case that females got “hooked” by the praise, whereas males, for 
whom it simply affirmed their success—it signified that they were 
competent—were propelled onward by it. But why might that be so? 
Clearly, some consideration of the general social conditions of 
the time might help with an explanation. It was the mid 1970s, and 

7 
« 
68 
Why We Do What We Do 
one of the most pressing insights of that moment—although, of 
course, it seems rather familiar to say it now—was the realization of 
how men and women had been socialized differently throughout 
childhood. Boys were expected tobe more adventurous, girls less so; 
boys were expected to be focused on success, girls on being interper- 
sonally sensitive. Feminists, and many of the rest of us, believed then 
and now that females were getting the short end of the stick when it 
came to opportunities for achievement. Through the insidious mes- 
sages in the social milieu, women were being taught that being com- 
petent at various tasks was not as important for them as for men, 
‘and, at the same time, they were developing a kind of hypersen- 
sitivity to praise because they had been taught to make praise a more 
central aspect of their human discourse. This hypersensitivity appar- 
ently led the women in the study to experience the praise as a control, 
and they quickly learned to see the puzzle solving as a way of obtain- 
ing praise rather than something that provides its own intrinsic grati- - 
fication. 
me 
These results were, of course, provocative, prompting contro- 
versy and further experiments. Ryan, for example, wondering if all 
positive feedback would undermine the intrinsic motivation of 
females, decided to use two different sets of positive feedback, one 
set consisting of controlling statements (using words like “living up 
to expectations” and “‘doing as you should”’) and another set consist- 
ing of statements that were not at all controlling (no mention of 
shoulds or expectations and no social comparison information, just 
— 
simple statements such as “‘you’ve done very well’’). It turned out 
that the controlling praise decreased everyone’s intrinsic motiva- 
tion—males and females alike—whereas the noncontrolling praise 
left everyone’s interest and persistence at a high level. 
. 
The point, then, is that praise can be clearly noncontrolling or 
clearly controlling, as Ryan’s study showed. Or it can be somewhat 
ambiguous as was the case in the study I did with Cascio and Krusell. 
If it is noncontrolling, it will enhance people’s intrinsic motivation; if 
it is controlling, it will diminish people’s intrinsic motivation; and if 
it is ambiguous with respect to whether or not it is controlling, males 

Engaging the World with a Sense of Competence 
69 
and females may interpret it differently. Females seem to have a 
greater tendency than do males to experience it as controlling. 
This research highlighted the fact that even praise when used as 
an interpersonal reward can have a negative effect on the enjoy- 
ment and motivation of people receiving it, and the problem once 
again is control. It is thus imperative, when using praise, to be 
careful about your own intentions. Are you praising in an attempt 
to get the person to do more? Are you perhaps being subtly con- 
trolling? With praise, with rewards, with limits, if you want to use 
© 
them in a way that does not undermine intrinsic motivation, you 
have to take pains to minimize the controlling language, the con- 
trolling style, and your own agenda of controlling the other per- 
son’s behavior. 
Unfortunately, all too often, parents, coaches, or media com- 
mentators impose controlling external criteria, and they use feed- 
back and rewards in evaluative and controlling ways. In order to 
_ motivate competent activity in their children or athletes, for exam- 
ple, people often become controlling and thus interfere with the nat- 
ural motivation that was already there. 
It is truly amazing how, in the Olympics, for example, commen- 
tators speak about the performance of someone who ends up taking 
the silver medal in, say, men’s figure skating as if he were a disap- 
pointing failure. The second-best skater in the world, and he’s 
treated like a loser. THat’s what happens when we turn everything 
into a contest in which there is only one winner, in which winning 
matters more than playing well or being a good sport. By creating 
highly controlling interpersonal contexts, we undermine the natural 
desire to feel competent. 
Competition does not need to be treated that way. The real func- 
tion of competition could be viewed as providing challenge—as pro- 
viding an opportunity 
for people to test themselves 
and to 
improve—and in the process to have fun. The pressure to win is 
extra; it is something that has been added, and it is the added pres- 
sure that undermines intrinsic motivation, as was shown in 
the study 
by Reeve and myself reported in Chapter Three. 

ee 
rr 
ee 
Oe) 
OED ee 
wt 
70 
Why We Do What We Do 
li 
he concept of perceived competence is employed by many so- 
cial and clinical psychologists these days, people such as Stan- 
ford University psychologist Albert Bandura. They agree that the 
important feeling of being effective is essential for a high level of 
motivation, but they have failed to realize that perceived competence 
must be accompanied by the experience of autonomy for the most 
positive results. As people gain competence in dealing with them- 
selves and their world, and as they become more autonomous in 
doing that, they will perform more effectively and display a greater 
sense of well-being. But gaining competence alone is not enough. To 
be a competent pawn, to be effective but not to feel truly volitional 
and self-determined at the activity you can do so well, does not pro- 
mote intrinsic motivation and general well-being. Of course, the 
worst case is to lack both perceived competence and perceived au- 
_ tonomy, which can easily result in a condition of ill-being such as 
depression—a state so lacking in motivation that it can lead to de- 
spair and even death—but perceived competence without perceived 
autonomy has also been shown to have negative effects. 
We see this problem in life all the time. For example, recognizing 
the importance of competence, many adults give children challenges 
- 
and then pressure them to master the challenges. Especially, if a child 
shows talent, the challenges can be great and the pressures intense. 
But there are two problems in this approach, even if the adults are 
well-meaning. First, if the challenge is not optimal—if it is not realis- 
tically within the child’s grasp—it will not be motivating. And sec- 
ond, the challenge must be accompanied by autonomy support 
rather than control to yield the best results. In fact, when adults are 
- 
autonomy supportive, they will almost surely provide optimal chal- 
lenges, because being autonomy supportive involves taking the oth- 
ers’ perspective. When people do that, they will understand what is 
optimal for the others. Providing others with challenges that will 
allow them to end up feeling both competent and autonomous, will 
promote in them greater vitality, motivation, and well-being. 
Autonomy fuels growth and health because it allows people to 
experience themselves as themselves, as the initiators of their own 
| 

hie 
= 
+ 
Engaging the World with a Sense of Competence 
wt 
actions. Perceived competence, or mastery, without perceived auton- 
omy is not enough because being a competent puppet does not nour- 
ish humanness. In such competence, the essence of life is missing. 
The strivings for competence and autonomy together—propelled 
by curiosity. and interest—are thus complementary growth forces 
that lead people to become increasingly accomplished and to go on 
learning throughout their lifetimes. The research reported thus far, 
along with more to come, indicates quite clearly that, on every level, 
the person who feels competent and autonomous, who directs his or 
her own life, is immeasurably better off than the person who does 
not. 
f positive feedback can have a potentially deleterious effect on 
motivation and performance by diminishing perceived autonomy, 
what must be the case with negative feedback? The answer, of 
course, is clear enough: It is far more disastrous. Experiments have 
showed that, too. When people were told that they did not perform 
well, they felt incompetent and controlled, and all their intrinsic mo- 
tivation was drained away. 
| 
But just because negative feedback can have a demotivating ef- 
fect does not mean that we, as parents, teachers, or managers should 
simply ignore poor performance. With negative feedback, as with 
rewards, limits, and positive feedback, it’s all in how you do it. 
I had a student once, a middle-aged woman pursuing her Ph.D. 
in nursing, who supervised nursing students at the university’s medi- 
cal center. She raised a practical problem in class one day. It centered 
on what to say to a young nurse who had made a mistake in hooking 
up a man’s intravenous tube—a mistake that resulted in an air bub- 
ble getting into it. It was a potentially very serious matter, to be sure, 
but fortunately her coworker noticed it and pointed it out so the man 
was not harmed. ‘‘What,” my student asked, ‘‘was the appropriate 
thing to have said to this young woman about the incident?” 
Another student in the class, a doctoral student in psychology, 
answered, “You should point out to her what a serious mistake it 

« 
\ 
72 
Why We Do What We Do + 
was, being sure she understands the potential consequences for the 
patient, and tell her that she really must be more careful in the future. 
Oh, and be sure to point out that you are not criticizing her, but 
instead are criticizing the behavior.’’ Other students voiced their 
agreement with this approach. 
What exactly was contained within those comments? Well, first, 
the students agreed it was important to step up to the problem—it is 
certainly not something to be ignored. Second, they advocated pro- 
viding information about the possible consequences and the impor- 
tance of being careful. And, third, they suggested phrasing the 
feedback in a way that focused on the behavior and not on the per- 
son. All three points are meaningful, and in the right situations could 
facilitate motivation. So, it would seem that they were right on tar- 
get. 
But let’s stop and think about it for a moment. Imagine yourself : 
in the position of the young nursing student. Do you suppose you 
would have realized it was a serious error with potentially dire con- 
sequences? Of course you would. And the admonition to be more 
careful would almost certainly have served no meaningful purpose. 
Could the young woman possibly not have known that she should be 
more careful? 
So I asked the class, ‘“‘How about starting by asking her what her 
thoughts were about the incident?” If we want to be autonomy sup- 
portive of the young trainee, we need to start from her perspective. 
And what better way to find out her perspective than to invite her to 
share it. “I’d be willing to bet,” I went on, “that if you asked her, she 
would say everything you thought it necessary to say.” In fact, she 
would probably go even further to criticize herself—as a nurse and as 
a person—which would not be helpful, so you might end up having 
to reassure her. But otherwise she could probably do most of the 
talking. 
. 
‘ 
One of the heartening things you will find if you are truly auton- 
omy supportive with trainees, subordinates, or anyone else you are 
teaching or supervising, is that those people will typically be amaz- 
ingly accurate in evaluating their own performance. In many cases, 
Ae eA 
ee 

Engaging the World with a Sense of Competence 
73 
they may be more accurate than you are. But just as surely, if you 
become controlling and evaluative with them, they will be defensive, 
evasive, and in all likelihood will blame others. Some will be highly 
self-deprecatory rather than pointing the finger at everyone else, but 
neither type of response will lead to productive problem solving and 
effective performance. 
For the type of engagement that promotes optimal problem solv- 
ing and performance, people need to be intrinsically motivated. 
That, as we have seen, begins with instrumentalities—with people 
understanding how to achieve desired outcomes—and with people 
feeling competent at the instrumental activities. Then, it is facilitated 
by interpersonal contexts that support people’s autonomy. With 
these important ingredients, people will be likely to set their own 
goals, develop their own standards, monitor their own progress, and 
attain goals that benefit not only themselves, but also the groups and 
organizations to which they belong. 


PART TWO 
The Role of 
Interpersonal 
~Connectedness 

5 iis — 
1; Sy, 
VER BSS 
Meta 
cotas 
Katie 
Ecol eee 
We 
Tid 

SIX 
The Inner Force 
of Development 
sychology has a history that is a bit like a patient with a split 
personality. It has two identities, dramatically different, each 
off in its own sphere of research and influence. One emerged 
as the study of internal processes that are often difficult to observe 
directly. The other emerged with a single-minded focus on distinct 
behaviors. The former—the psychoanalytic tradition which began 
» 
with Sigmund Freud’s revolutionary work—was built on the_belief 
that the reasons people act and feel as they do are deep within them. 
Thus change can be promoted only when people probe their psychic 
depths and bring into awareness those inner, often unconscious, dy- 
namics. The latter—the empirical tradition which began as behavior- 
ism—presumed 
that the causes 
of people’s 
actions 
are 
the 
reinforcements they have received, so a person’s life can be dramati- 
cally altered by precise adjustments in the administration of rein- 
forcements. 
Humanistic psychology—including the work of Carl Rogers, 
who pioneered client-centered therapy, and Fritz Perls, who pio- 
neered Gestalt therapy—has evolved out of the psychoanalytic tradi- 
tion. Although the differences between. the psychoanalytic and 
‘humanistic perspectives are frequently discussed, the two actually 
share many features. Both understand human behavior in terms of 
motivational and emotional dynamics; both focus on promoting 
77 

Par, 
ae 
. 
Why We Do What We Do 
awareness as the basis for change; and both build theory using obser- 
vations and direct experience. 
Behavioral theory, within the empirical tradition, is something 
else altogether. It shares few featitres with psychoanalytic or human- 
istic psychologies. B. F. Skinner, its best-known proponent, empha- 
sized that the science of psychology should focus on observable 
behaviors and the environmental conditions that reinforce them. Ac- 
cording to the rules of science, before a phenomenon will be accepted 
as fact, it must be demonstrated reliably by different investigators. 
Keeping the focus on observable behaviors and environmental rein- 
forcers, Skinner argued, would help to-ensure replicability of behav- 
ioral phenomena. 
_ Through the decades, the empirical tradition has also evolved. 
‘Many theorists now focus on individuals’ thoughts, rather than just 
observable behaviors and environmental reinforcements. Behaviors 
are thus explained in terms of people’s thoughts about reinforce- 
ments—their expectations and interpretations—rather than just the 
objective description of reinforcements themselves. Thus, many 
modern empirical psychologists—referred to as cognitive theorists— 
have moved “‘inside the person” to search for the causes of behavior, 
but they have stayed largely at the level of people’s thoughts rather 
than going deeper to their motivations. Furthermore, modern em- 
piricists have continued to view the person in mechanistic terms. Hu- 
mans, they say, are information-processing machines that work like 
computers to solve problems, make decisions, and behave. 
Psychology’s two fascinatingly different identities take divergent 
approaches to discovering truth within the field of psychology. The 
psychodynamic approach bases its theory on clinical experiences, 
whereas the empirical approach employs statistical analyses of data 
collected from scientific experiments. Of course, each of these two 
traditions is well aware of the other, but their attitudes toward each 
other range from benign neglect to vigorous contempt. Few psy- 
chologists have embraced the contributions of each to work toward 
a scientific study of psychological dynamics. 
As I approached the study of intrinsic motivation, I was faced 

as 
The Inner Force of Development 
79 
with the challenge of bringing together important aspects of these 
two traditions. I was determined to use empirical research methods, 
but the concept of intrinsic motivation did not seem as if it could be 
conveyed with mechanistic notions. Furthermore, I had the intuitive 
sense that intrinsic motivation was just one aspect of a larger set of 
phenomena that I really wanted to explore, and these phenomena 
would surely need a more humanistic starting point. What was 
needed was an empirical humanism. 
ey 
he influential child psychologist Jean Piaget observed that chil- 
dren seem to imbue everything with life. It is quite interesting 
that, in contrast to this anthropomorphic view held by children, 
many empirical psychologists hold just the opposite view, namely, 
that everything is inanimate. It is almost as if people, being mere 
machines like the computer, were dead. 
The inanimate viewpoint, the assumption that life is lifeless, 
lends itself easily to empirical study and to behavioral and cognitive 
explanations of behavior. But one of the troubling things about this 
approach is that it leads directly to the depiction of human behavior 
as being governed by external forces that prod, coerce, seduce, and 
direct. In the same way that programmers control the behavior of 
computers, savvy motivators must be relied on to control the behav- 
ior of people. 
A very different, but in a functional sense quite similar, view has 
been expressed by sociologist Talcott Parsons. He portrayed the 
birth of each infant as the invasion of a barbarian. People are alive, 
he would agree, but not in a constructive sense; they are alive but 
they are savages who need to be tamed. This infant-as-barbarian 
view is similar to the person-as-passive-mechanism view in the sense 
that both understand development as resulting from controlling chil- 
dren’s behavior. Both assert that society must shape the person. Both 
suggest that socializing agents must create the self of the child. In 
short, both see development as something that must be done to the 
child by the social world. 

80 
Why We Do What We Do 
If people are not machines waiting to be programmed, or savages 
waiting to be tamed, what then are they? They are organisms who, 
by their nature, explore, develop, and take on challenges, not be- 
cause they are programmed to, not because they are forced to, but 
because it is in their nature to. Development, when viewed from this 
perspective, as Piaget and a few other pioneering psychologists, such 
as Heinz Werner, have done, is really quite a different matter. It is a 
more constructive matter, a more human matter. Development is not 
something done to the child by the social world, but, rather, it is 
something the child does actively, with the support and nourishment 
of the social world. 
The assumption that human beings are organisms rather than 
mechanisms represents the humanistic starting point for the view of 
motivation employed by Richard Ryan and myself. Our agenda has 
thus been to ongoingly illuminate motivational phenomena by be- 
ginning with organismic, humanistic assumptions and employing 
empirical research methods. 
At the heart of our perspective is the assertion that people de- 
velop through the process of organismic integration as they proac- 
tively engage their world. This means that there is a basic tendency 
within people to move toward greater coherence and integrity in the 
organization of their inner world. It means that inherent in the na- 
ture of human development is the movement toward greater consist- 
ency and harmony within. 
The assertion that integration is the central feature of develop- 
ment has several ramifications. It encompasses the idea that people 
are inherently proactive and inclined to operate on their environ- 
ment to bring about effects, and in the process to learn and to grow. 
That, of course, is simply another way of stating that people are 
intrinsically motivated. But also contained within the organismic in- 
tegration principle is the idea that implicit within life itself is the 
tendency to move toward an ever more complex, yet organized, con- 
dition. Human development is a process in which organisms contin- 
ually elaborate and refine their inner sense of themselves and their 
world in the service of greater coherence. The urge to develop an 

The Inner Force of Development 
81 
integrated sense of self is thus .a central feature of who we are as 
individuals, and the activity—both physical and mental—that is nec- 
essary for this natural developmental trajectory is intrinsically moti- 
vated. 
. 
Concepts similar to what we call organismic integration can be 
found in other theories as well. Among Freud’s more important con- 
tributions was his proposal of a synthetic function of the ego, which 
suggests that throughout life, people work to bring coherence to 
their experience, and, indeed, to the development of their own per- 
sonality. It was a proposal much like Piaget’s hypothesized organiza- 
tional principle, and much like the assertion by Rogers (and fellow 
humanistic psychologist Abraham Maslow) that there is an actualiz- 
ing tendency within people, leading them toward greater internal 
harmony and integrity. 
In a way, intrinsic motivation and organismic integration to- 
gether can be thought of as a, kind of life force, a postulate of an 
implicit directionality to development. It is this set of ideas that Ryan 
_and I, working with our various colleagues, have been studying using 
s 
< 
empirical methods. The experiments on intrinsic motivation repre- 
sent the initial phase of that exploration. 
That research has indicated that intrinsic motivation is a viable 
concept; that intrinsically motivated performance is superior in 
many ways to externally controlled performance; and that social 
contexts that support and affirm people’s perceived autonomy and 
perceived competence enhance intrinsic motivation, while social 
contexts that diminish people’s perceived autonomy and perceived 
competence undermine intrinsic motivation. 
Although each of the experiments discussed so far involved spe- 
cific behaviors (and their relation to intrinsic motivation), when con- 
sidered together they begin to speak to the broader issue of human 
_ development. In other words, they can be thought of as being di- 
rectly related to the conditions that nurture the human organism’s 
energy and tendency toward integration in personality. 
To get a clearer idea of what is meant by integration in personal- 
ity, think of the football player who is also an artist and who is com- 

- 
82 
Why We Do What We Do 
petent and content in both roles—a young man who has managed to 
belong to two different sorts of teams. To allow these varied aspects 
of himself to find expression, and to feel like himself as he expresses 
each, he would have to have fended off pressures to be one or the 
other—the powerful forces of stereotyping that would foist on him a 
false, less complex sense of who he is. The young man would need to 
have maintained intrinsic motivation for both as he developed a har- 
monious relation between these two parts of himself. 
The development of integration in personality, of being who you 
truly are and becoming all you are capable of, is what allows authen- 
ticity. And this, of course, does not develop divorced from societal 
influences. The young artistic athlete (or athletic artist) was able to 
fend off pressures, no doubt, in part because he had support from 
one or more adults—parents, coaches, teachers—who were able to 
facilitate his autonomy and the integration of diverse aspects of his 
personality. By providing autonomy support, they would have facili- 
tated the young man’s natural development toward greater integra- 
tion and authenticity. 
hen you hear the assertions that intrinsic motivation and the 
\ 
V inherent integrative tendency are natural, you might imme- 
diately wonder why there seems to be so little proactivity and so little 
integration among the people you see every day. Why do so many of 
the children in our schools seem to be without vital energy and moti- 
vation to learn? Why do some seem driven only by fear of the next 
test or the desperate desire to avoid disapproval? And why do some 
behave like barbarians, sassing the teacher or tearing up the place? 
Those, of course, are the very questions that our research has - 
been addressing, and the results indicate that the innately striving 
and thriving organism—the human being—is vulnerable to being 
controlled and made to feel ineffective. Even in what might seem to 
some observers to be relatively benign circumstances—like relying 
on rewards to motivate performance, for example—a person’s natu- 
ral thrust toward growth can be seriously blunted. When that hap- 

3 
The Inner Force of Development 
83 
pens, the person begins to look more like the passive mechanism 
posited by many experimental psychologists, or like the barbarian 
that Talcott Parsons says we all are at heart. 
As psychologists, Ryan and I frame this set of issues with the 
question: Why is there so much. individual difference in the amount 
of integration and activity demonstrated by different people? That, 
of course, is one of the central questions that are addressed through- 
out this book, and the experiments arid examples thus far reported 
provide part of the answer, which in essence is that different people 
have been exposed to different amounts of controlling, pepenyaong 
circumstances during their development. 
To characterize our perspective more formally, we view human 
behavior and experience in terms of the dialectic between the person 
and the environment—the interaction (and potential opposition) be- 
tween the active organism striving for unity and autonomy and the 
social context that can be either nurturing of or antagonistic toward 
the person’s organismic tendencies. Synthesis occurs when there is 
enough support in the social context so that the natural, proactive 
tendencies are able to flourish. But in the absence of adequate sup- 
ports, not only will intrinsic motivation be undermined, but so too 
will the development of a more integrated or coherent sense of self. 
There are two main types of contexts that can turn a vital life 
into a disaffected one. The first and more obvious is the type referred 
to in the discussion of Bulgaria. Social contexts that are extremely 
inconsistent or chaotic, that make it impossible for people to figure 
out what is expected of them and how to behave competently so as to 
achieve intrinsic or extrinsic outcomes, will lead to a general thwart- 
ing of the human spirit. It will leave people with little or no motiva- 
tion. We say it produces amotivation. The second and less obvious is 
the type that has been the primary focus of this bobok—namely, con- 
trolling environments that demand, pressure, prod, and cajole peo- 
ple to behave, think, or feel in particular ways. These are the 
environments that promote automatons—people who engage in in- 
strumental reasoning, comply with demands, are, in a sense, only 
half alive, and, once in a while, are prompted to defy the controls. 

« 
84 
Why We Do What We Do 
It is truly amazing, as pointed up by our findings, that if people 
are ongoingly treated as if they were either passive mechanisms or 
barbarians needing to be controlled, they will begin to act more and 
more that way. As they are controlled, for example, they are likely to 
act more and more as if they need to be controlled. That fact has led 
some commentators to conclude that society should use more con- 
trols. It has led to the call for greater discipline, for more heavy- 
handedness. But ironically, it should call for just the opposite. This 
phenomenon behooves us to insist even more emphatically that it is 
time to stop looking for the easy answers contained in the reliance on 
control and instead to start employing more autonomy-supportive 
approaches. 
he importance of autonomy support for human development 
has been confirmed for Ryan and myself not only by our re- 
search, but by our clinical work as well. One such example is a case 
involving a young woman I’ll call Stephanie. She had experienced a 
good deal of emotional pain in her childhood, particularly surround- 
ing the loss of her mother who had fled with a lover, leaving eleven- 
year-old Stephanie and her father to fend for themselves. Despite 
that kind of harsh stress, Stephanie did manage to do well enough in 
school to gain entry to a nursing program at a top university. Once 
there, however, personal difficulties began to surface in an alarming, 
way. Her friends noticed that she had become awfully thin and that 
she related to food strangely, scraping the cheese off her pizza, for 
example. And she always ate her salad without dressing, taking ex- 
treme measures to cut down on. calories despite the fact that she was 
unsettlingly thin already. Her friends were caring enough and aware 
enough to insist that Stephanie see someone, 
at an eating-disorders 
clinic. Stephanie, at this point, weighed barely one hundred pounds. 
The diagnosis, of course, was anorexia nervosa, and the program 
of action at the clinic was clear-cut. The clinicians’ goal was to alter 
her eating habits through behavior modification. Targets for eating 
were set up, a specified number of calories had to be taken in, and a 

The Inner Force of Development 
85 
' 
prescribed progression of weight gain was established. She was to 
record everything she ate, and if her weight fell to ninety-five 
pounds, she would be put on a more drastic regimen. Stephanie had 
to sign a contract, indicating her agreement with this plan. 
The approach was pure control. Undesirable behaviors were 
identified, and a controlling program was devised to replace them 
with desirable behaviors. She was told that she had.to demonstrate 
improvement if she wished to avoid even more stringent control of 
her life. This latter element of the plan was intended to give added 
strength to the treatment. She would eat more, it was reasoned, in 
order to avoid the consequence of more stringent control. 
But Stephanie never did gain the targeted weight while she was in 
that treatment. Her diary showed that she was adhering to the eating 
requirements, but she frustrated her clinicians’ efforts by slipping to 
the limit of ninety-five pounds (and even that was, as it turned out, 
an inflated figure because Stephanie cleverly had taken to drinking 
large quantities of water to bloat herself each time she was to go to 
the clinic for her examination). The tension built, and Stephanie 
eventually withdrew from treatment. 
A few months later, one of Stephanie’s friends suggested she 
might want to talk with Ryan. His approach, of course, was very 
different. He was less concerned with’ the specific maladaptive 
behaviors than with what was actually going on inside Stephanie— 
the psychodynamic aspects of her condition. He listened to her with 
great care, trying to see the world from her point of view. What was 
she thinking or feeling each time she removed the cheese from a slice 
of pizza, for example? What was going on when she falsified her 
diary (which she quickly conceded she had done)? ; 
~ Stephanie, he learned, felt that she was fat despite her emaciated 
state. Her hips, regardless of what anybody else might think, seemed 
- 
to her to be offensively wide and her thighs seemed grossly heavy. 
But the interesting thing about it is that these perceptions of her body 
emerged only when she felt inadequate, criticized, or judged. As 
treatment progressed, Stephanie was gradually able to draw a con- 
nection between her painful vulnerability and the events of being 

~~ 
86 
Why We Do What We Do 
abandoned by her mother and overly controlled by her father, who 
did his best with her but was obviously overwhelmed by the task of 
raising a teenage daughter by himself. 
The well-meaning therapists in the clinic who had attempted to 
change her ways through behavior modification had inadvertently 
become part of the very dynamics that had already affected her ad- 
versely. The lack of empathic listening was stimulative of her. 
mother’s absence, and the controlling methods were reminiscent of 
the strained aspects of her relationship with her father. 
In Ryan’s therapy sessions with Stephanie, he never made the 
eating disorder a focus of the discussions. But she was, as you might 
guess, quite preoccupied by it and brought it up on her own. And 
when she did, she was able to see how her feelings of inadequacy led 
directly to her serious eating problem. As these dynamics became 
clearer, she no longer felt that she had to control her body so 
severely. The experience of an autonomy-supportive listener had 
helped Stephanie’s natural developmental process to get back on 
track. 
epeatedly, the experiments have shown and I have emphasized 
R that people need to feel competent and autonomous for intrin- 
sic motivation to be maintained and, I now argue, for development 
to proceed naturally. Before moving on to address the developmental 
issues more directly and discuss the developmental research, I want 
to emphasize the point that, when it comes to competence and au- 
tonomy, it’s really the person’s own perceptions that matter. To be 
intrinsically motivated people need to perceive themselves as compe- 
tent and autonomous; they need to feel that they are effective and 
self-determining. Someone else’s opinion does not do the trick. 
People’s perceptions of competence (or incompetence) are often 
quite closely linked to their actual performance at some target activ- 
ity. When people succeed at an activity, the research shows that they 
are likely to perceive themselves to be more competent. The same is 
true when they win a competition and when they receive positive 

The Inner Force of Development 
87 
feedback. Still, their perceptions do not always match up with the 
objective data. Just as Stephanie perceived herself to be heavy when, 
in fact, she was extremely thin, people who are actually doing well at 
an activity (in school, say) may perceive themselves to be quite inade- 
quate. When this occurs, there is clearly some emotional process at 
play, and because the link between performance and perceived com- 
petence is so direct, the discrepancy can typically be detected quite 
easily. With perceived autonomy, the issue is somewhat trickier. 
The key to whether people are living autonomously is whether 
they feel, deep within themselves, that their actions are their own 
choice. It is a psychological state-of feeling free, and it is in the eye of 
the behaver, so to speak. But it requires that people take an honest 
_ look. It is quite possible for people to report feeling free, and even to 
“sort of” believe it, while deluding themselves. Of course, when that 
is the case, people will not exhibit the qualities typically associated 
with perceived autonomy. 
Because the issue of autonomous action, and thus integrated de- 
velopment, concerns people’s own experience of their behavior, the 
issues may sound mysterious and elusive. But surely it is true that we 
can all feel within ourselves, at least intuitively, if we are autono- 
mous. We can know (if it interests us to know) when our actions are 
self-initiated or self-endorsed; we can know when we are interested, 
engaged, and alive. There is a feeling of harmony, a feeling of emo- 
tional integration, with the different aspects of the self working in 
contented partnership, even if the self in question is out of sync with 
society’s expectations. 
And just as surely, we know when we are being controlled. A 
woman who attempts to stop smoking just to please her doctor, or. 
because her coworkers have subtly criticized her, would know, if she 
were willing to listen to her internal voice, that she is not being au- 
tonomous in her efforts. And a man who stayed out late because his 
wife insisted that he come home early would know, if he were willing 
to be honest with himself, that he was not acting freely. When people 
are either complying with or defying controls, they are not being 
autonomous, and they can know that. 

88 
Why We Do What We Do 
Naturally, there will be times when people are not willing to be. 
honest with themselves, when they engage in self-deception and in- 
sist they truly want to do something that they are actually doing out 
of obligation or fear. But even then, they may have an inkling that 
something is not quite right, and that inkling can provide the cue to 
look deeper. They will sense the inner tension and notice how insis- 
tent they are being. They will become suspicious because they know 
what it means when they “‘doth protest too much.” Sensitive onlook- 
ers may also be able to pick it up because the people will likely be 
rigid and devoid of their natural vitality. 
arl Rogers became rhapsodic when he described the psycho- 
logically free or ‘fully functioning” person. Such an individ- 
ual, Rogers said, “‘is completely engaged in the process of becoming 
himself, and thus discovers that he is soundly and realistically 
social. 
. 
. .” Rogers was pointing to what Ryan and I regard as a 
third, innate psychological need. People not only need to be effective 
and free; they also need to feel connected with others in the midst of 
being effective and autonomous. We call it the need for relatedness— 
the need to love and be loved, to care and be cared for. 
Early motivation theorists focused on the sex drive (which is, 
there can be no doubt, an important motivator), but in so doing, they 
neglected what may be an even more important motivator of on- 
going human activity: the psychological desire for relatedness. One 
even suspects that much sexual activity may have more to do with 
the urge to feel loved, to feel included, to feel related, than it does 
with the drive for sexual gratification. 
People have often portrayed the needs for autonomy and related- 
ness as being implicitly contradictory. You have to give up.your au- 
tonomy, they say, to be related to others. But that is simply a 
misportrayal of the human being. Part of the confusion stems from 
equating autonomy and independence, which are in fact very differ- 
ent concepts. 

The Inner Force of Development 
89 
Independence means to do for yourself, to not rely on others for 
personal nourishment and emotional support. Autonomy, in con- 
trast, means to act freely; with a sense of volition and choice. It is 
thus possible for a person to be independent and autonomous (i.e., to 
freely not rely on others), or to be independent and controlled (i.e., 
to feel forced not to rely on others). Consider these examples. 
Although I’ve not seen him in years, I had a friend in California 
who was a fisherman. He kept his small boat near Monterey, and 
each day (weather permitting) he would leave the harbor about 6:30 
a.m. He would be alone in his small boat for the next ten or twelve 
hours, and he told me that he felt a sense of peace and contentment 
surrounded by the power of the ocean, the sensations of nature, and 
the test of himself against the fish, the waves, and, if I 
recall correctly, 
the divine forces. Of course, he was not wholly “‘an island unto him- 
self’’—he had a wife and children whom he loved very much, and I 
too felt quite close to him when I used to see him—but he was a good 
example of a person who was both autonomous and relatively inde- 
pendent. He chose to spend a great deal of time alone, relying on 
himself. 
Although my fisherman friend was a good example of autono- 
mous independence, most of the people I’ve known who were highly 
independent were driven to that independence by inner or outer 
forces. Their independence—or emotional isolation—was 
con- 
trolled; it was not a choice. I am thinking of another individual, who 
never had someone to rely on or trust when he was young. He was 
pushed by his unreliable parents to be independent—to stand on his 
own and be strong. ‘“‘Never trust anyone,” his parents told him, but 
really it was their actions more than their words that led him to de- 
velop a mistrust of others and as a result to remain highly indepen- , 
dent. Throughout his life he has had casual friends, but he has never 
been able to develop a deep, personal connection with anyone. 
The converse of independence is dependence, which means to 
rely on others for interpersonal support. People are naturally in- 
clined to form emotional bonds with others and then to both rely on 

. 
90 
, 
Why We Do What We Do 
‘and provide for those others. Dependence is motivated by the need 
for relatedness. It is intertwined with love, and feeling autonomously 
dependent is natural, useful, and healthy. 
Just as independence can coexist with either autonomy or con- 
trol, dependence can also coexist with either. Autonomous depen- 
dence is in fact a quite natural state. Coerced or controlled 
dependence—dependence that is not truly chosen—is what’s mala- 
daptive. Dependence has often been given a bum rap in our society, 
which tends to fetishize independence, but people have needs for 
both autonomy and relatedness, so the combination of the two, 
which results in an optimal amount of dependence, should have 
quite positive correlates. 
To test this out, Ryan collaborated with graduate student John 
Lynch on a study exploring the issue of independence and autonomy 
in teenagers. High school is a time when adolescents struggle to 
achieve a certain level of independence from their parents, and many 
writers have maintained that relinquishing family attachments is a 
critical task during this developmental phase. Ryan and Lynch 
- found, however, that a willing or volitional dependence on parents 
(rather than a strong independence from them) was essential for the 
teenagers’ integrity and well-being. Of course, people vary in how 
much dependence is appropriate for them (recall my fisherman 
_ friend), but so long as they are autonomous with regard to their de- 
pendence they will find the appropriate amount for themselves. 
“Fz 

SEVEN 
When Society 
Beckons 
visited a hardware store not long ago to pick up a small piece of 
] 
pipe. I found one that looked right, but I needed to know the 
diameter, so I hailed a salesman—a pleasant young man of 
about eighteen—and asked him for help. Quite agreeably he took his 
tape measure and held it up to the pipe. He looked at the ruler for a 
moment and then he looked at me. “‘What’s the mark just below the 
half-inch mark?” he asked. I was stunned, and it took me a moment 
to answer. 
. 
As I drove home with my piece of pipe—seven-sixteenths of an 
inch in diameter—the incident echoed in my mind. An apparently 
well-socialized young man, probably a high school graduate, still did 
not know his fractions. It seemed to me that familiarity with frac- 
tions would be useful for almost anyone, but especially for someone 
in a job that periodically calls for measuring things. What had hap- 
pened, I wondered. Why hadn’t he assimilated one of the most basic 
skills taught in school? 
One reason might be that he did not find math interesting, that 
he was not intrinsically motivated to learn it. But here is a case where 
learning something would have been useful for this fellow even if he 
did not find it interesting. The incident raises the question of how to 
promote a desirable behavior such as learning fractions if the behav- 
ior is not intrinsically motivated—if the person does not find it inter- 
i 
esting. 
91 

92 
Why We Do What We Do 
As socializing agents—parents, teachers, and managers—it is 
our job to encourage others to do many things they might find bor- 
ing but that allow them to become effective members of society. Ac- 
tually, our job goes beyond just encouraging them to do the 
activities; it’s more challenging than that. The real job involves facili- 
tating their doing the activities of their own volition, at their own 
initiative, so they will go on doing the activities freely in the future 
when we are no longer there to prompt them. 
Until now, the discussion has focused on activities that are in- 
trinsically motivating for people—activities that people are fully 
- willing to do on their own, out of interest—and the evidence is clear 
that if people in one-up positions act to facilitate a sense of auton- 
omy and competence in others whom they teach or supervise, those 
others will remain interested and energized. The problem now being 
considered is a different one, but it is one that most people in one-up 
positions encounter all the time. It is the problem of helping people 
function in society, where many important activities are not interest- 
ing. It is a problem that is essential for socialization. 
This problem has been addressed by countless theorists and 
other observers through the years. Often the word they use to de- 
scribe the specific process through which individuals take on the val- 
ues 
of society 
is internalization. 
However, 
the analyses 
of 
internalization have varied greatly depending on the philosophical 
assumptions they begin with. One approach to internalization begins 
with the view that people are either passive or barbarous—a view 
described in the previous chapter. The formulation of internalization 
from this perspective is essentially one of exerting external controls 
to program people’s behavior. This is the perspective that sees social- 
ization as something that gets done to people—as a matter of writing 
people’s life scripts, of molding them into their rightful place in soci- 
ety. 
. 
Our approach, in contrast, holds that humans are imbued with 
the tendency and energy to grow and develop in accord with their 
psychological needs. This second approach views internalization as a 
proactive process in which the developing child transforms external 

When Society Beckons 
| 
ees 
prompts into internal prompts. Think of the boy who, over time, 
transformed requests from his parents to take out the garbage into a 
process where he keeps his eye on the garbage and takes it out when 
appropriate, no longer requiring parental prodding. The boy would 
have internalized a regulation. 
When understood in this way, internalization was not something 
done to the boy (his parents did not program him); it was something 
done by the boy, with the help of his caregivers. The boy accepted 
the responsibility that his parents had requested of him. Of course, 
socializing agents play an important role in facilitating children’s in- 
ternalization, or thwarting it, but they do not do it. The children do. 
This may at first seem to you like nothing but an issue of seman- 
tics, like nothing but facile jargon: It is, however, much more than 
that. From a psychological perspective it is more than that because it 
says a great deal about the nature of human development; and from 
a practical perspective, it is also much more because it leads to very 
different prescriptions about how to promote responsibility in our 
children, students, employees, patients, and citizens. 
Internalization of a regulation and the value underlying it repre- 
sents an instance of people’s general propensity to integrate aspects 
of their world into an ever expanding and ever more unified repre- 
sentation of who they are—it is an instance of what we call organis- 
mic 
integration. 
In the taking-out-the-garbage 
example, 
the 
underlying value is the sharing of responsibility for making the fam- 
ily’s life operate smoothly, and integration is the process through 
which that value became part of the child’s developing self. 
To be connected to and involved with others—that is, to satisfy 
the need for relatedness—children make accommodations, and they 
are naturally inclined to accept values and rules of their immediate 
groups, and of society. Through making such accommodations— 
through internalizing values and behavioral regulations—children 
learn to competently negotiate the social terrain. But it is important 
to realize that there are two quite different types of internalization, 
so merely internalizing regulations does not guarantee autonomous 
or authentic self-regulation. 

94 
3 
, 
Why We Do What We Do 
The two forms of internalization are: introjection, which Fritz 
Perls likened to swallowing a rule whole rather than digesting it; and 
integration, which involves “digestion” and is the optimal form of 
internalization. To hold a rigid rule that pushes you around—that 
declares, demands, and demeans—and to act'in accord with that 
rigid rule means that the rule has only been introjected, so it does not 
form the basis for truly autonomous performance of the activity. 
Autonomous functioning requires that an internalized regulation be 
accepted as your own; the regulation must become part of who you 
are. It must be integrated with your self. Through integration, people 
become willing to accept responsibility for activities that are impor- 
tant but not interesting—activities that are not intrinsically motivat- 
ing. 
People’s need for autonomy, their need to be a causal agent in 
managing themselves, provides the energy for integrating (rather 
than just introjecting) a regulation. Thus, although the needs for 
relatedness and competence can motivate introjection, it is the need 
for autonomy that champions the integration of a value or regula- 
tory process into one’s self. 
People often take in the values and rules of groups to which they 
belong, and they subsequently act accordingly. When this process 
occurs only incompletely, it results in introjects—that is, in internali- 
zations that take the form of “‘shoulds”’ and ‘“‘oughts.”’ Introjects are 
voices in one’s head, so to speak, that come from the outside and 
issue orders—sometimes like mean-spirited drill sergeants and some- 
times like loving and well-meaning (but nonetheless intrusive) aunts. 
When internalizations become integrated, when they become true 
aspects of who one is, they allow more authentic actions and interac- 
tions. 
: 
If a young man who took over his dad’s business were successful 
in integrating the experience, he would be autonomous in his career 
pursuit. He would do it with a true sense of choice, and he would not 
feel coerced. But think of what happens when this process goes awry, 
when partial digestion results in a pelting cascade of shoulds and 
| 
oughts. There are various possible outcomes. The first of these is 

When Society Beckons 
— 
wisi 
rigid, dutiful compliance. The best-selling author: Michael Crichton 
represented an example of this at one point in his life. As he told the 
story to an interviewer, he had studied for many years to become a 
doctor, a goal that pleased his family very much. They evidently 
thought that growing up to be a doctor was exactly the right thing 
for him to do, the thing Crichton ought to do, and for many years 
Crichton himself bought into the plan. But after all that training he 
chose not to practice the profession. Instead, he did what he really 
wanted to do, which was to write. This decision, he told the inter- 
viewer, horrified his family. 
; 
Of course, I know neither Crichton nor his family, but, on the 
surface, this seems to be a case where the shoulds and oughts drove a 
highly capable young man to spend a large block of time preparing 
_ for a career in which he had little interest—a block of time during 
which he was controlled by strong introjects that led him to devote 
intense energy to learning medicine. Fortunately for him, he was able 
to free himself from those introjects and move on to the career he 
wanted. But in the more common scenario, people are held in the 
grip of introjects throughout their lifetime. 
A second possible response to a panoply of introjects occurs 
when they do not have quite such a firm hold on a person. The result 
would be a kind of halfhearted adherence. Someone told me the 
story of a young man who did take over his family’s business but was 
not integrated with respect to it. He did it because he thought he 
should, but he really felt emasculated in the process. This led to his 
running the business with the kind of ambivalence that ultimately led 
to its failure. He whined and complained about how things were 
going, coming up with a million excuses for why things were going 
badly, but he stuck with it, because he could not free himself from 
the introjects. They had a grip on him strong enough to keep him in 
the business, but not strong enough to make him committed to it. 
A third possibility is that the person’s tendency to defy could 
take over and lead to outright rebellion. Everyone knows a lawyer’s 
son who not only does not become an attorney, even though there is 
pressure to do so, but instead gets himself into trouble with the law. 

96 
pee 
Why We Do What We Do 
And there is the minister’s daughter 
who becomes a vocal, dyed-in- 
the-wool atheist. In these cases, in all likelihood, what we would be 
witnessing are instances where the parents’ values were introjected, 
but the children responded defiantly, as if to say to the introjects 
(and to their parents who initially pressured them), “You cannot 
control me; I’ll show you who’s in charge here!” 
Introjected values and regulations can thus result in a variety of 
outcomes, but none of these is optimal. Clearly the halfheartedness 
and the rebellion are good for neither party. And while the rigid 
compliance may please the socializing agents who prompted it, there 
are serious costs to be borne by the people who comply. 
n one study at the University of Rochester, Richard Ryan and 
Wendy Grolnick assessed the extent to which elementary-school 
children were motivated to do their schoolwork by introjected values 
and regulations, or alternatively, by more integrated ones. They also 
asked the teachers of these students to rate how motivated each stu- 
dent was, and they asked the children themselves how hard they-tried 
to do well in school. In terms of how motivated the students ap- 
peared to the teachers, or how hard they tried to do well, it did not 
matter whether the children were more introjected or more inte- 
grated. Students with high levels of introjected regulation were seen 
by teachers as very motivated, and students with equally high levels 
of the more integrated form of regulation were also seen as highly 
motivated. And both types of children reported trying hard. But 
_ that’s where the similarities ended. Those students who were more 
introjected were extremely anxious about school and displayed 
maladaptive patterns of coping with failure, whereas those who were 
more integrated enjoyed school and evidenced healthier patterns of 
coping when their efforts went awry. 
\ 
How often must it be the case that we look at children and see: 
that they are compliantly doing their schoolwork, or their chores, or 
whatever. “‘Ah,” we say to ourselves, “they are highly motivated,” 
and we think all is well. But maybe we should take another look and 

When Society Beckons 
oF 
ask ourselves whether they are really doing it of their own volition, 
whether they are doing it with a sense of personal endorsement. If 
they are, all probably is well. But they may instead be introjected, 
working hard because they think they should and think they will 
gain approval by doing so. If so, these children may be hurting deep 
inside. The internal pressure to perform, which may look so good at 
first glance, will extract a significant price. 
The compliance of these youngsters can work against them in 
various ways. Of course they will lack the vitality and enthusiasm 
that makes school a joyful experience, but an even sadder outcome is 
that it gets them focused on trying to please others rather than find- 
ing out what is right for themselves. Furthermore, in classrooms, 
these quiet, compliant students are often considered model students, 
so they are ignored—successful cases that need little attention. 
(Those who are noisy and defiant, in contrast, get a great deal of 
attention.) It may be a tragedy that these compliant students com- 
mand so 
little attention, for the feelings they may hold deep within 
themselves—feelings of inadequacy, for example—deserve concern. 
These feelings can easily result from partial internalization—from 
introjection rather than integration—for when people introject rules 
and evaluations, they often feel that they cannot live up to them no 
_ matter how hard they try. 
ntrojecting rigid rules represents but one kind of failure of the 
ii 
internalization process to function effectively. Another, more ex- 
treme kind is not taking in values and regulations at all. The young 
salesman I encountered in the hardware store represents an example, 
trivial though it be, of a person failing to internalize a value and 
regulation—in his case, the value and regulation for mastering his 
fractions. A similar example is what seems to me to be a fairly wide- 
spread tendency not to value the use of traditionally correct lan- 
guage. I recently saw a brief autobiographical statement written by a 
thirty-year-old man who had graduated from a quite respectable uni- 
versity and went on to earn an MBA. The statement, which was part 
\ 
\ 

98 
3 
| 
Why We Do What We Do 
of a job application, began, “When I was young, me and my family. 
lived in a small town.” I thought it a shame that he hadn’t learned the 
difference between the nominative and objective. 
Although this too may be a relatively trivial matter, there are far 
more troubling ones. Think of the teenage girls who, having failed to 
internalize the value of formal education and the importance of hav- 
ing a means to support themselves, get pregnant so they'll have 
‘something to care about.” Their desire to be mothers is wonderful, 
but their becoming mothers before they can care for themselves and 
their children is not. 
The question of why so many people appear not to have internal- 
ized values and regulations that are conducive to 2 productive, 
healthy life is an interesting and important one. How can this be, if, 
_as I suggested, people are naturally motivated to internalize aspects 
of their social world that are useful for effective functioning? In other 
words, why do so many people fail to become willing to do activities 
that are good for them? To understand this seeming paradox, we 
must go back to the dialectic—the interaction between the active or- 
ganism and the social context that can either support or thwart what 
the organism would be inclined to do naturally. 
- If you put a rooted avocado pit in a pot of earth it will probably 
grow into a tree, because it is in the nature of avocados to do that. It 
happens naturally. But not all pits become trees; some shrivel and 
decompose. They fail to thrive because the climate is inadequate, or 
the necessary nutrients are lacking. They need sun; they need water; 
and they need the right temperatures. Those elements do not make 
trees grow, but they are the nutriments that the developing avocados 
need, that are necessary in order for the avocados to do what they do 
"naturally. 
j 
In the same way, developing human beings need psychological 
nutriments to do what they do naturally. To internalize and integrate 
aspects of society that are important for their own success in life 
within that society, they must experience satisfaction of their basic 
psychological needs—for autonomy, competence, and relatedness— 

When Society Beckons 
99 
within the social context that provides the structures to be internal- 
' ized. 
; 
Il children face the challenge of responding to society’s beckon- 
ing without being overwhelmed or suffocated by it. They must 
find a way to become related to the social world while also achieving 
a sense of integrity within themselves. To a great extent, whether 
these young people are successful in their attempts to be authentic 
and responsible depends on the quality of their socializing environ- 
ment. It depends on whether the socializing environment provides 
the nutriments they need. It depends on whether the socializing envi- 
ronment allows them to satisfy their psychological needs while inter- 
nalizing the values and regulations in question. 
Part of the research program on internalization conducted by 
Grolnick and Ryan explored the qualities of family life that promote 
effective integration of external values and regulations. The re- 
searchers did structured interviews with the parents of elementary- 
school children in a demographically diverse rural community. They 
interviewed each parent separately, in the family’s home. They went 
into mobile homes propped on posts and sandwiched between others 
just like them; into large freshly painted Victorian houses with fancy, 
gleaming white gingerbread; into small, dilapidated farmhouses with 
chickens and rusting truck chassis in the yard. In each case, the inter- 
viewers asked a series of questions, such as what the parents do with 
respect to their children’s homework, and how they deal with the 
often thorny issue of their children’s household chores. 
| 
Grolnick and Ryan were interested in two main things: the ex- 
tent to which parents support their children’s autonomy, as opposed 
to pressuring and controlling the children’s behavior; and the extent 
to which the parents were really involved—devoting time and atten- 
tion to working with their children on these issues. The researchers 
found all kinds of parents: some seemed to ignore their children and 
hope for the best; some were demanding and critical; some were 

100 
: 
Why We Do What We Do 
- smothering; and some were encouraging without being intrusive or 
demeaning. 
The researchers also went into the local school to collect data 
from the children. Of primary interest was the degree to which the 
~ children had internalized the value of school—of doing homework 
and trying to do well at their school activities. Sure enough, those 
children whose parents were autonomy supportive and involved 
with them—who talked with them about their schoolwork and 
helped them with problems when they arose—had internalized the 
value quite well. These children believed schoolwork was important, 
and they accepted more responsibility for doing it. 
Furthermore, with the greater internalization and integration 
came greater achievement and better adjustment. Through the inter- 
nalization of the value of doing well in school (and of lending a hand 
around the house), these young people became more responsible and 
displayed greater well-being. It is particularly interesting that auton- 
omy support, which was a crucial contextual nutriment for individu- 
als’ maintaining intrinsic motivation and as a result being more 
creative, processing information more deeply, and enjoying their ac- 
tivities more, also turns out to be essential for promoting internaliza- 
tion and integration of the motivation for uninteresting, though 
important, activities. 
At one level of analysis, autonomy support means to relate to 
others—our children, students, and employees—as human beings, as 
_ active agents who are worthy of support, rather than as objects to be 
manipulated for our own gratification. That means taking their per- 
spective and seeing the world from their point of view as we relate to 
them. Of course, autonomy support may require more work, but 
then, as socializing agents, that is our responsibility. For us to expect 
responsibility from others, we must accept our own responsibility as 
the agents of their socialization. 
Although the concept of supporting autonomy to promote inte- 
gration is rather abstract, it can be translated into concrete sugges- 
tions for socializing agents. In order to do that, I decided to run an 
experiment with the help of graduate students Haleh Eghrari, Brian 

When Society Beckons 
101 
Patrick, and Dean Leone. We involved a group of experimental sub- 
* jects in a highly uninteresting task of watching a computer screen for 
the appearance of small spots 
of light. We hypothesized that three 
specific aspects of how we presented the task would be important for 
promoting integration. 
‘ 
First, providing a rationale for doing the uninteresting activity 
seemed necessary. When you ask your child to pick up the toys on 
the floor, for example, 
you might explain that the reason is so that 
the toys won’t get stepped on and broken, or so that the pieces won’t 
get lost. In the experiment, our rationale for asking subjects to do the 
vigilance task was so that they could improve their concentration; it 
is, after all, a task much like the ones used for training air-traffic 
controllers. Second, it seemed important to acknowledge that people 
might not want to do what they were being asked to do. This ac- 
knowledging people’s feelings, you might recall, was also key in the 
study where Koestner, Ryan, and their colleagues set limits to en- 
courage children to be neat, and it worked to keep the limits from 
undermining their intrinsic motivation. Here, we expected it to help 
the subjects integrate the regulation of the uninteresting behavior. 
Finally, we thought it essential that the language and style we used to 
initiate participation in the activity involve minimal pressure. The 
request should be more like an invitation than a demand, emphasiz- 
ing choice rather than control. 
We set up the experiment so these various experimenter behav- 
iors—providing a rationale, acknowledging feelings, and minimizing 
_ pressure—were either present or absent. And these factors did, in 
fact, make a real difference. Each of the three behaviors contributed 
to the amount of internalization that occurred: When they were pres- 
ent, there was more internalization than when they were absent. In- 
ternalization was manifest by subjects returning 
to the task 
later—spending their subsequent free-choice time working on this 
task rather than doing something else like reading magazines. 
There was another, even more important, finding, however. It 
turned out that if people internalized a regulation when the auton- 
omy-supportive behaviors (the rationale, acknowledgment, and 

102 
Why We Do What We Do 
choice) had been present, the subjects integrated the regulation. This 
was evident to us because their subsequent behavior was accompa- 
nied by their feeling free, enjoying the task, and believing that it was 
personally important. They were doing the behavior with a real sense 
of volition. 
In contrast, if the internalization occurred in the controlling con- 
text, with the three important facilitating behaviors absent—and 
there was some, though considerably less than in the auttonomy-sup- 
portive context—it took the form of imtrojection, not integration. 
These people, if they subsequently did the behavior, did it in spite of 
not feeling free, not enjoying it, and not believing it was personally 
important. They had swallowed the thought that they should do it, 
and they plodded forward, rather like sheep to slaughter. 
The finding that controlling contexts prompted some internal- 
ization, even though less than autonomy-supportive ones, was im- 
portant because it allowed us to reconcile reports by other, more 
behaviorally oriented psychologists that people can be “socialized” 
by controlling forces. It does appear that control can produce some 
internalization, but there will be less internalization under the con- 
trolling conditions than under autonomy-supportive ones, and fur- 
thermore the internalization that does occur will be only partial 
internalization—it will be only introjection. 
An onlooker might very well describe people who have in- 
trojected regulations as being responsible and doing the right thing— 
just as the teachers in the Grolnick and Ryan research described their 
introjected students as motivated. But these people whose responsi- 
ble behavior results from introjection pay the price of living with the 
unpleasant feelings and other negative consequences that accompany 
this type of internalization. Because there is an alternative—namely, 
responsible behaviors resulting from integration—that is not only 
more humane but more effective, it seems important that we work to 
promote integration rather than impose the strict discipline that pro- 
motes introjection and has significant psychological costs for the 
people being socialized. 

When Society Beckons 
, 
103 
he intrinsic need for relatedness leads people to be part of 
groups—initially their nuclear family, then larger groups, then 
society, and finally (one hopes) the global community—and this 
need, for good and for bad, opens people up to being socialized. 
When people belong to a group, the group becomes part of their 
identity, and they are naturally inclined to accept the group’s values 
and mores. To a significant extent, this is the process through which 
responsibility develops. 
Ryan and I put stock in the humanistic belief that it is important 
to be authentic, to be oneself, to march to one’s own drummer. But 
just as obviously, we put stock in the importance of being responsi- 
ble. To advocate autonomy does not mean to call for self-indulgence, 
because being truly oneself involves accepting responsibility for the 
well-being of others. The need to feel related leads people naturally 
to take on and assimilate aspects of the culture that can result in their 
making fertile contributions, and autonomy support from significant 
others helps this to occur. Individuals’ need for relatedness, coupled 
with socializing agents’ autonomy support, thus leads people to 
become responsible as they are becoming truly free. That is what 
being socialized means, at least in the positive and healthy sense of 
that term. 
Because being true to oneself has often been equated with the 
egoistic doing of ‘one’s own thing, authenticity has often been per- 
versely interpreted as justification for irresponsibility and then at- 
tacked by the critics who so interpret it. The selfish, egoistic doing of 
one’s own thing is in fact irresponsible and may have demonstrably 
negative consequences. But those behaviors are not authentic; they 
are not expressions of human autonomy; they are not instances of 
being one’s true self. 
Writers who have decried the call for authenticity have, in their 
_ 
own way, acted irresponsibly. In the name of responsibility, they 
have called for the very control that is detrimental to human devel- 
opment, and thus to responsibility. Allan Bloom, for example, in 
Closing of the American Mind, wrote the following: “We are told, 

104 
3 
Why We Do What We Do 
the healthy inner-directed person will.really care for others. To 
which I can only respond: If you believe that, you can believe any- 
thing.” Because Bloom’s portrayal of authenticity was superficial 
and inaccurate—because he failed*to recognize the important and 
complementary human needs for autonomy and relatedness—his 
discussion only adds confusion to a consideration of these issues. 
People who have become selfish, narcissistic, or rebellious will 
not “care for others” and will act irresponsibly. These conditions 
come from failures to satisfy their basic needs for autonomy and 
relatedness. They are responses to caregiving that is cold and con- 
trolling or chaotic and permissive. In such environments, people will 
fail to become authentic, and they will fail to become responsible. 
= 
t cannot be emphasized enough that autonomy support is not the 
I 
same thing as permissiveness. Still, people often interpret the idea 
of autonomy support as letting others get away with whatever they 
want. I recall one day when I was drinking coffee with a friend in the 
family room of his suburban Philadelphia home. His daughter 
Becky, who must have been about three, walked in from the back- 
yard carrying a rubber ball. “Becky,” he said, “leave the ball out- 
doors.” Becky kept walking as if she hadn’t heard a word. ‘Becky, 
please leave the ball outdcors,” said her father, and Becky kept walk- 
ing. My friend turned to me and resumed our conversation. I was 
aghast. 
My friend was not being autonomy supportive; he was being 
permissive. He was failing to set limits and failing to be consistent in 
administering consequences. As a result, not only did he not get the 
behavior he desired (leaving the ball outside) but he was interfering 
with internalization and socialization. If there are no limits, no struc- 
tures, no regulations to internalize, there will be no internalization. 
Permissiveness is easy, but autonomy support is hard work. It 
requires being clear, being consistent, setting limits in an understand- 
ing, empathic way. Once, after I had lectured on the topic, a woman 
~ 
protested, ‘““Autonomy support is very nice, but it’s not always fair.” 

- 
When Society Beckons 
105 
Unsure of what she meant, I encouraged her to say more. “Well,” she 
said, “I had a very important business meeting last week and my 
baby-sitter didn’t show up on time, so I was late for my meeting. 
He’s a painter, and when I called to see where he was, he said, ‘I’m 
right in the middle of a painting and I can’t leave it now.’ ” Develop- 
ing her argument, the woman said to me, ““You’re telling me I should 
have supported his autonomy and encouraged his self-expression. 
But it was very upsetting to me, and it’s just not fair.” 
I agreed with her. It was not fair. And I added that if I were she I 
would probably not ask him to baby-sit again. It’s great that he’s a 
painter, and I would like to support his intrinsic motivation and cre- 
ativity. But he made an agreement, and he was irresponsible in not 
following through. Trying to control him—that is, getting caught up 
in a power struggle—would surely be of no help. But if he cannot be 
counted on, if he does not keep his agreements, the consequence of 
his actions would be my not asking him back. Allowing him to be 
irresponsible and then asking him to baby-sit again is equivalent 
to 
being permissive. It is not autonomy support. 
Many people think the only alternative to permissiveness is con- 
trol—that is, heavy-handedness aimed at getting the other person to 
‘comply. Frequently, children make mistakes; sometimes they are 
irresponsible. But neither permissiveness nor cracking down pro- 
duces optimal results. Instead, helping children master difficult situa- 
tions and develop in healthy ways requires being autonomy 
supportive, which begins by understanding what is going on for 
them. We need to set limits and to be consistent in administering 
consequences, but it is important to do that with an understanding of 
the children. 
There may be more to another’s behavior than meets the eye. 
Maybe a daughter’s noncooperation is a way of getting back at her 
parents for something. Maybe a son’s acting out is a way of getting 
his parents’ attention. There are many possibilities, and neither ig- 
noring the behaviors nor becoming punitive is the answer. Under- 
standing what they are feeling and needing, and at the same time 
being clear about the limits and consequences, is the route both to 

af 
. 
106 
Why We Do What We Do 
appropriate behavior and to the children’s becoming better self- 
regulators. 
There will be times in life when being a responsible parent, 
teacher, or manager requires sacrificing something that one would 
like in order to be autonomy supportive with a child, student, or 
employee. A mother, for example, might have been planning for 
weeks to go to a special concert on Saturday night, only to find out 
when Saturday arrives, that her young daughter is quite sick, or per- 
haps is very upset from a terrifying experience and needs comfort. 
Staying home is the responsible thing to do—even though it may 
seem unfair. 
Most people will make sacrifices for the sake 
of a sick or fright- 
ened child. But being autonomy supportive may also require sacri- 
fices that come less easily. To take an example: Suppose a father has 
a plan for the family to attend a big family gathering. On that day, 
his son has an important Little League game, and he doesn’t want to 
let his teammates down. Both events are important, but the young- 
ster prefers to be with his friends. His desire is a worthy one, it is an 
expression of himself as well as a genuine recognition of his responsi- 
bility as a member of the team. For the father to allow his son a 
choice, even though it means not having all the family together with 
the relatives, would be decidedly autonomy supportive. It is not per- 
missive, though it may be a bit awkward, and it may deny the father 
what he wants. 
A still more difficult situation is one where a child has been irre- 
sponsible. Suppose a son broke his mother’s malachite armadillo 
after having been asked not to touch it. Autonomy support is still the 
route to go. That means that the mother would understand her son’s 
point of view, and she would also administer consequences in a 
straightforward way—not to punish, not to control, but to follow 
through on the agreement (whether implicit or explicit) that was es- 
tablished when she asked him not to touch her armadillo. Being au- 
tonomy supportive means 
that the mother would administer 
consequences, but she would also hang in there with her son, trying 
to understand his perspective and helping him understand hers. 

a 
When Society Beckons 
107 
It may seem as though I’m singing a different tune—offering a 
different prescription—for the irresponsible baby-sitter and the 
irresponsible son. To the extent that I am, it is because the two 
situations are different. In both cases, administering consequences 
is important. But in the case of the son, it is important to work 
with him to facilitate his developing greater responsibility, even if it 
requires making some sacrifice to do so. Parents have the responsi- 
bility of promoting the development of their children, and even if a 
child has been irresponsible, it is important to go the extra mile in 
supporting autonomy and promoting development. In the case of 
the baby-sitter, however, with whom the woman had only a super- 
ficial, business relationship, she did not have a responsibility to 
promote his development. Not asking him back would be adminis- 
tering consequences, but there is no necessity for her to go fur- 
ther—unless, of course, she wants to. Had he been an actual 
employee of hers, someone who worked for her full-time, she 
would appropriately have taken somewhat greater responsibility, 
but he was not. 
Part of the reason it is easy to confuse autonomy support and 
permissiveness is that people find it hard to admit that they are being 
permissive, so they misportray their permissive behavior as auton- 
omy support. I remember one evening a couple of years ago when I 
looked after my violin-playing friend Lisa. I guess she must have 
been about four at the time. As the evening wore on, she became 
increasingly overstimulated, and when it was time for the usual rou- 
tine—brushing teeth, story, and bed—she was quite hyperactive. 
There I was, someone who thinks about limit-setting a lot, and yet I 
found it hard to do what I knew to be the right thing—I found it hard 
to set limits with Lisa. The experience was an unsettling one for me, 
and as I probed my own reluctance to step up to the situation, the 
truth became perfectly clear, though not so easy to admit. I was re- 
luctant to set limits—even autonomy-supportive limits—because I 
somehow feared that Lisa would like me less. Out of my own need to 
be loved by a four-year-old, I was shirking my responsibility as a 
caregiver. 

108 
; 
Why We Do What We Do 
\ ‘ Y e are at a time in history when many parents are overworked 
as they try to accomplish the near impossible of balancing 
home and career. And because of this, there is a tendency among 
many parents, who really don’t haye as much time for their children 
as they would like, to feel'guilty about it and to be permissive with 
their children as a way of appeasing their own guilt. It is a very simi- 
lar dynamic to the problem I 
faced with Lisa. 
Some overworked parents respond to the stress by being more 
demanding and critical of their children rather than permissive. In 
the worst cases, these parents essentially act out their aggression 
against their children. When their children don’t respond as they’d 
like, when their children push them to the limit, they get angry and 
lash out. I’ve seen it many times, in the aisles of my local supermarket 
and the booths of my local family restaurant. Parents feel pressures 
from their own agendas, and if their children interfere with an 
agenda, they get agitated and end up yelling at the children, or shak- 
ing them. 
Any child can mile parents to their limits, especially when they 
are low on inner resources. When they are tired, stressed at work, or 
burdened by unfinished business, it is easy either to be permissive, or 
alternatively to become demanding, critical, and abusive when the 
child—or student or employee—is not acting as they would like. Ev- 
eryone is vulnerable to this, but the important thing is that people 
not delude themselves into thinking they are being autonomy sup- 
portive when they are actually being permissive, and that they not 
delude themselves into thinking heya 
are setting limits when they are 
actually aggressing. 
People are entitled to their tensions and conflicts, but if they rec- 
ognize these frustrations for what they are, if they own up to them} 
their children (or students or employees) will be less likely to pay the 
costs for the frustrations. By being aware of their own internal pres- 
sures and conflicts, people in one-up positions will be more able to 
facilitate effective accommodations between the individuals they 
teach, care for, or supervise, and the society that beckons. 
=

BRGH T 
The Self 
ina Social World 
ne of the things that has amazed me about the hundreds of 
bright, accomplished college students I’ve known through 
the years is how many of them have told me they don’t 
express their real feelings and beliefs. If they did, they say, they 
would feel selfish or guilty, and people wouldn’t like them. They 
can’t be who they really are because of fear or shame. 
These students hold introjects about who and what they should 
be, and those introjects are firmly anchored in their psyches. Some 
students even say they have no real sense of themselves separate from 
all the shoulds, musts, and have-to’s. Overpowered by these. in- 
trojects, the young people present a facade—a kind of false self—for 
they have lost touch with their true self. They have found acceptance 
from others by taking on an alien identity, by rigidly introjecting, 
rather than flexibly integrating, aspects of their social world. 
I remember the case of a young man, Arthur, who had a very 
active mind. As a boy, he tended to question the nature of the world 
- 
and to form coherent opinions. But this kind.of behavior was anath- 
ema to the rigid family that raised him. When, at the age of nine, he 
wondered out loud about the purpose of life, his mother responded, 
“We don’t ask questions like that.” When, a year or so later, he 
thoughtfully criticized one of his father’s favorite writers, his father 
responded, “Who are you to feel so superior to this great man?” In 
each case, his parents doused his inquisitive nature and he had 
to 
109 

110 
: 
_ 
Why We Do What We Do 
learn not to think out loud. Indeed, he seemed to lose all interest in 
abstract thoughts and big ideas. 
The story of his home life is not an unusual one; many students 
have told me similar ones, although this one had a happier ending 
~ 
than most. Arthur was extremely intelligent, and when he reached 
college and found support for independent thought, his inquisitive- 
ness was gradually rekindled. Eventually it flourished. But in the 
more common scenario, students who have been subjected to such 
controlling family environments, report an inability or an unwilling- 
ness to find their inner strengths and desires. They are anxious and 
fearful that something awful will happen if they make contact with 
the self that is within them. 
One former student, Barbara, wrote that she always tries to sat- 
isfy others, that she does whatever they want. She went on to say that 
this is fine with her, so nothing is lost. I knew Barbara quite well 
when she wrote those lines, and I couldn’t help but think that her 
doing what others want was not something she really chose, not 
something that really was fine with her. Instead, it seemed to me, she 
felt compelled to go along with what others wanted because she was 
terrified of the consequences if she did not. 
In the worst cases, students can’t even verbalize that they are 
being controlled by introjects and by others’ demands. They don’t 
have as much insight as Barbara had, and they don’t even realize they 
are suppressing their inner self. I have to infer it from their ongoing 
display of anxious, rigid behavior patterns and their insistence about 
what they have to do. These students have actually lost touch with a 
true self. Having fully accepted the introjects in a desperate attempt 
for approval, they are left with nothing that truly feels like them, and 
they can’t even acknowledge that. The potentials of their intrinsic 
self have gotten lost; a mature, true self has never developed; and 
they can’t even face up to it. 
One of the risks associated with being part of a unit—a family 
group, say, or society—is that people may be forced to give up or 
hide who they really are. They may feel obliged to relinquish their 

The Self in a Social World 
{ 
111 
autonomy and true self in order to fit in. Integration, which repre- 
sents optimal development and is in the best interests of both the 
children and their socializing agents, requires supports for both au- 
tonomy and relatedness, yet all too often socializing agents work 
against themselves, by attempting to control with contingent love, 
when autonomy support is what’s needed. If autonomy is pitted 
against relatedness its toll can be a person’s self. 
M ost modern psychologists and sociologists view the self as so- 
cially programmed, which means that people’s concepts of 
themselves are said to develop as the social world defines them. Ac- 
cording to that view, when others praise you for being friendly, you 
come to see yourself as a friendly person. When others worry about 
whether you will succeed, you develop a sense of doubt about your 
abilities. When others interrupt your activities to show you how to 
do them better, you accept the belief that you are not very compe- 
tent. For these theorists, whatever the social world programs us to 
be, that is what constitutes our self. 
The problem with that view of the self as socially defined is that 
it makes no distinction between a true and false self. It fails to recog- 
nize that we each begin with an intrinsic self (nascent though it be), 
as well as the capacities to continuously elaborate and refine that 
self. Thus, self can develop in accord with its nature, or it can be 
programmed by society. But the self that results from these two pro- 
cesses will be very different. 
The intrinsic self is not a genetically programmed entity that sim- 
ply unfolds with time, however. It is instead a set of potentials, inter- 
ests, and capabilities that interact with the world, each affecting the 
other. At any given time, self is the developmental outcome of this 
dialectical relationship. When the process operates effectively, true 
self is the result; when the process goes awry, the result is a less-true 
self. As-such, the development of self is significantly influenced by 
the social world, but the self is not constructed by that world. In- 

1742 
Why We Do What We Do 
stead, individuals play an active role in the development of self, and 
true self develops as the social world supports the individual’s activ- 
ity. 
True self begins with the intrinsic self—with our inherent inter- 
ests and potentials and our organismic tendency to integrate new 
aspects of our experience. As true self is elaborated and refined, peo- 
ple develop an ever greater sense of responsibility. Out of their needs 
for autonomy, competence, and relatedness, people develop a will- 
ingness to give to others, to respond with what is needed. By inte- 
grating such values and behaviors, people become more.responsible, 
while at the same time retaining their sense of personal freedom. 
But integration and development of true self require that peo- 
ple’s intrinsic needs be satisfied. When the social world within which 
people develop is autonomy supportive—when it provides optimal 
challenges and the opportunity for choice and self-initiation—true 
self will flourish. When the social world accepts people for who they 
are, providing love as they explore their inner and outer environ- 
ments, true self will develop optimally. But when these needs are not 
satisfied, the process will be thwarted. The development of true self 
requires autonomy support—it requires noncontingent acceptance 
and love. 
One of the most common approaches to discipline in modern 
society involves making the provision of love, acceptance, and es- 
teem contingent upon people’s behaving in certain ways. This with- 
drawal-of-love approach underlies one of the tragic aspects of life, 
namely that in many circumstances autonomy and relatedness are 
turned against each other by people in one-up positions. This does 
not mean that the needs are by nature antagonistic, only that the 
social world can capitalize on people’s vulnerability to being con- 
trolled—to having their autonomy robbed—by their need to be re- 
lated to others. The practice of making love contingent is one of the 
more controlling ways we can treat children (as well as peers), be- 
cause it forces them to relinquish autonomy to retain love, or alter- 
natively, to “‘live as an island.” 
Research has repeatedly confirmed that sputeelling contexts im- 

The Self ina Social World 
113 
pair development by stifling integration and promoting introjection. 
The contingent administration of love thus represents yet another 
instance of people—most notably parents—working against them- 
selves. By being invested in getting children to behave properly, par- 
ents use withdrawal of love, and in the process not only hinder 
internalization of regulations, but more importantly, hinder develop- 
ment of true self. 
Children’s accepting the values, regulatory processes, and con- 
ceptions of themselves that are offered to them by the social world is 
natural, but when the world’s offerings are accompanied by con- 
trol—when receiving love is dependent on accepting the world’s val- 
ues and regulations—children will, at best, only introject them, 
swallowing them whole rather than integrating them’into their devel- 
oping self. 
Introjected material is not part of the integrated or true self, but 
instead endures as rigid demands, concepts, and evaluations that are 
the basis of a false self. Alice Miller, in The Drama of the Gifted 
Child, explained that false self develops as children accept the iden- 
tity that controlling caretakers want them to have. In an attempt to 
please their parents and gain contingent love, children gradually in- 
tuit what it is that their parents want—what it is that they, the chil- 
dren, hope will gain them the love and avoid the reproach of their 
controlling parents. 
Introjects can be powerful motivators, relentlessly pushing peo- 
ple to think, feel, or behave in particular ways. But they also have a 
variety of side effects that attest to their maladaptation. Introjection 
is strongly related to anxiety—people live in fear of failure and loss 
of esteem. It is also accompanied by an inner conflict that rages be- 
tween what we metaphorically think of as the internalized controller 
who demands, cajoles, and evaluates and the person within the same 
skin who is being directed and criticized. Introjection is the process 
that facilitates the emergence of a false self—the emergence of a set of 
rigid rules and identities—and it is a process through which people 
can lose contact with who they really are. 
Once, when I was doing therapy with a man in his early twen- 

ey 
as 
Why We Do What We Do 
ties—tall and conservatively dressed in double-knit trousers and a 
bland tie—I became increasingly aware of how inexpressive he was, 
how robotlike, how tired. As the therapy evolved toward a discus- 
sion of the young man’s authoritarian father, I noticed.an expression 
of feeling in just one small part of his body: a clenched right fist. I 
invited him to hit the clenched fist into the palm of his other hand, 
which he did. Instantly, his whole body went startlingly rigid, his 
face contorted. The very notion that he might be striking back at his 
~ 
father, even symbolically, was so unsettling that the young man was 
virtually paralyzed. The false sense of being that took the form of 
° 
what his father thought he should be was incredibly powerful and 
hard to fight against. 
: 
The panic and rigidity slowly passed, and within an hour he was 
back in more or less the same shape he had been before the episode 
occurred. His introjects were intact, and it was almost as if the inci- 
dent had not occurred. Indeed, the young man found it-hard even to 
discuss the incident during subsequent meetings, because having 
angry thoughts about his father left him feeling like a terrible person. 
Still, he had gotten a glimpse of what his problem was, and contin- 
uing therapy did help him deal with the rage he felt for his father. It 
_even helped him regain some of his innate vitality. But it was a tough 
road. Caught in a coercive vise, the man had lost a true sense of self, 
and with it had gone his intrinsic motivation for life—the curiosity, 
the striving, the boldness that could energize his everyday experi- 
ence. Fortunately, a lot of hard work allowed him to recapture a 
little of it. 
he use of contingent love and esteem as a means of control not 
only promotes introjection, but it has the even sorrier conse- 
quence of teaching people to esteem themselves contingently. Just as 
they once had.to live up to external demands to gain love and esteem 
from others, they now have to live up to introjects to gain love and 
esteem from themselves. They feel like worthy people only if they do 
as the introjects demand. When my client was angry with his father, 

> 
_ The Self in a Social World 
115 
he felt like an unworthy person, and that contingent feeling of self- 
- 
worth gave enormous power to the introjects. Indeed, it gave them so 
much power that they virtually paralyzed him when he briefly dared 
to stand up to them. 
Ego involvement is a term that psychologists use to refer to the 
process of people’s feelings of worth being dependent upon specified 
outcomes. When people hold introjects and those introjects are but- 
tressed by contingent worth, the people are said to be ego-involved. 
A man is ego-involved in his work if his feelings of worth are depen- 
dent on amassing a fortune from the work, and a woman is ego- 
involved in her exercise if her feelings of worth are dependent on 
winning a competition at her health club. 
Ryan and his colleagues have done several studies exploring the 
effects of ego involvement. In a typical experiment, one group of 
subjects would be ego-involved or motivated by a threat to the self 
while another group would be task-involved or motivated by the 
_ interest and value of the activity itself. Results of the studies consist- 
ently showed that ego involvement undermined intrinsic motivation 
for the task and led subjects to report more pressure, tension, and 
anxiety about performance. 
Ego involvement develops when people are contingently es- 
teemed by others, so it goes hand in hand with introjection of values 
and regulations. When self-esteem is hinged on performance out- 
comes, people struggle to maintain a facade. They pressure them- 
selves to appear a certain way to others so they will feel good about 
themselves. This, of course, detracts from interest and enthusiasm. 
Indeed, it bolsters a false self while continuing to undermine-develop- 
ment of true self. 
When ego-involved, people focus on how they look to others, so 
they are forever judging how they stack up. A girl who is ego-in- 
volved in her grades, for example, will forever be checking to see 
how others did on a test so she will know whether she did “‘well 
enough.” 
Research has shown that ego involvement not only undermines 
intrinsic motivation, but as one would expect, it impairs learning and 
/ 

— 
116 
Why We Do What We Do 
creativity, and it tends to diminish performance on any task where 
flexible thinking and problem solving are required. The rigidities of 
ego involvement interfere with effective information processing; they 
lead people to be shallower, more superficial, in how they think 
about problems. 
In short, ego involvement is constructed on a tenuous sense of 
self, and it works against being autonomous. To become more au- 
tonomous—more self-determined—thus requires that people detach 
from their ego involvements, that they gradually give them up. 
Mel Wearing, a slugger for the Rochester Red Wings, is a power- 
ful guy and a hotshot hitter. When he first started on the team, peo- 
ple were expecting him to hit a home run every time he stepped to the 
plate. The problem was that he was also expecting it of himself. Ac- 
cording to his own account, when he joined the Red Wings he set out 
to impress people—to knock it out of the park time after time. He 
gripped the bat too tightly and swung too hard, he said. At the begin- 
ning of each season he would think to himself, ““This is going to be 
my year,” and he would bear down on himself. He tried to use his 
power to do the job, but it didn’t work. His performance was disap- 
pointing, and he felt bad about himself. 
Finally, one year, he realized that he would be better off if he 
stopped worrying about it, if he stopped trying so hard, if he stopped 
hinging his self-worth on being a slugger. All he had to do, he said to 
himself, was make contact with the ball. And sure enough, the less 
hard he tried, the better he did. He began living up to his potential 
because he stopped trying to. He had given up his ego involvement. 
It’s a paradox, but it’s true. 
_ 
Charlotte Selver developed the practice of Sensory Awareness. It 
is an approach to allowing one’s inner functioning, to coming more 
into contact with who one: really is. She’s had many notable stu- 
dents—people like psychiatrists Erich Fromm, Fritz Perls, and Clara 
- Thompson, for example—who have worked with her to develop a 
deeper sense of inner peace and a greater sensitivity to their sur- 
roundings. I once heard Charlotte make the comment, “If you dare 

The Self 
in a 
Social World 
117 
to be fat, then you can be thin.” Such a simple way to say something 
so profound. 
She was highlighting the power struggle that exists for so many 
people between the ego involvements that pressure them to be thin 
and the part of themselves that resists being pressured. By trying to 
force themselves to lose weight with the threat that they will hate 
themselves if they don’t, people create resistance. They undermine 
themselves by pressuring themselves and then resisting the pressure. 
Out of spite for the introjected controls they sabotage themselves. To 
lose weight—or to change any other behavior for that matter—peo- 
ple will be more successful if they start by giving up the ego involve- 
ment, if they start by getting themselves out of the power struggle 
with their introjects and out of the self-hatred that inevitably fol- 
lows. When they do that, “then they can be thin.” 
Think of it in terms of the master and slave. The master in your 
head thinks you should be thin and hates you for being fat. So the 
master criticizes and threatens, cajoles and humiliates. And, not sur- 
prisingly, although a part of you tries to please the master, another 
part of you wants to defy, to get back at the master. That of course is 
easy enough to do: Just stay fat. The problem is that the master is you 
, 
too, so spiting the master is spiting yourself. 
Allow yourself to fail and you will be more likely to succeed. 
That’s what Charlotte Selver was saying, and that’s what Mel Wear- 
ing finally realized. 
ecognizing how introjects and ego involvements motivate 
Re a process of contingent self-worth points to the very 
important fact that there are really two types of self-esteem. We refer 
to them as true self-esteem and contingent self-esteem. True self-es- 
teem represents a sound, stable sense of oneself, built on a solid foun- 
dation of believing in one’s worth as a human being. It accompanies 
a well-developed true self in which intrinsic motivation has been 
maintained, extrinsic limits and regulations have been well inte- 

118 
: 
Why We Do What We Do 
grated, and the processes necessary for regulating one’s emotions 
have been developed. True self-esteem thus accompanies freedom 
and responsibility. 
True self-esteem is not, however, the same thing as thinking you 
can do no wrong. People with true self-esteem have a sense of 
whether behaviors are right or wrong because true self-esteem is ac- 
- companied by integrated values and regulations. Such individuals 
evaluate their behaviors, but their feelings of worth as people are not 
riding on those evaluations. 
There is another type of self-esteem, however, that is less stable, 
less securely based in a fundamental sense of worth. It is present 
under some conditions but vanishes under others, leaving people de- 
pleted and self-derogatory. This is contingent self-esteem. When peo- 
ple are pressured and controlled to achieve particular outcomes, 
their self-esteem is often dependent on how those things turn out. 
Indeed, ego involvements gain power over people because they are 
accompanied by contingent self-esteem. If a man’s self-esteem rides 
on continually closing big business deals—especially ones that are 
bigger than his colleagues’—and if he were continually quite success- 
ful, he would generally feel pretty good about himself. But those feel- 
ings would be more ephemeral than real. They would likely take the 
form of self-aggrandizement—of a big ego, so to speak—rather than 
a solid sense of self, and they would tend to be formulated in terms of 
being better than others rather than simply being good and worthy 
like others. 
People with true self-esteem are able to esteem others and accept 
others’ frailties rather than evaluating and deprecating them. I once 
heard Elie Wiesel, winner of the Nobel Peace Prize, say, “I am here as 
a witness to describe, not as a judge to evaluate.”’ Of course, much of 
what he has described in his writings about the Holocaust is morally 
repugnant, and he surely deplores it, but his comment was focused 
on human potential, on what is good and possible for each of us. He 
went on to say, “I have hope because there is no other possibility for 
life.” These are the kinds of words that would be spoken by someone 
with true self-esteem. 

\ 
The Self ina Social World 
| 
119 
Countless popular books have extolled the importance of high 
self-esteem, but their failure to distinguish between true self-esteem 
and contingent self-esteem has led to questionable prescriptions. Au- 
thors advise parents, teachers, and friends to praise others—to re- 
mind them what good people they are. Of course, conveying to 
others your belief in their worthiness is noble, but praising does not 
necessarily do that. Indeed, it may have just the opposite effect if it is 
delivered contingently. 
Carl Rogers advocated what he called noncontingent positive re- 
gard. In essence, he was suggesting that regard from others (and, 
_most importantly, from ourselves) is our inalienable right. We are 
worthy by virtue of the fact that we are alive. Praise is usually differ- 
ent. It is typically made contingent on getting an A on an exam, eat- 
ing all those vegetables, or cleaning your room. Its hidden message is . 
that you would not be worthy if you had not hit the target. 
Praise runs the risk of bolstering contingent self-esteem rather 
than true self-esteem, 
and in the process it strengthens a controlling 
dynamic in which people become dependent on the praise. They then 
behave to get more praise so they will feel worthy—even if only for a 
moment. And in so doing, they further erode their autonomy. 
* 
he most important relationship in many people’s lives is one 
Ale 
particular peer relationship, usually with a romantic partner 
but sometimes with a best friend. That person is someone to turn to, 
someone to count on, someone to support you. That person is some- 
‘one who will listen, who will understand when no one else seems to. 
But that person is also someone to give to, to provide for, to hear, 
and to understand. The most important relationship in many peo- 
-ple’s lives is one of mutual dependence. It is one that allows them to 
satisfy their need for relatedness by being dependent on others who 
are also dependent on them. 
Such relationships are essential, and many people structure their 
lives around them. But in considering a mutually dependent relation- 
ship there is the important question of whether in the midst of the 

120 
Why We Do What We Do 
mutual dependence there is also mutual autonomy—and mutual au- 
tonomy support. With people who love each other, autonomy sup- 
port is a two-way street. 
What characterizes the most mature and satisfying relationships 
is that the true self of one person relates to the true self of another. 
Each is dependent on the other, but each maintains his or her auton- 
omy, his or her integrity, his or her sense of self. To the extent that 
each is in the relationship autonomously, with a true sense of choice, 
the relationship will be healthy, and each partner will be able to re- 
spond from his or her true self and will be able to support the in- 
dividuality and idiosyncracies of the other. 
Psychologists Marc Blais, Robert Vallerand, and their colleagues 
at the University of Quebec in Montreal did a study to explore peo- 
ple’s reasons for participating in their current romantic relationship. 
They adapted the Self-Regulation Questionnaire developed by Ryan 
and Connell to assess the extent to which people’s motivation for 
staying in the relationship was autonomous—the extent to which 
they were there with a true sense of choice and personal desire rather 
than feeling some pressure or control for being there. The researchers 
found that the autonomy of each partner was essential for the cou-- 
ple’s relational happiness. Those individuals who were autonomous 
in relating to their partner expressed the highest level of satisfaction 
in their relationship. Many of the people who were studied, however, 
were not autonomous, but instead felt quite controlled. These people 
did not feel free in the relationship. They related to their partner out 
of obligation. In these relationships the true selves of the partners 
were not engaged. 
I once had a therapy client who phoned my office for an initial 
visit and said her name’ was Mrs. Cutlass. When she arrived for the 
visit she introduced herself to me as Mrs. Cutlass, and every succeed 
ing time she identified herself—on the phone or in person—it was as 
Mrs. Cutlass. She made the appointment because she had hit her 
husband with a piece of firewood, and the event had shaken her 
badly. (I suspect he had been a bit. shaken, too.) She said that on and 
off for the last few weeks she had found herself angry at him, for no 
4. sil 

The Self 
in a Social World 
ieee 
121 
particular reason. This anger was very unsettling for her. In all their 
twenty-eight years of marriage she had never felt this way before. 
She had married right out of college and started a family within 
a couple of years. She was a model housewife and mother. She at- 
tended unwaveringly to the needs of her husband, always putting 
them ahead of her own. She was similarly attentive to the desires of 
her three children, the youngest of whom had just graduated from 
college. She drove them to football practice and music lessons, she 
was a Scout leader, and she helped out with various school and 
church events. 
I am sure her friends thought she loved her husband very much, 
that she was a devoted and loving wife. And in a sense she was. But 
it was an imbalanced love. She supported her husband in all his en- 
deavors, giving him whatever he wanted. On those occasions in ther- 
apy when I asked her what she wanted for herself from the 
relationship, or from life more generally, she could think of nothing 
to say. She wanted to be a good wife and mother, to be sure, and she 
wanted to’be thought well of for how she had performed those roles, 
but there seemed to be nothing she wanted for herself. 
She was able to acknowledge that there seemed to be a large gap 
in her life now that her children no longer needed her, but she could 
not identify any aspirations. She did not articulate any short-term 
desires, like having some time to herself to try painting, or having her 
husband take more interest in her feelings. Nor could she specify any 
longer-term desires, like starting a career, or finding something else 
to devote herself to. 
I thought it was very telling that she had introduced herself to me 
as Mrs. Cutlass. She is the only client I can ever recall who intro- 
duced herself without using her first name as well as her last. It was 
as if she had no identity of her own. 
Mrs. Cutlass was the wife of Mr. Cutlass, and of course ‘fe 
mother of his children. She was Mrs. Cutlass in.a one-down sense, 
and for twenty-eight years she had thought that was enough. But 
something seemed to be happening. Just being Mrs. Cutlass was no 
longer enough, although it took her several months to realize that 
> 

. 
122 
Why We Do What We Do 
and to accept that her hitting her husband had something to do with 
this issue. The anger, which took twenty-eight years to surface, 
stemmed from her identity’s having been subsumed by his. 
Ultimately, of course, it wassshe who was responsible for the 
subjugation of her self, even though her husband obviously contrib- 
uted. And this realization was the starting point for figuring out 
‘what she wanted for herself, and how she could get it. As she became 
more aware of her own wants, needs, and feelings, she was in a posi- 
tion to choose how to express and satisfy them. Gradually, she 
worked to change her relationship with her husband by identifying 
what she wanted in the relationship and negotiating to get it. 
Mature relationships are characterized by two individuals’ in- 
teracting openly with each other, unencumbered by ege involve- 
ments, introjected evaluations, or self-deprecations. In mature, 
mutual relationships, the one-up, one-down aspect that characterizes 
so many other relationships in life is not only absent in the structural 
sense but is absent in actuality. Each person is autonomous, and each 
supports the autonomy of the other. 
In such relationships, each partner is able to give to the other, 
expecting nothing in return and creating no obligations for the other. 
The giving comes from the true self, and thus the person experiences 
wanting to give. It is not a giving like that of Mrs. Cutlass, for hers 
came from an introjected set of beliefs about how she should behave 
as a wife and mother, rather than from an integrated self. Although 
she was a loving wife and mother, who did much good for others, her 
giving was at the cost of a solid sense of her self. 
When two people are relating maturely, each will be able to ask 
the other for what he or she wants or needs, fully trusting that the 
other will say “no” if he or she does not want to give 
it. Just as giving 
- 
sets up no expectations and receiving creates no obligations, in opti- 
mal relationships asking for something from one’s partner carries no 
expectations of receiving it and creates no obligation for the partner 
to give it. In these mature relationships, people freely give and they 
freely withhold giving. There is a balancing of getting what one 

The Self in a Social World 
123 
needs for oneself and giving to the other. Giving is not at the expense 
of one’s self but instead is wholly endorsed by the self. 
In such relationships, each partner can express his or her feelings 
freely and each can hear the other’s feelings without defensiveness. 
When, for example, a man says to his partner, “I am angry at you,” 
he will realize it does not necessarily mean his partner did something 
wrong. Rather, it means that he did not get what he wanted. Being 
aware of feelings is important for the development and functioning 
of the true self, and communicating them is important for intimacy 
in relationships. But when people “own them,” when people under- 
stand that their feelings are caused by the relation of events to their 
own wants, needs, and expectations, they will be able to express the 
feelings constructively, without engaging in aggression.-It also allows 
people to think about how to get what they want or need without 
necessarily requiring that their partners change. 
: 
It is not easy for another to listen to one’s anger without becom- 
ing defensive, but the more able one is to own the anger, the more 
likely it is that the other will be able to hear it. By owning feelings 
and sharing them with another, two people become ever closer. 
Erich Fromm, in his enormously popular book The Art of Lov- 
ing, pointed out that loving someone is very hard work. The thing 
that is hard about loving is freeing yourself from the introjects, the 
rigidities, the blaming, and the self-derogation that interfere with 
being able to relate honestly from your true self. What is hard is 
being psychologically free enough to make genuine contact. 

NINE 
When Society 
Corrupts 
t’s just half a century since the Second World War was won, and 
] 
people began to sleep easier with the American Dream dancing 
in their heads. Prosperity lay ahead for all, and people were con- 
fident that hard work would bring them the leisure and luxury of 
their dream. After all, ours is a society that favors self-reliance. Peo- 
ple who. own the tools of production and use them effectively ac- 
cumulate wealth, and those without the advantage of ownership can 
nonetheless be comfortable if they work hard and submit to the au- 
thority of the owners. 
The American Dream was a motivating force for many people, 
and acceptance of what Charles Reich called the generalized author- 
ity of believing there are certain ways that things “should be done” 
was the means to obtain the dream. So people knuckled down to a 
wholesome life of hard work. Unfortunately, the dream has not 
materialized for most people. At least not in the form they dreamed 
it. People work more now than in 1950—nearly an hour a day more, 
on average. Dual-income families have become the norm, so with no 
one home during the day, non-work time is usually gobbled up by 
kids and chores. There is little time left for leisure, and luxury has‘not 
materialized. Many families have two cars, a cleaning lady, a phone 
' 
machine, and a VCR, but far from feeling like luxuries, these have 
become necessities for coping with the stresses of an overextended 
| 
life. 
124 

When Society Corrupts 
125 
"Still, except during that brief period called the sixties, most peo- 
ple have bought into the American Dream, continuing to hope that 
one day the beautiful life—the life of Julia Roberts, Michael Jordan, 
or Barbra Streisand, say—might be theirs. And even if that glamour 
does not come to pass, a strong dedication to work may at least bring 
people an RV or Florida condo, along with the possibility of sending 
their children to a good college. 
I remember a man from a therapy group years ago, a highly suc- 
cessful business executive I’ll call Kevin Jacobs. An articulate and 
well-groomed man in his mid-forties, he was a satisfied husband and 
father of three teenagers. The family had an attractive urban life, 
with the children in private schools, and there was every indication 
that they had achieved a modest version of the American Dream. 
Kevin entered therapy because he had not been sleeping well for the 
past few months, and he felt an unpleasant constriction in his chest. 
A series of visits to his physician and a number of medical tests re- 
vealed no medical problems, but the uneasiness remained. 
Therapy started slowly for Kevin as he spoke about how elt 
everything was going for him. But then at one point, when he was 
talking about his son—the middle child—he went pale. His eyes wa- 
tered, and he found it hard to talk. It was almost as if an acute de- 
pression had overtaken him in an instant. His anxiety was intense, 
but gradually he was able to talk about the flood of thoughts that 
had begun in that fateful incident. As he did, the anxiety dissipated, 
and he began to plan meaningful changes in his life. 
The memory that triggered all this was of his son, at age six, a 
private-school first-grader who had a part in a school play. The son 
was excited, and the family looked forward to the Friday evening 
event. But on that Friday evening, at the time his son was on stage, 
Kevin was changing planes at O’Hare Airport, returning home from 
a business meeting. The memory was of the son’s disappointment 
when Kevin told him he would have to miss the play. 
The event is common enough these days, when so much of our 
work takes us out of town or ties us up in the evening. As a single 
event, it was surely not of such great significance for Kevin or for his 

126 
Why We Do What We Do 
son. But it was not just a single event. It was a symbol of how, 
for twenty years, Kevin’s career had come first. For twenty years he 
had put in sixty- to seventy-hour weeks, all in order to be a good 
provider, to give his family the American Dream. Suddenly, it had 
occurred to him (as it has to many other fathers-in similar moments 
of great sadness) that in the process he had not really been part of 
the family. His children were teenagers and he hadn’t watched them 
grow up. 
In the succeeding months, Kevin made some changes. He reor- 
dered his priorities. He shortened his work week, and he concen- 
trated on deepening his relationships with his wife and children. It 
was not all smooth, but it was a kind of happy ending. He did not 
have to go through a divorce or some other traumatic event—as so 
many others do—before he discovered what was really important to 
him. 
And what was it that was different now? He was able to achieve 
a balance in the satisfaction of his basic needs. He had always felt 
quite effective in his career, so the need for competence had been well 
satisfied. But now his relationships were deeper, so he experienced a 
fuller satisfaction of his need for relatedness. Furthermore, in all 
realms of his life, he felt more autonomous, more like he was truly 
making his own choices. He was no longer driven by his work. 
Surely the American Dream, with its emphasis on materialism, is 
a potent motivator. It kept Kevin chained to his desk for twenty 
years. And it allowed his children to keep up with the changing fash- 
ions in athletic shoes. But it cost Kevin and his family dearly in terms 
of personal satisfaction. Just how common this phenomenon is—just 
how pervasive the negative consequences of the American Dream 
are—is an interesting question. 
The concept of materialism has been widely discussed and bal 
debated. On the one hand, politicians and economists call for more 
_ spending to boost the GNP, while on the other hand critics and psy- 
chologists such as Paul Wachtel argue that affluence impoverishes 
the soul. Only recently has psychological data begun to shed light on 
this controversy. Richard Ryan and former graduate student Tim 

When Society Corrupts 
127 
Kasser have collected relevant data from hundreds of subjects—col- 
lege students and adults who span the spectrum of age as well as 
social and economic status. 
The researchers focused on six types of life aspirations. Three 
were what we call extrinsic aspirations—the stuff the American 
Dream is made of. They were the aspirations for being wealthy, fa- 
mous, and physically attractive. They were the ones where the de- 
sired outcomes are instrumental for still other ends. Money brings _ 
power and material possessions. Fame opens doors and may lead to 
a shower of gifts. A beautiful image provides options for glamorous 
escorts, marketing opportunities, and unending attention. 
In contrast, the other three aspirations were referred to as intrin- 
sic because they provide their own reward and help to satisfy peo- 
ple’s innate needs for competence, autonomy, and relatedness. These 
three were: having satisfying personal relationships, making contri- 
butions to the community, and growing as individuals. Of course, it 
is possible that a satisfying personal relationship with an influential 
person could open doors, and that making community contributions 
could bring acclaim, so there could be some instrumental advantages 
to the intrinsic aspirations. But the intrinsic aspirations are really 
quite different from the extrinsic ones; they are satisfying in their 
own right. People feel significant personal gratification from the 
three intrinsic outcomes whether or not they lead to other ends. 
All of the six aspirations are ones that most of us hold, and even 
the extrinsic aspiration for financial success.is important—at least to 
some degree—for living a satisfying life. It is undeniably reasonable 
— 
to want to own a small piece of the earth on which to have a dwell- 
ing, and to strive for food, medical care, and some aesthetic pleasure 
for yourself and your family. But what the researchers were primar- 
ily interested in is what happens when people’s desire for one or 
more of these life goals is out of balance with the others. 
In the research, individuals rated the importance to themselves of 
each of these life aspirations. Using a sophisticated statistical proce- 
dure, Kasser and Ryan indexed the degree to which individuals’ crav- 
ings for one of the goals was out of balance with the others. For 

i. 
7 
. 
a 
a ae if 
4 
: 
Net 
ats 
isn 
ot 
128 
Why. We Do What We Do 
example, if Kevin Jacobs had completed the questionnaire before 
therapy, his craving for material success would undoubtedly have 
been out of balance with his aspiration for community contributions 
and personal relationships. 
“ 
The researchers found that if any 
of the three extrinsic aspira- 
tions—for money, fame, or beauty—was very high for an individual 
relative to the three intrinsic aspirations, the individual was also 
more likely to display poorer mental health. For example, having an 
unusually strong aspiration for material success was associated with 
Narcissism, anxiety, depression, and poorer social functioning as 
rated by a trained clinical psychologist. The other extrinsic aspira- 
tions were similarly associated with indicators of poorer psychologi- 
cal functioning. In contrast, strong aspirations for any of the 
intrinsic goals—meaningful relationships, personal growth, and 
community coniributions—were positively associated with well- 
being. People who strongly desired to contribute to their community, 
for example, had more vitality and higher self-esteem. When people 
organize their behavior in terms of intrinsic strivings (relative to ex- 
trinsic strivings) they seem more content—they feel better about who 
they are and display more evidence of psychological health. 
Part of the difficulty posed by extrinsic aspirations such as 
wealth and fame is that people fear they will never be able to achieve 
them, and some psychologists have suggested that these negative ex- 
pectancies are what cause ill-being. If people place very strong im- 
portance on achieving any goal and believe they won’t be able to 
attain the goal, they will feel unhappy and perhaps depressed. I once 
knew a young playwright who had worked hard for two or three 
years writing a play about the stresses and confusions of family life. 
The play was substantially autobiographical, and he had had enough 
positive feedback about it from writers and theater people that he 
held high expectations for success in regional theater and then on the 
Great White Way. It was remarkable how closely his moods and 
general demeanor were tied to developments with the play. When 
something positive happened, he was ebullient and dreaming of a 

When Society Corrupts 
; 
129 
dazzling opening night, but when he encountered an obstacle his ex- 
pectations plummeted and he became depressed. With his strongly 
held goal, his negative beliefs about the likelihood of achieving the 
; 
goal predicted his dysphoria. 
; 
Kasser and Ryan, in their research on life aspirations, asked re- 
spondents to report their beliefs about how likely it was that they 
would achieve each of the three extrinsic goals and each of the three 
intrinsic goals. Recall that the first finding indicated that if people 
held extrinsic goals very dear, they had tenuous mental health. The 
second important finding was that, even if the respondents thought 
the chances of achieving the dearly held extrinsic goals were excel- 
lent, they still displayed poor mental health. Holding extrinsic aspi- 
rations and believing they won’t be able to achieve them will surely 
leave people dyspeptic, but the less obvious and more penetrating 
finding from this research is that holding very strong extrinsic aspira- 
tions and believing strongly that they will be able to achieve them 
was also associated with poorer psychological health. It is more the 
type of aspirations people hold very strongly than the expectations 
they have about achieving them that is the critical predictor of well- 
- being. 
These studies brought a whole new dimension to the research on 
personal autonomy. Whereas earlier studies had focused on issues 
like the quality of one’s performance and experience, these studies 
drew direct linkages between types of motivation and individuals’ 
mental health. It seems that people who are the healthiest focus on 
developing satisfying personal relationships, growing as individuals, 
and contributing to their community. Surely, they also aspire to suf- 
ficient financial success to live comfortably. But wealth, fame, and 
beauty do not disproportionately occupy the consciousnesses of 
these people the way they dominate the experiences of individuals 
who are less psychologically stable. 
Underlying a strong emphasis on extrinsic strivings is a tenuous 
hold on one’s self. Those extrinsic goals bring attention to what one 
has rather than who one is. They constitute a facade, a socially 
~ 

> 
Py 
130 
Why We Do What We Do 
derived persona that lacks a solid grounding. In the absence of feel- 
ing deeply satisfied, of achieving gratification of one’s intrinsic 
needs, people come to desire the more superficial goals. 
Unduly strong extrinsic aspitations can thus be understood as 
representing aspects of a false self. They have potence because peo- 
ple’s contingent self-esteem is dependent upon the attainment of 
these goals. When people have been continually subjected to contin- 
gent love and esteem, particularly when they were young, they learn 
to look to external criteria asthe basis for judging their worth— 
initially the things their parents indicated were necessary, and subse- 
quently what society implicitly or explicitly advocated. In developing 
an orientation toward external criteria for judging one’s worth, peo- 
ple become particularly vulnerable to the forces of society. They are 
more likely to adopt the values that society seems to endorse. Most 
notably, they will adopt the values that are inherent in advertising— 
values like accumulating more and fancier possessions, and values 
for which the criteria are readily apparent, like wealth, fame, or 
looks. Extrinsic aspirations, of course, fit exactly this description. 
asser, Ryan, and colleagues investigated the developmental an- 
| 
Sones of the different types of aspirations with the hope of 
shedding further light on the dynamic relationship between aspira- 
tions and mental health. To do this, they used data collected from 
mothers and their children over a fourteen-year period. In line with 
their speculations, the researchers found that eighteen-year-olds who 
placed undue weight on extrinsic aspirations such as wealth had 
mothers who had been controlling (rather than autonomy support- 
ive) and cold. (rather than nurturing) when the children were young. 
. 
In contrast, mothers who had been warm, involved, and autonomy 
supportive had children. who grew up to desire more intrinsic life 
outcomes. 
The research on aspirations added greatly to the emerging pic- 
ture, for it confirmed that failing to be autonomy supportive and 
involved with your children can promote a more extrinsic orienta- 

i 
“a 
; | When Seiety Corrupts 
| 
131 
tion, as well as more introjection and a more.contingent sense of self. 
This extrinsic orientation and the concomitant sense 
of contingent 
worth results from the children’s not being able to satisfy their fun- 
- damental intrinsic needs for autonomy, competence, and related- 
ness, and it is accordingly linked to poorer mental health. When 
individuals are strongly extrinsically oriented, they lack a firm foun- 
dation for well-being. 
The term human needs is commonly used and typically equated 
with the idea of a want or a desire. What a person would like to have 
is often said to be what he or she needs. But that is an imprecise and 
misleading use of the concept of human need. Instead, in line with 
Abraham Maslow, we define a human need as an organismic condi- 
tion—whether physiological or psychological—that must be ongo- 
ingly satisfied for people to remain healthy and that will result in 
dysfunction if it is not. Ryan and Kasser’s résearch provides clear 
support for this view and helps to verify that competence, autonomy, 
and relatedness are indeed fundamental human needs. In contrast, 
however, what are often called needs for money and fame, say, are 
not needs at all. They may be wants or desires, and they may be 
extremely potent organizers of one’s life activities, but they are not 
basic psychological needs. 
or a society to function effectively, its individual members must, 
F 
to some extent, adopt the society’s values and mores. But inter- 
nalizing values and the willingness to live by them is a delicate matter 
on two grounds. First, to be effective as an individual, a person’s 
values and the accompanying motivation to behave must be inte- 
grated—they must become part of a coherent self. If they do not, 
they will subjugate the self to society. And, second, if the values and 
mores that society offers to individuals—values like extreme materi- 
alism—are out of kilter with the individuals’ fundamental human 
needs, the internalization process can go awry. People may internal- 
ize the values, but they will pay a serious cost as they continually, 
strive to live up to those unusually strong extrinsic values. 

- 
132 
; 
Why We Do What We Do 
— 
Holding extrinsic values that are substantially more salient than 
intrinsic values is evidence of a lack of integration of these values. If 
people’s valuing of money were integrated into their sense of self, 
that aspiration would be in balance with the others—it would be 
valued for its utility in allowing them to live a full and balanced life, 
providing meaningful opportunities for relatedness, offering aes- 
thetic experiences, helping others, and supporting public institu- 
tions. If their aspirations for money were well integrated, they 
would, for example, be willing to make contributions to their public 
-radio station, or the Boy Scouts, without needing to be acknowl- 
edged or applauded. They would contribute to these, or whatever 
other public organization fits their individual taste, because of their 
sense of general connectedness to others and their feeling of responsi- 
bility for the general good: 
I am not suggesting that people should make their contributions 
anonymously. The point is that if the motivation were truly an in- 
trinsic desire to contribute to the community, and if their regard for 
money were well integrated with their intrinsic aspirations and with 
other aspects of themselves, they would be willing to contribute 
anonymously. The contribution would be its own reward, and any 
acknowledgment would simply be a nice bonus. 
The integration of extrinsic values—that is, the balance between 
them and intrinsic values—is to a considerable extent influenced by 
parenting styles, as the research by Kasser and Ryan indicated. Nur- 
turing, autonomy-supportive parents are more likely to have chil- 
dren who have been able to integrate the extrinsic values. But all the 
blame does not lie at the feet of parents. Society, with the raging 
force of its emphasis on materialism, is a formidable obstacle to pro- 
moting a balance in the values of our children—and indeed of our- 
selves. 
Money keeps people current, with flashy possessions, hot new 
gadgets, and coveted seats at sporting events and concerts. And, of 
course, it gives people power to stand out from the masses, to exer- 
cise their will over others, to look like someone special. So highly 
valued is money within our society that, according to James Pattern: 

When Society Corrupts 
; 
133 
and Peter Kim in their book The Day America Told the Truth, about 
twenty-five percent of our citizens would be willing to abandon their 
entire family to receive ten million dollars; about seven percent 
would be willing to kill a stranger for that amount; and three percent 
would be willing to put their children up for adoption. Surrounded 
by such strongly held desires for money, the parenting task of pro- 
moting a balanced desire in our children for extrinsic and’*intrinsic 
goals is a daunting challenge. 
4 
ne of the foundations of American society is individualism. 
Many of our heroes, both real and literary, have been indepen- 
dent individuals who have settled new territories or amassed enor- 
mous wealth. We hold a romantic view of the cowboys who roamed 
the west or the seamen who battled storms on the pages of our nov- 
els, and we have idolized the captains of industry after whom mu- 
seums, libraries, and universities have been named. 
Rags-to-riches stories abound in our cultural history and have 
been woven through countless textbooks to make the rather exag- 
gerated point that “We can all make of ourselves whatever we’d 
like.” This individualism for members cf our society is a logical by- 
product of the individualism of our sogiety as a whole. It was evident 
in the Pilgrims, and it underlay the Revolutionary War. The new 
nation stood for self-governance, and it granted self-governance to 
its citizens. Individualism was proclaimed a societal value and both 
political and economic systems were developed to support that 
value. 
As formally explicated by writer Ayn Rand and others, individu- 
alism holds to. the primacy of individuals’ rights. Each person’s 
desires reign supreme and are their own justification. Whereas, ac- 
cording to Rand, altruism views individuals as a means to the ends of 
others, individualism views individuals as ends in their own right. 
From that perspective, it is thus a moral imperative that the benefi- 
ciary of an action be the person who acts, so individualism and self- 
ishness are essentially equivalent. Both involve evaluating outcomes 

134 
Why We Do What We Do 
on the basis of self-interest. Interest of the whole—that is, of soci- 
ety—should not be a concern of the individual, they say. Instead, the 
good of society is theorized to result from all its citizens’ pursuing 
their own individual interests. Assuch, public well-being is not con- 
sidered a goal, but is assumed to be a corollary of individualism. 
Like independence, individualism has also been confused with 
autonomy, and many writers have used the terms interchangeably. 
Yet the two concepts are profoundly different. The confusion stems 
froma superficial similarity in the definitions of the two concepts. 
Individualism refers to being free to pursue your own ends; it means 
that no external force (read: no government) will interfere with your 
attempts to get what you desire, so long as you do it legally. (The 
value of individualism also entails keeping laws to a minimum.) 
: Similarly, autonomy can be defined as being volitional (i.e., free) in 
_ pursuing the goals that you choose. Both concepts thus have some 
relationship to freedom, and both convey the sense of self-rule. But 
the foci and meaning of the two concepts are very different. 
Individualism is about self-interest, about acting to achieve and 
acquire for yourself. It encompasses being personally or emotionally 
- 
independent (which was discussed in Chapter Six) but it goes far 
beyond independence to incorporate the sense of selfishness, of look- 
ing out just for yourself. Individualism stands in contrast to acting . 
for the common good. The converse of individualism is collectivism. 
Here individuals’ rights and goals are subordinated to the rights and 
goals of the whole. In a collective society, people are dependent on 
others, but their dependence is more than personal or emotional reli- 
ance; it is a structural interconnection in which all one’s outcomes 
are intertwined with those of others. Family comes before individual; 
group comes before individual; society comes before individual. In- 
dividuals are expected to behave in ways that serve the common 
- good rather than their own good. The well-being of individuals is 
thus viewed as a corollary of the strength of the collective, rather 
than the other way around. 
Autonomy, in contrast, is about acting volitionally, with a sense 
of choice, flexibility, and personal freedom. It is about feeling a true 
a 

~~, 
When Society Corrupts 
0355; 
willingness to behave responsibly, in accord with your interests and 
values. The converse of being autonomous is being controlled, which 
means that you are pressured to behave, think, or feel some particu- 
lar way. Control is often exerted by others—by people in one-up 
positions, or by the society, but, of course, people can be controlling 
with themselves to satisfy their introjects. To pressure yourself, to 
force yourself to act, or to feel as if you have to do something is to 
undermine your own autonomy. 
The hard-driving, competitive businessman who fights for more 
power and more wealth may be a rugged individualist, but he is not 
an exemplar of autonomy. To the extent that pursuit of his ends are 
pressured or coerced, even if from within, he is being individualistic 
but not autonomous. Many people, of course, find the notion of in- 
dividualism very appealing, but its appeal comes more from their 
compulsion to achieve within the capitalist economic system than it 
does from their innate needs. Several writers such as psychologist 
Carol Gilligan have confused individualism and autonomy so their 
critiques have portrayed the concept of autonomy as a culprit when, 
in fact what they were actually criticizing was masculine indepen- 
dence and Western individualism. To be autonomous in relating to 
others is hardly something that deserves critique. 
- 
Just as individualism can be controlled, so, too, can activity on 
behalf of the collective. The totalitarian communist regimes in East- 
ern Europe prior to 1989 were hideous examples of exactly that, 
with external, threatening contingencies 
as the instruments of con- 
trol. Japan, though different and less oppressive than the Soviet Em- 
pire, also represents a version of controlled collectivism. In Japan, 
the group has traditionally come before the individual. It is a strong 
societal value, almost universally held within the culture. Family al- 
legiance is understood to be mandatory and the honor of the family 
has even motivated suicides of family members who have lost face. 
Rather than being based in external coercion, however, Japan’s 
means of control is an incredibly effective process of promoting the 
kind of internalization in which people take in values and use them 
rigidly on themselves. People control themselves in accord with the 
& x 
: > 

136 
Why We Do What We Do 
social mores of the culture, rather than being controlled by the 
agents of that culture. 
Effective though it has been, however, there is increasing evi- 
dence that the fabric of the Japanese society is beginning to fray.’ 
Indictments for embezzlement and other collusion at high levels of 
the financial world attest to a growing sense of individualism, and 
social problems such as homelessness, while far less acute than in the 
U.S., are on the rise. 
It is possible, and indeed quite common in U.S. society, to be 
individualistic in one’s actions without being autonomous, just as it 
is possible to be collectivist without being autonomous, as has tradi- 
tionally been the case in Japan. 
Philosopher Robert Young, in providing a definition of auton- 
omy much like ours, said that acting autonomously requires rational 
capacities and strength of will. Of course, individualism requires 
these as well. But autonomy, according to Young, also requires self- 
knowledge. This point is an extremely important one, for self-knowl- 
edge implies personality integration, and that is what distinguishes 
autonomy from individualism. Through self-knowledge one be- 
comes more integrated and comes more into connection with one’s 
true inner being—with one’s intrinsic predilections and integrated 
values. Individualism, with its rational capacities and strength of 
will, can be autonomous only when accompanied by self-knowledge. 
As noted earlier, self-knowledge (as opposed to self-deception) is. 
a rather tricky concept. Self-knowledge begins with a relaxed atten- 
tion to one’s inner processes; it begins with genuine interest in one- 
self. What passes for self-knowledge is often not that at all, but 
instead involves an investment in seeing oneself, and being seen by 
others, in a particular way—as friendly, rich, intelligent, or what- 
ever. When people are interested in their inner self in an honest way, 
they will be more able to give up ego involvements and be more eager 
to understand whatever they encounter in their inner exploration. 
Autonomy facilitates and is facilitated by this self-knowledge. 
It is surely ironic that in our culture, which emphasizes individu- 
alism as a birthright, conformity is so evident. Although many Amer- 

When Society Corrupts 
37, 
icans are no longer controlled by religious or community values, they 
are increasingly controlled by extrinsic outcomes, conforming with 
‘the symbols of status promulgated by.the mass media. When you. 
think about it, doesn’t it seem rather silly that people wear labels on 
the outside of their clothing, rather than the inside? 
Understanding that individualism often coexists with control 
rather than autonomy allows us to understand this seemingly para- 
doxical phenomenon. People, in watching out for their own personal 
" interests, often feel pressured to bolster their sense of self through the 
attainment of narcissistic extrinsic aspirations. They comply and 
conform in striving to achieve those goals. 
There is, of course, nothing wrong or weak about wishing— 
choosing in a free and autonomous fashion—to be part of a group or 
to be like the other members of a group. It is part of human nature. 
When well integrated as individuals, people will be solid enough to 
persist as themselves in a society that is always shifting underfoot, 
and at the same time, because they draw strength from each other, to 
cherish their dependence on those others. 


5 
Isnt 
Ae 
«. 
g 
6 
= 
— 

ee: 
Gus. 
ay 
5 
: 
i 
Nera re kw 
* 
. 

LA ING 
How to Promote 
Autonomy 
y cousin and her husband are avid gardeners. For six 
| 
\ / [ 
months of each year, their ample yard is in glorious 
bloom, with more than enough flowers, fruits, and vege- 
tables for them, their neighbors, and the wildlife that is drawn to 
their property. Gardening is a kind of family affair for them, and 
from. the time their son was two years old he was right beside his 
parents with his hands in the dirt. 
One day when he was in kindergarten, his teacher handed out 
colored construction paper for the children to make flowers. From 
the red paper, the children cut circles with rippled edges to represent 
the blossoms. From the green, they cut stems and leaves. All the chil- 
dren, that is,.except my young cousin. He had seen many flowers and 
knew them well, and he started to make one that looked like what he 
had seen. He took the red paper and crumpled it up as he began to 
make the blossom of a red tulip. After all, the flowers he’d seen had 
all been three-dimensional. His teacher, however, had apparently 
wanted a two-dimensional flower, pasted to a background. She 
didn’t understand what my young cousin was doing, and she scolded 
him. He was crestfallen and confused. 
That night, at home, when he told his mother what happened, 
the tears he had successfully choked back in school began to flow. 
She listened and comforted him, of course, but she faced a dilemma. 
Obviously, the teacher had been unreasonable. She had been both 
ae 
Po" 
‘ 
141 

142 
Why We Do What We Do 
controlling and evaluative, and she had criticized him for doing 
something that was as right as what she had expected him to do. 
Telling her son that his teacher was wrong—a bad teacher, so to 
speak—would not, however, have been a useful thing for my cousin 
to do. So, the challenge she faced was to explain to her five-year-old 
that his idea of how to make a flower was indeed a good one, that 
there are many ways to make a paper flower, and that sometimes you 
need to do it the way the teacher wants. The teacher’s way was not 
better, but it was the way she had wanted the flowers this time. My 
cousin did manage to say all that, and then she got out some paper 
and they made some three-dimensional flowers together. 
ichard Ryan and I frequently talk to teachers and parents about 
motivation. Teachers tell us about parents who haven’t done a 
good job of parenting, and parents complain about teachers. There 
are surely countless incidents like the one with my cousin, where 
teachers and parents have a different view of things, and the ques- 
tions we get from teachers or parents often focus on the behavior of 
the other. Still, we always key our answers to the behavior of the 
person asking the question. And the answers all boil down to one 
crucial point: Regardless of how others treat the child, the best thing 
_for you to do is be autonomy supportive. That’s also our bottom line 
when managers and health-care providers ask us about motivation. 
Autonomy support is a personal orientation you can take toward 
other people—particularly other people in a one-down position. 
This orientation flavors every aspect of your interactions with them. 
It requires being able to take their perspective—being able to see the 
world as they see it. It thus allows you to understand why they want 
what they want and why they do what they do. Simply stated, to be 
autonomy supportive as, say, a manager means being able to grasp 
what it is like to be an employee of yours, in your company, commu- 
nity, and industry. 
As an autonomy-supportive teacher, parent, or manager, you 
would be building an alliance with your students, children, or em- 

How to Promote Autonomy 
143 
-ployees, and you would engage new situations from that perspective. 
This orientation, therefore, pervades all aspects of your teaching, 
parenting, and managing. Whether the agenda is deciding what to do 
or evaluating what has been done, carrying out the agenda in an 
autonomy-supportive way is dramatically different from carrying it 
out in a more traditional, controlling, or hierarchical way. And the 
way you carry it out will have an enormous impact on performance, 
adjustment, and morale. 
In the late 1970s, I spent some time observing in public school 
classrooms. I would sit in the back of the room, watching and listen- 
ing. The thing that struck me most was how I felt when I left different 
classrooms. Sometimes I would leave feeling open and light—happy, . 
_ 
really. Other times, I would feel closed and heavy, somehow bur- 
dened. 
I paid careful attention to what the teachers were doing—or 
more to the point how they were doing it—when I felt good, and 
when I felt not so good. And it seemed to me that when the teachers 
responded to the children by taking their perspective and encourag- - 
ing their initiative, I felt good, but when the teachers were demand- 
ing and critical, I felt bad. These, of course, were just observations, 
so Richard Ryan, Louise Sheinman (a school-district administrator), 
and I decided to collect systematic questionnaire and observational 
data to test this idea. As we expected, teachers who were oriented 
toward supporting their students’ autonomy had a more positive im- 
pact on their students than did the control-oriented teachers. The 
students of autonomy-supportive teachers were more curious and 
mastery-oriented, and they evidenced higher self-esteem. 
A mother who seemed genuinely convinced of the importance of 
supporting autonomy in the classroom (and I think at home, as well) 
once asked me how she would know whether her son’s teacher was 
autonomy supportive in the classroom. I asked whether she ever 
went to parent-teacher conferences with his teacher, and she said she 
did. I suggested that she pay attention to how the teacher speaks 
about her son. Does the teacher take the son’s perspective in talking 
about how he is doing in school? And does it all ring true in terms of 

144 
Why We Do What We Do 
what you know about your son? If so, the teacher is probably quite 
_ autonomy supportive. If the teacher is able to take the boy’s perspec- 
tive when talking with his mother, it is probable that the teacher 
would take the boy’s perspective when dealing with him. 
The idea of autonomy support, of course, seemed fully as rele- 
vant to the workplace as to the classroom, so with colleagues Ryan 
and Connell, I began doing some work in the Xerox Corporation. I 
traveled to many company offices around the country talking with 
employees and observing the operations, and we collected question- 
naire data from over one thousand people who were involved in the 
servicing of equipment. In line with our expectations, the data re- 
vealed that dynamics very similar to those we had isolated in the 
classroom were also operative among working adults. Autonomy- 
‘ supportive managers had workers who were more trusting of the 
corporation, had less concern about pay and benefits, and displayed 
a higher level of satisfaction and morale. Furthermore, we confirmed 
that it was possible to train managers to be more autonomy support- 
ive and, in turn, to elicit more positive work outcomes from the peo- 
ple they supervise. 
From all the observations in schools and work organizations, I 
have concluded that teachers and managers who are autonomy sup- 
portive approach many of their functions differently from the way 
controlling teachers and managers approach them. Here are a few 
examples. 
Deciding What to Do and How to Do It 
One of the central features of being autonomy supportive is provid- 
ing choice, which entails sharing the authority or power of your one- 
up position. Providing choice can be done at both the individual level 
and the group level. In other words, part of being autonomy support- 
ive means allowing individuals within your class or work group to 
participate in making decisions about issues that concern only them, 

wen? 
How to Promote Autonomy 
145 
and part is sharing decision making with the group as a whole. The 
most effective, autonomy-supportive managers and teachers allow 
their workers or students (whether individually or as a group) to play 
a role in decision making. 
Think about the woman who supervises the design staff for a 
major department store. Her work group creates the window dis- 
plays, the decorations throughout the store, the mannequin arrange- 
ments within the clothing departments, and so on. The displays are 
changed at certain times and they follow seasonal themes. As the 
manager, she could make all the decisions herself, or she could in- 
volve her staff in the decision making, both as a group and as in- 
dividuals. When it is summer, the designs would naturally reflect 
that season, but there are many summer themes—the beach, hiking, 
sailing, lawn parties, and so on. The group could decide on the gen- 
eral theme, for example, and individuals could be left to create spe- 
cific displays—with discussion and coordination among people to 
ensure a high-quality outcome. 
In schools, as well as in the workplace, choice is important. Nat- 
urally, students must learn to read, but why not let the group decide 
what to read? And why not let them talk about how to make the 
decision—by majority, by consensus, or by committee? The process 
of decision making is itself an important matter to learn about. Peri- 
ods could also be built into the class schedule for students to decide 
individually what to work on—finishing their math assignment, 
reading another book by an author they like, or whatever. 
Although providing choice and encouraging participation in de- 
cision making is relevant to decisions about what activities people 
engage in, there are limits to this. Many managers have told us that 
there is really no room for their subordinates to choose what gets- 
done—there are things that we just have to do. Many teachers have 
said much the same thing: The district or the state determines what 
has to be taught. 
: 
Certainly there is some truth to what they say: There are things 
that must be done. There are tasks that have to be accomplished on 
the job, and there are subjects that have to be covered in the class- 

146 
Why We Do What We Do 
room. But there is almost always some room for deciding what to do, 
and the point is that truly autonomy-supportive managers or teach- 
ers will accept the “givens” and work with them. 
Providing choice about how to do a task is even easier than pro- 
viding choice about what task to do. When a manager’s superior 
dictates what has to be done, the manager still has the possibility of 
letting the group decide how. With a task that has several aspects, for 
example, the group could decide how to parcel them out. Suppose a 
work group has the responsibility of servicing all the copy machines 
on the north side of the city. Why not let the team members decide 
_ how to carve up the region and whether to cover territories as in- 
dividuals or small groups? Suppose a class of elementary-school stu- 
dents has the task of learning about seeds and plants. Why not let the 
students decide whether to germinate seeds and grow plants in the 
classroom, have lectures by the teacher, or have individuals read as- 
signments and then teach each other about what they read? People 
who are managers or teachers are in the best position to figure out 
how to provide choice about what to do and how to do it within 
their own milieu because they are the ones with experience. Exam- 
ples of how to provide choice are as varied as their imaginations. 
Allowing choice about what to do has’ several possible advan- 
tages. For one thing, in the workplace, when the people who will be 
carrying out a decision participate in making that decision, it is pos- 
sible that the decisions will be of higher quality than when the man- 
ager decides alone. Furthermore, research has confirmed that choice 
enhances people’s intrinsic motivation, so when people participate in 
decisions about what to do, they will be more motivated and com- 
mitted to the task—to being sure that the task gets done well. The 
more seriously people take the challenge of figuring out how to offer 
choice, the more satisfying they will likely find their jobs, and the 
more positive will be the responses from their students or employees. 
Even people who believe in the power of personal choice may 
still wonder whether offering choice is always best. The answer is 
undoubtedly no, and there are a few considerations that have been 
found to be useful in determining when it is most apprepriate to 

How to Promote Autonomy 
147 
include people in making decisions. One is whether the decision 
would be too stressful and conflict-promoting if others participated. 
Suppose there is a team of twelve individuals and the supervisor has 
been told to downsize by one. It would probably be best for the man- 
ager to make that difficult call. The decision is so fraught with poten- 
tial conflict that asking the group to make the decision could cause 
hard feelings that would have unpleasant consequences for a long 
time to come. 
Another consideration is whether the particular decision is an 
appropriate one for people to decide, given their level of maturation. 
There are some choices, for example, that teenagers would be ready 
to make, but that are not meaningful or appropriate for young chil- 
dren. It is important for all youngsters to be given choices, but there 
are some issues. that they are not ready to. grapple with. A six-year- 
old who says she wants to baby-sit with her little sister ought not be 
allowed to (except in a pretend sense), but a twelve-year-old who 
says she wants to is probably ready. 
j 
There may be cases where secrecy is so paramount that subordi- 
nates ought not be offered choices. Leaks of critical government in- 
formation might be the result of including too many people in a 
decision-making process. Furthermore, there may be cases where the 
decision to be made has no real impact or relevance to a person, and 
including him or her may be a waste of resources. There may be cases 
where a decision needs to be made so quickly that it is not practical 
to include others. Simply stated, even though offering choices and 
allowing students, children, and employees to participate in decision 
making is motivationally (perhaps even morally) desirable, there are 
various circumstances where it may be impractical or disadvanta- 
geous. 
Often when Ryan or I give talks or consultations about auton- 
omy support, people tell us that their children, their students, or their 
employees don’t want to have choice—that they want to be told 
what to do. When we hear such comments, they do ring true, at least 
‘to some extent, but we realize that if they are true it is because people 
have been pushed to that point by being overly controlled in the past. 
‘s rns 
- 
hp 

148 
Why We Do What We Do 
Remember that if you control people enough, they may begin to act 
as if they want to be controlled. As a self-protective strategy, they 
become focused outward—looking for clues about what the people 
in one-up positions expect of them, looking for what will keep them 
out of trouble. I have seen this, for example, in countless students 
who have come to ask what topic to use for their term papers. I 
typically respond with something like, ““What interests you?” only to 
get the reply, “I don’t know; what do you think I should write 
about?” 
A former graduate student in our program, Yasmin Haddad 
(now a professor at the University of Jordan in Amman), once did 
a study to help-clarify why people might not want to make their 
own choices. She had elementary-school students work on ana- 
grams. Toward half the students she was very authoritarian, giving 
them controlling, evaluative feedback about their performance on 
the anagram task, and toward the other half she was quite support- 
ive, giving them non-evaluative information about their perform- 
ance. Subsequently, she told all the students that they would be 
working on four more anagrams, and she asked how many they 
would like to choose for themselves and how many they would like 
the experimenter to choose for them. It is interesting that the stu- 
dents with whom she had been controlling, subsequently said they 
wanted less choice than the students with whom she had been au- 
tonomy supportive. It seems that, to some degree at least, people 
adapt to being controlled and act as if they don’t want the very 
thing that is integral to their nature—namely, the opportunity to 
be autonomous. They probably fear that they will be evaluated— 
perhaps even punished—if they make the wrong choice. And they 
may well be. 
Of course, sometimes when teachers and managers tell us that 
people don’t want choice, they are just saying that to justify their 
own controlling behavior, but sometimes they know what they’re 
talking about. If they are right, however, it is probably because they 
themselves—or the parents, teachers, or managers the people were 

_ How to Promote Autonomy 
1 
lick: 
previously exposed to—had been controlling and not granted them 
choice. When people in positions of authority are controlling it is 
almost as if they were wringing the spirit out of the people they are 
supposed to be helping. 
S 
. 
What all this means is that being autonomy supportive can be 
very difficult, especially with people who are accustomed to being 
controlled. Thus, we have to be patient; we have to work with our 
students or employees to reawaken what is basic to their nature and 
what will almost surely lead to more positive results. We need to help 
them get back to the place where they are vital, interested, and eager 
to take on challenges and responsibilities. We need to promote their 
autonomy, in part by providing them with choice. 
Setting Autonomy-Supportive Limits 
I have emphasized repeatedly that supporting autonomy does not 
mean condoning irresponsibility, nor does it mean allowing people 
to engage in dangerous or harmful acts. Central to promoting auton- 
omy is encouraging people to understand where their rights end and 
others’ rights begin. Setting limits is a way of communicating that 
about people’s rights and about constraints that exist in the social 
world. As such, it helps people learn to be responsible in making 
their choices. 
When limits are necessary, there are several important considera- 
tions that will help ensure that the limit setting does not undermine 
autonomy. First, it is possible to have people set their own limits. If 
an individual’s choices might infringe on the rights of others in the 
group, the group as a whole—rather than its manager or teacher— 
could discuss the issue and arrive at a set of limits. A. S. Neill, 
founder of the Summerhill School in England and one of the cen- 
tury’s most progressive educators, used this approach very effec- 
tively. Students were encouraged to have group discussions aimed at 
os 
_ 
., 

150-7 
Why We Do What We Do. 
setting their own rules. As long as everyone agreed to it, the decision 
was considered acceptable. 
- In many cases, of course, the ineheaaie 
managers, or parents need 
to set the limits. And as the research has shown, the style they use in 
presenting the limits is important. For example, avoiding controlling 
language and acknowledging the resistance people may feel facilitate 
their willingness to accept the limits. Take a routine experience at 
home in which a mother tells her son, ‘Have fun playing in the sand- 
box, but don’t throw the sand out into the lawn.” The fact of setting 
such a limit might ruin the son’s day, but it needn’t. The mother can 
help her own cause (and the son’s) if she leaves out pressuring words 
and phrases like “do as you should” or “be a good boy.” Further- 
more, the son will be more likely to play happily without throwing 
the sand, if his mother acknowledges that she knows he might want 
to throw the sand all over the place. All of this conveys that she 
understands his perspective and is not simply trying to push him 
around. 
When people who are being limited understand the reason for 
limits, they are also more likely to accept them without feeling un- 
dermined. If the mother explains to her son why it is important not 
to throw the sand—for example, it will kill the grass and there will be 
no sand left in the box for next time—he may be learning something 
important at the same time that he is being given a meaningful reason 
to stay within the limit. 
The issue of providing useful information, of course, goes far 
beyond just making limit setting more effective. Understanding the 
usefulness or importance of the tasks people are doing and of the 
organization’s policies allows people to feel more a part of the orga- 
nization, less alienated from it. In some cases, particularly in educa- 
tion, it may be useful to go beyond just providing a rationale to 
encourage people to think for themselves about why a task might be 
useful for them. Even when students or employees are told what they 
must do and how they must do it, encouraging them to think 
through why they are being asked to do it in a particular way can be 
a valuable problem-solving task. When they fully understand why 

i. 
How to Promote Autonomy 
151 
something is important they will be more willing to do it autono- 
mously. 
There are a couple of other important considerations when it 
comes to setting limits. Making the limits as wide as possible and 
allowing choice within them will help keep people from feeling so 
restricted. Setting consequences that are commensurate: with the 
transgression is also an essential element for effective limit setting. 
Cutting off the hand that goes into the forbidden cookie jar is a bit 
extreme. When setting limits, people are creating “givens,” so it is 
important to be clear about the consequences of living with the “giv- 
ens” and the consequences of transgressing them. This issue calls for 
some thought because once the limits are set and the consequences, 
- 
communicated, it is important to follow through; otherwise, one is 
undermining one’s own credibility. 
Consequences of transgressing are not the same thing as punish- 
ments. Punishments are a means of controlling people, but limit set- 
ting. is not about control. It is about encouraging responsibility. If 
people set appropriate limits and communicate fair consequences, 
then they can leave it to the student or employee to decide whether to 
stay within the limits, or to transgress them. It is the person’s choice, 
and if the:limit setters are not willing to let him or her make the 
choice, they are not being truly autonomy supportive. If they get 
caught in a power struggle, they have moved beyond limit setting in 
the wrong direction. Setting limits is a matter of being clear and fol- 
lowing through; it is not a matter of fighting, pressuring, or strug- 
gling. 
One of the main purposes of setting limits with children and stu- 
dents is to communicate that life is full of choices and every choice 
has its consequences. They can choose what they want, but they need 
to be ready for the consequences. Those are simply the facts of life. 
Limit setters are working against themselves if they try to force oth- 
ers to comply. Only when the others have chosen to stay within the 
limits will the process be successful, and the process is most likely to 
succeed when the limit setters can take the others’ perspective, mini- 
mizing the pressure and keeping the lines of communication open. 

152 
Why We Do What’We Do 
Setting Goals 
and Evaluating Performance 
At the beginning of each quarter, many work groups commit to a set 
of goals that they will attempt to reach in the succeeding months and 
that will serve as standards against which their performance will 
later be evaluated. The goals are important for purposes of plan- 
ning—knowing what are the likely revenues from sales, knowing 
how many Model C3200’s are likely to be produced, and so on—but 
they are equally important for helping people maintain their motiva- 
tion. 
According to Edward Tolman and Kurt Lewin, two highly influ- 
ential German émigré psychologists, human behavior is purposive, 
by which they meant that motivated behavior is directed toward out- 
comes. People behave when they expect they can attain goals. By 
aiming for goals, people will remain on track and be able to assess 
ongoingly whether they are making progress. 
To be most effective, goals need to be individualized—they need 
to be suited specifically to the person who will work toward them— 
and they need to be set so as to represent an optimal challenge. When 
they are too easy, the person is likely to be bored and unmotivated; 
when too difficult, anxious and inefficient. 
; 
In setting individual limits, it is important to approach the task , 
from the other person’s perspective. I have known many managers 
who routinely work sixty-hour weeks. They work evening and week- 
end hours, and they keep very task-focused throughout. For such 
people, who often have substantial salaries and various perks, their 
job is challenging, exciting, and rewarding. It is a source of personal 
fulfillment. But a problem that I have sometimes seen arise is that 
they expect other employees, such as a secretary or assistant, to be 
there whenever they need him or her, not grasping that that expecta- 
tion may be very inappropriate. The other person’s life may not 
- 
allow it, and even if it does, the expectations may still be inappropri- 
ate given the circumstances. 
\ 

. How to Promote Autonomy 
153 
The secretary or assistant in all likelihood has a salary far below 
that of the manager, and the secretary or assistant may have personal 
commitments during non-eight-to-five hours. In addition, whereas 
the managers may find the work a source of substantial personal 
fulfillment, that may not be so for the secretary or assistant. 
The 
managers, by failing to take the other’s perspective, make unreason- 
able demands and create inappropriate stresses. Goals and standards 
must be reasonable, all things considered, for the person to whom: 
they are applied. 
The best way to set goals that are optimal for a work groupand 
its members—or for a class and its students—is to involve the people - 
in the process. Being autonomy supportive results in optimal goals 
that people will commit to because they themselves play an active 
role in formulating those goals. Through group or individual discus- 
sions, the people one supervises or teaches can be encouraged to 
think about what they are doing, what they ought to be able to ac- 
complish in the weeks or months ahead, what potential obstacles 
might pop up, and so on. This process is useful in many ways: it leads 
to optimal goals; it helps people reflect on the way they are doing 
_their jobs; it encourages them to take on new challenges; and it en- 
hances their motivation to attain the goals. And, it provides a stan- 
dard against which performance can later be appraised. 
Evaluating a person’s performance is always done against some 
explicit or implicit standard. People are doing well or poorly only 
with respect to some set of expectations about how they might be. 
able to do at that time and place. If goals have been properly set, they 
can represent the standard against which performance is evaluated. 
The great thing is that if people have participated in setting their 
goals they can also participate in evaluating their own performance. 
And who knows better than they how well they have done? 
At the end of each school year, I have a meeting with each of my 
graduate students to talk about the year. I go in with my own opin- 
ions about the progress the student has made, and I often have inputs 
from other faculty members. The meetings usually cover a lot of 
ground, and at some point during them we get around to what could 

154 
Why We Do What We Do 
be considered a performance appraisal. I begin by having the student 
give me his or her own assessment, and it has amazed me time and 
time again that the students generally say all the things I have on my 
mind, and then some. I seldom have much to add. Optimal evalua- 
tions are ones where people evalitate their own performance, against 
standards they set themselves and committed to. 
It is important, in any evaluative process, when APE RET 
falls short of the standard, to view the situation not as a basis for 
criticism but as a problem to be solved. In other words, don’t jump to 
immediate conclusions that the cause is in the person’s behavior. Per- 
haps the standards were inappropriate; perhaps unanticipated obsta- 
cles came up. And even if the difficulty was caused largely by the 
person’s behavior, viewing it as a problem to be solved—thinking 
about how this can be improved next time—rather than being criti- 
cally evaluative will generally produce more positive results. 
In a workshop that Ryan once ran in a school district, a fifth- 
grade teacher was complaining about how she had just been treated 
by the principal. It seems she had not turned in a report on the previ- 
ous. Friday afternoon—a report that she did not know the purpose 
of—and on Monday morning the principal really dressed her down, 
pointing out that her behavior was simply unacceptable. 
Ryan presented the problem to the group, inquiring about how 
they thought the problem should be handled. They had all the right 
answers. First, they all agreed that in such a situation the principal 
should step up to the problem: Missing a deadline like that should 
not go unnoticed, they said. But they added that it would have been 
very helpful if the principal had let the teacher know ahead of time 
why the report was so important. The teacher may have been willing 
to stay longer on Friday, or do it at home Thursday night, if she had 
understood how important it was. 
The group further agreed that it would have been useful not to 
assume the problem was in her behavior—which it may or may not 
have been—but instead to be open to understanding what had hap- 
pened. Maybe an emergency came up on Friday afternoon that took 
up the time she had set aside to write the report. Even if the problem 

_ How to Promote Autonomy 
wD) 
had been that the teacher simply did not put in the needed effort, a 
discussion about it rather than a dressing-down would probably 
have been more productive. Maybe she was feeling overburdened or 
a bit estranged. Working with her to bring her more on board would 
likely have had a more positive yield. 
It is possible, of course, that the real problem was that there is 
not adequate communication among the staff in that school: The fact 
that the teacher did not know the purpose of the report hints at that 
being true. And if it were true, the principal should be dealing with 
that issue rather than reproaching the teacher. 
_ 
Fhe 
Administering Rewards and Recognition 
At one point, when I was consultant to a major corporation, I at- 
tended a year-end recognition ceremony at a regional office in Texas. 
There were numerous, substantial awards—large-screen televisions, 
microwaves, blocks of tickets to professional football games, and so 
_ on—and each was given either to an individual or a team that did 
best on some criterion. It was rather programmed and predictable, 
but it did seem festive. 
Still, I 
couldn’t help thinking that this was not the best way to 
deal with recognition. Each award was given to the person or team 
who won some competition, which means that the process turned 
people against each other when it would have been better to encour- 
age them to work together. Furthermore, with a competition, the 
second-place person—who may have missed out only by a hair—is a 
loser. Competitions are typically all or none, which means that many 
superb performers become losers. A team that is second or third (out 
of, say, eight) on every single criterion wins nothing, even though in 
a sense they may be the best overall performers of the year. 
“Why not give each team an award for its most important ac- 
- complishment, or for its biggest improvement?” I ask the branch 
manager afterward. That way, teams compete against themselves, 

156 
. 
Why We Do What We Do 
rather than each other, and each team can be a winner. Of course, 
this strategy is not intended as a means of motivating employees, but 
rather is a means of expressing appreciation to each team for its year 
of work. If some team has not been having a good year, that is some- 
thing to be addressed ongoingly. But making them a loser at the rec- 
ognition meeting, when the purpose is to promote good feelings for 
the group as a whole, is riot likely to help. 
Rewards and recognition are important, but as the research has 
so clearly shown and I have reiterated many times, when rewards or 
awards are used as a means of motivating people, they are likely to 
backfire. Watches to employees and gold stars to students can en- 
_hance their sense of competence and leave them feeling acknowl- 
edged and appreciated. But the use of rewards is a treacherous road 
to travel, and one has to be very careful—and truthful—about why 
and how they are being used. 
Recognizing the Obstacles 
The fact that most teachers, managers, and parents do less support- 
ing autonomy and offering choice than would be optimal, leads to 
the question of why this is so. No doubt some people in one-up posi- 
tions have personalities that are oriented toward controlling others 
rather than being supportive—the authoritarian personality, for ex- 
ample—and that represents one difficult problem. But there are 
other obstacles to autonomy support that are both bigger and easier 
to change. One obstacle is that some people do not have the skills 
necessary for practicing autonomy support. They need training. 
In our research at Xerox, we did a training intervention to teach 
one group of managers how to be more sensitive and responsive to 
their subordinates, how to promote initiative and responsibility, and 
how to provide choice and support. The intervention began with a 
two-day off-site workshop and continued with occasional meetings, 
discussions, and feedback sessions over the succeeding three months. 

- How to Promote Autonomy 
; 
ST. 
Prior to the intervention, and then again after, we assessed their 
managerial approach on a scale that ranged from highly controlling 
to highly autonomy supportive, and we found that the managers had 
indeed become more autonomy supportive during the period of 
training. More important, perhaps, we found that during the same 
period the employees of these managers became more positive in 
their perceptions and attitudes about the workplace. The training 
had an impact on both the managers who had been trained and the 
employees they supervised. 
; 
Controlling personalities and lack of skills in teachers and man- 
agers are not the only obstacles to facilitating autonomy-supportive 
behavior, however. The situation can also make it very difficult to be 
autonomy supportive. Over and over, teachers have told us that they 
began their careers with excitement and enthusiasm, eager to work 
with the students to facilitate their intellectual and personal develop- 
ment. But as the years passed and the pressures and demands intensi- 
fied, the teachers have said, they lost much of their enthusiasm. They 
point to standardized curricula, where they have to teach specified 
material rather than what seemed right to them, and to the pressures 
on them to be sure their students get high standardized achievement 
scores. 
It occurred to us that these kinds of pressures may actually make 
the teachers more controlling—they feel pressured, so in turn they 
pressure the students. We did an experiment to test this hypothesis. 
We had subjects come into the lab to teach students how to solve 
problems. We gave the teachers plenty of time to practice with the 
problems, and we gave them both a list of useful hints and the actual 
solutions to all the problems. The teachers had been randomly as- 
signed to one of two groups, and everything was the same for the two 
groups except for the fact that we made one additional statement to 
the teachers in one group. We said, “Remember, it is your responsi- 
bility as a teacher to make sure your students perform up to high 
standards.” 
We tape-recorded the teaching session that followed, and later 
we analyzed the teaching styles. The results were astonishing. Teach- 

. 
158 
. 
Why We Do What We Do 
ers to whom we had mentioned ‘“‘performing up to high standards” 
spent twice as much time talking during the teaching session as the 
other teachers. They also made three times as many directives and 
three times as many controlling statements (e.g., using words like 
“should” and ‘“‘must’’). 
In a way, it is all quite ironic. Parents, politicians, and school 
administrators all want students to be creative problem-solvers and 
to learn material at a deep, conceptual level. But in their eagerness to 
achieve these ends, they pressure teachers to produce. The paradox is 
that the more they do that, the more controlling the teachers become, 
which, as we have seen so many times, undermines intrinsic motiva- 
tion, creativity, and conceptual understanding in the students. The 
harder the teachers are pushed to get results, the less likely it is that 
the important results will be forthcoming. The same is true for man- 
agers and others in one-up positions. The more they feel pressured to 
get results from their employees (or children, or athletes, or students) 
the harder they push. Unfortunately, in the process, they typically 
sabotage their own efforts. 
Although the experiment was done with teachers, it really has 
relevance to anyone in a one-up position. When parents or managers 
feel more pressured, it is also more difficult for them 
to be autonomy 
supportive. Controlling others seems to be the sort of “knee-jerk” 
reaction to feeling stress in any one-up position, and it is likely to 
have negative ramifications. One of the most important implications 
of this is that people in such positions—teachers, parents, and man- 
agers, for example—will not be very effective in supporting the au- 
tonomy of their students and employees if they do not have their 
own support. Finding that support—finding a network of people 
who will help you satisfy your own needs for autonomy, compe- 
tence, and relatedness—is one of the most important aspects of pro- 
moting autonomy in the people you teach, care for, or supervise. We 
return to this point in Chapter Twelve. 

PLEVEN 
Promoting 
Healthy Behavior 
aroline was severely obese when she went to her intake in- 
terview for a physician-supervised diet program. A thirty- 
/ nine-year-old mother of two, Caroline seemed very agitated. 
She said she really had to lose weight—that it was very important to 
her—and when the interviewer asked her why, she burst into tears. 
Several minutes passed with no words, and then she opened her 
purse and took out a photo of a stunning woman who appeared to be 
in her mid-twenties. ‘““That’s what I looked like sixteen years ago 
when I got married,” she said. ‘“Now my husband says that if I 
don’t 
lose at least one hundred pounds he’s going to leave me.” 
Victoria, who was about the same age and size as Caroline, also 
interviewed for the program. She was more relaxed and her story 
was quite different. She said she had been gaining weight fairly stead- 
ily for six or eight years. During stressful periods at work and in her 
extended family, she said, she ate continually. She had been thinking 
about this a lot over the preceding six months, and she had made a 
clear decision that.she was ready to take charge of her health. She 
had made up her mind to eat less and avoid unhealthy foods, and she 
was ready to begin exercising regularly. She wanted to start with a 
low-calorie diet and to consult with an exercise physiologist. 
The contrast between these two women is startling. Caroline was 
there because of external pressures, while Victoria was there because 
she had made a personal commitment to change. It is thus highly 
Oar 
| 
} 
igh Sa 
1 

* 
160 
Why We Do What We Do | 
probable that the two would be differentially successful in the pro- 
gram, that Victoria’s efforts would be more likely to result in main- 
tained weight loss. In fact, my colleagues and I have recently been 
exploring the very issue contained within this story in a program of 
research on how to promote healthy behavior change. We have in- 
vestigated, for example, whether people’s reasons for entering a 
weight-loss program, an alcohol treatment program, or a smoking- 
cessation program will predict how successful they will be in the pro- 
gram. 
There is no longer any question that there are serious health risks 
- associated with severe obesity, yet millions of Americans have failed 
to regulate their eating and exercise. There is likewise no question 
that there are serious health risks associated with tobacco use, yet 
millions of Americans continue to smoke. Indeed, many Americans 
regularly engage in a variety of unhealthy behaviors, cr fail to engage 
in healthy ones. 
If obituaries told the full story of people’s deaths, more than half 
of them would point out that the person “‘. . 
. ended his (or her) life 
prematurely.” The phrase would not be intended to imply suicide, in 
the conventional sense, but rather to highlight the fact that behavior, 
and the psychosocial factors that influence it, are important .con- 
tributors to death. A recent study by physician-researchers J. Mi- 
chael McGinnis and William Foege, for example, indicates that 
. 
tobacco and alcohol use, and exercise and diet patterns, account for 
more than one-third of all American deaths, typically by triggering 
the onset of terminal illnesses such as cancer and cardiovascular dis- 
ease. People are ‘‘behaving themselves to death,” so to speak, and yet 
the obituaries report only the illnesses—the cancers or heart at- 
tacks—as the causes of their deaths. 
In part because of the known seriousness of the health risks from 
tobacco use and obesity, smoking cessation and dieting have become 
big business. The New York Times best-seller list frequently includes 
a diet book; smoking-cessation programs have proliferated, with 
some people having participated in several; and belonging to a health 
club is de rigueur in some circles. All this suggests that people have 

Promoting Healthy Behavior 
‘ae 
some understanding of the risks and benefits of various health-re- 
lated activities, so they make efforts to change. But the results are 
generally dismal. A smoking-cessation program is considered suc- 
cessful, if something like ten percent of the participants are able to 
maintain long-term abstinence. And maintenance of weight loss over 
a period of three to four years following a diet program is a rarity. 
After years of studying motivation in the laboratory, as well as in 
homes, schools, and businesses, Richard Ryan and I were ready to 
begin exploring the motivational issues involved in promoting 
healthy behavior. At that time, Geoffrey Williams was a young inter- 
nist and faculty member at the University of Rochester Medical 
School. He had become interested in the psychological meaning of 
interactions between doctors and their patients because he was dis- 
satisfied ‘about the way many of his patients expected him to solve 
their medical problems but then failed to carry through on. what he 
prescribed. He joined forces with us, and we began to explore why so 
many people do not adhere to medical regimens and are unsuccessful 
in their attempts to lose weight, stop smoking, limit their alcohol 
consumption, and so on. 
The Reasons for Change 
When we began, we decided to focus on the reasons why people 
enter programs designed to change self-destructive behaviors. Ryan 
and colleagues did the first of these studies in'an alcohol treatment 
program, while Williams and colleagues did the next in a clinic- 
based weight-loss program. We had developed a survey instrument 
called the Treatment Self-Regulation Questionnaire, which asks par- 
ticipants a series of questions about why they are entering the pro- 
gram. 
Our interest was in how autonomous or self-determined each 
‘patient was in entering the program, so the questions all had that 
focus. Some were concerned with external factors that might pres- 

. 
v4) 
# 
162 
Why We Do What We Do 
sure people into participation—factors such as their friends’ or 
spouses’ insisting they go. Those are the most controlling, least au- 
tonomous types of reasons. Some questions focused on introjected 
reasons for attending—things like being ashamed of their obesity, 
feeling like a bad person for being an alcoholic, or thinking they 
should change. These reasons were still quite controlling, for in these 
cases the people were being pressured and coerced by their own inner 
thoughts. It is no doubt better for them to be pressuring themselves 
than to be pressured by others, but our past research in other do- 
mains had indicated that it is only when people fully endorse a 
change—only when they have a kind of relaxed commitment, reflect- 
ing a deep personal choice to change—that they will behave autono- 
mously and will have a higher probability of being successful in their 
attempts to change. People with autonomous reasons for entering 
the programs were ones who were ready to take charge of their own 
drinking or eating behaviors because they were tired of having dulled 
senses, hangovers, and stressful relationships caused by alcohol 
abuse, or of feeling sluggish and having trouble moving around 
caused by severe obesity. They were simply ready to improve the 
quality of their own lives. 
It seems so logical, so genta Madea so survival-oriented—for 
people to limit their alcohol intake, to diet and exercise, to give up 
smoking. And yet many people continue their unhealthy behavior. 
One might wonder, therefore, why all participants in treatment pro- 
grams aren’t ready to take charge of their drinking and eating behav- 
iors, and more generally why people are not fully willing to be 
autonomously self-regulating of behaviors that will make them 
healthier. 
The reason, quite simply, is that abusing alcohol, as well as 
smoking and overeating, all serve a purpose. They bind anxiety, pro- 
vide an escape from pressures, or provide some other, similar type of 
comfort. Drinking may dampen people’s feelings of loneliness, for 
example; eating may allow people to avoid their fears of rejection; 
and smoking may help people tolerate the nervousness they feel 
when they encounter a group of people in a social setting. Each of 

Promoting Healthy Behavior 
| 
163 
these behaviors can serve many different purposes which make them 
resistant to change. 
Consider, for example, the man—an advertising executive in his 
early thirties—who uses alcohol to get a boost on those infrequent 
occasions when he feels depressed, but who also uses it to calm down 
when he has gotten overstimulated by a stressful day at work. In fact, 
for him, alcohol is a seductive and multipurpose palliative for any 
mood swing. When he walks into a party and feels too self-conscious 
to speak, he has a drink or two and becomes voluble, even funny. 
When he is waiting to hear about some project he has turned in to his 
boss, he finds that a drink helps him tolerate the uncertainty. When 
he has a date or a meeting but doesn’t feel quite up to it, he also finds 
that a drink helps. 
Sometimes when he is alone, especially on those difficult morn- 
ings when his hangover is intense, he has the uneasy feeling that he is 
overusing alcohol and that it may have some long-term costs. Indeed, 
on many such mornings he has resolved to quit. But the resolve is 
fragile and lasts only until he feels those uncomfortable feelings—the 
depression, overstimulation, self-consciousness, or dread—making 
their reappearance. 
To be ready to change self-destructive behaviors, people have to 
reach the point where they are willing to allow the feelings that the 
behaviors are blocking. People must be ready to feel the frightening 
sense of inadequacy, the painful fear of abandonment, the terror of 
their mortality, or whatever it is that continues to power the un- 
healthy behaviors. They also have to be willing to “feel different” 
from others when they drink seltzer at a party where everyone else is 
drinking liquor; they have to be ready to resist the rich desserts that 
are put on the table in front of them; and they have to be willing to 
get up and go jogging when they would rather sit and watch televi- 
sion. 
When people are ready to accept responsibility—responsibility 
of the deepest and most profound type—for the behaviors that are so’ 
directly related to their well-being, the returns are likely to be great. 
In the study of alcohol treatment done by Ryan and colleagues, par- 

164 
Why We Do What We Do 
ticipants who were truly doing it for themselves—who endorsed au- 
tonomous reasons rather than controlling ones—attended the pro- 
gram more regularly. They stuck with it rather than dropping out. 
Similarly, in the weight-loss study by Williams and colleagues, pa- 
tients whose reasons for attending were more autonomous not only 
attended. more of the weekly meetings during the six-month, very- 
low-calorie-diet program, but they lost more weight during that pe- 
riod and had maintained more of their losses at a two-year 
follow-up. These people had really decided to make a change; they 
were integrated and autonomous in the way they engaged the pro- 
cess of making a change that was important for their own health. 
And they achieved concrete results that will prevent illness and pro- 
mote well-being. 
Of course, there are also physiological processes involved in 
some of the counterproductive behaviors. People become physiologi- 
cally addicted to alcohol and nicotine, for example, and recent evi- 
dence suggests that there may be a genetic predisposition to obesity. 
But these physiological processes do not cause the behaviors in a 
direct sense, because the relevant behaviors are also influenced by 
psychological processes. People with addictions or with genetic’ 
predispositions may find it harder to change than will those who 
don’t have to counteract such forces, but people can break addic- 
tions and they can overcome genetic predispositions when they are 
really ready to do so. When people are ready to accept responsibility 
for their behavior and health—when they are ready to make a deep 
personal commitment and to accept the uncomfortable feelings that 
may accompany change—their efforts to change are likely to be suc- 
cessful. 
People’s success at changing behavior begins with their taking 
genuine interest in their own motivations. This means asking them- 
selves why they are trying to change, and thinking honestly about 
their answers. If the reasons they come up with are that other people 
are pressuring them, or that they think they should change in order 
to live longer, or that they want to match some image, then they are 
off to a bad start. These reasons are not very convincing, and they are 

Promoting Healthy Behavior 
| 
165 
not likely to motivate meaningful change because they lack a per- 
sonal endorsement. 
Recall the advertising executive who resolved to change only 
— 
when the hangovers got too bad. His reasons were superficial and 
reflected 
no personal commitment, 
so 
his resolve 
to change 
amounted to naught. Indeed, if I 
had heard him give such a reason, I 
would have thought, “No sense bothering to try.” 
In contrast, think of the woman who began smoking in her 
early teens because all of her friends were doing it and she thought 
it helped her look grown-up and sexy. She became quite dependent 
on her cigarettes, and by the time she was twenty-one, she smoked 
three packs a day. She had tried to stop a couple of times, with no 
more success at quitting tobacco’ than the advertising executive 
who occasionally “‘gave up” drinking. But then something hap- 
pened for this young woman that changed all that. She fell in love 
with an attractive, outgoing man with plans and dreams. He was a 
nonsmoker, and although he did not prod her about her own 
smoking, he represented an example for her. And even more, as she 
began thinking about their life together, with babies growing into 
adults, she began to think of how her smoking could hurt them as 
well as herself. She, in fact, stopped smoking, and although it was 
not easy, it did last. Why? Because she had found a truly meaning- 
ful personal reason, and when she did, she had a deep determina- 
tion to carry through. 
The decision to change is one that individuals must make for 
themselves. That means exploring why they want to change and also 
paying attention to the benefits they are getting from the behavior. 
By exploring their motivations, people will be in a position to make 
a true choice. The choice might be to change, but it might also be to 
continue the behavior. It is up to them. But until they take interest in 
their underlying motivations and make a real choice, the self-destruc- 
tive behaviors will continue to “control them.” 
| Explorations of one’s motivation can be a difficult process, and 
carrying out a true choice can also be difficult. But these are the 
starting points for successful change. 

y 
= 
ye 
De 
ee 
te 
7 Fy 
* 
166 
. 
. 
Why We Do What We Do 
Noncompliance with Medical Regimens 
One of many significant problems facing the medical establishment 
today is what typically goes under the rubric of noncompliance. An 
extraordinarily large percentage of people fail to take their medica- 
tions as prescribed. They take too much, or too little. They forget it 
for a day or two; they remember sometimes but not others; or they 
just don’t bother. Such noncompliance has a whole range of conse- 
quences. It allows the illness to progress, causing greater health-care 
costs; it leads to stronger (often more toxic) medical prescriptions; 
and it can be confusing to physicians who believe the medication 
should be having positive effects. 
Noncompliance is also a problem in medical research. If some- 
one is prescribed a medication as part of an important clinical study 
but then fails to take the medicine as prescribed, it could invalidate 
the test. And if these people lie and say they followed the prescrip- 
tion, it can lead to the accumulation of inaccurate medical conclu- 
sions and have potentially harmful effects on other patients. 
Poor compliance with medical regimens has led many health- 
care providers to take a heavy-handed approach with their pa- 
tients—to be highly authoritarian and to use a variety of scare 
tactics. And still the problem remains. 
Our approach to this problem is quite different from the control- 
ling stance adopted by many. Indeed, we do not even formulate this 
issue as one of compliance. Compliance conveys the sense of being a 
“‘pawn’’; it conveys the sense of doing something because others told 
you to. Using the term can thus strengthen the view that “‘encourag- 
ing people to behave in health-promoting ways” is a matter of con- 
trolling their behavior—of making them comply. Our view, instead, 
is that people will adhere to a medication prescription if they feel 
autonomous in doing it, if their reasons for doing it are their own, if 
they accept responsibility for getting better. 
In a recent study, Williams, with psychologist Gail Rodin and 

lm 
Promoting Healthy Behavior 
167 
others, assessed the reasons why patients take their medication. 
These were all patients who had been on long-term medication regi- 
mens for a variety of illnesses such as angina, postmenopausal symp- 
toms, and hypertension. Some patients endorsed teasons that were 
very controlling—they take their medicine because their doctor told 
them they should. Others endorsed reasons that were more autono- 
mous—they take their medicine because it is important to them per- 
sonally to be healthy. The patients’ medication taking was then 
followed over the next two weeks, and the data indicated that those 
patients who did it for themselves—who were autonomous in their 
reasons—were much more reliable in following the prescriptions. 
Their doctors had made the prescriptions, but they, the patients, had 
accepted full responsibility for adhering to them. The prescriptions 
had come from the doctors, but once people had accepted them, ad- 
herence was not a problem. 
Accepting responsibility, once again, involves people taking in- 
terest in their own motivation. Quite simply, it means thinking about 
whether they believe in the utility of the medication and deciding 
whether they want to get well badly enough that they are willing to 
exert the effort or devise supports to help them. Again, it is their 
choice. If they do believe in the value of the prescription, and if they 
— 
do decide that being well is worth the effort, then adherence is likely 
to follow. 
Supporting Patients’ Autonomy 
When I first moved to Rochester, I needed an internist, so I asked 
around for a referral. Someone gave me a name, and I checked it out 
with other people who told me they had heard he was good. I made 
an appointment for a physical exam as a way of getting started. 
From that initial visit, | was uncomfortable with his interpersonal 
style. The differential in status was somehow made eminently clear: 

* 
168 
Why We Do What We Do 
He was one-up and I was one-down. At one point, he made a deroga- 
tory remark about one of his staff members who had not done some- 
thing quickly enough, and I winced. His communications were full of 
judgments of right or wrong and good or bad, and he was firm in 
telling me what I should and should not do. I felt constricted in his 
presence, and I didn’t ask any questions. I not only withheld the one 
or two questions I had, but the other questions that concerned me 
didn’t even come to mind until after I left his office. 
I remember one occasion some while after the initial visit when I 
was sick, and I felt reluctant to call my doctor. I went round and 
round in my own head about whether I should or should not call. I 
never did, and fortunately in a few days I felt fine again. But what if 
my problem had been a more serious one? The remarkable thing to 
me, as I reflect on it, is that although I was a young adult at the time, 
I had gotten caught up in a relationship where I was, in essence, 
acting like a child. In response to the doctor’s critical, authoritarian 
style, I had regressed. 
The contrast of my reaction to this physician and my reaction to 
the dentist I had when I lived in Palo Alto was startling. On my first 
‘visit to him I was seated in a chair that looked\out a large window 
into a courtyard that held a century-old oak tree. I felt immediately 
comforted. Then the doctor came in wearing a Hawaiian print shirt 
rather than a white smock, and he introduced himself using his first 
name. His assistants, while clearly respectful, also called him by his 
first name. Questions came easily to me, and his answers had all the 
information I was seeking. I left the first appointment thinking he 
was a great dentist. I did not feel “‘one-down,” even though I had 
- substantial respect for his expertise and his authority. I started floss- 
_ing more regularly, and I felt that I could call on him if I needed him. 
From my experiences with these two health-care providers, it 
seemed clear that the doctors’ orientations toward their patients 
must have a substantial effect on the patients, and it seemed to me 
that the style used by my Palo Alto dentist was the better of the two. 
Later, after years of research on motivation, I had the language to use 

Promoting Healthy Behavior 
169 
in describing these two health-care providers. The former was clearly 
controlling and the latter, autonomy supportive. And all of our past 
research led to the prediction, which eventually we would test, that 
the autonomy-supportive style would not only feel better to most 
patients (as it did to me), but that it would also have positive motiva- 
tional consequences. 
Williams, Ryan, and I have conducted several investigations to 
explore whether patients’ perceptions of practitioners’ having an au- 
tonomy-supportive (versus a controlling) style actually affects the 
patients’ motivation and health status. For example, in the weight- 
loss study mentioned earlier, we assessed patients’ perceptions of the 
staff. We found that when the staff was perceived as more autonomy 
supportive, the patients reported more autonomous reasons for ad- 
hering to the program guidelines, which, in turn, predicted main- 
tained 
weight 
loss 
over 
a two-year 
period. 
Patients’ 
being 
autonomous—being truly self-regulating—which is essential for 
behaving in healthy ways, actually appears to be influenced by the 
way health-care providers relate to them. 
We found the same results in the medication-adherence study. 
Patients’ perceptions of their doctors’ being autonomy supportive 
were related to the patients’ endorsing of more autonomous or inte- 
grated reasons for taking their medication, which, in turn, related to 
greater adherence. These and other studies confirm that when 
health-care providers recognize the importance of psychosocial fac- 
tors for patients’ health and thus relate to patients in more auton- 
omy-supportive ways, the patients are likely to become more 
autonomous in their motivation and to behave in healthier ways over 
the long haul. 
People sometimes ask how they can tell if their doctor is auton- 
omy supportive. The answer, really, is quite straightforward. Pay 
attention to how you feel when you leave the doctor’s office. Do you 
feel constricted, one-down, and passive, as I did when I left that in- 
ternist’s office? Or do you feel comforted and respected, as I did 
when I left my dentist’s? 

. 
170 
Why We Do What We Do 
The Biopsychosocial Approach 
Throughout the twentieth century, the American medical profession 
has increasingly focused on the technical aspects of health care, sub- 
scribing to a viewpoint called the biomedical approach. Illness is ad- 
dressed in biological terms, viewed as being caused by germs or 
organ malfunctioning, and it is treated by medication and surgical 
interventions. The narrow specializations that have become so com+ 
mon—orthopedists who work only on wrists, or internists who treat 
only kidney problems—are a natural outcome of the biomedical ap- 
proach. Focusing on the technical aspects leads one to specialize in 
order to be a true expert. With the concern for biological causes and 
cures, doctors have become oriented toward treating organs rather 
than people. The patients, in turn, have often felt that they are not 
being related to by their doctors and that they are not getting the 
information they need to manage their own health care. The highly 
technical focus has thus widened the gulf between the expert doctors 
who are the prescribers and the patients Kee are expected to comply 
with the doctors’ orders. 
Although many doctors feel quite comfortable with the biomedi- 
cal model and conduct their practices accordingly, a growing num- 
ber have felt vaguely uneasy with the impersonality of modern 
medicine. These doctors long for the personal care provided by the 
general practitioners of, say, the 1950s, coupled, of course, with the 
medical knowledge of the 1990s. 
The Medical Center at the University of Rochester has for a 
quarter of a century been a leading advocate of an alternative view- 
point referred to as the biopsychosocial approach. Illness is under- 
stood as having many facets that involve an interplay of natural 
systems, including chemical, neurological, psychological, and social. 
Because changes at any one level lead reciprocally to changes at oth- 
ers, every level is a contributor to human illness and health. Hans 
Selye’s pioneering work showed, for example, that stress can affect 
all the organs of the body by overactivating the autonomic nervous 
4 

‘Promoting Healthy Behavior 
i7i" 
system. Indeed, various psychological states can lead to physiologi- 
cal changes such as excess glandular secretions, rigidity in the muscu- 
lature, and suppression of the immune system, all of which have been 
implicated in the onset of cancer, heart disease, diabetes, and other 
of the illnesses that are responsible for the majority of American 
deaths. 
It is clear, then, that psychological and interpersonal factors can 
directly affect people’s health by influencing somatic functioning. 
But equally as important, psychosocial factors can also indirectly af- 
fect people’s health by affecting their behavior. Both the psychologi- 
cal and interpersonal processes described in this book that are 
related to human motivation and autonomy influence the behaviors 
that affect physical as well as mental health. 
High-risk behaviors such as overeating, smoking, abusing alco- 
hol, eating unhealthy foods, taking foolish risks behind the wheel, 
having unprotected casual sex, and playing with firearms, for exam- 
~ ple, have motivational underpinnings—they are psychologically and 
socially determined. Friends are doing it, so you cannot refuse. Your 
vulnerable ego pushes you to do it. Your inner turmoil seems too 
great to bear, and the behavior distracts you from that turmoil. Au- 
thorities have warned against it, so the tendency to defy controls 
makes you want to do it. Each of these motivational reasons suggests 
that when people are less autonomous—that is, when they are more 
controlled—they are more likely to engage in the behaviors that pro- 
mote ill-being. 
Similarly, the factors that lead people to change rele unhealthy. 
behaviors are also motivational, as our research has repeatedly indi- 
- cated. Recall the study by Williams and colleagues, showing that 
people were more successful in losing weight and maintaining the 
losses over a two-year period when their motivation was autono- 
mous rather than controlled—when they were doing it for them- 
selves rather than for others. In general, then, when people are more 
autonomous—when they are more intrinsically motivated and have 
integrated the regulation of important behaviors—they will not: only 
be less likely to engage in high-risk behaviors in the first place, but 

- 
fy2>%." 
Why We Do What We Do 
they will be more able to change those behaviors if they have gotten 
hooked by them. 
| 
The biopsychosocial approach to treatment emphasizes building 
a partnership between health-care providers and their. patients. It 
recognizes the importance of providers’ treating the whole person, 
and it recognizes that social and psychological processes are integral 
to well-being. Thus, for example, the approach emphasizes that the 
way a provider relates toa patient can influence whether the patient 
behaves in healthy ways—taking medication, losing weight, stop- 
ping smoking, and so on. 
Providers encourage patients to be active in managing their 
health—to ask questions and to participate in arriving at workable 
solutions to health-care problems. Doctors, of course, provide valu- 
able information and offer suggestions about treatment plans, but 
patients are encouraged 
to think about the options and to play a role 
in deciding on the plan. Behaviors are not prescribed by the provider; 
instead, the partnership makes a joint decision. That way, patients 
will not only offer valuable insights—it is the patients, not the pro- 
viders, who know what the patients will be able to do—but they will 
be more motivated to carry out the plans. It has long been recognized 
in all domains of human activity that when people play a role in 
deciding what to do and how to‘do it, they will be more committed 
to carrying through on the decision. 
; 
All of the features of being autonomy supportive—taking the 
other’s perspective, offering choice, providing relevant information 
that the other person may have no access to, giving the rationale for 
suggestions or requests, acknowledging the other’s feelings, and 
minimizing the use of controlling language and attitudes—describe 
~ 
perfectly what it means to be psychosocial or patient-centered in the 
practice of medicine. They help to build partnerships, and they are 
the physician attitudes and behaviors that are espoused by the bio- 
psychosocial approach. 
To build partnerships in health care thus involves the providers’ 
being autonomy supportive and taking the patients’ perspectives. 

+ 
Promoting Healthy Behavior 
173 
Accordingly, our studies on how doctors’ orientations toward pa- 
tients—whether they are autonomy supportive or controlling—af- 
fect the patients’ motivation and health helped to validate the bio- 
psychosocial approach for promoting healthy behavior change. 
Responsibility and Autonomy Support 
2 
When providers are autonomy supportive, they are more likely to 
understand and accept why a patient would be smoking, drinking, or 
overeating. And with that understanding they will be able to work 
with the patients to develop treatment plans that are likely to suc- 
ceed. Treatment plans that are imposed from a doctor’s perspective, 
that don’t take account of a patient’s unique needs and the obstacles 
the patient experiences, are likely to fail. Remember the example of 
the woman who failed to take her hypertension medication when her 
doctor was controlling but became quite reliable about it after she 
switched to an autonomy-supportive doctor? 
Ultimately, a patient’s behavior (and thus the patient’s health) 
is his or her own responsibility. Short of heroic efforts like forcibly 
hospitalizing and medicating patients, doctors cannot make a pa- 
tient well if the patient is not willing to cooperate. Patients have 
the right to smoke, and if they decide to, even though both they 
and the doctors know it is harmful, doctors need to respect their 
decision. Doctors cannot stop patients from doing it, and in most 
cases, when doctors cross the line from adviser to controller they 
have gone too far. They have usurped a responsibility that belongs 
to the patient. 
Although a patient’s health behavior is his or her own responsi- 
bility, doctors do have the responsibility of encouraging a patient to 
behave in healthy ways. It is thus a fine line that physicians must 
walk, promoting healthy behavior without controlling it. To do that, 
it is important for doctors to provide information to patients—for 

« 
174 
Why We Do What We Do 
example, the information that nicotine exacerbates hypertension and 
that this patient is particularly susceptible to those effects. It is also 
important for them to speak about health risks, and encourage 
change—in an autonomy-suppertive way—by conveying the mes- 
sage that they are concerned with the patient’s well-being and are 
there to help. But when they go too far, when they begin to control, 
it is likely to backfire. 
I heard the story of a cantankerous seventy-two-year-old chain- 
smoker who lived his last years in Florida. For years, doctors had 
warned him to stop smoking, for if he did not, they said, cigarettes 
would surely take his life. Well, when the end came, it was a brain 
tumor that got him, and he said he had shown those doctors after all. 
But it is not as easy as that. He resisted, he said, because he found the 
doctors too controlling. But he paid for his defiance. Cigarettes did 
not end his life, but they did-diminish the quality of the last several 
years. It was the cigarettes that had him coughing up phlegm each- 
morning and panting heavily when he climbed stairs or walked up a 
small hill. 
) 
Of course, I do not place all the blame on the doctors. The man 
could have decided to stop smoking and improved his own life. And 
I could have behaved more maturely in response to my first Roches- 
ter internist. Doctors’ styles surely have an effect on their patients, 
but the patients can rise above it, as we will see in the next chapter. I 
could have been more active in asking questions and more assertive » 
in getting what I needed. But I did not accept responsibility for my- 
self and my own health care, and it took me a while before I began to 
explore my own motivations and to act in a more self-determined 
way. 
: 
People’s health-relevant behavior is thus an interaction of their 
own motivations and of the style of the health-care providers. For 
more positive outcomes, people could explore their own motiva- 
tions to find a true desire to behave in healthy ways, and the Amer- 
ican 
medical 
establishment 
could 
become 
more 
autonomy 
supportive. 

Promoting Healthy Bebaitor 
: 
175 
Training Providers 
to Be Autonomy Supportive 
Because doctors’ being autonomy supportive is important for pro- 
moting health in their patients, it seemed to Williams and me that 
exploring how doctors could be trained to be more autonomy sup- 
portive and patient-centered would be a worthy endeavor. We 
gained access to the second-year. students in two medical schools 
who were taking a medical interviewing course. That is the place 
where aspiring physicians learn how to relate to their patients—how 
to give and get relevant information. At the beginning of the course, 
we assessed both the students’ reasons for taking the course, to ascer- 
tain how autonomous they were in their motivation, and their atti- 
tudes about the psychosocial approach: At the end of the five-month 
course, we assessed the same variables, along with the students’ per- 
ceptions of the autonomy-supportiveness of their instructors. There 
were over twenty instructors at the two universities, and they varied 
greatly in the extent to which they were autonomy supportive versus 
controlling in their teaching style. 
Results showed that the students whose instructors were auton- 
omy supportive in their teaching approach became more autono- 
mous in their reasons for studying interviewing and doctor-patient 
communications. In turn, as they became more autonomous in their 
own learning behavior, they also developed more positive attitudes 
about the biopsychosocial approach. In essence, the instructors who 
supported their students’ autonomy encouraged the internalization 
and integration of psychosocial values. 
A few months later, the students were audiotaped while inter- 
viewing a simulated patient, and the results of the tape analysis indi- 
cated that the medical students who had become more autonomous 
in their own motivation, and who had integrated the value of the 
psychosocial approach, were more “‘patient-centered”’ than those 
who had not. They supported the patient’s autonomy. 
a 

176 
Why We Do What We Do 
One of the most interesting things about the medical-student 
study was the finding that an autonomy-supportive teaching style led 
the students to adopt a more autonomy-supportive style of interact- 
ing with patients. In fact, when one draws together all of the research 
referred to in this book, one discovers that being a good parent, a 
good teacher, a good manager, or a good health-care provider all 
have something in common, namely, an autonomy-supportive inter- 
_ personal style. Indeed, being successful in any one-up position, as it 
relates to the performance, development, and well-being of people in 
a one-down position, begins with an autonomy-supportive interper- 
sonal style. 
It begins with listening openly so you can understand the 
situation from the other’s perspective. 

SPW 
E LEME 
uch 
7 
Being Autonomous 
Amidst the Controls 
| merica is replete with its legends—with its Abe Lincolns 
who, against all odds, rose to greatness. More than legends, 
actually, these people are models of self-reliance. Lincoln, 
after all, transcended his impoverished surroundings by educating 
himself when formal education was not available to him. 
Today, as well, one finds countless people who were raised in 
- 
poverty and neglect in our inner cities or rural countrysides and who 
go on to distinguished careers—or, remarkable in its own right, to 
stable, satisfying lives, providing for their children what was not pro- 
vided for them and contributing to their community with a spirit of 
gratitude and hope. 
Even though people’s motivation, behavior, and well-being are 
powerfully influenced by their social environments, it is fascinating 
| 
that some people are able to fare quite admirably despite having ex- 
perienced an upbringing marked by pressures, chaos, abuse, or ne- 
glect. How is one to account for this seeming puzzle? 
To begin with, one must recognize that people are born with 
individual differences. On every human characteristic (height, intelli- 
gence, aggressiveness, or whatever), people have the predisposition 
not only to differ from eachother, but to do so in accord with what 
is called a normal distribution—the familiar bell-shaped curve. This 
© 
means that before the environment has had any effect on them, peo- 
ple have their starting place on each human dimension. 
| 
TUL, 

Tt. 
. 
178 
Why We Do What We Do 
Each of these dimensions has its average—what is technically 
called the mean. There is a mean height and a mean IQ, for example, 
— 
and most people are clustered around the mean. As you get further 
from the mean there are fewer*cases. For example, the mean IQ is 
about 100, and two-thirds of all people have IQs between 90 and 
110. In contrast, only about two percent of the population have IQs 
in the range from 120 to 140, and a comparable two percent fall 
between 60 and 80. 
There is ample evidence that children are born with individual 
differences on psychological as well as physical variables, and these 
are the ones that are critical for the question we are addressing. Con- 
siderable research has documented, for example, that there are in- 
‘nate differences in temperament. Some infants are personable and 
happy; others are withdrawn and irritable. Some are vital and active; 
others are anergic and passive. These qualities of vitality and proac- 
tivity are, of course, related to intrinsic motivation. 
‘The more vital and proactive children are, the better start they 
have in developing an autonomous self-assured presence. But that’s 
just the beginning. Immediately, the environment begins affecting 
these processes, facilitating healthy development if it allows satisfac- 
tion of one’s basic needs, and diminishing development if it does not. 
This, of course, suggests that children who are raised in impover- 
ished environments will fare worse than those raised in nurturing 
environments. But it still leaves the question of why some are able to 
do rather well in spite of these environmental influences. 
Finding a Special Support 
Some children who live in what are generally non-nurturing environ- 
ments are able to find an adult with whom to have a special relation- 
ship. This is no doubt particularly true for children who are engaging 
and proactive to begin with. Very often, individuals who have risen 
above difficult backgrounds tell the story of some person who truly 

Being Autonomous Amidst the Controls 
179 
believed in them and gave them the support they needed to believe in 
themselves. Sometimes the person is a relative; sometimes it is a 
teacher or coach. Whoever it is, if children are able to attract the 
ongoing support of a special person who really believes in them, they 
may rise above the influence of their general surroundings. And if 
they are children with exceptional, innate characteristics to ee 
with, the likelihood is even greater. 
I was told the story of a school superintendent—I’ll call him 
Robert—who grew up in a very poor neighborhood. He had a 
brother and a sister, but he never saw his father. His mother strug- 
gled to keep the family together by cleaning houses, but that meant 
she was seldom at home. His descriptions of the schools he attended 
sound like a nightmare. 
Robert lives in comfortable suburban eepaaliine: has two 
children who seem to enjoy their lives, and belongs to several volun- 
teer organizations. Stories of his boyhood include a couple of note- 
worthy points about significant people. When he was a boy, his 
grandmother lived only two blocks away, and they had a very special 
attachment. She stayed with him when he was very young, and later 
she helped him with his homework. His stories also make frequent 
mention of a man who was athletic director at the settlement house 
in his neighborhood. Robert was particularly good at basketball, 
and joined in other sporting activities as well. The man was married, 
with his own family, and Robert spent quite a bit of time with them. 
I suspect that these two special relationships were powerful influ- 
ences that allowed Robert to actualize what were obviously special 
talents. 
Individuals and Their Social World 
Of course, everyone in impoverished or coercive surroundings does 
not have the advantage of such special relationships, but people 
do 
have the possibility of positively affecting their social world, as well 

180 
Why We Do What We Do 
as being affected by it. I have emphasized repeatedly that controlling 
versus autonomy-supportive contexts have profound effects that can 
persist throughout people’s lives, influencing their motivation, be- 
havior, and development. But te,some extent, people influence the 
social world that influences them, and one very important implica- 
tion of this is that children who are personable, vital, and proactive, 
for example, are likely to draw the best out of their caregivers. By 
being more vital and engaging, children can elicit greater involve- 
ment and autonomy support from the same parents and teachers 
who are colder and more controlling with other children. That little 
extra autonomy support can give these children an added boost. 
Thus, children’s innate characteristics not only affect their be- 
havior and development directly, but these characteristics also have 
an effect on the social environment that in turn affects the children’s 
development. Social environments have their own stable characteris- 
tics, but the fact that people can have even a small influence on their 
social environments helps to explain how some have been able to 
emerge from those environments with a more positive demeanor. 
One often hears teachers say that it is easy to support the auton- 
~ omy of students who are engaging and proactive, but passive or ag- 
gressive children just seem to ask for control. And when children do 
pull for control, it is easy to fall into the trap of controlling them, 
which further hinders their development. Take the case of two chil- 
dren—one who was a bit more passive than average and another 
who was a bit more proactive than average—who entered the same 
classroom. Both had the same teacher, whose ongoing style was a bit 
on the controlling side. When it came to these two children, she 
treated them slightly differently, being a little more controlling with 
the former and a little more autonomy supportive with the latter. As 
she saw it, the first child needed more control, whereas the second 
was more able to take responsibility for himself. Naturally, these 
differential interpersonal contexts provided for the two children by — 
the same teacher in the same classroom affected the two children 
differently, so by the end of the school year, the children were more 
different than they had been at the beginning. The first child was 

ee? 
pe 
: 
Being Autonomous Amidst the Controls 
181 
even more passive, and the second, more autonomous. Their relative 
_ positions on the bell-shaped curve had changed. 
As development proceeds, people build expectations about the 
social context. For example, if a girl had lived for her first five years 
in a very controlling home, she would probably enter school expect- 
ing it to be very controlling also, and to some extent, she would act 
as if it were. 
. 
Think of a work situation in which two different people work at 
the same job, with a manager who.treats them exactly the same. 
Their experiences could, nonetheless, be quite different. One em- 
ployee could view it as more autonomy supportive while the other 
views it as more controlling, because these two employees came to 
the situation with different expectations and sensitivities. The first 
person might see the setting as one that supports choice, so he or she 
would use relevant information from the situation in making 
choices, whereas the other person might react to comments as if they 
were critical and to requests as if they were demands. The former 
would act more autonomously while the latter would respond either 
compliantly or defiantly. 
© 
In terms of development, experiences that start with different ’ 
expectations based on past events can result in one person’s becom- 
ing more autonomous while the other becomes more controlled, 
even if the two people were in the same context and treated in the 
same manner. Of course, the context (e.g., their teachers) would 
probably not treat two such people exactly the same, but I 
am simply 
~ emphasizing that people’s preconceived expectations influence how 
they interpret a social environment and thus can affect whether they 
are able to rise above it. If a person develops an expectation of auton- 
»omy support, which Robert, the school superintendent, may have 
done from his grandmother and athletic director, the person could 
fare better in a situation than would others who were there with 
different expectations. 
A child who is born into a home that is both interpersonally and 
monetarily impoverished faces a far greater set of problems than a 
~ child who is born into one that is ripe with supports, but some in- 

* 
182 
v 
Why We Do What We Do 
dividuals—today’s Abe Lincolns—emerge from these seemingly im- 
poverished backgrounds to lead exemplary lives. And we now have 
several pieces of the answer to how this can happen. First, these in- 
dividuals may have been among+the very small percentage of children 
who are far above the mean on the psychological (and perhaps physi- 
cal) characteristics that can contribute to developing in healthy, au- 
tonomous ways. Second, these individuals may have found someone 
special to give them the interpersonal nutriments they need. Third, 
they may actually have influenced the cold and controlling adults in 
their lives to be a little less cold and a little less controlling with them. 
And, finally, they may have developed expectancies that led them to 
interpret various situations as more autonomy supportive than they 
actually were. 
While it is true that social environments—whether they be op- 
pressive or nourishing—have an enormous impact on children’s de- 
velopment, each of the four processes just outlined begins with the 
individual rather than the environment, and each helps to explain 
how people can excel in spite of relatively impoverished environ- 
ments, or, when these processes work in the negative direction, do 
even worse than would be expected. 
Recognizing that our children, students, employees, and patients 
can affect how we treat them, highlights a very important challenge 
for us as parents, teachers, managers, and health-care providers. The 
challenge is to be autonomy supportive even with individuals who 
pull on us to control them. It is the more passive, compliant, and 
defiant individuals who are most in need of an optimal interpersonal 
context—of involvement, autonomy support, and sensitive limit set- 
ting—but it is these individuals whom we have the hardest time giv- 
- 
ing it to, 
The interactive process between people and their environments 
continues throughout life. People come to each new situation with 
their own unique characteristics and interpretations, which have de- 
veloped in part from past interactions with the environment and 
which will affect future interactions. These individual differences 
tie 

Being Autonomous Amidst the Controls 
183 
that people bring to situations allow for some predictability in terms 
of how the people will respond to the situations, and together with a 
characterization of the situation itself, they explain a good deal 
about the interaction between people and their environments. 
\ 
Individual Differences in Motivation 
Richard Ryan and I, with various collaborators, have engaged in a 
long-term research program to study how individual differences in 
people’s motivation influence their lives. We reason that everyone is 
to some extent autonomous, and it is that aspect of people that leads 
them to seek out contexts that are autonomy supportive and to influ- 
ence others to treat them in a more autonomy-supportive fashion. 
Similarly, everyone is to some extent controlled (i.e., compliant and/ 
or defiant) in their behavior, and that aspect of them seeks or creates 
controls: The questions that have interested us concern how in- . 
dividuals’ tendency to be autonomous, as opposed to controlled, re- 
lates to a wide range of personal characteristics and behaviors. 
We began by developing a psychometric instrument to measure 
the degree to which people are autonomy-oriented and control-ori- 
ented, and we have found, for example, that people who are more 
autonomy-oriented have higher self-esteem and are more self-actual- 
ized. They also evidence greater integration in personality. In other 
words, people who are more autonomous also display greater coher- 
ence among various aspects of their personality, as well as between 
their personality and behavior. Furthermore, people high on the au- 
tonomy orientation also have more positive mental health, and re- 
port being more satisfied with their interpersonal relationships. 
Clearly, then, being autonomy-oriented is associated with posi- 
tive aspects of personality. Even more interesting, perhaps, are the 
findings that a strong autonomy orientation leads people to experi- 
ence social contexts as more autonomy supportive. This, therefore, 

« 
184 
Why We Do What We Do 
confirms the point that, through their behavior and expectations, 
people can influence their environments to provide them with more 
of what they need. 
In one study, for example,“patients in a weight-loss program 
whose personalities were more autonomy-oriented viewed their 
health-care providers as being more autonomy supportive, and these 
perceptions, in turn, had positive health consequences. In another 
study, medical students whose personalities were more autonomy- 
oriented experienced their instructors as being more autonomy sup- 
portive, 
and that, too, had positive consequences. 
The important point, both theoretically and practically, is that 
the extent to which people’s behavior is autonomous, creative, vital, 
and intrinsically motivated is determined by an interaction of their 
own personalities (what we call their autonomy orientation) and the 
degree to which the social context is autonomy supportive. Although 
the social context is enormously important in affecting people’s mo- 
tivation and behavior, people’s personalities also affect their motiva- 
tion and behavior. What’s more, people’s personalities also influence 
the social contexts that, in turn, have an influence on them. 
Promoting One’s Own Development 
The importance of this point is enormous: It gives people a handle to 
facilitate their own development. True, the environment’s influence 
on people may be greater than they have ever imagined—it works 
subtly and deeply. True, the environment can undermine people’s 
intrinsic motivation, leaving them passive and compliant without 
their even realizing it. But by the same token, people can change all 
that. They can begin to act more autonomously. They can figure out 
what they need for themselves, and they can begin to act on the 
world to get it. 
Rather than waiting for the world to give them what they want, 

—- 
’ 
Being Autonomous Amidst the Controls 
185 
people can become more proactive in making things happen for 
themselves. They can get the interactive process working on their 
behalf by behaving more autonomously. They can elicit from the 
social context more and more support for their autonomy. Their per- 
sonality and the social contexts in which they operate are synergistic, 
and together they affect people’s experiences and actions. 
A few years ago, I consulted to a company in the San Francisco 
area. The style of the top manager was controlling, and the eight 
managers who reported to him were quite unhappy. They com- 
plained a lot about their manager when I met with each of them 
individually, but they were very passive and did nothing about it. 
Not surprisingly, these managers responded to the boss’s controlling 
style by being controlling with their own work teams, so their un- 
happiness radiated to the one hundred or so people whom they 
managed. The pattern was a familiar one. 
A great deal of my attention while working there was focused on 
the eight managers. We spent some of the time exploring ways they 
could be more autonomy supportive with their work teams. But even 
more important, we worked on ways they could get their own needs 
satisfied. It is eminently clear that if the managers themselves do not 
feel competent, autonomous, and related to others they will not be 
autonomy supportive and involved with their subordinates. That, of 
course, is the same point we confirmed for teachers in the study 
where they were pressured by the command to be sure their students 
performed up to high standards. They became more controlling and 
evaluative of their students—just the opposite of what would have 
. been best for their students and for themselves. 
It seemed clear to me that the managers in the Bay Area company 
had to learn how to use each other—to ask of each other, and to give 
to each other. And that is what happened. Over the few months that 
Ihad periodic meetings with them, I noticed that their office doors 
were being left open more of the time. They spent more time relating 
to each other, providing support for each other, and working to- 
gether to solve problems. They broke through the isolation that had 

- 
196 
Why We Do What We Do 
previously characterized the management team. As they began relat- 
~ ing to each other differently, providing support for each other, they 
also became more autonomy supportive with their work teams, lead- 
ing to a more positive morale in‘the whole company. 
But the change in the way these managers related to their peers 
and to their subordinates was just part of the overall change that 
occurred. In addition, they learned how to manage their manager. 
During these few months, the senior manager gained some insight 
into how demanding and critical he was being with the people who 
worked for him, and that led to some positive results. But it seemed 
to me that even more of the positive results were prompted by 
changes in the team of eight second-level managers. These managers 
began to deal differently with their boss, and that really made a dif- 
ference. They asked him for what they needed rather than waiting 
and sulking as they had done for so long. They began to disagree 
with him in a polite and constructive way rather than continue to say 
“Yes, sir” and go away resentfully. They learned to read his moods 
so they could approach him when there was the best chance of his 
being responsive. And they learned to give him support, so he would 
reciprocate. 
In one retreat I had with the management team, I encouraged 
them to give positive feedback to each other, right there in the group 
meeting. They had a very difficult time at first—not because they 
couldn’t think of anything to say but because they were not used to 
the process of giving positive feedback within that management 
team. With practice, it became easier, and part of what they learned 
about “managing their manager”’ was that it helped to give him posi- 
tive feedback. 
Over time, the managers discovered that as they became more 
supportive of their subordinates, their peers, and their boss, those 
people became more supportive of them. A synergy did indeed de- 
velop, and the change in behavior of the eight managers was the. 
thing most responsible for that positive effect. It radiated in both 
directions, with positive results for the company as a whole. 
- 

Being Autonomous Amidst the Controls 
187 
Managing One’s Own Experience 
7 
Being autonomous in spite of controlling circumstances is not only 
about managing the environment. Even more, it is about managing 
oneself and one’s own inner experience. It is about developing the 
regulatory processes to manage emotions and inner urges and about’ 
finding ways to get one’s needs satisfied. 
Human emotions are a powerful source of energy for action. 
When angered or frightened, people have an enormous amount of 
energy. Stories abound about people trapped under an auto or a’pile 
of rubble who are able to extricate themselves. When they feel strong 
emotions, there is amazing energy available to them. People even 
report being unable to control themselves when they feel strong emo- 
tions. 
Establishing the structures and regulatory processes necessary to 
manage emotions effectively is a major developmental challenge for 
everyone. Some people have been more successful than others in con- 
quering this challenge, in part certainly, because they had more posi- 
tive parenting contexts. Those who have succeeded are able to feel 
their emotions fully while, at the same time, experiencing a genuine 
choice about how to express them. However, those who have failed 
to conquer the challenge end up either suppressing their emotions so 
they don’t feel them or being overpowered by their emotions. 
I know a man who never seems to feel any emotions, who even 
when provoked acts as if nothing had Happened. He prides himself 
on being strong. He suppresses his emotions with rigid regulatory 
structures that he introjected while growing up. He represents quite a 
contrast with other people I know who always seem to be expressing 
strong emotions. These people have failed to develop adequate 
regulatory structures to manage the expression of emotions, so they 
are frequently overwhelmed by them. Neither case represents opti- 
mal regulation of emotions—neither represents autonomous func- 
tioning with respect to emotions. 

* 
188 
Why We Do What We Do 
Emotions are reactions to real or imagined stimuli in the current 
situation or in your memory. A fist coming toward your face, a com- 
ment about how nice you look, or a car that pulls out in front of you 
are all stimuli that can lead to the experience of an emotion. So can 
the memory of standing on a beach on your honeymoon, or of a time 
years ago when the class bully called you names and pushed you 
around. 
The stimuli to which people have emotional reactions do not 
have universal meanings, however. People give their own meanings 
to the stimuli they encounter, and the meanings given by any two 
people can be very different. The same stimulus can lead one person 
to feel joy and another to feel anger because of the unique meaning 
each gives it. These meanings derive from how the stimulus relates to 
the people’s needs, wants, and expectations. 
A friend of mine, Jim Astman, once wrote a song for his younger 
sister about a time years earlier when’ she, like most children, had 
been bothered by monsters. In his song, he counseled her to ‘“make 
that monster your best friend.” The message was simple: Monsters 
do not frighten you if you do not interpret them as frightening. 
Regulating One’s Emotions 
The process of giving meaning to emotion-eliciting stimuli has two 
components, as pointed out by psychologist Magda Arnold. When 
people encounter certain stimuli, they intuit a meaning almost i 
in- 
stantaneously, and there is a built-in tendency to respond in certain 
ways to certain intuited meanings. For example, a fast-moving object 
that comes hurtling toward the side of your head will almost surely 
be intuitively experienced as threatening and lead to an immediate 
surge of adrenaline and the feelings of fright and anger. The tenden- 
cies to duck and lash out exist within our nervous system. 
But this immediate intuitive responding is only a first step. You 
then bring a more reflective process to bear, thinking about what is 
- 

Being Autonomous Amidst the Controls 
189 
happening. You might realize that the object was not going to hit 
you but was just a seagull flying past, headed for food that someone 
had thrown on the ground behind you. Your ability to think deliber- 
ately can adjust the immediate interpretation you have given a stimu- 
lus, and the emotion you experience will change as the meaning 
changes. Your fear and anger dissipate as you reappraise what actu- 
ally happened. 
It is the reappraisal process—the more reflective assessment— 
that gives people power over their emotions, and it was this process 
that Jim Astman highlighted in his song. The process of giving stim- 
uli less threatening meanings can be a very powerful tool for self- 
. 
regulation, but unfortunately it is not always easy to accomplish. 
You have to work at it. 
One reason that people interpret many events as threats is that 
they have developed ego-involvements. Being ego-involved, as was 
pointed out earlier, means that people’s feelings of self-worth are 
contingent upon some type of outcome. They might have to be seen 
as intelligent in order to feel worthy, or to be seen as feminine, 
strong, artistic, or handsome. People can become ego-involved in all 
sorts of things, and when they are they become highly rigid and con- 
trolling with themselves so they will appear intelligent, feminine, or 
whatever. And when they are ego-involved, they can be easily threat- 
ened by others. 
Ego-involvements make people a pawn to their emotions. If they 
need to be seen as strong in order to feel worthy, being called a wimp 
will threaten their self-worth and could send them into a rage. The 
anger results from the interpretation of a remark as a threat, but the 
remark is a threat only when people’s self-worth is hooked on being 
seen as strong. People might want to ask themselves, “Is it really that 
important to be seen as strong (or feminine, or creative, or intelli- 
gent, or whatever)?” Is it really worth getting all worked up about 
— 
‘and possibly behaving in ways they will later regret? It is interesting 
to realize that by being ego-involved people give others a weapon. 
And others quickly learn how to use it. 
Nothing is an ego threat if people don’t interpret it as sudtitoie 

190 
Why We Do What We Do - 
they don’t threaten their ego with it. Of course, some things are gen- 
erally more hurtful than others, and an intended insult may be hard 
not to interpret as a threat, but people can nonetheless become more 
effective at not interpretting stintuli as threats. If there are no realistic 
consequences associated with an insult, such as being rejected, aban- 
doned, or fired, people can learn to understand the insult as the 
speaker’s aggression and not feel so threatened by it, even if it hurts 
a little. By learning to interpret stimuli differently, people can 
become more effective in managing their own emotions. 
Part of how people can rise above the situation is to take interest 
in their own ego-involvements, to begin to.explore what hooks them. 
Then they can ask themselves whether it is really necessary to pres- 
sure and control themselves in that way. By exploring their ego-in- 
volvements, people can find ways of becoming less reactive, less 
controlled, less like a pawn. By exploring their ego-involvements and 
how ego-involvements affect the interpretations they give to stimuli, 
people can gain the capacity to regulate their own emotions without 
suppressing them—people can become more autonomous. 
Regulating One’s Behavior 
Regulating one’s emotions by changing the interpretations one gives 
to emotion-eliciting stimuli is just one of two essential steps for 
becoming more integrated or autonomous with respect to emo- 
tions—and in the process, giving oneself a means to rise above con- 
trolling forces. The other involves gaining more regulatory flexibility 
with respect to the behaviors that one’s emotions motivate. 
Emotions have certain behavioral tendencies built into them, no 
doubt left over from earlier phases in our evolutionary history. These 
tendencies—such as striking out when angry, fleeing when fright- 
ened, or approaching when joyful—can occur almost automatically, 
‘as an expression of the emotion. But people have the capacity to 
. inhibit the impulses and decide how to behave. 

Being aL orriers Amidst the Controls 
191 
Becoming autonomous involves developing integrated regula- 
tory processes for.managing behavior when emotions have been 
stimulated. By doing that, people will be able to experience true 
choice with respect to their behavior when they are angry, disgusted, 
or joyful. They may choose to talk about it, or not; they may choose 
to prolong it, or not; they may choose to problem solve, or not; they 
may simply choose to leave the scene. To the extent that people are 
integrated with respect to an emotion, they will feel a sense of free- 
dom with respect to how they behave. The emotion will not deter- 
mine the behavior but instead will be a piece of information relevant 
to the process of choosing how to behave. Behaviors will be chosen 
based on an awareness of the emotion and on a consideration of the 
goals they would like to accomplish. When people are autonomous, 
they will allow a full experience of their emotions, and they will feel 
free in deciding how to express them. 
In contrast, when emotion-motivated behavior is controlled by 
introjected regulatory processes, 
people behave in rigid, pro- 
grammed ways when a particular emotion is experienced. For exam- 
ple, when people feel anger, an introject might pressure them to get 
even with those who angered them. “‘That’s how you save face,” the 
introject might say. Or alternatively, it could pressure them to not let 
others know that they are angry. 
Even more extreme, some introjects lead people to suppress their 
emotions altogether. My acquaintance who never seemed to be both- 
ered by anything provided an example of this. Suppression, however, 
interferes with natural organismic processes and can have dire conse- 
quences. Our emotions are an important messenger. They say to us 
that we are—or are not—getting something we need. The emotions 
of fear and anger, for example, can mean that we think we will not 
get something we expect, desire, or need. 
| 
By using emotions as a cue, people can ask themselves. two key 
questions. First, what am I not getting? And, second, do I really need 
it? Emotions signal a discrepancy between people’s current state and 
-some standard they hold. This could mean that it would be useful to 
find a way to get what they want (for example, more autonomy sup- 

“ 
192 
| 
Why We Do What We Do 
port from others or more satisfying interpersonal relationships), or it 
-could mean that the expectations or desires they hold are unneces- 
sary or unreasonable. Ego-involvements are an example of standards 
people hold that may be unnecessary. 
Another standard that some people hold that limits their auton- 
omy and experience of life is the belief that all they want in life is to 
be happy. It is a vague statement, but one that fairy-tale endings are 
made of. In truth, happiness is not all that it’s cracked up to be, and 
most people don’t really want to be happy all the time anyway. Peo- 
ple often choose to go to movies or operas that are very unsettling— 
that terrify, sadden, disgust, or anger them. There is something 
about experiencing these emotions, whether in the safe and comfort- 
able context of a theater or at a dangerous mountain pass in the 
Himalayas, that is appealing to many people. They seek a wide range 
of feelings—the so-called negative as well as the so-called positive. 
Terror is not happiness. Nor is sadness, disgust, or anger. And it 
makes no sense to say that feeling anger and disgust makes one 
happy. Happy is simply the wrong concept for what it is that is natu- 
ral to people, for what it is that they seek and what it is that promotes 
human development. 
When people want only happiness, they can actually undermine 
their own development because their quest for happiness can lead 
them to suppress other aspects of their experience. Wanting to be 
happy can lead people to avoid (i.e., suppréss) sadness when a loved 
© 
one dies, or to avoid fear in the face of peril. The true meaning of 
being alive is not just to feel happy, but to experience the full range of 
human emotions. Insofar as the quest for happiness interferes with 
the experience of other emotions, negative consequences are likely to 
follow. 
Being integrated and autonomous means allowing oneself to feel 
emotions—all the emotions—and then deciding what to do with 
them. It is, however, useful to distinguish feelings in terms of the 
extent to which they are “‘pure.’’ There are basic emotions that are 
core to human experience, feelings such as joy, sadness, excitement, - 

\ 
aa 
Being Autonomous Amidst the Controls 
193 
and anger, and there are also feelings that have a cognitive overlay. 
Depression is not a pure emotion. It is often confused with sadness, 
but the two are quite different. Sadness is pure, and when one feels it, 
one is nourished by it. Depression is fraught with self-derogation, 
anxiety, and doubt. Depression is anything but nourishing; it is 
bewildering and draining. It is maladaptive. 
Aggrandizement is similar to depression, in a way. Whereas de- 
pression is the result of failure or loss when one has introjected stan- 
dards, aggrandizement is the result of meeting those standards. 
- Aggrandizement, like depression, is not pure. It has the overlay of 
boasting about yourself and derogating others. It does not nourish 
one’s true sense of self. 
Life is full of a variety of experiences. People succeed, they fail, 
they build relationships, 
they lose loved ones. And while one would 
not typically choose to fail or to losea loved one, the pure experience 
of the emotions accompanying these experiences is necessary to 
' make an optimal adjustment to these life changes. Being autono- 
mous involves allowing a full experience of one’s emotions, and ex- 
periencing emotions 
can 
be one 
of the most gratifying and 
actualizing elements of being alive. Being autonomous means neither 
blocking awareness of emotions because of introjected admonitions, 
nor letting them be overpowering. It means experiencing them fully 
and feeling a sense of choice about how to express them. 
The Use of Techniques 
Ona 
recent flight from London, I was served a soft drink by a pleas- 
ant, accommodating young flight attendant. He had a rubber band 
around his right wrist. Jokingly, I'said; ‘‘nice bracelet,” but, actually, 
I wondered whether he was using it as a behavior modification tech- 
nique. There is a kind of self-punishment technique in which every 
time you feel a particular urge or have a certain obsessive thought, 

« 
194 
| 
Why We Do What We Do 
you snap the rubber band. It can hurt, and its intent is to break up the 
thought pattern or overcome the urge by associating it with an un- 
pleasant stimulation. 
When it comes to issues of Thotivation, people always seem to 
want techniques for motivating or managing themselves. Screaming 
from the front cover of most self-help books are statements about 
“The newest techniques for motivating yourself,” or ““Techniques 
that have proven effective.” The truth is that there are no techniques 
that will motivate people or make them autonomous. Motivation 
must come from within, not from techniques. It comes from their 
deciding they are ready to take responsibility for managing them- 
selves. 
When people are really ready to change for their own personal 
reasons, and when they are willing to face and cope with the myriad 
feelings—anxiety, inadequacy, rage, terror, or loneliness—that un- 
derlie their maladaptive behaviors, then they will have the motiva- 
tion for change. Once that has happened, various techniques may be ° 
useful for them, but without a true resolve, without reasons for 
change that are personally important, techniques will not help. 
When people put stock in techniques as something that will change 
them, they are expressing an external locus of causality rather than 
an internal one; they are holding the misguided belief that being con- 
trolled rather than autonomous is the means for bringing about 
meaningful, personal change. 
A deep personal desire to change must come first. Then perhaps, 
a technique can give people a little help. I know a man who’s a very 
orderly fellow. He’s quite systematic in the way he goes about most 
things. I remember when he gave up smoking he did it in steps that 
were all planned out. He had been a two-pack-a-day smoker, and he 
decided he’d take five months to wean himself. So he set goals: thirty 
cigarettes a day for the first month; twenty a day for the second; ten 
a day for the third; five a day for the fourth; and in his last month as 
_ 
a smoker, he said, he’d have two a day—one after lunch and one 
after dinner. At the end of the fifth month, that would be it, he re- 
solved, and he’d never touch another cigarette. The satisfaction of 

Being Autonomous Amidst the Controls 
195 
matching his goal was, he vowed, the only reward he would need. 
Well, he did it, seven years ago, and he has not had a puff since. 
The goal-setting approach suited his character, so that’s how he 
proceeded. It was a useful technique for him. But many people have 
used the technique and failed miserably. It is not the technique that 
led the man to stop; it was his autonomous motivation. Some people 
who have made a resolve to quit will find it easier to go cold turkey, 
so setting progressively smaller nicotine goals would not be a useful 
technique for them. Using techniques is likely to be helpful only if it 
feels right for a person, and only if the person has made a true choice 
to change. People might try snapping their wrist with a rubber band 
when they crave a cigarette if that appeals to them. They can buy 
themselves little presents when they reach standards if that technique 
seems right for them. They can pick their own technique, if they want 
to use one at all. But if they are not really ready to change, there is no 
sense bothering with a technique for it is bound to fail. 
Accepting Oneself 
The starting place for change is accepting oneself and taking interest 
in.one’s inner world. One might wonder, for example: Why do I 
overeat? Why do yell at my wife? Why do I spend so little time with 
my kids? Why am I so dependent on cigarettes? People adopted the 
behaviors in the first place—perhaps years or even decades earlier— 
because those’ behaviors were the best response they could find to 
deal with a difficult situation. 
Discovering the reason they do something can be a helpful start, 
but it must not be an occasion for blame. Just as the process of 
change is facilitated by awareness of why people are doing the mala- 
daptive behavior, it is hindered by blaming themselves, or others, for 
the behavior. When people are truly interested in why they do some- 
thing, and personally committed to making a change, blame is irrele- 
. 
vant. They might discover that they overeat whenever they feel afraid 
as 

196 
Bes, 
Why We Do What We Do 
of failing on some project at work. That’s an interesting discovery. 
And it allows them to figure out how to manage the anxiety in less 
self-destructive ways. But blaming themselves for overeating or for 
managing their fear of failure matadaptively will only interfere with 
lasting change. Remember what Charlotte Selver said: Dare to be fat. 
Take interest in why you are fat. And then you will be ready to get 
thin. 
: 
A man might discover that he yells at his wife because he does 
not know how to (or’is afraid to) share some of his deep feelings or 
secrets with her. He yells to keep her at a distance—to protect him- 
self. That, too, is very interesting, and it is the first step in figuring 
out how to share more of himself, how to open up and be more 
vulnerable. That may not be easy, but it will likely be more satisfy- 
ing. 
Meaningful change comes out of an organismic readiness. It 
comes when people feel that now is the time to change, when they are 
ready to enact a commitment each moment. Pressuring does not 
help; indeed, it is likely to hurt just as blaming oneself is likely to 
hurt. When people feel pressured, compliance or defiance results. 
Compliance produces change that is not likely to be maintained, and 
defiance blocks change in the first place. Meaningful change occurs 
when people accept themselves, take interest in why they do what 
they do, and then decide that they are ready to do differently. 

a 
O 
lusi 
onc 


ore 
Z 3 
eT Pee es IN 
The Meaning a: 
Human Freedom 
arth Fagan is one of the true geniuses in the world of.con- 
temporary dance. His troupe‘has a signature routine in 
which the dancers soar to unimaginable heights in elegantly 
original positions. The routine is called ‘Prelude: Discipline Is Free- 
dom.” 
The Fagan dancers bound and undulate, with overwhelming en- 
ergy and force, and yet there is no chaos or anarchy in their work. 
Rather, there is responsibility and reliance on each other. Every 
dancer is in precisely the right place at precisely the right time. Quin- 
tessential responsibility, but at the same time, amazing freedom and 
flexibility. 
The behavior of these dancers helps illustrate the extremely im- 
portant point that responsibility need not be felt as obligation, but 
instead can be associated with freedom. The responsible behavior of 
these dancers is not controlled, it is autonomous. If the dancers felt 
pressured to be in the right place—if they had only introjected the 
necessity of being there—they would not be flexible and free and the 
marvel of their performance would be lost. But they do act freely, 
with full volition, so these highly disciplined performers express ex- 
ceptional creativity. 
Abraham Maslow said that “‘duty is pleasant, and pleasure is the 
fulfillment of duty.” He was making the same point. For him “duty” 
did not mean obligation or force. It meant giving what the situation 
_ 
| Beene 
| 
199 

. 
200 
: 
- 
Why We Do What We Do 
asks of you, and giving it freely. If the situation were that your chil- 
dren were hungry, you would feed them. But there is a big difference 
between doing that out of a sense of love and deeply felt responsibil- 
ity for your progeny, as opposed t6 a sense of obligation and duty. 
According to the existential philosopher Jean-Paul Sartre, being 
free means fully accepting one’s limitations. Freedom exists within 
the truth of constraints—not constraints arbitrarily imposed by oth- 
ers, but genuine constraints like those that make us unable to fly, 
those that make us unable to withstand the force of a tidal wave, 
and, for some of us, those that make us unable to understand nuclear 
physics. These are true constraints that exist in the nature cf things. 
But a constraint that gets imposed on a child such as, “Don’t make 
noise or you’ll be punished” is not a natural constraint; it is instead 
arbitrary, imposed by someone in a one-up position. It is shallow 
compared to the constraints that. speak to us about who we really 
are. 
People find freedom in part by accepting their real constraints, 
but that alone does not ensure that they will function effectively 
within society. In addition, they may need to accept some of the arbi- 
trary conventions created by the social organization. Society, of 
course, is very much invested in people’s accepting such rules. The 
important challenge for each individual is to accept the arbitrary 
constraints that are meaningful to him or her, while at the same time 
maintaining a sense of personal freedom. The Fagan dancers seem to 
have done that rather admirably. 
\ \ J hile Eastern Europe was still under Soviet domination, I vis- 
ited many factories, stores, and service agencies in Bulgaria 
and neighboring countries. I was struck by how little work the em- 
ployees actually did and by how little they cared about their work. 
Some told me they frequently went home for three-hour lunch breaks 
to tend their gardens or do other chores, sometimes making it back 
to work just in time to sign out for the day. They said they didn’t 
worry because they knew nothing would happen to them. Besides, 

The Meaning of Human Freedom 
: 201 
even if they were to get fired they’d simply get another job. As noted 
earlier, the communist government essentially guaranteed work and 
income to all of them, so they were, in an odd sort of way, free to do 
as they pleased. 
Nonetheless, the government imposed many arbitrary con- 
straints and obstacles. People could generally not leave the country, 
for example, and they had to be extremely careful if they criticized 
the government. Furthermore, it was typically futile for them to 
strive for meaningful, personal goals within the system, because bu- 
reaucracy and favoritism nearly always determined who would suc- 
ceed. Individuals were indeed restricted in many ways, but if they did 
not care about certain behaviors and accomplishments, the system 
seemed to afford them substantial freedom. 
In the West, we hear much about our freedom. It is, in some 
ways, the mirror image of what I witnessed in Bulgaria that looked 
like a kind of freedom. In the U.S., people are relatively free from 
government interference with their mobility, and they have the possi- 
bility of accomplishing their personal goals within the system. People 
can make millions—if they are clever enough and willing to work 
hard enough. They can create a music festival, build a house for 
themselves, rise in an organizational hierarchy, acquire unlimited 
possessions, and send their children to the schools they choose—if 
they are able and willing to behave in particular ways. The in- 
strumentalities for accomplishing these goals are relatively clear, and 
there are relatively few arbitrary restrictions. 
However, it is the goals and the necessity of behaving in particu- 
lar ways that are the kickers. These goals that people are free to 
pursue can end up controlling the people who pursue them. We saw, 
for example, in the research by Kasser and Ryan that people who 
had unusually strong extrinsic aspirations were more controlled and 
displayed poorer mental health. It is also the case that the necessity to 
behave in certain ways to achieve an outcome can feel like intense 
pressure, especially if a person’s ego or self-esteem is hinged on the 
outcome, or if people in one-up positions (like managers and teach- 
ers) administer such outcomes in controlling ways. 
* 

2a 
. 
« 
202 
Why We Do What We Do 
Ironically, the freedom to pursue one’s own ends often results in 
people relinquishing much of their personal freedom because of their 
own vulnerabilities—their ego involvements, for example—that de- 
veloped as their innate psychologital needs for competence, auton- 
omy, and relatedness were not adequately satisfied. In our economic 
system, most people do not feel free to go home during the work day 
to tend their gardens, because the instrumentalities—the necessity 
of 
behaving in particular ways to get desired outcomes—will not allow 
it. As noted earlier, although these instrumentalities provide infor- 
mation about how to achieve goals, they are also the means through 
which people can be controlled by their desires and goals, and by the 
people who administer the instrumentalities. 
Were the Bulgarians free when they went home to tend their gar- 
dens? Are Americans free when they throw themselves into their 
work and single-mindedly pursue their goals? To answer these ques- 
tions, it is necessary to specify exactly what is meant by freedom. 
Most frequently, the term freedom is applied at the political or 
societal level. The people of some societies are said to be free if they 
are allowed substantial opportunities to choose what to do and how 
to live, with relatively few arbitrary constraints. In this sense, Amer- 
_ 
ica is said to allow greater freedom than many other nations, particu- 
larly those under totalitarian rule. 
Of course, within any society, some may be relatively free and 
others not, as was the case during the period of slavery within this 
country. Nonetheless, it is generally possible to characterize societies 
in terms of how much freedom of action they allow the average citi- 
zen to pursue personal goals. The term freedom when used in this 
way, refers to freedom from external coercion at a systems’ level; it 
refers to minimal government interference 
in the way you live your 
life. It means, among other things, not being arbitrarily restricted 
from living where you want, shopping where you want, traveling 
where you want, and studying where you want. 
\ 
At a more proximal level, immediate interpersonal contexts cre- 
ated by people in one-up positions can also limit people’s freedom in 
ways that parallel the limitations created by the broader system. Peo- 

5 
The Meaning of Human Fréedom 
203 
_ ple in one-up positions have authority over others; and they can use 
that authority in relatively controlling (or alternatively, in relatively 
autonomy-supportive) ways. Much of the discussion in this book has 
- 
concerned the way that controlling interpersonal contexts—and ele- 
ments such as rewards and deadlines contained within them—can 
limit freedom. 
There is, however, yet another way in which people’s freedom 
can be restricted—a way that is even more important to our under- 
standing of human freedom than the distal or proximal controls im- 
posed by social organizations. It is the limitation imposed by inner 
constraints—by the limitations of our rigid internal structures. I 
know of a woman who seems to spend all her time talking about the 
deals she’s closed and the money she’s made. She is truly driven. 
She’s aggressive and competitive, and making the money and gaining 
the accompanying influence are apparently more important to her 
than anything else in her life. 
Is she really free? Does she act with a sense of personal freedom 
as she goes about her daily life? The relative lack of external con- 
straints allows her to pursue her goals. But the obvious strength of 
the inner pressure’ to pursue these goals—the degree to which she 
seems obsessed by them—suggests that she is not an exemplar of 
personal freedom. And what about the professor who always comes 
late to meetings? Is he acting freely when he is rebelling against the 
expectation that he behave like everyone else and be on time? 
These two examples—the woman who’s building her bank ac- 
count and the man who is always late—represent lack of personal 
' freedom of two complementary sorts. The first is an instance of com- 
pliance with introjected, societally sanctioned values, and the second 
is an instance of defiance against them. Both are cases of people 
being restricted, of being compelled by inner forces to act as they do. 
From this perspective, human freedom means to be truly autono- 
mous. It means to act in a way that is not bounded by introjects, by 
rigid inner structures, by paralyzing self-criticisms, or by the push to 
defy limiting forces. To be free means to feel volitional; it means to 
be governed in one’s actions by.a true self. 

204 
* Why We Do What We Do 
Of course social, political, and economic systems affect the ex- 
tent to which people are psychologically free. For one thing, systems 
' provide or withhold opportunities to pursue one’s goals, and they 
. 
impose more or fewer arbitrary sonstraints. But perhaps even more 
interestingly, social contexts also play a role in creating the internal 
pressures—the introjected values and regulations—with which peo- 
ple limit their own freedom. 
The high value our society places on material accumulation has 
made people particularly vulnerable to being controlled by contin- 
gent financial rewards as well as by contingent love. Thus, when 
people in one-up positions use these contingencies controllingly, they 
tend to have clearly negative consequences for the children, students, 
employees, and patients on whom they are used. As such, people in 
one-up positions who use rewards controllingly are catalysts for the 
systemic processes that, in the final analysis, limit the psychological 
freedom of many people who live within the system. The American 
system offers substantial freedom to pursue desired outcomes, but 
paradoxically people’s freedom often ends up being limited by the 
pursuit of these outcomes. 
In Bulgaria, employees who !eft work to go home and tend their 
gardens could have been free, psychologically, if they had made a 
true accommodation to the situation. My impression, however, from 
interviewing many of them, was that very few were free. Most were 
passive and conflicted. The totalitarian regime had taken a substan- 
tial toll even though it had not succeeded in controlling their work 
behavior. Instead of causing them to commit themselves to their 
work, it caused their minds to grow sluggish, their arms and legs to 
grow heavy. Most had relinquished their vitality to the regime be- 
cause the cost of not doing so seemed too great to bear. 
| 
But there were exceptions. One person in particular made a last- 
ing impression on me. He didn’t do much work under the communist 
regime, but instead spent most of his time studying—not at the uni- 
versity because the university was dominated by communist ideology 
and totalitarian procedures. Rather, he studied foreign languages, 
Western psychology, capitalist economics, and other such topics. He 
| 

The Meaning of Human Freedom 
205 
wrote to scholars in the West requesting articles, and he scoured the 
university and national libraries for interesting ‘books and articles. 
Not surprisingly, when President Zhivkov fell from power in 1989 
and the country began opening up to the West, this man was ideally 
suited to be an agent of change. 
Social contexts greatly influence the extent to which individuals 
are free, but they do not determine it. Freedom is a characteristic of 
an individual’s psychological functioning at any given moment. So 
freedom must be practiced on a moment-to-moment basis. That man 
in totalitarian Bulgaria had managed to live ‘‘freely’’ a good deal of 
the time because he had quite successfully freed himself from the 
oppression of internal controls and conflicts. 
Being free does not mean doing your own thing at the expense of 
others, however. Rather, it involves concern for others and respect 
for the environment, because those are manifestations of human con- 
nectedness. Freedom involves being open to one’s inner nature, and 
there one finds the tendencies for both relatedness and autonomy. 
Out of the need for relatedness, people grow to respect their social 
and physical surroundings. The Fagan dancers, while being autono- 
mous in their performing, are also being respectful of the others with 
whom they perform. 
A person who enters a situation and begins immediately to boss 
people around is not being autonomous because true autonomy is 
accompanied by relatedness—true autonomy involves respecting 
others. The person who begins immediately to boss others around is 
undoubtedly feeling pressured by some internal or external force, 
and the attempt to control others is simply a manifestation of that 
pressure. Were the person autonomous, he or she would begin.by 
accepting the environment before immediately trying to change it. 
I have a friend, a very active and assertive man, who walks into 
any situation and begins to change things—more light, less air, more 
pepper, less noise, move that table, hide the pillow. He seems to keep 
everything in motion. In a way, I respect the fact that he gets what he- 
needs for himself, but I’ve always felt that it was too much. It’s not 
really autonomy and freedom being exhibited—it’s too pressured. It 

206 
Why We Do What We Do 
is as if he always had to prove something. I want to say, “Take it 
easy. Feel out the situation. Respect what is here. Be sensitive to oth- 
ers. And then maybe think about changing it.” 
ir? 
True freedom involves a balance between being proactive in 
dealing with one’s environment and being respectful of it. Being psy- 
chologically free entails an attitude of accepting others. We are not 
ends in ourselves but part of a larger system, and because the true self 
has the dual tendencies toward autonomy and relatedness, the per- 
son who acts from a well-developed self will accept others and will 
respect the environment, as well as proactively influencing both. 
uman freedom leads to authenticity; it is about being who we 
H truly are. And with freedom comes responsibility, because that 
is part of who we truly are. It is in our nature to develop responsibly, 
as we strive to become integrated with the social community. What 
psychologist Andras Angyal called our “homonomous tendency” 
_(i.e., our tendency to be in union with a larger unit), in combination 
? 
with our “autonomous tendency,” urges us toward responsibility. 
Actualizing those tendencies (and thus achieving integration and 
well-being), however, requires nutriments from the socializing con- 
text. Society influences people’s. psychological freedom in accord 
with whether it (and the socializing agents who are its representa- 
tives) provides or withholds those nutriments. 
Unfortunately, the concepts of freedom, authenticity, and re- 
sponsibility have been so badly misportrayed by social critics over 
the past few decades that the issues surrounding these concepts have 
become hopelessly muddled. Because current research on human au- 
tonomy provides a basis for clarifying the muddle and explicating 
the meaning of human freedom, let us briefly use that work to reflect 
on developments of the past few decades that have been debated by 
social critics. 
The 1960s was a tense and dramatic decade. A wide-ranging so- 
cial movement gained substantial momentum as people like the 
funny and truculent Abbie Hoffman, followed by millions of the 

The Meaning of Human Freedom 
207 
country’s youth, took rebellion to the center of the national stage. 
Some, like Abbie, were angry souls who rebelled against all forms of 
structure—‘“revolution for the hell-of it,” he said—and some were 
lost souls who mimicked their rebellious leaders in a desperate at- 
tempt to belong. Together they marched, the angry and the lost, side- 
by-side. At times they broke windows, burned buildings, and even 
robbed banks. They called for authenticity and social responsibility, 
but they lacked these very characteristics in their own lives. 
But the sixties was a complex time. Neither rebellion nor control 
was the essence of that period for some of the people living through 
it. Instead, these people were concerned with the’compelling themes 
of the period—the themes of finding their own truth, loving one an- 
other, valuing the earth, questioning whether war is necessary, and 
developing greater personal and social responsibility. These people 
had taken the messages to heart and were working to be authentic in 
their own lives. These were the people who were enriched by the 
" movement. 
Social critics who have reflected on this period have generally 
portrayed it as either good or bad, because they have focused only on 
those who were authentically searching or only on those who were 
irresponsibly rebelling. Charles Reich saw it as part of an essential 
revolution that would yield more authentic individuals and a more 
human community, but Christopher Lasch labeled it a time of narcis- 
sistic self-gratification. Psychologist Rollo May said that the sixties 
movement was about discovering oneself through love and will, but 
writer James Lincoln Collier said it was a movement that promoted 
self-indulgence as a virtue. By failing to recognize the diversity of 
purpose, each of these writers failed to grasp one of the most impor- 
tant issues of our time, namely how people can be both authentic and 
_responsible in a society whose values and systems seem to thwart 
those goals at every turn. 
Part of the problem was that the polarized feelings of that trou- 
bled period led writers to give perverse meanings to terms. Allan 
Bloom essentially portrayed authenticity and self-indulgence as the 
same thing, asserting that to be authentic means to care for yourself 

. 
208 
| 
Why We Do What We Do 
instead of for others. He thus implied, incorrectly, that a self-affirm- 
ing autonomy and a deep sense of personal responsibility could not 
coexist in the same individual. 
It is true that much of the rebellion of the period was irresponsi- 
ble and indulgent, and to that extent it was not authentic. It was 
instead a response to introjected rigidities that had created in people 
an “inner voice” that sounded much like the voice of their elders. 
This swallowed voice of control, which was intended to make soci- 
ety’s youngsters fall into line with society’s ideals, pressured and de- 
manded, evaluated and criticized. And the dominant response to 
these controls, which was compliance during the fifties, became defi- 
ance during the sixties. 
| 
By the eighties, compliance had once again ascended and was 
hailed by many asa 
virtue. The conformity and achievement of those 
who looked disciplined—who acted right, dressed right, talked right, 
and fit right in—were handsomely rewarded. I encountered hun- 
dreds of compliant students during the eighties. They had stepped on 
the treadmill and were headed for Wall Street or Madison Avenue. 
Young men dressed in polo shirts with tasteful gold chains and de- 
signer jeans; young women even wore skirts to class. They sought 
success, and they selected courses and extracurricular activities that 
_ 
would look good on their résumés. These were the children of the 
eighties for whom the controls had worked to promote compliance 
in a world where writer Ayn Rand and economist Milton Friedman 
were the prophets. 
. 
These students supported the Gulf War with the same vigor that 
students of the sixties opposed the Vietnam War, and they did so 
with rhetoric rather than reason, just as many of the anti-Vietnam 
activists had. I remember one well-dressed, pleasant young man who 
started in on the Gulf War after class one day. He went on and on 
about patriotism, about Saddam being another Hitler, about stop- 
ping imperial aggression. I simply nodded. 
An interesting parallel can be found between the students 
of the 
sixties and the students of the eighties. In the sixties, some defied and 
rebelled while others worked to be authentic and responsible, 

The Meaning of Human Freedom 
209 
whereas in the eighties some complied and manipulated while others 
worked to be authentic and responsible. Those who complied in the 
eighties were as irresponsible as those who rebelled in the sixties, for 
neither were acting freely on the basis of integrated values. 
When controls of society are merely introjected by people, those 
people may either comply or defy. But neither compliance nor defi- 
ance represents authenticity, and neither represents responsibility. 
To defy what authority says just because authority says it, is to be 
irresponsible. But in a quite profound sense, it is also true that to 
comply with authority just because it is authority is to be irresponsi- 
ble. 
Responsibility—true responsibility—requires that people act au- 
tonomously in relating to the world around, that they behave au- 
thentically on behalf of some general good. In each epoch—the 
sixties and the eighties—there were caring and committed students 
who toiled on behalf of the homeless, the neglected, and the victims 
of violence. They behaved responsibly as a manifestation of their 
authenticity—of their being in contact with their own inner selves 
and with the inner selves of others. They were responsible because 
_ they were able to unhook themselves from the controls around them, 
because they were able to avoid the dynamics of compliance and 
defiance. 
a 
, 
As we proceed through the nineties, the dynamics of the earlier 
periods seem to have become amplified in response to social contexts 
that are either overly controlling 
or permissive. Pressures are mount- 
ing, and people are responding in a variety of irresponsible ways. 
And as they do, the calls for greater control can be heard all 
around—from critics, from politicians, from average citizens, from 
countless people who themselves 
are behaving irresponsibly. The 
problem, of course, is that more control will only make things worse. 
A t the heart of human freedom is the experience of choice. When 
autonomous, people experience choice about how to behave, 
but when controlled (whether they comply or defy), they experience 

210 
Why We Do What We Do 
a lack of choice. If someone held a gun to your head and said, 
“Jump,” you would likely jump, experiencing no choice about it. So, 
too, if an introject said jump, you might also jump and experience no 
choice. Such forces, whether external or internal, diminish people’s 
experience of choice, and they have very significant consequences for 
the quality of people’s behavior and well-being. 
Existential philosophers would say that people always have 
choice. According to Sartre, for example, at each moment, people 
create their existence with their choices, and they are thus fully re- 
sponsible for themselves. However, although in a sense that is true, 
and although it is the capacity to choose even in a pressured world 
that allows people to rise above political and economic influences, 
there is another sense in which the assertion that people always have 
choice fails to convey the nature of human experience. As living or- 
ganisms, people have vulnerabilities, and these vulnerabilities make 
it incredibly difficult to maintain a sense of freedom and health in the 
face of an aggressive lack of support for their basic human needs. To 
maintain a sense of freedom and authenticity when one is starving 
and food is made dependent on caving in would be a relatively super- 
human feat. In a sense, one would be choosing to sell one’s integrity 
for food and water, but that is so only in a rather abstract sense, for 
it fails to give adequate consideration to the experience of coercion 
and the human needs that are integral to the episode. 
At the same time that the truth of human vulnerabilities is appar- 
ent, and can substantially limit human freedom, the existential posi- 
tion presents each of us with an important challenge. It says to us 
that we are indeed responsible for ourselves, and it challenges us to 
accept that responsibility rather than giving in to the forces of chaos 
and control. 
In December 1985, Elena Bonner, Soviet dissident and wife of 
physicist/activist Andrei Sakharov, was allowed to leave her house 
arrest in the USSR to seek medical attention in the West. She spent 
six months undergoing surgery, visiting her mother and her children, 
and writing a memoir before she returned to her life of imprison- 
ment. 
Lb 

. 
_ The Meaning of Human Freedom 
211 
The Sakharovs, who had lived in internal exile for several years, 
were under the constant watch of the KGB, had no access to a phone, 
and were allowed almost no opportunity to leave their apartment 
- 
unaccompanied by guards. They went on hunger strikes, were ac- 
cused of numerous crimes against the state, and were arbitrarily ac- 
costed by authorities. All manner of controls were applied to the 
Sakharovs—forced injections of nutriments during their hunger 
strikes, constant break-ins at their apartment, accusations, harass- 
ment, and intimidation—and the Sakharovs stood their ground. 
They acted from their consciences, they spoke their beliefs, they re- 
fused to be broken. 
Bonner could probably have stayed in the U.S. as a defector, and 
part of her no doubt wanted to. Most of her family was:here, and she 
had myriad opportunities that must surely have appealed to her. The 
Western system offered her substantial freedom of action, but she 
accepted the existential challenge and chose to return to her life of 
internal exile. Why? Because Sakharov was there waiting. She could 
have remained in a land that provides a certain kind of political free- 
dom, but instead she chose to subject herself to one of the most hid- 
. 
eous forms of oppression. She chose it because sharing life’s 
experiences with her husband was the most important thing to her. 
Elena Bonner was being autonomous; her decision came from 
what we call an integrated sense of self. It was a true choice, an 
action not controlled by introjects or other pressures. As Bonner put 
it, “together . 
. 
. we are still free to be ourselves.” In a system of 
political control, the Sakharovs displayed greater personal freedom 
than do millions of people whose governments do not oppress them 
politically. 


NOTES ON 
WORKS CITED 
CHAPTER ONE 
Charles A. Reich. The Greening of America. New York: Random House, 
1970. 
Christopher Lasch. The Culture of Narcissism. New York: Norton, 1978. 
Allan Bloom. The Closing of the American Mind. New York: Simon and 
Schuster, 1987. 
Loren Baritz. The Good Life. New York: Knopf, 1988. 
Donald Winnicott. Human Nature. New York: Schocken, 1986. 
Alice Miller. The Drama of the Gifted Child: The Search for the True Salt 
(R. Ward, Trans.). New York: Basic Books, 1981. 
’ 
CHAPTER TWO 
Harry F. Harlow. Motivation as a factor in the acquisition of new re- 
sponses. In Current theory and research on motivation (pp. 24-49). 
Lincoln, NB: University of Nebraska Press, 1953. 
B. F. Skinner. Science and Human Behavior. New York: Macmillan, 1953. 
Barry Schwartz. The Battle for Human Nature. New York: Norton, 1986. 
Robert Henri quoted in Robert Goldwater and Marco Trever, Artists on 
Art. New York: Pantheon, 1945. P. 401. 
Richard deCharms. Personal Causation: The Internal Affective Determi- 
nants of Behavior. New York: Academic Press, 1968. 
Charles Reich. The Greening of America. New York: Random House, 
1970: 
213 

- 
214 
Notes on Works Cited 
CHAPTER THREE 
Henry A. Murray. Explorations in Personality. New York: Oxford Univer- 
sity Press, 1938. 
Zs 
CHAPTER FOUR 
Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi. Flow. New York: Harper, 1990. 
Charles Taylor. The Ethics of Authenticity. Cambridge, MA: Harvard Uni- 
versity Press, 1992. 
Teresa M. Amabile. The Social Psychology of Creativity. New York: 
Springer-Verlag, 1983. 
Frederick W. Taylor. Principles 
of Scientific Management. New York: 
Harper, 1911. 
CHAPTER FIVE 
Henry K. H. Woo. The Unseen Dimensions of Wealth. Fremont, CA: Vic- 
toria Press, 1984. 
- James P. Connell. Context, self and action: A motivational analysis of self- 
system processes across the life-span. In D. Cicchetti & M. Beeghly 
(Eds.), The Self 
in Transition: Infancy to Childhood (pp. 61-97). Chi- 
cago: University of Chicago Press, 1990. 
Ellen A. Skinner. Perceived Control, Motivation, and Coping. Newbury 
Park, CA: Sage, 1995. 
; 
R. W. White. Motivation reconsidered: The concept of competence. Psycho- 
logical Review, 1959, 66, 297-333. 
Albert Bandura. Social Foundations of Thought and Action: A Social Cog- 
nitive Theory. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 1986. 
CHAPTER SIX 
Sigmund Freud. The Ego and the Id. New York: Norton, 1962. (Original 
work published 1923.) 
Carl Rogers. Client-centered therapy. Boston: Houghton-Mifflin, 1951. 
Frederick S. Perls. Gestalt Therapy Verbatim. Lafayette, CA: Real People 
Press, 1969. 
B. F. Skinner. About Behaviorism. New York: Knopf, 1974. 
Jean Piaget. Biology and Knowledge. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 
O71. 
; 

Notes on Works Cited 
25) 
Talcott Parsons, The Social System. Glencoe, IL: The Free Press, 1951. 
Abraham H. Maslow. Motivation and Personality. New York: Harper 8& 
Row, 1954. 
CHAPTER SEVEN 
Fritz Perls. The Gestalt Approach and Eyewitness to Therapy. Ben Lomond, 
CA: Science and Behavior Books, 1973. 
CHAPTER EIGHT 
, 
Alice Miller. The Drama of the Gifted Child: The Search for the True Self 
(R. Ward, Trans.). New York: Basic Books, 1981. 
Charles V. W. Brooks. Sensory. Awareness: The Rediscovery of Experienc- 
‘ing Through Workshops with Charlotte Selver. Great Neck, NY: Felix 
Morrow, 1986. 
Elie Wiesel. Night (Stella Rodway, trans.). New York: Hill & Wang, 1960. 
Erich Fromm. The Art of Loving. New York: Harper & Row, 1956. 
CHAPTER NINE 
Charles A. Reich. The Greening of America. New York: Random House, 
1970. 
, 
Paul Wachtel. The Poverty of Affluence: A Psychological Portrait of the 
American Way of Life. New York: Free Press, 1983. 
James Patterson & Peter Kim. The Day America Told the Truth. New York: 
Prentice-Hall, 1991. 
' Ayn Rand. The Virtue of Selfishness. New York: The New American Li- 
brary, 1961. 
Carol Gilligan. In a Different Voice. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University 
Press, 1982. 
Robert Young. Personal Autonomy: Beyond Negative and Positive Liberty. 
New York: St. Martin’s Press, 1986. 
CHAPTER TEN 
A. S. Neill. Summerhill: 
A Radical Approach to Child Rearing. New York: 
Hart, 1960. 
E. C. Tolman. Purposive Behavior in Animals and Men. New York: Cen- 
tury, 1932. 

216 
: 
j 
Notes on Works ‘Cited 
K. Lewin. The Conceptual Representation and Measurement 
of Psychologi- 
cal Forces. Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 1938. 
CHAPTER ELEVEN 
~ 
J. M. McGinnis & W. H. Foege. Actual causes of death in the United States. 
Journal of the American Medical Association, 1993, 270(18), 2207- 
papas PR. 
Hans Selye. The Stress of Life (2nd edition). New York: McGraw-Hill, 
OSs 
CHAPTER TWELVE 
Magda Arnold. Emotion and Personality, Vol. 1: Psychological Aspects. 
New York: Columbia University Press, 1960. 
CHAPTER THIRTEEN 
“Abraham Maslow. Toward a Psychology of Being. Princeton, NJ: Van Nos- 
trand, 1962. 
Jean-Paul Sartre. Critique.of Dialectical Reason. New York: Verso, 1991. 
Andras Angyal. Neurosis and Treatment: A Holistic Theory. New York: 
Wiley, 1965. 
Charles Reich. The Greening of America. New York: Random House, 
1970; 
Christopher Lasch. The Culture of Narcissism. New York: Norton, 1978. 
Rollo May. Love and Will. New York: Norton, 1969. 
James Lincoln Collier. The Rise of Selfishness in America. New York: Ox- 
ford University Press, 1990. 
Ayn Rand. The Fountainhead. Indianapolis: Bobbs-Merrill, 1943. 
Milton Friedman. Why Government Is the Problem. Stanford, CA: Hoover 
Institute on War, Revolution, and Peace, Stanford University, 1993. 
Jean-Paul Sartre. Existentialism and Human Emotions. New York: Philo- 
sophical Library, 1957. 
Elena Bonner. Alone Together. New York: Knopf, 1986. 

List OF 
RESEARCH ARTICLES 
Amabile, T. M., DeJong, W., & Lepper, M. R. (1976). Effects of externally 
imposed deadlines on subsequent intrinsic motivation. Journal of Per- 
sonality and Social Psychology, 34, 92-98. 
Benware, C., & Deci, E. L. (1975). Attitude change as a function of the 
inducement for espousing a pro-attitudinal communication. Journal of 
Experimental Social Psychology, 11, 271-278. 
Benware, C., & Deci, E. L. (1984). The quality of learning with an active 
versus passive motivational set: American Educational Research Jour- 
nal, 21, 755-766. 
Blais, M. R., Sabourin S., Boucher, C., & Vallerand, R. J. (1990). Toward a 
motivational model of couple happiness. Journal of Personality and So- 
cial Psychology, 59, 1021-1031. 
Boggiano, A. K. & Barrett, M. (1985). Performance and motivational defi- 
cits of helplessness: The role of motivational orientations. Journal of 
Personality and Social Psychology, 49, 1753-1761. 
Boggiano, A. K. & Ruble, D. N. (1979). Competence and the overjustifica- 
tion effect: A developmental study. Journal a 
Personality and Social 
Psychology, 37, 1462-1468. 
Danner, F. W. & Lonky, E. (1981). A cognitive-developmental approach to 
the effects of rewards on intrinsic motivation. Child Development, 52, 
1043-1052. 
Deci, E. L. (1971). Effects of externally mediated rewards on intrinsic moti- 
vation. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 18, 105-115. 
Deci, E. L. (1972). Intrinsic motivation, extrinsic reinforcement, and 
inequity. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 22, 113-120. 
Deci, E. L. (1972). The effects of contingent and non-contingent rewards 
PANN 

218 
List of Research Articles 
and controls on intrinsic motivation. Organizational Behavior and 
Human Performance, 8, 217-229. 
Deci, E. L., Betley, G., Kahle, J., Abrams, L., & Porac, J. (1981). When 
trying to win: Competition and intrinsic motivation. Personality and 
Social Psychology Bulletin, 7, 79-83. 
Deci, E. L., & Cascio, W. F. (1972, April). Changes in intrinsic motivation 
as a function of negative feedback and threats. Eastern Psychological 
Association, Boston, MA. 
Deci, E. L., Cascio, W. F., & Krusell, J. (1975). Cognitive evaluation theory 
and some comments on the Calder and Staw critique. Journal of Per- 
sonality and Social Psychology, 31, 81-85. 
: 
Deci, E. L., Connell, J. P., & Ryan, R. M. (1989). Self-determination in a 
work organization. Journal of Applied Psychology, 74, 580-590. 
Deci, E. L., Driver, R. E., Hotchkiss, L., Robbins, R. J., & Wilson, I. M. 
(1993). The relation of mothers’ controlling vocalizations to children’s 
intrinsic motivation. Journal of Experimental Child Psychology, 55, 
151-162. 
Deci, E. L., Eghrari, H., Patrick, B. C., Leone, D. (1994). Facilitating inter- 
nalization: The self-determination theory perspective. Journal of Per- 
sonality, 62, 119-142. 
: 
Deci, E. L., Hodges, R., Pierson, L., & Tomassone, J. (1992). Autonomy 
and competence as motivational factors in students with learning 
disabilities and emotional handicaps. Journal of Learning Disabilities, 
25, 457-471, 
Deci, E. L., Nezlek, J., & Sheinman, L. (1981). Characteristics of the re- 
warder and intrinsic motivation of the rewardee. Journal of Personality 
and Social Psychology, 40, 1-10. 
Deci, E. L., & Ryan, R. M. (1985). The general causality orientations scale: 
Self-determination in personality. Journal of Research in Peysorenry, 
19, 109-134. 
Deci, E. L., & Ryan, R. M. (1993). Die Selbstbestimmungstheorie der Moti- 
vation und ihre Bedeutung fiir die Padagogik. Zeitschrift fiir Padago- 
gik, 39, 223-238, 
) 
| 
Deci, E. L., Schwartz, A. J., Sheinman, L., & Ryan, R. M. (1981). An instru- 
ment to assess adults’ orientations toward control versus autonomy 
with children: Reflections on intrinsic motivation and perceived compe- 
tence. Journal of Educational Psychology, 73, 642-650. 
Deci, E. L., Speigel, N. H., Ryan, R. M., Koestner, R., & Kauffman, M. 
(1982). The effects of performance standards on teaching styles: The 

List of Research Articles 
249 
behavior of controlling teachers. Journal of Educational Psychology, 
74, 852-859. 
7 
Enzle, M. E., & Anderson S. C. (1993). Surveillant intentions and intrinsic 
motivation. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 64, 257- 
266. 
| 
Frederick, C. M., & Ryan, R. M. (1993). Differences in motivation for sport 
and exercise and their relations with participation and mental health. 
Journal of Sport Behavior, 16, 124-146. 
Grolnick, W. S. & Ryan, R. M. (1987). Autonomy in children’s learning: An 
experimental and individual difference investigation. Journal of Per- 
sonality and Social Psychology, 52, 890-898. 
; 
Grolnick, W. S. & Ryan, R. M. (1989). Parent styles associated with chil- 
dren’s self-regulation and competence in school. Journal of Educational 
Psychology, 81, 143-154. 
Grolnick, W. S., Ryan, R. M., & Deci, E. L. (1991). The inner resources 
for school performance: Motivational mediators of children’s percep- 
tions of their parents. Journal of Educational Psychology, 83, 508-— 
Sur: 
Harackiewicz, J. (1979). The effects of reward contingency and perform- 
ance feedback on intrinsic motivation. Journal of Personality and Social 
Psychology, 37, 1352-1363. 
Harackiewicz, J. M., Sansone, C., Blair, L. W., Epstein, J. A., & Mander- 
link, G. (1987). Attributional processes in behavior change and mainte- 
nance: Smoking cessation and continued 
abstinence. Journal of 
Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 55, 372-378. 
Ilardi, B. C., Leone, D., Kasser, R., & Ryan, R. M. (1993). Employee and 
supervisor ratings of motivation: Main effects and discrepancies as- 
sociated with job satisfaction and adjustment in a factory setting. Jour- 
nal of Applied Social Psychology, 23, 1789-1805. 
Kage, M. (1991, September). The effects of evaluation on intrinsic motiva- 
tion. Paper.presented at the meetings of the Japan Association of Edu- 
cational Psychology, Joetsu, Japan. 
Kasser, T., & Ryan, R. M. (1993). A dark side of the American dream: 
Correlates of financial success as a central life aspiration. Journal of 
Personality and Social Psychology, 65, 410-422. 
Kasser, T., & Ryan, R. M. (in press). Further examining the American 
dream: The differential effects of intrinsic and extrinsic goal structures. 
Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin. 
Kasser, T., Ryan, R. M., Zax, M., & Sameroff, A. J. (in press). The relations 

* 
220 
. 
List of Research Articles 
of maternal and social environments to late adolescents’ materialistic 
and prosocial aspirations. Developmental Psychology. 
Kast, A. D. (1988). Sex and age differences in response to informational and 
controlling feedback. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 14, 
514-523. 
cee 
Koestner, R., Ryan, R. M., Bernieri, F., & Holt, K. (1984). Setting limits on 
children’s behavior: The differential effects of controlling versus infor- 
mational styles on children’s intrinsic motivation and creativity. Jour- 
_ 
nal of 
Personality, 54, 233-248. 
Lepper, M. R. & Greene, D. (1975). Turning play into work: Effects of 
adult surveillance and extrinsic rewards on children’s intrinsic motiva- 
tion. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 31, 479-486. 
Lepper, 
M. R., Greene, D., & Nisbett, R. E. (1973). Undermining children’s 
intrinsic interest with extrinsic rewards: A test of the ‘“‘overjustifica- 
tion” hypothesis. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 28, 
129-137. 
Manderlink, G. & Harackiewicz, J. M. (1984). Proximal vs. distal goal set- 
ting and intrinsic motivation. Journal of Personality and Social Psy- 
chology, 47, 918-928. 
McGraw, K. O. (1978). The detrimental effects of reward on performance: 
A literature review and a prediction model. In M. R. Lepper & D. 
Greene (Eds.), The hidden costs of reward (pp. 33-60). Hillsdale, NJ: 
Erlbaum. 
Mossholder, K. W. (1980). Effects of externally mediated goal setting on 
intrinsic motivation: A laboratory experiment. Journal of Applied Psy- 
chology, 65, 202-210. 
. 
Plant, R. W. & Ryan, R. M. (1985). Intrinsic motivation and the effects of 
self-consciousness, self-awareness, and ego-involvement: An investiga- 
tion of internally controlling styles. Journal. of Personality, 53, 435- 
449, 
Reeve, J., & Deci, E. L. (in press). Elements within the competitive situation 
that affect intrinsic motivation. Personality and Social Psychology Bul- 
letin. 
Ross, M. (1975). Salience of reward and intrinsic motivation. Journal of 
- 
Personality.and Social Psychology, 32, 245-254. 
Ryan, R. M. (1982). Control and information in the intrapersonal sphere: 
An extension of cognitive evaluation theory. Journal of Personality and 
Social Psychology, 43, 450-461. 
Ryan, R. M., & Connell, J. P. (1989). Perceived locus of causality and inter- 

List of Research Articles 
. 
, 
221 
nalization: Examining reasons for acting in two domains. Journal of 
Personality and Social’ Psychology, 57, 749-761. 
~ Ryan, R. M., Connell, J. P., & Plant, R. W. (1990). Emotions in non-di- 
rected text learning. Learning and Individual Differences, 2, 1-17. 
Ryan, R. M., & Frederick, C. M. (1994). Psychological vitality: A theory 
- 
and construct. Unpublished manuscript, University of Rochester. 
i. 
Ryan, R. M. & Grolnick, W. S. (1986). Origins and pawns in the classroom: 
Self-report and projective assessments of children’s perceptions. Jour-. 
nal of Personality and Social Psychology, 50, 550-558. 
Ryan, R. M., Koestner, R., & Deci, E. L. (1991). Varied forms of persist- 
ence: When free-choice behavior is not intrinsically motivated. Motiva- 
tion and Emotion, 15, 185-205. 
Ryan, R. M., & Lynch, J. (1989). Emotional autonomy versus detachment: 
Revisiting the vicissitudes of adolescence and young adulthood. Child 
Development, 60, 340-356. 
Ryan, R. M., Mims, V., & Koestner, R. (1983). Relation of reward contin- 
’ 
gency and interpersonal context to intrinsic motivation: A review and 
test using cognitive evaluation theory. Jour nal of Personality and Social 
Psychology, 45, 736-750. 
Ryan, R. M., Plant, R. W., & O’Malley, S. (in press). Initial motivations for 
alcohol treatment: Relations with patient characteristics, treatment in- 
volvement, and dropout. Addictive Behaviors. 
Ryan, R. M., Rigby, S., & King, K. (1993). Two types of religious internal- 
ization and their relations to religious orientation and mental health. 
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 65, 586-596. 
Ryan, R. M., Stiller, J., & Lynch, J. H. (1994). Representations of relation- 
ships to teachers, parents, and friends as predictors of academic motiva- 
tion and self-esteem. Journal of Early Adolescence, 14, 226-249. 
Ryan, R. M., Vallerand, R., & Deci, E. L. (1984). Intrinsic motivation in 
| 
sport: A cognitive evaluation theory interpretation. In W. F. Straub & J. 
M. Williams (Eds.), Cognitive sport psychology, pp. 231-241. Lansing, 
NY: Sport Science Associates. 
— 
Sheldon, K. M., Ryan, ReMo Reiss its i, & Rigby, S. (1994). What makes 
for a good day? Competence and autonomy in the day and in the per- 
son. Unpublished manuscript, University of Rochester. 
Smith, W. E. (1974). The effects of social and monetary rewards on intrinsic 
motivation. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, Cornell University. 
_ 
Strauss, J. & Ryan, R. M. (1987). Autonomy disturbances in anorexia ner- 
vosa. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 96, 254-258. 

. 
222 
List of Research Articles ; 
Swann, W. B. & Pittman, T. S. (1977). Initiating play activity of children: 
The moderating influence of verbal cues on intrinsic motivation. Child 
Development, 48, 1128-1132. 
Vallerand, R. J., & Bissonnette, R. (1992). Intrinsic, extrinsic, and amotiva- 
tional styles as predictors of behavior: A prospective study. Journal of 
Personality, 60, 599-620. 
Vallerand, R. J., Blais, M. R., Lacouture, Y., & Deci, E. L. (1987). L’Echelle 
des orientations générales a la causalité: Validation Canadienne Fran- 
caise du General Causality Orientations Scale. Canadian Journal of Be- 
havioral Science, 
19, 1-15. 
; 
Williams, G. C., & Deci, E. L. (1995). Internalization of biopsychosocial 
values by medical students: A test of self-determination theory. Unpub- 
lished manuscript, University of Rochester. 
Williams, G. C., Grow, V. M., Freedman, Z. R., Ryan, R. M., & Deci, E. L. 
(1995). Motivational predictors of weight loss and weight-loss mainte- 
. 
nance. Unpublished manuscript, University of Rochester. 
Williams, G. C., Quill, T..E., Deci, E. L., & Ryan, R. M. (1991). The facts 
concerning the recent carnival of smoking in Connecticut (and else- 
where). Annals of Internal Medicine, 115, 59-63. 
Williams, G. C., Rodin, G. C., Ryan, R. M., Grolnick, W. S., & Deci, E. L. 
(1994). Compliance or autonomous regulation: New insights about 
medication taking from understanding human motivation. Unpub- 
lished manuscript, University of Rochester. 
Williams, G. C., Wiener, M. W., Markakis, K. M., Reeve, J., & Deci, E. L. 
(1994). Medical student motivation for internal medicine. Journal of 
Genera! Internal Medicine, 9, 327-333. 
- Zuckerman, M., Porac, J. F., Lathin, D., Smith, R., & Deci, E. L. (1978). On 
the importance of self-determination for intrinsically motivated behav- 
ior. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 4, 443-446. 

Se 
“Acceptance of self, 195-96 
Accommodations, 93 
Accomplishment, as reward, 64, 65 
Accountability, 10 
Acknowledgment, reward as, 37-38, 
55, 60 
Actualizing tendency, 81 
Addictions, 164 
_ 
Aggrandizement, 193 
Alcohol abuse, 160, 162-63 
treatment program study, 161, 
163-64 
Alienation, 5, 7 
control and, 2-4, 60 
monetary rewards and, 28-29 
study of, 12 
Altruism, 133 
Amabile, Teresa, 50 
American companies, intrinsic 
motivation used by, 60 
American culture, 6, 32, 57, 59, 
Li77 
contingencies, 61-62 
-American Dream, 124-27 
American society; 133-37 
freedoms in, 201-2, 204 
Amotivation, 83 
Angyal, Andras, 206 
- Anorexia nervosa, 1, 84-86 
Aristotle, 12 
Arnold, Magda, 188 
Art, 21 
of children, autonomy study, 
42-43, 49-50 
The Art of Loving, Fromm, 123 
Aspirations, 127-31, 132 
Astman, Jim, 188, 189 
Authenticity, 2-5, 8-9, 19, 103, 209 
autonomy and, 4-5, 6, 7 
freedom and, 206-8 
integration in personality and, 82 
motivations and, 6—7 
social critics and, 5-6 
study of, 12 
Authoritarian personality, 156, 168 
Automatons, 83 
Autonomy, 2-5, 70-71, 103,.192-93 
aspirations and, 129 
authenticity and, 4-5, 6, 7 
and behavior change, 162 
and competence, 70 
contingent love and, 112 
ego involvement and, 116 
freedom and, 203, 205-6, 211 
and individualism, 134-36 
integration and, 94 
and intrinsic poate 3, 
33-36 
limits and, 149-51 
need for, 30-31 
of patients, 167-69 
perception of, 87 
223 

224 
promotion of, 141-58 
and relatedness, 88—90 
in relationships, 8-9, 120-23 
and responsibility, 209 
self-promotion of, 185 
and self-regulatéd behavior, 191 
studies, 13,.183-84 
support of, 73, 100-102 
and development, 84, 86, 
130-31 
integration and, 82, 111 
and limit-setting, 42-43, 50 
_ permissiveness and, 104-8 
and unhealthy behaviors, 
171 
Average work year, 28 
Bandura, Albert, 70 
Baritz, Loren, 6 
Behavior 
causes of, 12, 77-78 
change of, 194-95 
ego involvement and, 117 
self-acceptance and, 195-96 
control of, 3-4, 51 
desirable, rewards and, 52-54 
environment and, 180 
self-destructive, 161-65 
self-regulation of, 190-93 
Behaviorism, 77, 78, 19-20 
Behavior—outcome linkages, 59, 
61-64 
' Benware, Carl, 47 
Bigots, fable of, 26 
Biomedical approach, 170 
Biopsychosocial approach, 
170-73 
training for, 175-76 
Blais, Marc, 120 
Blame, 195-96 
Bloom, Alan, 5-6, 207-8 
Closing of the American Mind, 
103-4 
Bobbitt, Lorena, 10-11 
Bonner, Elena, 210-11 
’ Bonuses, 54 
Bulgaria, 204-5 
motivation of citizens, 57-58, 
200-201 
« 
Index 
Cascio, Wayne, 67 
Central-planning economies, 58-60 
Challenge, and motivation, 70 
Change, motivation for, 194-95 
Children, 70, 79-80, 82, 113 
art of, autonomy study, 42-43, 
49-50 
autonomy support for, 105-8, 142 
intrinsic motivation, 18-19, 20-22 
perceptions of motivations, 96 
China, work incentives, 58 
Choice, 10 
autonomy and, 34-36, 144-49 
for behavior change, 165 
consequences of, 151 
employees and, 60 
freedom and, 209-10 
and intrinsic motivation, 33-34 
of limits, 149-50 
Cobblestone Elementary School, 
65-66 
Cognitive theorists, 78 
Coherence, development and, 81 
Collectivism, 134, 135-36 
Collier, James Lincoln, 207 
Communism, 58, 135 
freedoms under, 204-5 
and motivations, 200-201 
Community, contribution to, 127, 
128, 132 
Competence, 63-67, 86 
perceived, autonomy and, 70-71 
praise as motivation for, 69 
Competition, 32, 41-42, 69, 155 
Compliance, 3-4, 10, 95, 96, 166, 
208-9 
and behavioral change, 19€ 
by children, 97 
with introjected values, 203 
“The Concept of Competence,” 
White, 65 
Conformity, 4 
individualism and, 136-37 
Connell, James P., 64, 144 
Consequences of behavior, 106-7, 
151 
Constraints, freedom and, 200-203 
Context of learning, and outcome, 48 

fa 
Index 
Contingencies in American system, 61 
_ Contingent love, 112-13, 130, 204 
control by, 111, 114 
Contingent self-esteem, 117-19, 130 
Contingent worth, 115-17 
Control, 1-2 
autonomy and, 2-3, 87, 135 
behaviorism and, 19 
and decision making, 147-49 
and dependence, 90 
by goals, 201 
individualism and, 137 
and instrumentalities, 59-60 
internalized, 5 
and motivation, 31, 33-34, 50-51 
negative results, 29 
? 
permissiveness and, 105 
praise as, 68-69 
in relationships, 8 
and responsibility, 209 
reward perceived as, 36-41 
social, in Japan, 135-36 
Controlled behavior, 3-4 
Controlling behavior, 156-58, 
185-86 
by health-care providers, 169 
Controlling environments, 83-84, 
102 
and development, 109-10, 113 
in eating disorder, 85-86 
Conventions of society, 200 
Costs of monetary rewards, 29 
Crichton, Michael, 95 
Csikszentmihalyi, Mihaly, 45 
Daily pressures, and intrinsic 
motivation, 33 
The Day America Told the Truth, 
Pattern and Kim, 132-33 
Deadlines, 31 
Deaths, unhealthy behavior and, 160 
deCharms, Richard, 27,30 
Decision making, 36, 60-61, 146-47 
autonomy and, 144-46 
Defiance, 3-4, 9, 95-96, 196, 203, 
208-9 
‘ 
Dependence, 89-90 
mutual, 119-20 
225) 
Depression, 70, 193 
aspirations and, 128-29 
Development, psychological, 79-80 
autonomy support and, 84, 86 
environment and, 109-10, 180-83 
internalization and, 93 
intrinsic motivation and, 82 
motivation studies and, 81 
organismic integration, 80-81 
parents and, 107-8 
of self, 111-13, 184-88 
_ Discipline, 1-2, 42 
autonomy and, 84 
Z 
contingent love and, 112 
Discrimination, 61 
Doctors, 1, 170 
and autonomy of patients, 167-69, 
173-76 
The Drama of the Gifted Child, 
Miller, 113 
Duty, 199-200 
Eastern Europe, freedom in, 200-201 
Eating disorders, 84-86 
Education, motivation in, 47-49. See 
also Teachers 
Effectiveness, 65-67, 70 
Efficiency, 59 
Eghrari, Haleh, 100-101 
Ego, synthetic function, 81 
Ego involvement, 115-17, 192 
contingent self-esteem and, 118 
emotions and, 189-90 
and freedom, 202 
Eighties decade, 208-9 
Emotions, 190-92 
management of, 187-90 
Empirical tradition, 12-13, 77-79 
approach to self, 7 
Employees, autonomy support for, 
144-46 
Enjoyment, as reward, 64 
Environment 
controlling, 83-84 
and development, 178-83 
respect for, freedom and, 205-6 
for socialization, 99-100 
Equitable rewards, 55-56 

226 
Evaluation of performance, 31, 
153-55 
; 
Existential philosophy, 210 
Expectations, 180-81 
inappropriate, 152-53 
lack of, 61 
negative, 128-29 
Experience 
of intrinsic motivation, 45-46, 50 
self-management of, 187-88 
Experimental findings, replication of, 
26 
Extrinsic aspirations, 127-31, 201 
psychological needs and, 131 
Extrinsic contingencies, 64 
Extrinsic control, 45, 47-49 
Extrinsic motivation, study, 22-27 
Extrinsic rewards, 59, 60 
praise as, 67 
and problem solving, 50 
Extrinsic values, 131-32 
Fagan, Garth, 199 
Failures in American system, 61 
False self, 113-15, 130 
Fame, 127, 128, 131 
Family environment, 109-10 
and values, 99-100, 130-31, 
132-33 
Feedback, 67-69 
negative, 71-72 
positive, 186 
Females, response to praise, 67-69 
Flow, state of, 45-46 
Foege, William, 160 
Freedman, Milton, 208 
Freedom, 6, 12, 200-211 
responsibility and, 199 
Freud, Sigmund, 77, 81 
Fromm, Erich, 116 
The Art of Loving, 123 
Gender differences in response to 
praise, 67-69 
Gilligan, Carol, 135 
Giving, 112 
in relationships, 119, 122-23 
he Ue 
nf 
ve 
4 
. 
Po 
ae 
o- ote. 
eye 
— 
Index ~— 
Goals, 31, 42, 152-55, 201 
Grades, as motivation, 47-48 
Grolnick, Wendy, 48-49, 96 
internalization study, 99-100 
Group membership, 110-11, 13709 
Growth, individual, 127, 128 
Haddad, Yasmin, 148 
Happiness, 192 
Harlow, Harry, 18 
Health-care providers, 169, 172-76 
Healthful behavior, 
159-76 
Henri, Robert, 21, 29, 45, 47, 50 
High-risk behaviors, 171-72 
; 
Hoffman, Abbie, 206-7 
Homonomous tendency, 206 
Human needs, 131 
Humanistic psychology, 77-78 
Identity, 103 
introjects and, 109 
Illness, biomedical approach, 170 
Imperfect self-defense, 10-11 
Impoverished environments, 
emergence from, 181-82 
Inanimate viewpoint, 79 
Inauthenticity, 5 
Incentives for performance, 54-55 
under communism, 58 
grades as, 47 
Independence, 6, 88-90 
Individual differences, 83, 177-78, 
180-84 
Individualism, 133-37 
Individualization of goals, 152 
Infant-as-barbarian view, 79 
Information, 36 
for healthful behavior, 173-74 
and limit setting, 150-51 
Inner constraints on freedom, 203 
Inner-city society, lack of motivation 
in, 61-62 
Instrumental behaviors, 51 
Instrumental reason, 46 
t 
Instrumentalities, 
57, 59-60, 61, 73 
control by, 202 
as motivation, 63-64 

Index 
— 
Insults, reaction to, 190 
Integration, psychological, 4-5, 
81-82, 94, 102, 111, 112 
_ autonomy and, 183 , 
development and, 80-82 
emotions and, 192-93 
and motivation of children, 96-97 
of values, 131-32 
Internalization, 5, 92-94, 98-100, 
131 
autonomy support and, 100-102 
failure of, 97-98 
limits and, 104 
partial, 97 
Interpersonal style, 
autonomy-supportive, 176 
Interpretation of motivations, 
36-38 
Intimate relationships, 8 
Intrinsic aspirations, 127-28, 132 
- Intrinsic motivation, 18-19, 20-22, 
83), 517-73, 79.8 
and autonomy, 31 
autonomy support and, 100 
choice and, 34-36, 146 
competence and, 66-67 
competition and, 32, 41-42 
deCharms and, 27 
- and development, 80-82, 83 
in education, 47-49 
ego involvement and, 115 
experience of, 45-46, 50 
and extrinsic reward, 30 
individual differences and, 178 
lack of, 91 
loss of true self and, 114 
managers and, 60 
money and, 55 
negative feedback and, 71-72 
and perception of self, 86-87 
praise and, 67-69 
rewards and, 27-29, 38-41, 64 
research project, 22-27 
Intrinsic outcomes, 64-66 
Intrinsic self, 111-12 
Introjection, 94-96, 102, 109-10, 
113-17, 203, 209 
Japa 
and emotions, 191 
and motivation of children, 96-97 
Irresponsibility, 1, 209 
authenticity and, 103-4 
Isolation, emotional, 89 
Japan, 49, 135-36 
Kage, Masaharu, 49 
Kasser, Tim, 126-31 
Koestner, Richard, 42-43 
Krusell, Judith, 67 
Language, failure to internalize, 
97-98 
Lasch, Christopher, 5-7, 207 
Learning, motivation for, 19-22, 
47-49 
' Leone, Dean, 101 
Lepper, Mark, 31 
Lewin, Kurt, 152 
Life force, 81 
Limits, 104-6, 152 
| 
and autonomy, 42-43, 149-51 
Long-term learning, tests and, 49 
Lynch, John, 90 
McGinnis, J. Michael, 160 
Males, response to praise, 67-69 
Managers, 1, 60, 158 
autonomy-supportive, 142-46, 
149 
training for, 156-57, 185-86 
Maslow, Abraham, 81, 131, 199 
Mastery, 71 
Materialism, 126, 132-33, 204. See 
also Money 
and mental health, 128 
Mature relationships, 120, 122-23 
May, Rollo, 207 
Medical regimens, noncompliance 
with, 166-67 
Menendez brothers, 10-11 
Mental health, 128-30, 183 
Miller, Alice, 7 
The Drama of the Gifted Child, 
113 

228 
Mind, needs of, 30 
Modern society, 46 
< 
Money, 45, 55, 127, 128,131, 
132-33. See also Materialism™ 
and intrinsic motivation, 27-29 
Monkeys, motivation study, 18 
Moral reasoning, development of, 53 
Motivation, 2, 6-7, 12, 51. See also 
Intrinsic motivation 
in American culture, 61 
for behavior change, 164-65, 
172-73, 174 
and behavior—outcome linkage, 59, 
61-63 
challenge and, 70 
competition as, 32 
environment and, 180 
goals and, 152 
humanistic view, 80 
individual differences, 183-84 
introjects as, 113 
and mental health, 129 
perceptions of, 96 
relationships and, 9 
research project, 22-27 
rewards and, 156 
by self, 9-10 
techniques for, 2, 17-20, 194-95 
for unhealthy behaviors, 171 
Murray, Henry, 30_ 
¥ 
Narcissism, 6, 104 
_ 
Needs, psychological, 65, 131 
autonomy, 30-31 
competence, 65-67 
connectedness, 88 
and development of self, 112 
internalization and, 92-94, 98-99 
satisfaction of, 126 
Negative expectancies, 128-29 
Negative feedback, 71-72 
Neill, A. S., 149 
New York Times best-seller nee 160 
Noncompliance with medical 
- 
regimens, 166-67 
Noncontingent positive regard, 119 
Non-nurturing environments, 
support in, 178-79 
Obesity, 1, 159-61, 162, 164 © 
One-up/one-down relationships, 
4 
8-10 
ie 
autonomy support in, 142-58 
: 
health-care providers, 168-69,176 
Optimal challenge, 66, 70 
2 \:
goals and, 152 
Optimal goals, 153 
Organismic integration, 80-81, 93 
Organisms, humans as, 80 
Others 
concern for, freedom and, 205 
true self-esteem and, 118 
Outcomes 
desired, strategies for, 64 
motivation and, 59 
Parents, 1-2, 142 
and autonomy, 99-100, 105-8 
and values, 130-31, 132-33 
a 
Parsons, Talcott, 79 
Patients, autonomy of, 167-69,172, 
175-76 
Patrick, Brian, 100-101 
* 
Pay-for-performance, 54-55 
- 
Perceived competence, 70-71, 87 
' 
Performance 
: 
controls and, 50-51 
evaluation of, 153-55 
pay for, 54-55. 
Perls, Fritz, 77, 94, 116 
Permissiveness, 42, 104-8 
Personal causation, 27, 30 
Personality, 81-82, 183-84 
Physical beauty, as an aspiration, 127 
Physiological processes in behaviors, 
164 
Piaget, Jean, 79, 80 
Piece-rate payment, 54-55 
Policy making, 60-61 
Positive feedback, 68-69, 71, 186 
Poverty, 61 
F i
Praise, 67-69, 119 
° 
“Prelude: Discipline Is Freedom,” 
Fagan, 199 
Pressures, 157-58 
for behavior change, 161-62, 196 
internal, and freedom, 204 

: ; Index 
a 
< te 
a) 
8 es 
4 
4 
‘« 
r 
Problem solving, 50, 55 
information and, 150-51 
Productivity, in Bulgaria, 57-58, 59 
-Profit-sharing stock options, 54-55 
Psychoanalysis, 77-78 
__. Psychodynamic approach, 78 
4 
4 
, 
] 
ss." 
Psychological laboratory, 22-23 
Psychology, divisions in, 77-79 
Psychosocial factors in health, 171: 
Psychotic behaviors, 4-5 
Public well-being, individualism and, 
134 
Punishments, 2, 151 
Purposive behavior, 152 
Quality control, 53-54 
Rand, Ayn, 133, 208 
Reading, reward as motivation, 52-53 
Rebellion, 4, 95-96, 104 
sixties decade, 207, 208 
Recognition, 155-56 
Reeve, Johnmarshall, 41 
Reich, Charles, 3, 28, 124, 207 
Relatedness, 6, 88, 90, 103 
and accommodations, 93 
and freedom, 205-6 
integration and, 111 
mutual dependence and, 119-20 
Relationships, 8, 119-23, 127, 128 
motivation in, 9-10 
special, development and, 178-79 
Responsibility, 9, 13, 209 
and authenticity, 207-8 
development of, 103, 112 
existentialism and, 210-11 
and freedom, 199 
for healthful behavior, 163-64, 
167, 173-74 
integration and, 94 . 
internalization of, 93, 102 
limits and, 43, 149 
Reward, as motivation, 2, 17-20, 
27-29, 37-41, 51-56 
autonomy-supportive, 155-56 
freedom limited by, 204 
interpretation of, 36-38 
research in, 22-27, 30 
V3 
229 
Rewrite man, 64-65 
Rodin, Gail, 166-67 
Rogers, Carl, 77, 88, 119° 
Romantic relationships, 120-23 
Rote memorization, 48 
Ryan, Richard, 7, 80, 81, 142, 154 
autonomy studies, 90, 143, 144 
China trip, 58 
and coexistence of autonomy and 
limits, 42-43 
and eating disorder case, 85-86 
ego-involvement studies, 115 
* 
feedback studies, 68 
internalization study, 99-100 
and interpretation of rewards, 
36-38 
learning studies, 48-49 
motivation studies, 96, 126-31, 
161, 163-64, 169, 183 
Sadness, 193 
Sakharov, Andrei, 211 
Sales commissions, 54 
Sartre, Jean-Paul, 200, 210 
Schwartz, Barry, 20 
Scientific Management, 54 
‘Self, 2, 5-6, 7, 11, 81. See also False” 
self; Intrinsic self; True self 
acceptance of, 195-96 
authenticity and, 4-5, 103 
development of, 83 
extrinsic aspirations and, 129-30 
and introjects, 109 
management of, 12 
perceptions of, 86-87 
socially defined, 111 
and values, 131 
Self-aggrandizement, 118 
Self-deception, 88 
Self-destructive behaviors, 171-72 
change of, 161-65 
Self-determination, need for, 30-31 
Self-direction, promotion of, 18 
Self-esteem, 117-19, 183 
contingent, 114-17 
Self-evaluation, 154 
Self-interest, individualism and, 134 
Selfishness, 104, 133-34 

230 
7 
‘Self-knowledge, autonomy and, 136 
ails g 
Self-motivation, 9-10 
tg 
Self-promotion of development, 
184-88 
Self-regulation of behavior, 190-93 ™ 
Self-reliance, 124, 177 
Selver, Charlotte, 116-17, 196 
Selye, Hans, 170-71 
Sensory Awareness, 116-17 
Sexual activity, 88 
Sheinman, Louise, 143 
Sixties decade, 206-9 
Skinner, B. F., 19, 78 
Skinner, Ellen, 64 
Smoking, 160-61, 162 
Social contexts, 83, 204-5 
Social criticism, 5-6, 12-13 
and sixties decade, 206-9 
Social environments, 180-82, 184 
Socialization, 79, 99-100, 102, 103 
for gender roles, 68 
problems of, 92-99 
Socializing agents, 8, 111 
and autonomy support, 100-101, 
103 
Society, modern, 46 
’ and values, 132-33 
pe 
Soma puzzle, motivation studies, 
23-25, 32-33 
Specialization, medical, 170 
Standards, 42, 153-54 
limiting, 192 
Structures, need for, 42 
Suppression of emotions, 191, 192 
Surveillance, 31 
Synthesis, 83 
Systems, and freedom, 204 
Taylor, Charles, 46 
Taylor, Frederick Winslow, 54 
' 
Teachers, 1, 142, 180-81 
autonomy supportive, 72, 143-46, 
149, 175-76 
pressures on, 157-58 
Techniques for behavior 
modification, 193-95 
Teenage pregnancies, 98 
Teenagers, independence in, 90 
aid 
+ 
Thompson, Clara, 116 
Threat, as motivation, 31 
Tobacco, 160-61, 162 
Tolman, Edward, 152 
Totalitarianism, 58-59, 204 
Training for autonomy support, 
156-57, 175-76, 185-86 
Transgression of limits, 151 
Treatment plans, 
autonomy-supportive, 173 
Treatment Self-Regulation 
Questionnaire, 161 
True self, 
111-13, 
117-18, 123, 
203 
University of Rochester Medical 
Center, 170-71 
Unmotivated behavior, 20 
Usunoy, Julian, 57 
Vallerand, Robert, 120 
Values, 8 
extrinsic aspirations and, 130 
integration of, 112 
internalization of, 94-96, 98-100 
self and, 131 
and true self-esteem, 118 
Violence, 1, 61 
Vroom, Victor, 22 
Vulnerabilities, 210 
Wachtel, Paul, 126 
Wearing, Mel, 116, 117 
Weight-loss programs, 159-61, 164 
Werner, Heinz, 80 
Wiesel, Elie, 118 
Williams, Geoffrey, 161, 164, 
166-67, 169, 175 
Winnicott, Donald, 7 
Woo, Henry, 59 
} 
Work, average time, 28, 124 
Workplace, choice in, 146 
Xerox Corporation, 144, 156-57 
Young, Robert, 136 
Zoos, animal behavior in, 17 


WHAT MOTIVATES US AS STUDENTS, 
EMPLOYEES, AND INDIVIDUALS? 
If you reward your children for doing their homework, they will usuall 
respond by getting it done. But is this the most effective method of 
motivation? No, says psychologist Edward L. Deci, who challenges 
traditional thinking and shows that this method actually works against 
performance. The best way to motivate people—at school, at work, o 
at home—is to support their sense of autonomy. Explaining the reasons 
why a task is important and then allowing as much personal freedom 
possible in carrying out the task will stimulate interest and commitment, 
and is a much more effective approach than the standard system 
¢ 
reward and punishment. We are all inherently interested in the world, 
argues Deci, so why not nurture that interest in each other? Instead of 
asking, “How can I motivate people?” we should be asking, “How can I 
create the conditions within which people will motivate themselves?” 
“An insightful and provocative meditation on how people can become § 
more genuinely engaged and successful in pursuing their goals.” 
—Publishers 
Cover design by Daniel Rembert 
U.S. $12.95 
CAN. 
$19.50 
780140"2552 
O 
A PENGUIN BOOK 
ISBN 0-14-025526-5 
a 
|| | 
(| 
| 

