
Industrialized Cruelty: 
Factory Farming
The competition to produce inexpensive 
meat, eggs, and dairy products has led 
animal agribusiness to treat animals as 
objects and commodities. The worldwide 
trend is to replace small family farms 
with “factory farms”—large warehouses 
where animals are confined in crowded 
cages or pens or in restrictive stalls.
“U.S. society is extremely naive about 
the nature of agricultural production.
“[I]f the public knew more 
about the way in which 
agricultural and animal pro­duction 
infringes on animal welfare, 
the outcry would be louder.”
Bernard E. Rollin, PhD
Farm Animal Welfare, Iowa State University Press, 2003
Hens in crowded cages suffer severe feather loss.
2
The Transformation of Animals into Food
Many people believe that animals raised for food must be treated well because 
sick or dead animals would be of no use to agribusiness. This is not true.
Bernard Rollin, PhD, explains that it is 
“more economically efficient to put a 
greater number of birds into each cage, 
accepting lower productivity per bird 
but greater productivity per cage… 
individual animals may ‘produce,’ for 
example gain weight, in part because 
they are immobile, yet suffer because 
of the inability to move.… Chickens are 
cheap, cages are expensive.” 1
In a November 1993 article in favor of 
reducing space from 8 to 6 square feet 
per pig, industry journal National Hog 
Farmer advised, “Crowding pigs pays.”

Birds  Virtually all U.S. birds raised 
for food are factory farmed. 2 Inside the 
densely populated buildings, enormous 
amounts of waste accumulate. The result-
ing ammonia levels commonly cause 
painful burns to the birds’ skin, eyes, 
and respiratory tracts. 3
To reduce losses from birds pecking each 
other, farmers cut a third to a half of the 
beaks off chickens, turkeys, and ducks. 4 
The birds suffer severe pain for weeks. 5 
Some, unable to eat afterwards, starve. 1
Egg-Laying Hens  Packed in cages 
(typically less than half a square foot of 
floor space per bird), 6 hens can become 
immobilized and die of asphyxiation or 
dehydration. Decomposing corpses are 
found in cages with live birds.
By the time hens are sent to slaughter 
for low production, their skeletons are 
so fragile that many suffer broken bones 
during catching, transport, or shackling. 7
“For modern animal agriculture, 
the less the consumer knows about 
what’s happening before the meat 
hits the plate, the better.
“If true, is this an ethical situation?
“Should we be reluctant to let people 
know what really goes on, because 
we’re not really proud of it and 
concerned that it might turn them 
to vegetarianism?”
Peter Cheeke, PhD
Oregon State University Professor of Animal Agriculture 
Contemporary Issues in Animal Agriculture, 2004 textbook
3
Chick being debeaked.
	 1	 	 Bernard E. Rollin, PhD, Farm Animal Welfare, 2003.
	 2	 	 Peter Cheeke, PhD, textbook Contemporary Issues in 
Animal Agriculture, 2004.
	 3	 	 Poultry Perspectives (MD Cooperative Extension), 2002;4(1).
	 4	 	 Agricultural Research (USDA ARS), 2005 Mar;53(3):4–7.
	 5	 	 J Appl Anim Welf Sci, 2001;4(3):207–21.
	 6	 	 USDA APHIS VS, Reference of 1999 Table Egg Layer 
Management in the U.S., 1/00.
	 7	 	 Poult Sci, 2004;83:184–92.
Inside a broiler house.
Egg-laying hens 
in battery cages.

Pigs  In the September 1976 
issue of the industry journal Hog 
Farm Management, John Byrnes advised: 
“Forget the pig is an animal. Treat him 
just like a machine in a factory.”
Today’s pig farmers have done just that. 
As Morley Safer related on 60 Minutes: 
“This [motion picture Babe] is the way 
Americans want to think of pigs. Real-life 
‘Babes’ see no sun in their limited lives, 
with no hay to lie on, no mud to roll in. 
The sows live in tiny cages, so narrow they can’t even turn around. They live over metal 
grates, and their waste is pushed through slats beneath them and flushed into huge pits.” 8
Dairy Cows  From 1940 to 2004, 
average per-cow milk production rose 
from 2.3 to 9.5 tons per year; 9 some 
cows have surpassed 30 tons. 10 High 
milk production often causes udder 
break­down, leading to early slaughter. 11
It is unprofitable to keep cows alive once 
their milk production declines. They are 
usually killed at 5–6 years of age, 11 
though their normal life span exceeds 20.
Dairy cows are rarely allowed to nurse 
their young. 11 Many male calves are 
slaughtered immediately, while others 
are raised for “special-fed veal”—kept in 
individual stalls and chained by the neck 
on a 2–3 foot tether for 18–20 weeks 
before being slaughtered. 10
Calf raised for veal.
“Mrs. DeBoer said she had never milked 
a cow by hand, and never expected to. 
In the factory that is her barn, 
the employees, almost entirely Latino, 
manage the machinery.
“‘It’s just a factory is what it is,’ she said. 
‘If the cows don’t produce milk, 
they go to beef.’”
“Urban Sprawl Benefits Dairies in California” 
The New York Times, 10/22/99
4
Cow with swollen udder on modern 
dairy farm in California.
Most breeding sows spend their adult lives 
inside stalls without room to turn around. 

Workers shock the animals with electric 
prods, which increases the incidence of 
“downers”—animals too sick or injured to 
stand. 12, 14 Downers are hauled from the 
trucks with skid loaders and forklifts. 12
Fish  FAO classifies 75% of world marine 
stocks as fully exploited, overexploited, 
or depleted. 15 Hundreds of thousands of 
mammals, including dolphins, die in nets 
each year. 16 The fastest growing animal 
food–producing sector is fish farming. 15 
Inappropriate stocking densities on farms 
cause poor water quality, stress, aggres-
sion, injuries, disease, and mortality. 10
	 8	 “Pork Power,” 60 Minutes, 6/22/03.
	 9	 	 USDA NASS, Agricultural Statistics 2006.
	10	 	 USDA, Animal Welfare Issues Compendium, 9/97.
	11	 	 Textbook Scientific Farm Animal Production, 8th edition, 2004.
	12	 	 USDA, Survey of Stunning & Handling, 1/7/97.
	13	 	 USDA FSIS Animal Disposition Reporting System, 2002.
	14	 “Don’t Let Stress, Heat be a Downer for Pigs,” Pork (May 2005): 16–18.
	15	 	 Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, The State of 
World Fisheries and Aquaculture 2006.
	16	 	 International Whaling Commission, SC/55/BC5, 5/03.
“Like this bull I had last year— 
this bull was one of the biggest bulls 
I’ve ever seen. It was at the very front 
of the trailer. And the spirit it had, he 
was just trying his hardest to get off 
the trailer. He had been prodded to 
death by three or four drivers…but 
his back legs, his hips have given out. 
And so basically they just keep prod-
ding it. So it took about 45 minutes to 
get it from the front nose of the trailer 
to the back ramp.…
“Then from there it was chained with 
its front legs, and it fell off the ramp, 
smashed onto the floor, which I don’t 
know how many feet that would be 
but quite a racket…I just said, 
‘Why don’t you shoot the damn thing? 
What’s going on? What about this 
Code of Ethics?’
“This one guy said, ‘I never shoot. 
Why would I shoot a cow that can 
come off and there’s still good meat 
there?’ When I first started, I talked 
to another trucker about downers. 
He said, ‘You may as well not get upset. 
It’s been going on for many years. 
It will go on for the rest of my life and 
your life. So just calm down about it. 
It happens. You’ll get kind of bitter 
like I did. You just don’t think about 
the animals. You just think that they 
aren’t feeling or whatever.’”
interview with a Canadian livestock trucker 
from A Cow at My Table, 1998 documentary
5
A downed cow is left to 
die at an Oklahoma stockyard 
as her calf watches.
Transport  Crammed together, ani-
mals must stand in their excrement while 
exposed to extreme temperatures in open 
trucks, sometimes freezing to the trailer. 12 
Approximately 200,000 pigs arrive dead 
at U.S. slaughter plants each year; 13 many 
of these deaths are caused by a lack of 
ventilation on trucks in hot weather. 14
U.S. pigs on a transport truck loaded in Oklahoma and destined for 
a slaughterhouse south of Mexico City, more than 30 hours away.

“It takes 25 minutes to turn a live steer 
into steak at the modern slaughter-
house where Ramon Moreno works.…
“The cattle were supposed to be dead 
before they got to Moreno. 
But too often they weren’t.
“‘They blink. They make noises,’ 
he said softly. ‘The head moves, 
the eyes are wide and looking around.’
“Still Moreno would cut. On bad days, 
he says, dozens of animals reached 
his station clearly alive and conscious. 
Some would survive as far as the tail 
cutter, the belly ripper, the hide puller.
“‘They die,’ said Moreno, 
‘piece by piece.’”
“Modern Meat: A Brutal Harvest” 
The Washington Post, 4/10/01
If Slaughterhouses 
Had Glass Walls…
If they survive the farms and 
transport, the animals—whether 
factory-farmed or free-range— 
are slaughtered.
Federal law requires that mammals be 
stunned prior to slaughter (exempting 
kosher and halal). Common methods:
◗ Captive bolt stunning – A “pistol” is set 
against the animal’s head and a metal 
rod is thrust into the brain. Shooting a 
struggling animal is difficult, and the 
rod often misses its mark. 17
◗ Electrical stunning – Current produces 
a grand mal seizure; then the throat 
is cut. According to industry consultant 
Temple Grandin, PhD, “Insufficient 
amperage can cause an animal to be 
paralyzed without losing sensibility.” 17
6

Recent Undercover Investigations 
into Poultry Slaughter
In January 2007, a Mercy For Animals 
investigator took a job at one of the 
nation’s largest poultry slaughterhouses 
to witness the conditions firsthand:
Birds with broken legs and wings, open 
wounds, and large tumors were shackled 
and hung on the slaughter line; some 
of the injured were left writhing on the 
floor for hours beforehand. Workers 
punched, kicked, threw, and mutilated 
live birds; they tore eggs from the birds’ 
bodies to toss at coworkers, and ripped 
the heads off birds who were trapped 
inside the transport cages.
In 2005, at an even 
larger plant, a PETA 
investigator saw 
many birds mangled 
by the throat-cutting 
machines; workers 
yanked the heads 
off birds who missed 
the blade.
For the undercover 
footage and further 
details on these and 
other slaughterhouse 
investigations, please see 
VeganOutreach.org/video
To ease handling, birds raised for meat 
are usually paralyzed via electrical stun-
ning. However, it is not known whether 
stunning renders the birds unconscious; 1 
the shock may be an “intensely painful 
experience.” 19 Each year, large numbers 
of chickens, turkeys, ducks, and geese 
reach the scalding tanks alive and are 
either boiled to death or drowned. 13, 20
7
“Hogs, unlike cattle, are dunked in tanks 
of hot water after they are stunned to 
soften the hides for skinning. As a result, 
a botched slaughter condemns some hogs 
to being scalded and drowned. Secret 
videotape from an Iowa pork plant shows 
hogs squealing and kicking as they are 
being lowered into the water.” 18
“In my opinion, if most urban meat 
eaters were to visit an industrial 
broiler house, to see how the birds are 
raised, and could see the birds being 
‘harvested’ and then being ‘processed’ 
in a poultry processing plant, they 
would not be impressed and some, 
perhaps many of them would swear off 
eating chicken and perhaps all meat.”
Peter Cheeke, PhD
Contemporary Issues in Animal Agriculture, 2004 textbook
	17	 	 Temple Grandin, “Animal Welfare and Humane Slaughter,” 11/04.
	18	 “Modern Meat: A Brutal Harvest,” Washington Post, 4/10/01.
	19	 “Humane Slaughter of Poultry: The Case Against the Use of Electrical 
Stunning Devices,” J Ag & Env Ethics, 7/94.
	20	 	 USDA FSIS, Meat and Poultry Inspection Manual, part 11.
At the slaughterhouse, this pig 
has collapsed in his vomit.

Not Your Childhood Image  by lauren Ornelas, VivaUSA.org
When I saw what life is really like for pigs on today’s farms, I was left feeling physically sick 
for days. I suppose I knew they lived on concrete, indoors in factory farms. However, I was 
not prepared for the intensity of their confinement, and the awful reality of their boredom.
In the gestation shed, I heard a constant 
clanging noise. It was the sows hitting 
their heads against their cage doors as 
if trying to escape. After a while, some 
would give up and lie down, while others 
again took up their futile action.
I saw the pens where pigs are fattened 
up for slaughter—essentially concrete 
cells, each holding about a dozen pigs. 
In one pen, there was a pig missing an 
ear. Another had a rupture the size of 
a grapefruit protruding from his stomach. 
A dead pig was constantly nudged and 
licked by others. The stench in these 
places is overwhelming.
At the larger farms I visited 
in North Carolina, there were 
thousands of pigs housed 
in sheds. Many were 
dead or dying—one 
actually died right 
in front of me as I 
videotaped. Dead 
pigs had been left in 
the pens with the 
living; other pigs 
had been tossed 
in the aisles—
barely alive, unable 
to reach food or water.
Stories from
Behind the Walls
If you go behind the walls the 
industry erects to hide the truth, 
you will find the situation worse 
than you could have imagined.
8
A rotting corpse left in the aisle 
between pens of live pigs.
Pig with stomach rupture.
“Do we, as humans, having an ability to 
reason and to communicate abstract 
ideas verbally and in writing, and 
to form ethical and moral judgments 
using the accumulated knowledge 
of the ages, have the right to take 
the lives of other sentient organisms, 
particularly when we are not forced to 
do so by hunger or dietary need, but 
rather do so for the somewhat frivolous 
reason that we like the taste of meat?
“In essence, should we know better?”
Peter Cheeke, PhD
Contemporary Issues in Animal Agriculture, 2004 textbook

Hope’s Rescue  from EggCruelty.com
On a cold December morning in 2002, 
while documenting the conditions inside 
an egg factory farm in Versailles, Ohio, 
two Mercy For Animals investigators dis­
covered a hen who would later be named 
Hope. She had been tossed in a trash can 
and left to die amid the rotting bodies of 
countless dead hens.
Hope was given a 
second chance at 
life when investiga­
tors reached into 
the rusted steel bin 
and lifted her 
frail body to 
safety. After 
being left for dead 
by the egg industry, Hope has now fully 
recovered. Free of the cruel battery cage, 
today Hope enjoys sunbathing, 
running through the grass, dust 
bathing, perching, and the 
company of the other rescued 
chickens that live with her at 
the farmed animal sanctuary.
Hope is one of 38 hens rescued 
from factory farms since 2001 by 
Mercy For Animals investigators. 
All of the hens were in severe need 
of veterinary care. Unfortunately, 
approximately 280 million hens 
remain in U.S. battery cages, 
where they are denied almost 
every natural behavior.
9
Cecilia takes her first steps 
of freedom after being rescued 
from a battery cage.
“Contrary to what one may hear from 
the industry, chickens are not mind-
less, simple automata but are complex 
behaviorally, do quite well in learning, 
show a rich social organization, and 
have a diverse repertoire of calls. 
Anyone who has kept barnyard chick-
ens also recognizes their significant 
differences in personality.”
Bernard E. Rollin, PhD
Farm Animal Welfare, Iowa State University Press, 2003
“The question is not, 
Can they reason? nor, 
Can they talk? but, 
Can they suffer?”
Jeremy Bentham
An Introduction to the Principles 
of Morals & Legislation, 1789
Hope, just rescued.
The skin on Jenna’s neck was impaled by a sharp piece of cage 
wire, exposing muscle and veins, when rescuers found her.
Hope, alive in a trash can 
filled with dead hens, moments 
before being rescued.
Hope, six months 
after rescue.

“Humans—who enslave, 
castrate, experiment on, and 
fillet other animals—have had 
an understandable penchant for 
pretending animals do not feel pain. 
A sharp distinction between humans 
and ‘animals’ is essential if we are 
to bend them to our will, make them 
work for us, wear them, eat them—
without any disquieting tinges of 
guilt or regret.
“It is unseemly of us, 
who often behave so 
unfeelingly toward 
other animals, 
to contend that only 
humans can suffer. 
The behavior of other 
animals renders such 
pretensions specious. 
They are just too 
much like us.”
Dr. Carl Sagan & 
Dr. Ann Druyan
Shadows of Forgotten 
Ancestors, 1992
“True human goodness, 
in all its purity and freedom, 
can come to the fore only when 
its recipient has no power.
“Humanity’s true moral test, 
its fundamental test (which 
lies deeply buried from view), 
consists of its attitude towards 
those who are at its mercy: animals.
“And in this respect humankind has 
suffered a fundamental debacle, 
a debacle so fundamental 
that all others stem from it.”
Milan Kundera
The Unbearable Lightness of Being, 1984
Crated calves live in 
their own excrement.
10
“Historically, man has expanded 
the reach of his ethical calculations, 
as ignorance and want have receded, 
first beyond family and tribe, later 
beyond relig­ion, race, and nation.
“To bring other species more fully into 
the range of these decisions may seem 
unthinkable to moderate opinion now. 
One day, decades or centuries hence, 
it may seem no more than ‘civilized’ 
behavior requires.”
“What Humans Owe to Animals” 
The Economist, 8/19/95
Male chicks, of no economic value to the egg industry, are 
found dead and dying in a dumpster behind a hatchery. Typically they 
are gassed 1 or ground up alive. 10 Other standard agricultural practices—
often performed without anesthesia—include castration, tail docking, 
debeaking, dehorning, toe trimming, and branding. 10
Entangled in the bars of her cage, a hen 
is left with no access to food or water.
Ducks and geese are force-
fed to produce liver pâté.
Widening 
the Circle

According to the American Dietetic 
Association’s position paper, vegetarians 
on average have lower body weight, cho­
lesterol, and blood pressure, and lower 
rates of type 2 diabetes, heart disease, 
prostate cancer, and colon cancer. 21
But, simply avoiding animal products will 
not ensure optimal health. Like everyone, 
vegans should eat a well-balanced diet. 
Protein, vitamins B12 and D, omega-3 
fats, calcium, and iodine are important.
Fortunately, there are plenty of nutritious 
and convenient options for vegans today, 
including various high-protein meat sub-
stitutes and fortified dairy alternatives.
Please visit VeganHealth.org and/or 
contact us for a free copy of our Guide 
to Cruelty-Free Eating, which contains 
a detailed article with recommendations 
based on the latest nutrition research.
A Healthy Way to Live
A vegan diet can be very healthful. In fact, 
many people initially stop eating animal 
products to benefit their health.
	21	 	 J Am Diet Assoc, 2003 Jun;103(6):748–65 (TinyURL.com/2m4wpj).
“[C]limate change is the most serious 
challenge facing the human race.
“The livestock sector is a major player, 
responsible for 18 percent of green-
house gas emissions measured in 
CO2 equivalent. This is a higher share 
than transport.”
FAO of the United Nations
Livestock’s Long Shadow, 2006 (TinyURL.com/z5kad)
11
Free-Range Farms?
Products may be labeled “free-range” 
if the animals had USDA-certified access 
to the outdoors, but no other criteria are 
included in this term. While free-range 
farms may be an improvement 
over standard factory farms, 
they are by no means free 
of suffering. Please see 
WhyVegan.com for more 
information.
A vegan diet can also be healthful for the planet: 
your dietary habits can actually have 
as much impact on reducing global 
warming as your driving habits.
Left: A free-range turkey whose beak and toes have been trimmed. 
Above: Hens who lay brown eggs sold in health food stores. 

You can generally shop for vegan foods 
at supermarkets, natural food stores, 
and co-ops. Vegan selections are usually 
offered at Italian, Chinese, Mexican, 
Indian, Thai, Middle Eastern, and other 
ethnic restaurants, as well as at many 
chains, such as Subway, Johnny Rockets, 
Papa John’s, and Taco Bell—just ask!
When baking, you can substitute eggs 
with Ener-G Egg Replacer, cornstarch 
(2 T per egg), or bananas (one per egg).
Soy, rice, and nut milks can be used 
in place of cows’ milk. These and other 
dairy alternatives—including vegan 
cheeses, yogurts, and frozen desserts—
can be purchased, or prepared at home.
Vegan twists on 
familiar recipes, 
often made 
with seitan (or 
“wheat meat”) 
and other meat 
substitutes, can 
be found in many 
cookbooks (such as 
Vegan Vittles) and on a 
large variety of Internet web sites.
Our Guide to Cruelty-Free Eating 
contains a vegan foods glossary 
and several easy recipes, 
including seitan and 
“cheezes.” Contact us 
for a free copy today!
What to Eat?
When changing your diet, it may 
take time to explore new foods and 
develop a routine. There are many 
different products to choose from—
keep experimenting to find your 
personal favorites.
12
Turtle Island Foods’ Tofurky beer brats, sizzling hot off the grill!
Popular favorites, such as burgers and apple 
pie, can be prepared with vegan ingredients.
“When I met my first vegetarian, 
he told me he had not eaten meat 
for fourteen years.
“I looked at him as if he had managed 
to hold his breath that entire time.
“Today I know there is nothing 
rigorous or strange about eating 
a diet that excludes meat.”
Erik Marcus
Vegan: The New Ethics of Eating, 1998

Some simple 
meal ideas:
◗ Breakfast
Pancakes
Soy yogurt
Fruit smoothie
Bagel or toast with jelly
Oatmeal or other hot cereal
Cereal or granola with nondairy milk
◗ Lunch/Dinner
Mock lunchmeat sandwich
Vegetarian hot dog
Grain or soy burger
Bean burrito
Tofu lasagna
Seitan casserole
Peanut butter and jelly
Pasta and tomato sauce
Baked tempeh or tofu sandwich
Soup or chili (over pasta or rice)
Baked, mashed, or fried potatoes
Tofu, tempeh, or seitan stir-fry
◗ Snacks/Dessert
Vegan pie, cookies, cake, or ice cream
Raisins, figs, or dried apricots
Peanuts, almonds, or walnuts
Banana, apple, or orange
Pretzels or popcorn
Chips and salsa
Trail mix
Clif Bar
13
Vegans enjoy delicious dairy-free desserts.
A growing number of vegan products are on the market. Soybeans 
are used to make milks, yogurts, cheeses, and spreads, as well as 
a wide variety of mock meats, such as deli slices and hot dogs.

Instead of supporting the hidden cruelties 
of factory farms and slaughterhouses, we 
can each choose to act with compassion 
by boycotting animal agriculture.
Making humane choices is 
the ultimate affirmation 
of our humanity.
“[W]hen nonvegetarians say 
that ‘human problems come first’ 
I cannot help wondering what exactly 
it is that they are doing for human 
beings that compels them to continue 
to support the wasteful, ruthless 
exploitation of farm animals.”
Peter Singer
Animal Liberation, 1990
Vegan Outreach
Being vegan isn’t about being 
perfect or pure—it’s about 
reducing suffering.
14
Over the course of a lifetime, one person’s 
food choices affect hundreds of animals. 
In order to prevent the most suffering, it’s 
important we each take an approach we 
can sustain. After reviewing this booklet, 
some people may decide to go vegan 
immediately; others may choose to eat 
fewer animal products and explore more 
vegetarian meals.
Remember: Veganism is not an end in 
itself. It should not be thought of as a 
religious doctrine prohibiting a list of 
evil ingredients. Rather, veganism is best 
viewed as a tool for reducing suffering.

“Veganism has given me a higher level 
of awareness and spirituality.”
Dexter Scott King
son of Rev. Martin Luther King, Jr. 
Vegetarian Times, 10/95
More Info and Free Recipes!
Our free Guide to Cruelty-Free Eating 
brochure contains lots more information: 
“Staying Healthy on Plant-Based Diets,” 
an article important for optimal health; 
delicious recipes, meal ideas, cooking 
tips, and a glossary of new foods; plus, 
essays, questions & answers, and a list 
of other helpful resources.
To request your free copy of the guide, 
please visit VeganOutreach.org/guide or 
write to Vegan Outreach at the address 
printed on the back of this brochure.
We can also provide you with copies of 
our brochures to share with friends and 
family or to distribute in your community. 
Please contact Vegan Outreach or visit 
VeganOutreach.org/catalog to order our 
literature, as well as books, videos, and 
other resources.
15
Based on a 2006 survey conducted 
by Harris Interactive, the Vegetarian 
Resource Group estimates that there 
are about two and a half million 
vegan adults in the United States.
Photos were provided courtesy of Amy’s Kitchen, Animal Protection Institute, 
Compassionate Action for Animals, East Bay Animal Advocates, Farm Sanctuary, 
Suzanne Haws, Iowa Pork Producers Association, Mercy For Animals, Kari 
Nienstedt, PETA, Turtle Island Foods, USDA, and Viva! USA.

Printed on recycled paper
© Vegan Outreach, 2007
Why Vegan?  Rev. 6/07
Distributed courtesy of…
POB 30865, Tucson, AZ 85751-0865
vegan@VeganOutreach.org

