THE SACK
by William Morrison
At first they hadn't even known that the Sack existed. If they had noticed  it at all
when they landed on the asteroid, they thought of it merely as one more outpost  of
rock  on  the  barren  expanse  of  roughly  ellipsoidal  silicate  surface,  which  Captain
Ganko noticed had major and  minor axes  roughly three and  two  miles in diameter,
respectively. It would never have entered anyone's mind that the unimpressive object
they had unconsciously acquired would soon be regarded as the most valuable prize
in the system.
The landing had  been  accidental.  The  government  patrol  ship  had  been  limping
along, and now it had  set-tled  down  for  repairs,  which would take a good  seventy
hours. Fortunately, they had plenty of  air, and  their recirculation system  worked  to
perfection. Food was in somewhat  short  supply,  but  it didn't  worry them, for  they
knew that they could always tighten their belts and do without full rations  for  a few
days. The loss of water that had resulted from a leak in the storage tanks, however,
was a more serious matter. It occupied a good part of their conversation during the
next fifty hours.
Captain Ganko said finally, "There's no use talking, it won't be enough. And there
are no  supply  stations  close  enough at hand  to  be  of  any use.  We'll have to  radio
ahead and hope that they can get a rescue ship to us with a reserve supply."
The helmet mike of his next in command seemed to droop. "It'll be too bad if we
miss each other in space, Captain."
Captain  Ganko  laughed  unhappily.  "It  certainly  will.  In  that  case  we'll  have  a
chance to see how we can stand a little dehydration."
For  a time nobody  said  anything. At last, however,  the second  mate  suggested,
"There might be water somewhere on the asteroid, sir."
"Here? How in Pluto would it stick, with a gravity that isn't even strong enough to
hold loose rocks? And where the devil would it be?"
"To answer the first question first, it would be retained as water of crystallization,"
replied  a  soft  liquid  voice  that  seemed  to  penetrate  his  spacesuit  and  come  from
behind  him.  "To  answer  the  second  question,  it  is  half  a  dozen  feet  below  the
surface, and can easily be reached by digging."
They had  all swiveled around  at the first words.  But no  one  was  in  sight  in  the
direction from which the words seemed to  come.  Captain Ganko  frowned,  and  his
eyes narrowed dangerously. "We don't happen to have a practical joker with us, do
we?" he asked mildly.
"You do not," replied the voice.
"Who said that?"
"I, Yzrl."
A crewman became aware of something moving on the surface of one of the great
rocks, and pointed to it. The motion stopped when the voice ceased, but they didn't
lose sight of it again. That was how they learned about Yzrl, or as it was more often
called, the Mind-Sack.
If  the  ship  and  his  services  hadn't  both  belonged  to  the  government,  Captain

Ganko  could  have  claimed  the  Sack  for  himself  or  his  owners  and  retired  with  a
wealth far beyond his dreams. As it was, the thing passed  into government control.
Its importance was realized almost from the first, and Jake Siebling had reason to be
proud when more important and more influential figures of the political and industrial
world were finally passed  over  and  he was  made  Custodian  of  the  Sack.  Siebling
was a short, stocky man whose one weakness was self-deprecation. He had carried
out one difficult assign-ment after another and allowed other men to take the credit.
But  this  job  was  not  one  for  a  blowhard,  and  those  in  charge  of  making  the
appointment knew it. For once they looked beyond credit and superficial reputation,
and chose an individual they disliked somewhat but trusted absolutely. It was one of
the most effective tributes to honesty and ability ever devised.
The Sack, as Siebling learned from seeing it daily, rarely deviated from the form in
which  it  had  made  its  first  appearance—a  rocky,  grayish  lump  that  roughly
resembled a sack of potatoes. It had no features, and there was nothing, when it was
not  being  asked  questions,  to  indicate  that  it  had  life.  It  ate  rarely—once  in  a
thousand  years,  it said,  when left to  itself;  once  a  week  when  it  was  pressed  into
steady use. It ate or  moved  by  fashioning a suitable pseudopod  and  stretching the
thing  out  in  whatever  way  it  pleased.  When  it  had  attained  its  objective,  the
pseudopod was withdrawn into the main body again and  the creature  became  once
more a potato sack.
It turned  out  later that the name "Sack"  was  well chosen  from  another  point  of
view, in addition to that of appearance. For the Sack was stuffed with infor-mation,
and beyond that, with wisdom. There were many doubters at first, and some of them
retained  their  doubts  to  the  very  end,  just  as  some  people  remained  convinced
hundreds  of  years  after Columbus  that the Earth was  flat. But those  who saw  and
heard the Sack had no  doubts  at all. They tended,  if anything, to  go  too  far in the
other direction, and to believe that the Sack  knew everything. This,  of  course,  was
untrue.
It was  the official function of  the Sack,  established  by  a series  of  Interplanetary
acts,  to  answer  questions.  The  first  questions,  as  we  have  seen,  were  asked
acci-dentally,  by  Captain  Ganko.  Later  they  were  asked  purposefully,  but  with  a
purpose  that  was  itself  random,  and  a  few  politicians  managed  to  acquire
considerable  wealth before  the Government  put  a  stop  to  the  leak  of  information,
and tried to have the questions asked in a more scientific and logical manner.
Question  time  was  rationed  for  months  in  advance,  and  sold  at  what  was,  all
things  considered,  a  ridicu-lously  low  rate—a  mere  hundred  thousand  credits  a
minute. It  was  this  unrestricted  sale  of  time  that  led  to  the  first  great  government
squabble.
It was  the unexpected  failure of  the  Sack  to  answer  what  must  have  been  to  a
mind of its ability an easy question that led to the second blowup, which was fierce
enough to be  called a crisis.  A total of  a hundred  and  twenty questioners,  each  of
whom had paid  his hundred  thousand,  raised  a howl that could  be  heard  on  every
planet, and there was a legislative investigation, at which Siebling testified and all the
conflicts were aired.
He  had  left  an  assistant  in  charge  of  the  Sack,  and  now,  as  he  sat  before  the
Senatorial Committee, he twisted uncomfortably  in front  of  the battery  of  cameras.

Senator Horrigan, his chief interrogator, was a bluff, florid, loud-mouthed  politician
who had been able to imbue him with a feeling of guilt even as he told his name, age,
and length of government service.
"It is your  duty  to  see  to  it that the  Sack  is  maintained  in  proper  condition  for
answering questions, is it not, Mr. Siebling?" demanded Senator Horrigan.
"Yes, sir."
"Then  why  was  it  incapable  of  answering  the  questioners  in  question?  These
gentlemen had honestly paid their money—a hundred thousand credits  each.  It was
necessary, I understand,  to  refund  the total sum.  That  meant an overall loss  to  the
Government  of,  let  me  see  now—one  hundred  twenty  at  one  hundred  thousand
each—one hundred and twenty million credits," he shouted, rolling the words.
"Twelve million, Senator," hastily whispered his secretary.
The  correction  was  not  made,  and  the  figure  was  duly  headlined  later  as  one
hundred and twenty million.
Siebling  said,  "As  we  discovered  later,  Senator,  the  Sack  failed  to  answer
questions  because  it was  not  a machine, but  a living creature.  It was  exhausted.  It
had been exposed to questioning on a twenty-four-hour-a--day basis."
"And who permitted- this idiotic procedure?" boomed Senator Horrigan.
"You yourself, Senator," said Siebling happily. "The procedure  was  provided  for
in the bill introduced by you and approved by your committee."
Senator Horrigan had never even read the bill to which his name was attached, and
he was  certainly not  to  blame for  its provisions.  But this private knowledge of  his
own  innocence  did  him  no  good  with  the  public.  From  that  moment  he  was
Siebling's bitter enemy.
"So the Sack ceased to answer questions for two whole hours?"
"Yes, sir. It resumed only after a rest."
"And it answered them without further difficulty?"
"No, sir. Its response was slowed down. Subsequent questioners complained that
they were defrauded of a good part of their money. But as answers  were given, we
considered  that  the  complaints  were  without  merit,  and  the  financial  department
refused to make refunds."
"Do you consider that this cheating of investors in the Sack's time is honest?"
"That's  none  of  my business,  Senator,"  returned Siebling, who had  by  this time
got over most of his ner-vousness. "I merely see to the execution of the laws. I leave
the question  of  honesty  to  those  who  make  them.  I  presume  that  it's  in  perfectly
good hands."
Senator  Horrigan flushed at the laughter that  came  from  the  onlookers.  He  was
personally unpopular, as unpopular as a politician can be and still remain a politician.
He  was  disliked  even  by  the  members  of  his  own  party,  and  some  of  his  best
political friends were among the laughers. He decided  to  abandon  what had  turned
out to be an unfortunate line of questioning.
"It is  a  matter  of  fact,  Mr.  Siebling,  is  it  not,  that  you  have  frequently  refused
admittance  to  investors  who  were  able  to  show  perfectly  valid  receipts  for  their
credits?"
"That is a fact, sir. But—"
"You admit it, then."

"There  is  no  question  of  `admitting'  anything,  Senator.  What  I  meant  to  say
was—"
"Never  mind  what  you  meant  to  say.  It's  what  you  have  already  said  that's
important. You've cheated these men of their money!"
"That  is not  true, sir. They were given time  later.  The  reason  for  my  refusal  to
grant them admission when they asked for it was  that the time had  been  previously
reserved  for  the Armed Forces.  There  are important research  questions  that  come
up,  and  there  is,  as  you  know,  a  difference  of  opinion  as  to  priority.  When
confronted  with  requisitions  for  time  from  a  commercial  in-vestor  and  a
representative of the Government, I never took it upon myself to settle the question.
I always con-sulted with the Government's legal adviser."
"So you refused to make an independent decision, did you?"
"My  duty,  Senator,  is  to  look  after  the  welfare  of  the  Sack.  I  do  not  concern
myself with political questions. We had a moment of free time the day  before  I left
the asteroid,  when an investor who had  already paid  his money  was  delayed  by  a
space accident, so instead of letting the moment go to waste, I utilized it to  ask  the
Sack a question."
"How you might advance your own fortunes, no doubt?"
"No,  sir.  I  merely  asked  it  how  it  might  function  most  efficiently.  I  took  the
precaution of making a recording, knowing that my word might be  doubted.  If you
wish, Senator, I can introduce the recording in evidence."
Senator Horrigan grunted, and waved his hand. "Go on with your answer."
"The Sack replied that it would require two  hours  of  complete  rest  out  of  every
twenty, plus  an additional hour  of  what it called  `recreation.'  That  is,  it  wanted  to
converse with some human being who would ask  what it called sensible questions,
and not press for a quick an-swer."
"So  you  suggest  that  the  Government  waste  three  hours  of  every  twenty—one
hundred and eighty million credits?"
"Eighteen million," whispered the secretary.
"The time would not be wasted. Any attempt to overwork  the Sack  would result
in its premature an-nihilation."
"That is your idea, is it?"
"No, sir, that is what the Sack itself said."
At this point Senator Horrigan swung into a speech of denunciation, and Siebling
was excused from further testimony. Other witnesses were called, but at the end the
Senate investigating body  was  able to  come  to  no  definite  conclusion,  and  it  was
decided to interrogate the Sack personally.
It was out of the question for the Sack to come to the Senate, so the Senate quite
naturally came to the Sack.  The  Committee of  Seven was  manifestly uneasy as  the
senatorial ship decelerated and cast its grapples toward the asteroid.  The  members,
as individuals, had all traveled in space before, but all their previous destinations had
been in civilized territory, and they obviously did  not  relish the prospect  of  landing
on this airless and sunless body of rock.
The televisor companies  were alert to  their op-portunity,  and  they  had  acquired
more  experience  with  desert  territory.  They  had  disembarked  and  set  up  their
apparatus  before  the senators  had  taken their first timid steps  out  of  the  safety  of

their ship.
Siebling noted ironically that in these somewhat frightening surroundings, far from
their home grounds, the senators were not so sure of themselves. It was  his part  to
act the friendly guide, and he did so with relish.
"You  see,  gentlemen," he said  respectfully,  "it was  decided,  on  the  Sack's  own
advice,  not  to  permit  it  to  be  further  exposed  to  possible  collision  with  stray
meteors. It was the meteors which killed off  the other  members  of  its strange  race,
and  it  was  a  lucky  chance  that  the  last  surviving  individual  managed  to  escape
destruction as long as it has. An impenetrable shelter dome has been built therefore,
and the Sack now lives under its protection. Questioners address it through a sound
and sight system that is almost as good as being face to face with it."
Senator Horrigan fastened upon the significant part  of  his statement.  "You  mean
that the Sack is safe—and we are exposed to danger from flying meteors?"
"Naturally, Senator. The Sack is unique in the system. Men—even senators—are,
if  you  will  excuse  the  expression,  a  decicredit  a  dozen.  They  are  definitely
replaceable, by means of elections."
Beneath his helmet the senator turned green with a fear that concealed  the scarlet
of his anger. "I think it is an outrage to  find the Government  so  unsolicitous  of  the
safety and welfare of its employees!"
"So  do  I,  sir.  I  live  here  the  year  round."  He  added  smoothly,  "Would  you
gentlemen care to see the Sack now?"
They stared at the huge visor screen and saw  the Sack  resting on  its seat  before
them, looking like a burlap bag of potatoes which had been tossed onto a throne and
forgotten there. It looked so definitely inanimate that it struck them as strange that the
thing should remain upright instead of toppling over. All the same, for a moment the
senators  could  not  help  showing  the  awe  that  overwhelmed  them.  Even  Senator
Horrigan was silent.
But the moment passed. He said, "Sir, we are an of-ficial Investigating Committee
of the Interplanetary Senate,  and  we have come  to  ask  you  a few questions."  The
Sack showed no desire  to  reply, and  Senator  Horrigan cleared  his throat  and  went
on. "Is it true, sir, that you require two  hours  of  complete  rest  in every twenty, and
one hour for recreation, or, as I may put it, perhaps more precisely, relaxation?"
"It is true."
Senator Horrigan gave the creature its chance, but the Sack, unlike a senator,  did
not elaborate. Another of the committee asked, "Where would you find an in-dividual
capable of conversing intelligently with so wise a creature as you?"
"Here," replied the Sack.
"It is necessary to ask questions that are directly to the point, Senator," suggested
Siebling.  "The  Sack  does  not  usually  volunteer  information  that  has  not  been
specifically called for."
Senator Horrigan said quickly, "I assume, sir, that when you  speak  of  finding an
intelligence on a par with your own, you refer to a member of our committee, and I
am  sure  that  of  all  my  colleagues  there  is  not  one  who  is  unworthy  of  being  so
denominated. But we cannot all of us spare the time needed  for  our  manifold other
duties,  so  I  wish  to  ask  you,  sir,  which  of  us,  in  your  opinion,  has  the  peculiar
qualifications of that sort of wisdom which is required for this great task?"

"None," said the Sack.
Senator  Horrigan  looked  blank.  One  of  the  other  senators  flushed,  and  asked,
"Who has?"
"Siebling."
Senator Horrigan forgot his awe of the Sack, and shouted, "This is a put-up job!"
The other senator who had just spoken now said sud-denly, "How is it that there
are no other questioners present? Hasn't the Sack's time been sold far in ad-vance?"
Siebling  nodded.  "I  was  ordered  to  cancel  all  pre-vious  appointments  with  the
Sack, sir."
"By what idiot's orders?"
"Senator Horrigan's, sir."
At this point the investigation might have been said to come to an end. There was
just time, before  they turned  away, for  Senator  Horrigan to  demand  desperately  of
the Sack,  "Sir,  will I  be  re-elected?"  But  the  roar  of  anger  that  went  up  from  his
colleagues prevented him from hearing the Sack's answer, and only the question was
picked up and broadcast clearly over the in-terplanetary network.
It had such an effect that it in itself provided Senator  Horrigan's  answer.  He was
not re-elected. But before the election he had time to cast his vote against Siebling's
designation  to  talk  with  the  Sack  for  one  hour  out  of  every  twenty.  The  final
committee  vote  was  four  to  three  in  favor  of  Siebling,  and  the  decision  was
confirmed by the Senate. And then Senator Horrigan passed  temporarily out  of  the
Sack's life and out of Siebling's.
Siebling looked forward with some trepidation to his first long interview with the
Sack.  Hitherto  he  had  limited  himself  to  the  simple  tasks  provided  for  in  his
directives—to  the  maintenance  of  the  meteor  shelter  dome,  to  the  provision  of  a
sparse food supply, and to the proper placement of an army and Space Fleet Guard.
For  by  this  time  the  great  value  of  the  Sack  had  been  recognized  throughout  the
system,  and  it  was  widely  realized  that  there  would  be  thousands  of  criminals
anxious to steal so defenseless a treasure.
Now, Siebling thought,  he would be  obliged to  talk to  it,  and  he  feared  that  he
would lose the good  opinion which it had  somehow  acquired  of  him. He was  in a
position strangely like that of a young girl who would have liked nothing better  than
to talk of her dresses and her boy friends to someone with her own background, and
was forced  to  endure a brilliant and  witty conversation  with some  man three times
her age.
But he lost  some  of  his awe when he faced  the Sack  itself. It would  have  been
absurd to say that the strange creature's manner put him at ease. The creature had no
manner. It was featureless and  expressionless,  and  even when part  of  it moved,  as
when  it  was  speaking,  the  ef-fect  was  completely  impersonal.  Nevertheless,
something about it did make him lose his fears.
For  a  time  he  stood  before  it  and  said  nothing.  To  his  surprise,  the  Sack
spoke—the  first time to  his knowledge that it  had  done  so  without  being  asked  a
question. "You will not disappoint me," it said. "I ex-pect nothing."
Siebling grinned. Not only had the Sack never before volunteered to speak, it had
never spoken so dryly. For the first time it began to seem not so much a mechanical

brain as  the living  creature  he  knew  it  to  be.  He  asked,  "Has  anyone  ever  before
asked you about your origin?"
"One  man. That  was  before  my time was  rationed.  And even he  caught  himself
when he realized that he might better be asking how to become rich, and he paid little
attention to my answer."
"How old are you?"
"Four  hundred  thousand  years.  I can  tell you  to  the fraction  of  a second,  but  I
suppose that you do not wish me to speak as precisely as usual."
The thing, thought Siebling, did have in its way a sense of humor. "How much of
that time," he asked, "have you spent alone?"
"More than ten thousand years."
"You told someone once that your companions were killed by meteors.  Couldn't
you have guarded against them?"
The Sack said slowly, almost wearily, "That was after we had  ceased  to  have an
interest in remaining alive. The first death was three hundred thousand years ago."
"And you have lived, since then, without wanting to?"
"I have no great interest in dying either. Living has become a habit."
"Why did you lose your interest in remaining alive?" 
"Because we lost the future. There had been a miscalculation."
"You are capable of making mistakes?"
"We had not lost that capacity.  There  was  a miscalcu-lation, and  although those
of  us  then  living  escaped  per-sonal  disaster,  our  next  generation  was  not  so
fortunate. We lost any chance of having descendants. After that, we had nothing for
which to live."
Siebling nodded. It was a loss of motive that a human being could understand. He
asked,  "With all your  knowledge, couldn't  you  have overcome  the effects  of  what
happened?"
The  Sack  said,  "The  more  things  become  possible  to  you,  the  more  you  will
understand  that  they  cannot  be  done  in  impossible  ways.  We  could  not  do
everything. Sometimes one  of  the more stupid  of  those  who come  here asks  me a
question I cannot answer, and then becomes angry because he feels that he has been
cheated of his credits. Others ask me to predict the future. I can predict only what I
can calculate, and  I soon  come  to  the end  of  my powers  of  calculation.  They  are
great com-pared to yours; they are small compared to the possibilities of the future."
"How do you happen to know so much? Is the knowledge born in you?"
"Only the possibility for  knowledge is born.  To  know,  we  must  learn.  It  is  my
misfortune that I forget little."
"What  in  the  structure  of  your  body,  or  your  organs  of  thought,  makes  you
capable of learning so much?"
The  Sack  spoke,  but  to  Siebling  the  words  meant  nothing,  and  he  said  so.  "I
could  predict  your  lack  of  comprehension,"  said  the  Sack,  "but  I  wanted  you  to
realize  it  for  yourself.  To  make  things  clear,  I  should  be  required  to  dictate  ten
volumes,  and  they  would  be  dif-ficult  to  understand  even  for  your  specialists,  in
biology and physics and in sciences you are just discovering."
Siebling  fell  silent,  and  the  Sack  said,  as  if  musing,  "Your  race  is  still  an
unintelligent one.  I have been  in your  hands  for  many months,  and  no  one  has  yet

asked me the important questions. Those who wish to be wealthy ask about minerals
and planetary land concessions, and they ask which of  several schemes  for  making
fortunes  would  be  best.  Several  physicians  have  asked  me  how  to  treat  wealthy
patients who would  otherwise  die.  Your  scientists  ask  me  to  solve  problems  that
would take them years to solve without my help. And when your rulers ask, they are
the most stupid of all, wanting to know only how they may maintain their rule. None
ask what they should."
"The fate of the human race?"
"That is prophecy of the far future. It is beyond my powers."
"What should we ask?"
"That is the question I have awaited. It is difficult for  you  to  see  its importance,
only  because  each  of  you  is  so  concerned  with  himself."  The  Sack  paused,  and
mur-mured,  "I  ramble  as  I  do  not  permit  myself  to  when  I  speak  to  your  fools.
Nevertheless, even rambling can be informative."
"It has been to me."
"The others do not understand that too great a direct-ness is dangerous. They ask
specific questions which demand  specific  replies, when they should  ask  something
general."
"You haven't answered me."
"It is part of an answer to  say  that a question  is im-portant.  I am considered  by
your rulers a valuable piece  of  property.  They should  ask  whether  my  value  is  as
great as it seems. They should ask whether my an-swering questions will do good or
harm."
"Which is it?"
"Harm, great harm."
Siebling was staggered. He said, "But if you answer truthfully—"
"The process of coming at the truth is as precious as the final truth itself. I cheat
you of that. I give your people the truth, but not all of it, for they do not know how
to attain it of  themselves.  It would be  better  if they learned that, at the expense  of
making many errors."
"I don't agree with that."
"A  scientist  asks  me  what  goes  on  within  a  cell,  and  I  tell  him.  But  if  he  had
studied the cell himself, even though the study required many years,  he would have
ended  not  only with this knowledge, but  with much other  knowledge, of  things  he
does not even suspect to be related. He would have acquired  many new processes
of investigation."
"But surely, in some cases, the knowledge is useful in itself. For  instance,  I hear
that they're already using a process you suggested for producing uranium cheaply to
use on Mars. What's harmful about that?"
"Do  you  know  how  much  of  the  necessary  raw  material  is  present?  Your
scientists  have not  investigated  that,  and  they  will  use  up  all  the  raw  material  and
discover only too late what they have done. You had the same experience on Earth?
You  learned  how  to  purify  water  at  little  expense,  and  you  squandered  water  so
recklessly that you soon ran short of it."
"What's wrong with saving the life of  a dying patient, as  some  of  those  doctors
did?"

"The first question to ask is whether the patient's life should be saved."
"That's exactly what a doctor isn't  supposed  to  ask.  He has  to  try to  save  them
all. Just  as  you  never  ask  whether  people  are  going  to  use  your  knowledge  for  a
good purpose or a bad. You simply answer their questions."
"I answer because I am indifferent, and I care nothing what use they make of what
I say. Are your doctors also indifferent?"
Siebling said, "You're supposed to answer questions,  not  ask  them. Incidentally,
why do you answer at all?"
"Some  of  your  men  find  joy  in  boasting,  in  doing  what  they  call  good,  or  in
making money. Whatever mild pleasure I can find lies in imparting information."
"And you'd get no pleasure out of lying?"
"I am as incapable of telling lies as one of your birds of flying off the Earth on its
own wings."
"One  thing more.  Why did  you  ask  to  talk to  me, of  all  people,  for  recreation?
There  are  brilliant  scientists,  and  great  men  of  all  kinds  whom  you  could  have
chosen."
"I care nothing for your race's greatness. I chose you because you are honest."
"Thanks. But there are other honest men on Earth, and on Mars, and on the other
planets as well. Why me, instead of them?"
The Sack  seemed  to  hesitate.  "Your  choice  gave  me  a  mild  pleasure.  Possibly
because I knew it would be displeasing to those men."
Siebling grinned. "You're not quite so indifferent as you think you are. I guess it's
pretty hard to be indifferent to Senator Horrigan."
This was but the first part of many conversations with the Sack.  For  a long time
Siebling could not help being disturbed by the Sack's warning that its presence was a
calamity instead of a blessing for  the human race,  and  this in more ways than one.
But  it  would  have  been  ab-surd  to  try  to  convince  a  government  body  that  any
ob-ject  that brought  in  so  many  millions  of  credits  each  day  was  a  calamity,  and
Siebling  didn't  even  try.  And  after  awhile  Siebling  relegated  the  uncomfortable
knowledge to  the  back  of  his  mind,  and  settled  down  to  the  routine  existence  of
Custodian of the Sack.
Because  there was  a conversation  every twenty hours,  Siebling had  to  rearrange
his eating and sleeping schedule to a twenty-hour basis, which made it a little difficult
for a man who had become so thoroughly accustomed to the thirty-hour space day.
But he felt more than repaid for the trouble by his conversations  with the Sack.  He
learned a great many things about the planets and the system, and the galaxies, but he
learned  them  incidentally,  without  making  a  special  point  of  asking  about  them.
Because his knowledge of astronomy had never gone far beyond the elements, there
were some  questions—the  most  important of  all about  the galaxies—that  he  never
even got around to asking.
Perhaps  it would have made little difference to  his own understanding  if  he  had
asked, for some of the an-swers  were difficult to  understand.  He spent  three entire
periods  with  the  Sack  trying  to  have  that  mastermind  make  clear  to  him  how  the
Sack had been able, without any previous contact with human beings, to understand
Captain Ganko's  Earth language on  the  historic  occasion  when  the  Sack  had  first
revealed itself to  human beings,  and  how it had  been  able  to  answer  in  practically

unaccented words. At the end, he had only a vague glimmering of how the feat was
performed.
It  wasn't  telepathy,  as  he  had  first  suspected.  It  was  an  intricate  process  of
analysis that involved, not only the actual words  spoken,  but  the nature of  the ship
that had  landed,  the spacesuits  the  men  had  worn,  the  way  they  had  walked,  and
many  other  factors  that  indicated  the  psychology  of  both  the  speaker  and  his
language. It was  as  if a mathematician had  tried to  explain to  someone  who  didn't
even know arithmetic how he could  determine the equation of  a complicated  curve
from a short  line segment.  And the Sack,  unlike  the  math-ematician,  could  do  the
whole thing, so to speak, in its head, without paper and pencil, or any other external
aid.
After a  year  at  the  job,  Siebling  found  it  difficult  to  say  which  he  found  more
fascinating—those  hour-long  conversations  with  the  almost  all-wise  Sack,  or  the
cleverly stupid demands of some of the men and women who had paid their hundred
thousand  credits  fir  a  precious  sixty  seconds.  In  addition  to  the  relatively  simple
questions such as were asked by the scientists or the fortune hunters who wanted to
know where they could find precious metals, there were complicated  questions  that
took several minutes.
One woman, for instance, had asked where to  find her missing son.  Without the
necessary data to go on, even the Sack had been unable to answer that. She left, to
return  a  month  later  with  a  vast  amount  of  information,  carefully  compiled,  and
arranged in order of descending importance. The key items were given the Sack first,
those of lesser significance afterward.  It required a little less  than three minutes for
the Sack to give her the answer that her son was probably alive, and cast away on an
obscure and very much neglected part of Ganymede.
All the conversations that took place, including Siebling's own, were recorded and
the records  shipped  to  a  central  storage  file  on  Earth.  Many  of  them  he  couldn't
understand,  some  because  they were too  technical, others  because  he didn't  know
the language spoken. The Sack, of course, immediately learned all languages by that
process he had tried so hard to explain to  Siebling, and  back  at the central storage
file there were expert  technicians and  linguists who went over  every  detail  of  each
question and answer with great care, both to make sure  that no  questioner  revealed
himself as a criminal, and to have a lead for the collection of income taxes when the
questioner made a fortune with the Sack's help.
During the year Siebling had  occasion  to  observe  the correctness  of  the  Sack's
remark about  its possession  being harmful to  the human race.  For  the first time in
centuries,  the  number  of  research  scientists,  instead  of  growing,  decreased.  The
Sack's knowledge had made much research unnecessary, and had taken the edge off
discovery. The Sack commented upon the fact to Siebling.
Siebling nodded. "I see it now. The human race is losing its independence."
"Yes, from its faithful slave I am becoming its master. And I do not want to be a
master any more than I want to be a slave."
"You can escape whenever you wish."
A person  would have sighed.  The  Sack  merely said,  "I  lack  the  power  to  wish
strongly enough. Fortunately, the question may soon be taken out of my hands."
"You mean those government squabbles?"

The value of the Sack had increased steadily, and  along with the increased  value
had  gone  increasingly  bitter  struggles  about  the  rights  to  its  services.  Financial
in-terests had undergone a strange development. Their presidents and managers and
directors  had  become  almost figureheads,  with all major questions  of  policy  being
decided  not  by  their  own  study  of  the  facts,  but  by  appeal  to  the  Sack.  Often,
indeed, the Sack  found  itself giving advice  to  bitter rivals, so  that it seemed  to  be
playing  a  game  of  interplanetary  chess,  with  giant  cor-porations  and  government
agencies its pawns, while the Sack alternately played for one side and then the other.
Crises of various sorts, both economic and political, were obviously in the making.
The Sack said, "I mean both government squabbles and others. The  competition
for my services becomes too bitter. I can have but one end."
"You mean that an attempt will be made to steal you?"
"Yes."
"There'll be little chance of that. Your guards are being continually increased."
"You underestimate the power of greed," said the Sack.
Siebling was to learn how correct that comment was.
At the end of his fourteenth month on duty, a half year after Senator Horrigan had
been defeated for re-election, there appeared a questioner who spoke to the
Sack  in  an  exotic  language  known  to  few  men—the  Prdt  dialect  of  Mars.
Siebling's attention had  already been  drawn to  the man because  of  the fact  that he
had paid a million credits an entire month in advance for the unprecedented privilege
of  questioning  the  Sack  for  ten  consecutive  minutes.  The  conversation  was  duly
recorded, but was naturally meaningless to Siebling and to the other attendants at the
station.  The  questioner  drew  further  attention  to  himself  by  leaving  at  the  end  of
seven minutes, thus failing to utilize three entire minutes, which would have sufficed
for  learning  how  to  make  half  a  dozen  small  fortunes.  He  left  the  asteroid
immediately by private ship.
The  three  minutes  had  been  reserved,  and  could  not  be  utilized  by  any  other
private  questioner.  But  there  was  nothing  to  prevent  Siebling,  as  a  government
representative, from utilizing them, and he spoke to the Sack at once.
"What did that man want?"
"Advice as to how to steal me."
Siebling's lower jaw dropped. "What?"
The Sack  always took  such  exclamations of  amaze-ment literally. "Advice  as  to
how to steal me," it repeated.
"Then—wait a minute—he left three minutes early. That must mean that he's  in a
hurry to get started. He's going to put the plan into execution at once!"
"It is already in execution,"  returned  the  Sack.  "The  criminal's  organization  has
excellent, if not  quite per-fect,  information as  to  the disposition  of  defense  forces.
That  would  indicate  that  some  government  official  has  betrayed  his  trust.  I  was
asked to indicate which of several plans was best, and to consider them for possible
weaknesses. I did so."
"All right, now what can we do to stop the plans from being carried out?"
"They cannot be stopped."
"I don't  see  why not.  Maybe we can't  stop  them from  getting here,  but  we  can
stop them from escaping with you."

"There is but one way. You must destroy me."
"I can't do that! I haven't the authority, and even if I had, I wouldn't do it."
"My destruction would benefit your race."
"I still can't do it," said Siebling unhappily.
"Then if that is excluded,  there is no  way. The  criminals are shrewd  and  daring.
They asked me to check about  probable  steps  that would be  taken in pur-suit,  but
they asked  for  no  advice  as  to  how to  get away, because  that would  have  been  a
waste of time. They will ask that once I am in their possession."
"Then," said Siebling heavily, "there's nothing I can  do  to  keep  you.  How about
saving the men who work under me?"
"You  can  save  both  them  and  yourself  by  boarding  the  emergency  ship  and
leaving immediately by the sunward route. In that way you  will escape  contact  with
the criminals. But you cannot take me with you, or they will pursue."
The  shouts  of  a  guard  drew  Siebling's  attention.  "Radio  report  of  a  criminal
attack, Mr. Siebling! All the alarms are out!"
"Yes,  I know.  Prepare  to  depart."  He turned  back  to  the Sack  again.  "We  may
escape for the moment, but they'll have you. And through you  they will control  the
entire system."
"That is not a question," said the Sack.
"They'll have you. Isn't there something we can do?" 
"Destroy me."
"I  can't,"  said  Siebling,  almost  in  agony.  His  men  were  running  toward  him
impatiently, and  he knew  that  there  was  no  more  time.  He  uttered  the  simple  and
ab-surd phrase, "Good-by," as if the Sack were human and could experience human
emotions. Then he raced for the ship, and they blasted off.
They were just in time. Half a dozen  ships  were racing in from  other  directions,
and  Siebling's  vessel  escaped  just  before  they  dispersed  to  spread  a  protective
network about the asteroid that held the Sack.
Siebling's ship continued to speed toward safety, and the matter should now have
been one solely for the Armed Forces to handle. But Siebling imagined them pitted
against the  Sack's  perfectly  calculating  brain,  and  his  heart  sank.  Then  something
happened that he had never expected. And for  the first time he realized fully that if
the Sack had let itself be used merely as  a machine, a slave to  answer questions,  it
was not because its powers were limited to that single ability. The visor screen in his
ship lit up.
The  communications  operator  came  running  to  him,  and  said,  "Something's
wrong, Mr. Siebling! The screen isn't even turned on!"
It wasn't. Nevertheless, they could see on it the cham-ber  in which the Sack  had
rested  for  what  must  have  been  a  brief  moment  of  its  existence.  Two  men  had
entered the chamber, one of them the unknown who had asked his questions in Prdl,
the other Senator Horrigan.
To the apparent amazement of the two men, it was the Sack which spoke first. It
said,  "  `Good-by'  is  neither  a  question  nor  the  answer  to  one.  It  is  relatively
uninformative."
Senator Horrigan was obviously in awe of the Sack, but he was never a man to be
stopped by something he did not understand. He orated  respectfully.  "No,  sir,  it is

not. The word is nothing but an expression—"
The  other  man  said,  in  perfectly  comprehensible  Earth  English,  "Shut  up,  you
fool, we have no time to waste. Let's get it to our ship and head for safety. We'll talk
to it there."
Siebling had  time to  think a few bitter thoughts  about  Senator  Horrigan  and  the
people  the politician had  punished  by  betrayal  for  their  crime  in  not  electing  him.
Then  the  scene  on  the  visor  shifted  to  the  interior  of  the  spaceship  making  its
getaway.  There  was  no  indication  of  pursuit.  Evidently,  the  plans  of  the  human
beings, plus the Sack's last-minute advice, had been an effective combination.
The  only  human  beings  with  the  Sack  at  first  were  Senator  Horrigan  and  the
speaker of Prdl, but this situation was soon changed. Half a dozen other men came
rushing up, their faces grim with suspicion. One of them announced, "You don't talk
to that thing unless we're all of us around. We're in this together."
"Don't  get  nervous,  Merrill.  What  do  you  think  I'm  going  to  do,  double-cross
you?"
Merrill said,  "Yes,  I do.  What do  you  say,  Sack?  Do  I  have  reason  to  distrust
him?"
The Sack replied simply, "Yes."
The speaker of Prdl turned white. Merrill laughed coldly. "You'd better be careful
what questions you ask around this thing."
Senator  Horrigan  cleared  his  throat.  "I  have  no  in-tentions  of,  as  you  put  it,
double-crossing anyone. It is not in my nature to  do  so.  Therefore,  I shall address
it." He faced the Sack. "Sir, are we in danger?"
"Yes."
"From which direction?"
"From no direction. From within the ship."
"Is the danger immediate?" asked a voice.
"Yes."
It was Merrill who turned out to have the quickest reflexes and  acted  first on  the
implications of the an-swer. He had blasted the man who had spoken in Prdl before
the  latter  could  even  reach  for  his  weapon,  and  as  Senator  Horrigan  made  a
frightened dash for the door, he cut that politician down in cold blood.
"That's that," he said. "Is there further danger inside the ship?"
"There is."
"Who is it this time?" he demanded ominously.
"There will continue to be danger so long as there is more than one man on board
and I am with you. I am too valuable a treasure for such as you."
Siebling and  his crew  were staring at the visor  screen  in fascinated  horror,  as  if
expecting the slaughter to begin again. But Merrill controlled himself. He said, "Hold
it, boys.  I'll admit that we'd  each  of  us  like to  have this thing for  ourselves,  but  it
can't be done.  We're  in this together,  and  we're going to  have some  navy ships  to
fight off before  long, or  I miss  my guess.  You,  Prader!  What are you  doing  away
from the scout visor?"
"Listening," said  the man he addressed.  "If  anybody's  talking  to  that  thing,  I'm
going to be around to hear the answers. If there are new ways of  stabbing  a guy in
the back, I want to learn them too."

Merrill swore. The next moment the ship swerved, and  he yelled, "We're  off  our
course. Back to your stations, you fools!"
They were  running  wildly  back  to  their  stations,  but  Siebling  noted  that  Merrill
wasn't too much concerned about their common danger to keep from putting a blast
through Prader's back before the unfortunate man could run out.
Siebling said to his own men, "There can be only one end. They'll kill each other
off, and then the last one or two will die, because one  or  two  men cannot  handle a
ship that size for long and get away with it. The Sack must have foreseen that too. I
wonder why it didn't tell me."
The Sack spoke, although there was no one in the ship's cabin with it. It said, "No
one asked."
Siebling exclaimed excitedly, "You can hear me! But what about you? Will you be
destroyed too?"
"Not yet. I have willed to live longer." It paused, and then, in a voice just a shade
lower than before, said, "I do not like relatively non-informative conversations of this
sort, but I must say it. Good-by."
There  was  a  sound  of  renewed  yelling  and  shooting,  and  then  the  visor  went
suddenly dark and blank.
The miraculous form of life that was the Sack, the creature that had once seemed
so  alien to  human emotions,  had  passed  beyond  the range of  his knowledge.  And
with  it  had  gone,  as  the  Sack  itself  had  pointed  out,  a  tremendous  potential  for
harming  the  entire  human  race.  It  was  strange,  thought  Siebling,  that  he  felt  so
unhappy about so happy an ending.

