 
Meet the Scoundrels of the Spaceways as They Find That Cheating Cheaters is Universal 
 
THE Saturnians had never seen anything like it, and they crowded around the novel space ship that
Trenholm and O'Hara had set down among them. The native's broad good-natured faces were agape
with excitement. 
On the side of the ship was a flamboyant painting of an Indian girl holding aloft a bottle that contained
The Red Man's Old-Fashioned Radioactive Herb Remedy, fortified with vitamins A to R inclusive, the
latter made with the most recently discovered carbon isotope. 
Beside the girl, there had originally been a sign announcing that the ship was the home of Trenholm
and O'Hara's Gigantic Medicine Show, but the names of the owners had been painted out and replaced
by the better serving names of the Jones Brothers. Trenholm and O'Hara, with understandable modesty,
desired no publicity for themselves. 
O'Hara was giving the Saturnians his usual spiel now. 
"Come closer, ladies and gentlemen, come closer," he chanted. The ladies and gentlemen, eyes alight
with expectation, obeyed. Their faces were elephantine, with huge flapping ears, but without trunks. And
to O'Hara they brought back old memories of those ancient cartoons that in bygone days had depicted
the Republican Party as a man with an elephant's head. 
But it was not the heads that chiefly interested him. It was the rough, pink beads they wore around
their necks. 
"We are now about to give you, ladies and gentlemen," he went on, "absolutely free of charge, two
hours of the most solid, fascinating, instructive, and educational entertainment it has ever been the fortune
of any mortal being to experience! Yes, sir, ladies and gentlemen. Entertainment unparalleled and
absolutely free of charge!" 
Trenholm threw a switch then, and their ancient movie projector flashed a picture of a Martian
dancing girl on the three-dimensional screen, while the braying of one of the latest dance tunes came from
the loudspeaker. Most of the music had been produced by the new electric trumpets and trombones,
with shrill overtones that were guaranteed to deafen a sensitive ear. The Saturnians watched and listened
as if spellbound. O'Hara stared at the pink necklaces, and whispered: 
"Trenholm, my lad, we've got a fortune in our hands!" 
 
TRENHOLM nodded. He was a large man, blond, something like an ancient Viking in appearance,
but with no trace of Viking recklessness. Recklessness wouldn't have paid. These Saturnians were twelve
feet tall, with muscles even out of proportion to their size, and an Earth man compared to them had no
more than the strength of a child. 
O'Hara was small and dark, with a volubility that contrasted with Trenholm's tendency to silence.
And at the moment, he was excited, very excited. 
Attracted by the noise of the music, more Saturnians were flocking to the ship. O'Hara almost went
crazy trying to estimate the value of those necklaces. They were made of satargyrite, which was mostly
silver sulphide, but they contained appreciable quantities of Element 102. 
Element 102 was the only known source of atomic energy whose transformation was capable of
being accelerated or retarded at will, and the price for it was high, extremely so. But getting it was a very
dangerous business. The Saturnians, being below par mentally, were protected by stringent laws. If
Trenholm and O'Hara were caught at their little game, the penalty would be at least ten years in a jail that
boasted no air conditioning, no television movies, and which guaranteed to teach wayward men the error
of their ways. 
The reel showing the Martian dancing girl came to an end, and Trenholm slipped on another that
depicted a Mercurian minstrel show. The jokes and gags were so babyish that a ten-year-old Earth child
would have flushed with shame to be caught listening to them, but they suited the Saturnian taste
perfectly, and gales of laughter swept the crowd. 

O'Hara did a little mental calculating then. Judging from the mass of people collected here, they
would get rid of their radioactive herb remedy in three days. From advance information they had secured,
they could reasonably count on a Saturnian patrol ship being back on the fourth day. That gave them a
whole day to spare. O'Hara grinned, and almost felt the untold wealth in his pocket. 
The Mercurian minstrels wheezed to an end, and O'Hara stepped forward with his right hand raised
for attention. 
"Ladies and gentlemen," he roared, "we offer you now an attraction so sensational, so unbelievable,
that you, will think your eyes and ears are playing you false. Nothing like it has been seen or heard of on
Saturn from the beginning of time. Nothing like it has been seen or heard of on any of the planets. Ladies
and gentlemen, we offer Waloo, the Saturnian with the intelligence of an Earthman!" 
Waloo stepped forward, grinning with pride. He seemed like an average Saturnian, and he was
exactly that. They had picked Waloo up stranded on Mercury, and he had shown no wisdom there. But
now he was wearing a pair of huge spectacles whose rims were caught around his flapping ears. And to
the other Saturnians he must have looked as wise as a judge. 
"Waloo," said O'Hara gravely, "how much is two plus two?" 
 
WALOO hesitated. "Four," he ventured after a while. 
The crowd began to whisper excitedly. Evidently they were checking up. After a few seconds,
however, most of them were convinced that Waloo's answer was correct, and they stared at him
admiringly. 
"How much is four times six?" O'Hara asked. 
"Twenty-four," Waloo guessed. "How much is ninety-nine divided by three?" 
"Seventeen," replied Waloo, grinning stupidly, and O'Hara smothered an oath and swept on to the
next question before the Saturnians could make up their minds whether or not he had made a mistake. 
For a time Waloo answered correctly. And then O'Hara played his trump card. 
"Ladies and gentlemen," he cried. "You have all heard of the Einstein theory. It is so difficult to
understand that few people, even on Earth, know what it is. But Waloo knows! Waloo, explain the
Einstein theory." 
Waloo began slowly. 
"In ordinary mechanics," he intoned, "if a body moves with the velocity `u' with reference to '0,' and
`0' itself moves with velocity 'v' with reference to '0'—" 
They were stricken with awe. They hadn't the slightest suspicion of what it all meant, of course. For
that matter, neither had Trenholm and O'Hara. Trenholm had simply taken the words from a
long-outmoded textbook on physics, and copied them for Waloo's benefit on a small placard. 
The placard was hung on the wall of the space ship, where to the near sighted Saturnians it was
practically invisible. But Waloo, with his spectacles, could read the words with ease, just as he had read
the answers to the questions O'Hara had asked him. They were spelled in the new interplanetary
phonetic manner, and even a Saturnian could pronounce them, no matter how ignorant he might be of
their meaning. The whole difficulty with Waloo had been in teaching him to reply to the questions in
order, and not to skip on to the next question's answer before the previous one had been given, as he
repeatedly did. 
Waloo came to the end of the Einstein theory, and there was a burst of spontaneous applause.
Waloo flushed happily. 
"The damn fool must really think he knows what he's talking about," O'Hara thought, and then
addressed the crowd again. 
"My friends, you have seen and heard this remarkable exhibition. Would you ever have expected
such intelligence from a Saturnian? Would you not have called it impossible? Well you, too, can be as
intelligent as Waloo. Yes, ladies and gentlemen, incredible as it may seem, we can increase your
intelligence a thousandfold! Just drink one bottle of genuine Red Man's Old-Fashioned Radioactive Herb
Remedy with vitamins A to R every day for five days, and you will be able to answer all the questions
Waloo has answered. 

"This intelligence remedy, discovered by an old Indian with one-fourth Martian blood in Oklahoma,
U.S.A., Earth, while digging far roots, has a record of one hundred percent success! It is radio-active, as
you can see when I bring a bottle close to this electroscope. It has all the vitamins in the world, and it
contains that magic element, carbon isotope seventeen-B the form of carbon responsible for the genius of
our greatest thinkers. Results guaranteed, or your money back." 
 
O'HARA had them going, and he knew it. Stupid as they were, the Saturnians differed from other
stupid people, in that they were aware of their deficiency. They had a tremendous respect for intelligence
and learning, and would do anything to improve their minds. O'Hara did not tell them that on Earth, the
same Radio-active Herb Remedy, consisting of little more than a trace of chemical and some colored
water, had been advertised as a purifier of the blood stream and a cure for various disease. On Mercury
they had guaranteed it to increase the strength of the muscles. The remedy had an unpleasant taste, and
that made people believe in it. And for occasional doubters, he and Trenholm could refer to that Martian
doctor who had written a crazy article solemnly asserting that they could improve the intelligence.
Sometimes O'Hara could not help grinning when he realized that despite all advances in science,
people had the same old weaknesses and desires, and fell for the same old tricks. 
"Results guaranteed, or your money back!" he repeated. 
"The price, you idiot, the price !" Trenholm whispered. "Tell them the price!" O'Hara had a tendency
to become intoxicated with his own words. 
"And what do we charge for our magic Radio-active Herb Remedy?" declaimed O'Hara. "Not one
thousand Interplanetary Lead Standard dollars, which it is well worth, ladies and gentlemen, which it is
well worth. Not one hundred dollars. Not even ten dollars! No, all we ask for five bottles of this
wonderful brain stimulator is one small necklace of pink beads. 
"Think of it, just one small necklace of worthless pink beads for five bottles! And as an extra added
bonus, to the first ten purchasers buying this wonderful Radio-active Herb Remedy with all the vitamins,
we intend to give away, absolutely free of charge, one pair of beautiful, hand-made, guaranteed plastic
spectacles that will make you look as intelligent as you are going to be!" 
If the Saturnians had been impatient to buy the remedy before, the offer of the spectacles stampeded
them. They pressed forward in so dense a mass that O'Hara was forced to plead with them. 
"Just a moment, ladies and gentle men, just a moment!" he boomed. "There is enough of the
Radio-active Herb Remedy for all. And my brother and partner, Mr. Jones, authorizes me to state that
our offer of spectacles to the first ten purchasers will be extended to every purchaser!" 
It was an hour before the buying spree had ended and the last Saturnian had gone, his five bottles of
Radioactive Herb Remedy clutched firmly to his breast, and his spectacles with their lenses of plain,
green-tinted translucite suspended from his ears. O'Hara was dancing around the ship. 
"Almost half the stock gone !" he gloated, fondling the necklaces. "Trenholm, one more evening like
this, and we're getting out of this place. We'll have enough to be rich!" 
 
TRENHOLM was more restrained. "Tomorrow's haul won't be as good as this one," he warned.
"We got the cream of the crop tonight." 
"If only I had thought to take more bottles," O'Hara groaned. He looked around the ship. "Where's
Waloo?" he asked suddenly. 
Waloo was gone. 
"He's out there in the open country," observed Trenholm. "We'll have to go after him." 
O'Hara nodded, and went into the ship. He returned with a small round metal object in his hand. 
"For the stinger prongs," he explained, and they set out. 
Overhead the rings of Saturn cast a faint, reflecting light, and they could see without using their
electric rays. The countryside had an eerie appearance in the semi-darkness. The plants were pyramidal
in shape, rising from a broad base, and coming almost to a point, so that they might conserve their heat
against the freezing temperatures that would come during the long night. They were almost all dark red
and brown in color, and there was no touch of green to relieve the ugly monotony. 

Trenholm and O'Hara remained at first on a well-traveled path. Then, from far off to the right, came
the whinnying of a megapod. They stopped suddenly. 
"That's probably it," said Trenholm. 
"Waloo heard it, and set out to capture it." 
They turned off the path to the right. A small glowing helix came twisting slowly past them, shedding a
lurid violet light, and they gave it a wide berth. When excited, the helix had been known to wrap itself
with incredible speed around a man's arm or leg, and squeeze. There was terrific force in the luminescent
coils, and the usual result was that the arm or leg fell off, the stump cauterized by the radiation as neatly
as if done by a surgeon's electrodes. 
In the distance they saw a megapod bound into the air, and come sailing down again slowly. Then
they heard a low whistle. That was undoubtedly Waloo. 
The Saturnian was no more than a few hundred feet from them, and if they were lucky they would
see him in less than five minutes. As they made their way forward, however, a sudden shadow fell on
them. They stopped again and looked up. 
Apparently descending from a spot in one of Saturn's rings, far to the left of them, a cloud of what
seemed to be dust was tracing a parabolic path in the air. 
"I guess that's it," O'Hara said, and grasped the small metal object he had taken from the ship more
tightly. "Suppose we put our backs to one of those plants?" he suggested. 
Trenholm shook his head. 
"The prongs might slide down its sides," he pointed out. "We'd better stay as far out in the open as
we can. Save the energy in that projector." 
The particles of dust came closer, so that they seemed like small black spheres. Then, while still high
up, the spheres distintegrated, and there were a thousand particles for each one that had existed before.
They fell less rapidly now, having encountered the resistance of the Saturnian air. But they fell
nevertheless, and when apparently only a mile up, the new particles, themselves grown to black spheres,
disintegrated in turn. 
"Do they split again?" asked O'Hara. 
"No. They're individual stinger animals now." 
 
AS the animals drifted down, the Earthmen could make out their outlines. Each black leathery
balloon was almost two feet in diameter. There was no appearance of eyes or any other features. Behind
each balloon were three large purple streamers several yards in length. 
It was these streamers, arranged like the prongs of a fork, that had given the animals their name, and
it was in them that the danger lay. A single touch of their purple fronds would incapacitate a Saturnian, or
kill an Earthman. 
The prongs were coming closer now, seeming to fill the whole sky. 
"Turn on the projector," Trenholm said. 
O'Hara pressed a button, and held the projector over his head. They could see very little, for the
prongs blotted out most of the light, and the projector's radiation was ultra-violet. But they knew the
projector was working, for above them a prong suddenly came within range, and exploded! 
The ultra-violet light had struck the black balloon, and both the leathery substance and the purple
streamers had dissolved into gas. O'Hara could smell a faint odor of sulfur compounds. 
The prongs began to explode rapidly now, and for a moment the space above them became clear.
But other prongs came drifting in from all sides, and O'Hara could not let up for a second. When he tired,
Trenholm took the projector from him, and directed it against the silent throng of invaders. 
A prong came within ten feet of them without exploding, and O'Hara tore it to pieces with a shot
from his electric gun. 
'"The radiation is getting weak now," Trenholm snapped. "If they keep coming—" 
A faint wind had sprung up suddenly, and all the prongs began to drift toward the left. 
"It'll drive them away," exclaimed O'Hara happily. "All we have to do is wait." 
The wind freshened, and within a minute it rose to hurricane intensity. 

And after that the rain hit them. 
Most of the prongs had drifted far enough away to be no longer dangerous, and the rest were
disintegrating in the rain. The raindrops were enormous, at least three inches in diameter, and they came
down with many times the force of any hailstones Trenholm and O'Hara had ever seen on earth. 
They fell without breaking up into smaller drops because they were not pure water, but a viscous
aqueous solution. The force of the wind had whirled them up from a lake where they had been resting
quietly, and was now hurling them at Trenholm and O'Hara. 
The two men cast themselves on the ground in the lee of a tetraphyte, one of the huge pyramidal
plants, and waited for the storm to pass. The drops of rain hit them and splattered, and the droplets
rolled down their faces go that they could taste them. They were bitter and nauseous, and their taste was
almost worse than the battering they were receiving from the rain. 
In ten minutes, the wind ceased suddenly, and with it the rain. The two men rose to their feet
painfully, and squeezed as much of the liquid as they could out of their clothes. Ahead of them, the
megapod sprang into the air a second time, and once more they could hear Waloo whistling to the animal
enticingly. 
 
THEY started forward again. Soon they could see the megapod clearly. At first glance it looked like
nothing more than four huge mustard-colored legs, grotesquely held together at the top by an insignificant
body. On each leg was a pair of wings, kept folded when the animal sprang upward, extended as soon
as the highest point in the leap had been reached, thus permitting a gradual descent. The wings were
useful also during a high wind, for then the animal could soar, and travel long distances without effort. The
legs were jointed, and the forelegs were twice as long as the others, so that on the ground the megapod
had difficulty keeping its balance. But it occasionally made use of a stiff tail that acted as an additional
support. The head was round and tiny, and hardly seemed fitted for a beast of sufficient size to carry a
Saturnian. 
Waloo was holding something green out to it. As Trenholm and O'Hara came closer, they recognized
the material as the roots of a rare variety of tetraphyte that was growing all about them. At the same time
that Waloo was trying to lure the megapod nearer to him, he whistled coaxingly. 
The megapod stared at Waloo, its tiny eyes showing its indecision. Finally it leaped forward, and
nibbled the green roots. Waloo did not move, and the megapod, encouraged, began to eat steadily. 
"It's wild, isn't it?" O'Hara asked, low-voiced. 
"Wild, but not ownerless," Trenholm said. "This field we're in belongs to a group of Saturnians." 
"Then if Waloo is caught—" 
"It's jail for him." 
O'Hara frowned. 
"What about us?" 
"The Saturnians will probably make enough noise for someone to send for the patrol," Trenholm
replied. "You know what the patrol, will do to us. Jail, and reconditioning of our evil way." 
"Don't you think we ought to get out of here?" O'Hara exclaimed. "We need Waloo for a couple of
evenings yet." Trenholm stiffened suddenly. "Something's happening to the beast!" 
The megapod had fallen asleep on its feet. With its tail jammed against the ground to keep itself from
falling, and its eyes closed, it resembled a piece of sculpture. The green roots had contained a drug called
somnal, and it had acted with great speed. 
Waloo had drawn several pieces of thin, metal twine from his pocket, and was carefully tying the
megapod's wings, to prevent them from unfolding. 
"Where did the Saturnians ever get the brains to handle these animals?" O'Hara wondered. 
"They didn't," answered Trenholm. "This method of capture was devised by a Martian and taught to
them. Watch." 
The wings had all been tied, and Waloo carefully mounted the animal's back, his feet wrapping
closely around it. Then he cautiously bit one of the vertebrae just below the megapod's neck. With one
startled spring, his steed was leaping high in the air. 

 
WITHOUT the wings to retard its descent, the megapod came down again as quickly as it had gone
up, and landed with a shock that sent a tremor through its body. His legs wrapped firmly about it, Waloo
held on. The megapod leaped again. 
This time, with the pain of the descent, it staggered and almost fell. The next leap was not so high,
and the following one still lower. Within a few minutes the megapod had become so bruised that it
refused to spring. Then Waloo carefully untied the hind wings, and bit the megapod's neck again. The
megapod leaped, and on the descent, spread its two free wings. The shock was not so severe now. 
In half an hour, Waloo had reached the stage where he dared untie all the wings. The megapod no
longer attempted to throw him off its back, and Trenhoim and O'Hara watched in fascination as the
animal and its rider went floating about the field. 
A sudden crunching sound on the ground nearby drew the Earthmen's attention. A Saturnian was
approaching, his eyes fixed on Waloo. His face showed an expression of deep anger. 
"We'd better warn the damn fool," O'Hara whispered to his partner. 
Waloo was unconscious of the danger. Then the Saturnian bellowed suddenly in a voice that sounded
like the roar of a hundred bulls, and from behind him came an answering bellow. The megapod, startled,
leaped into the air, and, spreading his wings, turned upside down. Waloo began to slip off, clutching
desperately at the animal's back to keep his balance. But his efforts were in vain. As he fell, the megapod
turned right side up, hit the ground again, and bounded away. 
"What do we do now?" O'Hara demanded. 
"We run," Trenholm said. "Somebody is sure to send for the patrol. We can't afford to wait for it." 
"But Waloo—" 
"The worst he'll get is a month or two. They'd give us ten years and recondition us. Do you want
that?" 
"But we've still got some unsold bottles!" 
"We've taken in enough satargyrite to be sitting pretty the rest of our lives. Come on!" 
Waloo was lying where he had fallen, stunned. They ran without looking back toward him. At first
the noise of the Saturnians behind them died away, but as they approached the space ship, it suddenly
grew in intensity once more. 
Waloo was coming after them in great twenty-foot strides. Behind him, the pack of Saturnians was
howling their heads off, calling on him to stop. Waloo paid them as much attention as if they hadn't
existed. 
A hundred yards from the ship, he passed O'Hara and Trenholm, who had to swerve aside to
prevent being run over by his hurtling body. He got to the ship five seconds ahead of them, and slammed
the door in their faces. 
"What do we do now?" O'Hara cried. "If they decide to make up for losing Waloo by taking it out
on us—" 
But the Saturnians were not interested in the Earthmen. They wanted Waloo. Through the transparent
windows of the space ship, they could see him, the key to the door in his hand. 
 
THEY shouted at him; they cursed; they urged him to come out and take his medicine like a man. But
Waloo didn't budge. Then the Saturnians, in their rage, began to bang against the ship. 
"They'll wreck it," O'Hara moaned. "And the patrol will be coming back soon!" 
Trenhoim was breathing hard. 
"The first thing to do," he said, "is to calm down. Take it easy, O'Hara. It'll be a half hour before the
patrol gets here, and we've got plenty of time. We've got to calm these Saturnians and get Waloo out of
the ship." 
"Is that all?" scoffed O'Hara excitedly. 
"Take it easy, or I'll smack you right in the teeth. That's better. I've got a plan. You're going to talk to
these people. Waloo can hear you through the auditory tube, and whether the rest of them pay much
attention to you or not won't matter at first. Give them a regular spiel, and lead up to the introduction of

Waloo, the intelligent Saturnian." 
O'Hara got it, and smiled slowly. He took a deep breath, and shouted: "Ladies and gentlemen!" 
The hubbub came to a sudden stop. 
"Ladies and gentlemen," he went on, "you are about to witness, absolutely free of charge, two hours
of the most solid, fascinating, instructive, and educational entertainment it has ever been the fortune of any
mortal being to experience. Yes sir, ladies and gentlemen. Entertainment unparalleled, and absolutely free
of charge." 
There was magic in O'Hara's voice, for they were actually listening to him. They muttered, but they
listened. 
"And to begin with," orated O'Hara, "we offer you an attraction so sensational, so unbelievable, that
you will think your eyes and ears are playing you false. Nothing like it has been seen or heard of on
Saturn since the beginning of time. Nothing like it has been seen or heard of on any of the planets. Ladies
and gentlemen, we offer Waloo, the Saturnian with the intelligence of an Earthman!" 
And Waloo, hypnotized by the familiar introduction, opened the door of the ship and stepped out, his
spectacles hanging from his ears! 
The mob of Saturnians uttered one huge roar of triumph, and plunged forward, carrying Waloo back
into the ship. Trenholm and O'Hara stood by shouting helplessly. 
It was ten minutes before the Saturnians thought of getting out again, and when they did, they carried
the unconscious Waloo as a trophy of victory. For the next couple of months, Waloo would inhabit a
cell. 
O'Hara and Trenholm hastened inside. At first glance, the place was a shambles, but the machinery
had not been damaged. 
They swung shut the door, locked the auditory tube, and started the engine. 
"Ready?" Trenholm asked, and without waiting for a reply, gave the ship the gun with a jerk that sent
O'Hara flying. 
 
THE ship rose quickly, passed the rings of Saturn, and straightened out into space in the direction of
Earth. O'Hara wiped the sweat from his forehead. Through the rear windows they could see the patrol
ship coasting in to make a landing. 
"That was close," O'Hara panted. "I only hope they don't try to follow us." 
"I'll take them a half hour to find out from the Saturnians what's been going on, and by then it'll be too
late." 
"If you knew how glad I am to get out of that place—" O'Hara began, and then he howled. "The
bottles! The bottles!" 
"What about them?" Trenholm demanded. 
"They're gone! Those Saturnians have stolen all our 'Radio-active Herb Remedy! There's just one
bottle left. And you claimed they were honest!" 
"They are, but they have no sense. If they see something in front of them, they take it." 
"The dumb clucks." And then O'Hara's voice froze with real horror. "They've taken the pink
necklaces! And we hid them !" 
"What!" Trenholm gasped. 
"Every last one of them!" O'Hara trembled. "We've made a mistake, Trenholm. Those Saturnians
aren't stupid !" 
Trenholm looked. O'Hara was right. Every last necklace was gone. "This is a dishonest business,"
Trenholm said heavily. "We should never have gone into it. But I don't understand—" He interrupted
himself. "Well, I'll be damned!" 
"What is it now?" 
"That damn herb remedy! Remember what first gave us the idea of an intelligence improver? That
article we read about an infusion of Martian plants containing the new carbon isotope temporarily
increasing the I. Q. Well, we used those plants to make our stuff. O'Hara, we actually made those
Saturnians intelligent enough to rob us!" 

"This is a fine time to be thinking of that!" stormed O'Hara. 
"Calm down," Trenholm urged, "and have a drink." 
"At a time like this, it's a drink you're offering me!" 
"Our last bottle of Red Man's Old-Fashioned Radio-active Herb Remedy. There's nothing better for
stimulating the brain. I'm thinking we have greater need of it than those formerly dumb clucks we left
behind us," Trenholm added gloomily. 
 

