www.allitebooks.com

Windows 7: Up and Running
www.allitebooks.com

www.allitebooks.com

Windows 7: Up and Running
Wei-Meng Lee
Beijing • Cambridge • Farnham • Köln • Sebastopol • Taipei • Tokyo
www.allitebooks.com

Windows 7: Up and Running
by Wei-Meng Lee
Copyright © 2010 Wei-Meng Lee. All rights reserved.
Printed in the United States of America.
Published by O’Reilly Media, Inc., 1005 Gravenstein Highway North, Sebastopol, CA 95472.
O’Reilly books may be purchased for educational, business, or sales promotional use. Online editions
are also available for most titles (http://my.safaribooksonline.com). For more information, contact our
corporate/institutional sales department: (800) 998-9938 or corporate@oreilly.com.
Editors:
Brian Jepson and Laurel Ruma
Production Editor:
Sumita Mukherji
Copyeditor:
Nancy Kotary
Proofreader:
Sumita Mukherji
Indexer:
Fred Brown
Cover Designer:
Karen Montgomery
Interior Designer:
David Futato
Illustrator:
Robert Romano
Printing History:
October 2009:
First Edition. 
Nutshell Handbook, the Nutshell Handbook logo, and the O’Reilly logo are registered trademarks of
O’Reilly Media, Inc. Windows 7: Up and Running, the image of a Persian greyhound, and related trade
dress are trademarks of O’Reilly Media, Inc.
Many of the designations used by manufacturers and sellers to distinguish their products are claimed as
trademarks. Where those designations appear in this book, and O’Reilly Media, Inc., was aware of a
trademark claim, the designations have been printed in caps or initial caps.
While every precaution has been taken in the preparation of this book, the publisher and author assume
no responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from the use of the information con-
tained herein.
ISBN: 978-0-596-80404-6
[M]
1253637954
www.allitebooks.com

Table of Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  ix
1. Installing Windows 7 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  1
Versions of Windows 7
1
System Requirements
3
Installing Windows 7
4
What’s New in Windows 7
9
Summary
17
2. Getting Around Windows 7 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  19
Taskbar
19
Aero Peek
20
Pinning Applications to the Taskbar
21
Jump Lists
22
Libraries
26
Exploring Libraries
26
Creating Your Own Library
27
Desktop Gadgets
31
Summary
35
3. File Sharing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  37
HomeGroup
37
Creating a New HomeGroup
39
Joining a HomeGroup
43
Sharing Files
43
Sharing Printers
43
Streaming Music
46
File Sharing with Windows XP
47
File Sharing with Mac OS X
50
Summary
51
v
www.allitebooks.com

4. Security . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  53
Action Center
53
User Account Control
57
The Credential Manager
59
Using the Credential Manager
60
Linking Online IDs
61
Backing Up the Credentials
63
BitLocker Drive Encryption
64
BitLocker
65
BitLocker To Go
67
Encrypting File System (NTFS Encryption)
69
Creating Certificates
71
Importing Certificates
73
Antispyware and Firewall Applications
73
Windows Defender
73
Windows Firewall
75
Summary
77
5. Essential Applications . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  79
Windows Live Essentials
79
Windows Live Messenger
80
Windows Live Mail
81
Windows Live Photo Gallery
87
Windows Live Writer
88
Windows Live Family Safety
89
Windows Live Movie Maker
91
Built-in Applications
92
Snipping Tool
92
Sound Recorder
94
Windows PowerShell
95
Windows Photo Viewer
97
Windows Disc Image Burner
99
Windows Media Center
101
Math Input Panel
103
XPS Viewer
104
Sticky Notes
105
Calculator
105
Microsoft WordPad
107
Microsoft Paint
107
Windows Media Player 12
107
Summary
108
vi | Table of Contents
www.allitebooks.com

6. Internet Explorer 8 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  109
Usability
109
Smart Address Bar
110
Enhanced Tabbed Browsing and Grouping
110
Compatibility View
112
Find on Page
113
Improved Search
114
Web Slices
116
Accelerators
120
Privacy
121
InPrivate Browsing
122
InPrivate Filtering
123
Suggested Sites
125
Security
127
Domain Highlighting
127
SmartScreen Filter
128
Summary
130
7. Using Windows XP Mode . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  131
Installing Windows XP Mode
131
Using Windows XP Mode
132
Running Windows XP Mode Seamlessly with Windows 7
135
USB Mode
137
Installing Other Operating Systems
138
Creating a New Virtual Machine
138
Starting the New Virtual Machine
139
Summary
142
8. Windows 7 Tips and Tricks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 143
Customizing the UI
143
Change Windows Explorer’s Default View
143
Open a Command Window Anywhere
147
Use Themes for Other Locations
148
Touch Gestures
150
Auto-Login
151
Taskbar
152
Rearranging the Icons in the Taskbar
153
Displaying the Old Quick Launch Bar
153
Taskbar Shortcuts
154
Pinning Folders to the Taskbar
157
Utilities/Troubleshooting Tools
157
Projector Screen Selection
157
Problems Steps Recorder
158
Table of Contents | vii
www.allitebooks.com

Troubleshooting Sleep Mode Problems
159
Windows Disk Image Burner
162
Calibrating Your Display
163
Windows 7 Compatibility Mode
164
Installing Windows 7
167
Installing Windows 7 Using a USB Hard Drive
167
Installing Windows 7 Using a USB Thumb Drive
170
Dual Booting Windows 7 with Windows Vista and Windows XP
171
Installing Windows 7 on a Virtual Hard Disk (VHD) File
172
Summary
177
Index . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  179
viii | Table of Contents
www.allitebooks.com

Preface
Windows 7 is Microsoft’s latest version of its Windows operating system. Unlike its
predecessor, Vista, Windows 7 offers incremental upgrades and is aimed at ensuring
maximum compatibility with applications and hardware already supported in Vista.
Microsoft’s key agenda around Windows 7 is to woo many of the Windows XP users
who skipped Vista.
Windows 7 offers significant performance improvements over its predecessors—most
notably Windows Vista and Windows XP. It is still based on the Vista kernel, but comes
with a redesigned Windows shell, a new taskbar, and a less-annoying User Account
Control (UAC) system. There are also improvements in networking, in particular the
introduction of a home network system known as HomeGroup.
This compact book offers the quickest path for Windows XP and Vista users to get
started with Microsoft’s new Windows 7 operating system. Microsoft has learned from
the mistakes of Windows Vista, and Windows 7 shows it—this new OS is much faster
and more stable. Millions of people have tried the public beta and Windows 7 Release
Candidate, and many give the software high marks.
Windows 7: Up and Running helps you be productive immediately. You’ll learn what’s
new and what’s changed, as well as everything you need to get going, from installing
to configuring the system. Windows 7 is poised to be a big hit among PC users, and
with this handy guide, you can be up and running with this new operating system right
away.
This book will help you:
• Quickly learn the system’s user interface, including the taskbar, Jump Lists, Desk-
top Gadgets, Aero Shake, system tray, and more.
• Discover the joys of networking with HomeGroup and file sharing, along with
improved Wi-Fi usability.
ix
www.allitebooks.com

• Take a tour of the system’s improved security, including the Action Center, User
Account Control, and the Credential Manager.
• Learn how to use Windows Live Essentials for messaging, photo sharing, movie
making, email, and blogging.
• Get to know the built-in applications and utilities, such as IE8, Windows Media
Player 12, Microsoft Paint, and WordPad.
How This Book Is Organized
The chapters in this book are organized as follows:
Chapter 1, Installing Windows 7
This chapter first walks you through the different versions of Windows 7 available,
and then gives you an overview of the installation process. You will then take a
look at some of the new features in Windows 7 before we examine them in detail
in subsequent chapters.
Chapter 2, Getting Around Windows 7
Among the new features (see Chapter 1) are the much improved taskbar, the im-
proved capabilities of gadgets, as well as the many UI improvements that make the
Windows experience a much more enjoyable one. In this chapter, you will take a
more detailed look at three features that have the greatest effect on your daily
Windows experience: taskbar, Libraries, and Desktop Gadgets.
Chapter 3, File Sharing
File sharing has been one of the common features across all Windows operating
systems. Besides sharing files with other Windows computers, the file sharing fea-
ture in Windows 7 also allows users to share files with other non-Windows com-
puters, such as those running Mac OS X and Linux. In Windows 7, file sharing has
been further simplified with the new HomeGroup feature. In this chapter, you will
learn about the HomeGroup feature, as well as learn how to share files with other
computers on the network.
Chapter 4, Security
On the security front, Windows 7 has streamlined several features found in Win-
dows Vista, making them much more accessible and less irritating in this new
version of Windows. For example, the infamous UAC is one of the most irritating
features in Vista. In this version of Windows, Microsoft has tweaked UAC so that
it interrupts users only when needed. Microsoft has also replaced the Security
Center in Vista with the new Action Center in Windows 7, which focuses not just
on displaying problems, but also on offering suggestions and solutions to solve
problems. The Credential Manager now has the ability to back up its credential
information to a file. In addition, Enterprise and Ultimate users can now encrypt
a portable thumb drive using BitLocker To Go.
x | Preface

Chapter 5, Essential Applications
One of the longstanding Windows traditions that Windows 7 broke is related to
bundled applications: it contains far fewer bundled applications than did
previous versions. For example, Microsoft Mail will not be available when you
install Windows 7. Similarly, Messenger will also not be available when you install
Windows 7. Instead, Microsoft will offer a suite of essential applications as a sep-
arate download. Doing so allows Microsoft to have separate release timelines for
Windows and these essential applications. This also allows it to make these es-
sential applications available for earlier versions of Windows more easily. In the
first part of this chapter, you will first see how you can install the suite of essential
applications from Microsoft free of charge. You will then look at the suite of built-
in applications that ship with Windows 7.
Chapter 6, Internet Explorer 8
Windows 7 ships with the new Internet Explorer 8 (IE8). IE8 builds on the foun-
dation of IE7, and this latest release contains many useful enhancements in the
areas of usability, privacy, and security. In this chapter, you will learn about some
of the innovations in IE8 and how they affect the way you surf the Web.
Chapter 7, Using Windows XP Mode
When Microsoft introduced Windows Vista, many users were very upset, as they
discovered that some of their older applications could not work correctly in Vista
(some application vendors simply did not upgrade their applications for Vista, or
charged more for new versions than users were happy to pay). As such, a lot of
users (and businesses) cited this as a reason for not upgrading to Vista. Microsoft
realizes the severity of this problem and hopes to solve this problem in Windows
7 by providing a feature known as Windows XP Mode (XPM). XPM lets you run
your legacy Windows XP applications inside a virtualized environment, either from
within a virtual XP window or as a seamlessly integrated application within Win-
dows 7.
Chapter 8, Windows 7 Tips and Tricks
Windows 7 is a complex operating system that is more evolutionary than revolu-
tionary. A lot of features available in Windows 7 are based on the features available
in the earlier versions of Windows: XP and Vista. Nevertheless, Windows 7 con-
tains a wealth of new features that greatly improve the usability of Windows and
its performance. In this chapter, you will learn some of the tips and tricks to getting
the most out of Windows 7.
Who This Book Is For
This book is written primarily for existing users of Microsoft Windows operating sys-
tems who are interested in upgrading to Windows 7. In particular, I am assuming that
you are at least familiar with Windows XP or Windows Vista (or both). If you are a
Preface | xi

new user coming to Windows 7 from another platform (such as Mac OS X or Linux),
you will still find this book easy to follow.
Conventions Used in This Book
The following typographical conventions are used in this book:
Italic
Indicates new terms, URLs, email addresses, filenames, and file extensions.
Constant width
Used for program listings, as well as within paragraphs to refer to program elements
such as variable or function names, databases, data types, environment variables,
statements, and keywords.
Constant width bold
Shows commands or other text that should be typed literally by the user.
Constant width italic
Shows text that should be replaced with user-supplied values or by values deter-
mined by context.
This icon signifies a tip, suggestion, or general note.
This icon signifies a warning or caution.
Using Code Examples
This book is here to help you get your job done. In general, you may use the code in
this book in your programs and documentation. You do not need to contact us for
permission unless you’re reproducing a significant portion of the code. For example,
writing a program that uses several chunks of code from this book does not require
permission. Selling or distributing a CD-ROM of examples from O’Reilly books does
require permission. Answering a question by citing this book and quoting example
code does not require permission. Incorporating a significant amount of example code
from this book into your product’s documentation does require permission.
We appreciate, but do not require, attribution. An attribution usually includes the title,
author, publisher, and ISBN. For example: “Windows 7: Up and Running by Wei-Meng
Lee. Copyright 2010 Wei-Meng Lee, 978-0-596-80404-6.”
xii | Preface

If you feel your use of code examples falls outside fair use or the permission given here,
feel free to contact us at permissions@oreilly.com.
How to Contact Us
Please address comments and questions concerning this book to the publisher:
O’Reilly Media, Inc.
1005 Gravenstein Highway North
Sebastopol, CA 95472
800-998-9938 (in the United States or Canada)
707-829-0515 (international or local)
707-829-0104 (fax)
We have a web page for this book, where we list errata, examples, and any additional
information. You can access this page at:
http://oreilly.com/catalog/9780596804046
To comment or ask technical questions about this book, send email to:
bookquestions@oreilly.com
For more information about our books, conferences, Resource Centers, and the
O’Reilly Network, see our website at:
http://oreilly.com
Safari® Books Online
Safari Books Online is an on-demand digital library that lets you easily
search over 7,500 technology and creative reference books and videos to
find the answers you need quickly.
With a subscription, you can read any page and watch any video from our library online.
Read books on your cell phone and mobile devices. Access new titles before they are
available for print, and get exclusive access to manuscripts in development and post
feedback for the authors. Copy and paste code samples, organize your favorites, down-
load chapters, bookmark key sections, create notes, print out pages, and benefit from
tons of other time-saving features.
O’Reilly Media has uploaded this book to the Safari Books Online service. To have full
digital access to this book and others on similar topics from O’Reilly and other pub-
lishers, sign up for free at http://my.safaribooksonline.com.
Preface | xiii

Acknowledgments
My sincere thanks to my editor, Brian Jepson, for suggesting that we do a book on
Microsoft’s latest operating system—Windows 7. Although many users were not too
thrilled with Windows Vista, the early beta and candidate releases of Windows 7 took
many critics by surprise. Not only does Windows 7 come with some really nice features,
but more importantly, it was a very stable operating system that performs well even
with older hardware. Realizing the potentials of Windows 7, I was very excited when
I got the chance to work on this book—especially with Brian, who has been more of a
mentor to me than an editor. Thanks, Brian!
I would also like to thank O’Reilly Managing Editor Marlowe Shaeffer. She has been
instrumental in getting the book ready so that you can get this book in your hands
before Windows 7 ships. Thank you, Marlowe.
Last but not least, I want to thank my family for their love and support, especially my
wife, SzeWa, and our lovely dog, Ookii. I love you all!
And of course, a big thank you to the production crew at O’Reilly, who made this book
possible.
xiv | Preface

CHAPTER 1
Installing Windows 7
Windows 7 is Microsoft’s latest version of its Windows operating system. Unlike its
predecessor, Vista, Windows 7 offers incremental upgrades and is aimed at ensuring
maximum compatibility with applications and hardware already supported in Vista.
As mentioned in the Preface, Microsoft’s key agenda regarding Windows 7 is to lure
back many of the Windows XP users who skipped Vista.
Windows 7 offers significant performance improvements over its predecessors—most
notably Windows Vista and Windows XP. It is still based on the Vista kernel, but comes
with substantial performance improvements and a redesigned Windows shell, a new
taskbar, and a less-annoying User Account Control (UAC) system. There are also im-
provements in networking, in particular the introduction of a home network system
known as HomeGroup.
This chapter first walks you through the different versions of Windows 7 available,
followed by an overview of the installation process. We will then take a look at some
of the new features in Windows 7 before we get into them in detail in subsequent
chapters.
Versions of Windows 7
With Windows Vista, Microsoft released multiple editions of its operating system with
the intention of targeting different segments of its user base with different features at
different price points. However, this approach wasn’t well received, as it confused the
market; many users urged Microsoft to come up with one simple, all-encompassing
version of the operating system.
With Windows 7, Microsoft still has many editions. However, Microsoft is expected
to focus its marketing effort on just two editions—Home Premium and Professional—
just as it did with Windows XP. Here is a list of the available editions, in ascending
order, from least to most advanced:
1

Starter Edition
A lightweight edition for netbook computers. Netbooks are low-powered comput-
ers specifically designed for lightweight tasks such as web browsing and emailing.
In this edition, Windows 7 will lack more advanced features such as Media Center,
Aero Glass, fast user switching, multiple-monitor support, DVD playback, and
multitouch support. This edition is geared toward replacing Windows XP on in-
expensive computers such as netbooks, a market that is currently dominated by
Windows XP. This edition will likely be available only as a preinstallation by
OEMs.
Windows 7 Starter Edition Application Limits?
In the early beta days of Windows 7, Microsoft announced that Windows 7 Starter
Edition would have a three-application limit. That is, no more than three applications
could run at the same time. Apparently, this did not go over well with the public, and
Microsoft reversed the decision.
Some restrictions remain. Microsoft has disabled the Personalize option in the context
menu that is shown when you right-click the desktop. This means that you won’t be
able to change your wallpaper. This limitation might be to allow OEMs to provide their
own custom-branded wallpapers. At press time, it is unclear whether Microsoft will lift
this limitation as well. To me, it makes perfect sense to lift this limitation—how can
you call your computer a Personal Computer when you can’t even change your
wallpaper?
Home Basic
This edition is designated for emerging markets only; it is for customers who are
looking for an inexpensive entry-level Windows experience (limited Aero support,
no features such as Windows Media Center or multitouch support).
Home Premium
This edition is designed for home users and will include features like Media Center,
multitouch support, the Aero Glass UI, and so on.
Professional
This edition is designed for home workers and small businesses, and will include
features like advanced network backup and the Encrypting File System.
Enterprise
Includes everything that Professional includes and adds BitLocker protection. It
will have the option to encrypt USB flash drives and external hard disks. It also
includes DirectAccess, which allows remote workers to access a company network
securely without using a VPN, and federated search.
Ultimate
Includes all the features available in Windows 7.
2 | Chapter 1: Installing Windows 7

Windows 7 Ultimate edition is really the same as the Enterprise edition.
The key difference is that the Enterprise edition will be sold through
volume licensing to companies, as well as through the Software Assur-
ance program. The Ultimate edition, however, will be available to retail
customers.
One key thing to note about the different editions of Windows 7 is that each higher
edition is a superset of its lower edition. That is, all the features available in Starter
Edition will be available on the Home Basic edition, and the Home Premium edition
will include all the features of Home Basic, and so on. This is different from Vista, where
Media Center was included in the Home Premium edition but not available in the
Business edition.
Though there are six different editions of Windows 7, Microsoft will focus its marketing
effort on just the Home Premium, Professional, and Ultimate editions. This is very
similar to Windows XP, in which you have only two main editions—Home and Pro-
fessional. As a quick rule of thumb, Windows 7 Home Premium is targeted at con-
sumers and Professional is targeted at small businesses.
System Requirements
If you are currently running Windows Vista, the good news is that you are ready for
Windows 7. Tests performed by various parties have consistently confirmed that Win-
dows 7 outperformed Windows Vista on a similar hardware configuration.
If you are coming from previous versions of Windows (pre-Vista), take note of the
following suggested hardware requirements:
• 1 GHz or faster 32-bit or 64-bit processor
• 1 GB RAM (for 32-bit) or 2 GB RAM (for 64-bit)
• 16 GB of available disk space (for 32-bit) or 20 GB of available disk space (for
64-bit)
• DirectX 9 graphics device with Windows Display Driver Model 1.0 or higher (for
Aero—the graphical user interface and default theme in most editions of Windows
7)
Though it is suggested that you have at least 1 GB of RAM, Windows 7
runs perfectly on my old trusty Dell Inspiron 5150 notebook (a 3 GHz
Pentium 4 processor with 640 MB of RAM). The suggested require-
ments are necessary to experience all the features of Windows 7 (such
as Aero Glass effects), but Windows 7 will still function on lesser
hardware.
Versions of Windows 7 | 3

Installing Windows 7
If you are currently running Windows Vista (with Service Pack 1), you can upgrade to
Windows 7 directly from within Vista. Windows XP users will need to install a fresh
copy of Windows 7.
Upgrading from Windows XP to Windows 7
Although Windows XP users cannot upgrade directly to Windows 7, Microsoft pro-
vides the Windows Easy Transfer utility, which allows you to easily transfer your
computer’s settings and files to the new Windows 7.
To launch the Windows Easy Transfer utility, log in to Windows XP, insert the Win-
dows 7 installation disc, and navigate to the \support\migwiz folder. Double-click
migwiz.exe to launch the Windows Easy Transfer utility (see Figure 1-1). Follow the
instructions on the screen to save the settings to another computer via a cable or net-
work, or save them to a hard disk or USB drive.
When Windows 7 has been installed, you can run the Windows Easy Transfer utility
via StartൺAll ProgramsൺAccessoriesൺSystem ToolsൺWindows Easy Transfer. Follow
the online instructions to copy the saved settings onto the new Windows 7 installation.
Figure 1-1. Use Windows Easy Transfer to migrate your Windows XP settings to Windows 7
4 | Chapter 1: Installing Windows 7

The following steps will walk you through the process of installing Windows 7 on a
fresh computer.
Installing Windows 7 is straightforward—if you’re doing a clean install, simply boot
up your computer with the Windows 7 installation DVD inside the DVD drive and
instruct your computer to boot from the DVD (you may need to press a key, such as
F11 or F12, while the computer is starting to enter the boot selection screen). If you’re
upgrading, simply boot into Windows Vista, insert the disc, and run the installer (if
you are using Windows XP, see the previous sidebar “Upgrading from Windows XP to
Windows 7”).
When the installer has booted up, you will be greeted with the screen shown in Fig-
ure 1-2 (the upgrade screen is slightly different; you will have an option to check the
compatibility of your system or start the installation). You will be asked to select the
language to install, the time and currency format, and your keyboard type.
Figure 1-2. Installing Windows 7: the first step
With the selections made, you can now install Windows 7 by clicking the “Install now”
button (see Figure 1-3).
Installing Windows 7 | 5
www.allitebooks.com

You will be asked to accept the license agreement. (If you are upgrading, you’ll first
have the option to go online to get any updates to the installer first.) Check the licensing
checkbox and continue.
Figure 1-3. Click the “Install now” button to start the Windows 7 installation process
On the next screen, you have a choice between upgrading your existing Windows or
installing a fresh copy of Windows. If you are using Windows XP or earlier, the first
option will not work for you—select the Custom (advanced) option (see Figure 1-4).
Figure 1-4. Two ways to install Windows 7—upgrade or fresh installation
6 | Chapter 1: Installing Windows 7

You can upgrade from Windows Vista only if you run the installer from
within Windows Vista. If you do a fresh boot using the Windows 7
installation disc, you will not be able to upgrade (you will be asked to
rerun the installation from within Windows).
For a fresh installation, you will be asked to select a disk for installing Windows 7.
Select the appropriate disk and click Next (see Figure 1-5). If you are upgrading, the
Windows 7 installer will generate a compatibility report and save it to your desktop.
Figure 1-5. Selecting the disk for installing Windows 7
If you are doing a clean install via the Custom (advanced) option, be
sure to back up any important data you have previously saved on your
hard drive before starting the installation. Installing Windows 7 will
wipe out all previous data.
Windows will now take some time to copy all the files into the selected disk and proceed
with the installation (see Figure 1-6). This will take about 20–30 minutes, depending
on the speed of your computer.
Installing Windows 7 | 7

Figure 1-6. Windows 7 proceeding with the installation
When the installation is complete, Windows 7 will restart. After Windows 7 has been
restarted, you should see the screen shown in Figure 1-7. Provide a username; your
computer name will be created based on what you have entered (you can change it to
another name if you want to after the installation). Click Next.
Figure 1-7. Providing a username for your account
8 | Chapter 1: Installing Windows 7

You will be asked to enter a password to protect your user account. You are strongly
advised to provide one. In the next screen, you will be asked to enter a product key to
activate Windows 7.
You will also be asked to select a way to update Windows. I suggest that you select the
first option, “Use recommended settings”; see Figure 1-8.
Figure 1-8. Selecting a way to update Windows
Next, you will set up the current date and time, and finally, if your computer has a
network card, Windows 7 will prompt you to select your current location (see Fig-
ure 1-9; wireless network users will be asked to select a wireless network to connect
to). Choose a location that best describes the environment you are in.
That’s it! You are now ready to explore Windows 7 (see Figure 1-10).
What’s New in Windows 7
The first time you power up Windows 7, you may feel a sense of déjà vu—it looks very
similar to Windows Vista. However, behind the familiar UI lies a more powerful and
versatile operating system. Subsequent chapters will cover some of the new features in
more detail, but here are some of the most prominent new features in Windows 7.
Installing Windows 7 | 9

Figure 1-9. Select your computer’s current location
Figure 1-10. You are now ready to explore Windows 7
10 | Chapter 1: Installing Windows 7

Touchscreen support
Windows 7 is designed with touchscreen support, especially multitouch, in mind. At
the time of this writing, companies like Dell and HP were shipping touchscreen com-
puters that work with Windows 7’s multitouch. As touchscreen computers are still not
common, this book will not discuss the touch capability of Windows 7.
But in case you’re interested, to demonstrate the power of touch in Windows 7,
Microsoft has created the Microsoft Touch Pack for Windows 7. The Microsoft Touch
Pack for Windows 7 is a collection of six applications that are optimized for touch
interactions. It consists of three games and three Microsoft Surface applications that
have been recreated for Windows 7. These applications are:
Microsoft Surface Globe
Displays a 3D earth with which you can interact using—what else?—your hands.
Microsoft Surface Collage
Manages your digital photos; you can resize and rearrange them.
Microsoft Surface Lagoon
A screensaver that you can interact with through multitouch.
Microsoft Blackboard
A game utilizing physics where you can use gestures to rotate gears, fans, seesaws,
and other objects.
Microsoft Rebound
A ball game in which you can play against another user or the computer.
Microsoft Garden Pond
Another interactive game where you use touch to place objects in a virtual pond.
The Microsoft Touch Pack for Windows 7will be made available first
to OEMs shipping touch-enabled PCs, although Microsoft may make it
available to end users.
New taskbar
Perhaps the most outstanding feature in Windows 7 is the new taskbar. The quick-
launch area that most Windows XP and Vista users are so used to is now gone. In place
of it is the ability to pin your applications icons in the taskbar for easy access, regardless
of whether the application is itself running.
Sadly, the classic Start menu has also been disabled in Windows 7.
Hopefully, Microsoft will turn it back on in a future service pack, or
determined hackers will find a way to replace it.
Installing Windows 7 | 11

Figure 1-11 shows the new taskbar in Windows 7 with several application icons in it.
On the left is the Start menu button, followed by Internet Explorer 8 (IE8), Windows
Explorer, and Windows Media Player.
Figure 1-11. The new taskbar in Windows 7
By default, the taskbar in Windows 7 has three applications pinned to it—IE8, Win-
dows Explorer, and Windows Media Player. As these applications are used often, they
are given permanent spots in the taskbar (for more information about pinning, see the
section “Pinning Applications to the Taskbar” on page 21). As you can see in Fig-
ure 1-11, the Media Player application does not have the rectangular border around
it—this signifies that the application is not running currently. Next to the Windows
Media Player icon are: Paint, Notepad (also not currently running), and Word.
New Show desktop shortcut
In the taskbar is another button known as the Show desktop shortcut. The Show desk-
top shortcut is the button on the extreme right of the taskbar (see Figure 1-12).
Figure 1-12. The Show desktop shortcut button
Positioning the mouse over this button will make all the current windows transparent
(this feature requires an Aero-capable video card and an edition of Windows 7 that
supports Aero), revealing the desktop (known as “peeking at the desktop”; see Fig-
ure 1-13).
You can disable the “peeking at the desktop” feature by right-clicking
the Show desktop shortcut button and unchecking the Peek at Desktop
item.
Clicking this button minimizes all opened windows and shows the desktop.
12 | Chapter 1: Installing Windows 7

Aero Peek, Aero Shake, and Aero Snap
Another cool new feature in Windows 7 is Aero Peek. Aero Peek displays live previews
of active applications when you move the mouse over the application icon in the task-
bar. Figure 1-14 shows Aero Peek in action when the mouse hovers over the IE icon in
the taskbar.
Figure 1-14. Aero Peek in action
Figure 1-13. Peeking at the desktop in action
Installing Windows 7 | 13

Aero Peek requires an Aero-capable video card and a Windows 7 edition
that supports Aero. Aero Shake and Aero Snap will work on any Win-
dows 7 system.
Windows displays the live previews of all running instances of IE. When the mouse
hovers over one of the live previews, the selected window appears, and the rest of the
windows turn transparent. To select the window, simply click the live preview.
When an application has too many open windows, the title of each
window will be displayed in a list instead of live preview thumbnails.
Aero Shake allows users to quickly minimize all nonactive windows by “shaking” the
current active window. To see Aero Shake in action, open up a few windows, click the
title bar of one window, and use the mouse to “shake” the application. You will notice
that all other windows will now be minimized, leaving the current window. To get all
the other windows back to their respective states, perform the same shaking action
again and they should now all appear again.
Another very useful UI feature in Windows 7 is Aero Snap. How many times have you
tried to arrange multiple windows on your desktop so that you see the windows
side-by-side? In Windows 7, when you drag a window to the left side of the screen, the
window is automatically docked onto the left of the screen (see Figure 1-15), occupying
half the screen. Likewise, when dragged to the right, the window will be docked to the
right. When dragged to the top, the window will be maximized. Besides dragging,
Windows 7 provides several shortcuts (see Table 1-1) for window management.
Figure 1-15. Aero Snap works by docking the window to the sides of the screen
14 | Chapter 1: Installing Windows 7

Table 1-1. Aero Snap keyboard shortcuts
Shortcuts
Descriptions
Windows Key + ൻ
Restores/minimizes window
Windows Key + ൸
Docks window to left of screen
Windows Key + ൺ
Docks window to right of screen
Windows Key + ൹
Maximizes window
Windows Key + Shift + ൸
Moves to left monitor
Windows Key + Shift + ൺ
Moves to right monitor
Gadgets
Microsoft first introduced gadgets in Vista. Gadgets are small utility applications that
“float” on your screen, providing quick access to them. In Windows 7, gadgets are not
confined to the sidebar (which itself was docked to one side of your screen in Vista)
but are free to roam about on your desktop (see Figure 1-16).
Figure 1-16. Gadgets can now roam the entire desktop without restrictions
Revised Paint and WordPad Applications
The venerable Paint and WordPad applications (see Figure 1-17) finally got a revision
in Windows 7. This time, both of them were updated to use the new ribbon interface
that was introduced in Office 2007.
Installing Windows 7 | 15
www.allitebooks.com

Calculator
Besides the Paint and WordPad applications, another longtime built-in Windows ap-
plication has also received some new improvements. The Calculator now has two ad-
ditional modes (in addition to the Standard and Scientific modes): Programmer and
Statistics (see Figure 1-18).
Figure 1-18. The Calculator in Programmer and Statistics modes
Figure 1-17. The Paint and WordPad applications both sport a new ribbon UI
16 | Chapter 1: Installing Windows 7

Besides the two new modes, the calculator also allows you to perform conversion tasks
such as unit and date conversions. It also provides worksheets for you to calculate
mortgages, vehicle leases, and fuel economy (see Figure 1-19).
Figure 1-19. The new worksheets in the Windows 7 Calculator
Summary
In this chapter, you have seen the various editions of Windows 7 and the system re-
quirements that you need to satisfy in order to run it. Over the years, Microsoft has
streamlined the installation process—and Windows 7 is no exception. Windows 7
performs exceedingly well, and stays out of your way thanks to a less naggy UAC. In
the following chapters, you will learn more about each of the new features of Windows
7 and how you can use each of them to your advantage.
Summary | 17


CHAPTER 2
Getting Around Windows 7
In Chapter 1, we took a quick glance at the various new features in Windows 7. Among
the new features are the much improved taskbar, the improved capabilities of gadgets,
and the many UI improvements that make the Windows experience a much more en-
joyable one.
In this chapter, we will take a more detailed look at three features that have the most
effect on your daily Windows experience:
Taskbar
The taskbar is now more than just a windows-switcher—it is also an application
launcher. You’ll learn how mastering the taskbar will make your life easier.
Libraries
The Libraries is a new feature in Windows 7. Using the Libraries, you can group
your files and folders into logical units so they are easier to manage.
Desktop Gadgets
Gadgets in Windows 7 now have a new lease on life. In Windows Vista, gadgets
were constrained to the Sidebar, which was never really a popular feature among
people with small-screen computers (netbooks and small portable computers). In
Windows 7, gadgets are free to roam about on your desktop.
Taskbar
One of the most significant changes in Windows 7 is the taskbar. The new taskbar in
Windows 7 combines the good old Windows taskbar with the Quick Launch feature
available in previous versions of Windows. As mentioned, it is no longer just a windows
switcher—it is also an application launcher, in which application icons can be pinned
for easy access.
19

Aero Peek
In Windows 7, mousing over an icon in the taskbar whose application is running reveals
the live thumbnails of all the opened windows of that application. For example, Fig-
ure 2-1 shows the live thumbnails of all the IE windows currently open when the mouse
is moved over the IE icon. If your computer or Windows edition is not Aero-capable
(or if you’ve chosen a non-Aero theme), you will instead see a list of open window titles.
Figure 2-1. Aero Peek displays live thumbnails of all opened windows
As you move the mouse over the live thumbnails of the IE windows, the corresponding
window will appear on the screen (see Figure 2-2) and all other windows will turn
transparent, allowing you to quickly preview the content of the current window. If you
decide to switch to the selected window, simply click the thumbnail, and the selected
window will now be active.
Figure 2-2. Viewing a selected window
20 | Chapter 2: Getting Around Windows 7

For most applications, each open window is represented by a single
thumbnail. For IE, however, each tab page or window is represented by
a single thumbnail. Developers writing applications for the Windows 7
platform have the flexibility to decide how their applications are repre-
sented by Aero Peek in the taskbar.
Pinning Applications to the Taskbar
In the previous versions of Windows, only running applications appear in the taskbar.
In Windows 7, you can keep an application’s icon in the taskbar even when it’s not
running.
This feature is very similar to that of Dock for Mac OS X, where fre-
quently used applications can have their icons “docked” on the Dock.
Applications can have their icons “pinned” in the taskbar permanently. For example,
Windows Media Player (see Figure 2-3) is pinned by default to the taskbar, as it is a
commonly used utility application. Clicking the icon will open the Windows Media
Player.
Figure 2-3. The Windows Media Player is pinned to the taskbar by default
Taskbar | 21

You can unpin a pinned application icon from the taskbar by right-
clicking it and then selecting “Unpin this program from taskbar.”
So, how do you know which applications are currently running and which ones are
merely pinned to the taskbar? The taskbar highlights all running applications with a
rectangular border (see Figure 2-4); those not running do not have any border. Appli-
cations that require attention have flashing icons (see the rightmost icon in Figure 2-4).
Figure 2-4. The taskbar uses a rectangular border to denote running applications; flashing icons
indicate a call for attention
Jump Lists
When you right-click an application icon in the taskbar, Windows 7 will display a list
of menus known as Jump Lists. Jump Lists contain several default options as well as a
list of tasks and destinations that you can perform within the selected application. For
example, Figure 2-5 shows the Jump List of the Control Panel application. It contains
a section called Recent that displays a list of recently used applications in the Control
Panel.
Figure 2-5. The taskbar showing the list of recent activities performed with the Control Panel
application
22 | Chapter 2: Getting Around Windows 7

The Jump List of an application can also be seen in the Start menu. If you click the Start
menu, you will notice that there are several items with an arrow next to them. For
example, clicking the Control Panel item (see Figure 2-6) will reveal its Jump Lists.
Figure 2-6. Jump Lists can also be seen in the Start menu
Tasks
As mentioned, Jump Lists contain a list of tasks and destinations. The tasks list contains
application-specific actions that you can perform with an application. Tasks are
context-free actions, independent of whether the application is running. As an example,
the Jump List for Internet Explorer (see Figure 2-7) contains a Tasks section in which
you can invoke InPrivate Browsing or create a New Tab page.
Destinations
Besides showing the recent tasks that you have performed with an application, the Jump
Lists of an application also shows the destinations of an application. For example, in
Taskbar | 23

the Jump List of Internet Explorer (as shown in Figure 2-7), you will see a section called
Frequent, which displays the list of frequently visited websites (the destinations of a
web browser).
The Difference Between Tasks and Destinations
The easiest way to differentiate tasks from destinations is to think of a task as a verb
and a destination as a noun. For instance, some examples of tasks are:
• Play all music (Windows Media Player)
• Resume previous list (Windows Media Player)
• Go to MSN home page (Live Messenger)
• New Note (Sticky Notes)
Some examples of destinations are:
• Recently visited websites (Internet Explorer)
• Documents (Word)
• Images (Paint)
Figure 2-7. The Frequent destination shows the list of frequently visited sites
24 | Chapter 2: Getting Around Windows 7

Default entries
By default, a Jump List has at least two list items in it. Figure 2-8 shows the Jump List
for the Paint application. The first item allows you to launch a new instance of the
application. The second allows you to pin (or unpin if it has already been pinned onto
the taskbar) the program from the taskbar.
Figure 2-8. The default items in a Jump List
The third item closes the application and will appear only if at least one instance of the
program is already running.
To pin an application onto the taskbar, first launch the application, and then right-
click the application’s icon in the taskbar. Select the “Pin this program to taskbar” list
item. By doing so, the application will now always appear in the taskbar.
You can also pin items listed in the Recent destination. For example, Figure 2-9 shows
the Recent destination of the Jump List for Word. You can pin an item by clicking the
pin icon shown to the right of the item. The pinned item will then appear in the Pinned
destination.
Figure 2-9. Pinning items in the Recent destination
Taskbar | 25
www.allitebooks.com

Some applications, such as Internet Explorer 8, let you pin destinations by dragging
them to the application’s taskbar icon. To pin a web page to IE8’s Jump List, drag the
web page icon to IE8’s taskbar icon. The web page icon appears to the left of its URL
in the location field at the top of the IE8 window.
Libraries
In Windows XP and Windows Vista, you have special folders named “My Documents,”
“My Pictures,” and so on for storing your files. However, not many people actively used
these folders for storing their personal data. Instead, people created their own folders,
with names like C:\My project June 2008 and C:\photos\Photos from Japan trip 2007.
Although there is nothing wrong with this approach, it makes indexing and searching
very time-consuming, not to mention frustrating.
In Windows 7, Microsoft has attempted to address this problem with the concept of
Libraries. Conceptually, Libraries are a central repository of all the various folders on
your computer. To search for files in your computer, go to the Libraries and navigate
the various subfolders contained within it. You can still create an assortment of folders,
but you can avoid the chaos by adding a folder to one of your libraries.
Exploring Libraries
The Libraries are found in Windows Explorer. Figure 2-10 shows the application with
its four default libraries—Documents, Music, Pictures, and Videos.
Figure 2-10. The Libraries in Windows Explorer
26 | Chapter 2: Getting Around Windows 7

When you click the arrow to the left of the Documents library (or double-click its icon),
you will observe that there are two folders contained within it (see Figure 2-11): My
Documents and Public Documents. These two folders are actual folders located else-
where on your computer.
Figure 2-11. The Documents library, which contains two folders
Each library is mapped to two separate folders for a good reason. The
first folder, called the private folder, is for saving your own personal
data. The second folder, called the public folder, is for everyone. If you
use the HomeGroup feature (see Chapter 3) to share files, the private
folder will have read-only permission. This means that other users on
the network can view what is in your private folder, but cannot make
changes to it. In contrast, public folders will have read-and-write per-
missions, which means that other users can view their content as well
as make changes to it.
In fact, My Documents is mapped to C:\Users\username\My Documents and Public
Documents is mapped to C:\Users\Public\Public Documents.
With the Libraries, all your content should ideally be grouped under the default libra-
ries. For example, all your documents should be saved in either the My Documents or
Public Documents folder. When you need to search for documents, you simply go to
the Documents library and start your search from there.
Creating Your Own Library
Of course, not everyone wants to save their documents in a generic folder named My
Documents. You can still save your documents in a specific folder—say, C:\My Report
June 2009—and then link it with the Libraries. Suppose you want to create a library to
contain all your reports. In this case, the first thing you do is to create a new library by
right-clicking Libraries and selecting NewൺLibrary (see Figure 2-12).
Libraries | 27

Figure 2-12. Creating a new library
Name your library (for this example, I have named it as Reports) and your newly created
library will now be empty (see Figure 2-13).
Figure 2-13. Your newly created library
To link your library to an actual folder, click the “Include a folder” button and specify
a folder name. For example, I have added the C:\My Report June 2009 folder to my
library. The Reports library now looks like Figure 2-14.
28 | Chapter 2: Getting Around Windows 7

Figure 2-14. Adding a folder to a library
To add more folders to the library, click the “1 location” link (see Figure 2-15).
Figure 2-15. Adding more folders to the library
Click the Add button to specify a folder to add to the library (see Figure 2-16). You can
add as many folders are you like.
Libraries | 29

Figure 2-16. Adding additional folders to the library
Note that the first folder added to the library will be the default save location for the
library. This means that when you drag-and-drop an item to the Reports library, the
item will be copied into the My Report June 2009 folder (because this is the first folder
added to the library).
You specify another folder as the default save location by right-clicking a folder in this
list and choosing “Set as default save location.” You can change the order in which
these appear by right-clicking and choosing Move Up or Move Down.
You can now use the library just like a normal folder. The files inside each folder are
saved in their respective directories, but the library itself offers a logical grouping of
related files (see Figure 2-17).
30 | Chapter 2: Getting Around Windows 7

Figure 2-17. Using the library
You may remove the entire library if you want, but this will not remove
the files or directories that are part of the library.
Desktop Gadgets
In Windows 7, Microsoft eliminated the Windows Sidebar, because feedback showed
that docking gadgets to the side of the screen is very restrictive, especially for small-
screen portable computer users.
Desktop Gadgets | 31

What Is the Windows Sidebar?
Windows Vista included a feature called the Windows Sidebar. The Sidebar is a
rectangular strip displayed on the side of your screen (hence the name “sidebar”) that
hosts mini-applications known as gadgets. A Sidebar gadget is an easy-to-use
mini-application that is designed to provide information at a glance. Sidebar gadgets
afford an easy way to access information at your fingertips and can be easily created by
developers familiar with HTML and scripting languages like JavaScript.
In Windows 7, you can now display the gadgets directly on the desktop rather than be
constrained to the Sidebar.
Windows 7 desktop gadgets are fully compatible with the Sidebar gadg-
ets in Windows Vista.
To view the list of gadgets installed on your computer, right-click the desktop and select
Gadgets. A list of gadgets will be shown (see Figure 2-18).
Figure 2-18. Displaying the list of available gadgets
32 | Chapter 2: Getting Around Windows 7

As shown in Figure 2-18, Windows 7 includes 10 default gadgets. To add a gadget to
your desktop, double-click the gadget. By default, the gadget will be docked to the right
side of the screen. Figure 2-19 shows the Slide Show gadget. Unlike in Windows Vista,
you can now drag the gadget onto any part of the desktop.
Figure 2-19. The Slide Show gadget, docked to the right side of the screen
To locate more gadgets, click the “Get more gadgets online” link. You will be shown
a page displaying a list of gadgets that you can add (see Figure 2-20).
Figure 2-20. Viewing the list of gadgets you can download
Desktop Gadgets | 33

To download a gadget, click the “Download gadget” link below each gadget. You will
be prompted to open or save the gadget. Click Open (see Figure 2-21) to directly
download and install the gadget.
Figure 2-21. Downloading a gadget
Once the download is complete, IE will prompt you with a security warning to ask
whether you want to run the application. Click Run to open the gadget. Next, you will
be prompted with another security warning. Click Install to install the gadget on your
computer.
Once the installation is complete, you will see the new gadget in the Gadgets window
(see Figure 2-22), and it will also automatically add a copy of itself to your desktop.
Figure 2-22. Locating the newly installed gadget
34 | Chapter 2: Getting Around Windows 7

Summary
In this chapter, you learned about the improvements made to the taskbar. The new
Aero Peek feature allows you to preview windows without switching to them. And
Jump Lists allow you to jump to a specific destination or task by simply right-clicking
an application icon. In addition, you also learned about the new Libraries feature, which
makes it easy for you to organize your files. And in Windows 7, the Desktop Gadgets
has a new lease on life.
In the next chapter, you will learn more about another new feature in Windows 7:
HomeGroup. HomeGroup will make use of the new Libraries feature to allow you to
easily share files with other users on the same network.
Summary | 35
www.allitebooks.com


CHAPTER 3
File Sharing
File Sharing has been one of the features common to all Windows operating systems.
Besides sharing files with other Windows computers, the File Sharing feature in Win-
dows also allows users to share files with other non-Windows computers, such as Mac
OS X and Linux users. In Windows 7, file sharing has been further simplified with the
new HomeGroup feature.
In this chapter, you will learn about the new HomeGroup feature, as well as learn how
to share files with other computers on your network.
HomeGroup
One of the challenges with previous versions of Windows is how to share files easily
with other users on the network. Suppose that you have multiple files on your notebook
computer that you have created while you were in the office and when you go back
home you want to use the files on your home desktop computer. Prior to Windows 7,
you had to create a shared folder on your notebook, navigate to the Network Neigh-
borhood on the other computer, and look for the notebook’s shared folder.
In Windows 7, Microsoft has made file sharing very simple with HomeGroup. Using
HomeGroup, you can easily share files as well as your digital media (such as music and
videos) with other users on the same network. What’s more, HomeGroup also allows
you to share one or more USB printers connected to a single computer with the rest of
the users on the network.
37

Wireless Networking
Connecting to wireless networks is now very simple in Windows 7. As in the previous
versions of Windows, there is the wireless signal icon in the system tray. However,
unlike previous versions, you can now click the wireless icon to display a list of wireless
networks available (see Figure 3-1).
To connect to a wireless network, simply move the mouse over the network name and
click the Connect button. If the wireless network requires a key, you will be prompted
to enter one. And you are connected!
Figure 3-1. Selecting from a list of wireless networks
HomeGroup revolves around the concept of a “home” network. When you are at home,
you want to be able to share files and printers easily with other family members. Hence,
the HomeGroup feature will work only if you are connected to the Home network (see
Figure 3-2).
When you are connected to the Home network, Windows 7 will initiate a network
discovery to start looking for other computers on the same network and will check to
see whether a HomeGroup is available for joining.
38 | Chapter 3: File Sharing

You can easily switch to another network by going to Control
PanelൺNetwork and Sharing Center and clicking the link below the
Network name (it will be labeled Home network, Work network, or
Public network).
Creating a New HomeGroup
Creating a HomeGroup is straightforward. Go to Control Panel and click “Choose
homegroup and sharing options,” which is found under the Network and Internet
section. If there is currently no HomeGroup created in your Home network, you will
see the screen as shown in Figure 3-3.
Windows 7 Starter Edition cannot create a HomeGroup, but it can join
a HomeGroup that you’ve created on another computer. Any users on
the Home network can create a HomeGroup. As soon as one user has
created a HomeGroup, the rest can just join the HomeGroup.
Figure 3-2. Selecting a location for the network
HomeGroup | 39

To create a HomeGroup, click the “Create a homegroup” button. You will be asked to
select the libraries and devices (such as printers) that you want to share. Click Next.
Only the default libraries created by Windows are displayed for you to
select. To share your own custom libraries, refer to the next section.
A password will be generated. Users who want to participate in this HomeGroup will
need this password. Click Finish to complete the creation process.
Changing the HomeGroup Password
You can always change the password that HomeGroup has generated for you. However,
Microsoft’s research has shown that users normally use their own personal password
for this purpose, and when they realize that this password must be shared with those
who need to join the HomeGroup, they are generally reluctant to share the password.
Hence, it is usually a good idea to use the generated password.
If you want to change the password, click the “Change the password...” link as shown
in Figure 3-4.
Figure 3-3. Creating a new HomeGroup
40 | Chapter 3: File Sharing

The HomeGroup window should now look like Figure 3-4.
Figure 3-4. The HomeGroup window, showing the various options available
To leave the HomeGroup, click the “Leave the homegroup...” link.
Controlling what is shared (and what is not)
In Chapter 2, you learned about the new Libraries feature in Windows 7. Recall that
for each of the default libraries (Documents, Music, Pictures, and Videos), there are two
locations. For example, the Documents library has two locations: My Documents and
Public Documents (see Figure 3-5).
By default, when you share a library, Windows 7 will apply different security settings
for each of the locations in the four libraries. The first folder (for example, My Pic-
tures) will have read-only permission applied to it. This means that users in your
HomeGroup can only view the items in the folder, but not make changes to it. The
other folder (for example, Public Pictures) will have read-and-write permission.
HomeGroup | 41

To change the share permission of a library, select the library, click the “Share with”
button, and select the relevant permission: Nobody, HomeGroup (Read), or
HomeGroup (Read/Write); see Figure 3-6.
Figure 3-6. Modifying the share permission for a library
Figure 3-5. Each library has two locations
42 | Chapter 3: File Sharing

You can also share a library with specific people by selecting the “Spe-
cific people...” menu item.
You can also modify each libraries’ location’s share permission by selecting the location
and then choosing the “Share with” button. In addition, you can also use this technique
to share your own custom library.
Joining a HomeGroup
Once a HomeGroup is created, users on the same Home network can join the Home-
Group and share files and devices (such as printers). If someone in the Home network
has created a HomeGroup, the HomeGroup window will appear.
Windows 7 will also try to detect an available HomeGroup during in-
stallation time. If there is one, you will be invited to join the group.
To join the HomeGroup, click the “Join now” button. You will be asked to select the
libraries and devices that you want to share. Click Next to continue.
You will then be asked to enter the password to join the network. Enter the password,
click Next, and then click Finish to join the HomeGroup.
Sharing Files
Once you have joined a HomeGroup, you will be able to view the files shared by other
users in the HomeGroup. To view the files, open Windows Explorer and look for the
item named HomeGroup displayed on the left side of the window (see Figure 3-7).
When you click a shared library (such as the Music library shown in Figure 3-7), Win-
dows Explorer will display all the files inside the two locations on the right side of the
window (My Music and Public Music). If you drag-and-drop files into a library, the files
will automatically be copied onto the public folder. This makes sense, as the public
folder has read-and-write permissions.
Sharing Printers
One really cool feature of the HomeGroup is the ability to share printers. Very often,
you have a printer connected to a computer via USB and you might want to share it
with other computers in your home network. Prior to Windows 7, sharing printers
required you to perform a series of steps to configure the printers for sharing.
HomeGroup | 43

In Windows 7, you can share a printer easily using the HomeGroup feature. When
another computer joins the HomeGroup, it will be able see the printer connected to
your computer. If the printer has the Windows logo, HomeGroup users will instantly
see the printer in their Devices and Printers window. Figure 3-8 shows the printer con-
nected to a computer on the HomeGroup made available to the local computer.
The Windows logo indicates that the printer manufacturer is partici-
pating in a program that ensures it is safe to automatically install its
driver on your computer without your direct consent.
If the printer does not have the Windows logo, the HomeGroup page will display a
message indicating that it has found a shared printer on the home network (see Fig-
ure 3-9). Click the “Install printer” button to install the printer driver.
Figure 3-7. Viewing files shared by other users in the HomeGroup
44 | Chapter 3: File Sharing

Figure 3-8. Printers shared from another computer
Figure 3-9. Detecting a shared printer on the home network
You will be prompted to install the driver for the printer. Click “Install driver.”
HomeGroup | 45
www.allitebooks.com

The best part of this is that the installation of the driver is automatic—the driver is
copied from the host computer (connected to the printer) and installed on the local
computer. With HomeGroup, a printer attached to one computer is made available to
everyone in the HomeGroup.
If you are logged in as a normal user, installing the printer driver will
require an administrator’s credentials.
Streaming Music
Using the new HomeGroup feature, you can now stream music from one Windows 7
computer to other computers and devices.
To stream your music and videos to other devices on the home network, check the
“Stream my pictures, music, and videos to all devices on my home network” checkbox
in the HomeGroup window.
To customize the files streamed to each individual computer in the HomeGroup, click
the “Choose media streaming options...” link. The Media streaming options window
will now appear (see Figure 3-10).
Figure 3-10. Customizing the streaming options for each computer and device
46 | Chapter 3: File Sharing

You can give a name to your media library and then click the Customize... link for each
device on your network to control which files to stream to each device.
Users on the HomeGroup will now be able to see your music collection from within
Media Player (see Figure 3-11).
Figure 3-11. Viewing the shared music collections from Windows Media Player
The shared music collection is also available in the Windows Media Center.
File Sharing with Windows XP
Though the new HomeGroup feature in Windows 7 makes file sharing very simple, it
is incompatible with previous versions of Windows. If you need to share files with
Windows XP or Windows Vista computers, you have to rely on the old trusty file-
sharing mechanism:
1. To share files with other users and computers on the network, turn off password-
protected sharing so that users can access the files without authentication.
2. Go to Control PanelൺNetwork and InternetൺNetwork and Sharing Center. Click
the “Change advanced sharing settings” link.
File Sharing with Windows XP | 47

3. Scroll to the bottom of the page and locate the “Password protected sharing” sec-
tion (see Figure 3-12). Turn off the password-protected sharing, as this will allow
other users to access your shared file without needing an account on your com-
puter. Click the “Save changes” button when done.
The previous step is needed only if you want everyone on your
network to access your files. If you want to share only with specific
users on other computers, you will need to create an account and
password for them on your computer so that they can use it to
access your files.
Figure 3-12. Turning off password-protected sharing
4. Create a folder that you want to share. For example, create a folder on the desktop
and name it Common Files.
5. Right-click the folder and select Properties.
6. Click the Sharing tab and click the Share... button. You will see the File Sharing
window, as shown in Figure 3-13.
Alternatively, you can also use the new “Share with” button located
in Windows Explorer to configure file sharing.
48 | Chapter 3: File Sharing

7. Click the drop-down arrow to select from a list of users who can access the shared
folder. Once selected, click Add to add the user to the shared list. You can also
configure the read/write permission for each user. Here, I am sharing the files with
everyone on the network.
8. Click Share.
Figure 3-13. Configuring who is allowed to access the file
On the Windows XP computer, open the My Network Places window, and you should
be able to see the various shared folders on the network. Double-click the one that
contains your shared folder.
You will now be able to access the content in the shared folder.
Viewing Shared Folders from Within Windows 7
In Windows 7, to view shared folders from other computers, launch Windows Explorer
and expand the Network item on the bottom-left corner of the window (see Fig-
ure 3-14). All shared folders on the network will be listed here.
File Sharing with Windows XP | 49

File Sharing with Mac OS X
If you want to share your Windows 7 files with Mac OS X users, use the SMB (Server
Message Block) protocol in Mac OS X.
The following steps outline how you can view shared folders in Mac OS X:
1. In Finder, select GoൺConnect to Server....
2. Specify the “smb://” prefix, followed by the IP address (or computer name) of the
Windows 7 computer and the “:139” port number. Click Connect.
3. If the connection is successful, you will be asked to log in to the Windows 7 com-
puter. For sharing with everyone, select the Guest account and click Connect.
4. You will be asked to select the folder to mount in Mac OS X (see Figure 3-15).
Select the folder and click OK.
5. Finally, the shared folder is now available in Mac OS X.
Figure 3-15. Selecting the shared folder to mount
Figure 3-14. Viewing the various shared folders on the network in Windows 7
50 | Chapter 3: File Sharing

Summary
In Windows 7, Microsoft greatly simplified file- and printer-sharing using the new
HomeGroup feature. Using HomeGroup, sharing files and printers is now a seamless
experience for Windows users. Not only that, but the ability to stream music from one
Windows 7 computer to another also makes Windows 7 an ideal platform on which
to build your next media center.
Although HomeGroup works only on Windows 7 computers, file sharing with other
platforms (such as Mac OS X, Windows XP, and Windows Vista) can still be performed
using the old file-sharing mechanism.
Summary | 51


CHAPTER 4
Security
On the security front, Windows 7 has streamlined several features found in Windows
Vista, making them much more accessible and less irritating in this new version of
Windows. For example, the infamous User Account Control (UAC) is one of the most
annoying features in Vista. In this version of Windows, Microsoft has tweaked UAC
so that it interrupts users only when needed. Microsoft has also replaced the Security
Center in Vista with the new Action Center in Windows 7, which focuses not just on
displaying problems, but also on offering suggestions and solutions to solve problems.
The Credential Manager now has the ability to back up its credential information to a
file. In addition, Enterprise and Ultimate users can now encrypt a portable thumb drive
using BitLocker To Go.
Action Center
In Windows 7, Microsoft has designated the new Action Center as the one-stop place
to find all your system maintenance and security messages. The key design goal of the
Action Center is to help users solve system issues quickly and conveniently.
The system tray is now less cluttered, compared with its appearance in previous ver-
sions of Windows—it now has four main icons: Action Center, Network, Speaker vol-
ume, and Date and Time (see Figure 4-1). Mobile computers will have a power icon as
well.
Figure 4-1. The four icons in the System tray
In particular, the Action Center icon (represented as a white flag, which will include a
red “x” if there are important messages requiring your attention) replaces several no-
tification icons from Vista, reducing much clutter. When you click the Action Center
53

icon, a pop-up window displays a summary of system messages of varying
importance levels. In addition, it also provides a way for you to resolve the error. For
example, Figure 4-2 shows that I have two messages for my computer—one important
and one normal. The pop up also includes two links for me to resolve my problems—
one to find an antivirus program and one to set up a backup for my computer. To view
the messages, click the message icons or click the Open Action Center link.
Figure 4-2. Viewing the messages summary and remedy links for the Action Center icon
The Action Center will display the details of the messages along with a button to help
you solve the issue.
Besides displaying messages on maintenance and security-related issues, the Action
Center can also help you troubleshoot problems with your computer and restore your
computer to its setup from an earlier time.
Messages are classified into two main categories: Security and Maintenance. Security
messages relate to issues concerned with:
• Windows Update
• Internet security settings
• Network firewall
• Spyware and related protection
• User Account Control
• Virus protection
54 | Chapter 4: Security

Maintenance messages relate to issues concerned with:
• Windows Backup
• Windows Troubleshooting
Messages can be important or normal. Important messages display notification bal-
loons (see Figure 4-3) in the System tray in addition to appearing in Action Center. A
good example of an important message balloon is what happens when the Windows
Firewall is turned off.
Figure 4-3. Important messages displaying notification balloons
In the Action Center, you can also expand on each message category to view the status
of each Security- and Maintenance-related item for your computer.
The Action Center is for displaying messages and resolving problems,
not managing tasks. For example, you can use the Action Center to help
you find an antivirus program, but you cannot manage your Windows
Firewall in the Action Center.
You have the option to prevent messages from displaying by clicking the Change Action
Center settings link in the left side of the Action Center window. Uncheck the item(s)
for which you do not want to view a message.
Turning Off Action Center
If you do not want to see the Action Center in the System tray at all, you can turn it off.
Perform the following steps to turn Action Center off:
• Right-click the “Show hidden icons” button in the Notification Area (see Fig-
ure 4-4) and select “Customize notification icons.”
• Click the “Turn system icons on and off” link (see Figure 4-5).
• For the Action Center icon, select Off (see Figure 4-6).
Action Center | 55
www.allitebooks.com

Figure 4-4. Configuring Action Center via the “Show hidden icons” button
Figure 4-5. Customizing notification area icons
56 | Chapter 4: Security

Figure 4-6. Hiding the Action Center
User Account Control
One of the most fiercely criticized features of Windows Vista is the User Account Con-
trol (UAC). Whenever a system-level change is made, Vista’s UAC displays a dialog
box prompting the user to continue or stop. This happens regardless of whether it is a
program that is making the changes or the user herself (even though she might be logged
in as an administrator). And with the frequency that the UAC displays prompts, most
users find it a nuisance rather than a useful security alert feature. Moreover, when the
user ends up with too many UAC prompts, it actually defeats the purpose, as users
simply give their permission without reading the prompts.
In Windows Vista, Microsoft only provided two options to control UAC—turn it on
or turn it off. In Windows 7, Microsoft has fine-tuned the UAC so that you can choose
when to be notified if changes happen.
To configure UAC, go to Control Panel and select User Accounts and Family Safety,
and then select User Accounts. Click the Change User Account Control settings link.
Notice that you now have four levels to specify how you are notified when changes are
made to your computer (see Figure 4-7).
User Account Control | 57

Figure 4-7. Modifying the notification levels of UAC
The four levels are:
• Always notify when programs install software or users make changes to the com-
puter. This is the most naggy option, as all changes require the permission of the
user (this is the option used by Vista).
• Notify only when programs make changes to the system. When the user makes
changes to the Windows settings, there will be no prompting. This is the default
level selected by Windows.
• Notify only when programs make changes to the system without desktop dimming.
When the user makes changes to the Windows settings, there will be no
prompting.
• The user is never notified. This option is not recommended.
When you select a particular notification level and click OK, you will be prompted to
confirm the selection.
58 | Chapter 4: Security

The Credential Manager
Windows 7 includes a feature known as the Credential Manager to help users save their
credentials to a vault. Although this is not a new feature, in this version it has the ability
to back up and restore the vault. In the Credential Manager, all the credentials are
stored in a secure location known as the Windows Vault.
To use the Credential Manager, go to Control PanelൺUser Accounts and Family
SafetyൺCredential Manager. There are three types of credentials you can store using
Credential Manager (see Figure 4-8):
Windows credentials
Stores the credentials of resources such as servers, printers, and the like.
Certificate-based credentials
Stores certificate-based credentials, such as those from a smartcard.
Generic credentials
Stores generic credentials, such as online IDs.
Figure 4-8. Launching the Credential Manager in the Control Panel
The Credential Manager | 59

Using the Credential Manager
Note that the Credential Manager is designed to work with resources (such as servers
and websites) that make use of the Credential Manager API to retrieve the username
and password from the Credential Manager. A good example is Windows Live Hotmail.
When you first log in to Windows Live Hotmail, you have an option to save the pass-
word to your computer. When you check the “Remember my password” link (see
Figure 4-9), the credential (Windows Live ID and password, in this case) is automati-
cally saved into the Credential Manager (see Figure 4-10).
Figure 4-9. Remembering the password on the local computer
Figure 4-10. The credential for Hotmail is saved in the Credential Manager
60 | Chapter 4: Security

For websites that do not use Windows Live Login, Internet Explorer
will store the ID and password pair in the Registry.
If you log out from Hotmail now and try to log in again, you will see that your Windows
Live ID is now displayed on the login page and that you can log in automatically (with-
out needing to enter the password) by clicking the “Sign in” button (see Figure 4-11).
Figure 4-11. Logging in automatically
Linking Online IDs
In the previous section, you saw how Hotmail automatically signs you in using the
credentials saved in the Credential Manager. The Credential Manager also allows you
to link your login user account with an online ID explicitly (such as those given by your
email service provider) so that you can sign in to these services automatically. This is
done via online ID providers. An online ID provider associates your Windows login
with an online ID so that when you access your online service you do not need to supply
your username and password again.
To manually link your user account with an online ID, click the “Link online IDs” link
at the bottom of the Credential Manager window (see Figure 4-12).
Click the “Add an online ID provider” link to locate an online ID provider (see Fig-
ure 4-13).
You will be brought to a web page where you can locate an online ID provider. At this
moment, only one online ID provider is available—Windows Live. Click the Windows
Live icon.
The Credential Manager | 61

Figure 4-12. Linking your user account with an online ID
Figure 4-13. Adding an online ID provider
62 | Chapter 4: Security

You will be brought to a page where you can download the necessary program. In this
case, you need to download the Windows Live ID Sign-in Assistant.
Once the download is complete, proceed with the installation. Figure 4-14 shows that
the WindowsLiveID provider installed in the Credentials Manager.
Figure 4-14. The WindowsLiveID provider in the Credentials Manager
Click the “Link online ID” link to add an online ID. Enter your Live ID.
You should now see the credentials you entered (see Figure 4-15).
Now when you use any of the Windows Live services (such as Hotmail and Messenger),
you will see that your credentials are automatically filled in for you.
Backing Up the Credentials
A new feature of the Credential Manager in Windows 7 is its ability to back up your
credentials to the filesystem. To back up the vault, click the “Back up vault” link.
You will be asked to select a path to back up the vault. Click the Browse... button and
specify the path and name of the backup vault. Click Next.
To continue, press Ctrl-Alt-Delete. You will now be asked to protect the file with a
password. Enter the password twice and the vault will be backed up.
The Credential Manager | 63

It is recommended that you save the backup vault to external storage.
To restore the vault, click the “Restore vault” link and supply the password used to
protect the file.
BitLocker Drive Encryption
In Windows Vista, you had the BitLocker Drive Encryption feature that allowed you
to encrypt the content of entire volumes. In Windows 7, Microsoft has extended this
feature to include removable hard disks and thumb drives. This new feature is known
as BitLocker To Go.
The encryption performed by BitLocker is transparent to the user—you
will use the drive normally and Windows 7 will automatically encrypt
the data on the fly when you write to the drive. Likewise, Windows will
decrypt the data on the fly when you read from the drive.
Figure 4-15. Viewing the credentials you just entered
64 | Chapter 4: Security

BitLocker
The BitLocker Drive Encryption feature in Windows 7 (also available in Windows
Vista) allows you to encrypt your hard drives so that it is safe from unauthorized access.
Using BitLocker, all data written to a hard drive stays encrypted when it is stored on
the drive. When the OS reads the data, it is automatically decrypted. However, if a
BitLocker-encrypted drive is removed from a computer, its content will not be acces-
sible unless the correct password is provided. This way, BitLocker helps protect the
integrity and security of your data.
Unlike the Encrypting File System (EFS), which allows you to selectively
encrypt files, BitLocker encrypts the entire drive.
There are two types of hard drives you can encrypt using BitLocker:
Operating system drive
This is the drive where Windows 7 is installed in.
Data drive(s)
This includes internal data drives attached to your computer.
BitLocker is available only in the Enterprise and Ultimate editions of
Windows 7.
To encrypt the operating system drive using BitLocker, right-click the C: drive and
select “Turn on BitLocker...” (see Figure 4-16).
Figure 4-16. Encrypting the C: drive using BitLocker
BitLocker Drive Encryption | 65

Alternatively, you can manage BitLocker on all your drives via the
BitLocker Drive Encryption application (see Figure 4-17) in the Control
Panel.
In order to use BitLocker to encrypt your hard drive containing your operating system,
your computer needs to have the Trusted Platform Module (TPM) chip. BitLocker uses
the TPM chip to store the keys that are used to decrypt your encrypted drive during
bootup time. Alternatively, if your computer does not have the TPM chip, you can store
the encryption key on a USB thumb drive. In this case, you need to insert your USB
drive into your computer during bootup time.
Figure 4-17. Managing BitLocker on all your attached drives
Using BitLocker to encrypt your operating system drive also requires
two partitions on the hard drive—one system partition (hidden boot
partition) and one operating system partition. Fortunately, Windows 7
automatically creates these two partitions during the installation
process.
For encrypting data drives, BitLocker requires the drive to be formatted using either
the exFAT, FAT16, FAT32, or NTFS filesystems.
66 | Chapter 4: Security

BitLocker To Go
BitLocker To Go is an extension of the BitLocker application that provides encryption
support for removable hard disks and thumb drives.
BitLocker To Go is available only in the Enterprise and Ultimate editions
of Windows 7.
To turn on BitLocker To Go, simply insert your thumb drive into your computer, right-
click the drive icon in Computer (see Figure 4-18) and select “Turn on BitLocker...”.
Figure 4-18. Turning on BitLocker for a thumb drive
Now you need to choose a way for the drive to be unlocked when it has been
encrypted—using a password or a smartcard. The easiest way would be to choose a
password; if you choose this option, supply a password. Click Next to proceed.
In the next step, you have a choice to store your recovery key to a file or print it out.
The recovery key is used to temporarily unlock a BitLocker-encrypted drive in the event
that you forgot the password. Choose the desired option and click Next.
You are now ready to encrypt your drive. Click the Start Encrypting button to begin
the encryption.
Windows will now start to encrypt your drive. It will take some time, especially if you
have a large-capacity thumb drive. When the encryption is done, a lock will appear on
the drive icon (see Figure 4-19).
From now on, whenever you insert your thumb drive into your computer, you will be
prompted to enter the password to unlock the drive. Enter the password and click the
Unlock button to unlock the drive.
BitLocker Drive Encryption | 67

If you insert a thumb drive encrypted with BitLocker To Go into a Windows XP
computer, you will be prompted to enter the key to unlock the drive.
If you forgot your password, click the “I forgot my password” link. You will be promp-
ted to enter the recovery key that you saved/printed earlier. Enter the recovery key and
you will be granted temporary access to the drive before you change its password.
You also have the option to automatically unlock the drive on the current computer.
If you choose this option, you will not be prompted to unlock the drive every time you
insert the thumb drive into the current computer. You should choose this option only
if you are sure that your computer is secure and that it is not easily accessible to other
people.
You can change the BitLocker feature of a drive by right-clicking the drive icon in
Computer and selecting Manage BitLocker. Figure 4-20 shows the options available.
Figure 4-20. Managing BitLocker on an encrypted drive
Figure 4-19. The BitLocker-encrypted thumb drive
68 | Chapter 4: Security

Encrypting File System (NTFS Encryption)
As you have seen, BitLocker and BitLocker To Go encrypt the entire drive to protect
the integrity of your filesystems. However, sometimes you may need to encrypt just
selected files (or folders), not the entire drive. To do this, you can make use of the
Encrypting File System, also known as the NTFS Encryption feature of Windows 7.
NTFS Encryption is available only in Windows 7 Professional, Enter-
prise, and Ultimate.
To encrypt a file (or folder), right-click its icon and select Properties. In the General
tab, click the Advanced... button. Check the “Encrypt contents to secure data” check-
box (see Figure 4-21) and click OK twice.
Figure 4-21. Encrypting an individual file
Encrypting File System (NTFS Encryption) | 69

You will be asked if you want to encrypt the entire file itself, or encrypt its parent folder
as well (recommended). Select the option you want and click OK.
The file will now be encrypted. If you click the Details button as shown previously in
Figure 4-21, you will see that the file has been encrypted using a certificate bearing your
name (this is created for you automatically).
When you select the certificate name, you will be able to back up the
certificate to disk. Doing so allows you to pass your certificate to other
users so that they can also access this encrypted file. However, giving
your certificate to other users will allow them to access all your encryp-
ted files and folders (that use the same certificate). So, think carefully
before you give away your certificates.
See the section “Importing Certificates” on page 73 for more infor-
mation on how to import certificates onto your computer.
To allow other users to access your encrypted file, click the Add... button to add the
certificates provided by the users. A user who possesses the certificate contained in the
certificates list (shown in Figure 4-22) will be able to access your encrypted file.
Figure 4-22. Viewing the user access list for the encrypted file
70 | Chapter 4: Security

Creating Certificates
When you encrypt a file using NTFS Encryption, Windows 7 automatically creates an
encryption certificate for you if you do not already have one. However, you can also
manually create your own encryption certificate using the “Manage file encryption
certificates” application (just type “Manage file encryption certificates” in the search
box of the Start menu).
By creating your own certificates, you can then encrypt different files
using different certificates. Doing so allows you to share specific en-
crypted files with other users without compromising the integrity of
other files.
When the application is launched, the window shown in Figure 4-23 should appear.
Click Next to continue.
Figure 4-23. The Manage File Encryption Certificates application
Encrypting File System (NTFS Encryption) | 71

If you already have a certificate created for you, you should see it now. To view other
certificates on your computer, click the “Select certificate” button.
If you want to create a new certificate, choose the “Create a new certificate” option and
click Next.
You will now choose the type of certificate you want to create (see Figure 4-24). If you
do not have a smartcard, you should select the first option, where you will create a self-
signed certificate stored on your computer. Click Next.
Figure 4-24. Selecting the type of certificate you want to create
Your certificate will now be created. On the next screen, you have the option to back
up your certificate to storage. Supply a path and a password for the backup. Click Next
to continue.
72 | Chapter 4: Security

Now you have the option to update your encrypted files with the new certificate and
key (all your encrypted files will now use this new certificate). Select the drives or folders
containing the encrypted files and click Next.
That’s it! Your certificate is now created. The certificate is saved as a file with the .pfx
extension.
Importing Certificates
When you receive a .pfx certificate from someone else, you can import it into your own
certificate store in Windows by double-clicking the .pfx file. When you double-click
a .pfx file, the Certificate Import Wizard will appear. Click Next to proceed.
You will be asked to specify the location of the .pfx file. When done, click Next.
Enter the password that was used to protect the certificate and then click Next twice.
Finally, if the importing is successful, click the Finish button.
Antispyware and Firewall Applications
As part of its Trustworthy Computing push, Microsoft is very serious about security in
Windows. As such, all recent Windows operating systems come with several built-in
tools to protect the users. Two tools that stand out are Windows Defender and Win-
dows Firewall.
Windows Defender
Like Windows Vista, Windows 7 includes an antispyware program called Windows
Defender. Windows Defender’s role is to prevent, remove, and quarantine spyware in
Windows.
Windows Defender was previously known as Microsoft AntiSpyware.
Windows Defender shipped with Windows Vista and is available as a
free download for Windows XP and Windows Server 2003.
Windows Defender is located within the Control Panel (you can find it by typing
“defender” in the Search box). Once Windows Defender is launched, you can start
scanning your computer for spyware by clicking the Scan button (see Figure 4-25).
Antispyware and Firewall Applications | 73

Figure 4-25. Scanning for spyware using Windows Defender
You can also configure Windows Defender to scan at regular intervals (see Fig-
ure 4-26) by selecting ToolsൺOptions.
Figure 4-26. Configuring Windows Defender to start scanning at regular time intervals
74 | Chapter 4: Security

Windows Firewall
First shipping in Windows XP and then Vista, the Windows Firewall is included in
Windows 7 as well. Windows Firewall prevents unauthorized data from traveling be-
tween your computer and the network (such as the Internet).
Windows Firewall was originally known as Internet Connection Fire-
wall when it first shipped with Windows XP.
Like the Windows Defender, the Windows Firewall can be accessed via the Control
Panel; select System and SecurityൺWindows Firewall.
You can configure Windows Firewall to turn on or off depending on the network
connections you are connected to—Home, Work, or Public. Home and Work are con-
sidered private networks; Public is considered a public network. Clicking the “Turn
Windows Firewall on or off” link will bring you to the customization page shown in
Figure 4-27.
Figure 4-27. The customization page of Windows Firewall
Antispyware and Firewall Applications | 75

If you have an application that is blocked by Windows Firewall, you can click the
“Allow a program or feature through Windows Firewall” link to allow it to pass through
the Windows Firewall explicitly (see Figure 4-28).
Figure 4-28. Granting permission so applications can pass through the Windows Firewall
Antivirus Tools
Despite Microsoft’s commitment to security, there is one tool that is apparently missing
in all Windows operating systems—antivirus tools.
Although there are many commercial antivirus tools available for the Windows plat-
form, one of my personal favorites is AVG Anti-Virus (http://free.avg.com). AVG comes
in three different versions: AVG Anti-Virus Free, AVG Anti-Virus Pro, and AVG Inter-
net Security. The first version is free for private use.
76 | Chapter 4: Security

Summary
In this chapter, you read about the various security features that ship with Windows
7. In particular, you have seen the use of:
• Action Center, the one-stop place where you will find all your system maintenance
and security messages
• User Account Control, to manage the level of warnings you receive when changes
are made to the system
• Credential Manager, to store credentials that you use to log in to websites and
servers
• BitLocker drive encryption, to encrypt data on your hard drives as well as remov-
able thumb drives
• Encrypting File System, to encrypt specific files on your filesystem
• Windows Defender and Windows Firewall, to block data traveling between your
computer and the network
Summary | 77


CHAPTER 5
Essential Applications
Another of the longstanding Windows traditions that Windows 7 abandoned is that it
contains fewer bundled applications than its previous versions. For example, Microsoft
Mail will not be available when you install Windows 7. Similarly, Messenger will also
not be installed when you install Windows 7. Instead, Microsoft offers a suite of es-
sential applications as a separate download. Doing so allows Microsoft to have separate
release timelines for Windows and these essential applications. It also allows them to
make these essential applications more easily available for earlier versions of Windows.
In the first part of this chapter, you will first see how you can install the suite of essential
applications from Microsoft free of charge. We will then look at the suite of built-in
applications that ship with Windows 7.
Windows Live Essentials
Windows Live is the brand name for a set of services and applications offered by Mi-
crosoft. Broadly speaking, Windows Live is made of two parts: Windows Live Services
and Windows Live Essentials. Windows Live Services refers to hosted applications/
services that you can use over the Web. A good example of a Windows Live Services
application is Hotmail; another example would be MySpace. Windows Live Essentials,
on the other hand, refers to a suite of applications that users can download and install
on their Windows computers. Examples are Messenger, Mail, and Photo Gallery. This
section will focus on Windows Live Essentials.
The Windows Live Essentials suite includes the following key applications (as well as
some add-ins to other applications such as the Windows Live Toolbar for Internet
Explorer):
• Messenger
• Mail
• Photo Gallery
• Writer
79

• Family Safety
• Movie Maker
To download Live Essentials, go to http://download.live.com. You can download the
main installer application, which will allow you to choose and download your desired
applications on demand (see Figure 5-1).
Figure 5-1. Download the desired applications in Live Essentials
Windows Live Messenger
Windows Live Messenger is an instant messaging application.
Windows Live Messenger offers the following functionalities:
• File transfers
• PC-to-PC and PC-to-phone calls
80 | Chapter 5: Essential Applications

• Photo sharing
• Sending SMS messages
Using Live Messenger, you can also send messages to other users even when they are
offline (see Figure 5-2).
Figure 5-2. Sending messages to offline users
Windows Live Mail
Windows Live Mail is the successor to Outlook Express (shipped with Windows XP)
and Windows Mail on Windows Vista. Using Live Mail, you can read and send email
from one or more email accounts, including accounts from providers such as Hotmail,
Gmail, Yahoo!, and more.
Live Mail supports the POP3, IMAP, and HTTP protocols. The last one is particularly
important for Hotmail users, because that service requires the HTTP protocol in order
to be able to read your email using a mail client (unless you subscribe to the Hotmail
Premium service).
Windows Live Essentials | 81

Also included with Mail are four other subapplications—Calendar, Contacts, Feeds,
and Newsgroups (see Figure 5-3; you need to press the Alt key to reveal the menu).
Figure 5-3. Four other subapplications included with Mail
When you click the Sign In button in the upper right, Windows Live Mail will:
• Allow you to use your Windows Live online contact list (via the Windows Live
Contacts application) and see when senders are online in Messenger
• Sync with your Windows Live calendars
Windows Live Mail Versus Live Hotmail
The popular, free web-based email service Hotmail was once called Windows Live
Mail. It has since been renamed Windows Live Hotmail. The name Windows Live Mail
now refers to the desktop version of the email application.
Subscribing to Microsoft Communities
To subscribe to a newsgroup using Windows Live Mail, click the Newsgroup icon in
the bottom left of the Windows Live Mail window (or make the menu visible with the
Alt key, then select GoൺNewsgroups). The first time you go to the Newsgroups section,
you will see a message indicating that you are not subscribed to any newsgroup. Click
the View Newsgroups button to see a list of available newsgroups from the Microsoft
Communities (see Figure 5-4). Select the newsgroups that you are interested in and
click Subscribe.
82 | Chapter 5: Essential Applications

Figure 5-4. Subscribing to newsgroups in Microsoft Communities
You can now start reading the various postings from the newsgroup you have
subscribed to (see Figure 5-5).
Figure 5-5. Reading the postings in the newsgroup
Windows Live Essentials | 83

Working with the Calendar
To view your calendar in Windows Live Mail, click the Calendar icon in the bottom
left of the Windows Live Mail window (or make the menu visible with the Alt key, then
select GoൺCalendar). The calendar will be displayed (see Figure 5-6).
Figure 5-6. Viewing the calendar in Windows Live Mail
By default, three calendars will be created for you: My Calendar (your
personal calendar), Birthday calendar (your contacts’ birthdays calen-
dar), and <Location> Holidays (the holidays of the country you have
selected).
You can create a new Calendar by clicking the “Add calendar” link, as shown in Fig-
ure 5-6. Creating a new calendar allows you to organize the entries according to specific
occasions. For example, you might have a calendar for company meetings and another
for family matters.
You can also share calendars that you have created with your friends or the public.
Before you can share your calendar, you need to sign into Live.com. Click the Sign In
button in the upper right of the Windows Live Mail Window (if you see your Windows
Live ID listed there instead of a Sign In button, it means that you are already signed in).
84 | Chapter 5: Essential Applications

However, to do so, you need to use the web-based version of Calendar. First, log in to
http://calendar.live.com. You will be asked to sign in using your Live ID (the one that
you signed into from within Windows Live Mail). Once you have signed in, you will
be able to specify which calendar you want to share by clicking the Share link (see
Figure 5-7). You can then specify whom you want to invite to subscribe to your calen-
dar, and the selected recipients will receive an email invitation.
To immediately synchronize the calendars and events created in Win-
dows Live Mail with the Calendar in Live.com, press F5.
Figure 5-7. Sharing calendars in Live.com
Another interesting thing you can do with Windows Live Mail is subscribe to an online
calendar. Subscribing to online calendars allows you to view the calendar of another
party and be updated automatically when the party’s calendar is updated.
Windows Live Essentials | 85

To subscribe to a calendar published by other users/organizations, click the Subscribe
link (see Figure 5-8).
Figure 5-8. Subscribing to calendars
You will be asked to either subscribe from a public calendar via a URL or import
an .ics file (see Figure 5-9).
.ics is the file format used by iCal (short for iCalendar).
When you subscribe to a calendar via a URL, you will always get the updates performed
by the calendar owner. An example of a calendar URL looks like this: http://
cid-6d498f3bdb1fa52e.calendar.live.com/calendar/Trainings/index.html. If you choose
to import the calendar via an .ics file, then you will only get a static calendar (i.e., you
won’t see updates performed by the calendar owner).
86 | Chapter 5: Essential Applications

Calendars created in Live.com will be synchronized automatically with Windows Live
Mail when you relaunch Windows Live Mail again (or simply press F5).
Windows Live Photo Gallery
Windows Live Photo Gallery is a photo management and photo sharing application
that is tightly integrated with Windows Live Messenger. Using the Live Photo Gallery,
you can organize your photos into folders, as well as tag photos and then upload them
to Windows Live Photos and Flickr.
Windows Live Photo Gallery is the successor to Vista’s Windows Photo
Gallery application.
Figure 5-9. Ways to subscribe to a calendar
Windows Live Essentials | 87

Figure 5-10 shows how you can tag a photo with names of a friend (or yourself) and
add descriptive tags to your photo.
Figure 5-10. Adding a tag to a photo
The names of your friends are taken from Windows Live Messenger and
Windows Live Contacts.
Windows Live Writer
Windows Live Writer is a blog-publishing application that allows you to publish your
postings to blog publishing sites such as Blogger, WordPress, TypePad, and Windows
Live Spaces.
When you first start Live Writer, you will be asked to create a new blog on Windows
Live or use an existing blogging account. Once you have done this, you can use Writer
to create a new posting and then publish it to your blogging account (see Figure 5-11).
88 | Chapter 5: Essential Applications

Figure 5-11. Using Live Writer to post a blog
A nice feature of Windows Live Writer is WYSIWYG editing, and also that it supports
rich content like images, maps, videos, and all major text-editing features like tables,
alignment, and spellchecking.
Windows Live Family Safety
Windows Live Family Safety is a parental control application that allows parents to
monitor their children’s activities on the Web. You can install Live Family Safety on all
computers that your children use in your home.
To activate Windows Live Family Safety, you will first be asked to log in using your
Windows Live ID (such as your Hotmail email account). Once you have logged in, you
will see the screen shown in Figure 5-12.
Windows Live Essentials | 89

Figure 5-12. The Windows Live Family Safety application
Select the account(s) to monitor and click Next. You will be prompted to match the
Windows account with the name in Family Safety. Once this is done, click Save. You
will now see that the default filter is Basic, which means that only adult websites are
blocked. To change the filter, go to http://familysafety.live.com and you will be able to
change the filter type to Strict, Basic, or Custom (see Figure 5-13).
Figure 5-13. Changing the filter type
90 | Chapter 5: Essential Applications

Once the filter is installed, if a child tries to visit a restricted website, he will see the
screen shown in Figure 5-14.
Figure 5-14. Blocking a site that is restricted
In order for the child to visit the page, he will need a parent (the one who signed in to
Live Family Safety) to authorize the page using the password supplied during the
signing-in process. Alternatively, the child can also email the parent the request.
Windows Live Movie Maker
Windows Live Movie Maker is a video creating and editing application. It is the suc-
cessor to the Windows Movie Maker included with Windows Vista.
Windows Live Movie Maker requires a video card that is at least as
powerful as the ATI Radeon 9500 or nVidia GeForce FX 5900.
Windows Live Essentials | 91

The new Windows Live Movie Maker (see Figure 5-15) is now much more user-friendly.
Using Live Movie Maker, you can save your movies in Windows Media as DVD quality
or Windows Media portable device format.
Figure 5-15. Creating movies using Live Movie Maker
Built-in Applications
In the previous section, you saw the suite of applications that you can download from
Microsoft free of charge. Though the number of bundled applications has apparently
decreased, there are still a number of cool applications shipped with Windows 7. The
following sections describe some of them in detail.
Snipping Tool
Beginning with Windows Vista, Microsoft shipped an application called the Snipping
Tool, which is included in Windows 7 as well. The Snipping Tool is a screen-capture
tool.
92 | Chapter 5: Essential Applications

Longtime users of Windows know that they can capture screenshots
easily using the Print Scrn key (or Alt-Print Scrn for capturing the current
active window) on the keyboard. But the Snipping Tool makes it easy
for you to capture specific parts of your screen directly without needing
to further edit your screenshots. It also allows you to directly save the
screenshots to file.
To launch the Snipping Tool, select Start menuൺSnipping Tool. You will see the win-
dow shown in Figure 5-16.
Figure 5-16. The Snipping Tool
Clicking the arrow next to the New button reveals four options in which you can cap-
ture your screenshots:
Free-form Snip
You can capture your screen by simply moving your mouse to designate the area
you want to capture; it can be of any shape.
Rectangular Snip
You capture a rectangular portion of your screen.
Windows Snip
You capture any of the opened windows on the screen.
Full-screen Snip
You capture the entire screen. This works for multiple monitor setups, too.
Figure 5-17 shows the screenshot captured with the Snipping Tool. You can save the
image to disk or email it. If you want to insert the captured image into another appli-
cation (say, Word), click the Copy icon (third icon) and paste it into your target
application.
Built-in Applications | 93

Figure 5-17. The Snipping Tool with the screenshot captured
Sound Recorder
Windows 7 also includes another useful application called the Sound Recorder. As its
name implies, it allows you to record sound and save it as an audio file. All you need
is an audio device (such as a microphone plugged into the audio jack of your computer,
or a webcam with a built-in microphone).
The user interface of the Sound Recorder is very simple (see Figure 5-18). It has a button
labeled Start Recording, which starts the audio recording. The bar displayed next to it
indicates the audio level (it moves as the audio input level changes).
Figure 5-18. The Sound Recorder application
94 | Chapter 5: Essential Applications

When you are done, click the Stop Recording button. You will be prompted to save
the audio recorded as a .wma file.
Windows PowerShell
In Windows 7, the Windows PowerShell application is included by default. The Win-
dows PowerShell is an extensible command-line shell application that executes appli-
cations written in its associated scripting languages, allowing IT administrators to easily
automate and administer their IT infrastructure. Think of Windows PowerShell as the
command prompt (with which most Windows users are familiar) on steroids—a very
powerful one indeed.
Windows PowerShell is available as a separate download for Windows
XP and Vista users.
To launch Windows PowerShell, type “Windows PowerShell” in the Start menu text
box.
Using the Windows PowerShell, you can issue commands that you normally use with
your command prompt window, such as dir:
Windows PowerShell
Copyright (C) 2009 Microsoft Corporation. All rights reserved.
PS C:\Users\Wei-Meng Lee> dir
    Directory: C:\Users\Wei-Meng Lee
Mode                LastWriteTime     Length Name
----                -------------     ------ ----
d-r--          5/2/2009   2:49 PM            Contacts
d-r--         6/22/2009   6:48 AM            Desktop
d-r--         6/20/2009   2:28 PM            Documents
d-r--         6/19/2009  12:02 PM            Downloads
d-r--         5/20/2009   9:06 AM            Favorites
d-r--          5/2/2009   2:49 PM            Links
d-r--          5/2/2009   2:49 PM            Music
d-r--         6/14/2009  10:07 PM            Pictures
d-r--          5/2/2009   3:42 PM            Saved Games
d-r--          6/9/2009   2:33 PM            Searches
d----         6/28/2009   9:49 AM            Tracing
d-r--          5/2/2009   2:49 PM            Videos
d-r--         6/20/2009   1:51 PM            Virtual Machines
PS C:\Users\Wei-Meng Lee>
Built-in Applications | 95

When you issue the dir command, PowerShell actually translates it into the name of a
cmdlet (Windows 7 has more than 100 cmdlets), which is a programming script. The
dir command is an alias of the Get-ChildItem cmdlet.
The following example shows how you can take the directory listing of the Windows
directory and then pipe it into another cmdlet named format-list, which displays in
detail the information of each directory and file:
PS C:\Windows> dir | format-list
    Directory: C:\Windows
Name           : addins
CreationTime   : 4/22/2009 4:55:52 PM
LastWriteTime  : 4/22/2009 4:55:52 PM
LastAccessTime : 4/22/2009 4:55:52 PM
Name           : AppCompat
CreationTime   : 4/22/2009 2:17:25 PM
LastWriteTime  : 5/16/2009 6:47:19 AM
LastAccessTime : 5/16/2009 6:47:19 AM
Name           : AppPatch
CreationTime   : 4/22/2009 2:17:25 PM
LastWriteTime  : 4/22/2009 5:01:13 PM
LastAccessTime : 4/22/2009 5:01:13 PM
Name           : assembly
CreationTime   : 4/22/2009 2:17:25 PM
LastWriteTime  : 5/28/2009 3:25:15 AM
LastAccessTime : 5/28/2009 3:25:15 AM
Name           : Boot
CreationTime   : 4/22/2009 2:17:26 PM
LastWriteTime  : 4/22/2009 4:55:52 PM
LastAccessTime : 4/22/2009 4:55:52 PM
Name           : Branding
CreationTime   : 4/22/2009 2:17:26 PM
LastWriteTime  : 4/22/2009 4:55:52 PM
LastAccessTime : 4/22/2009 4:55:52 PM
...
...
Name           : write.exe
Length         : 9216
CreationTime   : 4/22/2009 11:39:18 AM
LastWriteTime  : 4/22/2009 1:19:45 PM
LastAccessTime : 4/22/2009 11:39:18 AM
VersionInfo    : File:             C:\Windows\write.exe
                 InternalName:     write
96 | Chapter 5: Essential Applications

                 OriginalFilename: write
                 FileVersion:      6.1.7100.0 (winmain_win7rc.090421-1700)
                 FileDescription:  Windows Write
                 Product:          Microsoftr Windowsr Operating System
                 ProductVersion:   6.1.7100.0
                 Debug:            False
                 Patched:          False
                 PreRelease:       False
                 PrivateBuild:     False
                 SpecialBuild:     False
                 Language:         English (United States)
Name           : _default.pif
Length         : 707
CreationTime   : 4/22/2009 9:29:14 AM
LastWriteTime  : 3/20/2009 11:42:51 PM
LastAccessTime : 4/22/2009 9:29:14 AM
VersionInfo    : File:             C:\Windows\_default.pif
                 InternalName:
                 OriginalFilename:
                 FileVersion:
                 FileDescription:
                 Product:
                 ProductVersion:
                 Debug:            False
                 Patched:          False
                 PreRelease:       False
                 PrivateBuild:     False
                 SpecialBuild:     False
                 Language:
For more information on Windows PowerShell, refer to Windows
PowerShell Cookbook by Lee Holmes (O’Reilly).
Windows Photo Viewer
Windows 7 ships with the Photo Viewer application for viewing images. Using the
Photo Viewer, you can perform the following actions:
• Display the next/previous photo in the same folder
• Change the magnification of the photo
• Print the photo to a printer
• Send the photo to a printing service (PrintൺOrder prints...)
• Email the photo to a friend
Built-in Applications | 97

• Burn the photo to a data disc
• Open the photo using other applications such as Paint, Windows Media Center,
and so on
Windows Photo Viewer is automatically launched when you double-
click on an image.
The best part of Photo Viewer is its ability to make video DVDs using the bundled
Windows DVD Maker. To create a video DVD using your photos, select BurnൺVideo
DVD. This will launch the Windows DVD Maker. Click the “Add items” button to
select all the photos and videos that you want to add to your video DVD. Click Next
to continue.
You can select the style of the menu to apply to your DVD, as well change the title (see
Figure 5-19). You can also add background music to accompany your photos. When
you are ready, click the Burn button to burn the photos onto a DVD.
Figure 5-19. Customizing the content of your DVD
98 | Chapter 5: Essential Applications

Windows DVD Maker will now proceed to burn the photos onto the DVD. Fig-
ure 5-20 shows the DVD playing in Windows Media Player.
Figure 5-20. Playing the video DVD using Windows Media Player
You can also play your DVD using a conventional DVD player.
Windows Disc Image Burner
Windows 7 has a built-in disc burning tool that makes writing ISO or IMG images to
CD and DVDs very easy.
To burn an ISO or IMG image to disc, right-click the image name and select “Burn disc
image” (see Figure 5-21).
Built-in Applications | 99

Figure 5-21. Disc burning is now built right into Windows
The Windows Disc Image Burner will now appear (see Figure 5-22). Select the drive to
burn the image and check the “Verify disc after burning” checkbox to ensure that the
disc is written correctly. Then click the Burn button to burn the disc.
Figure 5-22. Selecting the drive to burn the image
One cool thing about the Windows Disc Image Burner is that when it detects a DVD-
RW with content on it, it will prompt you to confirm whether you want to erase its
content and write new content onto it. This is very helpful, as it prevents users from
accidentally erasing important data on the disc.
100 | Chapter 5: Essential Applications

Mounting ISO Images
Although it is neat to be able to burn an ISO image to CD or DVD natively in Windows
7, it would be even better to be able to mount ISO images as virtual drives, which would
allow users to access the content of the image just as if they were accessing the content
of an inserted CD or DVD. Unfortunately, Windows 7 does not ship with the tool for
mounting ISO images. For this purpose, my personal favorite is the free Virtual
CloneDrive from SlySoft (http://www.slysoft.com/en/virtual-clonedrive.html). Once Vir-
tual CloneDrive is installed, you can launch it by right-clicking an ISO image and se-
lecting Open withൺMount Files with Virtual CloneDrive (see Figure 5-23).
Once the image is mounted, you will see an additional drive in Computer.
Figure 5-23. Mounting an ISO image with Virtual CloneDrive
Windows Media Center
Windows 7 Home Premium (and higher) editions now ship with Windows Media
Center. Using Windows Media Center, you can watch and record TV programs, play
DVDs, listen to music, share your digital photos, and more.
If you wish to watch TV programs on your computer, you also need a TV tuner card.
A remote control that works with Windows Media Center will greatly enhance your
experience.
One nice improvement in Windows Media Center in Windows 7 is that you can now
continue to watch your video while you navigate to other sections of the application
(see Figure 5-24).
You can also use Windows Media Center to view your photos (see Figure 5-25).
Built-in Applications | 101

Figure 5-24. You can continue watching a program while you select from other menus
Figure 5-25. Viewing photos using Windows Media Center
102 | Chapter 5: Essential Applications

Math Input Panel
One very geeky application included with Windows 7 is the Math Input Panel
(StartൺAll ProgramsൺAccessoriesൺMath Input Panel). The Math Input Panel allows
you to literally “write” mathematical equations on the screen so that they can be trans-
formed into a format recognizable by applications (such as Word, OpenOffice, and
StarOffice) that support the MathML format.
Figure 5-26 shows that as you write the mathematical equation, it is instantly parsed
by the Math Input Panel and transformed into a recognizable format. Click the Insert
button to insert the equation into your word processor.
Figure 5-26. Using the Math Input Panel to create math equations
The equation from Figure 5-26 is then generated by the Math Input Panel (see Fig-
ure 5-27).
Figure 5-27. The equation generated by the Math Input Panel
Built-in Applications | 103

The Math Input Panel is best used with a touchscreen or a tablet, where
you can use a pen to write your mathematical equations quickly.
XPS Viewer
In Windows Vista, you had to download the XPS Essentials Pack in order to obtain the
XPS Viewer. In Windows 7, the XPS Viewer is bundled together with the OS.
What Is XPS?
The XML Paper Specification (XPS) is a page-description language and fixed-document
format specification developed by Microsoft. XPS allows you to preserve your
document’s fidelity while ensuring portability. XPS is similar in function to PDF, except
that PDF is a database of objects and XPS is based on XML.
The XPS Viewer (see Figure 5-28) in Windows 7 allows you to sign your documents
with your own digital certificates.
Figure 5-28. Using the XPS Viewer
104 | Chapter 5: Essential Applications

Like Windows Vista, Windows 7 also includes the XPS Document Writer by default.
Using the XPS Document Writer, you can create XPS documents easily by simply
printing to the XPS Document Writer. When you print to the XPS Document Writer,
you will be asked to provide a name to save the XPS file.
Sticky Notes
In Windows Vista, Windows Sidebar comes with a built-in gadget called Sticky Notes.
In Windows 7, the Sticky Notes gadget is no longer available. In place of it is the Sticky
Notes application (see Figure 5-29; available through the Start menu).
Figure 5-29. Using Sticky Notes in Windows 7
The Sticky Notes application has some useful functions, such as:
• Adding new sticky notes or deleting existing ones
• Changing the color of the note
• Resizing the notes
Calculator
The old Calculator application available in all versions of Windows finally gets a huge
makeover in this release of Windows. Calculator now supports four modes:
• Standard
• Scientific
• Programmer (new)
• Statistics (new)
Besides the two additional new modes, Calculator also features worksheets, in which
you can perform the following calculations:
• Unit conversion
• Date calculation
Built-in Applications | 105

• Mortgages
• Vehicle leases
• Fuel economy (mpg)
• Fuel economy (L/100km)
The Programmer mode allows users to quickly enter values using different bases (such
as binary, octal, decimal, or hexadecimal) and view its equivalent in binary (see Fig-
ure 5-30). You can also perform operations on numbers, such as AND, OR, and XOR.
Figure 5-30. The Calculator in Programmer mode
The new worksheets feature in Calculator is a big plus for a lot of Windows users.
Instead of fumbling to work out some common calculations (like fuel efficiency, mort-
gage repayment, and so on), you can now easily calculate them using the Calculator
(see Figure 5-31).
Figure 5-31. Calculating the mortgage repayment
106 | Chapter 5: Essential Applications

Microsoft WordPad
When Office 2007 was released, the new ribbon interface created quite a stir in the
world of Office users. Now, in Windows 7, you have the same ribbon interface in
WordPad (see Figure 5-32).
Figure 5-32. The ribbon interface in WordPad
Besides the change in user interface, WordPad also includes support for OpenXML and
OpenDocument Text (used by the free OpenOffice.org Writer program) files.
Microsoft Paint
Paint is the next application bundled with Windows 7 to receive a ribbon interface UI
makeover (see Figure 5-33). With the new ribbon interface, Paint is now much easier
to use.
Figure 5-33. The ribbon interface in Paint
Windows Media Player 12
Windows 7 also ships with a new Media Player: Windows Media Player 12.
Windows Media Player 12 is largely similar to its previous versions, but one of its key
features is its ability to stream music from another computer using the new HomeGroup
Built-in Applications | 107

feature of Windows 7. For more information on streaming music using HomeGroup
and Windows Media Player, refer to Chapter 3.
Summary
In this chapter, you have seen the numerous applications that you can download and
install from the Windows Live Essentials suite of applications. This suite of applications
offers much useful functionality that you would otherwise have to buy. Though
Windows 7 has drastically reduced the number of bundled applications, there are still
gems that ship with Windows 7.
108 | Chapter 5: Essential Applications

CHAPTER 6
Internet Explorer 8
Windows 7 ships with the new Internet Explorer 8 (IE8). IE8 builds on the foundation
of IE7 and this latest release contains many useful enhancements in the areas of usa-
bility, privacy, and security.
In this chapter, you will learn about some of the innovations in IE8 and how they affect
the way you surf the Web.
Usability
The first major noticeable improvement in IE8 is usability. Microsoft has taken pains
to improve the usability of IE8 by adding the following features:
• Smarter Address bar that lists all the relevant sites you have visited by searching
through your History, Favorites, and RSS Feeds
• Enhanced functionality of tabbed browsing by color-coding related tabs
• Support for older websites by displaying them using IE7 through the Compatibility
View
• A much more usable Find feature to make searching for phrases on the web page
easy
• Ability to visually search for items from providers like Wikipedia.com and
Amazon.com
• Web Slices to help users monitor constantly changing web content
• Accelerators, which integrate commonly used functions into the browser so that
users can perform common actions with a single mouse-click
109

Smart Address Bar
The Address bar in IE8 is now much smarter than its predecessor. In addition to typing
websites’ URLs, you can now type in keywords and it will search across your His-
tory, Favorites, and RSS Feeds and display all matching sites that you have visited
previously (see Figure 6-1).
Figure 6-1. The smarter Address bar
This feature is very useful for finding pages that you have visited previously but whose
URLs you cannot remember.
Enhanced Tabbed Browsing and Grouping
Prior to IE7, IE users were clamoring for tabbed browsing, which was a feature already
available in competing browsers like Firefox and Opera. However, with tabbed brows-
ing in IE7, things soon got out of control. You suddenly had tons of tabs on your
browser window, and it was quite a task to manage them.
In IE8, when you create a new tab from an existing tab (for example, by right-clicking
a link and selecting Open in New Tab), the new tab (and the existing tab) will be color-
coded to help you visually group them together. Figure 6-2 shows two tab groups, each
with two tab pages.
Figure 6-2. Tabs are color-coded to help you visually group them
110 | Chapter 6: Internet Explorer 8

The color-coding on the tabs will go away if you rearrange the tabs.
When you right-click one of the tabs, you can close the current selected tab, close the
entire tab group, or ungroup the current tab from the current group (see Figure 6-3).
Figure 6-3. You can perform various actions with the tab groups
When you start a new tab, IE8 will provide several options with which you can open
previously closed tabs as well as reopen the last browsing session (see Figure 6-4).
Figure 6-4. Creating a new tab page
Usability | 111

The “Reopen closed tabs” option allows you to reopen all the tab pages that you have
closed during the current browsing session. The Reopen Last Browsing Session option
opens all the page(s) that you opened during your previous browsing session (before
you closed your IE window).
Compatibility View
IE8 supports Compatibility View, which allows sites not optimized for IE8 to be dis-
played the way IE7 would have displayed them. This corrects problems such as mis-
aligned text, images, and text boxes. To force a site to be displayed in IE7 mode, click
the Compatibility View button located next to the URL of the site (see Figure 6-5).
Figure 6-5. Forcing a site to display in IE7 mode using Compatibility View
What does it mean for a site to be unoptimized for IE8? Technically, IE8
is more up-to-date with modern web standards than IE7. However,
some older sites that were optimized for IE7 relied on idiosyncrasies in
how IE7 interpreted modern web standards. So, although IE8 should
be more standards-compliant, there are still some websites that relied
on IE-specific workarounds that don’t look quite as good under IE8 as
they did under IE7.
You also have the option to maintain a list of sites that need to be displayed in com-
patibility view. To do so, go to the Command bar and select ToolsൺCompatibility View
Settings. You can now add the URL of sites that you want to view in Compatibility
View (see Figure 6-6). Observe that in this window, you have several options for viewing
pages in Compatibility View. You can obtain updated lists from Microsoft, disable IE8
to display Intranet sites in Compatibility View, or force all pages to be displayed in
Compatibility View.
When viewing intranet pages, IE8 will automatically render the content
using IE7 Standards mode. This is done to ensure maximum compati-
bility, as many intranet apps are still based on IE7. Hence the Compat-
ibility View button will not be shown for Intranet pages.
112 | Chapter 6: Internet Explorer 8

Find on Page
One of the most frustrating features in IE7 (as well as previous versions) was the Find
feature. Anyone who has used this feature knows that you needed to scroll the page to
the top before you could start searching for the things you want. For a long time, IE
has been playing catchup with browsers like Safari and Firefox, and finally in IE8, the
Find feature that most users are waiting for is finally here.
To find a word or phrase on the page, press Ctrl-F (or go to EditൺFind on this Page...)
and type the word or phrase you want to search for. Once the word or phrase is found,
you will see the result bar shown in Figure 6-7.
All occurrences of the word or phrase are highlighted in yellow and the current word
is highlighted in blue. To move to the next or previous occurrence of the phrase, click
the Previous or the Next button.
Figure 6-6. Maintaining a list of sites to display in Compatibility View
Usability | 113

Improved Search
Searching in IE8 has now been improved. Microsoft is partnering with various search
providers to provide “visual searches.” For example, you can visually search
Amazon.com’s huge library of books from within IE. All you need to do is to add the
Amazon Search Suggestion search provider by clicking the option arrow to the right of
the search field, selecting Find More Providers, and adding the search provider (see
Figure 6-8).
As you type, the search provider (Amazon.com in Figure 6-9) will return the search
results visually. You can also switch between the different search providers you have
installed by clicking the icons below the search result.
Figure 6-7. The new Find feature in IE
114 | Chapter 6: Internet Explorer 8

Visual Search Providers
Currently, the following search providers support visual search:
• The New York Times Instant Search
• Wikipedia Visual Search
• Amazon Search Suggestions
• eBay Visual Search
• Bing Search Suggestions
• Freebase Visual Search
• Bidtopia Search Suggestions
Figure 6-8. Adding new search providers to IE
Usability | 115

Figure 6-9. Visual search in Amazon.com
One neat trick with IE is that the web address field is also a search box—
just type the search string in it and the default search provider configured
in IE will perform a search.
Web Slices
IE8 supports a new feature called Web Slices. Basically, Web Slices allows you to au-
tomatically monitor changes in the content of some pages without needing to revisit
the page. Consider the case of bidding for an item on eBay. If you are currently bidding
for an item, you would be very interested in monitoring its bids closely so that you
know the latest price. Rather than refreshing the page continuously, IE8 can do that
for you and alert you when the content of the page changes.
116 | Chapter 6: Internet Explorer 8

Not All Sites Support Web Slices
Not all the websites out there on the Internet support Web Slices. When IE loads a
page, it scans for the following elements in order to determine whether Web Slices is
supported:
• The attribute class=hslice and the id attribute, like this:
<divclass="hslice"id="result">
• At least one child element with the entry-title class name, like this:
<div class="hslice" id="result">
        <h2 class="entry-title">Bidding for ...</h2>
        ...
    </div>
When you go to sites that support Web Slices, you will see the Web Slices icon appear
as your mouse moves over sections of the page. The RSS button will also turn into the
Web Slices icon. See the two highlighted icons in Figure 6-10.
Figure 6-10. Viewing pages that support Web Slices
Usability | 117

When you click the Web Slices icon, you will be asked whether you want to view it
from the Favorites bar (see Figure 6-11). Click the Add to Favorites Bar button to add
the Web Slices.
Figure 6-11. Adding a Web Slice
You can now view the Web Slice in the Favorites bar. Clicking it will display the portion
of the page (see Figure 6-12). When the content of the Web Slice has changed, the item
in the Favorites bar will be displayed in bold and its background color will change.
Figure 6-12. Accessing the Web Slice on the Favorites bar
118 | Chapter 6: Internet Explorer 8

One popular site that supports Web Slices is eBay (see Figure 6-13).
Figure 6-13. eBay is a good example of sites that support Web Slices
To customize the behavior of Web Slices, go to the Command bar and select
ToolsൺInternet Options. Under the Content tab, click the Settings button in the Feeds
and Web Slices section (see Figure 6-14). You can now configure the frequency of the
updates (ranging from once every 15 minutes to once every week).
Figure 6-14. Customizing Web Slices
Usability | 119

Accelerators
Imagine that you are searching for the address of a particular location. Once the address
is found, you would most likely copy the address and navigate to Google Maps (or
LiveSearch Maps) to check out the map of the location. Wouldn’t it be easier if IE
simply provided a link to automatically do just that?
Enter accelerators, a feature in IE8. Accelerators help you quickly accomplish tasks
without needing to navigate to other websites. For example, if you want to check the
map of a location, highlight the address (see Figure 6-15), click the blue accelerator
icon displayed on the screen, and select “Map with Bing” accelerator.
Figure 6-15. Using the accelerator to view a map of a location
The map of the selected address will now be displayed.
Another useful accelerator is the translation service provided by Live Search. Fig-
ure 6-16 shows the translation of a Japanese phrase to English.
120 | Chapter 6: Internet Explorer 8

Figure 6-16. Using accelerator to translate from Japanese to English
You can add more accelerators to IE8 by right-clicking any web page, choosing All
Accelerators, and clicking Find More Accelerators.
Privacy
Privacy has always been a big concern for web browser makers as well as users. In IE8,
Microsoft has taken one step forward in beefing up privacy through these features:
InPrivate Browsing
Allows you to view websites without leaving behind any trace on your computer.
The sites you visited and data you submitted will not be saved after you are done
with the session. This is ideal for surfing on shared or public computers.
InPrivate Filtering
Allows you to block code that websites often use to track your surfing pattern.
Although Microsoft has introduced these two features to enhance the privacy of its
users, it has also introduced another new feature that makes some users uneasy. The
Suggested Sites feature uses the information from sites you have visited to introduce
some other sites to you that you may be interested in. Although this is a cool feature,
some users are uncomfortable with Microsoft knowing too much about their surfing
patterns.
Privacy | 121

InPrivate Browsing
InPrivate Browsing is very useful in a public environment in which you do not want
others to know the pages you have visited. Some good examples are checking your
email or performing banking transactions using a public computer, such as at the air-
port. With InPrivate Browsing, IE8 does not store information about the sites that you
visit after the InPrivate Browsing session is closed. Such information includes cookies,
temporary Internet files, web page history, form data, and passwords.
To activate InPrivate Browsing, click the Safety button in the Command bar and select
InPrivate Browsing (see Figure 6-17).
Figure 6-17. Enabling InPrivate Browsing
You can also activate InPrivate Browsing by clicking the “Open an In-
Private Browsing window” link when you create a new empty tab in IE8.
A new window will be created (see Figure 6-18). Notice the label “InPrivate” displayed
next to the address bar.
All tabs created in an InPrivate Browsing window are protected by InPrivate Browsing.
InPrivate Browsing is turned off when you close the window.
122 | Chapter 6: Internet Explorer 8

Figure 6-18. An InPrivate Browsing window
InPrivate Filtering
Over the years, websites have developed many different techniques to track their visi-
tors’ profiles. In the early years, websites tracked the IP addresses of users who visited
their sites. By collecting the IP addresses of their users, websites were able to learn more
about the surfing and usage patterns of their users. However, IP addresses tend to
change, and hence, capturing users’ IP addresses was not a very effective way of tracking
them.
To overcome this, websites turned to cookies. When you visit a site, the site will save
a small chunk of data on your computer, known as a cookie. When you revisit the site,
the cookie will be sent back to the website, thereby allowing the website to know that
you are a returning visitor. Though using cookies is a good way to track visitors, it is
not cross-domain usable. The web browser will send back only a cookie created by the
originating website. For example, if you visit ebay.com and then visit ebay.com.sg, there
is no way for ebay.com.sg to know that you have visited ebay.com, as the cookie created
by ebay.com won’t be sent back to ebay.com.sg.
Privacy | 123

To overcome the restrictions of cookies, sites owners have turned to third-party content
providers, generally advertisers, which provide code that websites can embed into their
own content. When you visit a site embedded with code from a third-party content
provider, information about you is sent to the third-party content provider, which then
creates a profile of your surfing pattern.
IE8 specifically allows you to block this type of third-party code using the InPrivate
Filtering feature. If it detects that this third-party code has been used by more than 10
websites, it will block the code.
InPrivate Filtering may cause some sites to load incorrectly.
To turn on InPrivate Filtering, select the Safety button from the Command bar and
select InPrivate Filtering (see Figure 6-19).
When you turn on InPrivate Filtering, by default, all detected content providers that
are used by more than 10 sites are automatically blocked. If you want to manually
configure which content providers to block, select the InPrivate Filtering Settings item
from the Safety button. Figure 6-20 shows the list of content providers detected by IE8.
You can manually select which content providers to block, as well as change the number
of websites threshold.
Figure 6-19. Enabling InPrivate Filtering
124 | Chapter 6: Internet Explorer 8

Figure 6-20. Changing the settings of the InPrivate Filtering feature
Suggested Sites
IE8 has a new service called Suggested Sites. Based on the current web page you are
viewing, IE recommends other sites that are similar.
To turn on Suggested Sites, click the Suggested Sites button in the Favorites bar (select
ToolsൺToolbarsൺFavorites Bar if it is not visible) and click the “Turn on Suggested
Sites” button (see Figure 6-21).
Figure 6-21. Turning on Suggested Sites
Privacy | 125

You will be asked to confirm this action. Click Yes (see Figure 6-22).
Figure 6-22. Confirming that you want to turn on Suggested Sites
Once Suggested Sites is turned on, you can now navigate to a site and click the Suggested
Sites button to view other sites that are similar to the current one you are viewing (see
Figure 6-23).
Figure 6-23. Displaying other websites that are similar to the one that you are viewing now
126 | Chapter 6: Internet Explorer 8

Note that Suggested Sites does not work for all sites.
Suggested Sites and Privacy Concerns
Though Suggested Sites sounds like a very useful feature in IE8, you need to be aware
of how it works if you are concerned about your surfing privacy. In order for Suggested
Sites to work, the URL of the sites that you have visited will be sent to Microsoft together
with data such as your IP address, browser type, and regional and language settings.
Microsoft has assured users that it will never use that data for targeted advertising, but
privacy advocates are concerned that the data collected might be exploited by hackers.
Website operators also run the risk of their users being lured away to rival sites.
To turn off Suggested Sites, go to the Tools menu in the Command bar
and deselect Suggested Sites.
Security
On the security front, Microsoft has made some UI tweaks to IE to encourage users to
be more conscious of the sites they are visiting while at the same time adding new filters
to help detect malicious websites.
Domain Highlighting
In IE8, the domain name in the URL is highlighted to draw your attention to the site
you are visiting. As shown in Figure 6-24, it is apparent that the URL of the site is
oreillynet.com, as it is highlighted in black while the rest of the URL is in gray.
Figure 6-24. Highlighting the domain name in the address bar
Security | 127

SmartScreen Filter
In IE7, Microsoft introduced the Phishing Filter, via which IE will try to warn users
when they attempt to visit known phishing sites. In IE8, Microsoft has replaced the
Phishing Filter with a feature called the SmartScreen Filter, which is still essentially a
phishing filter, but with some advancement:
• Improved user interface
• Better performance
• Antimalware support
When a phishing site is detected, IE8 will display the warning page shown in Figure
Figure 6-25.
Figure 6-25. IE8 detecting a phishing site
You can also manually check whether a site contains threats by clicking the Safety
button and then selecting SmartScreen FilterൺCheck This Website (see Figure 6-26).
IE8 will check the URL against the list of suspected sites from its database.
128 | Chapter 6: Internet Explorer 8

Figure 6-26. Using the SmartScreen Filter
You will also find options on the menu to turn off the SmartScreen filter or report unsafe
websites.
Cross Site Scripting (XSS) Filter
IE8 also incorporates the XSS filter, which has the ability to prevent cross-site scripting,
a security vulnerability found in web applications that allows code to be injected by
malicious web users into pages viewed by others.
The XSS Filter can be turned on or off via ToolsൺInternet OptionsൺSecurityൺCustom
LevelൺEnable XSS Filter.
To experience the XSS Filter in action, navigate to http://www.ie8demos.com/tryit/ and
click the Cross Site Scripting Filter link. When cross-site scripting is detected, IE8 will
automatically block the malicious script from executing.
Security | 129

Summary
In this chapter, you have seen many of the features and improvements in IE8:
• Smart Address bar
• Enhanced tabbed browsing and grouping
• Compatibility View
• Find on Page
• Improved search
• Web Slices
• Accelerators
• InPrivate Browsing
• InPrivate Filtering
• Suggested Sites
• Domain highlighting
• SmartScreen Filter
With each revision, Microsoft is making sure that it stays ahead in the browser war.
For end users, this can be only good news.
130 | Chapter 6: Internet Explorer 8

CHAPTER 7
Using Windows XP Mode
When Microsoft introduced Windows Vista, many users were very upset to discover
that some of their older applications did not work correctly in Vista (some application
vendors did not upgrade their applications for Vista, or charged more for new versions
than users were willing to pay). As such, a lot of users (and businesses) cited this as a
reason for not upgrading to Vista.
Microsoft realized the severity of this problem and hopes to solve it in Windows 7 by
providing a feature known as Windows XP Mode (XPM). XPM lets you run your legacy
Windows XP applications inside a virtualized environment, either from within a virtual
XP window or as a seamlessly integrated application within Windows 7.
A virtualized environment creates an environment that mimics an actual computer, so
in XPM, you’ve got a copy of Windows XP that thinks it’s got a computer all to itself.
As a result, applications that run under XPM are similarly fooled: as far as they are
concerned, they are running under Windows XP, and do not interact directly with
Windows 7.
Installing Windows XP Mode
XPM is available for the following Windows 7 editions: Professional, Ultimate, and
Enterprise. If you don’t find it on your Start menu, you’ll need to get two things: Win-
dows Virtual PC and the Windows XP Mode package. If Windows Virtual PC is already
installed, you can skip ahead to the Windows XP Mode package instructions.
To get Windows Virtual PC, head over to http://www.microsoft.com/windows/virtual
-pc/download.aspx and download Windows Virtual PC. Windows Virtual PC is a small
Windows update package (about 5 MB) that will install on your Windows 7 computer.
131

Windows Virtual PC is an enhanced, but slightly stripped-down,
version of Microsoft Virtual PC 2007. This new version is especially
designed for Windows 7 so that it can support the seamless XP Mode
and USB devices.
Once Windows Virtual PC is downloaded, proceed with the installation. When the
installation is completed, you may be prompted to restart your computer.
The next step is to download Windows XP Mode package. The Windows XP Mode
package contains the hard disk image of an actual Windows XP installation (with Serv-
ice Pack 3 applied). Be aware that the package takes up a whopping 445 MB of disk
space, so you may want to start downloading it before you go to sleep.
In general, you need a separate license for each virtual operating system
you install on your computer. In this case, you are essentially getting a
free Windows XP license on your computer.
Once the package is downloaded, proceed with the installation. You will be asked to
specify a password to use for the Virtual Windows XP .
If you check the “Remember credentials (Recommended)” checkbox,
you won’t need to log in again the next time you launch Virtual Win-
dows XP. Instead, your credentials will be supplied to the virtual ma-
chine automatically.
You will then be asked a couple of questions. Basically, you are configuring another
installation of Windows, so the steps are very similar to configuring a new computer.
The first time you launch it, Virtual Windows XP will set itself up for first-time use.
This can take a bit of time (five minutes or more).
Using Windows XP Mode
When Windows XP Mode is ready, it will display the Virtual Windows XP window
(see Figure 7-1). Essentially, this is an instance of Windows XP running in a virtual PC.
You can now install your legacy applications on this virtual Windows XP and run them
within the window.
All your drives in your host computer (Windows 7) are accessible in the Virtual Win-
dows XP. Your drive will be named after this format:
<Drive letter> on <Computer name>
132 | Chapter 7: Using Windows XP Mode

Figure 7-1. Virtual Windows XP running an instance of Windows XP
Figure 7-2 shows the drives on my Windows 7 computer mapped as network drives
and visible in the Virtual Windows XP. This means that you can save your work either
within the Virtual Windows XP or directly onto your Windows 7 drives.
Figure 7-2. Drives on the Windows 7 computer are accessible on the virtual Windows XP
Installing Windows XP Mode | 133

One annoying limitation of the Virtual Windows XP window is that you cannot drag-
and-drop items between the host computer and itself (which is not the case for Virtual
PC 2007).
Error Restarting Virtual Machines
Sometimes you may encounter problems restarting virtual machines that have been
hibernating. For example, when I tried to restart my Virtual Windows XP after I hi-
bernated it, I got the error message shown in Figure 7-3 that prevented me from starting
the virtual machine.
To resolve this error, the easiest way would be to delete the corresponding .vsv file for
the virtual machine so that it loses its previously saved state. In my case, the Virtual
Windows XP.vsv file is located in C:\Users\Wei-Meng Lee\AppData\Local\Microsoft
\Windows Virtual PC\Virtual Machines (see Figure 7-4; you need to enable the “Show
hidden files, folders, and drives” option in Windows Explorer’s options). Deleting
the .vsv file is equivalent to pulling out the power plug of a machine and performing a
power off.
Figure 7-3. Problems starting Virtual Windows XP
Figure 7-4. Deleting the .vsv file of a virtual machine to remove its previously saved state
134 | Chapter 7: Using Windows XP Mode

Running Windows XP Mode Seamlessly with Windows 7
The coolest feature of Windows XP Mode is not its ability to run legacy applications
on a virtual Windows XP window. Rather, it is that all applications you installed on
the Virtual Windows XP are now available in the Start menu of your Windows 7
computer.
Applications that you install onto the Virtual Windows XP will be visible
in Windows 7 only if the applications you installed are for All Users. If
you have accidentally installed an application for a specific user, you
can move it to All Users pretty easily: right-click XP’s Start menu and
choose Explore All Users. Do this again, but choose “Explore.” Find the
application you installed and drag it to the corresponding location in
the All Users Start menu.
Figure 7-5 shows my Start menu with a Windows Virtual PC item, which is expanded
to show three more items.
Figure 7-5. All Windows XP applications are now available in Windows 7’s Start menu
Running Windows XP Mode Seamlessly with Windows 7 | 135

Virtual Machines
Opens a window and shows the list of virtual machines available on your computer.
Virtual Windows XP
Launches the Virtual Windows XP window.
Virtual Windows XP Applications
Expands and displays the list of applications installed within the virtual Windows
XP. This may not appear until you have installed some applications in the Virtual
Windows XP.
As you can observe in Figure 7-5, I have installed Microsoft Office in Virtual Windows
XP and the suite of applications is now available to me on Windows 7.
Figure 7-6 shows the Microsoft PowerPoint application running seamlessly within
Windows 7.
Figure 7-6. Running Microsoft PowerPoint in Windows XP Mode in Windows 7
In order to run a Windows XP application in seamless mode, you should
close the Virtual Windows XP window before you run the application.
Otherwise, when you run a Windows XP application in seamless mode,
it will offer to log off the user who is currently logged on in Virtual PC.
Similarly, if you want to launch the Virtual Windows XP window, all
applications running in Windows XP Mode should be closed, too.
136 | Chapter 7: Using Windows XP Mode

Note that applications running in Windows XP Mode use the default Windows XP
theme. Figure 7-7 shows the themes used by the two PowerPoint applications: the
background instance runs natively on Windows 7, while the foreground instance runs
in Windows XP Mode.
Figure 7-7. The different themes used by native and Windows XP Mode applications
USB Mode
One of the most requested features of Virtual PC was support for USB devices. In
Windows Virtual PC, users saw their dreams come true. Windows Virtual PC now
comes with support for USB devices (see Figure 7-8).
When Virtual Windows XP is launched, it automatically scans for USB devices attached
to your host Windows 7 computer. All USB devices will be displayed under the USB
menu item. If you want to use them from within your Windows XP computer, simply
select the item containing the device you want to use. The status of the device will then
switch from Attach to Release. Virtual Windows XP will then proceed to look for the
drivers for the selected device.
Running Windows XP Mode Seamlessly with Windows 7 | 137

Figure 7-8. Windows Virtual PC now supports USB devices attached to the host computer
Installing Other Operating Systems
When you install Windows Virtual PC and the XPM package, you get the Windows
XP virtual machine free of charge so that you can run your legacy Windows XP appli-
cations. However, besides running the free Windows XP virtual machine, you can also
install other operating systems on Windows Virtual PC. This section will show you
how to install another operating system on Windows Virtual PC. For illustration pur-
poses, I will install the Ubuntu Linux OS.
Creating a New Virtual Machine
First, launch the Virtual Machines window by going to StartൺAll ProgramsൺWindows
Virtual PCൺVirtual Machines. The Virtual Machines window will be shown (see Fig-
ure 7-9). This window will display all the virtual machines that you have installed on
your computer.
Figure 7-9. The Virtual Machines window, displaying the virtual machines you have installed on your
computer
138 | Chapter 7: Using Windows XP Mode

To create a new virtual machine, click the menu item “Create virtual machine.” You
will be asked to name the new virtual machine as well as specify a location to store the
new virtual machine file. Click Next.
In the next screen, you need to specify how much memory to allocate to this virtual
machine. You will also indicate whether you want the virtual machine to make use of
the current computer’s network connection for network access. Click Next to continue.
Finally, you will be asked to create or use an existing hard disk image file for the new
OS. If you are creating a new image, select the first option and click Create.
Starting the New Virtual Machine
Once the virtual machine is created, you will see it shown in the Virtual Machines
window (see Figure 7-10).
Figure 7-10. The newly installed virtual machine is shown in the Virtual Machines window
To start the new virtual machine, double-click it. The virtual machine will attempt to
perform a network boot, and will eventually fail. As you have not installed the OS yet,
press the Esc key now and you will see a message asking you to reboot or insert the
boot media in the selected boot device.
To install an OS on the virtual machine, you will need the installation disc for the OS
you are going to install and you must let Windows Virtual PC know how to locate the
installation disc. To do so, select ToolsൺSettings... and choose DVD Drive from the
list of settings.
Installing Other Operating Systems | 139

If your OS comes on a physical disc, insert the disc (CD or DVD) into your CD/DVD
drive now and select the “Access a physical drive option” (Figure 7-11). Choose the
drive letter that corresponds to your disc drive. If your OS is saved as an ISO file, choose
the “Open an ISO image” option and specify the path containing the ISO file. Click
OK to continue.
Figure 7-11. Mapping the DVD drive
Click the menu labeled Ctrl-Alt-Del in the virtual machine window. The virtual ma-
chine will now attempt to boot up. If the bootup is successful, you should see a bootup
screen like Figure 7-12.
You will now proceed with the usual steps to install the OS. Figure 7-13 shows my
newly installed Ubuntu running in Windows Virtual PC.
140 | Chapter 7: Using Windows XP Mode

Figure 7-12. Successfully booting up the OS
Figure 7-13. The Ubuntu OS running in Windows Virtual PC
Installing Other Operating Systems | 141

Summary
In this chapter, you have seen the new Windows XP Mode (XPM) available in Windows
7. XPM is a good solution for users who are still using legacy Windows XP applications
to move to Windows 7 without needing to worry whether their old applications are
still supported. Though most Windows XP and Vista applications should run without
any problems in Windows 7, XPM will serve as a good backup to ensure the maximum
support for all applications.
142 | Chapter 7: Using Windows XP Mode

CHAPTER 8
Windows 7 Tips and Tricks
Windows 7 is a complex operating system that is more evolutionary than revolutionary.
A lot of features available in Windows 7 are based on the features available in the earlier
versions of Windows—XP and Vista. Nevertheless, Windows 7 contains a wealth of
new features that greatly improve the usability of Windows and its performance. In
this chapter, you will learn some of the tips and tricks to getting the most out of Win-
dows 7.
Customizing the UI
In Windows 7, Windows Explorer has gone though a kind facelift, evident most notably
in the new Libraries feature, as well as with native support for touchscreens. Apart from
this, Windows 7 also packs some nice little surprises to spice up your Windows
experience.
Change Windows Explorer’s Default View
When you launch Windows Explorer, the default view you will get is always the Li-
braries (see Figure 8-1).
Though Microsoft thinks that your interaction with files should center around Libra-
ries, not everyone will find it useful. In particular, you may want Computer (where it
will display the disk drives available on your computer) to be displayed when you open
Windows Explorer.
To display something different, such as Computer, when you open Windows Explorer,
you need to undertake some tweaks. Click the Start menu and select All
ProgramsൺAccessories. Right-click the Windows Explorer icon and select Properties
(see Figure 8-2).
143

Figure 8-1. The default view of Windows Explorer
Figure 8-2. Locating the Windows Explorer application
144 | Chapter 8: Windows 7 Tips and Tricks

In the Properties window, click the Shortcut tab; you should see the Target attribute
set to:
%windir%\explorer.exe
Change it to the following (see also Figure 8-3):
%SystemRoot%\explorer.exe /root,::{20D04FE0-3AEA-1069-A2D8-08002B30309D}
Figure 8-3. Changing the Target attribute so that Computer will be displayed when Windows Explorer
is opened
Once this step is performed, whenever you open Windows Explorer, Computer will
now be shown (see Figure 8-4).
Customizing the UI | 145

Figure 8-4. Displaying Computer when Windows Explorer is opened
Note that performing the steps outlined here affects Windows Explorer only in the
Accessories folder. That is, if you launch Windows Explorer from the icon pinned to
the taskbar, you will still see the Libraries. To fix this, you need to unpin the Windows
Explorer icon from the taskbar (see Figure 8-5) and then pin it to the taskbar again.
Figure 8-5. Unpinning Windows Explorer from the taskbar
146 | Chapter 8: Windows 7 Tips and Tricks

Note that if you right-click the Start menu and select Windows Explorer,
it will still display the Libraries.
Open a Command Window Anywhere
If you are used to the command line, you will appreciate this tip. In Windows 7, you
can use Windows Explorer to navigate to any folder you want and then Shift-right-click
a folder and select the “Open command window here” option (see Figure 8-6).
Figure 8-6. Shift-right-click a folder to open a command window
Doing so will open a command window at the selected folder (see Figure 8-7).
Figure 8-7. Opening the command window at the selected folder
Customizing the UI | 147

Use Themes for Other Locations
When you install Windows 7, you are asked to select your current location. The loca-
tion that you select will determine the themes that you will see in Control Panel (under
the Personalization application).
For example, if you have selected United States for your location, you should see the
Aero Themes, as shown in Figure 8-8.
Figure 8-8. The Aero Themes available for your computer
However, if you now change your location to some other place, such as Canada or
United Kingdom, your Personalization control panel will now include themes for these
additional locations. Figure 8-9 shows the additional themes that were added to the
Personalization application when I changed my location to Canada and then the United
Kingdom.
If you change to a location that Windows does not have a theme for
(such as France), you will not see any changes to the Personalization
control panel. You can go online and download additional themes,
though.
148 | Chapter 8: Windows 7 Tips and Tricks

Figure 8-9. The additional themes added
Besides changing your location to see the additional themes available, you can also go
to a hidden folder (C:\Windows\Globalization\MCT) to locate the additional themes
(see Figure 8-10).
Figure 8-10. Additional themes in the hidden folder
Customizing the UI | 149

As you can see, there are five folders, each representing a location—Australia (MCT-
AU), Canada (MCT-CA), United Kingdom (MCT-GB), United States (MCT-US), and
South Africa (MCT-ZA). Within each folder are several subfolders, one of which is the
Theme folder. Inside the Theme folder, you will see a .theme file. When you double-
click the .theme file, the current theme will be changed to the selected theme, and it
will also appear in the My Themes section of the Personalization application (see Fig-
ure 8-11).
Figure 8-11. Changing to a selected theme
Touch Gestures
Windows 7 is designed with touchscreen support, and hence some of the UI elements
in Windows have implicit support for hand gestures, even if you don’t have hardware
support for touch. For example, in IE, you can use your mouse and click and drag down
the Address bar. IE will slide the history and favorites list into view as you drag (see
Figure 8-12).
Figure 8-12. “Touch” support in IE
150 | Chapter 8: Windows 7 Tips and Tricks

Of course, if you have a touch-enabled screen, the easiest way would be
to use your finger and swipe the Address bar downward.
The taskbar also supports touch; use your mouse and click an application icon in the
taskbar and move upward; it will fade and slide the Jump List into view (see Fig-
ure 8-13).
Figure 8-13. Swiping an application icon upward displays the Jump Lists
Auto-Login
In Windows 7, you can use the Advanced User Account feature to automatically log in
with your user account whenever you boot up your computer.
To use the Advanced User Account feature, click the Start menu, type “netplwiz” in
the search box, and press Return. The User Accounts window will appear (see Fig-
ure 8-14).
The Advanced User Account feature is also accessible with the com-
mand control userpasswords2, but it must be typed at the command
prompt or Run (Windows-R) dialog.
Customizing the UI | 151

Select the user to use to auto-login and then uncheck the “Users must enter a user name
and password to use this computer” checkbox. You will be asked to enter the password
twice.
Now when you start up your computer, you will be automatically logged in.
Taskbar
The new taskbar is one of the highlights in Windows 7. It is greatly improved, but is
still one of the areas that you can tweak to your heart’s content.
Figure 8-14. The User Accounts window to configure user access to your computer
152 | Chapter 8: Windows 7 Tips and Tricks

Rearranging the Icons in the Taskbar
In the previous versions of Windows, icons displayed in the taskbar are static; that is,
you cannot move them. In Windows 7, you can freely move the icons anywhere in the
taskbar simply by dragging-and-dropping them within the taskbar (see Figure 8-15).
Figure 8-15. Rearrange the icons in the taskbar by dragging-and-dropping them on the desired location
Displaying the Old Quick Launch Bar
Despite the many improvements made to the taskbar in Windows 7, some users may
still miss the old Quick Launch bar available in Windows XP and Vista. Follow these
steps to get the Quick Launch bar back to the taskbar:
1. Right-click the taskbar and uncheck the “Lock the taskbar” option.
2. Right-click the taskbar and select ToolbarsൺNew Toolbar.
3. When asked to choose a folder, enter the following (see Figure 8-16) and then click
the Select Folder button:
%userprofile%\AppData\Roaming\Microsoft\Internet Explorer\Quick Launch
Figure 8-16. Selecting a folder for the new toolbar
Taskbar | 153

The Quick Launch bar will now appear at the right side of the taskbar (see Figure 8-17).
Figure 8-17. The Quick Launch bar
Click the divider and drag Quick Launch bar to reveal the items contained within it
(see Figure 8-18).
Figure 8-18. Exposing the items contained within the Quick Launch bar
Taskbar Shortcuts
The taskbar contains many shortcuts that will make your life much easier. Here are
some really helpful ones:
Ctrl-click an application icon in the taskbar
This action will cycle through all the open windows belonging to the application.
For example, suppose that you have five IE windows open. Pressing the Ctrl key
while you click the IE icon in the taskbar will toggle between all the opened IE
windows (including tab pages).
Shift-click (or middle-click) an application icon in the taskbar
This will launch a new instance of the application.
Ctrl-Shift-Click an application icon in the taskbar
This action will launch the application in administrator mode.
Besides these taskbar shortcuts, the Windows Key has many shortcuts as well. Ta-
ble 8-1 shows the various shortcuts you can use with the Windows Key.
Table 8-1. Windows Key shortcuts
Key combinations
Descriptions
Windows Key + ൻ
Minimizes/restores window
Windows Key + ൸
Docks window to left of screen
154 | Chapter 8: Windows 7 Tips and Tricks

Key combinations
Descriptions
Windows Key + ൺ
Docks window to right of screen
Windows Key + ൹
Maximizes window
Windows Key + –
Zooms out when magnifier is active
Windows Key + +
Activates magnifier and zoom in
Windows Key + B
Switches focus to the notification area (use arrow keys to navigate)
Windows Key + D
Shows the desktop
Windows Key + E
Opens Windows Explorer
Windows Key + F
Opens the search Window
Windows Key + G
Cycles through the Gadgets
Windows Key + Home
Minimizes/restores all other windows
Windows Key + L
Locks the screen
Windows Key + M
Minimizes all windows
Windows Key + n
Opens or launches the application located on the corresponding position
in the taskbar (starting with 1 from the left, not counting the Start menu);
if the application is not running, it launches it; otherwise, it displays the
window list while you hold down the key, and activates the first item in
the list
Windows Key + P
Shows the display options pop up
Windows Key + R
Shows the Run dialog
Windows Key + T
Cycles through all the icons in the taskbar from left to right
Windows Key + U
Opens the Ease of Access Center
Windows Key + X
Launches Windows Mobility Center (on notebooks and mobile
computers)
Windows Key + Shift + ൸
Moves to left monitor
Windows Key + Shift + ൺ
Moves to right monitor
Windows Key + Shift + T
Cycles through all the icons in the taskbar from right to left
Windows Key + Space
Peeks at the desktop
Another useful shortcut is Alt-P, which shows the File Preview Pane in Windows Ex-
plorer. Figure 8-19 shows the File Preview Pane displaying the preview of a selected
image when you press the Alt-P shortcut.
Besides using the File Preview Pane to preview images, you can also use it to preview
known file types such as Word (see Figure 8-20) and PowerPoint documents.
Taskbar | 155

Figure 8-19. The File Preview Pane in Windows Explorer
Figure 8-20. Previewing a Word document
156 | Chapter 8: Windows 7 Tips and Tricks

Pinning Folders to the Taskbar
If you frequently work with certain folders, you might want to pin them to the taskbar.
To pin a folder to the taskbar, drag-and-drop it onto the taskbar (see Figure 8-21). The
folder will now appear in the Pinned section of the Windows Explorer Jump List.
Figure 8-21. Pinning a folder to the taskbar
Utilities/Troubleshooting Tools
Windows 7 ships with some really neat utilities to help you work with external acces-
sories as well as troubleshoot problems. Here are some of the cool ones.
Projector Screen Selection
If you have ever done presentations using your notebook computer, you know the kind
of nightmare you sometimes have to go through to get your display projected correctly
on the projector screen—find the right key combinations on your keyboard, toggle a
couple of times, and so on. If you want to use the projector screen as an extension of
your screen, you need to go to the screen settings and mess with the setup again.
In Windows 7, you can now quickly control the display projection by pressing the
Windows-P key combination. You will see the pop up shown in Figure 8-22.
Figure 8-22. Controlling the display output options
Utilities/Troubleshooting Tools | 157

As you can see, you can easily control how the display is shown on your computer and
the projector simply by selecting the option that applies to you.
You can also use the command displayswitch.exe to invoke the pro-
jector pop up. You can run it from the command prompt or the search
field of the Start menu.
Problems Steps Recorder
One very cool tool shipped in Windows 7 is the Problems Steps Recorder application.
This is one of the internal tools that Microsoft uses for feedback, now available in
Windows 7. The Problems Steps Recorder application basically captures screenshots
of what you are doing and details each step with descriptions of the actions that you
performed. When you are done recording, the details are saved as a web archive.
To launch the Problems Steps Recorder application, use the command psr.exe (you
can also find it by searching for “Record steps to reproduce a problem” in the Control
Panel). When the application is launched, you will see the window shown in Fig-
ure 8-23.
Figure 8-23. The Problem Steps Recorder
To start recording, click the Start Record button. From this point onward, whatever
items you click on the desktop will be recorded. In the process, you can also add your
own comments (in addition, the system will automatically insert detailed descriptions
of what you are doing). When you are done, click the Stop Record button. You will
now be asked to specify a filename for saving the recording.
The recording will be saved as a .mht file (archived web page) and zipped automatically
to save space.
Open the archived report and you will see a detailed description of what you did (see
Figure 8-24).
158 | Chapter 8: Windows 7 Tips and Tricks

Figure 8-24. Viewing the recorded problem steps
The entire Windows desktop is captured in the report.
You can also view the report as a slideshow. Click the “Review the recorded problem
steps as a slide show” link. Figure 8-25 shows the report as a slideshow.
Troubleshooting Sleep Mode Problems
If you use Windows 7 for some time, you may realize that your computer will suddenly
wake up from sleep mode, or that the battery of your notebook computer drains very
quickly. The possible causes of these symptoms are many and are often difficult to
troubleshoot.
Utilities/Troubleshooting Tools | 159

Windows 7 includes a very useful tool to troubleshoot potential problems with your
computer that may cause unexpected drain on the battery of your notebook. It can also
troubleshoot areas that cause problems with sleep modes, and display the different
power saving modes supported by your computer. To launch this tool, launch the
command window in Administrator mode (type cmd.exe in the Start menu, right-click
the cmd.exe item, and select “Run as administrator”).
Then, type the following command:
powercfg -energy
You can also use the powercfg tool to turn off hibernation (you need to
run the command as an Administrator):
powercfg -h off
The Power Policy Configuration tool will take a while to complete; when it is done, you
will see the information displayed as follows:
Figure 8-25. Viewing the recordings as a slideshow
160 | Chapter 8: Windows 7 Tips and Tricks

C:\Windows\system32>powercfg -energy
Enabling tracing for 60 seconds...
Observing system behavior...
Analyzing trace data...
Analysis complete.
Energy efficiency problems were found.
9 Errors
14 Warnings
10 Informational
See C:\Windows\system32\energy-report.html for more details.
The report generated is named energy-report.html and is saved in your current working
directory. You can navigate to the folder and use IE8 to view its content (see Fig-
ure 8-26).
Figure 8-26. Viewing the report generated
Utilities/Troubleshooting Tools | 161

Instead of navigating to the destination folder to view the report, you
can issue the following command in the command window to launch
the report directly:
start energy-report.html
You need to run this from the command window from which you ran
powercfg; otherwise, you may not be in the correct directory.
Windows Disk Image Burner
In previous versions of Windows, you needed a third-party application to burn an ISO
image to your CD or DVD. In Windows 7, this capability is built right into the OS. By
default, you can double-click an ISO image and Windows will display the prompt
shown in Figure 8-27.
Figure 8-27. The Windows Disc Image Burner
Select the CD/DVD burner, insert a disc, and click the Burn button to start burning
your CD/DVD.
162 | Chapter 8: Windows 7 Tips and Tricks

Calibrating Your Display
Windows 7 includes two cool tools to calibrate your display for text and graphics. These
tools are especially useful for notebook computer screens, as they make your display
much sharper. These two tools can be launched using Control PaneൺAppearance and
PersonalizationൺDisplay.
The two tools can also be launched via the command line—
cttune.exe and dccw.exe.
The cttune.exe application (the “Adjust ClearType text” link on the left of the window)
helps you to calibrate your display for displaying ClearType text (see Figure 8-28).
Figure 8-28. The cttune application
Utilities/Troubleshooting Tools | 163

The dccw.exe application (the “Calibrate color” link) helps you to calibrate the color
of your display so that colors can appear accurately (see Figure 8-29).
Figure 8-29. The dccw application
Windows 7 Compatibility Mode
If you have trouble running applications designed for the previous versions of Win-
dows, you can also use the Windows 7 Compatibility Mode to run them in Windows
7. Using the Compatibility Mode, you can configure an application to try to run in the
version of Windows that it was written for.
To configure an application to run in Compatibility Mode, right-click the application’s
shortcut, .exe, or installation program, and select Properties. Next, select the Compat-
ibility tab and you should see the option “Run this program in compatibility mode for:”
(see Figure 8-30).
Note that if Compatibility Mode is not supported for the application,
the option will appear grayed out. The most likely reasons for this are
that the application is designed for Windows 7 only, or that it is a 64-
bit application.
164 | Chapter 8: Windows 7 Tips and Tricks

Figure 8-30. The Compatibility tab in the Properties window
Check the option and you will be able to select the versions of Windows to use to run
the application (see Figure 8-31).
Figure 8-31. Selecting the Windows version to run the application in Compatibility Mode
Utilities/Troubleshooting Tools | 165

Do not use Compatibility Mode for antivirus programs and disk utilit-
ies, as this may cause data loss.
You will also be able to modify various other settings such as colors, resolutions,
themes, desktop composition (disabling this turns off Aero effects), and DPI settings.
You will also be able to run the application as an administrator.
If you are not sure which are the best settings to use, you can use the Program Com-
patibility application shipped with Windows 7. To invoke the Program Compatibility
application, type the following command in the command window or the Run dialog
(see Figure 8-32):
msdt -id PCWDiagnostic
Figure 8-32. Launching the Program Compatibility application
The Program Compatibility application can also be launched from Con-
trol PanelൺProgramsൺRun Programs made for previous versions of
Windows.
Follow through the wizard and it will guide you and provide recommendations for the
settings to use.
166 | Chapter 8: Windows 7 Tips and Tricks

Installing Windows 7
Netbooks are all the rage nowadays, with manufacturers rolling out new netbooks at
an incredible rate. Windows 7 is a popular choice for installing on netbooks, as it is
designed and optimized for low-powered computers like netbooks. However, one lim-
itation of netbooks is that they do not have DVD drives, and this makes installing a
new OS on them a bit challenging. Fear not: armed with a computer running Vista or
Windows 7 and a USB hard disk or thumb drive, you can install Windows 7 on a
netbook easily. Here’s how.
Installing Windows 7 Using a USB Hard Drive
You can install Windows 7 using a USB hard drive. The following steps show you how
to prepare your existing USB hard drive for installing Windows 7:
1. Connect your USB hard disk to your computer.
2. Launch the Disk Management application available in Windows.
In Windows Vista, the Disk Management tool is found under
Control PanelൺAdministrative ToolsൺComputer Management. In
Windows 7, type “disk management” in the Start menu to launch
it.
3. Locate the USB hard drive and right-click it (see Figure 8-33). Select Shrink
Volume....
Figure 8-33. Shrinking an existing hard disk
Installing Windows 7 | 167

4. You will be asked the size in MB to shrink. Enter an amount greater than 3,000
(3 GB). For my example, I used 15,000 (15 GB; see Figure 8-34). Click Shrink.
Figure 8-34. Specifying the amount to shrink
5. When the shrinking is done, right-click the new partition and select New Simple
Volume (see Figure 8-35).
Figure 8-35. Creating a new volume
168 | Chapter 8: Windows 7 Tips and Tricks

6. The New Simple Volume wizard will appear. Click Next.
7. Specify the size for the new volume: 15,000. Click Next.
8. Assign a new drive letter—use the default drive letter assigned. Click Next.
9. Format the drive using FAT32 (see Figure 8-36). Click Next.
Figure 8-36. Formatting the drive using FAT32
10. To complete the wizard, click Finish.
11. Right-click the new partition and select Mark Partition as Active to make it as the
bootable partition (see Figure 8-37).
Figure 8-37. Marking the partition as bootable
Installing Windows 7 | 169

12. Copy all the files from the Windows 7 installation disk onto the newly created drive.
13. If your Windows 7 comes as an ISO image, you can download third-party appli-
cations to mount the ISO image as a DVD drive. The application I used is Virtual
CloneDrive. You can download the free Virtual CloneDrive from http://www.sly
soft.com/en/download.html.
You can now connect the USB hard disk to your computer and boot from the USB drive
(during bootup, you need to instruct the BIOS to boot up using your USB devices).
Installing Windows 7 Using a USB Thumb Drive
If you want to install Windows 7 using a USB thumb drive, follow the steps outlined
here:
1. Use the diskpart.exe application to prepare the USB thumb drive. Launch the
diskpart.exe application in the command prompt and then issue the following
commands (see also Figure 8-38):
list disk
select disk n (where n is your thumb drive)
clean
create partition primary
format fs=fat32 quick
active
exit
Figure 8-38. Preparing the thumb drive with diskpart.exe
170 | Chapter 8: Windows 7 Tips and Tricks

2. Copy the content of the Windows 7 installation disk onto the USB thumb drive.
3. Insert the thumb drive into the computer and boot it up using the USB thumb drive.
As the Windows 7 installation takes up well over 2 GB, you would need
a USB thumb drive that is at least 4 GB.
Dual Booting Windows 7 with Windows Vista and Windows XP
Although Windows 7 offers many features and performance enhancements, you might
not be ready to totally move to this new operating system. In this case, a good solution
would be to keep your existing OS (XP or Vista) and install Windows 7 as a dual-boot
system. Installing Windows 7 as a dual-boot system requires disk partitioning, and this
section shows you how.
Before you proceed with preparing your existing hard disk for a dual
boot, be sure to back up your existing files. Partitioning a hard disk is
like walking a tightrope—you never know when an accident will occur.
If you are currently running Windows XP, you need to use some third-party partitioning
software, such as Partition Magic (http://www.symantec.com/norton/partitionmagic) or
GParted (http://gparted.sourceforge.net). The key here is to resize your current partition
and create a new partition of at least 16 GB. In Vista, you can use the Disk Management
tool (Control PanelൺAdministrative ToolsൺComputer Management) to shrink the ex-
isting hard disk (see Figure 8-39) to create a new partition of at least 16 GB. Once the
disk has been shrunken, create a new simple volume on the free space.
Figure 8-39. Shrinking the partition in Windows Vista
Installing Windows 7 | 171

Go back to the section “Installing Windows 7 Using a USB Hard
Drive” on page 167 to learn how to use the Disk Management tool.
Reboot the computer using the Windows 7 disk (or USB thumb drive or hard disk).
During the installation, select Custom (advanced) when asked to choose the installation
type and choose the newly created partition to set up Windows 7.
When the installation is done, you will have a dual-boot system that allows you to select
the OS to boot when you start up your computer.
Installing Windows 7 on a Virtual Hard Disk (VHD) File
Virtual machine technologies have been around for quite some time, and Microsoft is
a strong proponent of this technology, with products like Virtual PC and Virtual Server.
Using virtual machines, the operating system is installed on a virtual hard disk and the
operating system runs on an emulated hardware environment. However, the key lim-
itation of virtual machines is that they cannot leverage all the hardware available on
the system, such as graphics, wireless, USB, and so on.
In Windows 7, the Virtual Hard Disk that is used by Virtual PC (and other virtualization
products) is now natively supported. This means that you can now install the entire
operating system on a single VHD file and boot the computer off the single VHD file.
This allows the operating system to run natively on the hardware (and not on emula-
tion) and makes it very easy for administrators and developers to test different config-
urations of systems.
The following steps will show you how to install Windows 7 on a VHD file using a new
fresh hard disk:
1. Using the Windows installation disk, boot up your computer.
2. When you are asked to select a language, select the appropriate language.
3. Press Shift-F10 to launch a command console window (see Figure 8-40).
4. In the command window, issue the following commands (replace 60,000 with the
maximum size, in megabytes, for the VHD image):
a. diskpart
b. list disk
c. sel disk 0
d. create partition primary
e. format fs=ntfs quick
f. list vol
g. assign
172 | Chapter 8: Windows 7 Tips and Tricks

h. list vol
i. create vdisk file=C:\Windows7.vhd maximum=60000 type=expandable
j. select vdisk file=C:\Windows7.vhd
k. attach vdisk
l. create partition primary
m. format fs=ntfs quick
n. assign letter=U:
o. list vol
p. list vdisk
q. exit diskpart
r. exit
5. These commands first create a primary partition on your hard disk and then create
a new VHD file (of size 60 GB) in the primary partition.
6. Continue with the installation of Windows 7. You will now have created a VHD
file on your drive, which looks like a normal partition to the Windows 7 installer
Figure 8-40. Launching a command window during installation time
Installing Windows 7 | 173

(see Figure 8-41). Select Disk 1 Partition 1 to install Windows 7 (ignore the error
message displayed at the bottom of the window). Click Next.
Figure 8-41. Selecting the created VHD file to install Windows 7
7. Following the instructions on the screen to complete the installation of Windows
7.
When Windows 7 is installed on the computer’s hard disk, you can now proceed to
install another operating system on the hard disk using a VHD file. The following steps
show how to install another copy of the Windows 7 operating system using a VHD file:
1. Insert the Windows 7 DVD and boot up the computer using the DVD.
2. As in the previous list, press Shift-F10 after selecting the language to display the
command window.
3. In the command window, issue the following commands:
a. create vdisk file=C:\newWindows7.vhd maximum=60000 type=expandable
b. select vdisk file=C:\newWindows7.vhd
c. attach vdisk
d. exit
174 | Chapter 8: Windows 7 Tips and Tricks

4. These commands create another VHD file (also of size 60 GB) in the primary par-
tition of your drive.
5. Exit the command prompt. Proceed to install Windows 7 as normal.
6. Once the installation is done, you will see two copies of Windows 7 in the boot
loader when the computer restarts (see Figure 8-42). Select an instance to boot up.
Figure 8-42. The Windows Boot Manager displaying two instances of Windows 7
7. To change the description of each Windows instance, run the command prompt
window as an Administrator.
8. In the command window, type bcdedit /v. This will display the entries in the boot
manager (see Figure 8-43). Observe the identifiers of each boot entry (those en-
closed by the {}).
9. Enter the following command to change the description of the each entry in the
boot manager (where {xxx} is the identifier of the boot entry you want to change):
bcdedit /set {xxxxxxxx-xxxx-xxxx-xxxx-xxxxxxxxxxxx} description "Windows 7 VHD"
10. Restart the computer; you should now see the updated description of each boot
entries (see Figure 8-44).
Installing Windows 7 | 175

Figure 8-43. Viewing the entries in the boot loader
Figure 8-44. The boot loader with the updated entries
176 | Chapter 8: Windows 7 Tips and Tricks

Summary
In this chapter, you have learned the many tips and tricks that allow you to customize
Windows 7 to work the way you want. In particular, you have seen how to:
• Customize Windows Explorer and the taskbar, and apply themes to your Windows
desktop
• Use the various keyboard shortcuts in Windows 7
• Use the various troubleshooting utilities in Windows 7 to troubleshoot Windows
problems
• Burn ISO images to DVDs
• Use the touch gesture support in Windows 7
• Install Windows 7 using removable media such as USB thumb drives
• Dual-boot Windows 7 with Vista and Windows XP
Summary | 177


Index
A
accelerators
IE8, 120
Action Center, 53–55
Address bar
IE8, 110
Advanced User Account feature
auto-login, 151
Aero Peek
about, 13
taskbar, 20
Aero Shake, 14
Aero Snap, 14
antispyware
Windows Defender, 73
antivirus tools
AVG Anti-Virus, 76
Compatibility Mode, 166
applications, 79–108
Calculator, 16, 105
Compatibility Mode, 164
cttune.exe application, 163
dccw.exe application, 164
diskpart.exe application, 170
displayswitch.exe command, 158
legacy applications, 132, 135
Math Input Panel, 103
Microsoft Surface, 11
Paint, 15, 107
pinning to taskbar, 21
powercfg tool, 160
Snipping Tool, 92
Sound Recorder, 94
Sticky Notes, 105
Windows Disc Image Burner, 99
Windows Live Family Safety, 89
Windows Live Mail, 81–87
Windows Live Messenger, 80
Windows Live Movie Maker, 91
Windows Live Photo Gallery, 87
Windows Live Writer, 88
Windows Media Center, 101
Windows Media Player, 107
Windows Photo Viewer, 97
Windows PowerShell, 95–97
WordPad, 15, 107
XPS Viewer, 104
auto-login, 151
AVG Anti-Virus, 76
B
back up
certificates, 70
Credential Manager, 63
BitLocker Drive Encryption, 64–68
BitLocker To Go, 67
blog publishing
Windows Live Writer, 88
browsing
tabbed in IE8, 110
burning
DVDs, 98
ISO and IMG images, 99
C
Calculator, 16, 105
Calendar, 84–87
calibrating
We’d like to hear your suggestions for improving our indexes. Send email to index@oreilly.com.
179

displays, 163
CDs
burning, 99, 162
certificates
back up, 70
creating, 71
importing, 73
command line
opening command window, 147
Windows PowerShell, 95–97
command prompt
Windows PowerShell, 95
Compatibility View
IE8, 112
Credential Manager, 59–64
about, 60
back up, 63
linking online IDs, 61
credentials
Virtual Windows XP, 132
Cross Site Scripting (XSS) Filter, 129
cttune.exe application, 163
D
dccw.exe application, 164
default view
Windows Explorer, 143
destinations
Jump Lists, 23
dir command
Windows PowerShell, 95
Disc Image Burner, 99
disk images
burning, 162
disk utilities
Compatibility Mode, 166
diskpart.exe application, 170
displays
calibrating, 163
displayswitch.exe command, 158
Dock feature
Mac OS X, 21
domain highlighting
IE8, 127
downloading
Windows Live Essentials, 80
XPM package, 132
drag-and-drop
between Virtual Windows XP and Windows
7, 134
dragging windows, 14
drives
using with Virtual Windows XP, 132
dual booting
Windows 7 with Vista and XP, 171–172
DVDs
burning, 98, 99, 162
E
editions of Windows 7
list of, 1–3
NTFS encryption availability, 69
Windows Media Center, 101
XPM, 131
EFS (Encrypting File System), 69–73
compared to BitLocker Drive Encryption,
65
creating certificates, 71
importing certificates, 73
encryption
BitLocker Drive Encryption, 64–68
Encrypting File System, 69–73
Enterprise edition, 2
equations
Math Input Panel, 103
essential applications (see Windows Live
Essentials suite)
F
Family Safety, 89
Favorites
searching in Address bar, 110
features (see new features)
File Sharing, 37–51
HomeGroup, 37–47
with Windows XP, 47–49
with Mac OS X, 50
files, 37
(see also File Sharing)
certificates for encrypting, 71
Encrypting File System, 69–73
filesystems
BitLocker requirements, 66
filtering
InPrivate Filtering, 123
SmartScreen Filter, 128
180 | Index

XXS Filter, 129
filters
Windows Live Family Safety, 90
find on page feature
IE8, 113
firewalls
Windows Firewall, 75
folders
and libraries, 26–31
pinning to taskbar, 157
viewing shared folders, 49
G
gadgets
about, 15
displaying on desktop, 31–34
grouping
IE8, 110
H
hand gestures
touchscreen support, 150
hibernation
powercfg tool, 160
restarting virtual machines, 134
History
searching in Address bar, 110
Home Basic edition, 2
Home Premium edition, 2
HomeGroup, 37–47
creating, 39–43
joining, 43
sharing files, 43
sharing printers, 43
streaming music, 46
Hotmail, naming of, 82
(see also Windows Live Hotmail; Windows
Live Mail)
I
icons
Action Center, 53
taskbar, 153
IDs
linking online, 61
IE7 (Internet Explorer 7)
compatibility with websites and intranet
pages, 112
IE8 (Internet Explorer 8), 109–130
accelerators, 120
Address bar, 110
Compatibility View, 112
find on page feature, 113
grouping, 110
pinning destinations, 26
privacy, 121–127
search, 114
security, 127–129
tabbed browsing, 110
thumbnails, 20
Web Slices, 116–119
images, burning disk images, 99, 162
(see also photos)
IMG images
Windows Disc Image Burner, 99
importing
certificates, 73
InPrivate Browsing
IE8, 121
InPrivate Filtering
IE8, 121, 123
installing
Linux OS, 138
printer drivers, 44
Windows 7, 4–9, 167–175
XPM, 131–134
Internet Connection Firewall (see Windows
Firewall)
Internet Explorer (see IE7; IE8)
intranet pages
compatibility with IE8, 112
ISO images
burning, 99, 162
J
joining
HomeGroup, 43
Jump Lists, 22–26
K
keyboard shortcuts
Areo Snap, 14
L
Libraries
about, 26–31, 143
Index | 181

sharing, 40, 41, 43
linking
online IDs, 61
Linux OS
installing, 138–140
locations
themes, 148
M
Mac OS X
Dock feature, 21
file sharing with, 50
mail
Windows Live Mail, 81–87
maintenance
messages about, 53
maps
searching for, 120
Math Input Panel, 103
Media Center, 101
media players
Windows Media Player, 107
messages
maintenance and security, 53
Messenger, 80
Microsoft AntiSpyware (see Windows
Defender)
Microsoft Surface applications, 11
Microsoft Touch Pack for Windows
availability, 11
Microsoft Virtual PC 2007, 132
mounting
ISO images, 101
Movie Maker, 91
multitouch
support for, 11
music
streaming, 46
N
netbooks
installing Windows 7, 167
networks
wireless, 38
new features, 9–17
Aero Peek, Aero Shake and Aero Snap, 13
Calculator, 16
gadgets, 15, 31–34
Paint and WordPad, 15
Show desktop shortcut, 12
taskbar, 11, 19–26
touchscreen support, 11
Web Slices, 116–119
newsgroups
subscribing to, 82
notification balloons
Action Center, 55
NTFS Encryption (see EFS)
O
opening
command windows, 147
Outlook Express (see Windows Live Mail)
P
Paint, 15, 107
parental control
Windows Live Family Safety, 89
partitions
BitLocker operating system encryption, 66
passwords
HomeGroup, 40
saving, 60
peeking at the desktop feature, 12
performance
tests results, 3
Personalize option
Starter Edition, 2
.pfx certificates
importing, 73
phishing sites
SmartScreen Filter, 128
Photo Gallery, 87
Photo Viewer, 97
photos
Windows Live Photo Gallery, 87
Windows Photo Viewer, 97
pinning
applications to the taskbar, 21
folders to taskbar, 157
Power Policy Configuration tool, 160
powercfg tool
hibernation, 160
PowerShell, 95–97
printers
sharing, 37, 43
182 | Index

privacy, 53
(see also security)
IE8, 121–127
Suggested Sites, 127
private folders
in libraries, 27
Problems Steps Recorder, 158
Professional edition, 2
projector screen selection, 157
public folders
in libraries, 27
Q
Quick Launch bar, 153
R
RAM requirements, 3
requirements
drive formatting for BitLocker, 66
RAM, 3
system requirements, 3
video cards for Windows Photo Gallery, 91
restarting virtual machines, 134
restoring Windows Vault, 64
RSS Feeds
searching in Address bar, 110
S
screen-capture
Snipping Tool, 92
seamless mode
Windows XP applications, 136
search
IE8, 114
security, 53–77
(see also privacy)
Action Center, 53–55
BitLocker Drive Encryption, 64–68
Credential Manager, 59–64
Encrypting File System, 69–73
IE8, 127–129
shared libraries, 41
shared printer drivers, 44
UAC, 57
Windows Defender, 73
Windows Firewall, 75
Windows Live Family Safety, 89
Security Center (see UAC)
shaking active windows, 14
sharing
calendars, 84
files, 47–50
libraries, 41
printer drivers, 44
shells
Windows PowerShell, 95–97
short cuts
Areo Snap keyboard shortcuts, 14
shortcuts
taskbar shortcuts, 154
Window key shortcuts, 154
Show desktop shortcut, 12
Sleep Mode
troubleshooting, 159
SmartScreen Filter
IE8, 128
Snipping Tool, 92
Sound Recorder, 94
spyware
Windows Defender, 73
standards-compliance
IE8, 112
Start menu, 11
displaying Libraries, 147
Jump Lists, 23
legacy applications on Virtual Windows XP,
135
Starter Edition
HomeGroup, 39
Windows 7, 2
Sticky Notes, 105
streaming
music, 46
subscribing
to calendars, 86
to newsgroups, 82
Suggested Sites
IE8, 125
synchronizing
Calendar and Windows Live Mail, 85
system requirements, 3
system tray
Action Center, 53
T
tabbed browsing
IE8, 110
Index | 183

taskbar, 152–157
about, 11
Aero Peek, 20
icons, 153
Jump Lists, 22–26
pinning applications to, 21
pinning folders to, 157
Quick Launch bar, 153
shortcuts, 154
tasks
Jump Lists, 23
themes
locations, 148
thumb drives
BitLocker To Go, 67
thumbnails
of open windows, 20
touchscreen support
about, 11
hand gestures, 150
TPM chip
BitLocker Drive Encryption, 66
troubleshooting
Sleep Mode, 159
using Action Center, 54
U
UAC (User Account Control), 57
Ubuntu Linux OS
installing, 138
UI (User Interface)
customizing, 143–152
Ultimate edition, 2
upgrading
from Vista or XP, 4
usability
IE8, 109–121
USB hard drives
installing Windows 7, 167–170
USB Mode
XPM, 137
USB printers
sharing, 37
USB thumb drives
installing Windows 7, 170
User Account Control (UAC), 57
User Interface (UI)
customizing, 143–152
V
vault
Windows Vault, 59
versions (see editions of Windows 7)
VHD files
installing Windows 7 on, 172–175
video cards
Windows Photo Gallery requirements, 91
videos
Windows Live Movie Maker, 91
Virtual Windows XP, 132
Vista (see Windows Vista)
visual search
IE8, 114
W
Web Slices
IE8, 116–119
Window key shortcuts, 154
Windows 7 Compatibility Mode, 164
Windows Defender, 73
Windows Disc Image Burner, 99
Windows Easy Transfer, 4
Windows Explorer
default view, 143
Windows Firewall, 75
Windows Live Essentials suite, 79–92
Windows Live Family Safety, 89
Windows Live Mail, 81–87
Windows Live Messenger, 80
Windows Live Movie Maker, 91
Windows Live Photo Gallery, 87
Windows Live Writer, 88
Windows Live Family Safety, 89
Windows Live Hotmail
Credential Manager, 60
naming of, 82
Windows Live Mail
about, 81–87
Calendar, 84–87
naming of, 82
newsgroups, 82
synchronizing with Calendar, 85
Windows Live Messenger, 80
Windows Live Movie Maker, 91
Windows Live Photo Gallery, 87
Windows Live Writer, 88
Windows Media Center, 101
184 | Index

Windows Media Player, 107
Windows Movie Maker, 91
Windows Photo Gallery, 87
Windows Photo Viewer, 97
Windows PowerShell, 95–97
Windows Sidebar, 31
Windows Vault
credentials, 59
Windows Virtual PC
installing other operating systems, 138
Windows Vista
dual booting, 171–172
upgrading from, 4
Windows XP
dual booting, 171–172
sharing files with, 47–49
upgrading from, 4
Windows XP Mode (see XPM)
wireless networks
connecting to, 38
WordPad, 15, 107
worksheets
Calculator, 106
Writer, 88
X
XP (see Windows XP)
XPM (Windows XP Mode), 131–142
installing, 131–134
installing other operating systems, 138–
140
running in Windows 7, 135–137
XPS (XML Paper Specification)
defined, 104
XPS Document Writer, 105
XPS Viewer, 104
XSS filter, 129
Index | 185


About the Author
Wei-Meng Lee (Microsoft MVP) is a technologist and founder of Developer Learning
Solutions (http://www.learn2develop.net), a technology company specializing in hands-
on training for the latest Microsoft and Apple technologies.
Wei-Meng speaks regularly at international conferences and has authored and
coauthored many books on .NET, XML, and wireless technologies. He writes exten-
sively on topics ranging from .NET to Mac OS X. He is also the author of Windows XP
Unwired and .NET Compact Framework Pocket Guide, both from O’Reilly.
Colophon
The animal on the cover of Windows 7: Up and Running is a Persian greyhound
(Canis familiaris), known more commonly today as a saluki. Scientists believe the Per-
sian greyhound is the earliest known breed of domesticated dog; DNA analysis iden-
tifies this dog as one of the first to have diverged from wolves.
Persian greyhound–like animals decorate Iranian ceramics from 3500 BC and Egyptian
tombs from 2100 BC; the Persian greyhound also inspired Alberto Giacometti’s 1951
surrealist sculpture titled “Dog”. The breed gained an enormous following in England
in the late 1800s when the Honorable Florence Amherst imported a pair of Persian
greyhounds from Egypt and bred them. The Persian greyhound became popular in the
United States soon after.
While some are turned off by the breed’s aloofness and tendency toward boredom when
given repetitive tasks, many children love the Persian greyhound because it is gentle
with them. The dog’s gentle nature can disappear quickly, however, when it ventures
outside and spots an animal it believes is prey. Veterinarians recommend that the dog
never go off-leash outdoors, as it is nearly impossible to train the the Persian greyhound
to suppress its hunting instinct.
The cover image is from Lydekker’s Royal Natural History. The cover font is Adobe
ITC Garamond. The text font is Linotype Birka; the heading font is Adobe Myriad
Condensed; and the code font is LucasFont’s TheSansMonoCondensed.


