
Windows 10
Step by Step
Second Edition
Joan Lambert

Windows 10 Step by Step, Second Edition
Published with the authorization of Microsoft Corporation by: Pearson
Education, Inc.
Copyright © 2018 by Pearson Education, Inc.
All rights reserved. Printed in the United States of America. This publication is
protected by copyright, and permission must be obtained from the publisher
prior to any prohibited reproduction, storage in a retrieval system, or
transmission in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical,
photocopying, recording, or likewise. For information regarding permissions,
request forms, and the appropriate contacts within the Pearson Education Global
Rights 
& 
Permissions 
Department, 
please 
visit
http://www.pearsoned.com/permissions. No patent liability is assumed with
respect to the use of the information contained herein. Although every
precaution has been taken in the preparation of this book, the publisher and
author assume no responsibility for errors or omissions. Nor is any liability
assumed for damages resulting from the use of the information contained herein.
ISBN-13: 978-1-5093-0672-5
ISBN-10: 1-5093-0672-2
Library of Congress Control Number: 2017955971
First Printing December 2017
Microsoft and the trademarks listed at http://www.microsoft.com on the
“Trademarks” webpage are trademarks of the Microsoft group of companies. All
other marks are property of their respective owners.
Every effort has been made to make this book as complete and as accurate as
possible, but no warranty or fitness is implied. The information provided is on an
“as is” basis. The author, the publisher, and Microsoft Corporation shall have
neither liability nor responsibility to any person or entity with respect to any loss
or damages arising from the information contained in this book or from the use
of the practice files accompanying it.
For information about buying this title in bulk quantities, or for special sales
opportunities (which may include electronic versions; custom cover designs; and
content particular to your business, training goals, marketing focus, or branding
interests), 
please 
contact 
our 
corporate 
sales 
department 
at

corpsales@pearsoned.com or (800) 382-3419.
For 
government 
sales 
inquiries, 
please 
contact
governmentsales@pearsoned.com.
For questions about sales outside the U.S., please contact intlcs@pearson.com.
Editor-in-Chief

Greg Wiegand
Senior Acquisitions Editor

Laura Norman
Senior Production Editor

Tracey Croom
Editorial Production
Online Training Solutions, Inc. (OTSI) Compositor/Indexer
Susie Carr (OTSI)
Copy Editor
Jaime Odell (OTSI)
Proofreader
Kathy Krause (OTSI)
Technical Reviewer

Laura Acklen
Editorial Assistant
Cindy J. Teeters
Interior Designer
Joan Lambert (OTSI)
Cover Designer
Twist Creative • Seattle

Contents
i Introduction
Who this book is for
What this book is (and isn’t) about
The Step by Step approach
Features and conventions
Adapt procedures for your environment
Download the practice files
E-book edition
Get support and give feedback
Errata and support
We want to hear from you
Stay in touch
Part 1: The Windows 10 environment
1 Get started using Windows 10
Sign in to Windows
About the Lock screen
About the Welcome screen
Choose a user account type
Sidebar: Use a Microsoft account or local account
Sidebar: Sign in on a touchscreen device
Explore the desktop and taskbar
Explore the desktop
Explore the taskbar
Sidebar: Hey, Cortana!
Explore the Start menu
Explore Windows settings

Manage content and app windows
Resize, minimize, and close windows
Move and arrange windows
End a computing session
Key points
Practice tasks
2 Personalize your working environment
Configure the Start menu
Resize the Start menu
Configure the Start menu folder list
Configure the Start menu app list
Set the desktop background and system colors
Set the desktop background
Set an accent color
Customize the Lock screen
Set the Lock screen background
Sidebar: Configure a screen saver
Display app status information on the Lock screen
Apply and manage themes
Key points
Practice tasks
Part 2: Apps and files
3 Work with shortcuts and tiles
Create and manage app shortcuts
Start menu shortcuts
Sidebar: Touchscreen tile management
Taskbar shortcuts
Sidebar: Manage apps from the taskbar
Desktop shortcuts

Sidebar: Configure desktop system icons
Manage Start menu tiles
Customize the taskbar
Change taskbar appearance
Change taskbar behavior
Display and manage toolbars on the taskbar
Key points
Practice tasks
4 Work with apps and notifications
Locate and start apps
Explore built-in apps
Productivity and information management apps
Web browsers
Media management apps
Live information apps
Accessories
Tools for geeks
Install Store apps
Shop in the Store
Manage your Store account and settings
Install, reinstall, and uninstall apps
Manage app notifications
Key points
Practice tasks
5 Explore files and folders
Understand files, folders, and libraries
Folders
Libraries
Get to know File Explorer
Work with the standard ribbon tabs

Work with the tool tabs
Work with the Navigation And Search bar
Work with libraries
Change the File Explorer display options
Display and hide panes
Display different views of folders and files
Group, sort, and filter folder content
Change folder options
Find specific files
Windows Search
File Explorer Search
Key points
Practice tasks
6 Manage folders and files
Create and rename folders and files
Compress folders and files
Move and copy folders and files
Delete and restore folders and files
Sidebar: Recycle Bin size
Work with folder and file properties
View folder properties
Remove file properties
Key points
Practice tasks
Part 3: Devices and resources
7 Manage peripheral devices
Understand peripheral devices
Peripheral device terminology
Install peripheral devices

Sidebar: Boost your memory
Locate device information
Display your desktop on multiple screens
Set up audio devices
Sidebar: Expand your laptop or tablet with peripheral devices
Change the way your mouse works
Change the way your keyboard works
Manage printer connections
Sidebar: Virtual printers
Key points
Practice tasks
8 Manage network and storage resources
Manage network connections
Connect to a network
Sidebar: Network vs. internet connections
Display information about networks and connections
Configure network connection security
Sidebar: Wireless network security
Troubleshoot network connections
Manage homegroup connections
Share files on your network
Sidebar: Change the computer name
Key points
Practice tasks
9 Get assistance from Cortana
Configure Cortana settings
Sidebar: Cortana availability
Configure Cortana connections
Configure information tracking

Sidebar: Add reminders
Manage Cortana information and notifications
Key points
Practice tasks
10 Safely and efficiently browse the internet
Sidebar: About Microsoft Edge
Display websites in Microsoft Edge
Find, save, and share information
Manage Microsoft Edge settings
Sidebar: Anatomy of a website address
Sidebar: Educate kids about online safety
Configure browser security settings
Protect yourself from phishing and malicious sites
Block pop-up windows
Maintain browsing privacy
Troubleshoot browsing issues
Key points
Practice tasks
Part 4: Behind the scenes
11 Manage user accounts and settings
Understand user accounts and permissions
User profiles
User account permissions
Family accounts
User Account Control
Sidebar: Manage user accounts in the Computer Management console
Create and manage user accounts
Sidebar: Manage and monitor family safety settings
Create and manage family user accounts

Create and manage non-family user accounts
Manage settings for any user account
Manage account pictures and passwords
Customize your sign-in options
Synchronize settings across computers
Key points
Practice tasks
12 Manage computer settings
Manage date and time settings
Manage regional and language settings
Install and manage languages and language features
Configure regional settings
Manage speech settings
Sidebar: Dictate content to your computer
Customize device display settings
Key points
Practice tasks
13 Manage power and access options
Change the screen brightness
Configure power options
Sidebar: System power settings
Sidebar: Make your battery last longer
Configure Windows accessibility features
High-contrast settings
Magnifier settings
Narrator and Audio Description settings
Keyboard and mouse settings
Key points
Practice tasks

14 Work more efficiently
Configure Quick Action buttons
Search your computer and the web
Search storage locations and the web
Manage File Explorer search processes
Specify default apps
Organize apps on multiple desktops
Monitor apps and system tasks
Manage app startup
Key points
Practice tasks
15 Protect your computer and data
Manage Windows updates
Update Windows system files
Configure update options
Configure privacy settings
Restore computer functionality
Create and revert to restore points
Refresh or reset your computer
Back up data
Back up data to OneDrive
Automatically back up data by using File History
Back up and restore your system
Sidebar: Two-factor authentication
Key points
Practice tasks
Appendix: Keyboard shortcuts and touchscreen tips
Glossary
Index
About the author

i. Introduction
Welcome to the wonderful world of Windows 10! This Step by Step book has
been designed so you can read it from the beginning to learn about Windows 10
and then build your skills as you learn to perform increasingly specialized
procedures. Or, if you prefer, you can jump in wherever you need ready
guidance for performing tasks. The how-to steps are delivered crisply and
concisely—just the facts. You’ll also find informative, full-color graphics that
support the instructional content.
Who this book is for
Windows 10 Step by Step, Second Edition is designed for use as a learning and
reference resource by home and business users of desktop and mobile computers
and devices running Windows 10 Home or Windows 10 Pro. The content of the
book is designed to be useful for people who have previously used earlier
versions of Windows and for people who are discovering Windows for the first
time.
What this book is (and isn’t) about
This book is about the Windows 10 operating system. Your computer’s operating
system is the interface between you and all the apps you might want to run, or
that run automatically in the background to allow you to communicate with other
computers around the world, and to protect you from those same computers.
In this book, we explain how you can use the operating system and the accessory
apps, such as Cortana, File Explorer, Microsoft Edge, and Windows Store, to
access and manage the apps and data files you use in your work and play.
Many useful apps that are part of the Windows “family” are installed by
manufacturers or available from the Store. You might be familiar with common
apps such as Calendar, Camera, Groove Music, Mail, Maps, News, Photos, and
Windows Media Player. This book isn’t about those apps, although we do
mention and interact with a few of them while demonstrating how to use features
of the Windows 10 operating system.

SEE ALSO For information about working with apps, see Chapter 4,
“Work with apps and notifications.”
The Step by Step approach
The book’s coverage is divided into parts that represent general computer usage
and management skill sets. Each part is divided into chapters that represent skill
set areas, and each chapter is divided into topics that group related skills. Each
topic includes expository information followed by generic procedures. At the
end of the chapter, you’ll find a series of practice tasks you can complete on your
own by using the skills taught in the chapter. You can use the practice files that
are available from this book’s website to work through the practice tasks, or you
can use your own files.
Features and conventions
This book has been designed to lead you step by step through all the tasks you’re
most likely to want to perform in Windows 10. If you start at the beginning and
work your way through all the procedures, you’ll have the information you need
to administer all aspects of the Windows 10 operating system on a non-domain-
joined computer. However, the topics are self-contained, so you can reference
them independently. If you have worked with a previous version of Windows, or
if you complete all the exercises and later need help remembering how to
perform a procedure, the following features of this book will help you locate
specific information.
Detailed table of contents Search the listing of the topics, sections, and
sidebars within each chapter.
Chapter thumb tabs and running heads Identify the pages of each
chapter by the colored thumb tabs on the book’s open fore edge. Find a
specific chapter by number or title by looking at the running heads at the
top of even-numbered (verso) pages.
Topic-specific running heads Within a chapter, quickly locate the topic
you want by looking at the running heads at the top of odd-numbered
(recto) pages.

Practice task page tabs Easily locate the practice task sections at the end
of each chapter by looking for the full-page colored stripe on the book’s
fore edge.
Glossary Look up the meaning of a word or the definition of a concept.
Keyboard shortcuts If you prefer to work from the keyboard rather than
with a mouse, find all the shortcuts in one place in the appendix, “Keyboard
shortcuts and touchscreen tips.”
Detailed index Look up specific tasks and features in the index, which has
been carefully crafted with the reader in mind.
You can save time when reading this book by understanding how the Step by
Step series provides procedural instructions and auxiliary information and
identifies on-screen and physical elements that you interact with. The following
table lists content formatting conventions in use in this book.
Convention
Meaning
TIP
This reader aid provides a helpful hint or shortcut to simplify a
task.
IMPORTANTThis reader aid alerts you to a common problem or provides
information that is necessary to successfully complete a
procedure.
SEE ALSO
This reader aid directs you to more information about a topic in
this book or elsewhere.
1.
2.
Numbered steps guide you through generic procedures in each
topic and hands-on practice tasks at the end of each chapter.
▪
▪
Bulleted lists indicate single-step procedures and sets of
multiple alternative procedures.
Interface
objects
In procedures and practice tasks, semibold black text indicates
on-screen elements that you should select (click or tap).
User input
Bold green formatting identifies specific information that you
should enter when completing procedures or practice tasks.
Ctrl+P
A plus sign between two keys indicates that you must select
those keys at the same time. For example, “press Ctrl+P” directs
you to hold down the Ctrl key while you press the P key.

Emphasis and
URLs
In expository text, italic formatting identifies web addresses and
words or phrases we want to emphasize.
Adapt procedures for your environment
The instructions in this book assume that you’re interacting with on-screen
elements on your computer by selecting or clicking them with a mouse, or on a
touchpad or other hardware device. If you’re using a different method—for
example, if your computer has a touchscreen interface and you’re tapping the
screen (with your finger or a stylus)—substitute the applicable tapping action
when the book directs you to select a user interface element.
SEE ALSO For information about touchscreen interaction with
Windows 10 devices, see the appendix “Keyboard shortcuts and
touchscreen tips.”
Instructions in this book refer to user interface elements that you select or tap on
the screen as buttons, and to physical buttons that you press on a keyboard as
keys, to conform to the standard terminology that is used in documentation for
these products.
Multistep procedural instructions provide detailed instructions the first time
they’re presented. For example:
1. Select the Start button, and then select the Settings button to open the
Settings window.
2. In the Settings window, select System.
3. On the System settings page, select Power & sleep.
4. In the Power & sleep settings pane, in the Sleep section, expand the When
plugged in… list, and then do one of the following:
If you want the computer to go to sleep after a specific length of idle
time, select a time from 1 minute to 5 hours.
If you don’t want the computer to go to sleep when its idle, select Never.

On subsequent instances of instructions that require you to follow the same
process, the instructions might be simplified in this format because the working
location has already been established:
1. Display the System settings page, and then select Power & sleep.
2. In the Screen section of the pane, in the When plugged in list, select an
idle time from 1 minute to 5 hours after which you want the screen to turn
off, or select Never to leave the screen on when the computer is idle.
When the instructions tell you to enter information, you can do so by typing on a
connected external keyboard, tapping an on-screen keyboard, or even speaking
aloud, depending on your computer setup and your personal preferences.
Download the practice files
Although you can complete the practice tasks in this book by using your own
files, for your convenience we have provided practice files for many of the tasks.
You can download these practice files to your computer by going to
https://aka.ms/win10sbs2e/files and following the instructions on the webpage.
IMPORTANT Windows 10 is not available from the book’s website.
You should install that operating system before working through the
procedures and practice tasks in this book.
You can use the files that are supplied for the practice tasks to perform the tasks,
and if there are changes, you can save the finished versions of each file. If you
later want to repeat practice tasks, you can download the original practice files
again.
SEE ALSO For information about working with files, see Chapter 6,
“Manage folders and files.”

The following table lists the practice files for this book.
Chapter
Folder
File
1: Get started using
Windows 10
None
None
2: Personalize your
working
environment
Win10SBS\Ch02Background01.jpg 
through
Background08.jpg
3: 
Work 
with
shortcuts and tiles
Win10SBS\Ch03Image01.jpg through Image05.jpg
4: Work with apps
and notifications
None
None
5: Explore files and
folders
Win10SBS\Ch05Files\Brochure.pptx
Photos\Backgrounds\Background.jpg
Photos\Backgrounds\Background03.jpg
Photos\Backgrounds\Background08.jpg
Photos\Lucy.jpg
Photos\Lucy2.jpg
Events.docx
Expenses.xlsx
PackingList.docx
Password01.jpg 
through
Password03.jpg
Survey.docx
TravelChecklist.xlsx
6: Manage folders
and files
Win10SBS\Ch06Files\Brochure.pptx
Photos\Backgrounds\Background.jpg
Photos\Backgrounds\Background03.jpg
Photos\Backgrounds\Background08.jpg
Photos\Lucy.jpg
Photos\Lucy2.jpg
Reports\ (folder)
Events.docx
Expenses.xlsx
Password01.jpg 
through
Password03.jpg

Survey.docx
7: 
Manage
peripheral devices
None
None
8: Manage network
and 
storage
resources
Win10SBS\Ch08Folder only
9: 
Get 
assistance
from Cortana
None
None
10: 
Safely 
and
efficiently 
browse
the internet
None
None
11: 
Manage 
user
accounts and settings
Win10SBS\Ch11 Account01.jpg through Account05.jpg
Password01.jpg 
through
Password03.jpg
12: 
Manage
computer settings
None
None
13: Manage power
and access options
None
None
14: 
Work 
more
efficiently
None
None
15: 
Protect 
your
computer and data
None
None
E-book edition
If you’re reading the e-book edition of this book, you can do the following:
Search the full text
Print
Copy and paste
You can purchase and download the e-book from the Microsoft Press Store at
https://aka.ms/win10sbs2e/detail.

Get support and give feedback
This topic provides information about getting help with this book and contacting
us to provide feedback or report errors.
Errata and support
We’ve made every effort to ensure the accuracy of this book and its companion
content. 
If 
you 
discover 
an 
error, 
please 
submit 
it 
to 
us 
at
https://aka.ms/win10sbs2e/errata.
If you need to contact the Microsoft Press Support team, please send an email
message to mspinput@microsoft.com.
For 
help 
with 
Microsoft 
software 
and 
hardware, 
go 
to
https://support.microsoft.com.
We want to hear from you
At Microsoft Press, your satisfaction is our top priority, and your feedback our
most valuable asset. Please tell us what you think of this book at
https://aka.ms/tellpress.
The survey is short, and we read every one of your comments and ideas. Thanks
in advance for your input!
Stay in touch
Let’s 
keep 
the 
conversation 
going! 
We’re 
on 
Twitter 
at
http://twitter.com/MicrosoftPress.

Part 1: The Windows 10 environment
CHAPTER 1
Get started using Windows 10
CHAPTER 2
Personalize your working environment

1. Get started using Windows 10
In this chapter
Sign in to Windows
Explore the desktop and taskbar
Explore the Start menu
Explore Windows settings
Manage content and app windows
End a computing session
If you’re reading this book, it’s likely that you already have a Windows 10
computer or plan to acquire one, and you want to know how to get the most out
of it. This chapter will help you quickly come up to speed with the basic
elements of the Windows 10 user experience and environment—including that of
the Windows 10 2017 Fall Creators Update.
The first public release of Windows 10, in July 2015, combined popular
elements of Windows 7 and Windows 8 with new technology to create a
powerful, easy-to-use operating system. Since that time, additional functionality
has been added to Windows 10 through periodic public releases. Windows 10
can interact with you through commands that you enter on a keyboard, on
screen, or verbally; from information and activities on your phone; and (with
your permission) by gleaning information from email messages.
Windows 10 is designed to work not only on desktop and laptop computers, but
also on smaller mobile devices, such as tablets and phones. The user interface is
clean and simple so that it can scale gracefully across device formats. If you’re
new to Windows 10 but familiar with operating system concepts, many
Windows 10 features will be familiar to you.
This chapter guides you through procedures related to signing in to Windows,
exploring the primary user interface areas, managing content and app windows,
and various methods of ending a computing session.
Sign in to Windows

Between computing sessions, Windows displays one of two screens: the Lock
screen and the Welcome screen.
About the Lock screen
When your Windows 10 computer first starts or has been idle for a while, it
displays the Lock screen. As the name indicates, the Lock screen is a security
layer between the world outside the computer and the information inside the
computer. The Lock screen displays a background picture (or a slideshow of
pictures), the time and date, and network connection information. It can also
display information from some of the core Windows 10 apps, including Alarms
& Clock, Calendar, Mail, Messaging, Phone, Skype, Store, Weather, and Xbox.
The Lock screen doesn’t display user account information or specific message
content that you might not want to share with people who happen to walk past
the computer.
Windows 10 comes with a set of attractive Lock screen images. You can choose
a static background from among those, enjoy the daily Windows spotlight
photos, or choose a specific picture or set of pictures that you have access to
from your computer.

SEE ALSO For information about specifying the image and app
information that appear on the Lock screen, see “Customize the Lock
screen” in Chapter 2, “Personalize your working environment.”
About the Welcome screen
When you dismiss the Lock screen, the Welcome screen appears. The Welcome
screen displays a list of the user accounts that are registered on the computer in
its lower-left corner; provides access to the internet, accessibility, and power
settings in its lower-right corner; and displays the image and password entry box
or Sign In button for the most recent user in the center.
TIP This book contains many images of the Windows 10 user interface
elements (such as the Lock screen, Welcome screen, desktop, taskbar,
Start menu, and Settings window) that you’ll work with while

performing tasks on a computer running Windows 10. Unless we’re
demonstrating an alternative view of content, the screenshots shown in
this book were captured on a horizontally oriented display at a screen
resolution of 1600 × 900 and a magnification of 100 percent. If your
settings are different, user interface elements on your screen might not
look the same as those shown in this book.
From the Welcome screen, you sign in to Windows with your user account
credentials to begin or return to your computing session.
Choose a user account type
To start a Windows 10 computing session, you sign in to Windows with a user
account that is registered on that computer. The user account can be linked to a
Microsoft account that connects to all the resources associated with that account,
or it can be a local account that exists only on one computer.
Use a Microsoft account or local account
You can choose one of two account types when signing in to
Windows 10: a Microsoft account or a local account. Here’s a quick
overview of the two account types.
Microsoft accounts
Microsoft accounts are single sign-on (SSO) accounts that you can
use to sign in to any Microsoft service, to services provided by other
companies that have adopted Microsoft accounts as standard
credentials, or to computers running Windows 10, Windows 8.1, or
Windows 8.
TIP Single sign-on isn’t unique to Microsoft: Google, Facebook, Amazon, and many other
organizations use it. Many web services allow you to sign in by using one of the major SSO
accounts, rather than requiring you to create new accounts on their sites.
Any email account hosted on a Microsoft webmail service–
designated domain (hotmail.com, live.com, msn.com, outlook.com,
passport.com, passport.net, or any country/region-specific variant) is
automatically configured as a Microsoft account. If you don’t
already have a Microsoft account, you can easily create a free email
account on a Microsoft webmail domain, or enroll any valid email

address or phone number that you already have as a Microsoft
account. These options are available through the user interface when
setting 
up 
your 
Windows 
10 
user 
account, 
and 
at
https://signup.live.com.
IMPORTANT f someone is already signed in to a Microsoft account in your computing
session, you must sign out of that account (but not the computing session) from your web
browser before you can create a new one, or use an InPrivate browsing session to mask the
account credentials. For information about InPrivate browsing, see Chapter 10, “Safely and
efficiently browse the internet.”
Local accounts
A local account is exactly what it sounds like: a user account that
exists only on your computer. You (or someone with administrative
privileges) can create multiple local accounts on one computer, and
each account can sign in to that computer and access a combination
of private and shared information.

Local accounts are good for young children who don’t yet need an
email account. Local accounts might also be a good choice when you
don’t want to link the computer to other computers that you sign in
to by using your Microsoft account. A local account doesn’t require a
password (but can have one), doesn’t have an associated OneDrive
storage folder, and might have only limited access to Windows apps
and Office 365 tools.
If you create a local account but later decide that you would prefer to
sign in by using a Microsoft account, you can easily connect the

local account to a Microsoft account or create a new user profile on
the computer for the Microsoft account.
TIP You can designate any account as a child’s account to add parental controls. For more
information about setting up accounts and about parental controls, see Chapter 11, “Manage
user accounts and settings.”
When you install Windows 10, or the first time you sign in to a new Windows 10
computer, Windows guides you through the processes of configuring your basic
settings, connecting to the internet, and connecting to or setting up a computer
user account.
Microsoft encourages you to use a Microsoft account rather than a local account
to sign in. The advantages of signing in to Windows 10 by using a Microsoft
account include the following:
You can easily connect to other computers on your network that you sign in
to by using that account, because the computers have the same sign-in
credentials.
You can synchronize settings for the computer theme, web browser,
passwords, language preferences, Ease Of Access tools, printers, mouse
options, File Explorer, and notifications among the computers you sign in to
by using the same account.
You can pass credentials to other Microsoft services that require you to sign
in (such as Microsoft Office 365).
You have access to 5 gigabytes (GB) of free Microsoft OneDrive online
storage, or 1 terabyte (TB) with an Office 365 subscription (at the time of
this writing).
The first time you sign in to a computer by using a new user account, Windows
sets up the user account–specific folders and settings, and synchronizes settings
with other computers that your Microsoft account is configured on, if you’ve
chosen that option. While Windows goes through this process (which takes about
two minutes), it displays a series of reassuring messages on the screen. At the
end of this initial setup process, your personal Windows desktop appears.

SEE ALSO For information about synchronizing system settings on
multiple computers, see “Customize your sign-in options” in Chapter
11, “Manage user accounts and settings.”
Depending on the processes that are configured to run when you sign in, there
could be some activity, such as windows opening and closing, as various apps
start. Some of these will be apps that you want to interact with—for example,
you might want a communication app such as Skype or Skype for Business to
start automatically. Others will be tools that support the apps that are installed on
your computer. For example, installing an app such as Adobe Acrobat or Apple
iTunes also installs a tool that checks the internet for updates to the app each
time you start a new computing session. (This is usually for the purpose of
increasing app security rather than adding new functionality.)
TIP Some apps and services start automatically when any user signs in
to Windows, and 1 others run specifically when you sign in. You can
review a list of apps that start automatically and remove apps from the
list to conserve startup resources. For more information, see “Manage
app startup” in Chapter 14, “Work more efficiently.”
To dismiss the Lock screen
Click or tap a blank area of the screen.
Flick the screen upward by using your finger.
Press any keyboard key.
To sign in to Windows 10
1. Dismiss the Lock screen.
If the computer has multiple user accounts, the Welcome screen displays a
link to each account in the lower-left corner.
2. If the user account picture and name in the center of the screen aren’t for
the account you want to sign in to, select the account in the lower-left

corner of the Welcome screen.
3. Do one of the following:
If your account doesn’t have a password, select Sign in below your
account name.
If your account has a password, enter the password in the box below your
account name, and then press Enter or select Submit (the arrow button to
the right of the password box).
SEE ALSO For information about signing in to Windows from within
an existing Windows session, see “Explore the Start menu” later in this
chapter. For information about configuring and signing in by using
PINs, picture passwords, and biometric recognition, see “Customize
your sign-in options” in Chapter 11, “Manage user accounts and
settings.”
TIP If you’re working on a touchscreen device and want to enter your
account credentials from the On-Screen Keyboard app, tap the password
box once to display the keyboard. For more information about the On-
Screen Keyboard app, see “Configure Windows accessibility features”
in Chapter 13, “Manage power and access options.”
Sign in on a touchscreen device
Windows 10 is optimized for touchscreen interaction. You control
most options in the Settings window by using a simple on/off toggle
switch that’s easy to select whether you’re using a mouse, a stylus,
or your finger. Windows 10 has two on-screen keyboards.both of
which are available from the Welcome screen before you sign in.

If you’re working on a touchscreen device and want to enter your
account credentials on the Welcome screen by using one of the on-
screen keyboards, do either of the following:
Tap the Password or PIN box to display an on-screen keyboard
that is docked to the bottom of the screen.
Tap the Ease of Access button and then select On-Screen
Keyboard to display the floating keyboard that is one of the
Ease Of Access tools.
To close the keyboard, tap away from the docked keyboard or tap the
Close button on the floating keyboard.
TIP When you buy a new computer, you might be surprised to find
your desktop cluttered with shortcuts. Computer manufacturers or
resellers frequently install trial versions of apps on a computer in hopes
that you will use those apps instead of others that are available to you.
Most of these are benign, but often they include a well-known antivirus
app that provides a short trial period for free, and then prompts you to
pay for a subscription. This app can interfere with the free Windows
Defender security system that is built into Windows 10. You can delete
the shortcuts to tidy up the desktop, but that won’t uninstall the apps.
For information about cleaning up desktop shortcuts and uninstalling
apps, see Chapter 3, “Work with shortcuts and tiles” and Chapter 4,
“Work with apps and notifications.”

Explore the desktop and taskbar
Your starting point after you sign in to Windows is the desktop. The Windows 10
desktop has a picture or color background that fills your screen; hosts icons for
system tools such as the Recycle Bin; might have app shortcuts, folders, and
files stored on it; and has a taskbar that provides access to the computer content
and functionality.
Explore the desktop
The initial desktop background picture is configured as part of the Windows
installation. If you upgrade from another version of Windows and choose to keep
your personal settings, your desktop background won’t change. If you purchase a
computer that has Windows 10 preinstalled on it, it might feature a background
specific to the computer manufacturer (for example, a Dell computer desktop
might display the Dell logo).
The only icon that is typically displayed by default with a clean installation is the
one for the Recycle Bin, which is a temporary storage folder for deleted files.
The Recycle Bin is initially located in the upper-left corner of the desktop (but
can be moved by you), and might appear empty or full, depending on whether
you’ve deleted files.

Apps that you install later might place (or offer to place) shortcuts on the
desktop to provide a quick way to start them. You can place app shortcuts on the
desktop yourself, too. Most computer manufacturers preinstall apps from
companies they have alliances with, and place shortcuts to these apps on the
desktop. The appearance of your desktop might be different from the one shown
in this book, but the functionality will be the same. You might find it more
convenient to pin app tiles to the Start menu (as described later in this chapter),
to keep your desktop free of shortcuts and start all apps from the Start menu.
SEE ALSO For information about creating shortcuts on the desktop,
Start menu, and taskbar, see Chapter 3, “Work with shortcuts and tiles.”
The desktop itself is really just a background for the display of items that are
stored in one of two folders—the Desktop folder that is part of your user
account, or the Public Desktop folder that is shared by all users who sign in to
the computer. Some people like to save files or folders to their desktops for easy
access.
Explore the taskbar
The bar across the bottom of the desktop is the Windows taskbar. The taskbar
provides access to all the apps, files, settings, and information on the computer.
The fixed tools are on the left and right ends of the taskbar.

TIP By default, the taskbar is displayed at the bottom of your screen.
You can move it to the top or one of the sides, or hide it to provide
additional screen space. For more information, see “Customize the
taskbar” in Chapter 3, “Work with shortcuts and tiles.”
The Windows 10 taskbar looks very similar to the taskbar in earlier versions of
Windows, but there are some pleasant surprises here.
The Start button, search box, and Task View button are located at the left end of
the taskbar. Each of these has an important function:
Selecting the Start button displays the Start menu, the primary location
from which you access apps and settings. The Start menu has new
functionality in Windows 10. We discuss this at length in the next topic.
Right-clicking the Start button displays the Quick Link menu, your fastest
route to many frequently used computer management tools. The Quick Link
menu options are specific to the computer; on a laptop computer, the menu
also includes a link to Mobility Center.


TIP A menu that appears when you right-click a button, file,
folder, or other item is referred to as a shortcut menu. Most
shortcut menus don’t have names, but this is the Quick Link menu.
On a touchscreen device, tap and hold an item to perform the right-
click action. For more information about touchscreen interaction
with Windows 10 devices, see the appendix “Keyboard shortcuts
and touchscreen tips.”
Entering a term in the search box displays relevant apps, files, and settings
stored on your computer and, when you have an active internet connection,
relevant online information. Search results are grouped by type—selecting a
group (such as Apps, Settings, Folders, Documents, or Store) displays all
results of that type.

The icons to the left of the search results represent the app or system area of
each result. For example, an app icon indicates the default app for that file
type; a folder indicates a folder; a gear indicates a Settings page, pane, or

setting; and a key indicates a security feature setting.
TIP The search box is also your interaction point with Cortana,
your “personal assistant” on any Windows device (also available
on Android and iOS). After you initially configure Cortana, the
service will alert you to upcoming appointments; help you check in
for flights or track packages; provide information about local
restaurants, traffic conditions, and investment performance; and
much more. If you install Cortana on your smartphone, you can
also receive alerts from that device on your computer. For more
information, see the sidebar “Hey, Cortana!” later in this chapter.
Selecting the Task View button displays Task View (new in Windows 10),
which is a large-thumbnail view of all the open windows and running apps
on your desktop.
From Task View, you can easily switch among or close apps and windows.
You can also create virtual desktops, which are secondary instances of the
Windows desktop. When you create one or more virtual desktops, you can
organize the windows of running apps, files, and folders across them.

SEE ALSO For information about virtual desktops, see “Organize
apps on multiple desktops” in Chapter 14, “Work more efficiently.”
The center area of the taskbar, to the right of the Task View button, can display
shortcut buttons and toolbars. In a default installation of Windows 10, shortcuts
to the Microsoft Edge web browser, File Explorer, the Store app, and the Mail
app are pinned here. You can easily move or delete these and pin additional
items that you want quick access to.
SEE ALSO For information about pinning apps to the taskbar, see
“Create and manage app shortcuts” in Chapter 3, “Work with shortcuts
and tiles.”
The right end of the taskbar is the notification area. The icons displayed here
represent apps that run on your computer that might need to notify you of events
or system status. You can choose which app icons appear in the notification area,
and set them either to always display or to display an alert if something happens.
You can also select or right-click notification area icons to interact with the
underlying apps in various ways.

Some of the apps that you install on your computer, such as Microsoft OneDrive,
Outlook, OneNote, and Teams, will display icons in the notification area. By
default, the notification area contains the following items:
The People icon links to the People bar, a feature introduced in the 2017
Fall Creators Update of Windows 10. You can quickly pin contacts from the
messaging apps installed on your computer to the People bar.
The Show Hidden Icons button displays a pane of notification icons that are
for apps rather than for Windows functions. You can access app-
management commands from these icons.
The standard Windows notification icons provide access to network and
sound settings, app and operating system notifications, and other tools. The
specific icons depend on your computer configuration.
The Action Center icon opens the Action Center, which provides quick
access to messages, notifications, and settings. When you have unread
communications from apps (such as Cortana, Microsoft Mail, or Outlook),
or from Windows or other sources (such as mobile devices), the icon is
white and displays a number; otherwise, it is hollow.


The time and date displayed on the taskbar also provide access to configure
the time and date settings on your computer.
The narrow bar at the rightmost end of the taskbar is the Show Desktop
button, which you can use to minimize (hide) all open windows (and
thereby display the desktop).
TIP You can opt to display the Windows Ink Workspace, Touch
Keyboard, and Touchpad buttons in the notification area of the taskbar.
For more information, see “Customize the taskbar” in Chapter 3, “Work
with shortcuts and tiles.”
To search for content on the computer or internet
1. Activate the taskbar search box by doing either of the following:
Click or tap the search box.
Press the Windows logo key.
TIP We abbreviate the Windows logo key name as “Win” in
keyboard shortcuts so that it’s easier to read.
2. Enter the search term.
3. To refine the results, select Apps, Settings, Folders, Documents, or Store
in the search results list to display only results in that category.
To display or hide the Task View of all active apps and desktops
On the taskbar, to the right of the search box, select the Task View button.
Press Win+Tab.

On a touchscreen device, swipe in from the left edge of the screen.
To manage windows in Task View
To close a file or app, point to the thumbnail, and then select the Close
button (the X) in the upper-right corner.
To switch to a specific window, select the window thumbnail (not the
window title).
To display app-management icons and commands
1. At the left end of the notification area of the taskbar, select the Show
hidden icons button.
2. In the icon pane, right-click the icon of the app you want to display
commands for.
TIP On a touchscreen device, tap and hold an item to perform the
right-click action. For more information about touchscreen
interaction with Windows 10 devices, see the appendix “Keyboard
shortcuts and touchscreen tips.”
To display recent, unread messages from Windows and communication apps
Near the right end of the taskbar, select the Action Center icon.
To manage messages in the Action Center
To preview message content, select the arrow to the right of the message
subject.
To remove a message from the Action Center (but not from the app that
generated the message), point to the message header and then select the X
that appears in its upper-right corner.
To open a message in its app, select the message header.

SEE ALSO For information about managing settings from the Action
Center, see “Manage app notifications” in Chapter 4, “Work with apps
and notifications.”
To minimize all open windows
To minimize the windows, select the Show Desktop button or press
Win+D. Use the same technique to restore the minimized windows.
To temporarily minimize the windows, point to the Show Desktop button.
(This is called “peeking” at the desktop.)
TIP The Peek function can be turned on or off in the taskbar settings.
For more information, see “Customize the taskbar” in Chapter 3, “Work
with shortcuts and tiles.” For information about other techniques for
minimizing, maximizing, and restoring windows, see “Manage content
and app windows” later in this chapter.
Hey, Cortana!
Cortana is a curiously useful technology from Microsoft that is
described as a “personal assistant,” but is really a complex
information-analysis tool that monitors your activities and
communications and proactively provides you with relevant
information about them. You can interact with Cortana through the
taskbar search box, or if your computer or device has a microphone
input you can configure Cortana for speech recognition and then
activate it by saying, “Hey, Cortana.”

Cortana can track your incoming packages and outgoing flights;
remind you of appointments, meetings, and tasks from email
conversations; keep shopping and to-do lists; and provide
information about pretty much anything—local restaurants and
events, stock prices, traffic conditions, public transit options, movies
and television shows, news, sports, weather, and more.
You can set timers and alarms, and ask Cortana to remind you to do
things at a certain time, on a certain date, or when you arrive at a
specific location.
You can connect Cortana to a variety of services, including
Microsoft Dynamics CRM, Knowmail, LinkedIn, Office 365,
Outlook.com, Skype, and Wunderlist, to get all your notifications in
one place.
The concept of having your messages and location monitored can
take some getting used to, but in trade you’ll get proactive reminders
and relevant information that Cortana locates just for you.
To access Cortana, activate the taskbar search box, or press Win+Q.
To display your personalized content, at the bottom of the Cortana
pane, select I’ve got more for you… on a desktop computer or
Cortana can do much more… on a laptop computer.

If you like using Cortana on your computer and want to have it
available in other places, you can install the Cortana app on your
Windows, Android, or iOS phone, and link it to your computer so

that information is available to you on any of your devices. You can
also purchase a Cortana speaker, through which you can make and
receive Skype calls, control smart home devices, get information,
and play music.
SEE ALSO For more information, see Chapter 9, “Get assistance from Cortana.”
Explore the Start menu
The Windows 10 Start menu provides access to computer-management
commands, your account folders, the apps installed on your computer, and any
apps, folders, files, websites, or other things you want to pin to it. The Start
menu has commands in three areas:
The left side of the Start menu displays icons for Power, Settings, and
Account information by default, and you can add other links to it. The Start
menu is collapsed by default to display only the icons.
The app list displays an alphabetical list of all the apps that are installed on
your computer. Recently installed apps appear at the top of the menu.
The right side of the Start menu displays groups of app tiles that the
computer manufacturer pinned there for you or you choose to pin there.
Some apps support “Live Tiles” that display current information such as
weather, stock prices, or news.

SEE ALSO For information about Live Tiles, see Chapter 3, “Work
with shortcuts and tiles.”
You can configure the content of the Start menu however you want by adding,
removing, resizing, and grouping tiles. If you prefer a cleaner look, you can opt
to display a full-size Start screen instead of the partial-screen Start menu. The
full-size Start screen displays either Pinned Tiles view or All Apps view, with
the commands minimized on the left.

SEE ALSO For information about switching to the full-size Start
screen, see “Configure the Start menu” in Chapter 2, “Personalize your
working environment.” For information about pinning tiles to the Start
menu, see Chapter 3, “Work with shortcuts and tiles.”
Selecting your user account image at the top of the Start menu icon area displays
a list of options. You can access your user account settings, lock the computer, or
sign out of Windows from this user account menu. (You can also do all those
things from other places.) If multiple user accounts are configured on your
computer, they appear at the bottom of this menu, and you can switch to those
accounts without signing out of your current Windows session. For example, you
might switch between accounts if your home computer has user accounts
configured on it for other family members or guests, and you want to let one of
those people use the computer without ending your computer session, or if you
have a user account that is linked to your Microsoft account and a local user
account that isn’t.

If the other user account is already signed in to Windows, this is indicated by the
words “Signed in” under the user account name. Switching to an account that
has an active Windows session resumes that Windows session; otherwise,
switching to the account starts a new Windows session. Either way, when you
switch accounts Windows displays the Welcome screen, so you can either sign in
to Windows with the other user account credentials (including the account
password, if it has one) or sign in to the existing Windows session.
You can choose whether to display the Most Used and Recently Added sections
above the app list. Windows populates these sections automatically based on
your computer usage and displays the section headings only when it also
displays apps in those sections. Apps that you use more than others stay on the
Most Used list until others take their place. Newly installed apps stay on the
Recently Added list for about a day.
A hidden gem on the Start menu is the ability to quickly access jump lists of app-

management commands, recent files, or common tasks. Jump lists are a
marvelous time-saving feature. You can display a jump list by right-clicking an
app in the app list or in the pinned tile area.
To display the Start menu (default configuration)
Select the Start button.
Press the Windows logo key.
Press Ctrl+Esc.
To display user account controls
On the left side of the Start menu, select your user account button.
To switch to another user account
1. On the left side of the Start menu, select your user account button, and then
select the account you want to switch to.

2. On the Welcome screen, do one of the following:
If the account has a password, enter the password in the box below the
account name, and then press Enter or select Submit.
If the account doesn’t have a password, select Sign in below the account
name.
To display recent files for a specific app
On the Start menu, right-click the app name or tile.
Explore Windows settings
In versions of Windows prior to Windows 10, the various settings that controlled
the behavior of the computer were available from Control Panel. Navigating
through the Control Panel screens could be somewhat tricky. Control Panel still
exists in Windows 10, but most of the settings have been moved from Control
Panel to a much simpler interface: the Settings window. (The settings that
haven’t yet been moved are available through links from the Settings window.
It’s likely that future Windows 10 updates will result in the continued migration
of Control Panel content to Settings.) This topic provides an overview of where
you can find various settings that you’ll work with throughout later chapters of
this book.
In its default configuration, the Settings window displays iconic representations
of the 13 categories of settings that are present in the Fall 2017 Creators Update
of Windows 10.

TIP Four categories of settings are new since the initial release of
Windows 10: Phone, Apps, Gaming, and Cortana.
The Settings window is an example of the type of changes Microsoft made in
Windows 10 so that the operating system can run on devices of any size, from
desktop computers to smartphones. As the window width decreases, the icons
become smaller and move to a list format. Regardless of the format, each
category icon and name is accompanied by a short (and by no means complete)
list of settings available in that category, to give you an indication of where to
find specific settings that you’re looking for.

One of the benefits of the Settings interface over Control Panel is that each
category is only one level deep, so it’s relatively easy to browse to the feature or
setting you want to configure. In the standard (wider) Settings window
configuration, each category page displays a list of features in the left pane;
selecting any feature displays the settings for that feature in the right pane.

When the Settings window is narrower, selecting a category name displays only
the feature list, and then selecting a feature displays that pane of settings.
It’s easy to locate a specific setting from the Find A Setting search box at the top
of each page of the Settings window. The following table lists the features you
can configure settings for in each of the thirteen categories.
Settings category Features included in the category
System
Display
Notifications & actions

Power & sleep
Battery (on mobile devices)
Storage
Tablet mode
Multitasking
Projecting to this PC
Shared experiences
Remote Desktop
About (Windows and system information)
Devices
Bluetooth & other devices
Printers & scanners
Mouse
Touchpad (on mobile devices)
Typing
Pen & Windows Ink
AutoPlay
USB
Phone
General settings
Network & InternetStatus
Wi-Fi
Ethernet (on devices that have an Ethernet port)
Dial-up
VPN
Airplane mode
Mobile hotspot
Data usage
Proxy
Personalization
Background
Colors
Lock screen
Themes
Start
Taskbar
Apps
Apps & features
Default apps
Offline maps

Apps for websites
Video playback
Accounts
Your info
Email & app accounts
Sign-in options
Access work or school
Family & other people
Sync your settings
Time & language
Date & time
Region & language
Speech
Gaming
Game bar
Game DVR
Broadcasting
Game Mode
TruePlay
Xbox Networking
Ease of Access
Narrator
Magnifier
Color & high contrast
Closed captions
Keyboard
Mouse
Other options
Cortana
Talk to Cortana
Permissions & History
Notifications
More details
Privacy
General
Location
Camera
Microphone
Notifications
Speech, inking, & typing
Account info
Contacts

Calendar
Call history
Email
Tasks
Messaging
Radios
Other devices
Feedback & diagnostics
Background apps
App diagnostics
Automatic file downloads
Update & security Windows Update
Windows Defender
Backup
Troubleshoot
Recovery
Activation
Find my device
For developers
Windows Insider Program (by subscription)
You can locate the configuration options for a specific feature by selecting the
category and then the feature, or by searching from the Settings window search
box or the taskbar search box.
When you configure settings in the Settings window, your changes are
implemented as soon as you make them; it isn’t necessary to save your changes,
and it’s not possible to undo your changes other than by manually reversing each
change. If you ever need to identify the default settings for a feature, one way to
do so is to create a new local user account, switch to that user account, and then
check the settings in that account.
SEE ALSO For information about creating new user accounts, see
“Create and manage user accounts” in Chapter 11, “Manage user
accounts and settings.” For information about switching accounts, see
“Explore the Start menu” earlier in this chapter.

As previously mentioned, Control Panel still exists and you can configure many
of the less frequently used settings there. The standard Control Panel
configuration displays category names followed by tasks you can perform in the
categories.
Alternatively, you can display features instead of categories by switching to Icon
view, where you have the choice of displaying large or small icons. The content
in both views is the same, but it can be much simpler to navigate through
Control Panel in Icon view than in Category view. In either view, a search box is
located in the upper-right corner of the window. Searching from this box returns
results only from Control Panel.

You can access the settings in Control Panel directly (by navigating or searching
in Control Panel or from the taskbar search results list), by selecting links on the
Quick Link menu, and also by selecting links in the feature settings panes. Links
that lead from the Settings window to Control Panel are located in a Related
Settings section adjacent to the settings pane, and are often labeled as advanced
or additional settings. (For example, “Additional power settings” and “Change
advanced sharing options” both link directly to Control Panel.)
We’ll work with individual settings in later chapters of this book. In this first
chapter, we’re just making you aware of them in case you want to investigate
them on your own or need to configure something before you get to the relevant
topics.
To open the Settings window
On the left side of the Start menu, select the Settings icon.
Press Win+I.

Near the right end of the taskbar, select the Action Center icon and then, in
the Quick Actions section at the bottom of the Action Center, select All
settings.
To display a category of settings
In the Settings window, select the category you want to display.
To display settings for a specific feature
1. From the Settings window, display the category page.
2. On the category page, select the feature you want to configure.
To display the Quick Link menu
Right-click the Start button.
Press Win+X.
To display the Control Panel home page
In the taskbar search box, enter control, and then in the search results list,
select Control Panel.
In the Start menu app list or on the All apps screen, select any index letter.
In the alphabetic index, select W, expand the Windows System folder, and
then select Control Panel.
Manage content and app windows
As the name of the Windows 10 operating system indicates, most of the
information you view on your computer is displayed in windows—rectangular
content frames. Files open in app windows, folders open in File Explorer
windows, and operating system elements open in system windows. Regardless of
the content they display, all windows share certain common characteristics and
can be manipulated in the same ways.
In this topic, we discuss managing windows on the desktop.
Resize, minimize, and close windows
A window can either fill the entire screen or occupy only part of the screen. You

can open and close a window, move a window, and change the size of a window.
(These features help us to differentiate windows from other user interface
elements such as panes or dialog boxes.) When an app (including File Explorer)
or system element is active, its window has a corresponding taskbar button.
Windows have common features. Depending on which system or app generates
the window, its controls might look slightly different, but in general, a window
has a title bar at the top that has a title in the middle and window-management
buttons on the right side.
The three buttons on the right end of the title bar are:
Minimize Minimizing a window doesn’t close the file or app in the
window, but closes the window on the screen. You can reopen the window
by selecting the corresponding taskbar button.
Maximize/Restore When a window fills only part of the screen,
maximizing it increases it to full-screen size. When a window is
maximized, restoring it returns it to its previous part-screen size.
Close Closing a window also closes the file or app that the window
contains.
Pointing to (hovering over) the controls displays ScreenTips to help you identify
them.
You can also use the title bar at the top of a window or the window frame to
manage the window size.
To resize a window

To manually change only the window height, point to the top or bottom of
the window frame, and when the pointer changes to a double-headed arrow,
drag the arrow up or down.
To manually change only the window width, point to the left or right side of
the window frame, and when the pointer changes to a double-headed arrow,
drag the arrow left or right.
To manually change the window size in any direction, point to a corner of
the window frame, and when the pointer changes to a diagonal arrow, drag
the arrow in any direction.
TIP You cannot resize a maximized window by dragging its frame; you
must first restore the window to a non-maximized state.
To maximize the height of a window without changing the width
Point to the top or bottom of the window frame, and when the pointer
changes to a double-headed arrow, double-click.
To maximize a window
Double-click the window title bar.
At the right end of the title bar, select the Maximize button.
Drag the window by its title bar to the top of the screen, and then release it.
Press Win+Up Arrow to maximize a non-snapped window.
SEE ALSO For information about snapping windows, see the “Move
and arrange windows” section of this topic.
To restore a maximized window

Double-click the window title bar.
At the right end of the title bar, select the Restore button.
Drag the window by its title bar away from the top of the screen, and then
release it.
Press Win+Down Arrow to restore a non-snapped window.
To minimize the active window
At the right end of the title bar, select the Minimize button.
Press Win+Down Arrow to minimize a non-maximized window.
To minimize all windows other than the active window
Press Win+Home.
Shake (rapidly wiggle) the active window by its title bar.
To minimize all windows
Press Win+M.
To restore minimized windows
Press Win+Shift+M.
Press Alt+Tab to cycle through thumbnails of windows; release the Alt key
to open the window of the selected thumbnail.
Press Win+[a number from 0 to 9] to open the first instance of the first
through tenth active app on the taskbar. (The number 0 represents the app to
the right of the Task View button on the taskbar, the number 1 represents
the next app, and so on.)
To close a window
At the right end of the title bar, select the Close button.
Move and arrange windows
Some people might never open more than one window at a time. But most

people have at least a few windows open at the same time, and a business
computer user could easily have a dozen or more windows open on a single
screen, multiple monitors, or multiple desktops.
Earlier in this chapter, we looked at Task View, in which you can display a tiled
view of thumbnails of all your open windows at the same time, and switch to or
close individual windows. In this section, we discuss managing windows on the
desktop.
You can move and arrange windows by dragging them around the screen, by
using keyboard shortcuts, or by using commands on the taskbar shortcut menu.
You can arrange open windows in traditional cascaded, stacked, and side-by-side
arrangements or by snapping them to a half or quarter of the screen. Cascading

and snapping windows also changes the window sizes.
Snapping a window is a technique that sizes and positions a window to occupy
the left or right portion of the screen or one corner of the screen. Snapping a
window to the left or right side of the screen in Windows 10 resizes it to half the
screen width, unless another window is snapped to a screen edge. In that case,
snapping a window to the same edge matches the existing window width, and
snapping a window to the opposite edge fills the available space.
To drag a window
1. Press and hold the window title bar by using the primary mouse button,
your finger, or a stylus.
2. Move the pointing device until the window is where you want it.
To move a window
Drag the window by its title bar to the new position.
Press Win+Left Arrow or Win+Right Arrow to cycle the active window
through the left, right, and center of each screen.
To cascade all open windows

1. Right-click the taskbar.
2. On the taskbar shortcut menu, select Cascade windows.
To arrange all open windows in a grid
Right-click the taskbar, and then select Show windows stacked or Show
windows side by side.
To restore cascaded, stacked, or side-by-side windows
Right-click the taskbar, and then select the relevant Undo command.
To snap a window to the left or right side of a screen
1. Do either of the following:
Drag the window until the pointer touches the left or right side of the
display area (the contact point will flash briefly), and then release it.
Activate the window, and then press Win+Left Arrow or Win+Right
Arrow to cycle the window through the left, right, and center of each
screen.
TIP If you have multiple monitors (as opposed to virtual
desktops), selecting the right or left arrow keyboard shortcut
repeatedly acts on the window on the current monitor, then
moves it to the next monitor and cycles through the positions on
that screen. This is true whether the monitors are arranged
horizontally or vertically.
2. Select the thumbnail of the window you want to display in the remaining
space, or to close the thumbnail view without filling the other space, press
Esc, select the active window, or select the taskbar.
To snap a window to a quarter screen
1. Do any of the following:

Drag the window until the pointer touches a corner (not a side) of the
display area, and then release it.
Press Win+Up Arrow or Win+Down Arrow to snap a half-screen window
to the upper or lower quarter.
Press Win+Left Arrow or Win+Right Arrow to move a quarter-screen
window to another corner.
2. Select the thumbnail of the window you want to display in the remaining
space, or to close the thumbnail view without filling the other space, press
Esc, select the active window, or select the taskbar.
End a computing session
If you’re going to stop working with your computer for any length of time, you
can use one of these four options to leave the Windows session:
Lock the computer This leaves your Windows computing session active,
saves the state of any running apps and open files, and displays the Lock
screen. Signing in to Windows resumes your computing session.
Sign out of Windows This exits any running apps, ends your Windows
computing session, and displays the Lock screen. Signing in to Windows
starts a new computing session.
Put the computer to sleep This leaves your Windows computing session
active, saves the state of any running apps and open files, turns off the
monitor, and puts the computer into a power-saving mode. When you wake
the computer up, the monitor turns on, the Lock screen appears, and signing
in to Windows resumes your computing session.
Shut down the computer This signs all active users out of Windows, shuts
down the computer processes in an orderly fashion, and turns off the
computer.
You can access these processes from your account button and the Power button
on the Start menu and full-size Start screen. The Sign Out, Sleep, and Shut
Down processes are also available from the Quick Link menu.

The other available Power option is to restart the computer. When you do so,
Windows shuts down the computer, and then starts it again. It is sometimes
necessary to restart a computer to complete the installation of an update, when
the update affects system files that are in use during the computing session.
Restarting can also fix things if your computer is overtaxed with too many
processes and begins to run slowly or erratically.
If apps are running when you sign out of Windows or shut down or restart the
computer, Windows manages the process of exiting the apps. If files are open
and have unsaved changes, Windows pauses the sign-out process and prompts
you to save the files. At that point, you have the option of canceling the sign-out
process and returning to your Windows session.
To lock the computer
Display the Start menu. On the left side of the Start menu, select your user
account button, and then select Lock.
Press Win+L.
To sign out of Windows
1. Do either of the following:
Display the Start menu, select your user account button, and then select
Sign out.

Right-click the Start button to display the Quick Link menu, select Shut
down or sign out, and then select Sign out.
2. Respond if Windows asks whether to save unsaved changes to specific files
or apps.
TIP Watch the taskbar for flashing buttons that indicate an app that
needs attention; sometimes notifications end up behind other on-
screen processes. Select the button to activate the app, and then
provide any necessary feedback.
To put the computer to sleep
From within an active computing session, do either of the following:
On the left side of the Start menu, select the Power button, and then
select Sleep.
On the Quick Link menu, select Shut down or sign out, and then select
Sleep.
In the lower-right corner of the Welcome screen, select the Power button,
and then select Sleep.
To wake up a computer from sleep
Wake methods might vary depending on the computer. The following methods
are common:
Press and release the computer’s power button.
Press any keyboard key.
Wiggle the mouse.
To shut down the computer
From within an active computing session, do either of the following:
On the left side of the Start menu, select the Power button, and then

select Shut down.
On the Quick Link menu, select Shut down or sign out, and then select
Shut down.
In the lower-right corner of the Welcome screen, select the Power button,
and then select Shut down.
TIP If your Shut Down option is labeled Update and Shut Down,
Windows has installed an update that affects files and settings that
are in use in the current computing session. When you select
Update And Shut Down, Windows completes the update process
before shutting down the computer.
To restart the computer
From within an active computing session, do either of the following:
On the left side of the Start menu, select the Power button, and then
select Restart.
On the Quick Link menu, select Shut down or sign out, and then select
Restart.
In the lower-right corner of the Welcome screen, select the Power button,
and then select Restart.
TIP If your Restart option is labeled Update and Restart, Windows
has installed an update that affects files and settings that are in use
in the current computing session. When you select Update And
Restart, Windows completes the update process before restarting
the computer.

Key points
You start a computing session by signing in from the Welcome screen with
a user account. The user account can be either a Microsoft account or a
local computer account. If you sign in by using a Microsoft account, you
can share settings across multiple computers and synchronize more easily
with online services.
After you sign in to Windows, you work from the desktop, which is a
display panel for the contents of two folders—your personal Desktop folder
and a Public Desktop folder available to all user accounts on the computer.
The desktop displays shortcuts to system tools such as the Recycle Bin and
might display shortcuts to apps, files, folders, and webpages.
The taskbar located at the bottom of the desktop hosts the Start button, the
search box (which also provides access to Cortana), the Task View button,
and shortcuts to apps such as Microsoft Edge, File Explorer, the Store app,
the Mail app, and any apps that are currently running. You can modify the
shortcuts as you want.
The notification area at the right end of the taskbar includes the People
icon, notification icons for various apps and processes running on your
computer, the date and time, and the Action Center icon.
The Action Center provides quick access to messages and notifications that
you receive, and to settings that you might want to access quickly.
The Start menu provides links to your user account settings, the Settings
window, and power options. (You can add other links.) The alphabetical app
list on the Start menu provides access to all the apps installed on your
computer. You can pin app tiles to the Start menu and group them for easy
access.
In Windows 10, you access most computer settings from the Settings
window. Settings are organized into 13 categories of features.
Most of the content displayed on your computer screen is within content
frames called windows. These windows have common controls for resizing
and closing the windows. You can move and resize windows on the screen
and quickly snap them to a half or quarter of the screen.
You can leave a computing session by locking the session or putting the
computer to sleep. You can end the session by signing out of Windows or

shutting down the computer. If your computer isn’t running well or an
update requires that the system files be released from use, it might be
necessary to restart the computer.
 Practice tasks
No practice files are necessary to complete the practice tasks in this chapter.
Sign in to Windows
Perform the following tasks:
1. Start your Windows 10 computer.
2. Dismiss the Lock screen, and then sign in to Windows 10.
Explore the desktop and taskbar
Sign in to Windows, and then perform the following tasks:
1. From the taskbar search box, search for desktop. Filter the search results list
to display only folders, and then open the Desktop folder for your user
account.
2. Search for taskbar. Filter the search results list to display only settings.
Then display the settings pane in which you can specify which icons appear
on the taskbar.
3. In the notification area of the taskbar, right-click the Speakers icon, and
then select Sounds to open the Sound dialog box.
4. Display Task View to view all active apps and dialog boxes in your
computing session. From Task View, close the Sound dialog box and then
go to the Settings window.
5. Display the hidden icons in the notification area of the taskbar. Point to
each icon in the window to display a ScreenTip that identifies the app. Then
right-click any icon to display the available commands for that app.
6. From the notification area of the taskbar, display the Action Center.
7. If the Action Center contains messages, preview the content of a message,

and then remove that message from the Action Center.
8. Minimize all open windows. (You’ll use them in upcoming tasks.)
Explore the Start menu
Perform the following tasks:
1. Display the Start menu, and then display your user account menu.
2. From the user account menu, lock the computer. Then sign in to Windows
again.
3. Display the Start menu. Examine the app list for apps that have jump lists,
and notice the recent files and common actions for those apps.
Explore Windows settings
Perform the following tasks:
1. Open the Settings window.
2. Display any category of settings that interests you.
3. Within the selected category, display the settings for a specific feature.
4. Open Control Panel.
5. Leave the Settings window and Control Panel open for later use.
Manage content and app windows
Ensure that the Settings window and Control Panel are open, and then perform
the following tasks:
1. Activate the Settings window. Change only the width of the window so it is
approximately half the width of the screen. Then drag the window to the
approximate center of the screen.
2. Use the mouse or pointer to resize the Settings window in the following
ways:
a. Maximize the window height without changing its width.
b. Maximize the window to fill the screen.

c. Snap the window to the left side of the screen, and select Control Panel to
fill the right side of the screen.
3. Activate Control Panel, and then use keyboard shortcuts to resize it in the
following ways:
a. Snap the window to the upper-right quadrant of the screen.
b. Move the window to the left side of the screen.
4. Temporarily minimize all the open windows to display the desktop.
5. Stack the open windows.
6. Minimize all the active windows, and then restore them.
7. Activate the Settings window, and then minimize all windows other than
the active window.
8. Close the Settings window. Then activate and close Control Panel (and any
other windows that you opened earlier).
End a computing session
Sign in to Windows, and then perform the following tasks:
1. From the user account menu at the top of the Start menu, lock the
computer. Then sign in to Windows again.
2. From the Power button at the bottom of the Start menu, put the computer
to sleep. Then sign in to Windows again.
3. From the Start shortcut menu, sign out of Windows to end your computing
session.
4. From the Welcome screen, restart the computer.

2. 
Personalize 
your 
working
environment
In this chapter
Configure the Start menu
Set the desktop background and system colors
Customize the Lock screen
Apply and manage themes
In Chapter 1, “Get started using Windows 10,” you looked at the Windows user
interface elements that you encounter in every Windows session—the Lock
screen, the Welcome screen, the desktop, the taskbar, and the Start menu. (The
other place you’ll probably spend a lot of time is in File Explorer, which Chapter
5, “Explore files and folders,” covers at length.)
Some of the Windows user interface elements might look different on your
computer from those shown in this book, because the colors and images might
have been set to something other than the defaults. One of the things people like
to do with their Windows computers is personalize the user interface to reflect
things they like and want to see rather than things that other people have decided
they should see. And that’s what this chapter is about!
This chapter guides you through procedures related to modifying the Start menu,
setting the desktop background and system colors, selecting the Lock screen
background and content, and applying and managing themes.
Configure the Start menu
The Start menu is your primary entry point to the apps that are installed on your
computer. As mentioned in Chapter 1, “Get started using Windows 10,” you
have the choice of two Start menu configurations:
A partial-screen Start menu that displays the folder list, the app list, and
pinned tiles
A full-size Start screen that displays the folder list and either pinned tiles or

the app list
The partial-screen Start menu configuration is the default.
TIP The Windows 10 user interface has three distinct Start elements—
the Start button, Start menu, and full-size Start screen. Windows
documentation often refers to each of these simply as Start. For clarity,
we refer to each of these elements separately in this book.
Resize the Start menu
The Start menu configuration that is best for you depends on the way you work
—considerations include whether you primarily interact with Windows by
selecting or tapping the screen, which method you prefer to use to start apps,
whether you depend on Live Tiles for information, whether you make use of

jump lists, and how large your screen is. Your initial preference might be based
solely on what you’re used to and comfortable with. You can easily try out both
configurations to determine which is more efficient for the way that you work.
Changing the Start menu configuration is a simple one-step process. When you
turn the full-screen setting on or off, the change takes place immediately. It isn’t
necessary to sign out of Windows or restart your computer to implement it.
You can change to the full-size Start screen or revert to the default Start menu
size, and configure other Start menu settings, from the Start settings pane on the
Personalization page in the Settings window.
You can adjust the height and width of the Start menu. When you make the Start
menu wider or narrower, the width of the tile groups might also change.

SEE ALSO For information about arranging tiles and tile groups on the
Start menu, see “Manage Start menu tiles” in Chapter 3, “Work with
shortcuts and tiles.”
To resize the Start menu
Drag the top border of the Start menu up or down to increase or decrease
its height.
Drag the right border of the Start menu right or left to increase or decrease
its width.
To display pinned tiles that don’t fit on the Start menu
1. Point to the Start menu to display the vertical scroll bar on the right edge.
TIP The scroll bar appears only when there are more tiles than fit
on the Start menu at the current size.
2. Drag the scroll box or select the scroll bar to scroll the Start menu content.
To switch between the default Start menu and full-size Start screen
1. Open the Settings window by selecting Start and then Settings or pressing
Win+I.
2. Select Personalization, and then on the Personalization page, select Start.
3. In the Start settings pane, select Use Start full screen.
4. Select the Start button to test the setting.
To display commands on the full-size Start screen
In the upper-left corner of the Start screen, select the Expand button.

Configure the Start menu folder list
The default Start menu has three sections: the folder list on the left, the app list
in the middle, and the pinned tiles on the right. The folder list is collapsed to
display only icons, but you can open it by selecting the Expand button at the top.
The folder list always displays a link to manage your user account and displays
the Power button. By default, it also displays a link to the Settings window. In
addition to these, you can display links to the following items:
File Explorer
Your Documents, Downloads, Music, Pictures, and Videos folders
The HomeGroup and Network windows
Your personal folder, from which you can access all your user account–
specific folders and settings
The folders you select are always displayed in the same order.

To add or remove folders on the Start menu
1. Display the Start pane of the Personalization settings page.

2. At the bottom of the pane, select Choose which folders appear on Start to
display the list of options.
3. On the Choose which folders appear on Start page, turn on the folders
that you want to appear on the Start menu, and turn the others off.
TIP You can’t turn off the user account management or Power
buttons.
Configure the Start menu app list
The app list appears in the center pane of the Start menu. It displays an
alphabetical list of the apps installed on your computer (some within folders). It
can also display the following lists:
Recently added apps This list displays apps for a short time after you
install them. If no apps have been installed recently, the list disappears from
the Start menu.
Most used apps On a new Windows 10 installation, this list contains links
to some standard Windows tools, or to apps that were selected by the
computer manufacturer. As you use Windows, the apps you use most often
appear in this list.

Recently opened items When this setting is turned on, you can quickly
access files that you’ve opened with apps that support the jump list feature
(such as Microsoft Office apps) from the Start menu or taskbar.
If you prefer to not see the app list, you can remove the app list from the Start
menu, or switch to the full-size Start screen.
To remove the app list from the Start menu
1. Display the Start pane of the Personalization settings page.
2. Turn off Show app list in Start menu.
3. Select the Start button to test the setting.
To display or hide contextual app lists on the Start menu
1. Display the Start pane of the Personalization settings page.
2. Do either of the following:
To turn off or on the Most Used list, select Show most used apps.
To turn off or on the Recently Added list, select Show recently added
apps.
TIP The Recently Added app list and jump lists are turned on by
default. The Most Used app list is not on by default, but this can
be a handy feature, so you might want to turn it on.
3. Select the Start button to test the setting.
To display or hide jump lists on the Start menu and taskbar
1. Display the Start pane of the Personalization settings page.
2. Select Show recently opened items in Jump Lists on Start or the
taskbar to turn jump lists on or off.

Set the desktop background and system
colors
You can use the options on the Personalization page of the Settings window to
set the desktop background image or color, and the accent color that is used for
various operating system elements, including the Start menu, taskbar, Action
Center, and window title bars.
TIP In addition to the changes described in this topic, you can apply a
custom theme, which sets the background, color scheme, and other
properties. For more information, see “Apply and manage themes” later
in this chapter.

Set the desktop background
Your choice of desktop background usually reflects your personal taste—what
you like to see when your app windows are minimized or closed. Some people
prefer simple backgrounds that don’t obscure their desktop icons, some prefer
photos that reflect a specific theme, and some prefer personal photos of family
members, pets, or favorite places.
You can set your desktop background to any of the following:
A picture You can choose one of the photos that come with Windows, or a
digital image of your own. The image can be any of several file types,
including BMP, GIF, JPG, PNG, TIF, and the less common DIB, JFIF, JPE,
JPEG, TIFF, and WDP file types.
A solid color If you want to keep things simple, you can opt for a plain,
colored background. You can choose from a palette of 24 colors, or select a
custom color that you choose from a gradient or specify as an RGB (Red,
Green, Blue), HSV (Hue, Saturation, Value), or hexadecimal value.
A slideshow You can display the contents of a folder of your choice, with
the background image changing as frequently as every minute or every 10
minutes, 30 minutes, hour, six hours, or day. You can display the images in

the order they appear in the folder, or in a random order.
When you select a background option, a preview of the option appears at the top
of the Background settings pane and Windows implements the option on the
desktop. It isn’t necessary to save your changes.
When displaying an image or slideshow as your desktop background, you can
specify the position of the image as follows:
Fill The image is centered on the screen. The image fills the screen
horizontally and vertically and maintains its original aspect ratio. Parts of
the image might overrun the left and right sides or the top and bottom edges
(but not both).
Fit The image is centered on the screen. The image fills the screen
horizontally or vertically and maintains its original aspect ratio. Parts of the
image might not fill the left and right sides or the top and bottom edges.
Stretch The image is centered on the screen. The image fills the screen
horizontally and vertically but does not maintain its original aspect ratio.
No part of the image overruns the screen.
Tile The image is anchored in the upper-left corner of the screen at its
original size, followed by as many copies as are necessary to fill the screen.
Parts of the rightmost and bottom tiles might overrun the edges of the
screen.
Center The image is centered on the screen at its original size.
Span When you have multiple monitors connected to the computer, this
option stretches the image across the monitors.
When you select a picture position that doesn’t fill the screen (such as Fit or
Centered), the rest of the desktop is filled with the currently selected desktop
background color.
To set one desktop background image
1. Open the Settings window, select Personalization, and then on the
Personalization settings page, select Background.
2. In the Background settings pane, select the Background list and then
Picture.
3. In the Choose your picture area, do either of the following:

Select a thumbnail to select a Windows 10 image or a previously selected
picture.
Select Browse. In the Open dialog box, browse to and select the image
you want to use. Then select Choose picture.
4. In the Choose a fit list, select Fill, Fit, Stretch, Tile, Center, or Span to
indicate the way you want to position the image.
5. When the preview image updates to reflect your settings, make any
necessary changes to configure the desktop background the way you want
it.
IMPORTANT If you choose Fit or Centered and don’t like the
desktop background color behind the image, change it and then
reselect the desktop background image.
Or
1. Start the Photos app.
2. Locate and select the photo that you want to display as the desktop
background.
3. At the right end of the Photos menu bar, select See more (…) > Set as >
Set as background.

To display a series of desktop background images
1. Place the images you want to display into one folder.
2. Display the Background pane of the Personalization settings page.
3. In the Background list, select Slideshow.
4. If you want to use a folder other than the one shown in the Choose albums
for your slideshow area (by default, this is your Pictures folder), select
Browse. In the Select Folder dialog box, browse to and select the folder of
images you want to use. Then select Choose this folder.
TIP Although the area is labeled Choose albums… you can choose
only one folder in the Select Folder dialog box. To add multiple
folders of images to the slideshow, repeat step 4.


5. If you want the background image to change more or less frequently than
the default of every 30 minutes, expand the Change picture every list and
then select 1 minute, 10 minutes, 1 hour, 6 hours, or 1 day.
6. If you want to display the folder contents in a random order, turn on
Shuffle.
7. In the Choose a fit list, select Fill, Fit, Stretch, Tile, Center, or Span to
indicate the way you want to position the images. Consider that image sizes
in the slideshow might vary.
8. When the preview image updates to reflect your settings, make any
necessary changes to configure the desktop background the way you want
it.
To set a standard desktop background color
1. Display the Background pane of the Personalization settings page.
2. In the Background list, select Solid color to display the color grid. An
outline and check mark indicate the current background color.
3. In the color grid, select the color swatch you want to use.
To set a custom desktop background color
1. In the Background pane of the Personalization settings page, in the
Background list, select Solid color.
2. Below the color grid, select Custom color to open the Pick A Background
Color pane.
3. Do one of the following, and then select Done:
Select or drag on the gradient panel to specify a color.
Select More, and then enter an RGB or hexadecimal color value.
Select More, expand the RGB list, and select HSV. Then enter an HSV
color value.

Set an accent color

The preview at the top of the Background settings pane displays an image of the
desktop background, Start menu, and taskbar. The preview at the top of the
Colors settings pane also displays a content window, either with or without a
colored title bar, because the window title bar is one of the optional areas to
which you can apply the accent color. The other optional areas are the Start
menu, taskbar, and Action Center.
When selecting an accent color, you can choose from four configurations based
on combinations of two settings:
The tiles can be an accent color that you choose from a palette of 48 colors;
a custom color that you choose from a gradient or specify as an RGB (Red,
Green, Blue), HSV (Hue, Saturation, Value), or hexadecimal value; or a
color that Windows chooses based on the desktop background.
The Start menu, taskbar, and Action Center can be black or a darker shade
of the accent color.
The system window title bars can be white or the accent color. (This setting
doesn’t affect the color of Microsoft Office app title bars, for example,
which have their own color scheme setting.)
You have two options in addition to the accent color and the areas it affects:
transparency and light or dark app mode. The transparency option, which is
turned on by default, makes the Start menu, taskbar, and Action Center slightly
transparent so you can see the desktop and open windows behind them. This
Windows Aero feature was introduced for windows frames and the taskbar in
Windows Vista, was relegated to only the taskbar in Windows 8, and has
returned in Windows 10. You can’t control the percentage of transparency (or
rather, opacity) of the user interface elements—they’re either transparent or

opaque—but the low transparency level does seem to be less distracting than in
previous versions of Windows.


To set an accent color based on the desktop background
1. Display the Personalization settings page, and then select Colors.
2. In the Colors settings pane, select the Automatically pick an accent color
from my background check box.
TIP If your desktop background is set to Slideshow and you have
Windows pick an accent color based on the background, the accent
color will change when the desktop background changes. If you like
change, you’ll like this combination; if you don’t, you might find it
distracting.
To set a standard accent color
1. Display the Colors pane of the Personalization settings page.
2. In the Choose your color area, clear the Automatically pick an accent
color from my background check box. An outline and check mark
indicate the current accent color if it is one from the grid.
3. In the color grid, select the color swatch you want to use. Windows
implements the change and updates the preview image.
To set a custom accent color
1. Display the Colors pane of the Personalization settings page.
2. In the Choose your color area, clear the Automatically pick an accent
color from my background check box.
3. Below the color grid, select Custom color.
4. In the Choose a custom accent color pane, do one of the following:
Select or drag on the gradient panel to specify a color.
Select More, and then enter an RGB or a hexadecimal color value.
Select More, expand the RGB list, and select HSV. Then enter an HSV

color value.
To apply the accent color to the Start menu, taskbar, and Action Center
1. Display the Colors pane of the Personalization settings page.
2. In the More options area, below Show accent color on the following
surfaces, select the Start, taskbar, and action center check box.
To apply the accent color to system window title bars
1. Display the Colors pane of the Personalization settings page.
2. In the More options area, below Show accent color on the following
surfaces, select the Title bars check box.
To switch between transparent and opaque user interface elements
1. Display the Colors pane of the Personalization settings page.
2. In the More options area, do one of the following:
If you want the Start menu, taskbar, and Action Center to be transparent,
turn on Transparency effects.
If you want the Start menu, taskbar, and Action Center to be opaque, turn
off Transparency effects.
Windows implements the change. This setting doesn’t affect the preview
image, but if your desktop background has content at the bottom of the
screen, the effect might be apparent on your taskbar.
3. To check the effect of the setting, display the Start menu or Action Center.
Customize the Lock screen
When your computer comes out of sleep mode (and between computing
sessions), Windows displays the Lock screen. By default, the Lock screen
displays the current time, date, network connection status, and battery charge
(for devices running on battery power). However, it can be configured to display
much more information, including status updates from up to eight apps. It can
also double as an electronic picture frame and display a slideshow of pictures
stored in multiple folders on your computer and in the cloud.

The Lock screen has four primary purposes:
To act as a screensaver to prevent people from seeing your open files and
apps or using your computer when you’re away from it.
To display a single photo, or a slideshow of one or more folders of photos.
(Windows 10 can display photos from multiple folders.)
To display information from selected apps when the computer session isn’t
active, so you can be aware of upcoming appointments or other information
without signing in.
To deter accidental sign-in on a touch device.
Set the Lock screen background
On a clean installation of Windows 10, the Lock screen is configured to display
one of the Windows 10 theme images. You can choose any photo or a slideshow
of photos that are contained in one or more folders. The latter option displays
more than a simple slideshow; it displays from one to five images at a time and
mixes photos from the selected folders. When displaying your own images, you
also have the option to display fun facts and tips about Windows and Cortana on
the Lock screen. If you don’t want to use your own photos, you can choose the
Windows Spotlight slideshow, which features beautiful high-definition images,
information about the image subjects, and Windows and Cortana information.

TIP It is possible to disable the Lock screen by editing the registry or
Group Policies, but these activities shouldn’t be undertaken lightly and
are beyond the scope of a Step by Step book.
To display one image on the Lock screen
1. Display the Personalization page of the Settings window, and then select
Lock screen. The Preview area of the Lock Screen settings pane displays
your current Lock screen background.
If the current background is a single picture, the pane shows thumbnails of
other recent picture backgrounds (or background options from the current
theme) for quick selection. If the background is a slideshow, the pane shows

the folders that contain the slideshow photos.
2. In the Lock screen pane, select the Background list to expand it, and then
select Picture.
3. Select the background picture by doing either of the following:
If the Choose your picture section includes a thumbnail of the picture
you want to use, select the thumbnail.
If the Choose your picture section doesn’t show the picture you want to
use, select Browse. In the Open dialog box, browse to the picture you
want to use, and then select Choose picture.

TIP The pretty pictures provided with Windows 10 are stored in
C:\Windows\Web\Screen and are also provided as part of the
Windows 10 theme. You can download similar artwork from
windows.microsoft.com/windows/wallpaper.
Your selection is shown in the Preview area. If the picture you select
doesn’t have the same aspect ratio as the screen, Windows fills the screen
with the picture, which might cut off part of what you want to see.
4. Press Win+L to lock the computer and verify that the background looks the
way you want it.
Or
1. Start the Photos app.
2. Locate and select the photo that you want to display on the Lock screen.
3. At the right end of the Photos menu bar, select See more (…) > Set as >
Set as Lock screen.
4. Press Win+L to lock the computer and verify that the background looks the
way you want it.
To display a slideshow of images on the Lock screen
1. Identify one or more folders that contain pictures you want to display as a
slideshow. If you want to use only some of the photos from each folder,
create a new folder (Lock Screen Pics, for example) and copy the photos to
it.
2. Display the Lock screen pane of the Personalization settings page.
3. Expand the Background list, and select Slideshow. The Choose Albums
For Your Slideshow area displays your Pictures folder and any other folders
that were previously selected for a slideshow.
TIP The advanced slideshow settings can be configured to include
Camera Roll folders from your computer and Microsoft OneDrive,

without displaying those folders in the Choose Albums section,
and to include pictures that don’t entirely fit on the screen. It’s a
good idea to specifically configure those settings the way you want
them.
4. Do either of the following:
To add a folder to the slideshow, select Add a folder, browse to the folder
you want to add, select the folder, and then select Choose this folder.
To remove a folder from the slideshow album, select the folder to display
its controls, and then select Remove.


Configure a screen saver
Screen savers are blank screens or moving images that appear on your
screen after some period of inactivity. Originally, screen savers were
used to prevent screens from being permanently “imprinted” with a
static image that remained on the screen for too long. (This was back
in the dark ages of computer history, when monitors fired a stream of
electrons at the back of a CRT (cathode ray tube) or plasma screen to
create little white dots that combined to display text you could read
from the front side of the screen.) Modern monitors are not
susceptible to this kind of damage, so screen savers are now primarily
for visual entertainment.
The original screen saver was a simple app that made the screen blank
after a period of inactivity. It was created by John Socha, and its code
was published in the December 1983 issue of the Softalk magazine.
The Lock screen can display a series of images, but if you’re looking
for something less specific, Windows 10 still has six built-in screen
saver options:
3D Text Displays a rotating version of the text you specify. If
you don’t specify text, it displays “Windows 10.”
Blank Clears the screen of content.
Bubbles Displays colorful round bubbles that bounce around the
screen.
Mystify Displays colorful repeating lines in geometric and
curving patterns.
Photos Displays a slideshow of the files in any folder that you
specify. If you don’t specify a folder, it displays the content of
your Pictures folder.
Ribbons Displays ribbons of color that dance across the screen.
When you select a screen saver, you can preview the effect, set the
interval of inactivity before it will be displayed, and specify whether a
password is required to stop the screen saver after it is set in motion.

For some screen savers, you can set options such as size, motion
pattern, and style.
To configure a screen saver, follow these steps:
1. Display the Personalization page of the Settings window, and
then select Lock screen.
2. Near the bottom of the Lock screen settings pane, select Screen
saver settings to open the Screen Saver Settings dialog box.
3. In the Screen saver list, select the screen saver you want to use.
The dialog box displays a preview of the screen saver.
4. If the screen saver you select has options, the Settings button
becomes active. To configure nondefault options, select the
Settings button and provide the requested information.
5. If you want to preview the screen saver at full size on your
screen, select the Preview button. The preview ends as soon as
you move the mouse, tap the screen, or press a key.
6. In the Wait box, set the number of minutes of inactivity after
which you want the screen saver to start.
7. If you want Windows to display the Lock screen when the screen
saver stops, select the On resume, display logon screen check
box.
TIP The term “logon screen” in the Screen Saver Settings dialog box is left over from
a previous version of Windows, but refers to the Windows 10 Lock screen.
8. In the Screen Saver Settings dialog box, select OK.
To configure advanced slideshow settings
1. Configure the Lock screen to display a slideshow of images.
2. In the Lock screen settings pane, below the Choose albums for your
slideshow area, select the Advanced slideshow settings link to display the
Advanced slideshow settings pane.

TIP On a mobile device, the Advanced Slideshow Settings pane
includes an option to play or not play a slideshow when using
battery power.
3. Configure the advanced settings the way you want them for your slideshow.
To display the Windows Spotlight Lock screen
1. Display the Lock screen pane of the Personalization settings page.
2. Expand the Background list, and select Windows spotlight. A preview of
the current Spotlight background appears at the top of the Lock Screen
pane.

TIP On the Windows Spotlight Lock screen, you can vote for the
backgrounds you like, and Windows 10 will select future backgrounds
that reflect your preferences. To vote for or against a background, select
Like What You See? and then select I like it! or Not a fan.
To display tips on the Lock screen
1. Configure the Lock screen to display a picture or slideshow.
2. On the Lock screen settings pane, below the Choose your picture or
Choose albums section, turn on Get fun facts, tips, and more from
Windows and Cortana on your lock screen.
IMPORTANT The Get Fun Facts option is available only when
the Lock screen is configured to display a picture or slideshow; the
feature is automatically built in to Windows Spotlight.
Display app status information on the Lock screen
In addition to the background photo or photos and the time, date, network, and
battery information, you can choose to display detailed status information on the
Lock screen from one Store app, and quick status information from up to seven
Store apps. The primary purpose of this display is to provide you with quick but
basic information about something, such as the number of new emails or an
upcoming meeting, without requiring you to unlock your screen.
The apps that are available to you depend on the apps that are installed on your
computer. Run each app at least once to configure any required settings (for
example, to specify the location you want the Weather app to monitor), so it can
display updates at the bottom of the Lock screen.
To display app information on the Lock screen

1. Display the Personalization page of the Settings window, and then select
Lock screen. The controls to set Lock screen apps are below the
background settings.
2. In the Choose an app to show detailed status area, select the tile to
display a list of apps that can display status information on the Lock screen.
At the time of this writing, the eligible apps are Calendar, Mail, Messaging,
Phone, Xbox, and Weather. (You can also choose None.) Other apps or
games that you install might also be available.
3. In the app list, select one app to display detailed status updates on the Lock
screen.
4. In the Choose apps to show quick status area, select any tile, and then
select an app in the list. Repeat this process to select up to seven apps.

TIP The order of the app icons determines the order of status
updates on the Lock screen. An empty icon space displays a gap
between the other status updates.
Apply and manage themes
Previously in this chapter, we worked with the desktop background and system

colors. You can configure those elements individually, or you can apply an entire
package of personalization elements at one time by applying a theme. Windows
10 has two types of themes:
Decorative themes that provide a desktop background image or series of
images, and a corresponding system accent color (or colors that change
with the background image). These are the same elements covered in “Set
the desktop background and system colors” earlier in this chapter. A
decorative theme can also include custom notification sounds that play to
notify you of Windows events (such as a low battery or a User Account
Control request for Administrator approval of a change) and app events
(such as an incoming instant message, a blocked pop-up window, or a
completed transaction).
High contrast themes that are designed to make system elements easier for
people with visual limitations (such as color blindness) to see and use. The
high contrast themes increase the color contrast of text, window borders,
and images on your screen to make them more visible and easier to read
and identify.
This topic is about decorative themes. For information about high contrast
themes, see “Configure Windows accessibility features” in Chapter 13, “Manage
power and access options.”
The availability and necessity of decorative themes within Windows has changed
over the last few years as digital images have become more common; it’s easy to
use a favorite picture of your own or that you download from the web as a
desktop background, or to enjoy the Windows Spotlight imagery on your Lock
screen. But if you’d like to apply a theme, they’re still available and offer a wide
range of motifs with impressive imagery and artwork.
Three decorative themes (Windows, Windows 10, and Flowers) are provided
with Windows 10. Most of the images in this book depict the “Windows” theme
desktop background.


TIP If you use your own images as a desktop background and later
want to regain access to the original “Windows” or “Windows 10”
theme images, you can do so by applying that theme.
The manufacturer of your computer might also install a theme that is specific to
the brand of computer you have. If you work in a managed computer
environment, your company might have a corporate theme that is installed by
default with the base computer image.
In addition to these theme options, many others are available from the Store app
and from the Desktop Themes page of the Microsoft Support website. The
desktop backgrounds of these themes feature some breathtaking photography
and creative artwork across multiple subject categories that include not only
general photography (landscapes, animals, plants, people, and places) but also
themes tied to specific movies or games. You could spend hours browsing
through the options. The Store app is the preferred installation location for
Windows 10 themes. More than 75 themes are available from the Store at the
time of this writing.

Many more themes are still available from the Microsoft Support website.
They’re also somewhat easier to sort through in this location, because they’re
divided into categories that include both content and functionality.
TIP Themes that include custom sounds are easy to locate by selecting
With Custom Sounds in the category list.
Themes in the Panoramic category are designed to span across two screens, for
people who work with a second monitor that is connected to their computer
system. For panoramic themes to work as intended, both screens must have the
same resolution.
SEE ALSO For information about screen resolution, see “Display your
desktop on multiple screens” in Chapter 7, “Manage peripheral
devices.”
Most themes include multiple desktop background images. The number of

images included with the theme appears below the theme thumbnail and name.
Most themes are provided by Microsoft Corporation, but many of those in the
From The Community category are contributed by photographers to showcase
their work.
After you apply a theme, you can customize elements of it to suit your individual
taste. For example, many themes come with multiple desktop background
images, and you can choose the one that you like best, or choose a selection to
display in slideshow fashion. If you use your Microsoft account credentials to
sign in to multiple computers, you can choose to synchronize a custom theme
among all of your accounts.

At the time of this writing, themes are ultimately managed in Control Panel, but
you can also get to the theme settings through the Personalization page of the
Settings window.
Any changes you make to the background, colors, sounds, or cursors after you
apply a theme create a customized version of that theme, which is designated in
the Themes settings pane as Unsaved Theme. For example, you can change the
system color or select a single background image from among several that come
with a theme. If you like the changes you make to a theme, you can save it as a
custom theme, either for your own use or for distribution to other people.

IMPORTANT You can have only one unsaved theme at a time; until
you save it, any additional changes you make will remove that specific
background/color/sound combination from your themes.
To display the installed themes
1. Display the Personalization page of the Settings window, and then select
Themes.
2. Scroll to the Apply a theme area of the pane.
To apply an installed theme
Display the installed themes, and then select the theme you want to apply.
TIP You can display the updated desktop background by pointing to or
selecting the Show Desktop button located at the right end of the
taskbar, or by pressing Win+D.
To modify an element of the current theme
1. Display the Themes pane of the Personalization settings page.
2. In the Current theme area of the Themes pane, select the element you
want to change: Background, Sounds, Color, or Mouse cursor to go to
the applicable settings pane or dialog box.
3. Select the new element or settings you want.
To save a custom theme
1. Apply a theme and modify one or more theme elements.
2. Display the Themes setting pane. A customized theme is indicated by

Current theme: Custom at the top of the pane.
3. At the bottom of the Current theme area, select Save theme.
4. In the Save your theme box, enter a name for the theme, and then select
Save.
SEE ALSO For information about synchronizing your theme among
the computers associated with your Microsoft account, see “Customize
your sign-in options” in Chapter 11, “Manage user accounts and
settings.”

To apply a theme from the Store app
1. Do either of the following to display the Windows Themes page of the
Store:
Select the Store icon on the taskbar. Enter windows themes in the search
box, and then select Windows Themes in the filtered list.
Display the Themes settings pane of the Personalization settings page.
Near the bottom of the pane, select Get more themes in the Store (not
Get more themes).

2. Scroll the page to review the representative thumbnails of each theme.
3. Select any thumbnail to display the theme-specific page, which previews up
to three images from the theme and provides additional information and the
installation controls.
4. To display all images from the theme, select Show all adjacent to the
Screenshots heading.
5. To install the theme, select Get at the top of the theme page. After the
theme installs, select Launch to return to the Themes settings pane.
To apply a theme from the Windows website
1. Do either of the following to display the Desktop Themes page of the
Windows website in your default browser:
Go to windows.microsoft.com/windows/themes.
Display the Personalization settings window, and then select Themes.
Near the bottom of the Themes settings pane, under Get more
personality in Windows, select Get more themes (not Get more themes
in the Store).
2. Scroll the page to review the representative thumbnails of each theme. The
number of images included with each theme is shown below the theme
name.
TIP The Store app is the preferred theme installation location and
offers more preview options than the website. You can’t preview
themes on the website before installing them.
3. Select Download below the name of the theme you want to install, and then
select Open in the download notification to unpack the theme file, add the
theme to the Themes settings pane, and apply the theme.

TIP The installed theme elements are saved in the hidden
AppData\Local\Microsoft \Windows\Themes folder in your user
account folder. For information about displaying hidden files and
folders, see “Change the File Explorer display options” in Chapter 5,
“Explore files and folders.”
To remove a theme
In the Apply a theme area of the Themes settings pane, right-click the
theme you want to remove, and then select Delete.
Key points
The Start menu is your gateway to the apps installed on your computer. The
Start menu can occupy all or part of your screen, and can display the app
list and pinned tiles. You can modify the size and content of the Start menu.
If you want to, you can display a full-size version of the Start menu called
the Start screen. The Start screen has two views: Pinned Tiles and All Apps.
The desktop background can display an image, a slideshow of images, or a
solid color. You can choose the accent color that appears on app tiles or
have Windows choose a color that complements the desktop background.
You can optionally choose to apply a shade of the accent color to the Start
menu, taskbar, and Action Center.
You can set the desktop background, accent color, system sounds, and

mouse cursor individually, or by installing a theme from the Store app or
Windows website.
The Lock screen serves as a screen saver and can also display current
information from selected apps. You can display a built-in image, one or
more images of your own, or the Windows Spotlight imagery as the Lock
screen background.
Six of the traditional screen savers, including the popular 3D Text, Bubbles,
and Ribbons options, are still available if you want to configure them to
display over the Lock screen.
 Practice tasks
Before you can complete these practice tasks, you need to copy the book’s
practice files to your computer. The practice files for these tasks are located in
the Win10SBS\Ch02 folder. The introduction includes a complete list of
practice files.
Configure the Start menu
Open the Settings window, and then perform the following tasks:
1. Display the Start menu personalization settings.
2. Turn on the full-size Start screen (or leave it on if it already is).
3. Display the Start screen and note the organization of tiles and tile groups
on the screen.
4. Display the app list on the Start screen, and scroll the list to note how this is
different on the Start screen than on the Start menu.
5. Return to the Start menu personalization settings. Turn off the Recently
Added app list, Most Used app list, and jump lists.
6. Configure the Start menu to display only these folders:
File Explorer
Settings
Documents

Downloads
Pictures
Network
7. Display the Start screen to observe the results of the changes.
8. Return to the Start menu personalization settings. Turn off the full-size Start
screen.
9. Display the Start menu, and drag the corner of the screen until it is at its
minimum size.
10. If a vertical scroll bar appears, scroll down to display the hidden tiles.
11. Return to the Start menu personalization settings, and implement the Start
menu configuration, lists, and folders that you like best.
Set the desktop background and system colors
Open the Settings window, and then perform the following tasks:
1. Display the system accent color personalization settings.
2. Configure the settings so that Windows selects an accent color from the
desktop background.
3. Apply the accent color to the Start menu, taskbar, Action Center, and title
bars.
4. Turn on transparency effects.
5. Display the desktop background personalization settings.
6. Set the desktop background to a solid color of your choice. In the preview
image, note any change in the accent color.
7. Set the desktop background to the Background01 image located in the
practice file folder. In the preview image, note any change in the accent
color.
8. Configure the background settings to display the image in the center of the
screen without resizing it.
9. Minimize all open windows to show the desktop, and observe the change.
Notice that the background color you set in step 6 surrounds the image.
10. Return to the background personalization settings. Configure the

background settings as follows:
Display a slideshow of the images in the practice file folder.
Display the images in a random order, with the image changing every
minute.
Choose the fit option that will display all the images at full-screen size
without affecting the image aspect ratios.
11. Minimize all open windows to show the desktop and observe the change.
12. Expand the Start menu. Notice that the desktop background is visible
through the Start menu and taskbar.
13. Wait for the desktop background to change. Notice that the accent color on
the taskbar and other interface elements changes with the background
image. Locate the source of the accent color for each new background
image.
14. Return to the Settings window. Configure the desktop background and
accent color as you want them.
Customize the Lock screen
Display the Lock Screen settings pane, and then perform the following tasks:
1. Configure the Lock screen to display a slideshow of the images from the
practice file folder.
2. Lock your computer and observe the slideshow. Notice that the picture
layout changes from a single photo to multiple photos.
3. Unlock your computer, and then display the advanced slideshow settings.
Turn on the option to display photos from the Camera Roll folders on your
computer and on OneDrive. Then lock your computer and note any changes
from the previous Lock screen slideshow.
4. Unlock your computer, and then configure the Lock screen to display any
image from the practice file folder. Select the option to display Windows
and Cortana tips.
5. Lock your computer and observe the Lock screen.
6. Unlock your computer, and then configure the Lock screen to display
Windows Spotlight background images.

7. Select one app to display detailed information on the Lock screen, and at
least one app to display quick status information. If you haven’t yet done
so, start and configure each of the selected apps.
8. Lock your computer and observe the Lock screen. Take note of the app
information at the bottom of the screen. If you have the option to do so,
indicate whether you like or dislike the current Windows Spotlight
background.
9. Unlock your computer, and then configure the Lock screen to display the
information you want.
Apply and manage themes
Display the Theme settings pane, and then perform the following tasks:
1. Locate the themes that are installed on your computer.
2. Apply the built-in Flowers theme.
3. Open the Store app. Locate a theme that you like, and install it.
4. Go to the Desktop Themes webpage. Locate a theme that you like, and
install it.
5. Change the system color for the installed theme. Then return to the Themes
pane, and note that the unsaved theme reflects your changes.
6. Save the customized theme as MyCustomTheme.
7. Remove any of the new themes you installed that you don’t want to keep.

Part 2: Apps and files
CHAPTER 3
Work with shortcuts and tiles
CHAPTER 4
Work with apps and notifications
CHAPTER 5
Explore files and folders
CHAPTER 6
Manage folders and files

3. Work with shortcuts and tiles
In this chapter
Create and manage app shortcuts
Manage Start menu tiles
Customize the taskbar
In Chapters 1 and 2, you worked with the Windows user interface rather than
with apps that run on Windows. There are many ways to start the apps that are
installed on your computer. Chapter 4, “Work with apps and notifications,”
discusses some of the common preinstalled Windows 10 apps and how to install
others. This chapter covers configuring the Windows environment to make apps
available where you want them.
When you install an app on your computer, the app and the files that support it
are copied to folders within the Windows system folder structure. You can start
an app by navigating to those files and running the primary app executable file,
but that’s a lot of work. It’s easier to start the app from the Start menu app list or
from a shortcut that you create in the area that’s most convenient to the way you
work: the desktop, taskbar, or Start menu pinned tiles area.
This chapter guides you through procedures related to creating and managing
app shortcuts, managing Start menu tiles, and configuring the taskbar.
Create and manage app shortcuts
Installing an app adds it to the app list on the Start menu, and you can start the
app by locating it in the list and selecting it. If you plan to use the app often, you
can save time by creating a shortcut to the app in a more convenient location.
You can create app shortcuts in these locations:
On the Start menu, where the shortcut is a tile
On the taskbar, where the shortcut is a button
On the desktop, where the shortcut is indicated by an arrow on the icon
In a folder, where the shortcut is indicated by an arrow on the item

Start menu shortcuts
All Start menu tiles are actually shortcuts to files and folders that are stored
elsewhere. You can pin any app to the Start screen. To start an app from the Start
menu shortcut, simply select the tile.
By default, pinning an app to the Start menu creates a Medium tile. Start menu
tiles that link to desktop apps can be Small or Medium; Start menu tiles that link
to Store apps can be Small, Medium, Wide, or Large.
SEE ALSO For information about changing the size and location of
tiles, see “Manage Start menu tiles” later in this chapter. For
information about Store apps and desktop apps, see “Locate and start
apps” in Chapter 4, “Work with apps and notifications.”
Many Store apps are configured to display live tile content (but not all apps that
are configured for it have live tile content available at this time). If a Start menu
tile links to an app that is configured for live tile content, the tile shortcut menu

includes the command Turn Live Tile On or Turn Live Tile Off, depending on
the current setting. You can turn on live tile content for an app at any tile size,
but only Medium, Wide, and Large tiles can display live content.
To create an app shortcut on the Start menu
1. Do either of the following:
Locate the app in the app list on the Start menu.
In File Explorer, navigate to and select the app executable file.
2. On the menu or in File Explorer, right-click the app or the selected
executable file, and then select Pin to Start. (If the command says Unpin
from Start, the app is already pinned to the Start menu.)
To display or hide live content on an app tile
1. Do either of the following:
On the Start menu, right-click the tile.
On a touchscreen device, press and hold the tile until the Unpin and
Options buttons appear on the tile to indicate that it is active for editing.
Then in the lower-right corner of the tile, select the Options (…) button.
2. Select More, and then Turn Live Tile on or Turn Live Tile off.
TIP There might be a short delay after you turn on Live Tile content
while Windows connects to the app source to fetch and then display the
current content.
To remove an app shortcut from the Start menu
In the app list, right-click the app and then select Unpin from Start.
On the Start menu, right-click the app tile, and then select Unpin from
Start.
On a touchscreen device, press and hold the tile until it becomes active for
editing. Then in the upper-right corner of the tile, select the Unpin button.

Touchscreen tile management
If you’re working on a touchscreen device, you can display the
equivalent of the tile shortcut menu commands by pressing and
holding a tile until the Unpin and Options buttons appear.
Selecting the Options (…) button displays the available tile sizes and
live content options for the active tile. Tapping More displays the
available app management commands for the active tile. The
commands available for a tile depend on the app that it links to and
the current state of the tile.
Taskbar shortcuts
Because the taskbar is always available from the desktop, it can be much faster
to access apps, files, and folders from shortcuts that are on the taskbar than from
the Start menu. You can pin any Store app or desktop app to the taskbar. Taskbar
shortcuts look like buttons. To start an app from the taskbar shortcut, simply
select the button. App shortcuts display only icons until the app is active. An
underline appears below the taskbar icon for each open file.

On the taskbar, you can arrange shortcuts and active app buttons by dragging
them into the order you want. You can make all the taskbar buttons smaller at the
same time, but you can’t change the size of individual taskbar buttons.
SEE ALSO For information about changing the size of taskbar buttons,
see “Customize the taskbar” later in this chapter.
To create an app shortcut on the taskbar
1. Do either of the following:
Locate the app in the app list or pinned tiles area on the Start menu.
In File Explorer, navigate to the app’s executable file.
2. Right-click the app, the app tile, or the app executable file, select More, and
then select Pin to taskbar.
Or
1. On a touchscreen device, press and hold the Start menu tile until it becomes
active for editing.
2. In the lower-right corner of the tile, tap the Options button, tap More, and
then tap Pin to taskbar.
IMPORTANT Pinning an app to the taskbar replaces the command Pin

To Taskbar with the command Unpin From Taskbar. You can’t pin two
instances of an app to the taskbar.
To create a taskbar shortcut to a currently running app
On the taskbar, right-click the app button, and then select Pin to taskbar.
To create a taskbar shortcut to a file
Open File Explorer and locate the file. Drag the file to the taskbar. When
the ScreenTip Pin file to <app> appears, release the file to create a taskbar
shortcut to the app, with the file in the Pinned section of the shortcut menu.
With the file open, right-click the taskbar shortcut, locate the file in the
Recent section of the shortcut menu, point to the file, and then select the
Pin to this list button (the thumbtack) that appears.
To move an app shortcut on the taskbar
Drag the taskbar button left or right to its new location.
To remove an app shortcut from the taskbar
Right-click the taskbar button, and then select Unpin from taskbar.
Manage apps from the taskbar
You can start or switch to a pinned or running app by clicking its
taskbar abutton. If you prefer to use a keyboard shortcut, you can
start or switch to any of the first 10 apps in the taskbar button area by
pressing Win+n, where n is a number from 0 through 9 (with 0
representing 10).
When an app is running, a thick underline appears below the app
icon. A color variation on the bar indicates when multiple instances
of an app are running. Pointing to (hovering over) an active taskbar
button displays thumbnails of each instance of the app. You can
switch to a specific app window by selecting its thumbnail. You can
close an app window by pointing to its thumbnail, and then selecting
the Close button (the X) that appears in the upper-right corner.

Right-clicking a taskbar button (or dragging the button up slightly
above the taskbar) displays a jump list and a shortcut menu.
Depending on the app, the jump list displays tasks that are related to
the app or files that were recently opened in that app. (In the case of
a web browser such as Chrome, the jump list displays webpages
opened in the browser.) You can right-click files on the jump list to
display additional commands. The taskbar button shortcut menu
typically displays commands for starting or quitting the app and
pinning or unpinning the app.
You can manually pin items to a jump list by dragging files or

folders of the appropriate type to the taskbar button. For example,
you can drop a Word document on the Word icon, or drop a folder on
the File Explorer icon, to pin the document or folder to the relevant
jump list.
Desktop shortcuts
Traditionally, many desktop app installation processes create app shortcuts on
the desktop. There is no interface to “pin” an app to the desktop, but you can
easily create a desktop shortcut to any app. You can also create shortcuts to
webpages, files, and folders, or save files and folders directly on the desktop.
Items on the desktop are represented by icons, usually of the app that opens
them.
A shortcut is differentiated from an item that is stored directly on the desktop by
an arrow in the lower-left corner of the icon.
By default, desktop icons are created at a Medium size and aligned to a grid that
helps to maintain a bit of order. You can change the icon size to Small or Large.
Unlike the Start menu icons, which are individually sizable, this change affects
all icons on the desktop.

If you want to organize (or disorganize) icons without using the grid, you can
turn off grid alignment, and then drag items to whatever desktop position you
want.
Some people like to organize their active files, folders, and apps on the desktop
so they have everything they need in one place. You can organize content on the
desktop manually, in whatever order you want, or you can have Windows
manage the order for you.

When you turn on the Auto Arrange Icons feature, Windows moves all desktop
icons so they line up from the upper-left corner of the screen in the order (from
top to bottom and then left to right) that you specify on the Sort By submenu.
The desktop content is actually stored in a folder—or rather, in two folders. In
addition to system icons (such as the Recycle Bin), your desktop displays
content from two locations:
Content that is specific to your user account and displayed on only your
desktop is stored in the C:\Users\[user account name]\Desktop folder.

Content that is displayed for all users of the computer is stored in the
C:\Users\Public\Public Desktop folder.
If you want your desktop to appear totally clean, you can hide the desktop icons
without affecting the content of the Desktop folders.
You can open either folder in File Explorer to display a different view of the
shortcuts, folders, and files on the desktop.
To create an app shortcut on the desktop
TIP The first procedure option works only for desktop apps; the second
procedure option works for any app.
1. Display the desktop and minimize any open windows.
2. Open the Start menu. Right-click the app in the app list, or the app tile,
select More, and then select Open file location to open the Start
Menu\Programs folder. This folder contains shortcuts to all the installed
apps that are available from these locations.

IMPORTANT Some built-in apps, such as Calculator, don’t have
Open File Location links, so you have to use the alternative
method to create desktop shortcuts for them.
3. Do either of the following to create the desktop shortcut:
Right-click and drag the shortcut from the Start Menu\Programs folder to
the desktop, and then select Copy here on the menu that appears after
you release the shortcut.
Select the shortcut in the Start Menu\Programs folder, right-click the
selected shortcut, select Send to, and then select Desktop (create
shortcut). Use this method to avoid accidentally removing the shortcut
from the Start menu.
Or
1. Right-click an empty area of the desktop, select New, and then select
Shortcut.
2. In the Create Shortcut dialog box, enter or browse to the location of the
app executable file. Then select Next.
3. Enter a name for the shortcut, and select Finish.
TIP Use the same steps to create app shortcuts in File Explorer
that you do to create app shortcuts on the desktop.
To arrange desktop icons
Drag icons to any location on the desktop to snap them to the nearest grid
location.
If you want to force icons into the grid positions from top to bottom and left

to right, right-click the desktop, select View, and then select Auto arrange
icons.
If you want to permit less-precise arrangements, right-click the desktop,
select View, and then turn off Auto arrange icons and Align icons to grid.
If you want Windows to set the order for you, right-click the desktop, select
Sort by, and then select the order you want: Name, Size, Item type, or
Date modified.
To set the size of desktop icons
Right-click the desktop, select View, and then select Large icons, Medium
icons, or Small icons.
To hide or display desktop icons
Right-click the desktop, select View, and then select Show desktop icons.
To remove an app shortcut from the desktop
Right-click the shortcut, and then select Delete.
IMPORTANT An arrow in the lower-left corner of the icon indicates
that the icon represents a shortcut to a file or folder rather than an actual
file or folder. Deleting a shortcut does not delete the file or folder the
shortcut links to. Deleting a file or folder icon that doesn’t have a
shortcut arrow deletes the file or folder. If you do this accidently, you
can retrieve the file or folder from the Recycle Bin.
Configure desktop system icons
The default desktop displays the Recycle Bin. You can configure the
display of this and four other system icons—Computer, Control
Panel, Network, and your user account folder—in the Desktop Icon
Settings window. If you want to get creative, you can personalize the

system folders by assigning nonstandard icons to them.
To access the desktop icon settings, open the Settings window, select
Personalization, and then Themes. Then in the Related Settings area
of the Themes pane, select Desktop Icon Settings.
Manage Start menu tiles
The right pane of the Start menu displays content in the form of tiles. Each tile is
actually a shortcut to something else—usually an app, but tiles can also link to
other things, such as folders in File Explorer or individual songs in your Groove
Music library. You can pin many kinds of tiles to the Windows 10 Start menu,
including shortcuts to apps, files, folders, web links, contact cards, songs,
movies, and pictures—almost anything you want to get to quickly.

Tiles are square or rectangular and can be set to four different sizes: Small,
Medium, Large, and Wide. All tiles support the Small and Medium sizes. App
tiles also support the Large and Wide sizes, which are most appropriate for Live
tiles that display information (other than the app name and/or icon). (Of course,
you can also use them if you just want a big target.) When you pin an item to the
Start menu, the new app tile defaults to the Medium size and usually appears at
the bottom of the Start menu.
Tiles for some Store apps that provide access to frequently updated information
(such as news, weather, traffic, stock market data, messages, social media
network updates, and calendar events) can display and update content directly on
the Start menu. These are called live tiles. Some apps even permit you to pin
multiple live tiles that display different data to the Start menu. Only Medium,
Wide, and Large tiles display live content; the larger the tile, the more
information it supports.

The content displayed on a live tile can come from an online source, such as a
news service, or from a local source, such your Pictures folder. Live content is
not available for Small tiles, and if the on-screen movement bothers you, you
can turn off the live content for any tile. When live content is off, the tile
displays the app icon and name.
Tiles always align on the Start menu in a grid format. When you place tiles next
to each other, they form a group. Each group has a title bar area in which you
can assign a name to the tile group. You can create additional groups of tiles by
dropping them a bit further away from an existing group. After you create a
group, you can easily move tiles into or out of the group, or move the entire
group of tiles to a different location on the Start menu.

To provide another layer of organization for pinned tiles, the Windows 10 2017
Fall Creators Update introduced tile folders, into which you can insert multiple
tiles; the first nine are visible on a Medium tile (4 on a Small tile, 18 on a Wide
tile, 36 on a Large tile). Opening a tile folder expands it below the tile group that
it’s in, pushing other tile groups out of the way.

You can organize tiles on the Start menu in whatever grouping is most logical
and convenient to you—by type, by purpose, by project, alphabetically—there is
no magic formula that will satisfy everyone. Fortunately, the Start menu content
is easy to customize.
Computer manufacturers place tiles on the Start menu to help you find apps and
tools that you might want to use (for example, a link to the support department
for the computer manufacturer, or to a free app that comes with the computer).
You can remove the tiles you don’t use. Removing tiles does not uninstall apps,
delete folders, or otherwise affect the item that the tile links to. You can still start

apps from the app list or locate folders in File Explorer.
SEE ALSO For information about files and folders, see Chapter 6,
“Manage folders and files.”
IMPORTANT The procedures in this topic pertain to the mechanics of
the Start menu rather than its content. For information about managing
the content of the Start menu, see “Configure the Start menu” in
Chapter 2, “Personalize your working environment.”
To move a pinned tile
Select and hold the tile you want to move, and then drag it to its new
location.
TIP The screen becomes shaded to indicate change when you
move the tile, but until then there is no specific indicator that
you’re editing the screen.
Do the following:
a. On a touchscreen device, tap and hold the tile to activate the Start menu
elements for editing. The screen changes to a shaded color and the tile
group title boxes are visible.

b. Drag the tile to its new location.
c. Move any additional tiles, and then tap an empty area of the Start menu
to return it to its normal state.
To resize a pinned tile
1. Do one of the following:
Right-click the tile, and then select Resize.
Tap and hold the tile, tap the Options button that appears in its lower-
right corner, and then tap Resize.
2. Select the tile size you want (Small, Medium, Large, or Wide).
TIP Moving or resizing a tile might change the layout of the
surrounding tiles.
To add a tile to an existing tile group

Drag the tile to slightly overlap with an existing tile in the group you want
to add it to, and then release it.
To create and name a tile group
1. Drag a tile to an open space above, below, or to the side of an existing
group.
2. When a shaded bar (a blank tile group title bar) appears, release the tile to
create the tile group.
3. Do either of the following:
Point to the area above the tile. When Name group appears, select it to
activate it for editing, and then enter the title you want to assign to the tile
group.
If you create a tile group by tapping and dragging a tile on a touchscreen
device, the tile group title bar is active for editing when you release the
tile. Tap Name group, and then enter the title you want to assign to the
tile group.
To rename a tile group
1. Point to the tile group title, and then select the title bar or the handle that
appears at its right end to activate the title bar for editing.

2. Edit the existing title, or select the X at the right end of the title box to
delete the existing content, and then enter the new title.
3. Press Enter, or select or tap away from the title box to return the Start menu
to its normal state.
To move a tile group
1. Select and hold the tile group title bar, and then drag the group to its new
location. As you drag, the group tiles collapse into the group title bar, and
other groups move to make space for the group you’re dragging.
2. When the group is in the location you want it, release the title bar.
To create and work with tile folders
To create a tile folder, drag a tile onto another tile.
To add a tile to an existing tile folder, drag the tile onto the folder.
To add an app tile to a tile folder, drag the app from the app list to the
folder.
To open or close a tile folder, select it.
To remove a tile from a tile folder, open the folder and then drag the tile
from the folder to the pinned tiles area of the Start menu.
Customize the taskbar
In Chapter 1, “Get started using Windows 10,” you reviewed the functionality
available from the taskbar. This topic discusses the changes you can make to the

taskbar to customize it so that you can work more efficiently.
Change taskbar appearance
As previously mentioned, you can move the taskbar from its default location at
the bottom of the screen to any other edge of the screen. You might find it easier
to access the taskbar when it’s on the side or top of the screen than when it’s at
the bottom of the screen. If you’re working on a small screen, you might also
like to have the additional vertical space that you gain by moving the taskbar to
the left or right side of the screen. Wherever you position the taskbar, the Start
menu expands from the Start button.
When you move the taskbar to the left or right side of the screen, it changes in
the following ways:
The width changes to accommodate the time and date, which are at the
bottom of the vertical taskbar.
The Start button is at the top of the vertical taskbar, and the Show Desktop
button is at the bottom. The Start menu expands from the Start button
location.
The search box changes to a search button. Selecting the search button

expands the usual search pane.
Buttons, icons, and taskbar toolbars rotate to a horizontal orientation.
Regardless of the taskbar location, you can change the height (when horizontal)
or width (when vertical) to accommodate more buttons and toolbars. Other ways
to fit more onto the taskbar include the following:
Switch to “small taskbar buttons.” This change affects not only the size of
the buttons, it also changes the search box to a search button, which
provides significantly more space for buttons and toolbars.
If you don’t use Task View, or use a keyboard shortcut to access it, you can
remove the Task View button from the taskbar. Similarly, if you don’t use
the People bar, you can remove the People button.
TIP If you frequently use the Windows Ink Workspace, the touch
keyboard, or the touchpad—for example, on a Windows 10 tablet—you
can add these buttons to the notification area of the taskbar for easy
access.
By default, you can move and resize the taskbar freely, but if you prefer you can
lock the taskbar so that you don’t accidentally drag the taskbar or its border. You
can make changes to the taskbar only when it’s unlocked.
You manage some taskbar features from the taskbar shortcut menu and others
from the Taskbar pane of the Personalization settings page.
To display the taskbar shortcut menu
Right-click an empty area of the taskbar.

To display the Taskbar pane of the Personalization settings window
Open the Settings window, select Personalization, and then select
Taskbar.
Right-click an empty area of the taskbar, and then select Taskbar settings.


To prevent or allow changes to the taskbar
Display the taskbar shortcut menu, and then select Lock the taskbar. (A
check mark indicates that the option is active.)
Display the Taskbar pane of the Personalization settings page, and then
turn on Lock the taskbar to prevent changes, or turn it off to allow
changes.
To move the taskbar
Drag the taskbar to any edge of the screen.
TIP The movement of the taskbar across the screen might not be
apparent; instead, it might appear to jump from location to
location.
Display the Taskbar pane of the Personalization settings page. Select the
Taskbar location on screen list to expand it, and then select Left, Right,
or Top (or select Bottom to return the taskbar to its default location).
To change the taskbar height
1. Point to the inside edge (nearest to the center of the screen) of the taskbar.
2. When the pointer changes to a double-headed arrow, drag the inside edge of
the taskbar to change its height (or width, when vertical) to the size you
want it. The height or width can be up to 50 percent of the screen height or
width.
To display small taskbar buttons
In the Taskbar pane of the Personalization settings page, turn on Use
small taskbar buttons.
To hide standard taskbar buttons

On the taskbar shortcut menu, select Show Task View button or Show
People button to remove the check mark from the item and hide the button.
To display optional buttons in the notification area
On the taskbar shortcut menu, select Show Windows Ink Workspace
button, Show touch keyboard button, or Show touchpad button.
Change taskbar behavior
You can make a few other changes to the way that the taskbar functions, from
the Taskbar pane of the Personalization settings page.
By default, each app (or each instance of an app) that you open displays a button
on the taskbar. Active app buttons are differentiated from app shortcuts by a
colored bar below the button. By default, multiple buttons for the same app stack
on top of each other so that each app has only one button, and pointing to the
button displays thumbnails of each instance of the app. If you prefer, you can
display individual buttons for each instance of an app, or display individual
buttons until your taskbar is full and then combine them.
If you prefer to not have the taskbar taking up space on your screen, you can
hide it (on any edge of the screen) so that it appears only when you point to it.
This could be convenient if you have a small screen or are simply distracted by
the busyness of the taskbar.
If you find that you accidentally invoke the Peek function when your mouse
pointer wanders into the corner of the screen above the Show Desktop button,
you can turn off that function. Turning off Peek doesn’t affect the Show Desktop
function.
To hide the taskbar when it isn’t active
1. Display the Taskbar pane of the Personalization settings page.
2. Do either or both of the following:
Turn on Automatically hide the taskbar in desktop mode.
Turn on Automatically hide the taskbar in tablet mode.
To change the display of multiple app taskbar buttons
In the Taskbar pane of the Personalization settings page, select the

Combine taskbar buttons list to expand it, and then select one of these
options:
Always, hide labels (the default)
When taskbar is full
Never
To turn the Peek function off or on
In the Taskbar pane of the Personalization settings page, turn off Use
Peek to preview the desktop… to disable the feature, or turn it on to re-
enable it.
At far-right end of the taskbar, right-click the Show desktop button, and
then select Peek at desktop. A check mark next to the option indicates it’s
turned on.
TIP When the toolbar is unlocked, two vertical lines appear to the left
of each taskbar toolbar. You can change the width of a toolbar on the
taskbar by dragging this handle. Depending on the space allocated and
the toolbar configuration, toolbars might display names or icons on the
taskbar or on a menu. If all the toolbar links don’t fit on the taskbar, a
chevron button is available at its right end. Selecting the button displays
a menu of hidden links.
Display and manage toolbars on the taskbar
Windows provides three “toolbars” that you can display on the taskbar to
provide easy access to information that you’d otherwise have to open a separate
app to get to. Toolbars can display names and icons on the taskbar or on a menu.
The three built-in toolbars are:
Address The Address toolbar displays a browser address bar directly on the
taskbar and retains a list of recent entries. You can display websites,
perform web searches, and start apps from this toolbar.

Links The Links toolbar displays information from the same source as your
Internet Explorer Favorites bar. You can add and remove links (to websites,
files, folders, and apps) on either bar to share those changes with the
Favorites bar and Links toolbar on all computers that you sign in to by
using your Microsoft account.
IMPORTANT At the time of this writing, the Links toolbar is
connected to Internet Explorer and not to Microsoft Edge. We
expect that in a future release of Windows, the Links menu will
display favorites from the Microsoft Edge browser, or a shared list
of favorites from both Internet Explorer and Microsoft Edge.
Desktop The Desktop toolbar provides quick access to the storage locations
that are available in the File Explorer Navigation pane and on your desktop.

When you add a toolbar to the taskbar, the toolbar name appears at the left end
of the toolbar, next to the toolbar handle. You can remove the name from the
taskbar to save space.
In addition to displaying the built-in toolbars, you can create custom toolbars. A
custom toolbar points to a folder, which can contain shortcuts to files, apps, and
other folders. You can use this technique to quickly access files for a specific
project, client, or process.
To display or hide a built-in toolbar on the taskbar
On the taskbar shortcut menu, select Toolbars, and then select the toolbar
you want to display or hide. A check mark indicates that a toolbar is on the
taskbar.

To display a custom toolbar on the taskbar
1. Put the files and shortcuts you want to display on the custom toolbar into a
folder.
TIP Because the folder name will appear on the taskbar as the
toolbar name, it’s a good idea to give the folder a short name rather
than a long name.
2. On the taskbar shortcut menu, select Toolbars, and then select New
toolbar.
3. In the New Toolbar – Choose a folder window, browse to and select the
folder you worked with in step 1. Then select the Select Folder button.
To work from the Address toolbar
To display a website in your default browser, enter a URL in the address bar
and then press Enter or select the Go button (the arrow).
To conduct a web search by using the default browser search engine, enter a
search term in the address bar.

To start an installed app, enter the app executable name (for example, calc
to start the Calculator, excel to start Microsoft Excel, or cmd to display the
command prompt window.
To reopen a recent website or app or refresh a recent search, select the
arrow at the right end of the address bar, and then select the entry you want.
To change the width of a taskbar toolbar
Drag the toolbar handle (the double line to the left of the toolbar) to change
the taskbar space allocated to it.
To hide or display the name of a taskbar toolbar
Right-click the toolbar, and then on the extended taskbar shortcut menu,
select Show title.
To hide or display item names on a built-in or custom taskbar toolbar
Right-click the toolbar, and then on the extended taskbar shortcut menu,
select Show Text.
To remove a toolbar from the taskbar
On the taskbar shortcut menu, point to Toolbars, and then select the toolbar
you want to remove).
Right-click the toolbar, and then on the extended taskbar shortcut menu,
select Close toolbar.
TIP Removing a custom toolbar from the taskbar removes that
folder from the taskbar and from the Toolbars list. The folder
remains in File Explorer, and you can redisplay it as a toolbar if
you want to.
Key points

You can create app shortcuts as tiles pinned to the Start menu, buttons
pinned to the taskbar, or icons pinned to the desktop.
You can organize pinned tiles on the Start menu in named tile groups and in
tile folders.
You can dock the taskbar on any edge of the screen, change the height of
the taskbar and the size of the taskbar icons, and add and remove standard
taskbar buttons to suit your needs. You can also change the way the taskbar
shows multiple taskbar buttons from the same app.
 Practice tasks
Before you can complete these practice tasks, you need to copy the book’s
practice files to your computer. The practice files for these tasks are located in
the Win10SBS\Ch03 folder. The introduction includes a complete list of
practice files.
Create and manage app shortcuts
Perform the following tasks:
1. In the app list, identify two apps that are not yet pinned to the Start menu or
to the taskbar.
2. Pin the first app to the Start menu, and then locate its Start menu tile.
Right-click the tile, and then examine the shortcut menu to determine
whether the app supports live tile content. Then start the first app from the
Start menu.
3. Pin the second app to the taskbar, and then locate its taskbar button. Right-
click the taskbar button to examine the shortcut menu options for the app.
Then start the app from the taskbar.
4. On the taskbar, locate the button of the first app. Move the button to the
right end of the taskbar button area. Then pin the running app to the taskbar.
5. From the app list, open the Start Menu\Programs folder. From the folder,
create a desktop shortcut to any app.
6. Experiment with arranging and ordering the icons on your desktop.

7. Open the Desktop folder associated with your user account, and locate the
shortcut you created in step 5. Start the app from the Desktop folder.
8. Exit all the running apps, and delete any of the shortcuts you created in this
exercise that you think you won’t use in the future.
Manage Start menu tiles
Perform the following tasks:
1. Display the Start menu, and observe the configuration of the existing tiles.
2. Move a Start menu tile from an existing tile group and use it to create a new
tile group. Set the tile size to the largest size it supports.
3. Move another tile into the new group, and set its size to Small.
4. Name the new tile group Practice Tiles.
5. Move the Practice Tiles group to the upper-left corner of the Start menu.
6. Rename the Practice Tiles group as Favorite Apps.
7. Arrange and resize the tiles on your Start menu to suit the way you work.
Customize the taskbar
Perform the following tasks:
1. Check whether the taskbar is locked. If it is locked, unlock it.
2. Move the taskbar to the left edge of the screen.
3. Configure the taskbar to display small buttons and to hide it when it isn’t
active.
4. When the taskbar is hidden, point to the edge of the screen to display it.
Then stretch it to twice its current width.
5. Hide the Task View button.
6. Move the taskbar to the top of the window.
7. Display the Desktop toolbar on the taskbar.
8. Hide the title and text of the Desktop toolbar.
9. Resize the Desktop toolbar so that three icons appear on the taskbar and the

rest are available on a menu at the right end of the toolbar.
10. Configure the taskbar to display large buttons, and to never combine
taskbar buttons.
11. Create a custom toolbar that links to the Ch03 practice file folder. From the
toolbar, open the Image01 file in your default photo app.
12. From the Ch03 toolbar, open the Image03 file. Verify that a new taskbar
button appears for the photo app as you open each image.
13. Close the Desktop toolbar, and remove the custom Ch03 toolbar from the
taskbar.
14. Configure the taskbar content the way you want it, and then lock the
taskbar.

4. Work with apps and notifications
In this chapter
Locate and start apps
Explore built-in apps
Install Store apps
Manage app notifications
The Windows 10 operating system provides the interface through which you
communicate with your computer. When you do or create something on your
computer, you’re using software applications, or apps, that runs on Windows to
accomplish that task.
There are many types of apps, and you can get them from many sources.
Wherever you get your apps, after you install them on your Windows 10
computer, you can run them and manage access to them in the same ways.
Many apps communicate status, new activity, and other information to you in the
form of notifications. These might pop up in the corner of your screen—to notify
you of a message that has arrived or an update that is available. When these pop-
up windows appear (they are sometimes called pop-ups or toast because they
pop up like a piece of toast from a toaster), you can select them to open or
dismiss them. In Windows 10, recent notifications are available from the Action
Center that opens from the notification area of the taskbar.
This chapter guides you through procedures related to locating and starting
installed apps, exploring built-in apps and accessories, installing apps from the
Windows Store, and managing app notifications.
Locate and start apps
At the time of this writing, software programs that install components on a
computer or mobile device that runs Windows are divided into two groups:
desktop apps and Store apps. Store apps are those that you install on your
Windows 10 device from the Windows Store, which is called simply Store.
(Somewhat confusingly, Store itself is an app.) In general, Store apps have a
smaller installation footprint than desktop apps, and aren’t as powerful as

desktop apps.
When you purchase a new computer, it’s likely that the computer will have a
variety of apps installed on it by the computer manufacturer. These apps
generally fall into the following categories:
Apps provided by Microsoft with the Windows operating system. These are
installed with Windows 10 regardless of whether you upgrade to this
version of the operating system or have a clean installation.
Apps that are specific to the management of the hardware elements of your
computer, such as a touchpad or network adapter. These are usually related
to hardware support and firmware update functions.
Free full or trial versions of apps. Software companies often allow
computer manufacturers to provide full or limited-use versions of apps with
their computers as a way to add value to the package. You’re usually
required to register your information with the software company to use the
app, and they can then offer you updates and upgrades over time. This is a
win-win for the hardware and software manufacturers, and sometimes for
you.
You can start an app by selecting it in the app list on the Start menu, or by
selecting a Start menu, desktop, or taskbar shortcut to the app.
SEE ALSO For more information about app shortcuts, see “Create and
manage app shortcuts” in Chapter 3, “Work with shortcuts and tiles.”
The app list provides access to most of the apps and tools that are installed on
your computer. These include apps that are installed as part of Windows 10, by
the computer manufacturer, and by you. The app list is integrated into the Start
menu.


It is also an alternative view on the full-size Start screen.
The app list on the Start menu provides an alphabetical listing of apps, separated
by index letters. You can scroll through the menu manually or select any index
letter to display a menu from which you can go directly to recently added apps
(represented by a clock); apps with names that begin with a symbol (represented
by an ampersand), a number, or a specific letter; or apps with names that begin
with characters that aren’t in the alphabetical index (represented by a globe).
When an index letter has no menu entries, the letter is dimmed. This is a nice
improvement over the All Programs menu that was available in earlier versions
of Windows.

Most apps in the app list are in order by app name, but some are in folders and
therefore don’t appear on the menu where you might expect them to.

TIP As software development models and installation footprints have
changed, so has terminology. At one time, there were only software
applications, which were called programs. With the development of
small-footprint mobile technology came apps. Over time, different types
of apps were referred to as desktop apps, Windows apps, modern apps,
gadgets, and other terms. In this book, unless there’s a specific reason to
differentiate among app types, we simply refer to programs in both
categories as apps.
This is one reason why it’s almost always faster to locate an app by entering the
first few letters of its name in the search box, and selecting it from the search
results list.

IMPORTANT Many apps and services start automatically when
Windows starts. This can be very helpful, but it can also add
unnecessary overhead to your computer’s startup tasks, and slow down
the process. You can identify and disable apps that start automatically.
For more information, see “Manage app startup” in Chapter 14, “Work
more efficiently.”
To display the app list
Open the Start menu.
Open the full-size Start screen and then select the All apps button.
TIP You can navigate through the Start menu by pressing the
arrow keys.
To scroll the app list to apps beginning with a specific letter
1. In the app list, select any index letter to display the alphanumeric index.
2. In the index, select any letter or symbol to jump to those entries on the
menu.
TIP The clock symbol represents recently installed apps. The
ampersand represents numbers and symbols. The globe symbol
represents international apps (with names that begin with
characters that aren’t in the alphabetical index).
To start an app
In the app list, select the app name.
On the Start screen, select the app tile.

On the taskbar, select the app button.
Enter the app name in the taskbar search box. In the search results, select
the app name, or select the Apps heading and then select the app name in
the filtered results pane.
To start a second instance of a running app
On the taskbar, right-click the button and then select the app name.
TIP On a touchscreen device, select and release instead of right-
clicking. For more information about touchscreen interaction, see
the appendix “Keyboard shortcuts and touchscreen tips.”
TIP If you experience problems with a desktop app, it might be
necessary to run the app with elevated permissions so you can resolve
the issue. To do so, right-click the app, select More, and then select Run
As Administrator. The Run As Administrator command is available
only for desktop apps. It is not available for Store apps.
Explore built-in apps
Windows 10 includes many fun and functional apps—for example, the Alarms &
Clock app, which includes a world time map, timer, and stopwatch. Some of
these apps are part of Windows and others are powered by MSN or Bing. It is
not the purpose of this book to teach you how to use those apps. We do preview
some of the more useful apps and work with them in the practice tasks, but you
should explore them further on your own.

Productivity and information management apps
The many and varied Microsoft apps that you can use on a day-to-day basis to
get things done have been brought together under the Windows umbrella.
Although they have simple names and are free, they’re quite fully featured and
updated on a regular basis. These apps include Alarms & Clock, Calculator,
Calendar, Camera, Cortana, Food & Drink, Groove Music, Health & Fitness,
Mail, and Maps.
Other apps that fall loosely into the productivity category but have more
specialized purposes include Scan and Voice Recorder.
The apps draw information from many sources and are designed to be useful
both on your desktop and on the go. Many of them coordinate across the devices
that you sign in to by using your Microsoft account.

The People bar was introduced as a default part of the Windows 10 experience in
the Fall 2017 Creators Update. From the People bar, you can pin frequent
contacts to the taskbar. You can easily perform the following tasks after pinning
a contact:

Start an email message, instant message, call, or video call from the
contact’s taskbar button, so you don’t have to go through an app to initiate a
conversation.
Share a file by dragging it to the contact’s taskbar button (and then selecting
the app you want to use for sharing, if multiple apps support sharing that
type of file).
Display contact information in the People app and collate information from
multiple apps, including Mail, People, Outlook, and Skype.
Display a list of recent communications with the contact.

Web browsers
Microsoft Edge and Internet Explorer are both installed with Windows 10.

Microsoft Edge, which is new in Windows 10, is now the preferred browser.
This browser is discussed in detail in Chapter 10, “Safely and efficiently browse
the internet.”
Media management apps
The Movies & TV and Groove Music apps provide access to online media. The
branding of the site behind these apps has changed several times over the years.
Movies & TV provides access to video content you’ve purchased or rented from
the Store or from one of Microsoft’s earlier video outlets, such as Xbox, and to
video files stored on your computer or on a local or online storage location.
Similarly, Groove Music provides access to music that you own or have licensed
the rights to through the Store or one of its predecessors (Xbox Music and
Zune). You can configure these apps to link to multiple media storage locations.
Windows 10 also includes Windows Media Player, which has been around for
quite a long time now. You can use this app to play and manage media files, and
to manage the transfer of media to discs. It doesn’t interact directly with the
Store, but it’s a dependable media manager.
If your computer or device has a built-in camera, you can take pictures by using
the Camera app.

The Photos app is a convenient and easy-to-use app in which you can efficiently
manage and enhance pictures. The app tracks pictures stored in multiple
locations (including your Microsoft OneDrive storage) and automatically
catalogs photos by date. You can organize photos in albums, and edit and
enhance them in various ways, and share them through apps that provide that
functionality. The Photos app also provides a shortcut to setting a photo as your
desktop background or Lock screen image.
Live information apps
The information apps are frequently featured on Start screen tiles in new or
updated installations of Windows. They all have Live Tile functionality,
although they might not show anything specific or pertinent until you configure
them. When their Live Tiles are turned on (as they are by default), these apps
can provide interesting and timely updates about things that are happening in the
world around you, courtesy of Bing or MSN. The apps include Money, News,
Sports, and Weather.
TIP Having the latest headlines constantly available can be quite
distracting. If you don’t want to see the headlines, but still want to have
easy access to the information, you can turn off the Live Tile content for
individual apps.
The information apps provide general information but also allow you to identify
information that is specific to you and pin that information to the Start screen.
For example, you can track a specific stock in Money, pin a specific person’s
contact information in People, select a representative picture in Photos, or select
a specific location in Weather.
Accessories
Along with the shiny new Store apps, Windows 10 comes with several useful
desktop apps that have been around for a long time and perform a lot of useful
functions. (For that reason, they’re frequently referred to as tools or utilities.)
These apps (and others) are available from the Windows Accessories folder in
the app list on the Start menu:

Math Input Panel You can use Math Input Panel, which was originally
designed for tablet PC users, to convert simple and complex mathematic
equations from touchscreen input to text.
Notepad You can use this simple text editor to edit unformatted documents
or HTML files.
Paint 3D You can use this exciting new graphics app (which replaces the
traditional Paint app) to create and edit three-dimensional images.
Quick Assist You can use this app to share control of your computer with
another person, or take control of another person’s computer (with his or
her explicit approval) for the purpose of providing technical support.
Snipping Tool You can use this tool to capture an image of a screen area
and then annotate it with handwritten notes, save it as a .gif, .jpg, .mht, or
.png file, and send it by email.
Windows Fax and Scan You can use this desktop app to send and receive
faxes through an analog phone line and a modem, or through a fax server. If
a scanner is connected to your computer, you can also use Windows Fax
And Scan to scan text documents and graphics to your computer as digital
files that you can then send as faxes or email message attachments. The
Scan app that also comes with Windows 10 is a more modern Store app that
does the same thing.
WordPad You can use this word-processing app to work with documents
that include rich text formatting and character and paragraph styles.
TIP The Sticky Notes app that was available as a Windows accessory in
earlier releases of Windows is now available to install from the Store.
You can use this app to attach electronic notes to your computer desktop
in the same way you’d stick the paper version of a sticky note to your
physical desktop.
Other tried and true accessories include Character Map, Remote Desktop
Connection, Steps Recorder, and XPS Viewer. New accessories include 3D
Builder and Print 3D, which support Paint 3D.

TIP Like the Portable Document Format (PDF), the XML Paper
Specification (XPS) format allows a file to be saved in such a way that
it can be viewed but not changed without the use of special software.
Windows 10 comes with the XPS Viewer, in which you can view XPS
files, and with the software that is required to create XPS files from any
app you can print from. Simply open the file in its originating app,
display the Print dialog box, specify the Microsoft XPS Document
Writer as the printer, and select Print. When prompted, save the file with
the name and in the location you want.
Tools for geeks
Experienced computer users who want to be able to run apps and manage their
computers in traditional ways might find the following tools useful:
Windows PowerShell With a text-based interface similar to that of
Command Prompt, Windows PowerShell provides command-line tools that
can be used to automate administrative tasks. Windows 10 also includes
PowerShell ISE (Integrated Scripting Environment), which substantially
extends the Windows PowerShell user interface.
Command Prompt The Windows 10 Command Prompt (cmd.exe) is the
latest in a progression of command-line interpreters in the tradition of MS-
DOS and command.com. You can use it to run many DOS and Windows
command-line tools. Windows 10 has enhanced the user interface in a
number of ways, including the ability to use standard keyboard shortcuts to
copy and paste text.
Install Store apps
Windows 10 works across multiple form factors (desktop, laptop, tablet, and
phone), which has two notable effects. First, the simplified Windows user
interface adapts gracefully to different screen sizes; and second, developers can
more easily create (and support) apps that provide the same user experience on
multiple devices. As the relentless rush to become constantly connected, more
mobile, and less tied to desktop computers continues, these changes benefit both

the software companies and the software users.
You can install software on a Windows 10 computer from multiple locations. In
the past, the most common installation source was a CD or DVD, but software
distribution has rapidly moved toward an online installation model. You can
purchase or subscribe to software and install it on your computer or device
immediately.
Thousands of apps (and games, music, movies, and television programs) that are
specifically designed and optimized for use on Windows 10 are available from
the Store, many for free. You can also purchase and install apps from websites or
use the old-fashioned method and install them from CDs or DVDs.
Shop in the Store
The Store was first introduced in Windows 8. It has been substantially updated in
Windows 10 and changes frequently. This chapter includes some images for
guidance, but it’s quite possible that by the time you read this book, the Store
interface will be different from what’s depicted in this book. This section gives
an overview of the Store and describes Store functionality that we think is likely
to stay in place over time.
You access the Store by starting the Store app, which is installed by default and
can’t be uninstalled (though it can be unpinned from your Start menu if you
don’t want it there).

From the home page of the Store, you can search for specific apps, search by
category, or browse through collections of apps such as the most popular free or
paid apps or games, new music or movies, top-selling television shows, or
various collections of apps that are related by a common feature (such as music,
zombies, or productivity).
If you know the app, or the type of app, that you’re looking for, the simplest
method of finding it is to enter the name or descriptive information into the
search box located at the top of the Store window. Generally, the more text you
enter into the search box, the more you limit the search results.
TIP At the time of this writing, the Store search engine doesn’t support
Boolean search restrictions such as AND, OR, or wildcards.
Regardless of your choice of navigation method, the Store presents consistent
information, including app tile, name, rating, and price for each app.

Most Windows apps are classified as Free. Some app developers accept
donations. Some apps are free only for a trial period, or require that you
purchase an upgrade or accompanying service to unlock the really useful
functionality. Because there are variations of “free,” it’s a good idea to read the
details before you actually install an app. You can select any app tile for more
information.
Some of the useful details provided for apps in the Store include these:
Screenshots of the app user interface
Ratings and reviews that can be filtered by device type
Feature lists
The publisher’s name, website, support site, and privacy policy
Hardware and storage space requirements
Category and age rating

Supported processors and languages
The access permissions the app requires, which might include permission to
use your location, access your internet connection, access your local
network, act as a server, read data from other apps, use your device’s
camera, record audio, and more
To start the Store app
On the taskbar, select the Store icon.
On the Start menu, select the Store tile.
On the Start menu, in the app list, select any index letter, and then select S.
In the list of apps that have names beginning with S, select Store.
Manage your Store account and settings
The Store is linked to your Microsoft account, so you can access your purchased
apps on any device that you sign in to by using that account. Information about
business that you’ve transacted when signed in to a site or service with that
account is stored with your account information. Transactions include those for
free and paid apps, services, and subscriptions through entities such as the Store
app, the online Microsoft Store, Xbox Live, Groove Music, Bing Rewards,
Office 365, and OneDrive.
You can manage your Store settings from within the Store app, and you can also
link from the Store account menu directly to specific areas of your online
Microsoft account information.
IMPORTANT To use the Store, you must be signed in with a Microsoft
account, or your local user account must be associated with a Microsoft
account.
The Store settings you can configure at the time of this writing are whether to:
Automatically update apps.
Activate Live Tiles.

Run limited-license games and apps offline.
Require a password for app purchases.
The Settings window in the Store is similar to the pages of the Settings window
in Windows 10. A toggle button controls each of the settings.
TIP When you narrow the Store app window, a menu button appears in
the upper-left corner. Selecting the menu button displays all the menu
items that usually appear on the Store menu bar and all the items that
usually appear on the Store account menu.
Selecting any link other than Downloads And Updates, Settings, My Library, or
Send Feedback on the Store account menu starts or opens your default browser
and displays information from your Microsoft account. You must sign in to your
account (if you haven’t already) and reconfirm your credentials when accessing
pages that contain financial information. The following table describes the
actions you can take from these pages that are relevant to Store purchases.
Menu
item
(page)
Description
Redeem a
code
Enter a gift card number or promotional code to add credit to your
Microsoft account. If your Microsoft account has a credit balance,
Store purchases use the credit first and then charge only the
difference to your selected payment option.
View
account
Review recent purchases and your devices. Browse from here to any
other account information.
Payment
options
Add, edit, and remove payment options that are linked to your
account. Valid forms of payment include credit cards (Visa,
MasterCard, American Express, and Discover), debit cards, direct
bank account debit, PayPal accounts, physical and digital gift cards,
and Microsoft account credit that is added from a Bitcoin digital
wallet.

You can remove only payment options that aren’t associated with an
active subscription. (If you want to remove a payment option that’s
assigned to a subscription, you must first assign a different form of
payment to the subscription.)
PurchasedDisplay the date, description, form of payment, and amount for
transactions that are associated with your Microsoft account.
SEE ALSO For more information about Microsoft accounts, see the
sidebar “Use a Microsoft account or local account” in Chapter 1, “Get
started using Windows 10.”
You can go directly to a specific page of your account information from the
Store account menu, or navigate among the pages within the browser window.
When you install an app or game from the Store on any Windows 10 device, you
own that app and can install it on up to 10 devices. If you want to install the
same app on another device, you can locate the app in your list of apps and
install it from there.
To access your Microsoft account settings from the Store
On the Store menu bar, select the See more button (…), and then do any of
the following:
To display the home page of your Microsoft account, select View
account.
To display the Payment Options page, select Payment options.
To display the Purchase History page, select Purchased.
To display the gift card/promotional code–entry interface, select Redeem
a code.
TIP All these links display a page of the Microsoft account

management website, and you can move to any other page of the
website from there.
Install, reinstall, and uninstall apps
Most apps are free. When you purchase an app that isn’t free and doesn’t include
a free trial, you select a payment method in the Payment & Billing section of
your Microsoft account. Most require only a one-time payment, but some are
managed on a subscription basis, and until you cancel the subscription, the
payment option that you select is charged each month.
The Store tracks all the apps, games, music, movies, and television episodes that
you purchase. From your library, you can display information about the items
you’ve purchased, and you can install, reinstall, and share those items.

The My Library page displays recent purchases that you made when signed in
with your Microsoft account, on any device, in order from most recent to least
recent. Selecting the Show All link adjacent to any category heading displays all
the items of that type that are installed on any device that is associated with your
Microsoft account. Depending on your installation history, the entries on your
My Library page might be divided into sections that are titled “Works on this
device” and “Doesn’t work on this device.” For example, when you’re in the

Store on your Windows 10 computer, Windows phone apps that were developed
for versions of Windows Mobile earlier than Windows 10 appear in the “Doesn’t
work” list because they won’t run on your Windows 10 computer.
You can start (launch) an app or game from your library if it’s already installed
on your computer. Apps and games that work on your Windows 10 computer
and aren’t already installed on it have an Install icon on the right side.
When you select the icon, the Store app checks your current installations to
make sure that you haven’t exceeded the 10-device limit. It then assigns one of
your 10 device licenses to the app, downloads the app, and installs it. During that
process, the app appears on the Downloads And Updates page, which is an
interim staging location for apps and updates that are pending installation on
your computer.
To install an app or game for the first time
1. In the Store, search for or browse to the app or game you want to install.
2. Select the app or game thumbnail to display its information page.
3. On the information page, below the description, select the button labeled
either Free or with the price of the app or game.
4. If you selected an app or game that requires a purchase, enter your
Microsoft account password when prompted to do so. Then select a
payment option and approve the purchase to install the app and add it to the
app list.

By default, Store apps automatically download and install updates. If you would
prefer to approve updates, you can turn off the automatic update option and
manage the updates from this page. When an app or update is ready for
installation, the installation icon appears on the Store menu bar, next to your user
account icon.
To display your purchased and installed apps and games
1. On the Store menu bar, select the See more button (...), and then select My
Library.
2. By default, the My Library pane displays recently installed apps and games.
To display all apps or games, do either of the following:
Select the Show All link to the right of the Apps heading to display the
Your Apps pane.
Select the Show All link to the right of the Games heading to display the
Your Games pane.
To install a purchased app or game on a different computer

1. On the computer where you want to install the app or game, start the Store
app.
2. On the Store menu bar, select the See more button (...), and then select My
Library.
3. If the app or game you want to install doesn’t appear in this pane, display
the Your Apps or Your Games pane.
4. Locate the app or game, and select the Install icon on the right side of its
entry.
IMPORTANT If there is no Install icon, then the app is already
installed on or incompatible with the current device.
You can monitor the installation process from the Downloads And Updates
pane.
To manage downloads and updates
1. On the Store menu bar, select the See more button (…), and then select
Downloads and updates.
2. In the Queue area of the Downloads and Updates pane, do any of the
following:
Select the Get updates button to search for any available updates that
haven’t yet been registered on your computer.
Select an available update to download and install it.
Select the Pause or Restart button near the right end of an in-process
update to pause or restart the process.
Select the Close button at the right end of an in-process update to remove
the update from the queue.
To turn off automatic app updates
1. Start the Store app.

2. On the menu bar, select the See more button (…), and then Settings to
display the Settings pane for the Store app.
3. In the Settings pane, turn off Update apps automatically to immediately
implement the change.
To uninstall a Store app
1. Open the Start menu, and locate the app in the app list.
2. Right-click the app, and then select Uninstall.
IMPORTANT Some apps (such as Calculator, Calendar, and
Camera) can’t be uninstalled, and the Uninstall option doesn’t
appear on the shortcut menu.
Manage app notifications
A notification is a short message that is generated when an event happens in an
installed app. Not all apps generate notifications; the app developer determines
whether notifications will be issued and for which events.
When an event issues a notification, it might play a sound and briefly display a
banner in the lower-right corner of your screen. You can point to the notification
banner to keep it visible, select the banner to display pertinent information (if
available) in the app that generated it, or select the Close button that appears in
its upper-right corner to dismiss it. The notification is also stored in the Action
Center.

You might or might not notice notifications when they appear, but the Action
Center icon on the taskbar changes to indicate that you have unread
notifications, and the number of unread notifications appears in a circle in the
lower-right corner of the icon. You can open the Action Center to display and
process the notifications.
SEE ALSO For more information about the Action Center, see
“Explore the desktop and taskbar” in Chapter 1, “Get started using
Windows 10.”
You manage these three aspects of notifications in the Notifications & Actions
pane of the Settings window:
The general behavior of notifications
Which apps generate notifications
The specific types of notifications each app generates
You manage the general behavior of notifications in the Notifications section of

the Notifications & Actions pane. In this section, you can turn on or off the
display of Windows system notifications and of app notifications; the display of
notifications, alarms, reminders, and incoming calls on the Lock screen; and
whether Windows automatically hides notifications when you’re sharing your
screen in an online presentation.
After the notification settings, there is a list of all the apps installed on the
computer that are configured to generate notifications. You can turn notifications

on or off for individual apps.
You can turn notifications on or off for each individual app. Selecting an app
name takes you to a page of notification settings specific to the app.
TIP If you leave Notifications turned on and turn off banners and
sounds, the app generates notifications and delivers them to the Action

Center for you to review at your leisure. You can also add a few apps to
the Lock screen, and they will show very basic notifications. For more
information about this, see “Customize the Lock screen” in Chapter 2,
“Personalize your working environment.”

You can temporarily disable all banners and sounds by using the Quiet Hours
feature. When Quiet Hours is turned on, the Action Center icon includes a
crescent moon to indicate that notifications are not active.

IMPORTANT When the Quiet Hours feature first debuted, you could
configure it to turn on and off automatically at specific times so you
wouldn’t be disturbed by notifications from a Windows 10 computer or
device while sleeping. At the time of this writing, the Quiet Hours
options have been reduced to On and Off, so it’s basically just a quick
way to turn off notifications.
Notifications are still available in the Action Center when Quiet Hours is turned
on. The Action Center icon changes to a filled white icon when notifications are
available.
To open the Action Center
In the notification area of the taskbar, select the Action Center icon.
Press Win+A.
To limit system notifications
1. In the Settings window, select System, and then select Notifications &
actions.
2. In the Notifications area of the Notifications & actions pane, turn off
Show me the Windows welcome experience… and Get tips, tricks, and
suggestions as you use Windows.
To turn off all notifications for an app
1. Display the Notifications & actions settings pane.
2. In the Get notifications from these senders list, locate the app, and then
select the toggle button to turn it off.
To turn off banners or audio notifications for an app

1. Display the Notifications & actions settings pane.
2. In the Get notifications from these senders list, select the app that you
want to configure notifications for.
3. In the pane that is specific to the app, do either of the following:
To turn off notification banners, turn off Show notification banners.
To turn off audio notifications, turn off Play a sound when a notification
arrives.
4. If the app supports Group Notifications (synchronized notifications across
devices), this section appears separately near the bottom of the pane. You
can turn on or off each device in the list.
5. In the upper-left corner of the pane, select the Back arrow to return to the
app list and check the settings.
To temporarily turn off banner and audio notifications
In the notification area of the taskbar, right-click the Action Center icon,
and then select Turn on quiet hours.
Open the Action Center, expand the Quick actions section if necessary, and
then select the Quiet Hours button.
Key points
Installing a Store app or desktop app on your Windows 10 computer makes
it available in the app list on the Start menu. You can start the app from the
app list or from a shortcut on the Start menu, taskbar, or desktop.
Several common productivity and information management apps and tools
are installed with Windows 10. You can install additional apps from the
Store, from online sources, or from external installation media.
The installation routines for some apps configure them to start

automatically when you sign in to Windows. A list of these apps is available
for review and management from the Startup tab of Task Manager. You can
review the memory resource impact of each app and choose whether to
permit it to start automatically.
Many apps display notifications when specific events occur. You can
review a list of these apps and choose whether to permit the apps to display
audio, banner, and group notifications. To temporarily turn off all
notifications, turn on the Quiet Hours feature.
 Practice tasks
No practice files are necessary to complete the practice tasks in this chapter.
Locate and start apps
Perform the following tasks:
1. Open the Start menu or Start screen and display the app list.
2. Manually scroll the list to display apps that begin with the letter G. Along
the way, notice the apps that are installed on your computer.
3. Display the alphabetic index of the app list. From the index, jump to the
apps that begin with the letter M.
4. From the app list, start the Maps app.
5. In the taskbar search box, enter weather. Locate and start the Weather app.
6. Leave both apps running for the next task.
Explore built-in apps
Start the Maps and Weather apps, and then perform the following tasks:
1. Switch to the Maps app.
2. Enter your address in the search box. If the app locates an address match,
select the address to display it on the map.
3. On the button bar in the right pane, select the Map views button to display

the available views of the location.
4. Display each of the available views of the map. Experiment with zooming
in and out in each view, and note the details that are available in each view.
5. Switch to the Weather app. In the search box, enter the name of the nearest
large city to you. Experiment to find out what types of information are
available in this app.
6. In the app list, scroll or jump to the W section. Open and browse the
contents of the folders in that section to familiarize yourself with the apps,
accessories, and tools that are available.
7. Exit all the running apps.
Install Store apps
Perform the following tasks:
1. Start the Store app.
2. Locate a free app that interests you, and install it. Then locate another free

app that you don’t want to keep and install that, too.
3. Display your library of recent apps and games, and then display the list of
apps associated with your account.
4. In the Your Apps pane, look for an app that has an Install icon. If you find
one, install the app on your computer.
5. From the Store, display your Microsoft account information. Locate your
list of purchases and identify the apps you installed in steps 2 and 4.
6. If you’ve had a Microsoft account for a while, identify the first year for
which your account has a record of transactions.
7. In the app list, locate the apps that you installed in step 2. (Hint: If you
display the Recently Added section on the Start menu, it will be easy to find
the new apps.)
8. Uninstall one or both of the apps.
Manage app notifications
Perform the following tasks:
1. Open the Action Center and examine any current notifications.
2. In the Settings window, on the System settings page, display the
Notifications & actions pane. Review your current notification settings.
3. Review the list of apps installed on your computer that can generate
notifications.
4. Display the notification options for the Calendar app. Turn off audio
notifications for Calendar. Then return to the list of apps and note the
change.
5. Review and modify the notification settings to meet your needs.
6. Turn on the Quiet Hours feature and note that the Action Center icon
changes. Then turn off Quiet Hours.

5. Explore files and folders
In this chapter
Understand files, folders, and libraries
Get to know File Explorer
Change the File Explorer display options
Find specific files
You view all the drives, folders, and files that are stored on your computer and
on storage drives it is connected to through a network or over the internet, in File
Explorer. File Explorer can display the contents of a folder, a library of folders,
or a virtual collection of items (such as the Quick Access list).
To simplify the way that you work with files, Windows presents files in File
Explorer as though the files are organized in a hierarchical storage system of
folders and subfolders (folders within folders). In reality, files are stored on the
computer’s hard drive and in other locations (such as Microsoft OneDrive)
wherever they fit, and the storage structure that File Explorer displays is only a
series of pointers to the files. This provides you with easy access to files while
still maintaining an organizational system.
You can organize files in folders and create virtual libraries of folders so that you
can access files in multiple ways. If you forget where you stored a file, you can
use the simple yet powerful search features of Windows 10 to quickly locate
files and other information on your computer based on the file name, content, or
type.
This chapter guides you through procedures related to getting to know File
Explorer, changing the File Explorer display options, and searching for files.
Understand files, folders, and libraries
There are many different types of files, but they all fall into these two basic
categories:
Files used or created by apps These include executable files (such as the
Microsoft Office app files) and dynamic-link libraries (DLLs) (files used by

apps to provide functionality). Some of these files might be hidden (not
shown in a standard folder window view) to protect them from being
inadvertently changed or deleted.
TIP By default, you can’t display, select, or delete hidden system
files or the folder structure they’re stored in. You can choose to
display and work with other hidden files, folders, and drives by
selecting that option in the Folder Options dialog box, which is
discussed in “Change the File Explorer display options” later in
this chapter.
Files created by you These include documents, worksheets, graphics, text
files, presentations, audio clips, video clips, and other things that you can
open, look at, and change by using one or more apps.
The files that are installed with an app and those it creates for its own use are
organized the way the app expects to find them, and you shouldn’t move or
remove them. However, you have complete control of the organization of the
files you create (such as documents and worksheets), and knowing how to
manage these files is essential if you want to be able to use your computer
efficiently.
Folders
As with files, there are also many different types of folders, but they fall
generally into two categories: folders created by Windows or apps and folders
created by you to organize your files. Creating folders is covered in “Create and
rename folders and files” in Chapter 6, “Manage folders and files.”
When Windows 10 was installed on your computer, it created system folders,
including these:
Program Files folder Many apps install the files they need in subfolders of
the Program Files folder. You might have the option to choose a different
folder, but there’s rarely a reason to do so. After you install an app, you
shouldn’t move, copy, rename, or delete its folders and files; if you do, you

might not be able to run or uninstall the app.
TIP There are a few valid reasons for deleting app system files,
such as deleting the Normal.dot file to reset the Microsoft Word
normal template, but if you’re working at that level you’re
probably an expert computer user or following reliable
instructions. For more information about using Word to its full
potential, see Microsoft Word 2016 Step by Step (Microsoft Press,
2015) by Joan Lambert.
Users folder For each user account on the computer, Windows also creates
a user account folder in the Users folder. The user account folder contains
several subfolders, referred to in this book as your personal folders. Some
of your personal folders are visible in your user account folder, which is
located at C:\Users\[account name].
TIP Many of the personal folders can be added as buttons on the
left side of the Start menu for quick access; these include

Documents, Downloads, Music, Pictures, and Videos. For more
information, see “Configure the Start menu” in Chapter 2,
“Personalize your working environment.”
There is also a hidden folder named AppData that contains information
about your user account settings for Windows and for apps that you use.
Windows creates the user account folder and its subfolders the first time a
user signs in. As you work on your computer and personalize Windows,
Windows saves information and settings specific to your user profile in
these folders.
In addition to the account-specific folder for each user account that is active
on the computer, the Users folder also contains a Public folder, the contents
of which are accessible to anyone who is logged on to the computer. The
Public folder contains subfolders. Some of these are visible, such as
Documents, Downloads, Music, Pictures, and Videos. The hidden
subfolders contain information about settings that are common to all user
accounts on the computer. If you want to make files available to anyone
who logs on to the computer, you can store them in the Public folders rather
than in your personal folders.
TIP If other people have user accounts on your computer, they
won’t have access to the files in your personal folders unless they
have administrative rights or know your password, or if you’ve
shared the folders in a HomeGroup or over the network. To clearly
differentiate your personal folders from the public folders,
Windows 10 refers to the public folders as Public Documents,
Public Downloads, Public Music, Public Pictures, and Public
Videos.
Windows folder Most of the critical operating system files are stored in
this folder. You can look, but unless you really know what you are doing,
don’t touch! Most Windows 10 users will never need to access the files in
the Windows folder.

Libraries
You can display a collection of folders that you want easy access to in a library.
Libraries are virtual folders that aren’t physically present on the hard drive but
that display the contents of multiple folders as though the files were stored
together in one location.
The default Windows 10 installation includes seven standard libraries: Camera
Roll, Documents, Music, Pictures, Podcasts, Saved Pictures, and Videos. In
previous versions of Windows, the libraries included user account folders and
their corresponding Public folders, but in Windows 10 the default starting
content is your user account folder. Configuring a OneDrive connection on your
computer adds your OneDrive Documents, Music, and Pictures folders to the
corresponding libraries.
In Windows 10, libraries are hidden by default in File Explorer. You can turn on
the display of libraries if you want to use them.
You manage a library from the Manage tab that appears when you select or open
a library in the Libraries window. (Tabs that appear only in specific contexts are
called contextual tabs or tool tabs, because they host tools for working with the
selected file or folder.)

You can add folders from any connected location to libraries, and some apps add
folders to libraries for you when you make selections.

In addition to the standard libraries, you can create your own libraries, and a
folder can belong to more than one library. For example, suppose you are
working on a Fall Promotion project for a client, Contoso Pharmaceuticals. If
you create one library that displays all the folders of your current projects and
another library that displays all the folders associated with Contoso, you can
include the Fall Promotion folder in both libraries.
If you don’t use libraries, you can choose to not display the Libraries node at the
root of the Navigation pane.
TIP If you store files locally on your computer rather than in a cloud
storage location such as OneDrive, consider storing your private
documents, spreadsheets, databases, and similar files in subfolders of

your Documents folder, and any files you want to share with other users
in subfolders of the Public Documents folder. Similarly, store all your
private pictures in Pictures and those you want to share in Public
Pictures; and so on for music and video files. Then include the Public
folders in the libraries. When you follow this process, backing up your
work is a simple matter of backing up only the libraries.
SEE ALSO For more information about how to make any default or
custom library available to other users or computers on your network,
see “Manage homegroup connections” and “Share files on your
network,” both in Chapter 8, “Manage network and storage resources.”
Get to know File Explorer
Early versions of Windows displayed physical hard drives at the root of the file
storage structure. As file management and storage practices have evolved—first
to include virtual libraries of folders and now to commonly include OneDrive
and other cloud storage locations—File Explorer has also evolved. At the root of
the storage structure, File Explorer displays a series of conceptual organizational
systems, including the following nodes:
Quick Access Contains links to folders and files that you access frequently
or pin here for easy access
This PC Contains links to your user account–specific folders, and to the
physical storage locations that are installed in or connected to your
computer
Libraries Contains links to virtual collections of folders, which by default
are composed of the user account–specific folders and their corresponding
OneDrive folders
Network Displays a representation of other computers on your local area
network
Homegroup Displays a representation of other computers on your local
area network that are joined to the network homegroup

SEE ALSO For information about connecting to network
computers and homegroup members, see Chapter 8, “Manage
network and storage resources.”
When you connect your Windows 10 computer to OneDrive or OneDrive for
Business cloud storage drives, those drives also appear at the root of the storage
structure.
Within the This PC node, File Explorer displays the user-specific file storage
folders and the storage devices that are connected to your computer. Storage
locations included in This PC include hard drives installed in the computer and
storage devices (such as CDs, DVDs, USB flash drives, and external hard
drives) that are physically connected to the computer. Each storage drive that is
physically connected to the computer is identified by a letter, and in some cases

by a description. Your computer’s primary hard drive (the one where the
operating system is installed) is almost always identified by the letter C. (By
tradition, the letters A and B are reserved for floppy disk drives, which are all but
obsolete and have been superseded by higher-capacity storage media.) If your
computer has additional built-in hard drives, they are assigned the next
sequential letters, followed by any removable media drives.
TIP You can’t assign a specific drive letter to a local drive in File
Explorer, but you can name each drive. For information, see the sidebar
“Change the computer name” in Chapter 8, “Manage network and
storage resources.”
To explore your computer’s storage system, you can use the This PC window as
a convenient entry point. The devices represented in This PC are divided into
groups. Internal hard drives (those physically installed in your computer) and
external hard drives (those connected to your computer by a cable) are shown
first, followed by internal removable storage drives (such as CD and DVD
drives) and external removable storage devices (such as USB flash drives), and
then storage locations you access through a network connection. For each drive
or device, the total storage space and available storage space are given, both as
actual measurements and visually as a colored progress bar. The length of the
progress bar indicates the portion of the total storage space that is in use. The
default bar color is aqua; when less than 10 percent of the storage space on a
drive or device remains available, the bar color changes to red.
The File Explorer window layout includes the following elements:
The ribbon This command interface has commands organized in groups on
tabs. The File menu and ribbon tabs are covered later in this topic.
Navigation pane This vertical pane is open by default on the left side of the
window. It displays a hierarchical view of the physical and virtual storage
structures available to the computer. You can browse to folders and files on
your computer or network by selecting locations in this pane.
Content pane This primary pane displays the contents of the selected
folder as a textual or iconic list. You can’t close the content pane.

Details pane This pane displays information about the selected folder or
file.
Preview pane This pane displays a preview of the file that is selected in the
content pane. The Preview pane can display the contents of image files,
Microsoft Word documents, Excel workbooks, PowerPoint presentations,
PDF files, and other common file types.
TIP You can display either the Details pane or the Preview pane on the
right side of the window, or you can close both. For more information,
see “Change the File Explorer display options” later in this chapter.

Work with the standard ribbon tabs
The ribbon in File Explorer includes the File menu, a set of standard tabs, tabs
that are displayed for specific folders, and tabs that appear only when specific
types of items are selected. These context-sensitive tabs, also called tool tabs,
host commands that you need only when you select an item of that type. Tool
tabs are covered in the “Work with the tool tabs” section later in this topic.
The standard ribbon elements are:
File menu The File menu displays commands in the left pane and a list of
recently or frequently displayed folders on the right. You can invoke
commands and open specific locations from the File menu.
TIP The most useful of the available commands is Options
(labeled Change Folder And Search Options in some Windows
versions), which we work with later in this chapter.
You can pin locations to the Frequent Places list by selecting the thumbtack
icon. Pinned locations stay at the top of the list and are indicated by angled
thumbtacks.

Home tab The Home tab is available when File Explorer is displaying
anything other than the This PC, Network, and Homegroup nodes.
Commonly used commands are grouped on the Home tab.
Share tab The Share tab provides various ways for you to share a folder or
file with other people. These options include sending a copy of a file to
other people or sharing its location with other people who are on your
network. In addition to sharing options, the Share tab provides commands
for printing, burning a file to a disc, and compressing a file.
View tab The View tab hosts the commands that you can use to customize
the display of items in the File Explorer window.
The Home tab provides access to the most commonly used File Explorer
commands. Many of them are covered in depth later in this chapter, but some
deserve a quick mention, such as the following:
Pin to Quick access This adds the selected folder to the Quick Access list
at the top of the Navigation pane. This list is available from within apps and
in File Explorer.
Easy access This command displays a menu that offers various ways to
make the current location more easily accessible.

Open and Edit When a folder is selected in the content pane, selecting the
Open button expands the folder. The Edit button is disabled. When you
select an editable file (such as a Word document) in the content pane, both
the Open and Edit buttons will open the file. The difference is that when
you select the arrow next to Open, you get a list of all the programs known
to File Explorer that can open this file type, and an option to choose a
default one.
History This displays the current file in the File History viewer.
SEE ALSO For information about file version history, see “Back
up data” in Chapter 15, “Protect your computer and data.”
The View tab provides access to several commands you can use to tailor File
Explorer to suit your preferences. Many of these tabs are discussed in greater
detail in “Change the File Explorer display options” later in this chapter.
The following commands are the most commonly used:
Navigation pane Select this to display a list of Navigation pane features
you can turn on or off, including the display of the pane itself.

Preview pane and Details pane You can display either of these panes, but
only one at a time. The active pane appears on the right side of File
Explorer. When the Preview pane is active, selecting a file displays the file
content in the preview pane. If the Details pane is active, selecting a file
displays its icon and file information such as its size.
Layout commands These commands determine whether the files are
displayed as icons of various sizes or one of two types of list.
TIP You can quickly switch between a detailed list and large icons
view by using the icons in the lower-right corner of the File
Explorer window.
Current view commands Sort By allows you to select the column to sort
by. You can also do this by selecting a column title. Select it again to
reverse the sort. Select Group By and Add Columns to see the options for
each.
Show/hide commands The three check boxes in Show/Hide turn the
display of their respective items on and off. You can select one or more
items (files or folders) and select Hide Selected Items to mark them as
hidden. Then select or clear the Hidden Items check box to display or hide
them in the content pane. To unhide the items, first show all hidden items,

then select the hidden items, and select Hide Selected Items to turn it off.
TIP When hidden items are displayed in the content pane, the
icons of the hidden items are slightly dimmed to differentiate them
from items that aren’t hidden. The Hide Selected Items button is
active when hidden files are selected.
Options The Options command displays the Folder Options dialog box,
which we discuss in “Change the File Explorer display options,” later in
this chapter.
Work with the tool tabs
Tool tabs appear on the ribbon when specific storage locations are displayed or
specific types of files are selected. Tool tabs are in named groups of one or more
tabs that host commands specific to working with the selected file type. (Most
groups have only one tab.) A colored tab in the title bar displays the tool tab
group name. The tool tab or tabs are below the group tab and to the right of the
standard tabs. For example, when you select an image file, the Manage tool tab
in the Picture Tools group appears; when you select an audio file, the Play tool
tab in the Music Tools group appears; and when you select a compressed folder
(a zip file), the Extract tool tab in the Compressed Folder Tools group appears.
TIP The tool tabs appear when you select multiple files of the same
type, but not when you select multiple types of files.

There are theoretically more than 200 tool tabs, each with its own combination
of commands. The storage locations that have their own tabs include This PC,
Drive, Network, Homegroup, Search, Library, and Recycle Bin. The file types
that display tool tabs when you select them include ISO, ZIP, Image, Audio,
Video, and Shortcut file types.
For example, when you select This PC in File Explorer, the Home and Share tabs
are replaced by the Computer tab. This tab contains links to common functions
and tools that you can use to manage your computer. You can point to each
command on the Computer tab to display a ScreenTip explaining its purpose.
TIP Some of these commands open in a new window and some change
what File Explorer displays. This can be confusing. Check for a Back
button in the window before selecting Close; otherwise you might close
File Explorer.
When you select a hard drive in the Navigation pane, the Manage tool tab in the
Drive Tools group appears.

If you have a local network, you can select the icon for it in the Navigation pane.
Commands appropriate to the network are displayed on the Network tab.
Even the Recycle Bin has its own tool tab. When you double-click the desktop
icon for the Recycle Bin, the Manage tab in the Recycle Bin Tools group appears
on the ribbon.
From this tool tab, you can empty the Recycle Bin or restore deleted items.
Work with the Navigation And Search bar
The Navigation And Search bar is displayed just below the ribbon. You can use
the commands on this bar to quickly navigate through the folder structure.
To the immediate right of the folder navigation arrows is the Address bar. The
Address bar displays an icon and the friendly path to the current folder. Selecting
the folder icon at the left end of the Address bar displays the absolute path from

the root drive. Each item in the friendly path has a > after it. If you select a >, the
folders within that item are displayed, and you can select one to open it. You can
drag the icon to another location, such as the desktop, to create a shortcut to this
folder at that location. You can right-click anywhere in the Address bar to
display the shortcut menu.
To the right of the Address bar are the Refresh button and the search box.
Selecting the Refresh button is the same as pressing the F5 key: it refreshes the
display. The search box is one of those special locations that produces a tool tab.
Search is discussed in more detail in “Find specific files,” later in this chapter.
To start File Explorer
On the Start menu, select File Explorer.
On the taskbar, select the File Explorer button.
Select Win+E.
Right-click the Start button and then on the Quick Links menu, select File
Explorer.
To display the contents of a folder in File Explorer
In the Navigation pane, select the folder name.
In the content pane, double-click the folder name.
To expand or collapse a folder in the Navigation pane
Double-click the folder, or select the < to the left of the folder name.
To move through a list of recent locations
At the left end of the Navigation and Search bar, select the Back and
Forward buttons.
To move directly to a location
1. In File Explorer, on the Navigation and Search bar, do either of the
following:
Select the Recent locations button (the v between the Forward and Up
buttons) to display a menu of recent locations.

Select the Previous Locations button (the v at the right end of the
Address box) to display a menu of previous locations.
2. Select the location you want to move to.
TIP You can paste or enter a folder path from the File Explorer Address
bar directly into the Address bar in a dialog box to display that location.
To move up one level in the current folder path
In File Explorer, on the Navigation and Search bar, select the Up button
(the upward-pointing arrow to the left of the Address box).
Work with libraries
The Libraries node that is optionally displayed in the File Explorer Navigation
pane is more conceptual than most other folders. Rather than containing files and
folders, it points to folders that might exist on your hard drive, on a USB drive,
or even on a hard drive on someone else’s computer on a network you can
access.
TIP You can control the display of libraries by going to the File
Explorer View tab, selecting Navigation Pane, and selecting Show
Libraries.
Libraries are shortcuts to folders that you can navigate to individually, but that
you want quicker access to. For example, the Documents library might include
pointers to your private Documents folder, to the Public Documents folder, and
to the Documents folder in your OneDrive folder. When you add a file to one of
those folders, and it is indexed, it shows up in the Documents library.
You can add folders from any connected location to an existing or new library.
Until the library contains at least one folder, it displays a button labeled Include

a folder.
One of the benefits of managing file locations within libraries is that the
Libraries node and all the folders it points to are included by default in File
History backups.
SEE ALSO For information about search indexes, see “Find specific
files” later in this chapter and “Search your computer and the web” in
Chapter 14, “Work more efficiently.” For information about File
History, see “Back up data” in Chapter 15, “Protect your computer and
data.”
You can optimize individual libraries for specific file types—either documents,
music, pictures, or videos—to set sorting and grouping options specific to that
file type. To further personalize the library, you can assign one of over 400 icons
to it.

If you no longer use a library, you can delete it without affecting the files and
folders it contains, or you can simply hide it so that it doesn’t appear in the
Navigation pane.

You manage a library and its contents from the Manage tool tab or the library
Properties dialog box.
To display or hide the Libraries node in the Navigation pane
In File Explorer, on the View tab, in the Panes group, select Navigation
pane, and then Show libraries.

To open a library in File Explorer
In the Navigation pane, select the Libraries node. Then in the content
pane, double-click the library you want to open.
In the Navigation pane, select the > to the left of the Libraries node, and
then select the library you want to open.
To open the Properties dialog box for a library
In File Explorer, right-click the library, and then select Properties.
To create a library
1. In the File Explorer Navigation pane, do either of the following:
Right-click the Libraries node.
Select the Libraries node and then right-click an empty area of the
content pane.
2. Select New, and then Library to create the library with the name active for
editing.
3. Enter a name for the new library, and then press Enter. The icon remains
neutral until you choose a content type.
TIP To quickly add the first folder to a new library, open the library in

File Explorer, select the Include A Folder button in the content pane to
open the Include A Folder dialog box, browse to and select the library
you want to include, and then select Include Folder.
To add a folder to a library
1. Do either of the following:
Open the library in File Explorer. On the Manage tool tab, in the Manage
group, select Manage library to open the Library Locations dialog box
specific to the library.
Open the Properties dialog box for the library.
2. Select Add to open the Include Folder In dialog box for the library.
3. Browse to and select the folder you want to include, and then select Include
folder to add the folder to the library.
4. Select OK to close the dialog box.
To optimize a library or folder for a file type
Open the library’s Properties dialog box. In the Optimize this library for
list, select General items, Documents, Music, Pictures, or Videos. Then

select Apply or OK.
In File Explorer, display the Libraries node, and then select the library you
want to optimize. On the Manage tool tab, select Optimize library for,
and then in the list, select General items, Documents, Music, Pictures, or
Videos.
To change the folder icon of a custom library
1. Do either of the following to open the Change Icon dialog box:
Open the library in File Explorer. Then on the Manage tool tab, select
Change icon.
Open the library’s Properties dialog box and select Change library icon.
2. In the Change Icon dialog box, select the icon you want to use, and then
select OK.
To remove a folder from a library
Open the library’s Properties dialog box, select the folder, and select
Remove. Then select Apply or OK.
Open the library’s Library Locations dialog box, select the folder, and
then select Remove. Then select OK.
To hide a library in the Navigation pane
In the library’s Properties dialog box, clear the Shown in navigation pane
check box. Then select Apply or OK.
TIP You can hide a folder that is in a system-created library so that the
folder appears in the content pane but not in the Navigation pane. To
hide a library folder from the Navigation pane only, expand the library
and right-click the folder in the Navigation pane, and then select Don’t
Show In Navigation Pane. To stop hiding the folder, display it in the
content pane, right-click it, and then select Show In Navigation Pane.

Change the File Explorer display options
Windows 10 provides many ways to personalize the display of File Explorer to
suit the way you work.
Display and hide panes
Each pane of the File Explorer window displays a specific type of information.
You can display and hide some panes to show or hide information, or to change
the amount of space available in the content pane. For example, if your folders
typically contain many files and you are adept at navigating in the Address bar,
you might want to turn off the Navigation, Detail, and Preview panes so that the
content pane occupies the entire folder window.
To display or hide the File Explorer Navigation pane
1. In File Explorer, on the View tab, in the Panes group, select Navigation
pane.
2. Select or clear the Navigation pane check box to display or hide the pane.
To display or hide the File Explorer Preview pane
Select Alt+P.
On the View tab, select Preview pane.
To display or hide the File Explorer Details pane
Select Alt+Shift+P.
On the View tab, select Details pane.
TIP You can change the width of a pane by pointing to its border and,
when the pointer changes to a double-headed arrow, dragging in the
direction you want to increase or decrease its size. This technique is
useful if you want to display more information in one pane without
closing the other panes.

Display different views of folders and files
You use commands on the View tab to set the layout, sort order, grouping, and
columns that are displayed in the content pane. You can choose to display a
check box column (the boxes appear only when you point to or select items), file
name extensions, and hidden files.
TIP The Layout options that you set apply only to the current folder.
The Show/Hide settings apply to all folders. You can apply some
settings to all folders of the same type in the Folder Options dialog box
that is displayed when you select the Options button (not the arrow) at
the right end of the View tab.
The standard information displayed for files in Details view includes the file
name, date modified, type, and size. You can add a lot more information to the
Details view to make it more useful to you. For example, you can display the
dimensions of images, the number of pages in a document, or the number of
slides in a PowerPoint presentation. Having these types of details available
directly from File Explorer can save you a lot of time and effort. Over 300
properties are available for display in File Explorer. Most apply only to specific
file types, but many could be useful to you.
When the Details pane is open, it displays detailed information when you select
a single file. As you select more files, the Details pane displays the number of
items selected, the total size of the files, and other types of information common
to the selected files.

If you add a folder to the selection, the Details pane displays only the number of
items selected (the folder is counted as one item, regardless of the number of
subfolders and files in it) and a stack of icons.
Different views are best suited to different tasks. For example, when you are
looking for a specific graphic among those stored in a folder, you might find it
useful to be able to see the graphic thumbnails in the content pane.
The available views include the following:
Icons The four Icon views (Extra Large, Large, Medium, and Small)
display an icon and name for each folder or file in the current folder. In all

but Small Icons view, the icons display either the file type or, in the case of
graphic files (including PowerPoint presentations), a representation of the
file content.
List This view is like Small Icons view in that it shows the names of the
files and folders accompanied by a small icon that represents the file type.
The only difference is that the items are arranged in columns instead of in
rows.
Details This view displays a list of files and folders, each accompanied by a
small icon that represents the item type and its properties, arranged in a
tabular format, with column headings. The properties shown by default for
each file or folder are Name, Date Modified, Type, and Size. You can hide
any of these properties, and you can display a variety of other properties
that might be pertinent to specific types of files, including Author and Title.
Tiles For folders, this view displays a medium-size icon and the folder
name and type. For files, the icon indicates the file type and is accompanied
by the file name, type, and file size.
Content For folders, this view displays an icon, the folder name, and the
date. For files, the icon indicates the file type and is accompanied by the file
name, type, file size, and date.
TIP In the Extra Large Icons, Large Icons, Medium Icons, Tiles, and
Content views, folder icons display representations of the folder content
depicted as pages and pictures.
To change the File Explorer folder view
On the View tab, in the Layout group, select a layout option.
TIP If you point to one of the view layouts, the content pane
temporarily displays that layout.

Right-click an empty spot in the content pane, point to View, and then
select a view from the list.
In the lower-right corner of the content pane, select the Details or Large
Icons button.
TIP You can optimize a folder for a specific view on the Customize tab
of the folder’s Properties dialog box. Doing so makes that the default
view for the folder. You can select a different view at any time by using
one of the techniques listed here.
To display folder content as icons
On the View tab, in the Layout group, select Extra Large icons, Large
icons, Medium icons, or Small icons.
To display folder content as a list of items and their properties
On the View tab, in the Layout group, select Details.
To add, remove, or rearrange properties in Details view
1. In File Explorer, display the contents of the folder as a detailed list.
2. Do either of the following to open the Choose Details dialog box:
On the View tab, in the Current view group, select Add columns and
then Choose columns….
Right-click any column header, and then select More….

3. In the Choose Details dialog box, do any of the following:
Select a column name to add or remove its check mark, which adds or
removes that column from Details view.
Select a column name, and then select Show or Hide to show or hide that
column in Details view.
Select a column name, and then select Move Up or Move Down to move
the column higher or lower on the list, which also moves the column to
the left or right in Details view.
To resize a column in Details view
In File Explorer, point to the line between the column heading and the
heading to its right, and when the mouse pointer changes to a double-
headed arrow, do any of the following:
Drag to the left to make the column narrower.
Drag to the right to make the column wider.
Double-click to make the column resize to fit the widest item in the
column.
To resize all columns in Details view to fit the widest item in the column

On the View tab, in the Current view group, select Size all columns to fit.
To display or hide folder features and content
In File Explorer, on the View tab, in the Show/hide group, do any of the
following:
To turn on or off the display of check boxes when you point to or select
an item, select or clear the Item check boxes check box.
To show or hide each file name extension (for example, .docx), select or
clear the File name extensions check box.
To show or hide hidden items, select or clear the Hidden items check
box.
Group, sort, and filter folder content
By default, the folders and files in the content pane are displayed in alphabetical
order by name, with the subfolders at the top and files below them. You can sort
or group the items in a folder or library in any view, by any default or displayed
property. The default options include Name, Date Modified, Type, Size, Date
Created, Authors, Categories, Tags, and Title. The Sort By and Group By menus
display the currently available properties; to sort or group by a hidden property,
display the property first to add it to the menu, and then return to the menu to
sort or group the folder or library contents.

TIP Changing a folder’s layout, type, grouping, or other attribute
doesn’t affect its appearance in a library. Libraries independently
control the appearance of folder content.
If you group folders and files, their overall arrangement changes, but within each
group the sort order remains the same. You can change the order of the items in
the content pane by sorting them by any of the displayed properties.
TIP If you choose to sort grouped content in ascending or descending
order, files and folders are sorted within their groups.

Options for sorting and grouping content are available from the View tab, and
also from the shortcut menu that appears when you right-click an empty area of
the content pane. Although both options are very similar, the ribbon menus
display a few more options.
If a folder contains a lot of files, or contains subfolders of files, you can filter the
folder content to display only the files that meet specific conditions. Filtered
results include individual files, whether they are at the top level of the folder or
within subfolders.
To group folder content
1. On the View tab, in the Current view group, select Group by. If a property
has a dot to its left, items in the folder are already grouped by that property.
2. If the Group by list doesn’t include the property you want to group by,
select Choose columns, select the property in the Choose Details dialog
box, and then select OK.
3. In the Group by list, select the file property you want to group items by.
To ungroup folder content
On the View tab, in the Current view group, select the Group by button,
and then select (None) from the bottom of the list.
To sort files in any view
1. On the View tab, in the Current view group, select Sort by. If a property
has a dot to its left, items in the folder are already sorted by that property.
2. If the Sort by list doesn’t include the property you want to sort by, select
Choose columns, select the property in the Choose Details dialog box, and
then select OK.
3. In the Sort by list, select the file property you want to sort items by.
To sort folder content in Details view
Select the column name you want to sort by.
Selecting the column name once sorts in alphabetical or ascending
numerical order.

Selecting the column name a second time sorts in reverse alphabetical or
descending numerical order.
A ^ or v appears in the middle of the column heading to let you know the
column is sorted in ascending or descending order.
To filter folder content
1. In File Explorer, display the contents of the folder as a detailed list.
2. Point to a column header until a v appears at its right edge.
3. Select the v to display a list of items you can filter on. (The list content is
specific to the properties of the items in the folder.)
4. Select a check box to show only those items in the list that match the filter.
Each filter is applied when you select it, so you can immediately see its
impact.
TIP You can repeat steps 3 and 4 to apply filters from other
columns to the content pane.
5. Click or tap outside the list to close it.
Change folder options

Most of the common folder options you might want to change are included on
the File Explorer ribbon. However, some less common ones are available when
you select the Options button (not the arrow) at the right end of the View tab.
In the Folder Options dialog box, you can customize folder windows by
changing settings on these two tabs:
General On this tab, you can change how you browse folders, whether you
select or double-click to open items, and how the Navigation pane behaves.
View On this tab, you can change the default view for all folders and
change specific display/hide settings. For example, you can specify whether
to show the status bar in File Explorer windows.
TIP When you first start working in Windows 10, the default view for
each folder is determined by its type. If you apply the current folder

view to all folders of a particular type and then change your mind, you
can select Reset Folders on the View tab of the Folder Options dialog
box to restore the type-based default views. For information about
folder types, see “Work with folder and file properties” in Chapter 6,
“Manage folders and files.”
To display the Folder Options dialog box from File Explorer
On the File menu, select Options or Change folder and search options.
On the View tab, select the Options button, or select the Options arrow and
then select Change folder and search options.
To change the default File Explorer starting folder
1. In the Folder Options dialog box, display the General tab.
2. Select the Open File Explorer to list, and then select either Quick access
or This PC.
3. Select OK.
To change how you select to open an item
1. In the Folder Options dialog box, on the General tab, do either of the
following:
Select Single-click to open an item (point to select).
Select Double-click to open an item (single-click to select).
2. Select OK.
To add a location to your Quick Access list
Select the folder in File Explorer, and then do either of the following:
On the Home tab, in the Clipboard group, select Pin to Quick access.
In the content pane, right-click the folder, and then select Pin to Quick
access.
To hide items in the Quick Access list

1. In the Folder Options dialog box, on the General tab, do either of the
following:
Clear the Show recently used files in Quick access check box.
Clear the Show frequently used folders in Quick access check box.
2. Select OK.
TIP In Windows 10, a new group called Quick Access was added at the
top of the Navigation pane. When this is selected, the content pane on
the right displays a collection of your frequently used folders and recent
files so that you can quickly return to programs, files, or locations you
often need to access. These can be folders on your computer, network
computers, or external hard drives.
Find specific files
Windows 10 provides various ways to search everything from a folder on your
computer to the web, all from the taskbar search box. File Explorer provides an
additional search capability that is limited to files only (that is, it doesn’t return
apps and web searches). The underlying search engine is the same from all these
locations, but the focus of the searches and the way the results are returned
varies.
Windows Search
Recent advancements in online and computer search technology have made the
instant location of information and files so simple that it’s easy to forget how
tedious tracking down the same items would have been in the past. The search
technology that is built in to Windows 10 is excellent.
Using Windows Search, you can find apps, files, messages, and message
attachments on your computer. You don’t need to know the name or location of
the file or item you want to find; simply enter a word or phrase in the taskbar
search box to display a list of matching items, organized by type.
How does Windows Search find items so quickly? Behind the scenes, Windows

Search maintains an index of all the keywords in, and associated with, the files
stored on your computer—app names, common tasks, and the file names and
content (when possible) of documents, audio and video recordings, images,
email messages, webpages, and other data files. Windows Search automatically
indexes the most common file types (such as documents, text files, and email
messages) and doesn’t index file types you are less likely to search (such as
operating system files). It does not include the system files; such an index would
be huge and would slow down the search process.
When you enter a search term, Windows looks for the term in the index instead
of searching the actual files on your hard drive.
TIP By default, Windows doesn’t index encrypted files, because a
search by another computer user could reveal the encrypted data. You
can add encrypted files to the search index if you first put in place a
full-volume data-encryption solution, such as Windows BitLocker Drive
Encryption. For information about changing the file storage locations
that are indexed, see “Search your computer and the web” in Chapter
14, “Work more efficiently.”
File Explorer Search
File Explorer Search differs from Windows Search in that it is limited to
searching for files and displays them in its own familiar interface. So when you
get a results list, you can use all the usual commands on the View tab to refine
the display.
You initiate a File Explorer Search from the Search box at the right end of the
Navigation And Search bar. When you activate this box to enter a search term,
the Search Tools group tab appears, providing tools you can use to refine your
search.

You can save a set of search parameters so that you can display updated results
at any time. Saved searches are added to the Favorites group in File Explorer and
are also available from your personal Searches folder.
To search for a file in File Explorer
In the upper-right corner of the File Explorer window, enter a search term in
the Search box. As you enter the search term, Windows filters the program
files, folders, and email messages stored on your computer.
To refine a File Explorer search
On the Search tool tab, in the Refine group, select the property by which
you want to filter the search results, and then enter the criteria for the filter.
To save a search for later reference
1. On the Search tool tab, in the Options group, select the Save search
button. The Save As dialog box displays the content of your personal
Searches folder.
2. In the Save As dialog box, select Save to accept the default name and save
the search in the Searches folder.
TIP Close the Search Results window to return to the original folder.
Key points

File Explorer is the app in which you display and access the files stored on
your computer. Files are organized into folders. Some folders are created by
Windows, some by apps, and some by you. You can also create virtual
libraries of files.
You can display additional file properties in File Explorer, and group, sort,
and filter files by any displayed property.
You can limit a search to files and to specific file locations by searching
from the File Explorer search box.
 Practice tasks
Before you can complete these practice tasks, you need to copy the book’s
practice files to your computer. The practice files for these tasks are located in
the Win10SBS\Ch05 folder. The introduction includes a complete list of
practice files.
Understand files, folders, and libraries
There are no practice tasks for this topic.
Get to know File Explorer
Perform the following tasks:
1. Start File Explorer, and navigate to the practice file folder.
2. Open the Photos folder, and then open the Backgrounds subfolder.
3. Use the tools on the Navigation and Search bar to move up to the Ch05
folder.
4. In the Navigation pane, contract all the expanded storage nodes. Then
review the locations in the Navigation pane and ensure you’re familiar with
each.
5. In the Navigation pane, double-click This PC. Review the file storage
locations that are connected to your computer.
6. On the View tab, display the Navigation pane menu. If the Navigation
pane isn’t already configured to display libraries, display them now.

7. Expand the Libraries node. Create a new library named Win10SBS and
ensure that it appears in the Navigation pane.
8. Add the Backgrounds subfolder of the Ch05\Photos folder to the new
Win10SBS library.
9. Optimize the Win10SBS library for the display of photos. Then assign an
icon that you like to the library folder.
10. Hide the Win10SBS library from the Navigation pane. Then unhide it.
Change the File Explorer display options
Start File Explorer, and then perform the following tasks:
1. Navigate to the practice file folder and expand its contents in the content
pane.
2. Experiment with the settings in the Panes group on the View tab to hide
and redisplay the Navigation pane.
3. Display the Details pane. Select a file in the content pane and notice the
available details. Select a different type of file, and then select multiple
files, noting the details available for each.
4. Display the Preview pane and repeat the process in step 3. For each file that
displays a preview, observe the preview content and notice the controls
available in the Preview pane for scrolling or moving through the preview.
5. Resize the Preview pane by dragging its border.
6. Experiment with the settings in the Layout group on the View tab. Display
the content of the practice file folder in each of the eight available layouts.
Consider the information provided by each layout and when each would be
most or least useful.
7. Display the Details view of the practice file folder content.
8. From the Add columns list, navigate to the longer list of columns and
select Dimensions to add that column to the Details view.
9. Rearrange the columns in the content pane so that the Dimensions column
is immediately to the right of the Name column.
10. Resize all columns to fit the widest item in the column.
11. Remove the Date Created and Dimensions columns from the Details view.

12. Display item check boxes, file name extensions, and hidden items.
13. Group the items by type.
14. Sort the grouped items alphabetically by name. Then reverse the sort order.
15. Filter the items by using the Size filter to display only large items (1-16
MB).
16. Remove the filter, restore the default sort order, and remove the file
grouping.
17. Add the Photos folder to your Quick Access list.
Find specific files
Display the practice file folder in File Explorer, and then perform the following
tasks:
1. Search for a file from the File Explorer search box by using the search term
travel.
2. Refine the search by narrowing the results to items that are small (between
10 and 100 KB).
3. Save the search for later reference.
4. Return from the Search Results folder to the original folder.

6. Manage folders and files
In this chapter
Create and rename folders and files
Compress folders and files
Move and copy folders and files
Delete and restore folders and files
Work with folder and file properties
You will find it much easier to locate files and correctly identify them if they are
logically organized and given names that clearly describe their contents. You use
File Explorer to manage and work with the folders and files that are stored on
your computer.
Every file and folder has properties—information that describes the file and its
content. Some properties are created automatically by Windows or by the app
you create or edit the file in. You can assign other properties that you want.
TIP You can use file properties to automatically populate information
within files and in file-management systems such as Microsoft
SharePoint. You can display, sort, and group by file properties in File
Explorer. For more information, see “Change the File Explorer display
options” in Chapter 5, “Explore files and folders.”
When managing large files or a lot of files, you can compress them to save space
or simply to manage them as one unit.
This chapter guides you through procedures related to creating, renaming,
compressing, moving, copying, deleting, and restoring files and folders, and
working with folder and file properties.

Create and rename folders and files
Many apps (such as email apps and web browsers) automatically store files in a
default location, but most apps allow you to specify storage locations for the
files you create. You could save everything in your Documents folder, but that
would soon get unwieldy. If you use a logical system for naming and organizing
folders and files, you can always find what you need.
One common approach is to store all your private files in subfolders of your
Documents folder, and to store all files that you expect to share with others in
subfolders of the Public Documents folder. A benefit of this approach is that
Windows can automatically back up these locations to OneDrive or to an
external hard drive.
Wherever you store your files, give some thought to a logical naming convention
that works for you and within your organization. Here are some things to
consider:
Unique identification Ideally, the name of a file or folder will contain all
the information that you need to identify it independently of the folder
structure you store it in. For example, if you save a purchase order
document 
as 
12345.docx 
in 
the 
folder 
structure
Accounting\Documents\Purchase Orders\2017\October, much of the
information is lost when you email the document or otherwise remove it
from the folder structure. An informative file name such as
PurchaseOrder_12345_2017-10-31 is much more useful and you won’t
need to store the file in such a complex folder structure.
Sort order File names that incorporate dates will sort in numerical order.
To keep them in logical order, enter the date in year-month-day order and
use numeric month equivalents. (For example, 2017-10-31 sorts by year,
then month, then day, whereas 10-31-2017 sorts by month, then day, then
year.)
Web addresses If you store files and folders in the cloud, spaces in the file
name or path are converted to the character code %20. This presents two
problems:
When linking to a file online, the path is difficult to parse. For example:
https://sharepoint.contoso.com/files/purchase%20order%template.docx
When downloading files with names that contains spaces, some systems

convert the spaces to underscores (_).
You can avoid these issues by not using spaces in file names.
Readability Long file names, especially those that don’t contain spaces,
can be difficult to parse. You can maintain descriptive yet readable file
names by using internal capitalization (commonly called camel caps) or by
using underscores or hyphens to separate words. For example:
PayStub_Smith-Jane_2017-10-31
Whatever file naming convention you decide on, use it consistently. If you work
within an organization, discuss, agree on, and communicate the naming
convention to avoid confusion.
To create a folder
1. In File Explorer, do either of the following:
In the content pane, navigate to the location where you want to add the
new folder. Then on the Home tab, in the New group, select New Folder.
In the Navigation pane, right-click the folder to which you want to add
the new folder (as a subfolder), point to New, and then select Folder.
The default name New folder is automatically selected for editing.
2. Enter the name you want to assign to the folder to replace the selected text.
To rename a file or folder in the content pane
1. In the content pane, select the file or folder you want to rename.
2. Do one of the following to activate the name for editing:
Select the file or folder again (this equates to a slow double-click).
On the Home tab, in the Organize group, select Rename.
Right-click the file, and then select Rename.
Press F2.
3. Enter the new name, and then press Enter.
To rename a file or folder in the Navigation pane

1. Right-click the file or folder, and then select Rename.
2. Enter the new name, and then press Enter.
Compress folders and files
When you buy a computer these days, it likely comes with a hard drive capable
of storing hundreds, if not thousands, of gigabytes (GB) of information. A
gigabyte is 1 billion bytes, and a byte is a unit of information that is the
equivalent of one character. Some of your files will be very small—1 to 2
kilobytes (KB), or 1000 to 2000 characters—and others might be quite large—
several megabytes (MB), or several million characters. Small files are easy to
copy and move around; large files or large groups of files are more time-
consuming to copy and move from one place to another, or to send by email,
unless you compress them.
You can compress individual files or entire folders. The result is a compressed
folder that is identified by a zipper on its folder icon.
TIP Compressing is frequently referred to as zipping. Compressed
folders are also called zip files. The term zip was adopted by the original
file-compression technology developer to indicate that compressed files
would move quickly from one location to another.
The reduction in size when you compress a file depends on the compression

method and the type of file. Many image file formats are already highly
compressed. Microsoft Office file types that end in x (.docx, .xlsx, and .pptx,
which have been the default file formats since Office 2007) are actually
collections of content definition files that have been compressed and given a
different extension. Therefore, compressing a folder that contains Word
documents or images might have little effect on the folder size.
You open and display the contents of a compressed folder in File Explorer just as
you do any other folder. The Extract tool tab on the ribbon indicates that you’re
displaying the contents of a compressed folder rather than a standard folder.
You can easily add, replace, or remove files within a compressed folder.
To compress one or more files
1. In the content pane, select the file(s) or folder(s) you want to compress.
2. Do either of the following:
Right-click any file in the selection, select Send to, and then select
Compressed (zipped) folder to create a compressed folder with the same
name as the file you right-clicked.
On the Share tab, in the Send group, select Zip to create a compressed
folder with the same name as the first selected file.
3. The compressed folder name is selected so that you can change it. Edit the
name as necessary, and then press Enter.
To display the contents of a compressed folder
In the Navigation pane, select the compressed folder.

In the content pane, double-click the compressed folder.
To work with files in a compressed folder
To add a file or folder, drag it into or onto the compressed folder.
To replace a file, drag the new file into the compressed folder and then
select Copy and Replace.
To remove a file or folder, open the compressed folder in File Explorer and
then delete the file or folder from the content pane.
To extract all files from a compressed folder
1. Do either of the following:
Right-click the compressed folder, and then select Extract All.
Select or open the compressed folder and then, on the Extract tool tab,
select Extract all.
The default extraction location is a new folder with the same name as the
compressed folder, created in the folder that contains the compressed folder.
2. If you want to extract the files to a folder other than the one indicated in the
Files Will Be Extracted To This Folder box, select Browse and then, in the
Select a destination dialog box, navigate to the folder you want.
3. In the Extract Compressed (Zipped) Folders dialog box, select Extract.
To extract selected files from a compressed folder
1. Open the compressed folder in File Explorer.

2. Select the file or files that you want to extract.
3. Do one of the following:
Drag the selection from the content pane to the folder into which you
want to extract the files.
On the Extract tool tab, in the Extract To gallery, select the folder you
want to extract the selected files to.
On the Extract tool tab, in the Extract To group, select the More button,
select Choose location, and then in the Copy Items dialog box, browse
to the folder and select Copy.
Move and copy folders and files
It is often necessary to move or copy folders and files from one location to
another. When you move something to a new location, it is essentially deleted
from the original location and copied to the new location. When you copy
something to a new location, a copy remains in each location.
Before you move or copy items, you need to select them. There are various ways
to select individual or multiple files in the File Explorer content pane. When
multiple files are selected, the Details pane indicates the number of items and the
total size of the selection. (Because the file sizes in the content pane are rounded
up, the total in the Details pane will be more accurate.) If both folders and files
are included in the selection, the Details pane indicates the number of items but
not the cumulative size. You have the option of displaying check boxes in File
Explorer to make it easy to select multiple files.

SEE ALSO For information about the File Explorer Details pane, see
“Get to know File Explorer” in Chapter 5, “Explore files and folders.”
When you cut or copy a folder or file, the item is stored in a storage area called
the Clipboard so that you can then paste one or more copies of it elsewhere. In
addition to copying files and folders to other locations, you can also make copies
of files in the original folder; when you do, File Explorer appends - Copy to the
original file name to create the new file name.
When you move or copy a folder or file by dragging it, the item is not stored on
the Clipboard.
To select all the items in a folder
On the Home tab, in the Select group, select Select All.
Press Ctrl+A.
When item check boxes are shown, select the check box to the left of the
first column header.
To select multiple contiguous items
Select the first item, hold down the Shift key, and then select the last item in

the group you want to select.
TIP It sometimes helps to group or sort the items to gather the
ones you want to select.
To select multiple noncontiguous items
Select the first item, and then hold down the Ctrl key and select each
additional item.
When item check boxes are shown, select the check box to the left of each
item you want to select.
To copy selected items to the Clipboard
On the Home tab, in the Clipboard group, select Copy.
Right-click the selection, and then select Copy.
Press Ctrl+C.
To cut selected items to the Clipboard
On the Home tab, in the Clipboard group, select Cut.
Right-click the selection, and then select Cut.
Press Ctrl+X.
To paste items from the Clipboard
On the Home tab, in the Clipboard group, select Paste.
Right-click a blank area in the folder, and then select Paste.
Press Ctrl+V.
To move selected items to a different folder
On the Home tab, in the Organize group, select Move to and then either

select the destination folder or select Choose location and browse to the
destination folder.
Cut the files to the Clipboard, navigate to the new folder, and then paste the
files into the folder.
Display the original folder and the new folder in two File Explorer
windows. Use the left mouse button to drag the selected items to the new
location.
Display the original folder and the new folder. Use the right mouse button
to drag the selected items to the new location. Then select Move Here on
the menu that appears when you release the mouse button.
To copy selected items to a different folder
On the Home tab, in the Organize group, select Copy to, and then either
select the destination folder or select Choose location and browse to the
destination folder.
Copy the files to the Clipboard, navigate to the new folder, and then paste
the files into the folder.
Display the original folder and the new folder in two File Explorer
windows. Hold down the Ctrl key and use the left mouse button to drag the
selected items to the new location. Release the mouse button, and then
release the Ctrl key.
Display the original folder and the new folder. Use the right mouse button
to drag the selected items to the new location. Then select Copy Here on
the menu that appears when you release the mouse button.
TIP You can make copies of another item in the same folder; the copies
are appended with numbers to give them unique file names.
Delete and restore folders and files
Removing a file from your computer is a two-step process: You first delete the
file, which moves it to the Recycle Bin—a holding area on your hard drive from

which it’s possible to restore an item if you realize you need it. Then you empty
the Recycle Bin, which permanently erases its contents. By default, Windows
prompts you to confirm the deletion of files and folders. If you prefer, you can
turn off this setting.
TIP If you aren’t sure whether you will need some files, consider
backing them up to a DVD, an external hard drive, or an inexpensive
cloud-based storage service such as Microsoft OneDrive.
There are some situations in which deleting something does not send it to the
Recycle Bin. The most common are deleting from a shared network drive or an
external USB drive.
If you realize immediately that you mistakenly deleted a file, you can often
recover it by pressing Ctrl+Z to undo the deletion. If you realize it later, you can
usually recover a deleted file or folder by opening the Recycle Bin, locating the
item, and restoring it. You can recover a deleted file from the Recycle Bin at any
time until you empty the Recycle Bin. You can’t open and work with files
directly from the Recycle Bin.
You can search the contents of files in the Recycle Bin just as you can search the
contents of files in other folders. If you activate the search box when the Recycle
Bin is selected, both the Search and Recycle Bin tool tabs are displayed.
Assuming that deleted files are listed in the content pane, you can search for any
that match the text you enter in the search box.

TIP If you want to occasionally bypass the Recycle Bin, you can do so
by holding down the Shift key when you press the Delete key or select
the Delete button.
To delete an item
1. In the content pane, select the file or folder.
2. Do either of the following:
Press the Delete key.
On the Home tab, in the Organize group, select Delete.
3. In the Delete File dialog box that opens, select Yes to confirm the deletion
and send the file to the Recycle Bin.
TIP You cannot delete a file by pressing the Backspace key.
To restore a deleted item
1. On the desktop, double-click the Recycle Bin.
2. Locate the file you want to restore. If it isn’t at the top of the list, here are a
couple of tricks:
Sort by Name, Original Location, Date Deleted, or another column, if you
know any of that information.
If you remember part of its name, enter that into the search box. This
opens the Search tool tab.
3. Select the files you want to recover.
4. On the Recycle Bin Tools tool tab, in the Restore group, select Restore the
selected items to return the items to the location from which they were
deleted.
To turn off confirmation when deleting items

1. On the desktop, right-click the Recycle Bin, and then select Properties to
display the Recycle Bin Properties dialog box.
2. Clear the Display delete confirmation dialog check box.
3. Select OK to apply your changes.
Recycle Bin size
The Recycle Bin is intended to be a place to temporarily store files
that you think you no longer need. Keep in mind, however, that the
contents of the Recycle Bin take up space on your hard drive. By
default, 10 percent of a drive up to 40 GB in size is allocated to the
Recycle Bin, plus 5 percent of any space over 40 GB. If your hard
drive is divided into partitions and the Recycle Bin is on a 10 GB
partition, only 1 GB is available for deleted files.
When deleting a very large file, Windows might inform you that the
file is too large to store in the Recycle Bin and that it will delete it
permanently. If you’re sure you won’t need to recover the file, you
can allow Windows to delete the file; if not, you can cancel the
deletion. On a small hard drive or drive partition, you might see this
“too large” message quite often.
You might need to restrict the amount of space that is used by the
Recycle Bin, or you might want to instruct Windows to bypass the
Recycle Bin entirely. Both of these options are available from the
Recycle Bin Properties dialog box.

To manage the Recycle Bin actions, locate the Recycle Bin on the
desktop, right-click it, and then select Properties. Set the maximum
size as you see fit, and then select OK to apply your changes.
Work with folder and file properties
Every folder and file has certain properties that describe it or determine how it
can be used. Although you can see some of these properties in Details view in
File Explorer, you can see the full set by selecting that file or folder in File
Explorer and selecting the Properties command on the Home tab.
The Properties dialog boxes for folders and files are similar, but not identical.

View folder properties
The Properties dialog box for a folder typically has four tabs; five if version
history is enabled. The tabs are:
General The General tab displays the folder’s name, some statistics about
it, and a few attributes. You can edit the name and the attributes, though it is
easier to edit the name in File Explorer.
The Read-only attribute is one that you will change most often. The Read-
only attribute can be selected, cleared, or marked with a square box. If the
attribute is selected, all the files in the folder and all the subfolders are read-
only. If the attribute is cleared, all the files in the folder and all the
subfolders are editable. And if the attribute is marked with a square, the
folder and subfolders contain a mix of read-only and editable files.
Sharing Options on this tab control whether a folder is shared.
Security You can use the options on this tab to assign the folder’s access
permissions to specific users or groups.
Previous Versions If you have enabled File History in Control Panel or PC

Settings, all the files in specified folders are backed up periodically. Each
backup is separate, so you can view and restore a specific version. You can
use this tab to review the contents of the folder after each backup.
SEE ALSO For information about file versions and version
history, see “Back up data” in Chapter 15, “Protect your computer
and data.”
Customize The Properties dialog box for some folder types includes a
Customize tab, which has some interesting options that you can set.
Optimize this folder for On this menu you can set the folder to one of

five types: General, Documents, Pictures, Music, or Videos. This setting
determines the file layout when you open the folder and whether a tool
tab is displayed on the File Explorer ribbon when you select the folder.
Folder pictures Use this setting to assign an image to be displayed for
the folder in the Details pane, or when the folder appears in an icon view
that is larger than Small Icons.
Folder icons Use this setting to replace the default icon with one that you
choose.
File Properties dialog boxes are very similar to those for folders. As with folder
Properties dialog boxes, the content depends on the type of file you have
selected. The file Properties dialog box includes a Details tab, which isn’t
present in folder Properties dialog boxes. The information on this tab varies with
the file type. The tab also provides an option to remove personal information.

Remove file properties
Selecting the Properties button on the Home tab opens the Properties dialog box
for the selected item. If you select the arrow below the Properties button instead
of the Properties button itself, you are presented with two options (if you have
selected a folder, only the first option is enabled):

Properties Selecting this option displays the Properties dialog box for the
selected item and is the same as selecting the Properties button.
Remove Properties Selecting this displays a dialog box in which you can
choose to remove all the properties that can be removed, or only selected
ones. One reason to do this is to remove personal information that is stored
with some file types.
Some file types have no properties that can be removed. Others, such as
Word documents, have a long list.

TIP The information displayed in the Remove Properties dialog box
varies depending on the type of file selected when you choose the
command.
To display the Properties dialog box for a folder or file
1. In File Explorer, select the folder or file you want to display properties for.
2. Do any of the following:
Right-click the file or folder, and then on the shortcut menu, select
Properties.
On the Home tab, in the Open group, select the Properties button) not
the arrow).
On the Home tab, select the Properties arrow, and then select
Properties.
To remove personal information from a file
1. In File Explorer, select the file from which you want to remove personal
information.
2. Do any of the following:
On the Home tab, in the Open group, select the Properties arrow, and
then Remove properties.
In the Open group, select the Properties button to open the file’s
Properties dialog box, and then on the Details tab, select the Remove
Properties and Personal Information link at the bottom.
Right-click the file and select Properties, and then at the bottom of the
Details tab, select Remove Properties and Personal Information.
3. In the Remove Properties dialog box, do either of the following:
Select Create a copy with all possible properties removed, and select
OK.
Select Remove the following properties from this file, select the

properties you want to remove, and select OK.
Key points
Choose a naming convention for files and folders that works for you and
your organization, and apply it consistently.
You can compress folders and files to save space or to manage multiple
items as a single unit.
You can move files and folders between locations in File Explorer, or make
multiple copies of files.
If you accidentally delete a file, you can restore it from the Recycle Bin.
Restoring a file returns it to the location from which it was deleted.
You can display, edit, and remove file properties from within File Explorer.
 Practice tasks
Before you can complete these practice tasks, you need to copy the book’s
practice files to your computer. The practice files for these tasks are located in
the Win10SBS\Ch06 folder. The introduction includes a complete list of
practice files.
Create and rename folders and files
Display the practice file folder in File Explorer, and then perform the following
tasks:
1. In the practice file folder, create a subfolder and name it MyFiles.
2. Rename the MyFiles folder as MySBSFiles.
3. Rename the Events document as Newsletter.
Compress folders and files
Display the practice file folder in File Explorer, and then perform the following
tasks:

1. In the content pane, select the three Password files.
2. Save the selected files to a compressed folder, and name it PasswordPhotos.
3. Extract the files from the PasswordPhotos compressed folder to the Photos
folder.
Move and copy folders and files
Display the practice file folder in File Explorer, and then perform the following
tasks:
1. Select all the items in the folder, and then release the selection.
2. Select three items that are next to each other (listed contiguously) in the
folder, and then release the selection.
3. Select three items that are not next to each other in the folder, and then
release the selection.
4. Copy the Expenses workbook to the Clipboard. Open the Reports folder,
and paste a copy of the Expenses workbook in that folder.
5. Return to the Ch06 folder. Cut the Survey document to the Clipboard, and
then paste it into the Files subfolder.
Delete and restore folders and files
Display the practice file folder in File Explorer, and then perform the following
tasks:
1. Delete the Photos folder and all its contents.
2. Navigate to the Recycle Bin. Then restore the Photos folder and all its
contents.
Work with folder and file properties
Display the practice file folder in File Explorer, and then perform the following
tasks:
1. Display the properties of the Photos folder.
2. Display the properties of the Password01 file.

3. Display the properties of the Expenses workbook. Determine whether the
file is read-only. If it is, change that property.
4. Add your name as one of the properties of the Expenses workbook. Then
use the commands in the Remove Properties dialog box to remove that
property from the file.

Part 3: Devices and resources
CHAPTER 7
Manaage peripheral devices
CHAPTER 8
Manage network and storage resources
CHAPTER 9
Get assistance from Cortana
CHAPTER 10
Safely and efficiently browse the internet

7. Manage peripheral devices
In this chapter
Understand peripheral devices
Locate device information
Display your desktop on multiple screens
Set up audio devices
Change the way your mouse works
Change the way your keyboard works
Manage printer connections
If your computer is a desktop computer, you’ll need to connect a few peripheral
hardware devices—such as a monitor, a keyboard, and a mouse—to it before you
can use it. Other common peripheral devices are printers, speakers, scanners, fax
machines, external storage drives, and external media drives such as DVD
drives. Depending on your interests and how you use your computer, you might
also use devices such as a microphone, webcam, fingerprint reader, joystick,
touchpad, or drawing tablet. The point of all these devices, of course, is to make
your computing experience more productive, more enjoyable, and (hopefully)
simpler.
Many people now use laptops as their primary computer at home or at work.
Laptops have the basic peripherals built in, but you can also connect an external
monitor, keyboard, mouse, and other peripherals to your laptop to make it feel
more like a desktop environment.
In this chapter, you’ll work with a computer’s most common external devices—
the monitor, mouse, keyboard, printer, speakers, and microphone. In the process,
you’ll learn about plug-and-play devices, device drivers, and ports.
This chapter guides you through procedures related to installing peripheral
devices, locating device information, displaying your desktop on multiple
screens, setting up audio devices, changing the way your mouse and keyboard
work, and managing printer connections.

Understand peripheral devices
Peripheral devices are things that you can add to your computer to extend its
functionality or power, or to serve as an interface between it and human users.
There are two general types of peripheral devices:
Internal You install these inside your computer’s case and are likely to
consider them part of the computer. Internal devices can come in the form
of an expansion card, or a new hard drive or DVD drive. For example, you
might install an additional video card to improve your computer’s graphics
capabilities or support multiple displays.
External You attach these to your computer by connecting them to ports on
the outside of your computer’s case.
Peripheral device terminology
Ports are outlets in your computer’s case through which various types of
information can pass. Ports come in many shapes and sizes, each designed for a
specific purpose. A typical modern computer has a VGA or HDMI port to which
you can connect a monitor, an Ethernet port to which you can connect a network
cable, and several USB ports to which you can connect a variety of devices. The
computer might also support wireless connections through Wi-Fi, Bluetooth, and
radio waves (typically used for wireless keyboards and mice).
An older computer might have a DVI monitor port, PS/2 keyboard and mouse
ports, a parallel printer port, or an IEEE 1394 port to which you can connect
high-speed devices such as digital video cameras. But you probably won’t be
running Windows 10 on one of these computers.
If you find that you don’t have enough ports to connect all the devices you want
to use with your computer, you don’t have to limit your device choices. Here are
three options for expanding your connection capacity:
Install extra ports You can purchase an expansion card with more ports.
After turning off your desktop computer and removing its cover, you insert
the card into one of the available expansion slots. When you turn the power
back on, Windows 10 detects and installs the new ports.
Use a hub You can connect a multiport hub to your computer and then
connect multiple devices to the hub, enabling all the devices to share that

single connection. Hubs are available for network, USB, and other
connection types.
Use more wireless devices A wireless version of almost every external
peripheral you might want to use is now available. You can connect to a
printer, scanner, fax, keyboard, mouse, or hard drive without using a cable.
You can listen to audio and use a microphone without plugging anything
into your computer.
Install peripheral devices
Installing a new peripheral device is usually easy and intuitive, because most of
these devices are now plug and play. Plug and play quite literally means that you
can connect devices to the computer and begin using them. Plug-and-play
devices include printers, external hard drives, flash drives, fingerprint readers,
smart card readers, cameras, and many others.
When you connect a device to your computer, Windows 10 identifies the device
and searches through its database of device drivers to locate the appropriate
driver for the device. Device drivers are files that let Windows communicate
with your device. Drivers can be specific to an individual device or to a family
of devices (such as all HP LaserJet printers), and they are often specific to a
certain version of Windows.
Windows 10 doesn’t automatically support all devices (no operating system
does), but it natively supports more devices than any previous version.
Sometimes old hardware is simply incompatible, or the manufacturer hasn’t
chosen to provide an updated Windows 10 driver. You can check the
compatibility of your current devices or one you are thinking about buying from
the 
Hardware 
Compatibility 
Checker 
at
www.microsoft.com/accessories/support/compatibility.
If Windows 10 doesn’t have a current driver for your device, it asks you to
provide the driver. You might have the driver on an installation disc provided by
the device manufacturer. Alternatively, Windows can search the internet for the
driver, or you can visit the device manufacturer’s website.
TIP If your device is in the list of compatible devices in the Hardware

Compatibility Checker, allowing Windows 10 to search for the drivers
online is almost always the fastest and easiest way to get them.
Some devices come with installation software that expands the devices’
capabilities. 
For 
example, 
you 
might 
connect 
an 
all-in-one
printer/scanner/fax/copy machine to your computer and be able to print, fax, and
copy without installing additional software. However, to scan documents to
electronic files, you might need to install the software provided with the device.
Boost your memory
If you want to upgrade your Windows 10 computer’s memory, you
can do so without physically installing additional RAM in your
computer case. The Windows ReadyBoost feature enables your
Windows 10 computer to use a qualifying USB flash drive as a
memory-expansion device. For best performance, you should use a
USB drive (also referred to as a USB stick or thumb drive) with
available space of at least double the amount of memory that is
installed in your computer, and preferably four times as much
memory. You can use up to eight flash memory devices
synchronously (with a total of up to 256 gigabytes [GB] of memory)
on one computer—if you have enough ports.
ReadyBoost is easy to use. Insert the USB drive in a USB port, right-
click the drive in File Explorer, and select Properties. On the
ReadyBoost tab of the Properties dialog box, Windows suggests the
amount of flash drive memory you can dedicate to ReadyBoost, and
you select the amount you want to use. When ReadyBoost is
enabled, Windows 10 creates a file named ReadyBoost.sfcache in the
root of the flash memory device.

TIP To use more than 4 GB on a single flash drive, format it with the
NTFS file system.
If one or more solid-state drives (SSDs) are connected to your
computer, ReadyBoost might be unavailable, because some solid-
state drives are faster than flash memory devices and are unlikely to
benefit from ReadyBoost.
Locate device information
You can display information about the devices that are connected to your
computer from the Devices page of the Settings window. On this page, Windows
10 displays information about printers, scanners, projectors, the mouse or
touchpad, the keyboard, Bluetooth and USB devices, and other devices that are
connected to the computer.

The information that is available from this page is specific to the hardware and
peripheral devices that are connected to your computer either directly or through
a network.
SEE ALSO Display connections are managed from the System page of
the Settings window. For information about displays, see “Customize
device display settings” in Chapter 12, “Manage computer settings,”

and “Display your desktop on multiple screens” later in this chapter.
You can add devices to your system by selecting the Add button at the top of the
appropriate settings pane and following the steps described in the wizard to
install the compatible device drivers on your computer. You can remove the
connection to a device by selecting it in the list and then selecting Remove
Device. Doing so doesn’t delete the device’s drivers from your computer, so if
you add the device again later, the process is a bit simpler.
Adding a device means more than just connecting to the device physically or
wirelessly; it means that Windows has confirmed that the drivers are correct and
it can communicate with the device. What you are really adding it to is the list of
available devices that are displayed when you choose to do something that
requires a device. For example, when the Print dialog box is displayed, all the
available printers are listed so you can choose the one you want. When you
remove a device, you’re just removing it from that list.
When a device isn’t working properly, you can get information about the device
and its drivers, and often troubleshoot the problem, from the Device Manager
window.

You can double-click any device to display its Properties dialog box, in which
you can explore detailed information about any device.
You can also display information about the hardware, software, and components
that form your computer system, in the searchable System Information window.

To open the Settings window
Select the Start button, and then select Settings on the menu.
TIP When the Settings window opens, its icon is displayed on the
taskbar. To make it easier to open this window in the future, you
can right-click that icon and select Pin To Taskbar.
To display information about installed devices
1. Do either of the following to start Device Manager:
Right-click the Start button and then, on the Quick Link menu, select
Device Manager.
Enter Device Manager in the taskbar search box, and then select the
Device Manager Control Panel app.

TIP There are various ways to do almost everything in Windows
10. These procedures introduce different approaches. Always
feel free to explore each approach more fully on your own.
2. In the Device Manager window, expand any category to display the
devices in that category that are installed on your computer.
3. To display information about a specific device, double-click the device (or
right-click the device, and then select Properties).
IMPORTANT Don’t change any of the settings unless you have
the experience necessary to anticipate the consequences of the
change.
To display information about hardware, software, and components
1. Enter system information in the taskbar search box and then, in the search
results, select the System Information desktop app.
2. In the System Information window, expand any category to display
information about the system components that are installed on your
computer.
Display your desktop on multiple screens
A basic computer system includes one display that shows your Windows
desktop. This is sufficient for many computing experiences. However, in some
situations, you might find it convenient, or even necessary, to extend your
desktop across multiple displays or duplicate your desktop on a secondary
display (such as a remote monitor or video projector screen). You can easily add
one, two, or more displays to your computer system.
You can physically connect as many displays as you have ports available; ports

can be provided by video cards, a multiport video card, or USB ports. Windows
10 also natively supports Miracast—a wireless technology you can use to project
a screen image from your Windows 10 device to a television, projector, or other
device that also supports Miracast. Miracast does not require a wireless network
or use your network bandwidth. Many modern internet-connected televisions
support screen casting, so you can, for example, use this technology to play a
slideshow or video (with audio) on televisions throughout your house during a
get-together. (Or, for the video gamers in the house, to display your
championship game on the big screen so your friends don’t have to watch over
your shoulder.) No special app is required.
You connect the display to the computer by using a cable with the appropriate
port connectors on it, or, if you are using Miracast, wirelessly. If you don’t have
a cable with connectors that match the available ports, you can use an adapter to
match the cable connector type to the port type. You then inform Windows
where the displays are physically located so you can easily move on-screen
objects between displays.
When you physically connect a secondary display to your computer, Windows
10 detects the device and, if your computer system already has the necessary
drivers, automatically extends the desktop to the newly connected display.
After connecting the display, you can change the way Windows displays
information on the devices. Options include:
Duplicate these displays The same content appears on both displays. This

is useful when you are giving a presentation and are not facing the screen
(for example, when standing at a podium facing an audience) or want to
have a closer view of the content you’re displaying.
Extend these displays Your desktop expands to cover both displays. The
Windows Taskbar appears only on the screen you designate as the primary
display.
Show desktop only on Content appears only on the selected display. This
is useful if you are working on a laptop or tablet that is connected to a
second, larger display.
When you are working on a computer that is connected to two displays,
Windows designates one as the primary display and the other as the secondary
display. The Welcome screen and taskbar automatically appear on the primary
display, as do most app windows when they first open. You can set the taskbar to
appear on one or all displays, and drag selected windows between displays. You
configure these settings separately, from the Taskbar pane of the Personalization
settings page.
By default, Display 2 appears to the right of Display 1. When you move the
mouse pointer horizontally from screen to screen, it should leave the right edge
of the left screen and enter the left edge of the right screen at vertically the same
point. If your displays are not physically the same size, are set to different screen
resolutions, or are not placed level with each other, you can change the
alignment of the displays so that the pointer moves cleanly between them.
To open the Display settings pane
In the Settings window, select System, and then select Display.
Right-click an empty area of the desktop, and then select Display settings.

TIP If a technical problem involving the connection between your
computer and one display occurs when your desktop is extended across
two or more displays, you might find yourself in the situation of having
windows open on the inactive displays. To retrieve a hidden window,
press Alt+Tab until the window you want to move is selected in Task
view, and then press Shift+Win+Right Arrow (or Left Arrow) to move
the active window to the next display.
To extend or duplicate your desktop across multiple displays

In the Display settings pane, select an option from the Multiple displays
list (which is available only if a second display is connected), and then
select Apply.
TIP If you later want to change the Multiple Display settings, you
can do so quickly by pressing Win+P. A Project pane slides out
from the right side of your main display, offering the same options
to extend or duplicate the display.
To extend your screen to a TV or remote display by using a Miracast
connection
1. Make sure the remote display is turned on and the dongle is connected (if
applicable).
2. Display the Display settings pane.
3. In the Multiple displays sections, select Connect to a wireless display.
The Connect pane slides out from the right side of your screen and displays
a list of wireless display and audio devices within range. Select the device
you want to connect to.
TIP Wireless screen extensions are not made automatically, so
they are a bit more effort to initially establish and must be
reestablished each time you restart your computer. (Wired
connections are restored with the previous settings each time you
restart.) After setting up the connection, you can customize the
display settings.


4. Accept any connection prompts that appear on the remote screen.
The remote screen displays a message telling you that it is connecting to the
computer. After the connection is made, the desktop extends to the remote
screen, and you can arrange the displays as you want.
To ascertain which screen is the primary display
In the Display settings pane, below the Select and rearrange displays
preview area, select Identify to show the numbers from the display icons
on the screens that they represent.
To change which display is designated as the primary
1. In the Display settings pane, in the Select and rearrange displays preview
area, select the secondary display.
2. In the Multiple displays area, select the Make this my main display check
box, and then select Apply.
To adjust the relative position of the displays
1. In the Display settings pane, drag the rectangle representing Display 2 to
the location you want it to be in relation to Display 1. Try to align the
display rectangles so that the arrangement resembles the alignment of the
physical displays.

2. Select Apply.
TIP After rearranging the display icons, you can judge whether the
displays are appropriately aligned by moving the pointer between
the screens. Ideally, the pointer will remain on the same horizontal
or vertical plane when you do so.
SEE ALSO For information about changing screen resolution and
increasing the size of on-screen elements, see “Customize device
display settings” in Chapter 12, “Manage computer settings.”
To specify the position of the taskbar on multiple displays
1. Right-click an empty area of the taskbar, select Taskbar settings to display

the Taskbar pane of the Personalization settings page, and then scroll to the
Multiple Displays section.
IMPORTANT The controls in the Multiple Displays section are
active only when multiple displays are connected to your
computer.
2. In the Multiple displays section of the Taskbar settings pane, do either of
the following:
If you want to extend the taskbar across the screens, turn on Show
taskbar on all displays.
In the Show taskbar buttons on list, select the location where you want
to display the working taskbar content.
Set up audio devices
Computers are no longer devices used primarily to produce traditional business
documents such as letters, reports, and worksheets. You can use your computer
for multimedia activities such as listening to music, watching movies, or playing

games, and you can create sound-enhanced documents such as presentations and
videos. Even if you’re not likely to work with these types of files, your
productivity might be diminished if you cannot hear the sound effects used by
Windows 10 to alert you to events such as the arrival of email messages. And
you’ll need speakers and a microphone if you want to participate in video
conferences or use your computer to place telephone calls.
Expand your laptop or tablet with peripheral
devices
Laptops and tablets are useful when you want to be able to move
around with your computer—from room to room, from work to
home, or from city to city.
Although laptops can offer fast computing and large-capacity hard
disks, you might have to deal with a smaller screen, a smaller
keyboard, and a touchpad or stylus instead of a standard mouse.
Many “ultra-light” laptops don’t have internal CD or DVD drives.
Carrying a full-size monitor, keyboard, and mouse when you travel
with your portable computer is not always convenient, but adding
full-size peripheralsis a great way to improve your computing
experience when you’re using your laptop in your office or at home.
If you use a laptop so that you have a seamless transition between
work and home, you can set up a monitor, keyboard, and mouse at
each location for a relatively small sum of money. You then have the
best of both worlds—mobile computing and a full-size setup.
Instead of connecting your hardware devices to your laptop through
a USB port or wirelessly, you could connect the devices to a docking
station or USB hub, and then connect your computer to that
whenever you want to use the devices.
When you attach an external monitor to your laptop, you might at
first see the same content on both displays, or the content might
appear only on the laptop display. To change which display shows
your desktop, use the techniques described in “To change which
display is designated as the primary” earlier in this topic.

If you want to use external audio input and output devices, you can connect them
to your computer either through the audio jacks, through USB ports, or through
Bluetooth or wireless connections. USB-connected microphones generally
produce cleaner audio because the processing is done externally to the PC, so the
sound isn’t subject to as much electronic interference. This is particularly
important in text-to-speech conversion.
Desktop computers have audio output jacks (usually found on the back of the
computer case) and might also have dedicated headphone jacks (either on the
front or on the back of the case). Laptop computers have headphone jacks and
microphone jacks, or on rare occasions one jack that handles both output and
input.
TIP The audio output jack might be indicated by a small speaker icon,
an arrow symbol, or the words Audio or Audio/Out. On desktop
computer cases that feature standard component color-coding, the audio
output jack is light green, the headphone jack is light orange, and the
audio input jack is pink. This color-coding simplifies the process of
locating the correct jacks. Some audio device connection cables are
color-coded to match.
With the rapid evolution of internet-based communications, digital video, and
speech-to-text technologies, microphones are being used more commonly with
business and home computer systems. Microphones come in a variety of types,
such as the following:
Freestanding microphones
Headset microphones with built-in headphones that allow more private
communication and consistent recording quality
Boom microphones with a single headset speaker
If you will be recording a lot of speech or using the Windows Speech
Recognition feature, consider investing in a good-quality microphone. To get the
highest quality sound, it’s critical that you choose the type of microphone that
fits your needs. Headset and boom microphones maintain a constant distance

between the microphone and your mouth, which helps to maintain a more
consistent sound level than a stationary microphone.
The Speech Recognition feature in Windows 10 includes a very capable speech
recognition engine. After you set up speech recognition, you can use it to control
your computer and enter text into most apps where you would normally type it.
Windows 10 also features Cortana, a service that is designed to be your new
digital assistant and can respond to your voice instructions.
SEE ALSO For information about configuring your Windows 10
computer for Cortana, see Chapter 9, “Get assistance from Cortana,”
and for speech recognition, see “Manage speech settings” in Chapter 12,
“Manage computer settings.”
When you connect an audio device to your Windows 10 computer, a notification
might appear briefly and then be stored with other notifications in the Action
Center.
To switch between audio playback devices
1. In the notification area of the taskbar, right-click the Sound icon (labeled
with a speaker), and then select Playback devices to display the Playback
tab of the Sound dialog box.

2. Select the speakers, headphones, or other playback device you want to use,
and then select Set Default.
To manage audio playback device settings
On the Playback tab of the Sound dialog box, select the device you want to
manage, and then select Properties to display settings that you can
configure manually.

Or
1. On the Playback tab of the Sound dialog box, select the device you want to
manage, and then select Configure to start the Speaker Setup wizard.
TIP A configuration appears twice in the list if the audio channel
has multiple speaker-arrangement options.
2. On the Choose your configuration page, select the appropriate audio
channel, and select Test. Then select each speaker in the speaker setup
diagram.
An image representing sound waves appears next to each speaker as the
wizard plays a sound through that speaker. If a sound is not audible each

time the sound waves appear, or if the sound plays through a speaker other
than the one indicated in the wizard, verify that the speakers are properly
connected and test again.
3. Select Next to display the Select Full-Range Speakers page.
4. In some configurations, the front left and right speakers, or the surround
speakers, are full-range speakers that produce the entire audio range and
include a subwoofer unit to enhance bass output. If your speaker
configuration includes full-range speakers, select the check box for those
speakers. Then select Next.
5. On the Configuration complete page, select Finish, and then select OK to
close the Sound dialog box.
To switch between audio recording devices
1. In the notification area of the taskbar, right-click the Sound icon, and then
Recording devices to display the Recording tab of the Sound dialog box.

2. Select the microphone, headset, or other recording device you want to use,
and then select Set Default.
To manage audio recording device settings
On the Recording tab of the Sound dialog box, select the device you want
to manage, and then select Properties to display settings that you can
configure manually.
Or
1. On the Recording tab of the Sound dialog box, select the device you want
to manage, and then select Configure to open the Speech Recognition
window of Control Panel.
2. In the Speech Recognition window, select Set up microphone to start the
Microphone Setup Wizard.

3. Select the type of microphone you are using, and then select Next.
TIP You can return to the previous wizard page at any time by
selecting the arrow in the upper-left corner of the wizard.
4. On the Set up your microphone page, follow the instructions to correctly
position the microphone, and then select Next.
5. On the Adjust the volume page, read the microphone test paragraph aloud
in your normal speaking voice. Or, just for fun, you might try singing a
couple of lines from your favorite song! Any audio input delivered at the
volume you’ll usually use when using the microphone will work.

As you speak (or sing), the volume gauge moves in response to your voice.
TIP If the volume gauge does not move, your microphone might
be incorrectly connected, malfunctioning, or incompatible with
your computer. If this happens, hold the microphone close to your
mouth and speak loudly; if the recording meter moves slightly, the
connection is good, and the problem is compatibility between your
microphone and your computer. You might be able to solve this
problem by downloading new device drivers from the microphone
manufacturer’s website, or it might be simpler to replace the
microphone.
6. When you finish reading the paragraph, select Next.
7. If it seems necessary to repeat the input sample, do so. When you’re
satisfied with the results, select Next on each page until the wizard
confirms that the microphone is set up. On the last page of the wizard,

select Finish.
Change the way your mouse works
In the beginning, a computer mouse consisted of a shell with one clickable
button and a rubber ball on the bottom that correlated your mouse movements
with a pointer on the screen. Nowadays, mice come in many shapes and sizes,
employing a variety of functions, buttons, wheels, and connection methods.
Windows 10 offers enhanced wheel support that allows for smooth vertical
scrolling and, on some mice, horizontal scrolling. Check the manufacturer’s
documentation to see whether your mouse can take advantage of this technology.
Even if it can’t, you can still customize your mouse settings in various ways to
optimize the way it works with Windows.
You can change the function performed by each of the buttons and the wheel, if
your mouse has one, in addition to the appearance of the pointer in its various
states, and its functionality. If you want, you can allow the appearance of the
mouse pointer in Windows 10 to be controlled by the visual theme.
TIP If you have a high-tech mouse, it might come with software you
can install that extends its functionality beyond what the Settings
window or Control Panel offer. Similarly, some mice and keyboards
include custom management interfaces that augment or override the
Windows settings. Look in the packaging for a CD/DVD or instructions
for installing the software from the manufacturer’s website.
To set basic button and wheel options
1. In the Settings window, select Devices, and then select Mouse.
2. Configure any of the following settings:
To specify the normal functionality of the mouse buttons, in the Select
your primary button area, select Left or Right.
If you select Right, you would select the right mouse button to select an
item and select the left one to display a shortcut menu.

TIP This setting is useful if you are left handed, if you have
injured your right hand, or if you want to switch your mousing
hand to decrease wrist strain.
To set the distance scrolled when you move the scroll wheel, from the
Roll the mouse wheel to scroll list, select either Multiple lines at a time
or One screen. When you select Multiple Lines At A Time, you can
specify how many lines to scroll at a time by dragging the slider.

Dragging the slider displays the number of lines in a small box above the
slider. This number is approximate and varies depending on where the
text is and how it is formatted.
To scroll an inactive window when you point to it, turn on Scroll inactive
windows when I hover over them.
To change additional mouse button settings
1. At the bottom of the Mouse settings pane, select Additional mouse
options to open the Mouse Properties dialog box.

2. On the Buttons tab, do either of the following:
In the Double-click speed area, double-click the folder image to test the
speed at which Windows registers a double-click. Then, if necessary, drag
the Speed slider to adjust the speed. (If you have changed the default
primary button, use the right mouse button to double-click the folder and
to drag the slider.)
To drag without holding down the mouse button, in the ClickLock area,

select the Turn on ClickLock check box.
3. Select Apply to apply the changes but leave the dialog box open, or OK to
apply the changes and close the Mouse Properties dialog box.
To change the appearance of the entire set of mouse pointers
1. In the Mouse Properties dialog box, select the Pointers tab.

2. In the Scheme list, select a different scheme to display the set of pointers
associated with that scheme.
3. Select Apply to apply the changes and keep the dialog box open, or OK to
apply the changes and close the Mouse Properties dialog box.
To change an individual pointer icon
1. In the Mouse Properties dialog box, display the Pointers tab.
2. In the Customize list, select any pointer icon, and then select Browse. The
Browse dialog box opens, displaying the contents of the Cursors folder.
(Cursor is another name for pointer.)
3. In the Browse dialog box, double-click any pointer icon to replace the one
you selected in the Customize list.

TIP You can restore the selected pointer to the default for the
original scheme at any time by selecting Use Default.
4. If you want to add a shadow to your pointers, select the Enable pointer
shadow check box.
5. Select Apply to apply the changes and keep the dialog box open, or OK to
apply the changes and close the Mouse Properties dialog box.
To change the mouse pointer functionality
1. In the Mouse Properties dialog box, select the Pointer Options tab.

2. Make any of the following changes:
To change the pointer speed, in the Motion section, drag the slider.
To speed up dialog-box operations, in the Snap To section, select the
Automatically move pointer to the default button in a dialog box
check box.
To make the pointer more visible on the screen, in the Visibility section,

select or clear any of the three check boxes.
3. Select Apply to apply the changes and keep the dialog box open, or OK to
apply the changes and close the Mouse Properties dialog box.
To change how the mouse wheel works
1. In the Mouse Properties dialog box, select the Wheel tab.
Here you can set the scroll distance just as you can in the Settings window.
If you set this in either location, the change is reflected in the other location
the next time you open it.
2. To control how much of the screen scrolls with each roll of the mouse
wheel, in the Vertical Scrolling section, do either of the following:
Select The following number of lines at a time, and then enter or use
the arrows to select the number of lines you want to scroll.

Select One screen at a time.
3. If your mouse supports horizontal scrolling, in the Tilt the wheel to scroll
the following number of characters at a time box, enter or select the
number of characters you want to scroll horizontally when you tilt the
mouse wheel to the left or right.
4. Select Apply to apply the changes and keep the dialog box open, or OK to
apply the changes and close the Mouse Properties dialog box.
Change the way your keyboard works
Regardless of the type of keyboard you have, all keyboards work in the same
general way: Pressing each key or key combination generates a unique key code
that tells the computer what to do. Pressing a key or key combination that gives a
command always carries out that command.
You can change the keystrokes that Windows receives from a keyboard to those
of another language. Chapter 12, “Manage computer settings,” reviews
procedures for installing languages and switching among installed keyboards.
In the Typing pane of the Devices page of the Settings window, you can change
settings that control the following text input features:
Spelling Choose whether to automatically correct and/or highlight
misspelled words.
Typing Show text suggestions as you type, add a space when you insert
suggested text, and add a period after you insert two spaces.
Touch keyboard Play key sounds as you type, capitalize the first letter of
each sentence, turn on All Caps when you double-tap the Shift key, add the
standard keyboard layout as a touch keyboard option, and automatically
show the touch keyboard in windowed apps when there is no keyboard
attached to your device.
You can configure options on the Speed tab of the Keyboard Properties dialog
box, which is accessible from Control Panel or search, to change the speed at
which you must press and release a key to input a single character.
To configure text input settings
1. Open the Settings window, select Devices, and then select Typing to

display spelling, typing, and touch keyboard options.
2. Turn on or off each toggle button to configure the settings as you want
them.
To change the key repeat delay and blink rate
1. Do either of the following to open the Keyboard Properties dialog box:
Display an Icons view of Control Panel, and then select Keyboard.
Enter keyboard in the taskbar search box, and then select the Keyboard
Control Panel app.

2. To adjust how long you can hold down a key before Windows repeats its
character, drag the Repeat delay slider.
3. To adjust the rate at which Windows repeats a character while you hold
down its key, drag the Repeat rate slider.

TIP You can test the Repeat Delay and Repeat Rate settings in the
box at the bottom of the Character Repeat area.
4. To adjust how fast the cursor blinks, drag the Cursor blink rate slider.
5. Select Apply or OK.
Manage printer connections
Previous editions of this book provided many pages of information about
connecting printers to your computer. The good news is that modern printer
connections are incredibly simple to complete.
If you have only one computer and one printer, you can connect them directly,
by using a physical cable, or over a network. When you do, Windows searches
for the printer driver. If you have an installation disc for your printer, you can
install the printer drivers from the disc. However, the installation disc might
contain out-of-date drivers. The more dependable option is to have Windows
download the current list of printers that are supported by the drivers that are
available through Windows Update. You can choose your printer in the list and
immediately install the latest driver (this is an example of “plug and play”).
Printer driver discs frequently include printer management apps that provide an
interface to information about your printer; you can also get that information by
entering the IP address and port the printer is connected to into a browser
window. If your computer doesn’t have an optical drive for the installation disc
(which is becoming quite common with laptops and all-in-one computers), you
can install the printer management software from the printer manufacturer’s
website.
You manage installed printers from the Printers & Scanners pane of the Devices
settings page.

Your computing environment might include one or more printers that are
connected directly to the network through a wired or wireless network
connection. These printers are called network printers. Network printers aren’t
connected to any computer and are available on the network whenever they are
turned on.

SEE ALSO For information about sharing printers and other resources
with a homegroup, see “Share files on your network” in Chapter 8,
“Manage network and storage resources.”
If Windows is unable to locate and automatically connect to a remote printer,
you can help to identify it by providing either the path to the printer, if it’s
connected to another computer, or the IP address, if it’s a network printer.
To install a local plug-and-play printer
1. In the Settings window, select Devices, and then Printers & scanners. The
Printers & Scanners pane displays a list of the currently installed printers.
2. Connect the printer to the appropriate port on your computer.
3. Connect the printer to a power outlet, and then if necessary, turn it on.
Windows 10 locates and installs the appropriate device driver while
displaying a progress bar in the Printers area. If the printer appears in the
Printers section of the Printers & Scanners pane, your printer is installed
and ready to use.
IMPORTANT If the printer wasn’t recognized or the drivers
weren’t properly installed, continue with the next procedure.
To manually install a local printer
1. Display the Printers & scanners settings pane.
2. At the top of the pane, select Add a printer or scanner. Windows searches
for any available printers that aren’t yet installed on your computer.

3. If the list includes the printer that you want to install, select it to have
Windows locate and install the appropriate device driver.
4. If the search didn’t locate the printer you want to add, select The printer
that I want isn’t listed to start the Add Printer wizard.

TIP A printer that is connected directly to your computer is called
a local printer. A printer that is available to you through your
network is called a network printer or remote printer.
5. On the first page of the Add Printer wizard, select Add a local printer or
network printer with manual settings, and then select Next.
6. On the Choose a printer port page, select the port to which your printer is
connected from the Use an existing port list. Then select Next to display
the Install The Printer Driver page.
IMPORTANT It’s likely that the correct port will already be
selected. If not, the installation instructions from your printer
manufacturer will tell you which port you should use. Some
manufacturers supply helpful drawings to guide you.

7. Do either of the following:
If your printer model is listed, select it.
If your printer is not listed, or if you want to be sure you have the latest
driver, select Windows Update. Windows Update retrieves the current
set of Windows 10 printer drivers from its online database and updates
the Manufacturer and Printers lists. There are a lot of printer drivers, so
this process can take a couple of minutes. In the updated list, select your
printer.
8. Select Next to display the Type A Printer Name page.
IMPORTANT The Printers list is actually a list of drivers, rather
than printers. Many printer drivers support multiple printers, and
the supported printers might not all be in the Printers list. If the list
doesn’t include your specific printer model, select a model with a
similar name. Alternatively, download the necessary drivers from

the manufacturer’s website, return to the Install The Printer Driver
page, and select Have Disk to install the printer manually.
9. On the Type a printer name page, change the printer name or accept the
suggested name. Then select Next.
A progress bar indicates the status of the driver installation. When the
installation is complete, the Printer Sharing page appears.
10. On the Printer Sharing page, choose whether to share the printer through
your computer with other printers on your network. Then select Next.
TIP To share a printer with other network computer users, the
Network Discovery and File And Printer Sharing settings must be
turned on for the current network profile. For information, see
“Share files on your network” in Chapter 8, “Manage network and
storage resources.”
The Add Printer wizard confirms that you’ve successfully added the printer.
If you chose to share the printer, it is now available to other network
computer users.
11. On the last page of the Add Printer wizard, select Print a test page. Your
printer might require an additional step or two here to print the page. After
Windows 10 sends the test page to the printer, a confirmation message box
appears.
12. In the confirmation message box, select Close. Then in the Add Printer
wizard, select Finish. An icon for the newly installed local printer appears
in the Printers area of the Printers & Scanners window.
To display information about printer status
1. Display the Printers & scanners settings pane.
2. Select the printer you want to display status information for, and then in the
pane that opens, select Open queue.
The printer-specific window displays information about the printer status

and active print jobs. You can manage settings and print jobs from the
Printer menu.
To manage printer settings
In the Printers & scanners settings pane, select the printer, and then select
Manage to open a window that contains printer-specific configuration
options.

Virtual printers
Some apps install printer drivers that you can use to “print” content
to their default file type. Most notably, virtual printer drivers allow
you to print to a PDF file, a text file, an XPS file, or Microsoft
OneNote. When you install an app that has this capability, it usually
automatically installs the appropriate driver and adds the virtual
printer to the printer list.
You can print to a virtual printer just as you do to a real printer.
Virtual printers are available in apps in the same locations as other

printers.


Key points
You can connect peripheral devices to your computer, either through a cable
or wirelessly through a USB or Bluetooth connection, to extend its
capabilities. Keyboard and mice are the most common peripheral devices.
Other examples are external monitors, drives, printers, smart card readers,
and fingerprint readers. You can display information about the devices
connected to your computer in Device Manager.
You can connect a Windows 10 computer to multiple displays through
physical connections, or you can connect wirelessly to display devices
(such as televisions) that support Miracast.
You can connect a variety of audio output and input devices to your
computer and easily switch between devices to fit the requirements of a
specific situation.
Whether you use a wired or wireless mouse, you can specify which button
is the primary mouse button and the speed of action that constitutes a
double click. If your mouse has a scroll wheel, you can specify the number
of lines the screen content moves when you scroll.
You can set keyboard options to correct many common typing errors.
Windows 10 has built-in drivers for most device connections, which makes
it easy to connect to a local or network printer.
 Practice tasks
No practice files are necessary to complete the practice tasks in this chapter.
Understand peripheral devices
There are no practice tasks for this topic.
Locate device information
Perform the following tasks:
1. Open the Settings window and display the Devices settings page. Review

each pane of the page. Identify the devices that you can currently configure
from this page.
2. Open Device Manager and familiarize yourself with the categories of
installed devices. Then do the following:
If any device displays a warning symbol, open its Properties dialog box
and on the Driver tab, select the Update Driver button to search for a
new device driver.
Select each of the options on the View menu to display other ways of
locating devices. Then return to the Devices By Type view.
3. If you want to, open the System Information window to locate technical
information about the hardware, software, and components in your
computer system.
Display your desktop on multiple screens
Perform the following tasks:
If you have multiple displays connected to your computer, do the following:
In the Settings window, select System, and then select Display. From the
Display settings pane, identify the monitors by number.
If you want to, change the screen that is designated as the primary
display.
Experiment with extending and duplicating the display. Consider the
circumstances under which you might want to use each of these settings.
If your desktop is extended across displays, adjust the relative position of
the displays, and then move the pointer across the displays and notice the
effect.
In the Settings window, select Personalization, and then Taskbar. In the
Multiple displays section, try each of the taskbar settings. Choose the
one you like best, and then select OK.
Set up audio devices
Perform the following tasks:
1. Open the Sound dialog box.

2. Configure the settings for the playback device you want to use, manually or
by using the wizard.
3. Configure the settings for the recording device you want to use, manually
or by using the wizard.
Change the way your mouse works
Perform the following tasks:
1. Display the Mouse settings pane. Review the settings that you can manage
in this pane, and configure them as you want them.
2. At the bottom of the Mouse settings pane, select Additional mouse
options. In the Mouse Properties dialog box, review the settings that you
can manage, and configure them the way you want them. Then select
Apply.
3. Compare and contrast the settings in the open Mouse settings pane with
those in the open Mouse Properties dialog box. Then close the dialog box.
Change the way your keyboard works
Perform the following tasks:
1. Display the Typing settings pane. Review the settings that you can manage
in this pane, and configure them as you want them.
2. From Control Panel (or taskbar search), open the Keyboard Properties
dialog box. Review the settings that you can manage in the dialog box, and
configure them the way you want them. Then select Apply.
3. Compare and contrast the settings in the open Typing settings pane with
those in the open Keyboard Properties dialog box. Then close the dialog
box.
Manage printer connections
Perform the following tasks:
1. Display the Printers & scanners settings pane, and review the physical and
virtual printers that are available in the window.

2. If you have a printer installed, display the printer-specific configuration
options. Review the available options and configure them the way you want
them. Then close the window.

8. 
Manage 
network 
and 
storage
resources
In this chapter
Manage network connections
Manage homegroup connections
Share files on your network
In the early days of Microsoft, Bill Gates envisioned a future with “a computer
on every desk and in every home.” Today, the business world couldn’t function
without computers, and terms such as “information worker” are commonly used
to describe people who spend most of the day working on computers. Computers
make it possible for an increasing number of people to successfully run small
businesses with large presences, to maximize productivity by working from
home, to have learning resources at their fingertips (literally), and to stay
connected to information all the time, from any location.
As more apps and resources become available as online services, an internet
connection is increasingly important to the computing experience. Your
computer connects to the internet through a network that provides and
safeguards the connection. Windows 10 uses network connection security
profiles to govern the way your computer interacts with other computers and
devices on the network. On a local network, you can connect directly to other
computers or manage the connection through a homegroup—a password-
protected security group that defines the sharing of specific information and
devices with other homegroup member computers.
This chapter guides you through procedures related to managing network
connections, managing homegroup connections, and sharing files on your
network.
Manage network connections
A network is a group of computers that communicate with each other through a
wired or wireless connection. A network can be as small as two computers or as

large as the internet. In the context of this book, the term network refers
primarily to the connection between computers in one physical location that are
connected to each other, and to the internet, through a network router.
IMPORTANT This chapter assumes that you are connecting to an
existing, functioning network. This chapter does not include instructions
for setting up or configuring networking hardware. When setting up a
network infrastructure, be sure to follow the instructions provided by
the hardware manufacturer.
Connect to a network
If your computer is a desktop computer, you’ll probably connect it to only one
network: your home or office network. However, you might connect a laptop or
mobile device to networks in many locations for the purpose of connecting to the
internet: at home, at work, at a friend’s or relative’s house, at a public library, at
a coffee shop—some highway rest areas even offer free internet access! You
can’t connect a device directly to the internet, so wherever you want to connect
to the internet, you will first need to connect to a network.
Connecting your computer to a network requires two things:
Your computer must have an active network adapter. This is usually in the
form of a network interface card that is part of the internal workings of the
computer, but you can purchase external network adapters that connect to a
USB port on your computer. A network adapter can be for a wired network
or a wireless network. Many laptops and desktop computers have both. If a
computer has a wired network adapter, it has an external Ethernet port that
the cable connector fits into. This looks a bit like a wide telephone cable
port.
The environment you’re in must have a network. This could be a wired
network that you connect to directly or through a switch box, a wireless
network that you connect to through a router, or a wireless network
connection that you share from a phone or other device that connects to a
cellular network.

If your computer has an enabled network adapter, whether or not it is actively
connected to a network, a connection icon appears in the notification area at the
right end of the Windows Taskbar. The connection icon indicates whether your
network adapter is an Ethernet adapter or a wireless adapter and whether it is
currently connected to a network.
The white arcs on the wireless connection icon indicate the strength of the
wireless network signal that the computer is currently connected to. When the
computer is configured for a connection but not connected to a network,
different versions of the basic network connection icon indicate the network
status, as follows:
A white starburst indicates that a connection is available.
A white X on a red background indicates that no network is available.
Selecting the network connection icon displays information about the current
network connection status and any available wired networks, VPN connections,
wireless networks, and Wi-Fi Direct devices.

Each network connection has a name; it might be a generic name provided by
the network router or a specific name assigned by the network owner. The icon

to the left of the network name indicates the connection type and, for wireless
connections, the signal strength. The word or words below the network name
provide additional information about the network.
Right-clicking the connection icon in the notification area displays a shortcut
menu of commands that you can use to diagnose network connection problems
and display the Network & Internet settings page.
When you physically connect your computer to a network by using an Ethernet
cable, Windows 10 automatically creates the network connection. To connect to
a wireless network for the first time, you need to make the connection.
Network vs. internet connections
Connecting a computer to a network does not automatically connect
the computer to the internet; it connects the computer to the network
router or hub that sits between the computer and the internet.
Additional action might be necessary to connect to the internet.
For example, when you connect to a corporate network, the network
management system might scan the security settings on your
computer and require that you install updates before it permits a
connection. When this happens, the connection will be noted as
Limited, and you must disconnect from the connection, perform the
required action, and then reconnect.
When connecting to a free, pay-per-use, or subscription-based public
network (such as one at an airport, restaurant, coffee shop, library, or
hotel), you might have immediate internet access. Frequently,
though, you will be required to provide information, credentials, or
payment to connect from the public network to the internet. You
might be prompted to provide this information when the connection
is established. If you connect to a network but then find that you
can’t connect to the internet, start a new instance of the web browser
to display the organization’s connection page, and then provide the
required information. (It might be necessary to refresh the page to
force the display of the gateway page.)
The purpose of connecting a computer to a network is usually to connect beyond

the network to the internet, but it might also be to access devices (such as
printers) or information (such as files) on other computers that are connected to
the same network. On a computer running Windows 10, connecting a computer
to a network doesn’t automatically allow users to access folders on other
computers on the network. If you want to do so, you must first turn on network
discovery. The network discovery feature enables the computer to “see and be
seen by” other computers on the network that also have this feature turned on.
Simply turning on network discovery doesn’t automatically expose the
information stored on your computer to other computers. You configure the
sharing of specific folders individually on each computer. This helps to ensure
that you don’t accidentally share information that you don’t want to.
SEE ALSO For information about sharing individual folders and Public
folders, see “Share files on your network” later in this chapter.
To connect to an available wired network
1. Plug one end of an Ethernet cable into the port on the network router or a
switch box that is connected to the router.
2. Plug the other end of the cable into the Ethernet port on your computer.
To connect to an available wireless network
1. In the notification area of the taskbar, select the wireless connection icon to
display a list of available connections.
2. In the connection list, select the network you want to connect to, to display
the connection options.

3. If you want the computer to automatically connect to this network when it’s
available, select the Connect automatically check box.
TIP Automatic connection is appropriate when you are connecting
to a home network or another network that you trust. It works less
well when connecting to a public network that has a gateway
access page. If your computer establishes a connection, it might
appear that you have internet access when you don’t. And you
might not realize that you don’t have a connection until you notice
a dozen unsent messages in your email outbox.
4. Select Connect. If the network prompts you to enter credentials or a
password (such as a WEP encryption key or WPA password), do so.
TIP Wired Equivalent Privacy (WEP), Wi-Fi Protected Access
(WPA), and Wi-Fi Protected Access II (WPA2) are security
protocols that govern the credentials passed from a computer to a
wireless network when establishing a connection. WPA2 is the
most current of these.

To turn on network discovery
1. Open File Explorer.
2. In the Navigation pane, select the Network node. If network discovery is
turned off, Windows displays an informative message. Select OK to
dismiss the message window. The information remains visible on a banner
below the ribbon, and the Network folder is empty.
3. Select the banner, and then select Turn on network discovery and file
sharing to display the Network Discovery And File Sharing message box.
If your user account doesn’t have administrative permissions on the
computer, a User Account Control window opens and requires the entry of
administrative credentials. Do either of the following:
Enter the password for the displayed account, and then select Yes.
Select More choices, choose a different account, enter the password for
that account, and then select Yes.
Because Windows 10 automatically designates new connections as Public
networks, you must specify whether to permit network discovery on all
Public networks.

IMPORTANT You almost certainly do NOT want to select the
Yes option in this dialog box. Doing so would keep the network
connection Public and allow computers on other Public network
connections to gain access to your computer.
4. Unless you specifically want to allow computers on Public networks to
connect to your computer, select No, make the network that I am
connected to a private network to change the network connection type to
Private, turn on network sharing, and display a list of the network resources
you can now access.
To disconnect from a wired network
Remove the cable from the Ethernet port on your computer or from the
network connection point.
Disable the network adapter.

SEE ALSO For information about disabling network adapters, see
“Troubleshoot network connections” later in this topic.
To disconnect from a wireless network
1. In the notification area of the taskbar, select the wireless connection icon.
2. At the top of the list of network connections, select the network that is
designated as Connected.
3. Select Disconnect.
TIP Unless you’re connecting to a wireless network that accesses the
internet over a cellular network, moving out of range of the network
broadcast will automatically disconnect you.
Display information about networks and connections
After you connect to a network, you can display information such as which
computers, printers, and other devices are connected to it. In File Explorer, the

Network window displays the devices on your network that the current Public or
Private security profile settings allow the computer to detect, and the devices
that support the network infrastructure, such as the network router.
TIP Your Network window will show the devices on your network
rather than those shown in the images in this book.
From the Network window, you can access information and devices in different
ways. For example:

The Computer section of the Network window displays other computers on
the network. Double-click a computer to display the folders that are shared
with you on that computer. Right-click a computer to display the shortcut
menu, which has options for displaying content, creating shortcuts, or
starting a Remote Desktop Connection session.
SEE ALSO For information about sharing files and folders on a
network, see “Share files on your network” later in this chapter.
The Displays section shows network display devices that are available
through a Miracast connection.
SEE ALSO For information about connecting to wireless displays,
see “Display your desktop on multiple screens” in Chapter 7,
“Manage peripheral devices.”
The Media Devices section displays media servers on the network. Double-
click a device to display its default media interface, which might be
Windows Media Player or a proprietary app for the operating system that is
installed on the device.
The Network Infrastructure section displays wired and wireless routers on
the network. Double-click a router to display its web management interface
in your default web browser.
The Printers and Scanners sections display devices that support printing and
scanning; if a device supports both, it appears in both sections. Double-
click a device to display its web management interface, if it has one, in your
default web browser.
Most of the device shortcut menus include options for displaying device
webpages or properties. You can change the display of devices in the Network
window from the View tab. In Details view, you can display properties such as

the discovery method, MAC address, and IP address.
SEE ALSO For more information about working with File Explorer
views, see “Change the File Explorer display options” in Chapter 5,
“Explore files and folders.”
Information about your current network connection is available in the Status
pane of the Network & Internet settings page.
Similar information is available in the Network And Sharing Center. Some
settings can be accessed more directly from this window.

Beyond the general network connection information, you can also display useful
information about the connection speed and data transfer to and from the
computer from the status dialog box of each adapter. (The speed varies with the
signal quality, but also depends on other factors.) Each connection is linked to a
network adapter; the connection information is available from the adapter
information.

If you’re interested in the details of your network activity, that information is
available to you from the Data Usage and Usage Details panes. Windows 10
provides you with information about the amount of data transfer by connection
type and by app in the past 30 days.

To display network device information in the Network window
1. Open File Explorer.
2. In the Navigation pane, select Network.
TIP If network discovery is off, an error message appears when you
select Network. For information about this, see “Connect to a network”
earlier in this topic.
To display network connection information in Settings
Right-click the Start button and then on the Quick Links menu, select

Network Connections.
Open the Settings window, select Network & Internet, and then select
Status.
In the notification area of the taskbar, select the network icon, and then
select Network & Internet settings.
In the notification area of the taskbar, right-click the network icon, and then
select Open Network & Internet settings.
To display network connection information in the Network And Sharing
Center
Display the Status pane of the Network & Internet settings page. Near the
bottom of the pane, select Network and Sharing Center.
Open Control Panel in Category view. In the Network and Internet
category, select View network status and tasks.
Open Control Panel in an Icons view, and then select Network and
Sharing Center.
To display detailed information about the current network connection
Display the Status pane of the Network & Internet settings page. Near the
bottom of the pane, select View your network properties.
To display network connection speed and data transfer information
1. Open the Network and Sharing Center.
2. In the View your active networks section, to the right of Connections,
select the network adapter name.
To display data usage by app
1. In the Settings window, select Network & Internet.
2. Select Data usage to display the total amount of data transferred in the past
30 days, broken down by connection type.
3. In the Data usage pane, select View usage details to display the amount of
data transferred by each app over the current type of connection.

4. On the Usage details page, to show app usage for a different connection
type, select the Show usage from list, and then select Wi-Fi or Ethernet.
To display the status of all installed network adapters
Display the Status pane of the Network & Internet settings page. In the
Change your network settings section, select Change adapter options.
Open the Network and Sharing Center. In the left pane, select Change
adapter settings.
To display details of a specific network adapter
1. Open the Network Connections window.
2. Do one of the following:
Double-click the network adapter you want to display information for.
Select the network adapter to activate the toolbar buttons. Then, on the
toolbar, select View status of this connection.
IMPORTANT If the Network Connections window isn’t wide
enough to display all the buttons related to a selected adapter on
the toolbar, chevrons (>>) appear at the right end of the toolbar.
Select the chevrons to display the remaining commands.
Configure network connection security
Each time you connect your computer to a network that you haven’t previously
connected to, Windows 10 associates the network connection with one of two
security profiles, Private or Public, and then assigns the security settings
configured for that profile to the network connection.
TIP Previous versions of Windows prompted you to designate whether

the network was at work, at home, or in a public place for the purpose
of configuring appropriate security settings for the environment.
Windows 10 has only Private and Public network security profiles.
The network security profiles include the following settings:
Network discovery Determines whether the computer can see and be seen
by other computers connected to the network.
File and printer sharing Determines whether network users can access
folders and printers that you configure for sharing from the computer.
HomeGroup connections Determines whether user account credentials are
necessary to connect to computers that are joined to your homegroup.
Available only for the Private network security profile.
Public folder sharing Determines whether network users can access files
that are stored in the Public account folders on your computer.
Media streaming Determines whether network users can access music,
videos, and pictures that are stored in your media library.
File sharing connections Determines the security requirements for devices
that connect to your computer’s file sharing connections.
Password protected sharing Determines whether shared files are available
to any network user or only to those users with user accounts on your
computer.
You can review and configure the settings for the individual security profiles and
the security settings that apply to all network connections in the Advanced
Sharing Settings window. The window has three sections of settings: Private,
Guest Or Public, and All Networks. You can expand or hide each section
separately.

The settings that are applied to all network connections are available in the All
Networks section at the bottom of the window. These include settings for sharing
Public folders, streaming media, protecting file-sharing connections, and
specifying the type of credentials that are required to access the computer from
another computer on the network.

The settings that are applied to Guest or Public networks are intended for the
types of networks that you might connect to in a public place, such as an airport
or coffee shop, only for the purpose of connecting your computer to the internet.
You don’t have a need to access information on other computers that are
connected to a Public network, and it isn’t a good idea to allow those other
computers to access information on your computer. When you connect to any
network that you don’t explicitly trust, configure the connection as a Public
network to protect your privacy. The Public network profile connects your
computer to the network without exposing it to other network users.

Windows 10 assumes that every network you connect to is Public until you tell it
otherwise. Before you can access network resources you must either change the
network connection type (from Public to Private) and turn on network discovery,
or create a homegroup.
SEE ALSO For more information about homegroups, see “Manage
homegroup connections” later in this chapter.
The settings that are applied to Private networks are intended for networks such
as the network in your home or small business. If you connect computers and
devices that only you use and control to the network and want to share
information among the computers (for example, if you want to insert a picture
stored on one computer into a document you’re creating on a different
computer), the Private network security profile is the one for you.
If you share your network credentials with people who visit your home so that
they can connect their laptops or other devices to the internet through your
network, be aware that assigning the Private network security profile to a
computer will expose any information you choose to share from that computer
with anyone you provide the network credentials to, should they choose to look
for it.

SEE ALSO For more information about sharing network resources with
other people, see the sidebar “Wireless network security” later in this
topic.
The Private network security profile connects your computer to the network and
configures the network profile to include network discovery, file and printer
sharing, Public folder sharing, media streaming, and password-protected sharing.
Your computer is visible to other computers and devices on the network. You
don’t necessarily have permission to access these computers or devices, but you
know they’re connected to the network, and other network members know that
your computer is also connected.

TIP If you’re running Windows 10 on a computer in an enterprise
environment, the computer and its network settings are likely managed
by the IT department, and you won’t have to concern yourself with
these settings. You’re more likely to encounter this situation when
connecting a laptop or mobile device to a network, or if you have
multiple computers on a home network.
You can change the settings for the Private security profile, the Public security
profile, or all networks. When you do so, Windows automatically applies the
new settings to all network connections.
Network discovery is controlled by the network security profile—it is off for
Public networks and on for Private networks. You can change the security profile
for a specific network that you’re connected to. For example, if you connect to a
wireless network at a friend’s house and want to allow your friend to copy files
from your computer over the network, you can change the network connection
from Public to Private. (And when you finish, you can change it back so that the
next time you connect to the network, your shared folders are protected.)

To open the Advanced Sharing Settings window
1. Open the Network and Sharing Center.
2. In the left pane, select Change advanced sharing settings.
Or
1. Display the Network & Internet settings page, and then select the
connection type (either Wi-Fi or Ethernet).
2. In the Related settings section of the pane, select Change advanced
sharing options.

To identify the security profile assigned to the current connection
1. Open the Advanced Sharing Settings window.
2. Review the three security profile headings. The phrase current profile
appears in parentheses after the name of the active security profile.
Wireless network security
If you have a wireless network router, it is important that you secure
the network properly to prevent unauthorized users from connecting
to it and gaining access to the computers on your network.
When you set up your wireless router, be sure to follow the
instructions that come with it. For the initial setup, you’ll usually be
required to connect the router directly to a computer (by using an
Ethernet cable) and run a setup program. After the router is set up,
you can usually connect to it wirelessly by using its IP address on
your network. During the setup process, you can do several things to
increase the security of your wireless network, such as:
Change the administrative password from the default password
shared by all routers of that type to a unique, strong password.
(Some manufacturers use the same password for all routers, and
some use blank passwords.)
Secure the network with an appropriate level of encryption.
Establish WEP key or WPA password to prevent unauthorized
users from connecting to your wireless network.
Your router configuration might offer multiple levels of WEP
encryption, controlled by the length of the WEP key. A 10-character
WEP key provides 64-bit encryption, and a 26-character key
provides 128-bit encryption.
WPA encryption is a far more secure encryption standard than WEP
encryption. If you have a gigabit network router (which transmits
data at 1,000 kilobytes per second (KBps), as opposed to the
standard 100 KBps), you should use WPA encryption. WPA
encryption supports gigabit data transmission; WEP encryption does
not.

When creating a security key or password, use a combination of
letters and numbers that you can remember—for example, a series of
significant dates. If the key is particularly long or difficult, you
might want to keep a printed copy of it handy for when visitors want
to connect their devices to your wireless network. Better yet, set up a
Guest network that is isolated from the network that you connect
your computers to. Guests can then access the internet without also
being able to locate or attempt to access the computers on your
regular network.
To display or hide settings for a specific security profile
Select the circled v or ^ at the right end of the security profile heading.
To modify the settings for a network security profile
1. Open the Advanced sharing settings window.
2. Expand the security profile that you want to change.
3. Make your changes and then, at the bottom of the window, select Save
changes. If you’re signed in with a standard user account, Windows
prompts you to provide administrative credentials.
4. If the User Account Control dialog box opens, select an administrative
user account and enter its password, or have the person who owns the
account do it for you.
To change the security profile assigned to a network connection
1. Display the Network & Internet settings page.
2. Display the settings pane that applies to the adapter you want to configure
(Wi-Fi or Ethernet), and then at the top of the pane, select the specific
connection to display its information.
3. In the Network profile section of the adapter page, select Public to hide
the computer from other network devices, or Private to make the computer
discoverable.

TIP Computers running Windows 10 can easily coexist on a network
with computers running earlier versions of Windows. Other computers
and devices on the network do not affect the available network security
profiles or their settings. However, network security profiles and
homegroups aren’t available on a computer running a version of
Windows earlier than Windows 7.
Troubleshoot network connections
A network of any size includes several components that affect the network
connection. Your network might include one or more wired routers, wireless
routers, hubs, or switches. These hardware devices, the cables that connect them,
and the external connection to your internet service provider (ISP) can all
develop problems or entirely quit functioning. A large organization usually has
one or more network technicians (if not an entire IT department) who maintain
the organization’s hardware and keep the internal and external network
connections running smoothly. In a small to medium organization, or in a
household, it helps if you know enough about your network to be able to
function as your own network technician. This book provides information
specifically about managing the network connections on a Windows 10
computer.
As mentioned earlier in this topic, the network adapter is the hardware on your
computer’s end of a network connection. A computer typically has one or two
network adapters. You can monitor and manage network adapters and their
current connections from the Network Connections window of Control Panel.
This window displays connectivity information for each network adapter and for
each dial-up or virtual private network (VPN) connection on your computer. A
red X on an adapter icon indicates that the adapter is disabled or disconnected.

When you experience a network or internet connection problem, first determine
whether the problem occurs only on your computer, or also on other computers
on your network. You can frequently resolve connection issues by taking one of
these simple actions:
If the problem occurs on only one computer, reset the network adapter or
restart the computer.
If computers can connect to the network but not to the internet, restart the
router that connects your network to your ISP.
When you experience a connection problem beyond these simple issues, either
when connecting to the internet or when connecting to another computer on your
network, you can use one of the handy troubleshooting tools included with
Windows 10. These troubleshooting tools (referred to as Troubleshooters) can
help you identify and resolve problems. Individual troubleshooters are available
from the relevant settings panes. The entire collection of Troubleshooters (for
Programs, Hardware and Sound, Network and Internet, and System and
Security) is available from Control Panel.

IMPORTANT The following procedures require administrative
permission.
To disable a network adapter
1. Open the Network Connections window.
2. Select the adapter you want to disable.
3. On the toolbar, select Disable this network device. The icon and words
that represent the disabled adapter change from color to gray, and the word
Disabled appears below the adapter name.

To enable a network adapter
1. In the Network Connections window, select the adapter you want to
enable.
2. On the toolbar, select Enable this network device. The icon and words that
represent the disabled adapter change from gray to color. If the adapter is
configured to automatically connect to a network, it does so.
To reset a network adapter
1. In the Network Connections window, disable the adapter.
2. After the process of disabling the adapter completes, enable the adapter.
To display network troubleshooting tools
In the Settings window, select Update & Security, and then select
Troubleshoot.
To run a Troubleshooter
1. In the Troubleshoot settings pane, select the Troubleshooter you want to
run, and then select Run the Troubleshooter. The Troubleshooter starts,
scans your system, and then leads you through a diagnostic process.
If the Troubleshooter finds an issue, it prompts you to apply or skip the
recommended fix. When the troubleshooter completes, it reports its
progress.

If the Troubleshooter doesn’t identify any specific issues, it offers you the
option to explore additional options.
2. Select Close the troubleshooter to quit the process, View detailed
information to display more information about the applied fix, or Explore
additional options to display a list of pertinent resources.
Manage homegroup connections
When your computer is connected to a Private network, network computer users
can connect to resources on other computers either through the network or
through a homegroup. You can think of a homegroup as a private network that
allows secure access to specific resources, such as files that are stored on the
computers that are joined to it. Only one homegroup can exist on a local
network; it exists as long as it has at least one member. (If your environment has
multiple networks, each can have one homegroup.) The homegroup doesn’t have
a name, a designated administrator, or a management interface.

TIP Homegroups were introduced in Windows 7 and are not accessible
to computers running earlier versions of Windows or a non-Windows
operating system.
When a homegroup exists on a Private network, other computers on that network
can join the homegroup. The only information you need to join the homegroup is
the homegroup password, which Windows generates randomly when the
homegroup is created. If the homegroup password isn’t readily available, it’s
quite simple to locate.
The randomly generated homegroup passwords aren’t easy to remember. If you
want to, you can change the password. It’s best to do so immediately after you
create the homegroup because changing the password disconnects any
computers that joined by using the original password. Alternatively, you can
have Windows validate your identity when joining multiple computers to the
homegroup by using your user account credentials.
You can create and manage homegroup connections from two separate places:
The HomeGroup window of Control Panel, which displays commands as
links
The Homegroup node in File Explorer, which displays commands on a
ribbon and sends you to Control Panel to manage homegroup settings

You can create or join a computer to a homegroup when you are signed in with a
Standard or Administrator user account. When you start the process of
connecting a computer to a homegroup, Windows 10 tells you whether a
homegroup already exists on the network.
Homegroup membership is on a per-computer basis, not a per-user basis. (In
other words, the computer joins the homegroup, not the user.) When any user of
a computer that has multiple user accounts joins the computer to a homegroup,
the computer is joined to the homegroup on behalf of all its users. However, each
user has control over the resources that he or she shares with other homegroup
members. By default, all libraries other than the Documents library are selected
for sharing.
SEE ALSO For information about libraries, see “Understand files,
folders, and libraries” in Chapter 5, “Explore files and folders.” For
information about changing the resources shared with your homegroup,
see “Share files on your network” later in this chapter.

On a multiple-user computer, if another user joins your computer to a
homegroup, it doesn’t share any of your user account folders. You can specify
your homegroup resource sharing settings at any time from either homegroup
window. When another user has shared the computer, a message appears in the
homegroup window. Each user sets individual sharing settings.
The only resource sharing setting that is common to all user accounts of a
homegroup member computer is the Printers & Devices setting, which controls
access to the Devices And Printers folder. When any user shares or excludes this
folder from the shared homegroup resources, the printer is shared or excluded on
behalf of the computer rather than the user.
If at any time you decide that you no longer want to share resources with other
homegroup members, you can remove your computer from the homegroup with
no adverse effects. It is not necessary to disconnect from the network. If you
have any problems with the homegroup, Windows 10 has a built-in
troubleshooting tool that can help you to diagnose and fix homegroup problems.
SEE ALSO For more information about Troubleshooters, see
“Troubleshoot network connections” earlier in this chapter.
To open the Homegroup window in File Explorer
In the Navigation pane of File Explorer, select the Homegroup node. If a
homegroup already exists on the network, the window contains a Join Now
button. If no homegroup exists, the window contains a Create A
Homegroup button.

To open the HomeGroup window of Control Panel
In Category view of Control Panel, under Network and Internet, select
Choose homegroup and sharing options.
In Large Icons view or Small Icons view of Control Panel, select
HomeGroup.
In File Explorer, right-click the Homegroup node, and then select Change
HomeGroup settings.
In File Explorer, open the Homegroup window. Then on the HomeGroup
tab, select Change homegroup settings.
If a homegroup already exists on the network, the window contains a Join
Now button. If no homegroup exists, the window contains a Create A
Homegroup button.

To create a homegroup
1. Open the HomeGroup window of Control Panel or the Homegroup
window in File Explorer.
2. Select Create a homegroup to start the Create a Homegroup wizard. On
the first page of the wizard, select Next.
3. On the Share with other homegroup members page of the wizard, do the
following for each folder or library:
To share the resource, select Shared in the adjacent Permissions list.
To keep the resource private, select Not shared in the adjacent
Permissions list.
SEE ALSO For information about changing the resources
you’ve shared through a homegroup, see “Share files on your
network” later in this chapter.
4. Select Next to create the homegroup and display the homegroup password.
5. If you want to print the password, do the following:
a. On the Use this password to add other computers to your homegroup
page of the wizard, select Print password and instructions.

b. On the View and print your homegroup password page of the wizard,
select Print this page.
c. In the Print dialog box, select a printer, and then select Print.
6. If you don’t want to print the password, manually record it in a convenient
location (write it down or save a screen clipping in Microsoft OneNote).
7. Select Finish to display your homegroup sharing settings and options for
working with the homegroup.
To display the password for an existing homegroup
Sign in to any computer that is joined to the homegroup, and then do any of
the following:
Open the HomeGroup window of Control Panel, and then select View or
print the homegroup password.
In File Explorer, right-click the Homegroup node, and then select View
the HomeGroup password.
In File Explorer, display the Homegroup node. Then on the HomeGroup
tab, select View password.
TIP If you don’t have an account on another network computer, you
might have to ask another person to sign in to a computer that is
connected to the homegroup and retrieve the password for you.
To change a homegroup password
1. Make sure that any computer that has already joined the homegroup is
active (turned on and not asleep).
2. Display the HomeGroup window of Control Panel. In the Other
homegroup actions section, select Change the password to start the
Change your Homegroup Password wizard. If you’re logged in as a
Standard user, provide the credentials of an Administrator account when
prompted to do so.

TIP You can’t change the password from the Homegroup window
in File Explorer.
3. On the Changing the homegroup password will disconnect everyone
page of the wizard, read and heed the warning. Then when you’ve prepared
the homegroup-joined computers, select Change the password.
4. On the Type a new password for your homegroup page of the wizard, do
one of the following, and then select Next:
Accept the new randomly generated password.
Select the Refresh button (labeled with circling arrows) to generate a new
random password.
Enter the password that you want to use.
5. If necessary, record the new password somewhere. Then on the Your
homegroup password was successfully changed page of the wizard,
select Finish.
To discard the password requirement for a homegroup
1. Open the Network and Sharing Center.
2. In the left pane, select Change advanced sharing settings.
3. In the Advanced sharing settings window, expand the Private security
profile.
4. In the HomeGroup connections section of the profile, select Use user
accounts and passwords to connect to other computers.

5. Select Save changes, and then sign out of Windows to apply your changes
to the homegroup.
To join a computer to an existing homegroup
1. If you haven’t already joined a computer to the homegroup when logged in
with the current user account, obtain the homegroup password.
TIP The homegroup doesn’t require an existing user to enter the
password when joining additional computers to the homegroup.
2. Do either of the following:
Open the HomeGroup window of Control Panel.
Open the Homegroup window in File Explorer.
3. Select Join now to start the Join a Homegroup wizard. On the first page of
the wizard, select Next.
4. On the Share with other homegroup members page, designate each
folder or library as Shared or Not shared, and then select Next.
SEE ALSO For information about changing the resources you’ve
shared through a homegroup, see “Share files on your network”

later in this chapter.
5. If the wizard displays the Type the homegroup password page, enter the
password you obtained in step 1, and then select Next.
6. On the You have joined the homegroup page of the wizard, select Finish.
To connect to homegroup resources
1. In the Navigation pane of File Explorer, expand the Homegroup node to
display the user accounts that have shared resources through the
homegroup.
2. Expand each user account to display the computers or devices the user has
shared resources from.
3. Expand each computer or device to display the specific shared folders,
libraries, and devices. Devices that are offline or sleeping aren’t shown.
4. Select any user account, device, or shared item to display its contents in
File Explorer.
To disconnect all other computers from a homegroup
Change the homegroup password.
To reconnect computers to a homegroup after changing the password

1. On each computer, display the HomeGroup window of Control Panel.
2. Select Type new password to start the Update Your Homegroup
Password wizard.
3. Enter the new password, select Next, and then select Finish.
To remove a computer from a homegroup
1. Display the HomeGroup window of Control Panel.
2. Select Leave the homegroup to start the Leave The Homegroup wizard.
3. On the first page of the wizard, select Leave the homegroup.
4. When the wizard confirms that the computer has successfully been removed
from the homegroup, select Finish.
TIP Changing the network security profile for a connection from
Private to Public also removes a computer from a homegroup. If you
use this method and then later change the connection type back to
Private, your computer will automatically rejoin the homegroup.
To delete a homegroup
Remove each member computer from the homegroup.
To run the HomeGroup troubleshooter
Open the HomeGroup window of Control Panel and then, in the Other
homegroup actions section, select Start the HomeGroup troubleshooter.
In File Explorer, right-click the Homegroup node, and then select Start the
HomeGroup troubleshooter.
In File Explorer, open the Homegroup window. Then on the HomeGroup
tab, select Start troubleshooter.
Share files on your network

If you have more than one computer in your organization, you might find it
convenient to share files and file storage locations with other people on your
network. And if you have more than one computer in your household, you might
want to share resources with family members, whether or not your computer is
joined to a homegroup. For example, you might:
Share project-related files with specific team members.
From your laptop, work on a file that is stored on your desktop computer.
Share household management documents with your family members.
Collect all your family photos in one place by having all your family
members save their digital photos to a shared external hard drive.
Change the computer name
When your computer was initially set up by the original equipment
manufacturer (OEM) it was assigned a default name, probably based
on its make or model. The name might be one that helps you to
identify the computer, such as ACER or DELL, or something less
obvious such as FVPAD89. When network discovery is turned on,
the computer name is displayed in the Network node of File Explorer
and to other network users.
The name isn’t really important, as long as it is unique within your
local network. However, you might want to assign a name that
makes it easier for you and other network users to identify it—such
as OfficePC, GuestLaptop, or GamingPC—or that follows a themed
naming convention you have for your network—such as Hibiscus,
Plumeria, and Sunset on a network named Paradise.
IMPORTANT You must be signed in with an Administrator account
to rename your computer.
To rename your computer, follow these steps:
1. In the Settings window, select System, and then About. The
About pane displays your current computer name, operating
system version and product ID, and hardware information.
2. In the About pane, below your current computer name, select

Rename this PC to open the Rename Your PC dialog box.
3. In the input box below your current computer name, enter the
new name. The name can include uppercase and lowercase
letters, numbers (0-9), and hyphens, but no other symbols. Then
select Next.
IMPORTANT Selecting Next commits you to the selected
name. You can’t change the name again until after you restart
the computer.
After a short process, the dialog box displays a restart notice.
You can restart the computer now or later; the name change
takes effect after the restart. Until then, the PC name in the
About pane of the Settings window reflects the planned change.
There are several ways to share files with users (including yourself) who are
logged on to other computers in your network. To share files by using any of
these methods, you must first make sure network discovery and file and printer
sharing are turned on so that your computer and any resources you choose to
share are visible to other network computers and devices. Network discovery
and file and printer sharing are turned on by default for Private network

connections.
TIP When network discovery is on, your computer is visible in the
Navigation pane of File Explorer and in the Network window. When file
and printer sharing is on, any resources you choose to share from the
computer are also visible in the Network window.
When you share a folder, you can specify the people (in the form of user
accounts or groups of users) you are sharing the folder with and what each
person (or group) can do with the folder contents. The permission level options
are:
Read The user can open a file from the shared folder but cannot save any
changes to the file in the shared folder.
Read/Write The user can open and edit a file and save changes to the file
in the shared folder.
The default permission level is Read. If you want to allow a network user or
group of users to modify shared files, you must explicitly assign the Read/Write
permission level.
IMPORTANT Files and printers that you share are available only when
your computer is on, and not when it is in Sleep mode.
Files that you store in the Public folders (Public Documents, Public Downloads,
Public Music, Public Pictures, and Public Videos) are accessible to any user
logged on to your computer. If you choose to share the Public folders on your
computer with other computers on your network, their contents are visible to any
user connected to your network. Public folder sharing with other network
computer users is turned on by default for Private and Public network
connections.

If you frequently connect to public networks, consider carefully whether you
want to share the contents of your computer’s Public folders with strangers. If
not, you can easily turn off this feature to safeguard your privacy.
SEE ALSO For more information about Public folders, see Chapter 5,
“Explore files and folders.” For information about the Network And
Sharing Center, see the “Connect to a network” section in the topic
“Manage network connections” earlier in this chapter.
When your computer is a member of a homegroup, you can share files with
other homegroup members while still keeping the files hidden from computers
that aren’t homegroup members. (Remember that computers, rather than users,
are the homegroup members.) When you first create or join your computer to a
homegroup, you have the option of sharing the built-in Documents, Pictures,
Music, and/or Videos libraries. The choices you make at that time are not
binding; you can change the library selections at any time. You can add or
remove libraries from the shared homegroup resources at any time. Files that
you store in a library that you share with your homegroup, whether in your
personal folders or the Public folders, are accessible to any user logged on to a
computer that is a member of the homegroup.
Regardless of whether your computer is a member of a homegroup, you can
share a folder or library with users of other computers on your network. You can
control access to the shared folder or library by specifying the user accounts or
groups of users that can access the shared resource and assigning a specific level
of access for each user account or group.
You can share an entire storage drive—either a disc drive that is built in to your
computer, or an external storage device such as a freestanding hard drive or a
USB flash drive. For example, you might share an internal hard drive on which
you store only project-related resources with all the computers on your work
network so that your coworkers have access to them, or you might share an
external hard drive with all the computers on your home network so that all your
family members can save digital photos in one place for safekeeping.
To configure your computer to share files with other network computer
users

1. Open the Network and Sharing Center.
2. In the left pane, select Change advanced sharing settings.
3. In the Advanced sharing settings window, expand the Private profile, and
then do the following:
In the Network discovery section, select Turn on network discovery.
In the File and printer sharing section, select Turn on file and printer
sharing.
4. At the bottom of the Advanced sharing settings window, select Save
changes. (If you didn’t make any changes, select Cancel.)
To prevent network users from accessing your Public folders
1. Open the Advanced sharing settings window.
2. Expand the All Networks profile.
3. In the Public folder sharing section of the profile, select Turn off Public
folder sharing. With this setting off, the Public account folders on your
computer can be accessed only from your computer, and not from the
network.

4. At the bottom of the Advanced sharing settings window, select Save
changes.
To change the resources that you’re sharing with a homegroup
1. Do either of the following to start the Change Homegroup Sharing
Settings wizard:
Display the HomeGroup window of Control Panel, and then select
Change what you’re sharing with the homegroup.
Display the Homegroup window in File Explorer. On the HomeGroup
tab, select Share libraries and devices.
2. On the Share with other homegroup members page of the wizard, do the
following for each folder or library, and then select Next:
To share the resource, select Shared in the adjacent Permissions list.
To keep the resource private, select Not shared in the adjacent
Permissions list.
3. On the Your sharing settings have been updated page of the wizard,
select Finish.
TIP Custom libraries that you create on your computer aren’t among
those listed in the wizard. You can share a custom library by following
the procedure for sharing individual folders and libraries.

SEE ALSO For more information about homegroups, see “Manage
homegroup connections” earlier in this chapter.
To share a folder or library through a homegroup
1. Do one of the following to display a menu of user accounts on network-
connected computers, and other sharing options:
In File Explorer, right-click the folder or library you want to share, and
then select Give access to.
In File Explorer, display the folder or library you want to share. On the
Share tab, select the More button at the bottom of the Share with gallery
scroll bar.

TIP If the computer is not joined to a homegroup, the Give
Access To menu and Share With gallery have Create Or Join A
Homegroup options instead of Homegroup options. When a
folder is shared, the menu and gallery include a Remove Access
option.
2. On the Give access to menu or in the Share with gallery, select the level of
access that users of homegroup-joined computers will have to the folder:
To allow homegroup users to display the folder and open (but not edit)
files stored in the folder, select Homegroup (view).
To allow homegroup users to edit files stored in the folder, select
Homegroup (view and edit).
To share a folder or library with one person
Display the Give access to menu or Share with gallery for the folder, and
then select the user account name or email address of the person you want
to share the folder with.
To share a folder or library with everyone on your network
1. Display the Give access to menu or Share with gallery for the folder, and
then select Specific people... to start the Network Access wizard.
2. In the Network access wizard, select the v at the right end of the empty box
to display a list that includes people and groups you can share the folder
with.

3. In the list, select Everyone. Then select Add.
4. If you want to allow network users to edit files stored in the folder, select
the arrow in the Permission Level column adjacent to Everyone, and then
select Read/Write.
5. In the Network access wizard, select Share. After sharing the folder, the
window displays the shared folder’s information. You can quickly share a
link to the folder with other people by selecting the e-mail link.
6. To close the Network access wizard, select Done.

TIP When you select a shared file or folder in File Explorer, the Details
pane displays a list of the people or groups the folder is shared with.
If you collaborate with a team of people on a document, working with
the document in a shared folder entails the risk of one person
overwriting another person’s changes, even if you restrict access to the
folder. To eliminate this risk, you need to use a system with version
control. If your organization uses Microsoft SharePoint, you can store
the document in a document library so that only one person at a time
can check out and work on the document.
To stop sharing a folder or library
In File Explorer, right-click the folder, select Give access to, and then select
Remove access.
In File Explorer, display the folder or library you want to stop sharing. On
the Share tab, in the Share with group, select Remove access.
To make shared resources available without user account access
1. Display the Advanced sharing settings window.
2. Expand the All Networks profile.
3. In the Password protected sharing section, select Turn off password
protected sharing.
4. At the bottom of the Advanced Sharing Settings window, select Save
changes.

To share a drive
1. In File Explorer, do one of the following to open the drive Properties dialog
box:
Display the drive you want to share. On the Share tab, in the Share with
gallery, select Advanced sharing....
Right-click the drive you want to share, and then select Properties.
Right-click the drive you want to share, select Give access to, and then
select Advanced sharing....
TIP Remember that if the shared drive is removable, it is shared
only until it is removed.
2. In the Properties dialog box for the drive, select the Sharing tab, and then
select Advanced Sharing. If Windows prompts you to enter administrator
credentials, do so.
3. In the Advanced Sharing dialog box, select the Share this folder check
box.
4. The Share name box displays the drive letter of the drive you’re sharing. If
you want to replace the drive letter with a more user-friendly name to
distinguish it from other network drives, enter the name in this box.

5. Select Permissions to display the share permissions for the drive.
6. If the group or user you want to share with is not listed in the Group or
user names box, select Add, and then do the following:
a. In the Select Users or Groups dialog box, enter the name of the user,

group, or computer you want to share the drive with, and then select
Check Names. You can enter multiple names, separated by semicolons.
Tip To display a list of users and groups you can share with,
select Advanced and then, in the secondary Select Users Or
Groups dialog box that opens, select Find Now.
b. After Windows indicates a valid name by underlining it, select OK to
return to the Permissions dialog box.
7. In the Group or user names box, select the user account or group you want
to share the drive with.
8. In the Permissions for list, select the check boxes of the permission levels
you want to grant to the user account or group.

9. Select OK in the Permissions dialog box and in the Advanced Sharing
dialog box. Then close the drive’s Properties dialog box.
Key points
A network consists of two or more computers that communicate with each
other through a wired or wireless connection. Network connections are

made by network adapters installed in or connected to your computer. You
can view detailed information about the adapters, the active network
connections, and the data being transferred through the connections.
You can change the name of your computer to make it more easily
identifiable on your network.
You can share files that are stored in libraries among computers on your
network by creating a password-protected homegroup from one computer
and joining other computers to it. Each computer user can select the
libraries she or he wants to share with other homegroup users.
You can share folders outside of libraries with your homegroup, with
everyone on your network, or with specific users.
 Practice tasks
Before you can complete these practice tasks, you need to copy the book’s
practice file folder to your computer. The practice file folder for these tasks is
the Win10SBS\Ch08 folder. The introduction includes a complete list of
practice files.
Manage network connections
Complete the following tasks:
1. In the notification area of the taskbar, point to the network icon to display
information about your current network connection status.
2. Select the network icon to display a list of available networks.
3. If your computer is not currently connected to a network and one is
available, select that network name, and connect to it.
4. Near the bottom of the network pane, select Network & Internet settings.
5. In the Status pane of the Network & Internet settings page, review the
information about your active network connection.
6. In the Change your network settings section, select Network and
Sharing Center. To the right of Connections, select the connection name
to display its status. Notice the information about the connection speed,

duration, and activity. Then close the Status dialog box and Network and
Sharing Center.
7. In the Change your network settings section, select Change adapter
options to display the network adapters available on your computer. Notice
the adapter types that are available and whether each is enabled, disabled,
or connected.
8. Select any adapter, and then if necessary, display additional commands that
don’t fit on the toolbar. Notice that you can enable or disable the adapters
and diagnose, rename, or change the settings of the current connection.
9. Return to the Network and Sharing Center. In the left pane, select
Change advanced sharing settings to display the sharing options for the
different network profiles.
10. Note the type of network that your computer is currently connected to.
Review the settings for that network security profile.
11. Display the network troubleshooting tools. Review the available
troubleshooters, and run one that interests you.
12. Open the Settings window. Select the Network & Internet category, and
then display the Data usage pane.
13. Review the historical information about data transfers by connection type.
14. In the Data usage pane, select View usage details and then the individual
connections to display the amount of data transferred by each app.
15. When you finish, close the open windows.
Manage homegroup connections
Complete the following tasks:
1. Open the HomeGroup window of Control Panel.
2. Determine whether your computer is currently part of a homegroup. If it
isn’t, determine whether a homegroup is available to join.
3. If your computer is not connected to a homegroup, do either of the
following:
If no homegroup is available, create a homegroup.
If a homegroup is available, join the homegroup.

Or
If your computer is connected to a homegroup, do any of the following that
interest you:
Display the homegroup password.
Display the homegroup resources in File Explorer.
Disconnect from the homegroup.
Share files on your network
Complete the following tasks:
1. Open the Advanced sharing settings window.
2. Review the Private network security profile settings, and verify that
network discovery and file and printer sharing are turned on, so that your
computer can detect and connect to other computers on private networks.
3. In the Advanced sharing settings window, expand the All Networks
profile.
4. In the Public folder sharing section of the profile, turn on or off the
sharing of Public folders from your computer. (Choose the option you
want.)
5. Save your changes and close the Advanced sharing settings window.
6. Open File Explorer and locate the practice file folder for this book.
7. Select the Ch08 folder to select it. On the Share tab, notice your options for
sharing the folder with other people. If you want to, follow the procedure
for sharing the folder with everyone on your network.
8. If you have access to another computer on the network, verify that the
folder is available from that computer.
9. On your computer, stop sharing the Ch08 folder.
10. When you’re done, close File Explorer.

9. Get assistance from Cortana
In this chapter
Configure Cortana settings
Configure Cortana connections
Configure information tracking
Manage Cortana information and notifications
Cortana is an exciting feature of Windows 10 that can really help you to do
things more efficiently. Touted as “your personal assistant,” Cortana can monitor
your online activity and provide helpful reminders. Cortana interacts with Bing
Search to locate information, and also enables you to conduct searches and
perform tasks on your computer by giving verbal commands.
The sidebar “Hey, Cortana!” in Chapter 1, “Get started using Windows 10,”
introduced Cortana. If you’ve been using Windows 10 for a while, you might
have already experimented with Cortana as a verbal interface to your computer.
It’s a convenient technique, and after you become accustomed to using it, you’ll
probably find a lot of uses for it.
This chapter guides you through procedures related to configuring Cortana
settings and connections, specifying the types of information you want Cortana
to track, and managing the information Cortana collects.
Configure Cortana settings
Earlier releases of Windows 10 required users to perform a few processes to set
up Cortana on the computer, but now the service is running from the get-go. On
a new Windows 10 computer, Cortana leads you through the computer setup
process verbally, which is a great way to get used to interacting with the
computer by using voice commands. (In case you’ve been wondering, Cortana’s
name is pronounced “Cor-tonn-uh” rather than “Cor-tann-uh.” But after you
train it to recognize your voice, it responds to your preferred pronunciation.) You
can also install the Cortana app on your Android, iOS, or Windows phone.
Cortana is easy to use and interact with through the keyboard and verbally. You
can keep Cortana in a listening mode to respond to a verbal cue, or you can

activate it manually. Here are some of the methods you can use to activate
Cortana:
When on the Lock screen or signed in, say “Hey Cortana” to activate
Cortana’s listening mode.
When signed in, activate the taskbar search box to bring up the on-screen
user interface, or press Win+C to activate Cortana’s listening mode. (If
Win+C doesn’t work for you, you can enable it in the Cortana settings.)
You configure Cortana activation, permissions, and notifications settings from
the Cortana settings page, and you separately configure the information that you
want to track on the Cortana Notebook page. You have the option of providing a
name for Cortana to address you by.
One of the fun and useful features of Cortana is that you can give commands
verbally. You can manually cue Cortana to listen, or you can configure Cortana
to listen for the verbal cue “Hey, Cortana.” When you provide verbal input to
Cortana, the search box displays the detected input, and then evaluates and
refines it to match logical searches or commands. The input and recalculation is
displayed in the search box. It’s quite interesting to watch the logical revision of
the perceived input.
The Cortana input interface can be hidden, or hidden on the taskbar in one of
two ways: as the Cortana icon, or as the search box. When it is in the form of a
search box, the Cortana icon at the left end indicates that Cortana is configured,
and a microphone icon at the right end indicates that Cortana is configured to
accept audio input.

To display the Cortana settings page
Open the Settings window and select Cortana.
Open the Cortana pane, and then in the lower-left corner, select the Settings
icon.
To configure Cortana to respond to a voice prompt
1. If you plan to use an external microphone or headset, connect it to the
computer and set it as the default recording device.

SEE ALSO For information about configuring a microphone in
Windows 10, see “Set up audio devices” in Chapter 7, “Manage
peripheral devices.”
2. Display the Cortana settings page.
3. In the Hey Cortana section of the Talk to Cortana pane, turn on Let
Cortana respond to “Hey Cortana”.
4. If you want Cortana to always monitor for a voice prompt, select the Keep
my device from sleeping... check box.
5. If you want Cortana to ignore voice prompts from other people, select Try
to respond only to me or, if the option is unavailable, do the following:
a. Select Learn how I say “Hey Cortana” to start the Cortana-specific
voice recognition wizard, which takes you through a quick six-phrase
exercise.

b. When you’re ready to start speaking the phrases, select Start. Cortana
prompts you to speak the first phrase. As you speak, the taskbar search
box displays what Cortana hears you say. When it understands you, it
moves to the next phrase.
TIP Instead of speaking a phrase immediately after Cortana
prompts you to, wait for the audio signal and the Cortana icon to
flash before you begin. Otherwise, you’ll have to repeat yourself.
c. Speak each of the six phrases, using different inflections to provide a
good sample of how you might sound when you verbally cue Cortana.
When you finish, close the Cortana pane, and then speak the cue Hey
Cortana to test that it activates the search box.
To turn on the Cortana keyboard shortcut
1. Display the Cortana settings page.
2. In the Keyboard shortcut section of the Talk to Cortana pane, turn Let

Cortana listen for my commands... to activate the Win+C keyboard
shortcut.
To configure Cortana listening mode on the Lock screen
1. Display the Cortana settings page.
2. In the Lock Screen section of the Talk to Cortana pane, turn on or off Use
Cortana even when my device is locked.
3. When Lock screen listening is turned on, select or clear the Let Cortana
access my calendar... check box to control access to your information from
the Lock screen.
TIP Cortana’s Lock screen listening mode doesn’t affect the
display of Cortana tips on the Lock screen. You can turn these on
when you set a picture or slideshow as your Lock screen
background.
To display or hide Cortana on the taskbar

1. Right-click a blank area of the taskbar or the taskbar search box.
2. On the shortcut menu, select Cortana, and then select Hidden, Show
Cortana icon, or Show search box.
Cortana availability
At the time of the 2017 Fall 2017 Creators Update, Cortana is
available in the following locations and languages.
Country/region Language
Australia
English (Australia)
Brazil
Portuguese (Brazil)
Canada
English (Canada) and French (Canada)
China
Chinese (Simplified)
France
French (France)
Germany
German (Germany)
India
English (India)
Italy
Italian (Italy)
Japan
Japanese
Mexico
Spanish (Mexico)
Spain
Spanish (Spain)
United KingdomEnglish (United Kingdom)
United States
English (United States)
To use Cortana, your device must be configured so that the country
or region, device language, and speech language match as shown in
the table.
TIP When Cortana isn’t available, you can still use the taskbar search feature, which works
in all locations and languages. For more information about taskbar search, see “Search your
computer and the web” in Chapter 14, “Work more efficiently.”

Configure Cortana connections
Activating the taskbar search box displays the Cortana home page. Cortana
might offer you specific information or query suggestions here. From the menu
in the upper-left corner of the home page, you can go to the other information
pages”Notebook, Devices, and Collections”and to the Cortana settings page.
The Notebook is Cortana’s central information portal.

The Cortana Notebook is divided into two sections. The top section contains the
lists and reminders that Cortana is tracking for you, and these three menus on
which you configure your personal information:

About Me Change the name or nickname Cortana uses for you, save
favorite locations (such as home and work) that Cortana can use when
providing information, and specify the Microsoft account you want Cortana
to associate your information with.
Connected Services Connect Cortana to your Office 365 account, or to a
Dynamics CRM, Knowmail, LinkedIn, Outlook.com, Skype, or Wunderlist
account.
Music If you have a music service subscription, provide the connection
information to Cortana so it can stream music from the service to your
devices. At the time of this writing, Cortana supports Groove Music and
Spotify subscriptions.
Connected Home If you use smart home devices such as lights, plugs,
locks, thermostats, and water monitors, you can connect from Cortana to
the device controller services. At the time of this writing, Cortana supports
the Hue, Insteon, Nest, Samsung SmartThings, and Wink controllers.
TIP On the Cortana Devices page, you can manage any connected
Cortana devices that you have on your network. At the time of this
writing, available devices include computers and phones with the
app installed, and a Harmon Kardon speaker that has Cortana built
in. Microsoft is experimenting with Cortana connections that are
built in to cars, and other devices are presumably in development.
Skills These are apps and routines that Cortana can use to provide you with
information and services. A wide variety of skills are available. For
example, Cortana can order a pizza from Domino’s, make a restaurant
reservation through OpenTable, fetch a recipe from FoodNetwork, get
information about a sports team, provide a weather report or trivia fact, and
much 
more. 
The 
full 
catalog 
of 
skills 
is 
available 
from
www.microsoft.com/en-us/cortana/skills/all. The skills are free to use, but
you must provide permission to Cortana the first time that you use each
skill.
If you sign in to your Windows 10 devices with a Microsoft account and

synchronize settings across your devices, you need to set up Cortana to connect
to services on only one device. The settings automatically sync with your other
devices to get you up and running quickly.
To change or provide a name for Cortana to use for you
1. Open the Cortana pane. In the upper-left corner, do either of the following
to display the Notebook page:
Select the menu button, and then Notebook.
Select the Notebook icon.
2. At the top of the Notebook page, select About Me.
3. In the About me pane, select Change my name.
4. On the What would you like me to call you? page, enter the name or
nickname you want Cortana to use when addressing you, and then at the
bottom of the pane, select Enter.
IMPORTANT The rest of this procedure requires that your device
have working audio input and output devices. Make sure that your

speakers, microphone, headset, or other audio devices are
connected and working before you continue.
5. On the Is this right? page, select Hear how I’ll say it. Listen to the
pronunciation, and then do one of the following:
If Cortana pronounces the name correctly, select Sounds good.
If you want to modify the pronunciation, select That’s wrong. Then
select the microphone icon in the taskbar search box, speak the name, and
follow the prompts for further refining the pronunciation by providing
phonetic prompts, if necessary.
To save locations for Cortana to reference
1. Open the Cortana pane and select the Notebook icon.
2. In the upper section of the Notebook page, select About Me.
3. In the Favorite places section, select Edit favorites.
4. At the bottom of the Places pane, select the Add button (+).
5. In the Add a favorite pane, begin entering an address or location name in
the search box.
6. If the address or location you want to enter comes up in the search results,
select it. Otherwise, complete the address entry in the search box and press
Enter.
7. In the Nickname box, enter a name by which you’d like to be able to find
the location.

8. If the location is your home, turn on Set as home.
9. If the location is your workplace, turn on Set as work.
10. Select Save (
) to save the location.
To manage your saved locations
1. Display the Notebook page. In the upper section of the page, select About
Me.
2. In the Favorite places section, select Edit favorites.
3. In the Places pane, review the locations that have been saved or associated
with your account.
4. To modify location details, right-click the location, and select Edit. Then

enter a nickname for the location, or specify it as your Home or Work.
5. To delete a location, right-click the location, and select Delete.
To connect to an information service
1. Display the Notebook page. In the upper section of the page, select
Connected Services.
2. If the service you want to connect to doesn’t appear in the list on the
Connected Services page, select Add a service and then select the service.

3. On the service-specific page, read the information, and then select
Connect.
4. In the Connecting to a service window, provide your existing credentials
for the selected service and then provide any requested authorization for
Microsoft to access your information and save your connection information.
When the connection is complete, the Connect button changes to a
Disconnect button.
To connect to a music streaming service
1. Open the Cortana pane and select the Notebook icon.
2. In the upper section of the Notebook page, select Music.
3. If the service you want to connect to doesn’t appear in the list on the Music
page, select Add a service and then select the service.
4. On the Music page, turn on the music streaming service that you want to
configure a connection to.
5. On the service-specific page, read the information, and then select
Connect.
6. In the Connecting to a service window, provide your existing credentials

for the selected service and then provide any requested authorization for
Microsoft to access your account.
To connect to a smart device controller service
1. Open the Cortana pane and select the Notebook icon.
2. In the upper section of the Notebook page, select Connected Home.
3. On the Connected Home page, turn on Enable Connected Home.
4. On the Connected Home page, select the smart device controller service
you want to connect to.

IMPORTANT The rest of this procedure requires that you have an

existing account with a supported smart device controller service.
5. On the service-specific page, read the information, and then select
Connect.
6. In the Connecting to a service window, provide your existing credentials
for the selected service, and then provide any requested authorization for
Microsoft to access your connected devices.
To enable a Cortana skill
1. Open the Cortana pane and select the Notebook icon.
2. In the upper section of the Notebook page, select Skills.
3. On the Manage Skills page, select Learn more... to open the Cortana
Featured Skills webpage. Near the top of the page, you can switch between
featured skills and all skills, or filter the skills for those that apply to iOS,
Android, or Windows, or to the Invoke speaker.
4. Locate a skill that interests you. An example of the verbal cue for each skill
is shown below the skill name; if a skill has multiple examples, pointing to
the example displays arrows on the left and right sides of the card. Select
the arrows to move between examples.

5. To enable a skill, do either of the following:
Speak the verbal cue on the card.
Select the card to display more information, and then select Try Now.
Then in the skill-specific Cortana pane that opens, select Yes to provide
permission for Cortana to use the skill.
Configure information tracking
The lower section of the Cortana Notebook page contains the information
categories described in the following table. Each category has options for
configuring Cortana to track information of that type.
Category Options
Cortana
tips
On/off: All tip suggestions, Tip cards, Tip notifications, Skills
notifications
Option: Notify me what Cortana can do (available only on Android
and iPhone)
Eat 
&On/off: Eat & drink cards, Restaurant recommendations, Lunch

drink
Conflict Experience
Set: Cuisine preferences, Times you normally eat lunch, Ambience
Finance
On/off: Finance cards
Set: Stocks you’re tracking
Getting
around
On/off: Traffic, time, and route notifications
Options when driving: Traffic updates to my calendar events, Notify
me when it’s time to go to my calendar events, Traffic updates to
my favorite places, Notify me when it’s time to go to work or head
home
Options when using public transit: Transit updates to my calendar
events, Notify me when it’s time to go to my calendar events,
Transit updates to my favorite places, Notify me when it’s time to
go to work or head home, Notify me when the last ride is leaving,
Show me taxi choices when it’s time to leave
Set: Your preferences for getting around
Meetings
&
reminders
On/off: Meeting & reminder cards & notifications, Meeting prep,
Daily timeline, Related documents, Show reminders on Cortana
home, Email assistance
News
On/off: News cards, Local news - Stories happening near you,
Headline news - Today’s top stories, Recommended stories - News
based on your interests, News topic cards, News category cards,
Popular now - Stories people are searching for
Set: Teams, news topics, and news categories you’re tracking
On the go On/off: All on the go cards; Offer suggestions when I leave work,
leave home, arrive home, or arrive at work; When I’m far from
home and work, show me helpful information
Packages On/off: Package tracking cards
Option: Notifications for your packages
Set: Packages you’re tracking
Pick 
up
where 
I
left off
On/off: Help me pick up where I left off
Shopping On/off: All shopping cards, Coupons, Grocery card
Special
On/off: Celebrate special days

days
Sports
On/off: All sports cards & notifications, Score updates for your
teams, Show upcoming games and matches
Set: Teams you’re tracking
Suggested
reminders
On/off: All reminder suggestion cards
Option: Notify me when something I mentioned doing is coming up
Travel
On/off: Travel cards & notifications
Weather
On/off: Weather cards & notifications, Nearby Forecast, Forecast
for your cities
Set: Cities you’re tracking, Temperature units
IMPORTANT When you change an option, you must select Save at the
bottom of the category pane to save your change.
To configure your Cortana information preferences
1. Display the Notebook page. In the lower section of the page, select the
category you want to configure.
2. In the category pane, turn on or off each setting. When individual settings
are available, select the check box, setting name, or Add link as
appropriate, and then provide the requested information.
Most options permit only one choice, but some options permit multiple
choices.

3. If you make changes in a category, select the Save button at the bottom of
the category pane before leaving the pane.
4. Select the Back arrow in the upper-left corner of the pane to return to the
Notebook, where you can select a different category.
Add reminders
Cortana can remind you about upcoming appointments and travel
plans it finds in your electronic information, but you can also set
specific reminders in Cortana. This is particularly convenient if you
have Cortana on all your compatible devices, so you can get
reminders wherever you are. On a device that has GPS, Cortana can
provide reminders based on your location—for example, when you
get home, Cortana can remind you to do the laundry, and when you

arrive at your local grocery store, Cortana can remind you to buy
bread.
You can link each reminder to a specific time, to a place, or to a
person or company that is in your contact list; mark the tasks as
complete; and look back through your completed task history.
You add reminders from the Reminders pane of Cortana, or you can
simply say “Hey, Cortana, remind me to...” Cortana interprets your
request in the form of a reminder.
Cortana prompts you for any missing information, and then asks you
to approve the reminder. You can say Yes or select Remind to set the
reminder, say No or select Cancel to cancel the reminder, or edit the
reminder information in the pane and then complete the process.
Manage 
Cortana 
information 
and
notifications
While you use your Cortana-enabled devices, Cortana collects and analyzes
information about where you are, who you communicate with, your schedule,
packages that are on their way to you, tasks you say you will complete, websites
you visit, and so on. All this information enables Cortana to offer helpful advice

and answers. If you would prefer that Cortana not collect specific types of
information, you can turn off information collection for a specific category of
information on a device-by-device basis.
You can also manage the information that Cortana provides by filtering out adult
content from search results, including or excluding cloud storage content, and
including or excluding information gleaned from your app history, settings
history, and search history on your devices”not only those that are running
Cortana, but any that you sign in to with the account Cortana is connected to.
After you install the Cortana mobile app on your phone, Cortana can notify you
on your computer about phone calls that you miss, text messages that you
receive, app notifications issued on your phone, and low battery status. These
notifications appear in the Cortana section of the Action Center. This convenient
inter-device messaging enables you to review and respond to text messages from
within the Action Center.

By default, inter-device notifications are also stored in the cloud so they can be
managed across multiple devices that you sign in to.
To manage information previously saved by Cortana
1. Display the Cortana settings page, and select Permissions & History.
2. In the Permissions section, do any of the following:
To review the types and sources of personal information that Cortana
collects, select Change what Cortana knows about me in the cloud.
TIP You can review the information saved by other services by
selecting Change What Cortana Knows About Me In The Cloud,
and then selecting other links such as Bing Maps and Search
History Page from the Personal Information pane.
To clear the information saved by Cortana, select Change what Cortana
knows about me in the cloud, and then at the bottom of the Personal
Information pane, select Clear.
3. In the History section, if you want to clear the app and settings information
that Cortana has saved on this device, select Clear my device history.
To manage Cortana’s access to information
1. Display the Cortana settings page, and select Permissions & History.
2. In the Permissions section of the Permissions & History pane, select

Manage the information Cortana can access from this device.
3. In the Permissions section of the Manage the information... page, turn on
or off any of the following:
Location
Contacts, email, calendar & communication history
Browsing history
4. If you turn off any of the options, follow these steps to delete the existing
information:
a. Open Cortana and select the Notebook icon.
b. In the Cortana Notebook, select About Me, and then at the bottom of the
page, select your account.
c. In the Account window, select Sign out.
To manage Cortana search settings
1. Display the Cortana settings page, and select Permissions & History.
2. In the SafeSearch section, select Strict or Moderate to designate the types
of adult content you want to filter out of search results, or Off if you don’t
want to filter content.

3. In the Cloud Search section, if you want to exclude files stored in
Microsoft OneDrive and other cloud content from search results, turn off
Windows Cloud Search.
To manage device and search history settings
1. Display the Cortana settings page, and select Permissions & History.
2. In the History section, do any of the following:
To include or exclude app and setting information, turn on or off My
device history.
To include or exclude search terms and results, turn on or off My search
history.
To configure Cortana notifications about your phone
1. Display the Cortana settings page, and select Notifications.
2. To manage notifications about missed phone calls, text messages, app
notifications, and low battery warnings on your phone, turn on or off Send
notifications between devices.
3. When phone notifications are turned on, select Manage notifications to
open the Manage Notifications pane in Cortana. In this pane, you can see
the status of the Upload Notifications From This PC To The Cloud setting.
To change the setting, select it in the pane and then, in the setting-specific
pane, turn it on or off.
TIP You can get more information about how Cortana and Windows
handle your personal information from the More Details pane of the
Cortana settings page. You can manage your privacy settings from the
Privacy settings page. For more information, see “Configure privacy
settings” in Chapter 15, “Protect your computer and data.”
Key points

Cortana is a helpful personal assistant that you can take with you on any
device. It monitors your activities and provides useful related information
and reminders.
You can use Cortana to manage connected smart home devices and interact
with many companies and services.
 Practice tasks
No practice files are necessary to complete the practice tasks in this chapter.
Configure Cortana settings
If Cortana is available on your computer, perform the following tasks:
1. Display the Cortana Notebook page. In the About Me pane, provide any
information that you want Cortana to have, but haven’t yet saved”for
example, a nickname to personalize its communications with you, or your
work address.
2. Display the Cortana settings page. From the Talk to Cortana pane,
configure Cortana to respond to verbal cuing, and set the other options in
the pane as you want them.
3. Experiment with giving Cortana commands, such as “Hey, Cortana. Start
Word,” and asking questions, such as “Hey, Cortana. What’s the weather?”
Configure Cortana connections
Perform the following tasks:
1. Review the options in the Connected Services, Music, and Connected
Home panes. If you have accounts with any of the available services,
configure a connection to them.
2. Return to the Cortana Notebook page. Display the skills that you can
configure for Cortana. Review the skill cards and select one that interests
you to see more information about it. If you want to, configure Cortana to
connect to one or more of the available skills.

Configure information tracking
Perform the following tasks:
1. Configure your Cortana information preferences.
2. Review the information shown on the Cortana home page.
Manage Cortana information and notifications
Perform the following tasks:
1. In the Permissions & History pane, review the types of information that
Cortana collects about you, and consider how that can be of service to you.
2. In the Notifications pane, review the notification options that are available
for you to manage. If you want to make any changes to these, do so.

10. Safely and efficiently browse the
internet
In this chapter
Display websites in Microsoft Edge
Find, save, and share information
Manage Microsoft Edge settings
Configure browser security settings
Maintain browsing privacy
Troubleshoot browsing issues
Some businesses and government agencies totally isolate their computers from
any direct connection to the public internet, for security and privacy reasons. But
for the average person, internet access is one of the primary reasons for having a
computer.
Many apps connect to the internet without any external input, but the primary
method for individuals to interact on the internet is through an internet browser.
Regardless of the browser you use, the internet browsing experience has many
common characteristics.
The Microsoft Edge browser, which was released with Windows 10, was
designed from the ground up for speed and security. It offers many interesting
and useful features. Since its initial release, it has had many updates, and
independent tests have found it to be the best-performing browser for running
modern web applications, more effective than Chrome or Firefox at blocking
malware downloads and phishing attacks, and more power-efficient than Chrome
or Firefox when streaming high-definition video.
This chapter guides you through procedures for displaying websites in Microsoft
Edge; finding, saving, and sharing information; managing Microsoft Edge
settings; configuring browser security settings; maintaining browsing privacy;
and troubleshooting browsing issues.

About Microsoft Edge
Microsoft Edge is a universal app, which means it will run on many
different devices—not only on your computer, but also on tablets,
phones, Xbox gaming systems, HoloLens headsets, and Surface Hub
devices. This is a bigger deal than it might seem—universal apps have
only recently become an achievable reality. The benefit for app
developers is that they can learn one coding system, create only one
version of each app, sell it to consumers on multiple platforms, and
provide support for only one source code project. The benefit to
consumers is that they can purchase one app that is of better quality
and use it across multiple platforms. (For example, a Bejeweled game
that you can play on your computer, phone, and tablet, with your
progress following you across all the devices.) Universal apps are a
win-win situation for everyone.
Microsoft Edge is installed as part of the Windows 10 operating
system and is automatically set as the default browser. This means
that you can use any browser you want, but when you select a link in
an app, it automatically opens in Microsoft Edge. The initial version
released with Windows 10 was a little rough around the edges, but
since that time, Microsoft Edge has become a great browser. It’s fast,
secure, has a sleek interface, and features some cool tools. In short,
there’s a lot to like about it.
If you updated your computer from another version of Windows to
Windows 10, any browsers you had installed on your system are still
installed and available for use. Internet Explorer is also available; it’s
hidden in the app list in the Windows Accessories folder, but if you
want to use it (or any other browser), you can create a Start menu or
taskbar shortcut.
SEE ALSO For information about creating app shortcuts, see “Create
and manage app shortcuts” in Chapter 3, “Work with shortcuts and
tiles.”
If you give Microsoft Edge a try and find that it isn’t going to work
for you, you can change the default browser to any other that you
have installed. For information about setting default apps, see
“Specify default apps” in Chapter 14, “Work more efficiently.”

Display websites in Microsoft Edge
The Microsoft Edge user interface is simple and clean. The browser was
designed to be secure, but also to provide a minimal interface with relatively few
distractions.
Microsoft Edge has a tabbed browser interface so you can display multiple
webpages in one window. When you start the browser, it displays either the Start
page, a new tab, the most recent tab set, or a home page (or pages) that you
specify. New tabs display your choice of a blank page, links to the websites that
you frequently visit, or website links and newsfeed content.
The Microsoft Edge controls are on a simple toolbar below the page tabs.

In addition to the standard browser view experience, Microsoft Edge supports
playing audio in the background of webpages (for example, the sound of birds
shown in some Bing background images) and has a Reading view that hides the
distracting elements and displays the current webpage as it might appear in an e-
book reader, so you can concentrate on the content.
TIP When Reading view is active, the Reading view button in the
toolbar is blue. When Microsoft Edge displays a webpage that doesn’t
support Reading view, the button is dimmed.

Reading view becomes available only after Microsoft Edge loads all the
webpage content, including advertisements. Reading view is available only for
some webpages because it displays primarily text content. It doesn’t display all
the content on the page—and the standards by which it chooses content aren’t
entirely clear. It isn’t available for website home pages, online commerce sites,
or webpages that don’t contain much text.
TIP If you own a website that doesn’t display well in Reading view,
check 
the 
Microsoft 
Edge 
Reading 
View 
webpage 
at
docs.microsoft.com/en-us/microsoft-edge/dev-guide/browser/reading-
view to identify possible causes.
If a webpage includes audio content, a speaker icon appears on the page tab
when the audio is playing. This makes it much easier to locate the source of
unwanted audio output. If you can’t hear the audio and want to, you might need
to turn up your speaker volume or change your audio playback device.
The Microsoft Edge version released with the Fall 2017 Creators Update of
Windows 10 also supports the filling out of PDF forms in the browser window.
To start Microsoft Edge
On the taskbar, select the Microsoft Edge button (labeled with a stylized e).
On the Start menu, in the app list, jump to the M section, and then select
Microsoft Edge.
To display the Settings And More menu
In the upper-right corner of the Microsoft Edge window, below the Close
button (the X), select the Settings and more button (...).
To open a new browser tab

At the top of the Microsoft Edge window, to the right of the rightmost tab,
select the New tab button (the +).
Press Ctrl+T.
To preview all open webpages
At the top of the Microsoft Edge window, to the right of the New Tab
button, select the Show tab previews button (the v).
To display a webpage
1. Select the Address bar to activate it.
2. Enter a URL or search term into the Search or enter web address box, and
then press Enter or select a webpage from the list that appears below the
Address bar.

To display webpages on separate Microsoft Edge tabs
Right-click a link, and then select Open in new tab.
Right-click a tab, and then select Duplicate. In the duplicate tab, navigate
to a new webpage.
To display webpages in separate Microsoft Edge windows
Right-click a link, and then select Open in new window.
Drag an existing tab away from the original Microsoft Edge window to
display it in its own window. (Releasing the tab creates the new window.)
Right-click a tab, and then select Move to new window.
On the Settings and more (...) menu, select New window.
On the Settings and more (...) menu, select New InPrivate window.
SEE ALSO For information about InPrivate browsing, see
“Maintain browsing privacy” later in this chapter.
To move between webpages visited on a tab
At the left end of the active tab toolbar, select the Back or Forward button.

Hold down the Shift key and then scroll the mouse wheel.
To refresh the display of a webpage
At the left end of the active tab toolbar, select the Refresh button.
Press F5.
Right-click any tab, and then select Refresh all.
To switch the display of a webpage to and from Reading view
In the Address bar, select the Reading view button.
TIP You can configure the Reading view background color and
type size. For more information, see “Manage Microsoft Edge
settings” later in this chapter.
Find, save, and share information
A web search for specific information sometimes leads to webpages that contain
a lot of content. It can be difficult to locate the information you’re looking for on
the webpage. You can quickly highlight all instances of a search term on the
current webpage, and scroll to spot them or cycle through them in order.
After you find the information you’re looking for, you can annotate (draw and
write on) a snapshot of the webpage by using the Add Notes tool, and then save
or share the annotated webpage.

You can share webpages or their content with other people, or save them for
your own reference. The Share pane displays the apps you can use to share the
webpage.

You can share a screenshot of the webpage, or you can send, post, or save
information from the webpage and a link to it. Your sharing options depend on
the apps that are installed on your computer and the user account you’re signed
in to Windows with. Some common options include the Cortana, Facebook,
Mail, Messenger, OneNote, Skype, and Twitter apps.
SEE ALSO For information about Cortana, see Chapter 9, “Get

assistance from Cortana.”
You can easily keep track of and return to sites of ongoing interest. If you think
you will want to return to a webpage, you can add it to one of your lists:
Add articles and blogs that you want to read later to your Reading list.
Add sites that you want to store for long-term reference to your Favorites
list. You can organize favorites in folders and optionally display them on
the Favorites bar for quick access.
TIP The Favorites bar is hidden by default but can be a very convenient
tool. To display it, follow the instructions in “To display the Favorites
bar” later in this topic.
If you’ve built a Favorites list in another browser, you can transfer it to
Microsoft Edge.
You can also pin websites to the Start screen or taskbar so that you can easily
access them.
If you have multiple webpages that you use together, such as a timecard site,

payroll site, and employee pension site, or if you want to save a set of tabs that
you’re working with and come back to them later, you can ‘set them aside’ and
easily open all of them at one time. You can set aside multiple sets of tabs.
Restoring the tabs removes them from the saved tab sets, so if you want to use
them again, you should save them in your Favorites.
To find text on a webpage
1. Display the webpage in Microsoft Edge.
2. Do either of the following to display the Find On Page toolbar:
Press Ctrl+F.
On the Settings and more (...) menu, select Find on page.
3. Begin entering your search term in the search box.
As you enter characters, every instance of matching text on the webpage is
highlighted. The number of instances found on the page appears to the right
of the search box.
4. After you enter as much of the search term as is necessary to return a
manageable number of results, you can scroll through the page content to
review the highlighted instances of the search term, or select the Next or
Previous buttons to move among the results.
5. To further restrict the search, select Options on the Find on page toolbar,
and then select Match whole word or Match case.
To annotate a webpage
1. On the Microsoft Edge toolbar, select the Add Notes button (the pen). The
browser converts the page to a screenshot and displays an annotation
toolbar at the top of the page.

2. Select the buttons on the toolbar to activate any of the following functions:
Draw with a pen (select from 30 ink colors and 24 widths).
Highlight (select from 6 ink colors and 53 widths).
Erase (freehand or all markup).
Add a typed note.
Clip part of the image.
Draw with your finger or a stylus instead of the mouse.
Save the marked-up page to OneNote, your Favorites list, or your
Reading list.
Share the marked-up page through any of the installed apps that support
content sharing.
To share a webpage
1. At the right end of the Microsoft Edge toolbar, select the Share button to
open the Share pane on the right side of your screen. The Share pane
displays people you frequently share information with, and the apps you
can use to share the webpage.
2. Do either of the following:
At the top of the Share pane, select the person you want to share the page
with, or select More people and then find and select the person. Then
select the sharing method you want to use.
At the bottom of the Share pane, select the method you want to use to
share the page. Then follow the process appropriate to that method to
share the page on your feed or with specific people.
To save a webpage for later reference
1. Select the Add to favorites or reading list button (the star) at the right end

of the Address bar, or press Ctrl+D.
2. At the top of the pane, select either Favorites or Reading list.
3. In the Name box, edit the page name that will be displayed in the list, if you
want to.
4. If you’re saving the page to your Favorites list and you have organized your
favorites in folders, select Save in to display the storage folders, and select
or create a folder.


5. Select Save.
To set aside tab sets
1. Open the webpages that you want to save together, on tabs within one
browser window. Close any tabs that you don’t want to save with the set.
2. Near the upper-left corner of the window, select the Set these tabs aside
button.
To restore tab sets
1. In the upper-left corner of the Microsoft Edge window, select the Tabs
you’ve set aside button.
2. In the Tabs you’ve set aside pane, locate the tab set you want to open. In
the upper-right corner of the tab set, select Restore tabs.
To import your Favorites list from another browser to Microsoft Edge

1. At the bottom of the Settings and more (...) menu, select Settings.
2. In the Settings pane, under Import favorites and other info, select Import
from another browser to display a list of installed browsers that have
saved favorites.

3. Select the browser you want to import favorites from, and then select
Import. Repeat for each browser you want to import your favorites from.
To display your Favorites list, Reading list, browsing history, or file
downloads
1. On the Microsoft Edge toolbar, select the Hub button. The Hub displays the
most recently accessed pane when it opens.


2. At the top of the Hub, select the Favorites, Reading list, Books, History,
or Downloads button to display that list.
To pin the Hub to the browser window
1. Display any list in the Hub.
2. In the upper-right corner of the Hub, select the Pin this pane button (the
pushpin).
To read articles from your Reading list
1. On the Microsoft Edge toolbar, select the Hub button.
2. At the top of the Hub pane, select the Reading list button.
3. Select the article you want to read, to display it in the current tab.
To remove a webpage from your Reading list
1. Display the Reading list in the Hub.
2. Right-click the page you want to remove, and then select Delete.
To organize your Favorites list
1. Display the Favorites list in the Hub.
2. Do any of the following:
To move a saved page into a folder, drag the page to the folder.
To move a saved page or folder onto the Favorites bar, drag it to the
Favorites Bar folder.
To rename a saved page or folder, right-click it and select Rename. Then
edit the entry or enter a new name, and press Enter to save the change.
To sort your saved favorites, right-click any folder or page and then select
Sort by name. Folders appear at the top of the list, followed by pages.
To change the URL associated with a saved page, right-click the page and
then select Edit URL. In the box that opens, edit the URL and then press
Enter to save the change.

To display the Favorites bar
1. At the bottom of the Settings and more (...) menu, select Settings.
2. In the Settings pane, turn on Show the favorites bar.
3. If you have a lot of favorite sites and want to fit more of them on the
Favorites bar, turn on Show only icons on the favorites bar to display only
site icons and not names.
To pin a webpage to the Start menu or taskbar
On the Settings and more (...) menu, select Pin this page to Start or Pin
this page to the taskbar.
To print the current webpage
1. In Microsoft Edge, on the Settings and more (...) menu, select Print to
preview the page in the Print dialog box.
2. If the webpage will print on multiple pages, a Next arrow appears above the
preview to the right of the page number. Move through the pages to verify
that they will print as you want them.

3. In the Printer list, select the printer or app you want to print to.
4. Configure any additional print settings, and then select Print.
Manage Microsoft Edge settings
All browsers provide a way to set options and default behavior. The settings in
Microsoft Edge are well organized and, for the most part, straightforward. You
manage Microsoft Edge settings from the Settings And More menu that expands
from the upper-right corner of the browser window.


The Microsoft Edge settings panes are quite bland and don’t have icons to
visually differentiate between settings, so it can be slightly difficult to locate
specific settings.
You configure most of the Microsoft Edge settings in the Settings pane and the
Advanced Settings pane. We don’t cover configuration processes for all the
individual settings in this section, but they’re easy to locate and most have
simple On/Off toggle buttons.
You can specify the page or pages that Microsoft Edge displays when it starts,
and you can specify, to some extent, the content of new tabs that you open. The
options include:
A blank page, which displays only a search box.
Top sites, which displays up to eight tiles that link to sites that you visit
most frequently.
Top sites and suggested content, which displays site tiles and news feeds.
By default, Microsoft Edge uses the Bing search engine. If you prefer to use a
different search engine, you can easily specify any search engine that uses
OpenSearch technology.
You can have Microsoft Edge save passwords and form entries, and
automatically enter them for you. It can be very convenient to not have to
manually enter your address into online forms, but before agreeing to save a
password, consider whether you want this information to be available to
someone else who might use your computer and user account. You should never
save a password on a computer that has a shared user account, such as a public
computer at a school or library.
To display the Settings And More menu
In the upper-right corner of the Microsoft Edge window, below the Close
button (the X), select the Settings and more button (...).
To set or change your home page or starting content
1. At the bottom of the Settings and more (...) menu, select Settings.
2. In the Settings pane, expand the Open Microsoft Edge with list, and then
do one of the following:

Select Start page to display news feeds from MSN.
Select New tab page to display a new tab showing either a blank page,
your frequently visited sites, or top sites and suggested content.
SEE ALSO For information about setting the content for new
tabs, see the procedure “To specify the content of new tabs” later
in this topic.
Select Previous pages to display the tabs that were open when you last
closed Microsoft Edge.
Select A specific page or pages to have Microsoft Edge display one or
more specific pages when it starts.
3. If you chose A specific page or pages, do any of the following:

To specify the first home page, select the Enter a URL box, enter the
webpage address, and then select the adjacent Save button (
).
TIP To include the Microsoft Edge Start page in a home page
set, enter about:start as the URL, or to include a blank page,
enter about:blank.
To specify additional home pages, select +Add new page, enter the
webpage address, and then select the adjacent Save button.
To modify a home page address, point to the URL, select the Edit button
(the pencil) that appears, edit the address, and then select the adjacent
Save button.
To remove a page from a set of home pages, point to the webpage
address, and then select the Delete button (the X) that appears.
TIP If you set a home page or home pages, display the Home
button on the Microsoft Edge toolbar so you can return to your
home page by selecting the button. To display the button, turn on
Show The Home Button at the top of the Advanced Settings
pane.
4. Open a new Microsoft Edge window to display your selected configuration.
To specify the content of new tabs
1. At the bottom of the Settings and more (...) menu, select Settings.
2. In the Settings pane, expand the Open new tabs with list, and then do one
of the following:
Select Top sites and suggested content to display thumbnails of the sites
you visit often and a current newsfeed.

Select Top sites to display only thumbnails of sites you visit often.
Select A blank page to display the simplest page, without any distracting
content.
3. Open a new tab to test your selected setting.
To customize your suggested content (news feed)
1. Set the new tab content to Top sites and suggested content (referred to in
some places as Top sites and my news feed).
2. Open a new tab in Microsoft Edge.
3. At the right end of the Top sites heading, select the Customize button (the
cog) to display your suggested sites/news feed customization options.
4. In the Information cards section, turn on the topics you want to display.

5. Select Save to apply your changes.
To change your default search engine
1. Open Microsoft Edge and go to the webpage of the search engine you want

to use (for example, to use Google Search, go to www.google.com).
TIP Microsoft Edge supports OpenSearch search engines. For a
full 
list 
of 
OpenSearch 
search 
engines, 
visit
www.opensearch.org/Community/OpenSearch_search_clients.
2. At the bottom of the Settings and more (...) menu, select Settings.
3. At the bottom of the Settings pane, select View advanced settings.
4. In the Privacy and services section of the Advanced settings pane, below
Search in the address bar with, select Change search engine to display
the search engine options.


5. In the Change search engine pane, select the search engine you want to
use, and then select Set as default.
IMPORTANT If the Change Search Engine pane doesn’t include the
search engine you want to use, be sure that you completed step 1.
To save and manage passwords and form entries
1. At the bottom of the Settings and more (...) menu, select Settings.
2. At the bottom of the Settings pane, select View advanced settings. Then in
the Advanced settings pane, locate the Privacy and services section.

3. Do any of the following:
To save and autofill passwords that you enter in password boxes in the
Microsoft Edge browser, turn on Offer to save passwords.
IMPORTANT This option doesn’t automatically save every new

password you enter; it displays a message box offering to do so.
To stop saving passwords, turn off Offer to save passwords.
To review the sites that you’ve saved passwords for, select Manage
passwords to open the Manage Passwords pane.
Select any website to display and edit the saved user name and password,
or point to a website and select the Clear button (the X) that appears on
the right side of the pane to delete the saved user name and password.
To save form entries that you enter in the Microsoft Edge browser (so the
browser can automatically enter them for you in other forms), turn on
Save form entries.
To stop saving form entries, turn off Save form entries.
IMPORTANT The information you save will be used to
automatically fill forms in the future. This is convenient, but it
might also be a security risk. Some less-than-scrupulous websites
add hidden form fields to collect information that you don’t
know you’re providing.

TIP Another interesting password management tool is Credential
Manager, which you can open from the taskbar search box or an Icons
view of Control Panel.
To delete saved information
1. At the bottom of the Settings and more (...) menu, select Settings.
2. In the Clear browsing data section of the Settings pane, select Choose
what to clear to display the types of data you can clear.


3. In the Clear browsing data pane, select the check boxes of the types of
browsing data you want to purge. Then select the Clear button.
Anatomy of a website address
The words, letters, numbers, and symbols that appear in the Address
bar of your web browser window when you connect to a webpage
might look like a logical address or like a bunch of nonsense. Every
character has a specific purpose. Here’s a breakdown of a typical
webpage address and a description of what each part does. The
webpage address is http://movies.msn.com/showtimes/today.aspx?
zip=’92127’.
ProtocolSubdomainDomain
name
Folder
Page
Query
http
movies
msn.com
showtimestoday.aspx?
zip=’92127’
The protocol tells your web browser what type of connection to make
to the destination site. The most common protocol is http (Hypertext
Transfer Protocol, the protocol that delivers information over the
World Wide Web). Another common web protocol is https (HTTP
over a secure connection). In a URL, the protocol is followed by a
colon and two forward slashes (://).
TIP There are dozens of protocols for many different types of communication, including
internet connections, email delivery, file sharing, local and remote network connections, and a
plethora of others. Some of the more familiar protocols include ADSL, DHCP, DNS, FTP,
HTTPS, IMAP, IP, ISDN, POP3, SMTP, SOAP, TCP, and Telnet.
The domain name is the base address of the site. The top-level domain
(TLD), such as .com, is part of the domain name. Each domain name
is purchased and registered by an organization or individual and is
assigned to an Internet Protocol (IP) address representing the location
of the site content on a server. Domain names and IP addresses are
managed by ICANN (the Internet Corporation for Assigned Names
and Numbers), a nonprofit corporation based in California. Although
ICANN is an American corporation, it manages internetrelated tasks
worldwide in cooperation with international agencies.

TIP Top-level domains (TLDs) are governed by an international organization. Each TLD has
a specific meaning: generic TLDs (such as .com and .net) are available to anyone, sponsored
TLDs (such as .edu, .gov, and .travel) belong to private agencies or organizations, and
twoletter country code TLDs are intended to represent the country or region of origin or use
of a site’s content. Country code TLDs are frequently used for other purposes, however; for
example, the TLD .am is assigned to Armenia, and .fm is assigned to the Federated States of
Micronesia, but many radio stations have website addresses ending in these TLDs.
When you go to a website, your computer connects to the internet to
find out the IP address currently assigned to the domain name. Then it
connects to the server located at that IP address and displays the
content located on that server. Because the alphabetic domain name
leads to the less-obvious IP address, the domain name is sometimes
referred to as a friendly name.
If an address includes a subdomain, it points to a specific site, usually
one of a group of sites presented under the umbrella of one domain
name. The sites represented by the subdomains don’t have be of the
same type or reside in the same location. For example, Contoso
Corporation might have the registered domain name contoso.com, a
public website at http://www.contoso.com and the subdomains
sharepoint, 
for 
its 
collaboration 
site 
at
http://sharepoint.contoso.com;mail, for its web email server at
http://mail.contoso.com; and shopping, for a secure online shopping
cart application at https://shopping.contoso.com.
A folder name indicates the location in the website structure of the
page on the screen. In the same way that you store files within a
logical folder structure on your hard drive, a website administrator
might arrange files in a logical structure within the site. Single
forward slashes (/) separate folders from other address elements, in
the same way that single backward slashes (\) separate folders in the
File Explorer Address bar.
The page name represents the specific file containing the content and
code that generates the information displayed on the screen; it
includes a file name extension indicating the file type. Common page
name extensions include .htm for HTML files containing static
content, and .aspx for Active Server Pages (ASP pages) displaying
dynamic content gathered from a database or other source within a
framework governed by code in the file.
An HTML page name might include a bookmark, preceded by a
pound sign (#), indicating a specific location in a file. An ASP page

name might include a query, preceded by a question mark (?),
indicating the search term that generated the page content. In the
example given at the beginning of this sidebar, the query ?zip=‘92127’
is intended to return show times for movies playing in the
geographical area identified by the ZIP Code 92127.
When you connect to a simple website address, Microsoft Edge uses
the protocol to establish the communication method, connects to the
server hosting the domain or subdomain, and then displays the page
designated by the website administrator as the home page for the site.
To configure your Reading view settings
1. Display a webpage in Reading view.
2. Do either of the following to display the Reading view Options menu:
Click or tap near the top of the page to display the menu bar, which is
hidden by default. Then on the menu bar, select the Options button.
Press Ctrl+Shift+O.
3. To adjust the text size, do any of the following:
In the Text size section of the Options menu, select the Make smaller or
Make bigger button.

Press Ctrl+Minus sign to decrease the text size, or Ctrl+Plus sign
(Ctrl+Equal sign also works, if the Plus sign is above that on your
keyboard) to increase the text size.
TIP You can use the keyboard shortcuts without opening the
Options menu.
4. To change the page background and font colors, in the Page theme section
of the Options menu, select the Light, Sepia, or Dark button.
Educate kids about online safety
In November 1998, the US Congress passed the Children’s Online
Privacy Protection Act (COPPA), which requires that operators of US-
based online services or websites obtain parental consent before
collecting, using, disclosing, or displaying the personal information of
children under the age of 13. COPPA went into effect on April 21,
2000, and is governed by regulations established by the Federal Trade
Commission.
Many children have internet access at home, at school, and at friends’
houses. On their own computers, you can protect children from
exposure to objectionable content by setting up their user accounts as
Child accounts and configuring the Family Safety settings at age-
appropriate levels. However, it’s important to proactively educate
children about online safety and computer security.
The Federal Trade Commission provides helpful information for
parents and teachers about computer security, phones, social
networks, virtual worlds, texting, video games, parental controls, and
COPPA at consumer.ftc.gov/topics/kids-online-safety.
SEE ALSO For more information about Child accounts and Family
Safety, see “Create and manage user accounts” in Chapter 11,
“Manage user accounts and settings.”

Configure browser security settings
It is difficult (at least for some of us) to imagine how we would survive without
constant access to the internet. The internet has become a primary source of
information and services. But it can be hard to know whether the information is
accurate and the services are benign: some people use the internet to try to steal
information from other people, or damage their computers, through malicious
attacks on computer systems.
The security of Microsoft Edge is constantly monitored and managed by
Microsoft. Windows Defender updates are released frequently to safeguard your
computer against newly discovered threats, or source code issues through which
someone who really wants to could exploit the browser. There are bad people
who launch malicious attacks, and good people who fix problems; between those
two groups, there are people who have the challenging job of finding potential
problems before the bad guys do, so the good guys can fix them. All these
people are smart and dedicated to playing their roles in the threat lifecycle.
Malware can present itself in many forms—you can find it, or it can find you.
Some of the problems that the browser can guard against include:
Unsafe websites that are phishing websites or that contain malicious
software.
Pop-up windows that display false information and links to malicious
software. These frequently are crafted to look like Windows warning
messages.
Taking care of Microsoft Edge is the responsibility of Microsoft. Protection
generally lags slightly behind the threat, so there is no guarantee that Microsoft
or any other company can protect you from all threats. Being aware while
browsing the internet is the responsibility of each individual. This topic
describes measures that you can take to be safe and secure while browsing the
internet.
Protect yourself from phishing and malicious sites
One of the special security features of Microsoft Edge is the Windows Defender
SmartScreen filter. It runs in the background of your browsing session and
monitors websites, webpages, and downloads for known issues or suspicious
content. SmartScreen warns you if it identifies (or suspects) a security problem,

such as:
If you visit a website that has been reported as an unsafe website.
If you visit a webpage that has characteristics that might indicate a security
risk.
If you download an app that is known to be unsafe.
If you download an app that isn’t known to be unsafe, but also hasn’t been
downloaded by many people.
SmartScreen is on by default in Microsoft Edge. The only management option is
whether it is on or off. If your computer is centrally managed by your
organization, the option might be unavailable. If it is, the Advanced Settings
pane will include the message Some settings are managed by your organization,
and the SmartScreen setting text and toggle button will be gray.
You can also turn on SmartScreen for Store apps that pass URLs, from the
Privacy page of the Settings window.
To turn SmartScreen on or off
1. At the bottom of the Settings and more (...) menu, select Settings.
2. At the bottom of the Settings pane, select View advanced settings.
3. At the bottom of the Advanced settings pane, turn on or off Help protect
me from malicious sites and downloads with Windows Defender
SmartScreen.
To report an unsafe website to Microsoft
1. On the Settings and more (...) menu, select Send feedback.
2. In the Feedback & reporting pane, select Report unsafe site.
3. On the Report a website page, verify that the URL shown in the Website
you are reporting section is that of the website you want to report.
4. Select any of the following check boxes:
I think this is a phishing website
I think this website contains malicious software
5. At the bottom of the page, enter the characters from the image into the box

to verify that you are a person rather than a computer. Then select Submit.
Block pop-up windows
Pop-up windows are secondary web browser windows that open in front of (or
sometimes behind) the window you’re working in when you go to a website or
select an advertising link. The content of these windows might be informational
—for example, a new window might open when you select a link for more
information or when you sign in to a secure site—or in some cases might be
irritating or malicious—for example, when browsing the internet for
information, you might display a page that causes several advertisements to pop
up behind it. However, pop-up windows frequently display annoying
advertisements, adware (fake warning messages containing links to product
sites), spyware (malicious software that can collect personal information from
your computer), or other types of content you did not invite and probably don’t
want.
If a suspicious pop-up window does open, it’s best to not select any buttons in it;
instead, you can usually close the window from the taskbar, from Task View, or
from Task Manager. You can also configure your browser to block pop-up
windows from opening. When a site does try to display a pop-up window, the
browser alerts you, and you can choose to provide a one-time or permanent
exception for that site. If you later change your mind, you can review and
remove specific exceptions in Microsoft Edge.
To block pop-up windows
1. At the bottom of the Settings and more (...) menu, select Settings.
2. At the bottom of the Settings pane, select View advanced settings.
3. Near the top of the Advanced settings pane, turn on Block pop-ups.
To clear pop-up window exceptions that you’ve granted
1. At the bottom of the Settings and more (...) menu, select Settings.
2. At the bottom of the Settings pane, select View advanced settings.
3. In the Website permissions section of the Advanced settings pane, select
Manage.
4. In the Manage permissions pane, the word Pop-ups indicates each site that

you’ve allowed pop-up windows on. Point to any site that you want to
remove from the list, and then select the Clear button (the X) that appears.
Maintain browsing privacy
Internet browsers keep track of the websites you visit so that you can return
quickly to them from your browsing history list. They also track the credentials
you sign in to websites and services with, so they can resupply them to the site
without bothering you. This can cause conflicts if you have multiple user names

for the same site—for example, if you have two different Microsoft accounts, or
two different Microsoft Office 365 accounts.
Some sites temporarily save credentials and other information that you provide,
in session variables that expire after some period of time. To ensure that your
information isn’t available to other people who connect to the site from the same
computer, take care to sign out of secure sites instead of just closing the browser
window.
You can restrict Microsoft Edge from tracking your browsing and credentials by
using an InPrivate browsing session. This opens a separate browser window that
doesn’t carry forward any credentials that are currently in use. The browsing that
you do in this window is not tracked—the pages and sites do not appear in your
browsing history, and temporary files and cookies are not saved on your
computer.
The InPrivate browsing session lasts only as long as the window is open. Any
browsing that you do in other browser windows is recorded as usual.
InPrivate browsing is a useful tool for information workers who have multiple
Office 365 accounts; you can ensure that Microsoft Edge uses the correct
credentials for a browsing session by starting from an InPrivate window.
You can increase the security of an InPrivate browsing session by disabling
toolbars and extensions in those sessions. This setting is turned on by default in
Microsoft Edge.
To start an InPrivate browsing session
On the taskbar, right-click the Microsoft Edge button, and then select New

InPrivate window.
In Microsoft Edge, on the Settings and more (...) menu, select New
InPrivate window.
Press Ctrl+Shift+P.
Troubleshoot browsing issues
If Microsoft Edge is unable to support site requirements, it displays a link so that
you can switch to Internet Explorer. If you think Microsoft Edge is having
difficulty with a site, you can switch to the other browser from within Microsoft
Edge (and transfer your session information at the same time), or you can have
Microsoft Edge act as though it’s a different browser (emulate the browser), even
one that doesn’t usually run on your computer or device. Microsoft Edge can
emulate many different browsers, not only those installed on your computer.
If you have difficulty navigating a webpage by using the mouse, you can use
caret browsing instead. Caret browsing enables you to use standard navigation
keys on your keyboard—Home, End, Page Up, Page Down, and the arrow keys
—to select text and move around on a webpage.
The concept of caret browsing has been available for years. Like many things
associated with accessibility, it can be useful to almost anyone.
To switch the display of a site from Microsoft Edge to Internet Explorer
In Microsoft Edge, on the Settings and more (...) menu, select Open with
Internet Explorer.

To emulate a different browser
1. In Microsoft Edge, on the Settings and more (...) menu, select F12
Developer Tools.
2. In the F12 Developer Tools window, select the Emulation tab.
3. In the Mode section of the tab, in the User agent string list, select the
browser (or browser and platform, if appropriate) that you want Microsoft
Edge to emulate.
4. If you want to move the F12 Developer Tools window away from the
browser window so you can see more of the content, select the Undock
button near the right end of the window title bar.
TIP Watch the webpage as you select a browser to emulate. The page
will refresh and might look a little or a lot different, depending on your
selection.
To turn on or off caret browsing
1. In Microsoft Edge, press F7.
2. In the Turn on caret browsing? or Turn off caret browsing? dialog box,
do the following:
a. If you want Microsoft Edge to automatically turn on or off caret browsing
when you press F7, select the Don’t ask me again when I press F7
check box.
b. Select Turn on.
IMPORTANT After you select the Don’t Ask Me Again When I
Press F7 check box, the Turn On/Off Caret Browsing? dialog box
will not open again, so you can skip this step.

To use caret browsing
Select or tap in a text area on the webpage to set the initial insertion point.
Then do any of the following:
Press the arrow keys to move the insertion point one character or line at a
time.
Press the Home, End, Page Up, and Page Down keys to move greater
distances.
Hold down the Ctrl key and press Home or End to move to the beginning
or end of the page.
Hold down the Shift key and press the navigation keys to select text.
Key points
Microsoft Edge is a fast and secure browser with a clean and simple user
interface that has tabbed browsing. You can display websites in the standard
view or cut down on distractions by using Reading view. You can annotate
webpages, and fill out PDF forms in the browser window.
You can save websites or webpages that you want to return to later by
adding them to your Favorites list or your Reading list.
You can organize sites in your Favorites list within folders, and put the sites
you access most frequently on the Favorites bar.
You can set aside entire sets of tabs to return to later.
You can specify the page or pages that Microsoft Edge displays on startup,
and also specify the information that appears on new tabs.
Windows Defender SmartScreen helps to protect you from unsafe websites
and downloads. It’s turned on by default.
InPrivate browsing is a useful feature if you’re juggling multiple sets of
credentials or don’t want Microsoft Edge to save information from your
browsing session.
If Microsoft Edge doesn’t display a website correctly, you can quickly open
the current browsing session in Internet Explorer, or use the Developer
Tools to emulate the experience of a different browser.

If you have difficulty navigating the content of a webpage by using the
mouse, you can turn on caret browsing and use the keyboard instead.
 Practice tasks
No practice files are necessary to complete the practice tasks in this chapter.
Display websites in Microsoft Edge
Perform the following tasks:
1. Start Microsoft Edge and display the msn.com site. Select an article title on
the page to display an article. Notice whether the article opens in the same
tab or in a new tab.
2. If the article opened in the same tab, the Back button is now available.
Select the Back button to return to the first page, and the Forward button
becomes available. Select the Forward button to return to the new article.
TIP If the article opened in a new tab, try the Back and Forward
buttons later, when the Back button is available.
3. In the new article, right-click a link, and then select Open in new tab.
Right-click another link, and then select Open in new window. Note the
differing results.
You now have two Microsoft Edge windows open. The first window has at
least two page tabs, and the second window has one page tab.
4. Arrange the Microsoft Edge windows side by side, and drag one tab from
the first window to the second window, to move the page between
windows.
5. In either window, to the right of the rightmost tab, select the New tab
button to open a new tab. Note the content of the tab, which will be one of
the following:

A ‘blank’ page that displays a search box
A page that displays eight squares, some or all of which might contain
tiles that represent websites
A page that displays eight site tile spaces and news articles
In a later exercise, you’ll configure this page to display different content.
6. In the Address bar, enter Windows 10 to display a list of search suggestions
(and possibly sites, if you’ve visited any Windows 10 sites). Enter
microsoft after Windows 10 to further refine the search term list.
7. Select the highlighted search term directly below the Address bar to search
for Windows 10 microsoft, and to display a page of search results.
8. On the Microsoft Edge toolbar, to the right of the Address bar, notice the
Reading view button. Note whether the button is active (with a dark
outline) or inactive (with a pale outline).
9. On the search results page, locate the result that represents the primary
Windows page of the Microsoft website. Select the link to display the
Windows home page.
10. On the Microsoft Edge toolbar, note whether the Reading view button is
active. If the button isn’t active, select a link to display another page until
you find one that does support Reading view.
11. On the Microsoft Edge toolbar, select the Reading view button to display
the current page in Reading view. Note the background color of the page.
In a later exercise, you’ll change the Reading view color scheme.
12. Scroll the page to determine the content that is displayed in Reading view.
13. Select the Reading view button again to return to the standard view of the
page. Locate the information from Reading view on the page and note the
page elements that Reading view did not display.
14. Close the browser windows, selecting the option to close all tabs when
prompted to do so.
Find, save, and share information
Perform the following tasks:
1. Start Microsoft Edge and display the website of your company, your school,

an organization you belong to, or another organization whose website
content you’re familiar with. (If you can’t think of another website, display
the Windows website at windows.microsoft.com.)
2. Display the Find On Page toolbar. In the search box, start entering a word
or phrase that appears multiple times on the page. As you enter each
character, notice that the number of results changes.
3. Modify the search to include only results that aren’t part of other words.
Note whether the number of results changes. Then remove the filter.
4. Modify the search to include only results that have the same letter casing
that you entered. Note whether the number of results changes. Then remove
the filter.
5. From the Find on page toolbar, display the first search result, and then
move to the second search result. Then scroll the page and notice that all
search results are highlighted.
6. On the Microsoft Edge toolbar, select the Add Notes button to display the
annotation toolbar. Point to each of the buttons on the toolbar to display the
button name.
7. On the annotation toolbar, select the Pen button. Use the pen tool to circle
something on the page, and then to underline something else.
8. On the annotation toolbar, select the Add a typed note button. Select the
text next to the circle you drew in step 7, and then enter Good idea! in the
note window that appears.
9. On the annotation toolbar, select the Eraser button. Then swipe anywhere
on the underline you drew in step 7 to erase it. Notice that swiping
anywhere on the line erases the entire line.
10. Experiment with other annotation techniques. When you finish, select the
Share button near the right end of the annotation toolbar to display the
Share pane and the apps you can use to share the webpage.
11. Share either the webpage or a screenshot of the webpage by using one of
the available options.
12. Exit the annotation toolbar.
13. Save the current webpage to your Reading list.
14. Display your Reading list in the Hub pane, and then display your browsing

history. Review the webpages that you’ve visited today.
15. Pin the current webpage to the Start menu. Then close the browser window
and locate the Start menu tile for the webpage.
Manage Microsoft Edge settings
Perform the following tasks:
1. Set your Microsoft Edge home page to either MSN, Bing, or Custom. If
you choose Custom, specify a webpage of your choice.
2. Without closing the Settings pane, display the Open new tabs with list,
and then select a tab content option. (Choose something different from the
content you noted in step 5 of the first practice task.)
3. Display the Advanced settings pane, turn on the display of the Home
button, and then configure the Home button to display the same page you
designated as your home page. (Use msn.com for MSN or bing.com for
Bing.)
4. Click or tap anywhere on the webpage to close the Advanced Settings pane.
Then on the Microsoft Edge toolbar, select the Refresh button to update the
Home button settings.
5. Select the Home button and verify that it displays the home page you chose
in step 2.
6. Select the New tab button, and verify that it displays the content you chose
in step 3.
7. Follow the procedure for importing your Favorites list from another
browser into Microsoft Edge. If another browser is available, import those
favorites. Then display the Hub pane and verify that your Microsoft Edge
Favorites list includes the imported entries.
8. Close the browser window.
Configure browser security settings
Perform the following tasks:
1. Start Microsoft Edge and display the Advanced Settings pane.
2. Near the top of the Advanced settings pane, verify that the option to block

pop-up windows is turned on.
3. Locate the Privacy and services section of the pane. Review and consider
the settings you can configure. At the bottom of the section, verify that the
option to use SmartScreen is turned on.
4. Perform any other procedures from the ‘Configure browser security
settings’ topic of this chapter that interest you. When you finish, close the
browser windows.
Maintain browsing privacy
Perform the following tasks:
1. Start Microsoft Edge and display any website that you sign in to by using
credentials. (If you can’t think of another website, display your Microsoft
OneDrive site at onedrive.live.com.) Sign in to the website.
2. Open a new tab and display the same website you chose in step 1. Notice
that it recognizes your credentials and signs you in.
3. From the Settings and more (...) menu, open a new InPrivate browsing
window. In the InPrivate window, display the same website you chose in
step 1. Notice that it doesn’t automatically sign you in.
4. Close the browser windows.
Troubleshoot browsing issues
Perform the following tasks:
1. Start Microsoft Edge and display a website of your choice.
2. From the Settings and more (...) menu, display the F12 Developer Tools
window. Move or resize the window so you can see the website.
3. On the Emulation tab, choose a different browser to emulate. Notice any
differences in the display of the website.
4. Choose a browser that is on a different platform, and notice differences in
the display of the website.
5. Close the F12 Developer Tools window, and then close the browser
window.

Part 4: Behind the scenes
CHAPTER 11
Manage user accounts and settings
CHAPTER 12
Manage computer settings
CHAPTER 13
Manage power and access options
CHAPTER 14
Work more efficiently
CHAPTER 15
Protect your computer and data

11. Manage user accounts and settings
In this chapter
Understand user accounts and permissions
Create and manage user accounts
Manage account pictures and passwords
Customize your sign-in options
Synchronize settings across computers
Computers have become an integral part of our lives. We store personal and
business information on them, and use them to access financial and social
information online. That information might be protected by a password, but the
password could easily be accessible to any other person who is using your
computer. To protect your privacy and the integrity of your information, it is
important to control who can sign in to your computer or tablet, and what they
can do when they’re signed in.
Computer access is managed through user accounts. Each user of a computer,
regardless of age, should sign in with his or her own account. Each user account
has access to a private file storage area and user interface customizations, and to
a shared public file storage area. Accounts designated as Child accounts have
additional safeguards that are designed to protect them from content that isn’t
age appropriate.
When you sign in to your computer, you have a myriad of options available for
doing so. User accounts can be protected by passwords, but users can choose
alternative sign-in credentials such as PINs, picture passwords, and biometric
identification through fingerprint or facial recognition.
This chapter guides you through procedures related to creating and managing
user accounts, managing account pictures and passwords, customizing your sign-
in options, and synchronizing settings across computers.
Understand user accounts and permissions
Windows 10 requires at least one user account. You specify that account when

you’re completing the installation processes, or the first time the computer starts
after Windows 10 has been installed. Windows 10 designates this first account as
an Administrator account so that the account can be used to manage the
computer. It isn’t possible to sign in to the computer without a user account.
The words “user” and “account” are used frequently in this book, and
particularly in this chapter. Here’s a summary of the uses of those terms:
A user is the person who is using the computer.
A user account is an account that a person uses to sign in to a computer.
Each user account is either:
A Microsoft account, which is any email address that has been registered
with the Microsoft account service.
A local account that exists only on a single computer and is not associated
with a specific email address.
You can use your Microsoft account to sign in to multiple computers, websites,
and services by using the same email address and password. By signing in with
your Microsoft account credentials, you can share settings and files among all
your devices. Any device you sign in to with this account has access to the same
settings and information. Signing in with a local account places limits on the
applications you can purchase or download from the Store, and might limit your
access to Microsoft OneDrive. Because almost any email account can also be set
up to be a Microsoft account, it’s a good idea to take advantage of the extra
benefits that allows.
Every user account is also classified as either:
An Administrator account
A Standard User account
This classification provides a specific level of permission to manage system
actions on the computer. The next section of this topic explains what each of
these types of accounts can do.
A user account can also be one of the following:
A Child account that is monitored by using Family Safety

An Adult account that can manage Family Safety settings for Child
accounts
These are optional designations that make the user account holder part of your
family group. The sidebar “Manage and monitor family safety settings” later in
this chapter discusses family groups.
IMPORTANT The information in this chapter applies to computer user
accounts, and not to network domain user accounts.
User profiles
Windows provides the ability to share one computer among multiple users, or for
one user to have multiple accounts for different purposes. To do this, each user
account (whether a Microsoft account or a local account) is associated with a
user profile that describes the way the computer environment (the user interface)
looks and operates for that user. This information includes simple things such as
the desktop background, desktop content, and Windows color scheme. It also
includes personal and confidential information, such as saved passwords and
your internet browsing history.
Each user profile includes a personal folder that is not generally accessible by
other people who are using the computer, in which you can store documents,
pictures, media, and other files that you want to keep private.
The Windows 10 system of user profiles allows more than one person to use the
same computer while providing the following safeguards:
Each user’s information is stored separately You prevent standard users
from reading or altering your documents, pictures, music, and other files by
storing them in subfolders that are automatically set up within your user
account folder. For example, if you manage your family’s financial records
on a home computer that your children use to do their homework, the
children log in with separate accounts and don’t have access to confidential
information or the ability to change your files. Administrators can access all
user accounts.

Each user’s working environment is protected You can personalize your
environment in various ways, without worrying about other people making
changes to your personal settings.
Each user’s app usage is unique Each user runs separate instances of each
app on the computer. For example, you can set up Outlook to connect to
your accounts, and other computer users can set up Outlook to connect to
their accounts, but they cannot also connect to your accounts. Each user’s
data is stored and managed separately.
User account permissions
The system actions that a user can perform are governed by the type of account
he or she signs in with. An Administrator account has higher-level permissions
than a Standard User account, which means that an Administrator account owner
can perform tasks on your computer that a Standard User account owner cannot.
Standard User account credentials allow a user to do things that affect only his or
her account, including:
Change or remove the password.
Change the user account picture.
Change the theme and desktop settings.
View files stored in his or her personal folders and files in the Public
folders.
Administrator account credentials are necessary to do things such as:
Create, change, and delete accounts.
Change settings that affect all the computer’s users.
Change security-related settings.
Install and remove apps.
Access system files and files in other user account profiles.
Tasks that require administrator permission are indicated in windows and dialog
boxes by a Windows security icon that is shaped like a shield.

If you have an Administrator account‘even if you’re the only person who will be
using your computer‘it’s a good idea to create and use a Standard User account
for your day-to-day computing. There is a much higher risk of serious damage to
a computer system if malware infiltrates your computer (or a malicious person
gains control of it) when you’re signed in as an administrator than there is when
you’re signed in as a standard user. Through an Administrator account, the
person or app has access to all system files and settings, whereas a Standard
User account doesn’t have access to certain functions that can permanently
damage the system.
Family accounts
Many children use computers for educational or entertainment purposes. Each
child should have a unique Microsoft account that you designate as a Child
account. For each Child account, you (and other adults you designate as family
members) can do the following:
Monitor web browsing history, app use, and game use.
Block websites that contain adult content, or allow young children to visit
only specific websites.
Restrict the usage of apps and games to only those that meet specific age
ratings.
Monitor screen time, and restrict computer usage to only specific times or
to a specific number of hours per day.
Manage payment options and monitor purchases in the Windows Store and
Xbox Store.
You can monitor children’s activity on every computer or device they sign in to
with their Microsoft accounts.
You can check on your child’s recent computer usage on the Family page of your
Microsoft account website (at account.microsoft.com) at any time, and you can
opt to receive weekly reports summarizing your child’s computer use.

SEE ALSO For more information about monitoring and managing
children’s computer activity, see the sidebar “Manage and monitor
family safety settings” later in this chapter.
User Account Control
User Account Control (UAC) protects your computer from changes to Windows
system settings by requiring that an administrator expressly permit certain types
of changes. Each area of the Windows interface that requires administrator
permission is labeled with a security icon. When you attempt to access or change
protected Windows settings, a User Account Control message box appears,
asking for confirmation that Windows should continue the operation. The
message box varies depending on your account and the action.
If you’re signed in with an Administrator account, you can simply select Yes to
continue the operation. If you’re signed in with a Standard User account, the

message box displays a list of the Administrator accounts on the computer. To
continue the operation, you select one of the Administrator accounts, enter its
password in the box that appears (or have the account owner do it for you), and
then select Yes.
TIP If an Administrator account doesn’t have an associated password,
you can continue the operation by simply selecting that account and
then selecting Yes. This is one of the reasons it’s important that each
Administrator account on the computer has a password.
Windows doesn’t save the credentials you enter in the User Account Control
message box; they are valid for this operation only. Anyone who doesn’t have
access to administrator credentials can’t perform the operation, which effectively
prevents non-administrators from making changes you haven’t authorized.
UAC has four levels of control. Only the first two are available when you’re
signed in with a Standard User account, even if you have access to administrator
credentials:
Always notify me This is the default setting for a Standard User account.
When a user or app initiates a change that requires administrator
credentials, the desktop dims and the User Account Control message box
opens. You must respond to the message box before you can take any other
action.
Notify me only when apps try to make changes to my computer This is
the default setting for an Administrator account. When an app initiates a
change that requires administrator credentials, the desktop dims and the
User Account Control message box opens. You must respond to the
message box before you can continue.
Notify me only when apps try to make changes to my computer (do not
dim my desktop) When an app initiates a restricted action, the User
Account Control message box opens. The restricted action will not be
performed until you respond to the message box, but you can perform other
tasks while it is open.
Never notify me This is the equivalent of turning off UAC. Any user or

app can make any changes to the computer without restriction.
With the default setting, Windows 10 prompts for administrator credentials when
a user or app initiates an action that will modify system files. There’s not a lot of
reason to change the User Account Control setting, but you can.
To change the User Account Control setting
1. Do one of the following to open the User Account Control Settings
window:
On the taskbar or in the Settings window, enter UAC in the search box
and then, in the search results list, select Change User Account Control
settings.
Display Control Panel in an Icons view. Select User Accounts, and then
Change User Account Control settings.
Display Control Panel in Category view. Select User Accounts, User
Accounts, and then Change User Account Control settings.
TIP The security icon to the left of the command indicates that
administrator credentials are required to complete this operation.

2. Click or tap above or below the slider, or drag it, to set UAC to the level
you want, and then select OK.
3. In the User Account Control message box that appears, enter administrator
credentials if necessary, and then select OK.
TIP You must be signed in with an Administrator account to select
either of the two lowest settings. If you select Never Notify, you
must restart your computer to finish turning off UAC.
Manage 
user 
accounts 
in 
the 
Computer
Management console
Some user account management tasks can be completed from the
Family & Other People settings pane. On a computer running

Windows 10 Pro or Windows 10 Enterprise, additional tasks can be
performed in the Users node of the Computer Management console.
TIP The Local Users And Groups folder referenced in this sidebar is
available in the Computer Management console only in Windows 10
Pro and Windows 10 Enterprise. It is not available in Windows 10
Home.
To open the Computer Management console, do any of the
following:
Right-click the Start button, and then on the Quick Links
menu, select Computer Management.
On the Start menu, in the app list, expand the Windows
Administrative Tools folder, and then select Computer
Management.
Enter computer management in the taskbar search box, and then
select the Computer Management desktop app.
To open the Users node, follow these steps in the left pane of the
Computer Management console:
1. Expand the System Tools folder and the Local Users and
Groups subfolder
2. Select the Users folder.

Create and manage user accounts
An administrator can give other people access to the computer in one of three
ways:
Create a user account that is linked to an existing Microsoft account.
Create a user account that is linked to an email address, and register that
account as a Microsoft account.
Create a local account that isn’t linked to a Microsoft account.
Every user account has an associated name and can have a picture and a
password. Any user can change the following details for his or her account:
Account name You can change the display name that appears on the
Welcome screen and Start menu.
Account picture You can change the picture that identifies you on the
Welcome screen and Start menu.
Password You can create or change the password.
If you have administrator credentials, you can change these properties for any
user account. You can also change the account type from Administrator to
Standard User (provided that at least one Administrator account remains on the
computer) or vice versa.
You create computer accounts and designate permission levels from the Family
& Other People pane of the Accounts page of the Settings window.
IMPORTANT Only administrators can create user accounts—if you’re
signed in with a Standard User account, your Accounts pane list will not
include Family & Other People.
When you create a user account, you must designate whether the user is part of
your family group. All types of user accounts are visible in the Family & Other
People pane. However, the processes for managing family accounts and non-
family accounts differ, so the following sections cover them separately to

avoid confusion.
TIP You manage other user accounts from this pane, so the lists don’t
include the 11 account you’re signed in with.
When you first add a user account, it is identified in lists by its email address or
by the name you give it. If your computer is running Windows 10 Pro or

Windows 10 Enterprise, you can change the user account name (and delete user
accounts) from the Users node of the Computer Management console.
If a person is not going to sign in to a specific computer again, it’s a good idea to
delete his or her user account. This will clean up the user account lists and
recover the hard-drive space that is used by that user’s data. If you don’t want to
delete the user account data, you can disable the account instead of deleting it.
Manage and monitor family safety settings
Microsoft Family Safety is an impressive system for safeguarding
against young family members accidentally accessing inappropriate
content on the internet. It allows you to place restrictions on their
computer usage and provides you with reports that you can use to
spot problems. Family Safety was introduced with Windows 7, and
has evolved with each version of Windows. If you’ve used it in the
past, it’s a good idea to revisit it now to make sure the settings are up
to date for the way your children use the computer.
Originally, Family Safety was an app through which you could
register specific computer user accounts. It was necessary to register
a child on each computer he or she used, and Family Safety reported
separately on each local account. Since then, Family Safety has
evolved into an online service that can monitor your child’s activity
on each device he or she signs into that is running Windows.
The key to the successful use of Family Safety is for each child to
sign in to Windows 10 computers and devices with his or her own
Microsoft account, and for parents to designate the account as a
Child account. Family Safety monitors and reports on the websites
children visit, the apps they use, the games they play, and the time
they spend signed in to the computer.
Create and manage family user accounts
You can designate a user account as belonging to a family member. When you
do, the account is added to your family group. Adults in the family group can
manage family safety settings online.

You can change the display name of a family user account to use something
other than that person’s email address
For the safety of your children, all family user accounts must be associated with
Microsoft accounts. You can’t create a local account in the Your Family group,
or an account linked to an email address that isn’t yet registered as a Microsoft
account.
IMPORTANT You must sign in to the computer with an Administrator
account to perform any of the following procedures.
You can review usage and modify settings on the Family page of
your 
Microsoft 
Account 
site, 
or 
directly 
through
familysafety.microsoft.com, and opt to receive weekly activity reports
by email. From the Family page, you can choose to block or allow
specific websites or content by rating so that children have access to
only age-appropriate information.

To create a family user account
1. In the Settings window, select Accounts, and then select Family & other
people.
2. In the Your family section of the Family & other people settings pane,
select Add a family member to start the wizard.
3. On the Add a child or an adult page, select Add a child or Add an adult,
and then enter the person’s Microsoft account address in the Enter their
email address box. If the person doesn’t have an email address, or has an
email address that isn’t yet registered as a Microsoft account, select The
person I want to add doesn’t have an email address, and then skip to the
procedure “To create or register a Microsoft account” later in this topic.
4. After you enter the email address, select Next. The wizard searches the
Microsoft account database for the email address.
5. If the email account is already registered as a Microsoft account, select
Confirm on the Add this person? page to add the person to your family
group and create a user account for him or her on the computer.
Or
If the email account isn’t already registered as a Microsoft account, the
wizard displays a warning.

If the warning appears, do either of the following:
Enter a registered email address, select Next, and then select Confirm to
create the account.
Select sign up for a new one, and then skip to the procedure “To create
or register a Microsoft account” later in this topic.
When you register an adult family account, the person receives an email
message and must select a link in the message and then sign in to his or her
Microsoft account to confirm membership in the family group.

Until the family membership is confirmed, the person can sign in to the
computer but the account status is shown as Adult, Pending.
To create or register a Microsoft account
1. On the Let’s create an account page, provide the requested information,
and then select Next.
2. If you want to, clear the check boxes permitting Microsoft to send and track
information for marketing purposes. Then select Next.
3. On the final page of the wizard, select Finish.
To change the display name of a family user account

IMPORTANT This procedure can be performed only on computers
running Windows 10 Pro or Windows 10 Enterprise. The Computer
Management\Local Users And Groups folder in which this procedure is
performed is not available in Windows 10 Home.
1. On a computer running Windows 10 Pro or Windows 10 Enterprise, display
the Users node of the Computer Management console.
SEE ALSO Instructions for navigating to the Users node of the
Computer Management console are in the sidebar “Manage user
accounts in the Computer Management console” earlier in this
chapter.
2. Do either of the following:
To change the full name that appears in the user account lists, double-
click the account name to open the Properties dialog box. Then enter or
update the name in the Full name box, and select Apply or OK to make
the change.

To change the short name by which Windows identifies the account,
right-click the account name in the Users list, and select Rename to
activate the name for editing. Then enter the short name you want, and
press Enter to complete the change.
To disable a family user account
1. On the Accounts page of the Settings window, select Family & other
people.
2. In the Your family section of the Family & other people pane, select the
account you want to disable to display your options for managing the
account.

3. On the account tile, select Block. Windows displays a confirmation request.
4. In the Block this person from signing in? box, select Block.
To enable a disabled family user account
1. On the Accounts page of the Settings window, select Family & other
people.
2. In the Your family section of the Family & other people pane, select the
account you want to enable to display your options for managing the
account.
3. On the account tile, select Allow. Windows displays a confirmation request.
4. In the Allow this person to sign in? box, select Allow.
To delete a family user account
IMPORTANT This procedure can be performed only on computers
running Windows 10 Pro or Windows 10 Enterprise. The Computer
Management\Local Users And Groups folder in which this procedure is
performed is not available in Windows 10 Home.
1. Ensure that the user has moved or copied personal files from the user
account folders and uninstalled or deactivated any apps that require this to
free up the user license.

IMPORTANT To preserve any files that are saved in the user
account folders, back up the folder C:\Users\[UserName] (where
[UserName] is the account name of the user).
2. On a computer running Windows 10 Pro or Windows 10 Enterprise, display
the Users node of the Computer Management console.
SEE ALSO Instructions for navigating to the Users node of the
Computer Management console are in the sidebar “Manage user
accounts in the Computer Management console” earlier in this
chapter.
3. Right-click the user account you want to delete, and then select Delete. A
message box displays a warning.
4. In the message box, select Yes to delete the account and all its files.

Create and manage non-family user accounts
Accounts in the Other People section of the Family & Other People settings pane
are not associated with your family safety group. These accounts can certainly
belong to members of your family, but they can’t be part of your family safety
settings group. Local computer accounts can be created only in the Other People
section.
IMPORTANT You must sign in to the computer with an Administrator
account to perform any of the following procedures.
To create a non-family user account that is linked to an existing Microsoft
account
1. In the Settings window, select Accounts, and then select Family & other
people.
2. In the Other people section of the pane, select Add someone else to this
PC to start the wizard.
3. On the How will this person sign in? page, enter the Microsoft account
address in the Email or phone box, and then select Next. The wizard
confirms that the email address is a registered Microsoft account.
4. Select Finish to complete the process.
To create a local user account
1. On the Accounts page of the Settings window, select Family & other
people.
2. In the Other people section of the pane, select Add someone else to this
PC to start the wizard.

3. At the bottom of the How will this person sign in? page, select I don’t
have this person’s sign-in information.
4. At the bottom of the Let’s create your account page, select Add a user
without a Microsoft account to get to the interface for creating a local
account.
5. Enter a user name. If you don’t want to create a password for the local
account, leave the rest of the boxes blank. Otherwise, enter the password
(two times) and an optional password hint. Then select Next to create the
account.
IMPORTANT If you don’t implement a password, anyone can sign in
to your computer by selecting your user account and then selecting Sign

In. Your data is especially vulnerable if you travel with your computer
or use it in a public place. The password hint appears on the Welcome
page if you can’t remember your password.
To disable a non-family user account
IMPORTANT This procedure can be performed only on computers
running Windows 10 Pro or Windows 10 Enterprise. The Computer
Management\Local Users And Groups folder in which this procedure is
performed is not available in Windows 10 Home.
1. On a computer running Windows 10 Pro or Windows 10 Enterprise, display
the Users node of the Computer Management console.
SEE ALSO Instructions for navigating to the Users node of the
Computer Management console are in the sidebar “Manage user
accounts in the Computer Management console” earlier in this
chapter.
2. Double-click the account you want to disable.
3. In the Properties dialog box, select the Account is disabled check box.
Then select OK.
To enable a disabled non-family user account
1. On a computer running Windows 10 Pro or Windows 10 Enterprise, display
the Users node of the Computer Management console.
2. Double-click the account you want to enable.
3. In the Properties dialog box, clear the Account is disabled check box.
Then select OK.

To delete a non-family user account
1. Ensure that the user has moved or copied personal files from the user
account folders and deactivated any apps that require deactivation to free up
the user license.
IMPORTANT To preserve any files that are saved in the user
account folders, back up the folder C:\Users\[UserName] (where
[UserName] is the account name of the user).
2. Display the Settings window, select Accounts, and then select Family &
other people.
3. In the Other people section of the Family & other people pane, select the
account you want to delete, to display your options for managing the
account.
4. On the account tile, select Remove. Windows displays a confirmation
request.

5. In the message box, select Delete account and data. Windows deletes the
account and then returns to the Family & Other People pane.
Manage settings for any user account
Windows 10 has two built-in accounts, Administrator and Guest, that don’t have
passwords assigned. When Windows creates the first user-specific Administrator
account, it disables the default Administrator account. The Guest account is
inactive by default (and disabled on computers that are part of a domain. You
can activate the Guest account to give someone temporary, limited access to your
computer without having to create a user account for that person.
Another method of giving someone limited access is to restrict the account so
that it can access only one app. Access restriction works only with Store apps
that are already installed on your computer.
When creating a family or non-family user account, if you don’t supply an email
address, the wizard displays a page on which you can create a new outlook.com
email address or register an existing email address as a Microsoft account. The
email address that you provide will receive a confirmation email message; you
must respond to it to activate the account.

To activate the built-in Guest account
On a computer running Windows 10 Pro or Windows 10 Enterprise, do the
following:
a. Display the Users node of the Computer Management console.
b. Double-click the disabled Guest account.
c. In the Properties dialog box, clear the Account is disabled check box,
and then select Apply or OK.
On a computer running Windows 10 Home, do the following:
a. In the taskbar search box, type cmd. In the search results, right-click the
Command Prompt desktop app, and then select Run as administrator.
b. In the command prompt window that opens, enter net user

guest/active:yes, and then press Enter.
c. Close the command prompt window.
To grant administrative permissions to an account
1. In the Settings window, select Accounts, and then select Family & other
people.
2. Select the account you want to modify, to display your options. Then select
Change account type.
3. In the Account type list, select Administrator. Then select OK.
To revoke administrative permissions
1. On the Accounts settings page, display the Family & other people pane.
2. Select the account, and then select Change account type.
3. In the Account type list, select Standard User. Then select OK.
IMPORTANT This procedure can be performed only on computers
running Windows 10 Pro or Windows 10 Enterprise. The Assigned
Access feature is not available in Windows 10 Home.

To restrict an account to one Store app
IMPORTANT This procedure can be performed only on computers
running Windows 10 Pro or Windows 10 Enterprise. The Assigned
Access feature is not available in Windows 10 Home.
1. On the Accounts settings page, display the Family & other people pane.
2. At the bottom of the pane, select Set up assigned access.
3. In the Choose which account will have assigned access section, select
Choose an account (or, if the pane already displays a restricted account,
select the account). Then, in the Choose an account pane that opens, select
the Standard User account that you want to restrict.
4. In the Choose which app this account can access section, select Choose
an app (or if the section already contains an app, select it) and then in the
Choose an app pane that opens, select the app you want to assign.
5. If the user you assigned access to is currently signed in to the computer,
sign the user out to complete the access assignment process.

TIP When you sign in to Windows 10 with an assigned access
account, you have access only to the assigned app. To sign out of
an assigned access account, press Ctrl+Alt+Del.
To switch from a Microsoft account to a local account
1. On the Accounts settings page, display the Your info pane.
2. In the area below your user picture, select Sign in with a local account
instead.
3. In the Switch to a local account window, enter your Microsoft account
password to confirm your identity, and then select Next.
4. Provide a user account name for the local account. If you don’t want to use
a password, leave the rest of the entries blank. Otherwise, fill in the
password and password hint entries.
5. Select Next, and then select Sign out and finish to return to your profile.
To connect a local account to a Microsoft account
1. Display the Your info settings pane, and select Sign in with a Microsoft
account instead.
2. On the Make it yours page, enter the email address of the Microsoft
account you want to sign in with, and then select Next.
3. On the Enter password page, enter your Microsoft account password, and
then select Sign in.
4. If your local user account has a password, enter it on the Sign in to this
device using your Microsoft account page, and then select Next.
A code will be sent to the Microsoft account email address, or you can open
the list below the question about how you want to get the code, and choose
to receive it in a text message. After you receive the code, return to this
process and enter it in the box provided. Then select Finish.

TIP The verification code arrives quickly and is valid for only a
short time, so check your email or text messages for the code and
finish the account creation process promptly. If the code expires
before you complete the process, you can select Back on the code
page and request another code.
5. Select Sign out and finish to return to your profile.
Manage account pictures and passwords
As previously discussed, you can sign in to Windows 10 by using a Microsoft
account or a local account.
Each user account has an associated user account picture that is shown on the
Welcome screen, at the top of the Start menu, on app and browser window title
bars when you’re signed in, and in other places. If you sign in to Windows with
your Microsoft account credentials, Windows displays the user account picture
that is associated with that account. If you sign in by using a local account, you
can associate a picture with that account on that computer. Until you associate a
picture with either type of account, the computer account displays a placeholder
account picture (a head-and-shoulders icon) wherever the account picture would
usually appear. Selecting your user account button displays all active user
accounts.

You can easily add or change an account picture, regardless of whether you’re
signed in with a Microsoft account or a local account, on any computer you sign
in to.
Previous versions of Windows provided many Standard User account picture
options, depicting a variety of animals, sports, and interests. Windows 10 doesn’t
provide any account pictures, but does offer the option of taking a picture if your
computer has a webcam. You can use .bmp, .gif, .jpg, or .png files as user
account pictures. The original image can be any size or shape, but Windows 10
displays the user account picture as a circle, so when selecting a picture, keep in
mind that it will be cropped to a square and then have its corners cut off.
All Microsoft accounts have passwords. If you sign in to Windows or any
website with your Microsoft account credentials, you use the same password
wherever you sign in. (The user account name and password, together, are
referred to as credentials.) Local accounts can have or not have passwords. If
you don’t store or access personal information on your computer, a password is
not essential. However, it’s never a bad idea to have a password. You can add a

password to a local account or change the password, and you can change your
Microsoft password. Changing your Microsoft account password changes it
across all computers, sites, and services.
If you’re going to take the trouble to protect your user account with a password,
choose one that no one is likely to guess. A strong password is at least eight
characters long, does not contain names or dictionary words, and contains at
least one uppercase character, one lowercase character, one number, and one
punctuation mark.
IMPORTANT If you change your Microsoft account password and
then sign in to a computer that hasn’t been able to connect over the
internet to the Microsoft account site since before you changed the
password, the computer won’t be able to verify your new password and
will prompt you to sign in with the last password you used on that
computer.
When you assign a password to a local user account, you can also save a
password hint. Windows displays the password hint on the Welcome screen after
you enter an incorrect password.
Each computer user manages his or her own account picture and password. The
information in this section assumes that you’re working with your own account.
To display the Your Info settings pane
On the left side of the Start menu, select your user account button, and then
select Change account settings.
In the Settings window, select Accounts, and then select Your info.
The content of the Your Info pane varies based on whether you’re signed in
with a Microsoft account or a local user account, and what pictures have
been associated with the account on the computer.

To assign an existing picture to your user account
1. Locate and review the photo. If necessary, edit it to ensure that it displays
well in the circular format.
2. Display the Your info settings pane, and then do one of the following:
If you want to select a previously used image, select the image in the
Create your picture section.
If you want to select an image that isn’t shown in the Create your
picture section, select Browse for one. In the Open dialog box, locate
and select the image you want to use, and then select Choose picture.
To capture and set a user account picture

1. Display the Your info settings pane.
2. In the Create your picture section, select Camera.
3. If Windows Camera prompts you to permit it to access your location, select
Yes or No.
4. Adjust the camera, yourself, and your background as necessary, and then
select the Take Photo button (the camera icon) to take the picture.
5. If Microsoft Photos prompts you to allow it to access your contacts, select
Yes or No.
6. In the Photos window, do any of the following, and then select Done:
Drag the photo within the defined square to center the image you want
within it.
Drag any corner of the crop box to change the size of the square.
To set or change your Microsoft account picture
1. Display the Your info settings pane.
2. Select Manage my Microsoft account to display your Microsoft Account
home page.
3. Select Your info on the menu bar, or select your account picture.
4. On the Your info page, select New picture.
5. In the Open dialog box, locate and select the picture you want to use, and
then select Open.
6. On the Your info page, drag any of the picture handles to resize the circle,
and drag the circle to change the part of the picture that is displayed. The
crosshairs mark the center of the picture.
To add a local user account password
1. In the Settings window, select Accounts, and then select Sign-in options.
2. In the Password section, select Add.
3. On the Create a password page, enter and reenter the password you want
to use. Enter a password hint if you want to be able to display one from the
Welcome page, and then select Next.

4. Select Finish.
To change or delete a local user account password
1. In the Settings window, select Accounts, and then select Sign-in options.
2. In the Password section, select Change.
3. On the Change your password page, enter your current password, and then
select Next.
4. On the second Change your password page, do either of the following,
and then select Next:
To change your password, enter and reenter the password you want to
use. Enter a password hint if you want to be able to display one from the
Welcome page.
To delete your password, leave the three boxes empty.
5. On the final Change your password page, select Finish.
To change a Microsoft account password
1. Display the Sign-in options settings pane.
2. In the Password section, select Change to open a Microsoft Account
window.
3. In the Making sure it’s you dialog box, if your user account has a PIN,
enter the PIN for identity verification.
4. On the Please reenter your password page, enter the password for the
account, and select Sign in.
5. On the Help us protect your info page, choose a phone number or email

address at which you want to receive a one-time security code. Enter the
last four digits of the phone number, or the email address, in the verification
box, and then select Next.
6. Check your phone’s text messages, or your email account, for the security
code, and then enter it on the Enter the code you received page.
7. On the Set a new password page, enter your current password and then
enter and reenter the new password.
IMPORTANT The new password must be one that you haven’t
used before. The password reset system will not permit you to
enter a password that you’ve used previously.
If you’re uncertain whether you entered the password correctly, select the
eye icon at the right end of the input box to temporarily display the
password.
8. When you’re satisfied with the new password, select Next.
9. On the page confirming the password change, select Finish.
In addition to the onscreen confirmation, Microsoft sends a confirmation
email message to your Microsoft account email address and to any email
addresses that you provided as secondary contacts for the Microsoft
account.
Customize your sign-in options
Each user manages the password and sign-in options for his or her account. This
topic addresses actions you can take for your own user account, not for other

people’s user accounts.
If (and only if) your sign-in account has a password, you can create alternative
sign-in options on each computer you log in to. These sign-in options include the
following:
Personal identification number (PIN) A number (from 4 to 127 digits
long) or alphanumeric phrase that you enter in place of your password.
Picture password An image of your choice on which you perform a
specific combination of gestures. Windows divides the picture into a
100x100 grid and looks for your selected gesture pattern in the appropriate
grid coordinates. You can perform the gestures directly on a touchscreen or
by using a mouse.
IMPORTANT Some critics say that a picture password isn’t very
secure because people generally do the obvious thing on any
picture. For example, on a picture of a person, people tap the eyes
and draw a line across the mouth. When you set up a gesture-based
password, try to do something less obvious.
Windows Hello Biometric identification through fingerprint, facial, or iris
recognition. This feature is available only on computers that have biometric
identification hardware such as a built-in or external fingerprint reader.
After you set up a PIN or picture password sign-in option, the Welcome page
changes to offer your new option by default. There is also a Sign-In Options link
on the page, so if you forget your PIN or the specific gestures of your picture
password, you can sign in at any time by using your password.
When you have a fingerprint reader, facial recognition camera, or other
biometric identification hardware installed on your computer, the Windows
Hello section of the Sign-In Options settings pane includes an option to set up
biometric recognition. Otherwise, it includes the message “Windows Hello isn’t
available on this device.” If you don’t have built-in biometric identification
hardware but would like to use Windows Hello, you can purchase a USB
fingerprint reader and insert it into the computer’s USB port.

IMPORTANT The options available to you in the Sign-In Options
settings pane are specific to your computer configuration and, in a
business environment, may be subject to restrictions set by your system
administrator.


When you have multiple sign-in options configured for your account, the
Welcome screen displays the most recently configured sign-in option by default.
You can switch to a different sign-in option from the Welcome screen.
IMPORTANT You can perform the following procedures only for your
own account (or the account that is currently logged in).
To create a PIN
1. On the Accounts settings page, select Sign-in options.
2. In the Sign-in options pane, in the PIN section, select Add.
3. In the Please reenter your password window, enter the password for your
account, and then select Sign in.
4. In the Set up a PIN window that opens, do one of the following:
If you want to use a numeric PIN (as indicated by the term personal
identification number), enter a number that is from 4 to 127 digits long in
the New PIN and Confirm PIN boxes.
If you want to use a combination of numbers, letters, and symbols in your
PIN, select the Include letters and symbols check box, and then enter an
alphanumeric phrase in the New PIN and Confirm PIN boxes.
You can select the eye icons to check your entries.

5. In the Set up a PIN window, select OK.
If your computer system meets certain conditions, you will be prompted to
complete the process in a secondary window.

6. Select Set up PIN. In the next window, enter the verification code you
receive from Microsoft and select Next. Then select OK to create your PIN
and make the PIN sign-in option available from the Welcome screen.
To change a PIN
1. In the Sign-in options settings pane, in the PIN section, select the Change
button.
2. In the PIN box, enter your current PIN to validate your credentials.
3. Enter the new personal identification number (at least four digits long) in
the New PIN and Confirm PIN boxes, and then select OK.

To configure Windows Hello fingerprint authentication
1. In the Sign-in options settings pane, in the Windows Hello section, select
Set up to start the Windows Hello setup wizard, and then select Get
started.
TIP In the Windows Hello section of the Sign-In Options settings
pane, the option to configure biometric identification is available
only if your computer system includes a compatible fingerprint
reader or facial recognition camera.
The Windows Hello Setup wizard that starts prompts you to provide a series
of sample fingerprint swipes.

2. Swipe any finger across the fingerprint reader (from top to bottom, as
indicated). Keep the finger flat and steady as you swipe. After the reader
detects a usable fingerprint reading, it prompts you to swipe the same finger
again, until it gets about four good readings.
3. After Windows registers the fingerprint, you can immediately add another
fingerprint by selecting Add another finger and repeating step 2.
4. If you haven’t yet set up a PIN, Windows Hello prompts you to do so. (If
you close the wizard without setting up a PIN, the fingerprint isn’t saved.)
To create a picture password
1. Locate the picture you want to use. Choose a picture that includes objects
you can use to correctly position your gestures.
2. In the Sign-in options settings pane, in the Picture password section,
select Add to start the Picture Password wizard. The wizard has a
background picture of purple flowers in a field of green.
3. In the Create a picture password dialog box, enter your account password,

and then select OK to verify your identity.
4. The wizard demonstrates the three permissible gestures (tap, line, and
circle) against the floral background. After you’re familiar with the
gestures, select Choose picture.
5. In the Open dialog box, browse to and select the picture you want to use,
and then select Open to replace the wizard background picture. Drag the
picture to adjust it in the available space, and then select Use this picture.
6. Decide on a combination of three taps, lines, and/or circles you’ll be able to
consistently remember, and then perform them on the picture. The wizard
changes the number in the left pane as you perform each gesture.
7. Repeat the three gestures when the wizard prompts you to do so, and then
select Finish.
To change authentication methods on the Welcome screen
1. On the Welcome screen displaying your user account name, select Sign-in
options to display an icon for each sign-in method you have configured.
2. Select the icon for the sign-in method you want to use.
Synchronize settings across computers
In addition to controlling sign-in options, each user who signs in with Microsoft

account credentials can choose whether to synchronize settings across all the
computers he or she signs in to with those credentials. This is a very cool feature
after you have it set up the way you want it and get used to it. You can
synchronize the following groups of settings:
Theme Desktop background, colors, and sounds
Web browser settings Favorite sites and recent searches
Passwords Passwords that you’ve saved for specific websites
Language preferences Installed language packs, regional date and time
settings, and keyboard language
Ease of Access settings Narrator and other accessibility tools
Other Windows settings Your Start menu app list, shared printer list,
mouse cursor size and color, File Explorer settings, and notification
preferences
To configure setting synchronization across computers
1. In the Settings window, select Accounts, and then select Sync your
settings.
2. In the Sync your settings pane, turn on Sync settings to activate
synchronization on this computer.

IMPORTANT The sync settings are available only when you’re
signed in with a Microsoft account. If you’re signed in with a local
user account, the settings will be unavailable (gray).
3. Consider the computers that you sign in to with the current Microsoft
account credentials. Then, in the Individual sync settings section, do the

following:
Turn on each setting that you want to synchronize to and from this
computer.
Turn off each setting that you want to maintain independently on this
computer.
Key points
Each person who uses the computer should sign in to his or her own user
account.
Each user account is either a Microsoft account or a local account and a
Standard User or Administrator account. Secondary accounts added to the
computer are either Family or Other (non-family) accounts. Family
accounts are either Child or Adult accounts. Each of these designations
controls some aspect of the rights and permissions associated with the
account.
When you first set up your Windows 10 computer, you sign in with a
Microsoft account or create a local user account. You can create additional
user accounts and specify the rights and permissions of the accounts. Other
settings for each user account, such as the picture, password, and alternative
sign-in options, are managed by the person who signs in with the user
account.
You have the option of not assigning passwords to local user accounts.
Accounts that have passwords can also have numeric or alphanumeric
PINs, biometric validation that relies on fingerprint or retinal scan
recognition, and picture passwords that require the user to draw three
gestures on a background.
One of the greatest benefits of signing in to your Windows 10 computer
with a Microsoft account is that you can synchronize your desktop theme,
passwords, language settings, Ease Of Access settings, favorite websites,
and web searches across multiple Windows computers and devices.
 Practice tasks

Before you can complete these practice tasks, you need to copy the book’s
practice files to your computer. The practice files for these tasks are located in
the Win10SBS\Ch11 folder. The introduction includes a complete list of practice
files.
Understand user accounts and permissions
There are no practice tasks for this topic.
Create and manage user accounts
Display the Family & Other People settings pane, and then perform the
following tasks:
1. Create a local user account with the name Riley that is not part of your
family group.
2. If your computer is running Windows 10 Pro or Windows 10 Enterprise,
disable the account and verify that it no longer appears in the Family &
other people settings pane.
3. Activate the built-in Guest account.
4. If you disabled the Riley account, enable it for use in the next practice task.
5. Verify that the Riley and Guest accounts appear in the Family & other
people settings pane.
6. Check the permissions for the Riley account, and make sure that it is a
Standard User account.
Manage account pictures and passwords
Perform the following tasks:
1. From the user account menu at the top of the Start menu, switch to the
Riley account, and sign in to the computer.
2. Display Riley’s account information in the Your info settings pane.
3. Add an account picture to Riley’s account. Choose one of the Account
pictures in the practice files folder.
4. Add a password to Riley’s account.
5. Lock the computer, and sign in as Riley, using the password.

Customize your sign-in options
Perform the following tasks:
1. Sign in using the Riley account you created in the preceding task, or if you
want to configure your own sign-in options, sign in using your account.
2. Display the sign-in options that are available for the account.
3. Create a PIN that you can use instead of the current password to sign in to
the computer.
4. Lock the computer.
5. Dismiss the lock screen, and then sign in by using the PIN.
6. If your computer has a biometric identification system that is compatible
with Windows Hello, create a Windows Hello sign-in authentication. Then
lock the computer, dismiss the lock screen, and sign in by using Windows
Hello.
7. Create a picture password that you can use to sign in to the computer. Use
one of the assword pictures in the practice file folder.
8. Lock the computer.
9. Dismiss the lock screen. On the Welcome screen, select the Sign-in options
link and notice the icons that represent the available authentication
methods.
10. Sign in by using the picture password. If you want to, change the picture
password to use a picture of your own.
Synchronize settings across computers
Perform the following tasks:
1. Display the Sync your settings pane. Review the elements that you can
synchronize among computers and consider which of these would be useful
or not useful. (If you’re signed in as Riley, you won’t be able to modify the
sync settings because it is a local account.)
2. If you have a Microsoft account and want to modify the sync settings for
that account, sign in using your own account, return to the Sync your
settings pane, and modify the settings to fit your needs.

3. If you’re signed in as Riley, sign out and then sign in with your own
account. Then remove the Riley account from your computer.

12. Manage computer settings
In this chapter
Manage date and time settings
Manage regional and language settings
Manage speech settings
Customize device display settings
In Windows 10, the management of computer settings is gradually migrating
from the more complex Control Panel to the seemingly simple Settings window.
This migration supports the development of Windows 10 as a cross-platform
system that operates equally gracefully on large (desktop computer) and small
(mobile device) display screens. The Settings window organizes function-
specific pages into 13 categories that, due to the simplification of the category
titles, aren’t always self-explanatory. The organization of the settings isn’t
entirely different from that in Windows 8.1, Windows 7, and earlier versions of
Windows, but it’s different enough that users of any previous version of
Windows are likely to need a bit of time to get used to it. Most settings that
remain in Control Panel can be reached through links from the Settings window
panes.
In previous chapters, you worked with user interface settings. In this chapter,
you work with settings that control the underlying behavior of the computer.
This chapter guides you through procedures related to managing date and time
settings, regional and language settings, and speech settings, and for customizing
the display of on-screen content.
Manage date and time settings
Your computer system has an internal clock that keeps track of the date and time
(down to time increments as small as nanoseconds—billionths of a second), even
when the computer is turned off. By default, Windows 10 displays this system
date and time in the notification area at the right end of the taskbar, and most of
us refer to that information frequently.
The taskbar clock doesn’t display the time down to the nanosecond. But

programmatically, when a system tool or app captures the time or a time
duration, it will typically be accurate to between 1 millisecond and 100
nanoseconds, depending on the hardware platform and the programming
language. This accuracy can be very important in some cases. Communication
and calendaring software coordinates with the internal clock to keep us on time
and on task, but more importantly, system tools and apps use that clock to
monitor and manage events on your computer.
To help keep the date and time that your computer references accurate, the clock
is set to automatically synchronize with an internet time server every seven days.
(You can set the time manually if you can’t synchronize with a server.) Internet-
based time servers transmit the current Coordinated Universal Time to your
computer. This time is known as UTC (for Universal Time Coordinated), an
acronym based on a compromise that allows the use of the same abbreviation in
all languages. UTC is a standard based on International Atomic Time and
roughly equivalent to Greenwich Mean Time (GMT), which is kept at the Royal
Observatory in Greenwich, England. Time zones around the world are expressed
by the number of hours they are ahead of or behind UTC/GMT. Computers that
aren’t located in the UTC/GMT time zone must be set to the correct time zone to
display the correct time. If your computer is in a region that participates in
daylight saving time, you also need to indicate that fact, so that your computer
adjusts from standard time to daylight saving time and back again on the
appropriate days. Many computers now have built-in GPS functionality that can
provide an accurate location to the computer so that you don’t have to adjust
your computer.
TIP If your computer is connected to a network domain, the domain
server synchronizes with the time server, and your computer
synchronizes with the domain server.
When you install Windows 10, it prompts you to select a time zone. If you move
or travel with your computer, you can easily change the time zone.
If you want to be able to quickly check the time, day, and date in other locations,
you can configure Windows to display up to three clocks; for example, if you
work in a regional office, you might also want to keep track of the time at your

company headquarters. The taskbar displays the primary clock. You can display
additional clocks in a ScreenTip or in the calendar pane.
If you need to display time in more than three locations, you can do so on the
World Clock page of the built-in Alarms & Clock app.
You can manage the date, time, time zone, daylight saving time, and date and
time formats in the Date & Time pane of the Time & Language settings page.


To display the current time and date
The taskbar displays the time and the date. To display additional
information, do either of the following:
Point to the time or date to display the day of the week, the month, the
day, and the year.
Select the time or date to display the current time to the second, the day
and date, and the calendar for the current month. (Your First Day Of
Week setting determines the first column.)

To display the Date & Time settings pane
On the taskbar, right-On the taskbar, right-click the current date or time, and
then near the top of the shortcut menu, select Adjust date/time.
In the Settings window, select Time & Language, and then select Date &
time.

To manually set the system date and time
1. Display the Date & time settings pane.
2. To stop the computer from synchronizing with a time server, turn off Set
time automatically.
3. Select Change to display the Change Date And Time pane.
4. In the Change date and time pane, set the date and time as you want them,
and then select Change to apply your changes.
To manually synchronize with an internet time server
1. Open Control Panel, and then do either of the following to open the Date
And Time dialog box:
In Category view, select Clock, Language, and Region, and then select
Date and Time.
In Small Icons or Large Icons view, select Date and Time.
2. In the Date and Time dialog box, select the Internet Time tab, and then
select Change settings to open the Internet Time Settings dialog box.

TIP The shield adjacent to the Change Settings command indicates
that this action requires administrator-level permissions. For
information about user account permissions, see “Understand user
accounts and permissions” in Chapter 11, “Manage user accounts
and settings.”
3. Select the Synchronize with an Internet time server check box, and then
expand the Server list to display the available servers.
TIP The internet time servers available in your Server list might
differ from those shown here. The default internet time server is
time.windows.com, which is maintained by Microsoft. Servers with
nist in their names are maintained by the National Institute of
Standards and Technology (NIST) at various locations around the
United States. At the time of this writing, NIST is upgrading the
servers and networks that support the internet time service; this
will result in new addresses for some servers and the
discontinuation of others. The global address for all NIST servers
is time.nist.gov

4. In the Server list, select the server you want to synchronize with, and then
select Update now to try to connect to the server and update your system
time. A message below the server list lets you know whether the clock was
successfully synchronized.
TIP If the synchronization fails, and you have an active internet

connection, 
select 
Update 
Now 
again 
to 
resubmit 
the
synchronization request to the server.
5. After the clock successfully synchronizes, select OK in the Internet Time
Settings dialog box, and again in the Date and Time dialog box.
To change the time zone
1. Display the Date & time settings pane.
2. Turn off Set time zone automatically.
3. Select the Time zone list to display a list of the time zones. Notice that
there are multiple time zone descriptions per time zone.
4. In the Time zone list, select any time zone that matches your region’s
variance from UTC. Then check the taskbar clock to confirm that the

system time has changed.
5. If your location participates in daylight saving time, turn on Adjust for
daylight saving time automatically.
To change date and time formats
1. Display the Date & time settings pane. The Formats section displays the
current settings for the first day of the week, short date, long date, short
time, and long time.
2. In the Formats area, select Change date and time formats to display the
Change Date And Time Formats pane.

The First Day Of Week options, which control the display of weekly and
monthly calendars, are simply the days of the week. The other lists use
abbreviations to represent numeric and alphabetic expressions of the month,
day, year, hour, minute, second, and 12-hour time notation.

3. In the Change date and time formats pane, select the setting you want for
the first day of the week and the short and long date and time expressions.
Changes to the Short Time and Short Date are immediately reflected on the
taskbar. Changes to the Long Date are reflected in the ScreenTip that
appears when you point to the taskbar time or date.
SEE ALSO For information about changing date and time formats
to those of a specific location or language, see “Manage regional
and language settings” later in this chapter.
To configure Windows to display multiple clocks
1. Display the Date & time settings pane. At the bottom of the pane, select
Add clocks for different time zones to display the Additional Clocks tab
of the Date And Time dialog box.
2. For each additional clock you want to display, select the Show this clock
check box, select a time zone in the corresponding list, and then enter a

display name to identify the time on calendars.
3. Select OK in the Date and Time dialog box to implement your changes.
To display secondary clocks
Point to the taskbar clock to display the additional clocks in a ScreenTip.
Select the taskbar clock to display the calendar pane with the information
for the additional time zones at the top.

Manage regional and language settings
Windows 10 was initially released in 190 countries/regions and 111 languages.
At the time of this writing, the operating system is “fully localized” in 39
location-specific language variations, shown in the following table.
Arabic (Saudi Arabia)
Bulgarian (Bulgaria)
Chinese 
(Simplified,
China)
Chinese (Hong Kong)
Chinese 
(Traditional,
Taiwan)
Croatian (Croatia)
Czech (Czech Republic)
Danish (Denmark)
Dutch (Netherlands)
English (United Kingdom)
English (United States)
Estonian (Estonia)
Finnish (Finland)
French (France)
French (Canada)
German (Germany)
Greek (Greece)
Hebrew (Israel)
Hungarian (Hungary)
Italian (Italy)
Japanese (Japan)
Korean (Korea)
Latvian (Latvia)
Lithuanian (Lithuania)
Norwegian, 
Bokmål
(Norway)
Polish (Poland)
Portuguese (Brazil)
Portuguese (Portugal)
Romanian (Romania)
Russian (Russia)
Serbian (Latin, Serbia)
Slovak (Slovakia)
Slovenian (Slovenia)
Spanish (Spain, International
Sort)
Spanish (Mexico)
Swedish (Sweden)
Thai (Thailand)
Turkish (Turkey)
Ukrainian (Ukraine)
Regional variations of these languages are available as Language Interface
Packs, which provide a translated version of the most widely used dialog boxes,
menu items, and help content. At the time of this writing, 140 Language
Interface Packs are available.
Install and manage languages and language features
The Windows display language is used by the operating system to label user
interface elements (such as dialog box titles, settings, and button names). When
you upgrade to Windows 10, the default Windows display language stays the

same as before the upgrade. If you want or need to work with features in a
language other than the current Windows display language, you can change the
system language, switch between languages, or simply install the other language
to make its features available on your computer. Other apps can check the
system language and use features that are installed with the language. For
example, installing a language that uses characters other than those in the default
language installs fonts that support those characters. You can use those fonts
when creating documents in Microsoft Word, Adobe InDesign, Silhouette
Studio, or any other app that pulls a font list from Windows. Windows and
installed apps fetch content based on your region and language settings. At the
time of this writing, 140 languages, plus dialects, are available.
Some system languages include enhanced language-specific features such as
spelling, text prediction, alphabet-specific fonts, handwriting recognition, optical
character recognition, speech recognition, text-to-speech, and Cortana support.
You can install some of these options separately from the language pack. The
Optional Features list shows installed supplemental font features.
IMPORTANT At the time of this writing, the interactive Cortana
service is available in 13 countries/regions–Australia, Brazil, Canada,
China, France, Germany, India, Italy, Japan, Mexico, Spain, the United
Kingdom, and the United States–but can translate phrases in 40
languages. When the system language is set to one that Cortana doesn’t
speak, the feature is automatically disabled. The standard search feature
is available when Cortana isn’t.
Installing a language makes the keyboard layout for that language available. If
you connect a physical keyboard with the layout and character set that is
typically used with that language, switching the keyboard language enters the
correct characters (as labeled on the keyboard) when you press the keys. If you
don’t have a physical keyboard that is configured for a language, switching the
keyboard language makes your existing keyboard function as though it were
labeled in that language. It also makes the on-screen keyboard available in that
language. There are often other options available; they vary by language.

TIP To display the touch keyboard icon on the taskbar, right-click or
press and hold a blank area of the taskbar, and then select Show Touch
Keyboard Button. Although this is called the touch keyboard, you can
also use your mouse to select the keys.
After you install a language, it is available from the Settings window and from
the notification area of the taskbar. You can easily switch languages from the
taskbar.
IMPORTANT If you synchronize settings across multiple computers
through your Microsoft account, installing a language on one computer
triggers the installation of that language on your other computers, and
switching languages on one computer makes the same change on your
others. If your keyboard begins to generate keystrokes other than you
think it should, check the notification area of the taskbar to make sure
that you haven’t inadvertently changed the language.
You can manage the country or region of record and the system language in the
Region & Language pane of the Time & Language settings page.

To display the Region & Language settings pane
In the Settings window, select Time & Language, and then select Region
& language.

To specify your country or region for local content
1. Display the Region & language settings pane.
2. Select the Country or region list, and then select the location you want
Windows and installed apps to consider your home location.
TIP Many websites discern your location based on the IP address
of your internet connection. The location you select in the Region
& Language pane does not affect the location that is conveyed by
the IP address.
To install an additional system language
1. Display the Region & language settings pane. The Languages section
displays the currently installed languages. (There is only one until you add
a language.)
2. In the Languages section, select Add a language to display the list of
languages you can install. The name of each language is shown first in that
language and then in your current system language.

3. Scroll the list and select the language you want to install. If Windows has
multiple versions of that language available, select the dialect you want
from the secondary screen.

Windows displays a notification and installs the language from Windows
Update, or adds the language to the language list and notifies you that you
need to install a language pack.
To install a language pack
1. In the Languages area of the Region & language settings pane, select a
language that has an available language pack.
2. In the pane that expands, select Options to display the Language Options
pane.
3. At the top of the Language options pane, in the Download language pack
area, select Download to download and install the language pack. You can
also track the installation progress from the Region & Language settings
pane.

To configure language options
1. In the Languages area of the Region & language settings pane, select an
installed language and then, in the pane that expands, select Options to
display the Language Options pane.

2. Peruse the available options and download or configure any you want to
use.
To display the installed supplemental font features
1. In the Settings window, select Apps, and then select Apps & features.
2. In the Apps & features section of the Apps & features pane, select
Manage optional features.

To change the Windows display language
1. In the Languages area of the Region & language settings pane, select a
language that is not labeled Windows display language and then, in the pane
that expands, select Set as default. The change takes effect immediately in
some system areas, such as the date and time displayed on the taskbar.
2. Sign out of Windows, and then sign back in to completely implement the
display language change.
To remove a system language
In the Languages section of the Region & language settings pane, select
the language you want to remove and then, in the pane that expands, select
Remove.
To change the keyboard language
1. Install the system language of the keyboard you want to use.
2. Do either of the following:
On the taskbar, to the left of the clock, select the keyboard language

button to expand the available keyboard list.
Press Win+Spacebar to cycle through the installed keyboard languages.
Configure regional settings
You can modify numeric formats to those of another country/region without
installing a language. You can modify settings for only your user account, or also
for the Welcome screen, system accounts (such as the Guest account), and new
user accounts on the computer.
To change date and time formats to those of a specific region
1. Display the Date & time settings pane. In the Related settings area, select
Additional date, time, & regional settings to display the Clock,
Language, And Region category of Control Panel.

2. In the Region category, select Change date, time, or number formats to
display the Formats tab of the Region dialog box. The default format is
Match Windows display language.
3. Select the Format list, and then select the language and country or region
that you want to use for the standard date and time formats.

TIP You can make changes to the date and time formats by
selecting Additional Settings. You can reset customized settings to
the defaults for the language and location at any time.
4. In the Region dialog box, select OK to apply your changes and close the
dialog box.
To copy regional settings to Windows system screens and new user accounts
1. Display the Region dialog box, and then select the Administrative tab.
2. In the Welcome screen and new user accounts section, select Copy
settings to display the current settings.

3. At the bottom of the Welcome screen and new user accounts settings
dialog box, select one or both check boxes to specify the settings that you
want to change. Then select OK.
4. Restart the computer to implement the changes.
Manage speech settings
Many people talk to their computers, but the time has finally come when doing
so represents more of an efficiency than an eccentricity. If your Windows 10
computer is configured to run one of the system languages that supports speech

recognition, you can now accomplish even more by speaking to your computer,
through the Cortana user interface. You can also configure your computer to
respond to verbal commands, and you can dictate content into apps.
TIP At the time of this writing, speech recognition is available for only
the following languages: English (United States, United Kingdom,
Australia, Canada, and India), French, German, Japanese, Mandarin
(Chinese Simplified and Chinese Traditional), and Spanish. For more
information about Cortana, see Chapter 9, “Get assistance from
Cortana.”
You can make the best use of speech recognition if you have a good-quality
microphone. Most computers and devices have built-in microphones, but you
can also purchase reasonably priced headset microphones that maintain a
constant distance between the microphone and your mouth and block out
external distractions. They also tend to pick up fewer keyboard and mouse
noises than built-in microphones that are close to those interface elements.
Dictate content to your computer
The Fall 2017 Creators Update includes specific improvement in
dictation features. You can easily dictate text into any text field by
pressing Win+H to open the dictation toolbar, and then speaking the
text you want to write.
You can tap the microphone on the dictation toolbar to turn dictation
on and off, or you can give verbal commands, such as select, clear,
delete, go after (or before), move to, move forward (or back) to, go
up (or down) to, tap, press, start, and stop. To turn off dictation, say
“stop dictation.” A full list of commands and a guide for entering
symbols are available from support.microsoft.com/help/4042244.

If you’re having trouble getting Cortana to understand verbal commands, you
can run the Speech troubleshooter to configure your microphone. Additional
speech configuration tools are available from the Speech Recognition page of
Control Panel. If you intend to dictate content into an app that supports it, it’s
worthwhile to invest time in the speech tutorial and the speech recognition voice
training. If you use a good microphone and enunciate properly, speech
recognition works well. It won’t outpace a fast, accurate typist, but if you are a
“hunt and peck” typist, this might help you churn out your next novel.
As you interact with Cortana, Windows 10 monitors your spoken, handwritten,
and typed input in addition to your messages and appointments. (This feature
was originally called Getting to know you but is now referred to simply as
speech services and typing suggestions.) From this information, Cortana can
adjust the speech recognition patterns, create a local user dictionary, and serve
up content that is pertinent to the things it detects happening in your life. Speech
services and typing suggestions are on by default and are required to use Cortana
voice commands. If you’re not using Cortana, you can turn off speech services

and typing suggestions in the Windows 10 privacy settings.
SEE ALSO For more information about Cortana, see Chapter 9, “Get
assistance from Cortana.”
Your computer can talk back to you, too. By using text-to-speech technology, it
can read printed content to you, or provide verbal cues for the visual aspects of
the user interface (for example, reading button labels or dialog box options to
you). The English-language version of Windows 10 has three default voice
options—a female voice identified as Zira and two male voices identified as
David and Mark. You can listen to a sample of each voice. Adding language
packs can also add male and female voices with language-specific names and
samples.
Under the best of conditions, this technology is amazing, and seems almost like
artificial intelligence. Under the worst of conditions, it is at least mildly funny.
Between those extremes it can range from mildly useful to mildly annoying.
You can manage the speech language, text-to-speech, and microphone settings in
the Speech pane of the Time & Language settings page.
To display the Speech settings pane
In the Settings window, select Time & Language, and then select Speech.
To run the Speech troubleshooter
1. Display the Speech settings pane.
2. In the Speech language section, expand the Choose the language… list,
and then select the language that you speak and want the computer to
recognize.
TIP The list includes only the system languages that are installed

on your computer that support speech recognition. To make one of
these languages available that isn’t your default, you must first
install the language pack. For more information, see “Manage
regional and language settings” earlier in this chapter.
3. To give the computer the best chance of understanding you, select the
Recognize non-native accents for this language check box.
4. Prepare your microphone:
If you have a headset microphone, put it on and adjust the microphone so
that it’s directly in front of your mouth, with two to three finger-widths of
space between your lips and the microphone.
If you have a freestanding microphone, position it so that it is in front of
you when you’re facing the computer screen.
Be sure that the microphone is turned on and connected to the computer.
Close the door and turn off or remove any loud things from the area.
5. In the Microphone section of the Speech pane, select Get started to start
the Speech wizard. (This button used to start a microphone setup wizard,
but that has been replaced with a microphone/speaker troubleshooter.)
6. To troubleshoot the microphone, select Cortana can’t hear me and then on
the Which of these devices… page, select the microphone you prepared in
step 4.
7. On the Set up your microphone page, select Set up the mic. After reading
the instructions on the Mic Calibration page, select Next. The wizard

provides a sentence for you to speak.
8. Read aloud the sentence below the progress bar, speaking in the voice that
you will normally use when dictating text, giving verbal commands, or
speaking to Cortana. When the wizard has a sufficient sample to properly
adjust the microphone levels, it moves to the next page.
9. Select Close to complete and exit the wizard.
To display additional speech configuration tools
Display Control Panel in Category view. Select the Ease of Access
category, and then select Speech Recognition.
Display Control Panel in Large Icons view or Small Icons view, and then
select Speech Recognition.
To change the voice and speed of the computer’s text-to-speech narrator
1. Display the Speech settings pane.
2. In the Text-to-speech area, expand the Voice list to display the currently
available voices.

3. In the Voice list, select the voice you want to set as the default.
4. On the Speed slider, set the speed you think you’ll be comfortable with.
(The slider represents speeds from very slow on the left to very fast on the
right.)
5. Set your speakers to a comfortable level, and then select Preview voice.
6. Adjust your settings as necessary until the preview voice clip is at a speed
you can understand.
To turn off speech services and typing suggestions
1. Do either of the following to display the Speech, inking, & typing privacy
settings pane:
Display the Speech settings pane. In the Related settings area, select
Speech, inking, & typing privacy settings.
In the Settings window, select Privacy, and then select Speech, inking,
& typing.

2. Read the feature description and be certain that you don’t want to use the
dictation or Cortana features. (You can still use the Ease Of Access Speech-
to-Text app.)
3. Select Turn off speech services and typing suggestions.
Customize device display settings
Windows 10 was designed to run on a diverse array of devices with displays of
many different sizes, shapes, and orientations.
When you purchase a computer monitor, all-in-one computer, laptop, tablet, or
smartphone, one of the things you consider is its size, or display area, which is
measured like a television screen: diagonally in inches. As important as the
physical size, though, is the screen resolution the monitor supports, which is
measured in pixels and is expressed as the number of pixels wide by the number
of pixels high. Pixels are the individual dots that make up the picture displayed
on your screen. Each pixel displays one color; depending on your screen
resolution, the images shown on the screen might consist of from 500,000 to

several million individual dots of color.
When personal computers first became popular, most computer monitors could
display only 640 pixels horizontally and 480 pixels vertically (a screen
resolution of 640 × 480). Nearly all screen displays now support a screen
resolution of no less than 1024 × 768 pixels, and many newer screens support a
resolution of 3840 × 2160 pixels (referred to as 4K) or even higher. In effect, as
the screen resolution increases, the size of each pixel decreases, and more
information can be shown in the same display area. In other words, as the screen
resolution increases, so does the amount of information that is shown on the
screen—but all the information appears smaller.
Most computer systems provide a choice of at least two screen resolutions, but
you might have many more choices. Some people prefer to work at a lower
screen resolution so that everything on the screen appears larger; others prefer to
fit as much information on the screen as they possibly can. Recent statistics
indicate that more than 95 percent of internet users have their screen resolution
set to 1024 × 768 or greater. At the time of this writing, the most widely used
screen resolution is 1366 × 768 pixels, which is a common laptop screen
resolution.
Originally, most monitors had a 4:3 aspect ratio, with the screen 4 units wide and
3 units high. These 4:3 displays are now referred to as standard displays. Many
monitors now have widescreen displays intended to improve the experience of
viewing movies on the computer by displaying them at a 16:9 aspect ratio, which
is also the standard for high-definition television and ultra-high-definition
television. These resolutions might be available on your computer regardless of
the native aspect ratio of your actual monitor. The popular 1366 × 768 computer
screen resolution is a widescreen display. Tablets and smartphones rotate to
support both horizontal and vertical displays.

TIP To guarantee clear display of the official Windows 10 desktop
background, Microsoft provides nine high-resolution versions of it at
different vertically and horizontally oriented sizes. These files are
available from the C:\Windows\Web folder.
In the original release of Windows 10, the screen resolution was deemed an
“advanced” display setting—possibly because most people like to set it and
forget it—and was not as easily accessible as in earlier versions of Windows.
Fortunately, that decision was revisited, and in the Fall 2017 Creators Update,
the screen resolution setting is back on the Display pane of the System setting
page. Screen resolution capabilities are hardware specific.

TIP The maximum resolution is the highest resolution supported by
your monitor or the highest resolution supported by the graphics card
installed in your computer, whichever is lower.
Windows 10 offers an additional option for increasing the size of user interface
elements. Instead of changing the size of everything on the screen (by changing
the screen resolution), you can change the size at which Windows displays user
interface elements. The default setting is 100%, and you can increase the size in
25-percent increments. The maximum increase depends on the screen size and
resolution.
You can temporarily magnify part or all of your on-screen content by using the
Magnifier tool. For information about Magnifier, see “Configure Windows
accessibility features” in Chapter 13, “Manage power and access options.”
Smaller handheld devices such as tablets and smartphones are designed to
support the rotation of on-screen content as the device rotates, but this capability
isn’t generally built into laptops or desktop monitors (although there are
specialized monitors that support rotation). If you have a device that supports
monitor rotation, you can easily configure Windows 10 to change the orientation
of on-screen content. The default orientation is Landscape (with the screen wider
than it is high). Other options include Portrait, flipped Landscape, and flipped
Portrait.
SEE ALSO For information about manually and automatically
adjusting the screen brightness and color tone, see Chapter 13, “Manage
power and access options.”
To display the Display settings pane
Open the Settings window. Select System, and then select Display.
Right-click an empty area of the desktop, and then select Display settings.
To change the screen resolution
1. Display the Display settings pane.

2. In the Scale and layout section, expand the Resolution list to display the
screen resolutions that are supported by the computer graphics card and the
monitor.
TIP When you change the screen resolution, try to choose one that
has the same aspect ratio as your actual monitor. If
(Recommended) appears after a screen resolution, this will be the
largest screen resolution at the native aspect ratio. You might be
able to discern the aspect ratio visually from the preview boxes; if
not, you can do the math to identify the aspect ratio. The available
resolutions depend on your graphics card and monitor.
3. In the list, select the screen resolution you want, to temporarily apply the
setting. Windows displays a Keep These Display Changes? message box.

4. If you like the new screen resolution, select Keep changes. Otherwise,
select Revert (or wait 15 seconds) to return to the previous screen
resolution.
To change the scale of user interface elements
1. Display the Display settings pane.
2. In the Scale and layout section, expand the Change the size of text, apps,
and other items list, and then select the scale you want. The change takes
effect immediately in the Settings window and on the taskbar.
3. To apply the change to all apps, sign out of Windows and then sign back in.
TIP It is possible to set a custom scaling level, but this is not
recommended. If you’re interested in this, select Custom Scaling in
the Scale And Layout section of the Display settings pane, enter a
scale from 100 to 500, and then select Apply.
To change the orientation of on-screen content
1. In the Display settings pane, select the Orientation list, and then select
Landscape, Portrait, Landscape (flipped), or Portrait (flipped).
2. Windows temporarily changes the screen orientation and displays a Keep
These Display Changes? message box. If you like the new screen
orientation, select Keep changes. Otherwise, select Revert (or wait 15
seconds) to return to the previous orientation.
Key points
Your computer’s internal clock can be synchronized to an internet time
server or set manually.
Windows 10 supports many languages. You can install language packs to
support the use of alternative keyboard layouts, speech-recognition
languages, and menu and option labels.

You can interact with your computer by talking to it, and it can read content
back to you. You can choose from multiple computer voices and adjust the
speed to fit your pace.
You can change the screen resolution and orientation, and the scale of the
content, to best suit your current working conditions.
 Practice tasks
No practice files are necessary to complete the practice tasks in this chapter.
Manage date and time settings
Perform the following tasks:
1. From the taskbar, experiment with different methods of displaying the
current time and date.
2. Display the calendar, and from there display the Date & time settings pane.
3. Change the time zone to another, and notice that the clock immediately
changes. Examine other content on your computer that has time stamps,
such as email messages, and determine how the time zone change affects
that content. Then set the time zone to the one you’re in.
4. Configure Windows to display date and time information for an additional
time zone. Choose a time zone that is far away from your own, preferably
on the other side of the date line. Then experiment with the different
methods of displaying the secondary clock.
5. Configure Windows to display the clocks that you want to have available.
Manage regional and language settings
Display the Region & Language settings pane, and then perform the following
tasks:
1. Check that the correct country or region is specified for local content.
2. If you want to, install an additional system language. If the language
requires a language pack, install the language pack.

3. If you install an additional language, notice that the language button
appears in the notification area of the taskbar. Select the button to display
the keyboard language options. Experiment with the other keyboard if you
want, to try to locate keys that enter different characters than those shown
on your keyboard.
4. Experiment with any other features that are discussed in the “Manage
regional and language settings” topic that you’re interested in. When you
finish, configure the settings on your computer for the way you want to
work.
Manage speech settings
Display the Speech settings pane, and then perform the following tasks:
1. Preview the voices that are available for the computer’s text-to-speech
narrator. Choose the voice you like best, and then adjust its speed so you
can best understand it.
2. Complete the process of setting up your microphone, if you haven’t
previously done so.
3. Display the additional speech configuration tools available from Control
Panel. If you’re interested in more precisely configuring the computer for
speech recognition, complete at least one of the configuration processes.
Customize device display settings
Display the Display settings pane, and then perform the following tasks:
1. Experiment with the Change the size of text, apps, and other items slider
to determine the largest possible magnification you can apply to your
display by using this feature. If you want to, apply the 125% setting, and
then sign out and back in to your computer to get the full effect of the
setting.
2. Display the screen resolution options supported by your computer system.
If you want to, temporarily apply a different screen resolution and examine
the effect. If you find another screen resolution that you prefer, keep it.

13. Manage power and access options
In this chapter
Change the screen brightness
Configure power options
Configure Windows accessibility features
Your power settings determine how long your computer will sit idle before
reducing power consumption by turning off the screen or going into sleep mode.
One factor in your computer’s power usage that you can control is the screen
brightness. A brighter screen uses more power. You can manage the screen
brightness independently or as part of a power plan.
Screen brightness, in addition to the color of the light coming from the screen,
can cause eyestrain and sleeplessness. The Night Light feature introduced with
the Fall 2017 Creators Update of Windows 10 can help mitigate the negative
effects of spending too much time in front of your computer screen.
Microsoft takes wellness and accessibility seriously, and this is apparent in the
company’s early and continued commitment to the Windows Ease Of Access
features that provide alternative methods for information input and output.
Anyone can use these features to enhance their computing experience.
This chapter guides you through procedures related to changing the screen
brightness, configuring power options for corded and battery-powered
computers, and configuring Windows accessibility features.
Change the screen brightness
You might have heard the term blue light for the light that shines from a
television, computer, or mobile device screen. Health professionals advise that
people should avoid blue light for an hour before going to bed, because it can
contribute to sleeplessness.
When you’re working in a dark room, a brighter screen can cause more eyestrain
than a dimmer screen. You can adjust the screen brightness, and you can now
also change the color tone from blue light to warmer colors, by using the Night

Light feature.
You can turn the Night Light feature on and off manually, or schedule it to turn
on and off automatically.
To change the screen brightness
Display the Action Center, expand the Quick Actions section if it’s
collapsed, and then select Brightness to cycle through screen brightness
settings in 25-percent increments.
Open the Settings window. Select System, and then Display. In the
Brightness and color section, drag the Change brightness slider, or click
or tap on either side of the slide box, to adjust the screen brightness to a
percentage of the maximum level configured for your screen.

The brightness changes immediately, so you can slowly move the slider
until the screen is exactly as bright as you want it in your current lighting
conditions.
To turn Night Light on or off
Display the Action Center, expand the Quick Actions section if it’s
collapsed, and then select Night light.
In the System settings window, select Display. In the Brightness and color
section, turn on Night light.
To configure Night Light screen color
1. In the System settings window, select Display.
2. In the Brightness and color section, select Night light settings.
3. On the Night light settings page, drag the Color temperature at night
slider, or click or tap on either side of the slide box, to adjust the color.

To configure automatic Night Light start and end times
1. In the Brightness and color section of the Display system settings pane,
select Night light settings.
2. In the Schedule section of the Night light settings pane, turn on Schedule
night light, and then do either of the following:
To link the on and off times to your local sunset and sunrise, select
Sunset to sunrise.
To schedule specific on and off times, select Set hours, and then set the
Turn on and Turn off times.

IMPORTANT If Sunset To Sunrise is unavailable, select Location
Settings, and in the Location pane of the Privacy settings page, turn on
Location Service. Then select the Back button in the upper-left corner of
the Settings window to confirm that Sunset To Sunrise is turned on.
If your Sunset To Sunrise schedule shows times from 12:00 AM to
12:00 AM, leave and then return to the Night Light Settings page to
update the sunset and sunrise times.
Configure power options
Reducing power consumption is obviously of higher priority if your device is
running on battery power. On battery-powered computers, such as laptops and
tablets, you can separately configure settings that are in effect when the device is
plugged in and when it runs on battery power.
The screen brightness can have a significant effect on the length of time a battery
charge powers a computer. In the previous topic, you learned about
independently adjusting the screen brightness. You can also manage it as part of
a power plan.
Each Windows 10 computer has a set of built-in power plans that define three
settings:

When to turn off the display
When to put the computer to sleep
How bright to make the display
The built-in power plans vary based on the computer type and manufacturer, but
usually include the following:
Power Saver This power plan prioritizes power conservation over
performance. The screen is less bright and computer processes turn off
earlier.
High Performance This power plan prioritizes the user experience over
power conservation. The screen is brighter and the computer remains idle
for a longer time before turning off processes.
Balanced This power plan uses less power than High Performance and has
higher performance values than Power Saver.
You can choose a preconfigured power plan, modify individual elements of a
power plan, or even create your own. Creating a custom plan is similar to editing
an existing plan, but you name and save it so you can easily apply it at any time.
If you decide you no longer need a custom power plan, you can delete it.
To configure the power management settings
1. Open the Settings window. Select System, and then select Power & sleep.
The Power & Sleep pane displays the current length of inactive time you
want the computer to wait before it turns off the screen and then goes to
sleep.

TIP A laptop or other battery-powered computer has separate “on
battery power” and “when plugged in” lists; a desktop computer
has only the “when plugged in” lists.
2. In the Screen section of the Power & sleep pane, in each available list,
select a time from 1 minute to 5 hours, or Never, to indicate the period of
inactivity after which you want the screen to turn off (but the computer to
continue running).
3. In the Sleep section of the Power & sleep pane, in each available list, select
a time from 1 minute to 5 hours, or Never, to indicate the period of
inactivity after which you want the computer to enter Sleep mode.
TIP The Sleep timeout must be equal to or greater than the Screen
timeout. Setting the Sleep value to less time than the Screen value

lowers the Screen value to match; setting the Screen value to more
time than the Sleep value raises the Sleep value to match.
The power setting changes take effect immediately.
To choose a built-in power-management plan
1. Display the Power & sleep settings pane.
2. In the Related settings section of the pane, select Additional power
settings to open the Power Options window of Control Panel.
3. If Show additional plans appears below the plan descriptions, select it to
display hidden power plans.
4. To compare plan settings, select the Change plan settings link to the right
of each plan name, peruse the settings, and then select the Back button to
return to the Power Options window.
5. In the Power Options window, select the preconfigured power option you
want.
To modify an existing power plan
1. Open the Power Options window of Control Panel.
2. Select Change plan settings to the right of the plan that you want to

modify, to open the Edit Plan Settings window for the plan.
TIP A laptop or other battery-powered computer has separate “on
battery power” and “when plugged in” lists; a desktop computer
has only the “when plugged in” lists.
3. For each available power source, do the following:
To the right of Turn off the display, select a time from 1 minute to 5
hours, or Never, to indicate the period of inactivity after which you want
to turn off the screen when the computer is running on that power source.
To the right of Put the computer to sleep, select a time from 1 minute to
5 hours, or Never, to indicate the period of inactivity after which you
want the computer to enter Sleep mode when it is running on that power
source.
To the right of Adjust plan brightness, move the slider to indicate how
bright you want the screen to be when the computer is running on that
power source.

4. In the Edit Plan Settings window, select Save changes to apply your
changes to the power plan and return to the Power Options window. If you
modified the currently active plan, changes to the brightness are
immediately apparent.
TIP If you decide you don’t like the screen brightness you set, you
can change it at the bottom of the Power Options window. The
change will be applied to the current plan and automatically saved
with it.
System power settings
Windows 10 has default behaviors for entering sleep mode, waking
up, and shutting down. If you find that these defaults aren’t working
for you, you can change the options. (Changes require approval from
an Administrator account.)
There are three sets of settings that you can change:
Shutdown action triggers These settings are related to the Power
and Sleep buttons (the physical buttons) on your computer. Not
all computers have Sleep buttons, but many do; they’re usually
located on the keyboard and labeled with something that
indicates sleep such as “zzz” or a moon. On a laptop, you can
also specify what happens when you close the lid. The
following table describes the shutdown actions that can occur
when you press the Power or Sleep button, or close the laptop
lid.
Shutdown action
Power buttonSleep buttonClose the lid
Do nothing
Y
Y
Y
Turn off the displayY
Y
Not optional

Sleep
Y
Default
Y
Hibernate
Y
Y
Y
Shut down
Default
N
Y
Password requirement By default, when your computer comes
out of sleep mode, Windows displays the Lock screen. Users
whose accounts are protected by passwords must enter their
passwords to sign in. You can turn off this requirement.
Shutdown settings This category is a bit of a catchall. You can
control whether the Power menu includes the Sleep and
Hibernate commands, and whether the user account menu
includes the Lock command.
In general, if things are working well for you, it’s best to leave them
as they are. But if you want to make changes, you can do so from the
System Settings page of Control Panel. In Category view, select
Hardware And Sound, and then in the Power Options group, select
Change What The Power Buttons Do. Most of the options are
unavailable to change until you select Change Settings That Are
Currently 
Unavailable 
and 
provide 
Administrator 
account
credentials.
To create a custom power plan
1. Open the Power Options window of Control Panel.
2. In the left pane, select Create a power plan to open the Create A Power
Plan window.

3. Select one of the default plans as the starting point for your new plan, then
provide a name for your custom power plan. Then select Next to display the
Edit Plan Settings window.
4. For each available power source, select times in the Turn off the display
list and the Put the computer to sleep list, and move the Adjust plan
brightness slider to indicate how bright you want the screen to be when the
computer is running on that power source.
5. In the Edit Plan Settings window, select Create to create the custom
power plan and return to the Power Options window.
To edit advanced settings of an existing power plan
1. Open the Power Options window of Control Panel.
2. Select Change plan settings to the right of the plan that you want to
modify.
3. At the bottom of the Edit Plan Settings window, select Change advanced
power settings to open the Power Options dialog box.

4. If the plan shown at the top of the Power Options dialog box is not the one
you want to modify, expand the list, and select the plan you want to

customize.
5. Scroll through the available settings and select the expand button (+) to
expand any category of interest.
6. If the settings you want to change are unavailable (dimmed), you can select
the Change settings that are currently unavailable link above the list and
provide administrator permission, if necessary, to make the changes.
7. If you change settings, select Apply or OK to apply the changes.
Make your battery last longer
The Battery Saver feature is available only on battery-powered
devices (such as laptops). Battery Saver conserves battery power
(and thereby extends battery life) by regulating background activity
and hardware settings.
In the Battery system settings pane, the Battery progress bar
indicates the remaining battery charge; the note below the bar
indicates whether the battery is currently discharging or charging.
TIP The Battery settings pane is available only on battery-powered
devices.
To reset a power plan to its defaults
1. Open the Power Options window of Control Panel.

2. Select Change plan settings to the right of the plan that you want to
restore.
3. At the bottom of the Edit Plan Settings window, select the Restore default
settings for this plan link, and then select Yes in the Power Options
message box that opens.
Windows automatically turns the Battery Saver feature on when the
battery charge falls below 20 percent, but you also have the option of
turning it on whenever the device is running on battery power. To
manually start Battery Saver, display the Battery settings pane, and
then turn on Battery Saver Status Until Next Charge. This setting is
available only when the computer is running on battery power, not
when it’s plugged in.
To modify the battery charge level at which Battery Saver turns on,
select the Turn Battery Save On Automatically... check box, and then
move the slider to select the charge level you want.
To delete a custom power plan
1. Open the Power Options window of Control Panel.
2. Apply any power plan other than the one you want to delete.
3. Select Change plan settings to the right of the plan that you want to delete.

4. At the bottom of the Edit Plan Settings window, select the Delete this
plan link, and then select OK in the Power Options message box that
opens.
TIP You can delete only custom power plans. You can’t delete built-in
power plans.
Configure Windows accessibility features
Are the words on the screen too small to read easily? Do you wish the icons
were larger? Does it take you a while to locate the cursor because it is so skinny?
Windows 10 has accessibility features that make it easier for you to get
information from the computer (output features), and other features that make it
easier for you to provide information to the computer (input features).
Windows 10 includes a group of tools (collectively known as Ease Of Access
features) that are specifically designed to help people interact with the computer
by making content easier to access or providing alternative input and output
methods. The tools include the following:
Closed captions Text narrations of audio content that display as videos
play.
High Contrast Color schemes that make individual user interface elements
stand out on the screen.
Magnifier A panel that magnifies the screen under the mouse pointer up to
nine times. You can move and resize the magnification panel.
Narrator A text-to-speech tool that reads menu commands, dialog box
options, and other screen features out loud, telling you what options are
available and how to use them. It also reads your keystrokes to you as you
type them, and tells you the pointer location on the screen as you move the
mouse.

SEE ALSO For information about high-contrast themes, see “Apply
and manage themes” in Chapter 2, “Personalize your working
environment.”
When you turn on an accessibility feature, it remains on until you turn it off.
If you sign in to multiple computers by using your Microsoft account
credentials, you can configure the accessibility settings on one computer, and
then have Windows 10 synchronize the settings across all computers.
SEE ALSO For information about synchronizing Ease Of Access
settings across devices, see “Customize your sign-in options” in Chapter
11, “Manage user accounts and settings.”
You can turn on the High Contrast, Magnifier, Narrator, On-Screen Keyboard,
Sticky Keys, or Filter Keys features from the Welcome screen, before you sign
in to Windows. When you’re signed in to Windows 10, you can manage most of
the accessibility features from the Ease Of Access settings page.

Accessibility features are also still available from the Ease Of Access Center in
Control Panel. If you’re unsure which features would be helpful to you, you can
answer a series of questions, and Windows will recommend accessibility settings
based on your answers.

Many of the accessibility features have keyboard shortcuts, but those aren’t of
much use when you’re working on a device that doesn’t have an external
keyboard. To simplify the process for users of tablets and other handheld
Windows 10 devices, you can configure Windows 10 to launch Magnifier,
Narrator, or the On-Screen Keyboard when you press the external Windows
button and Volume Up button on those devices.
To display Ease of Access settings
To display the Ease Of Access settings page, do either of the following:
Open the Settings window, and then select Ease of Access.
Press Win+U.
To display the Ease Of Access Center
Display Control Panel in category view, select Ease of Access, and then
select Ease of Access Center.
To get accessibility setting recommendations from Windows
1. Display the Ease of Access Center.
2. Select the Get recommendations to make your computer easier to use

link.
3. On the Eyesight, Dexterity, Hearing, Speech, and Reasoning pages, select
the check box for each statement that applies to you, and then select Next.
4. On the Recommended settings page, review the accessibility options that
Windows recommended in response to your selections. Select or clear any
additional check boxes that you want to, and then select Apply or OK.
To configure a device hardware shortcut for an accessibility tool
1. Display the Ease of Access Center.
2. In the Explore All Settings section, select Make touch and tablets easier
to use.
3. In the Launching common tools section, expand the list, and then select
the accessibility tool that you want to start when you press the Windows
button and Volume Up button on your device.
4. In the Make touch and tablets easier to use window, select Apply or OK
to implement the change.
High-contrast settings
A high-contrast theme displays text and background colors that might be easier
to see and cause less eyestrain. When you apply a high-contrast theme, it affects
all the content that you display on your screen. Some content, such as a busy
webpage image, is not visible when a high-contrast theme is applied. Windows
comes with four high-contrast themes. You can preview and modify the color
palettes of each of the high contrast themes in the Settings window.

It takes Windows a bit longer (about 10 seconds) to apply a high-contrast theme
than it does to make other changes. Windows displays a Please wait screen while
it applies the theme.
To preview and apply a high-contrast theme
1. Open the Settings window, select Ease of Access, and then select High
contrast.
2. In the High contrast settings pane, expand the list, and then select one of
the four high-contrast themes to preview the theme colors that are assigned
to the background, text, hyperlinks, disabled text, selected text, and button
text.

3. Select the theme you want, and then select Apply.
To apply the most recent or default high-contrast theme
To reapply the most recent high-contrast theme (or to apply High Contrast
#1 if you haven’t yet applied a high-contrast theme), press left Alt+left
Shift+Print Screen, and then select Yes in the message box that appears.
To modify the High Contrast settings

1. Do one of the following to display Ease Of Access Center:
In the taskbar search box, enter ease, and then select Ease of Access
Center.
In Category view of Control Panel, select Ease of Access, and then Ease
of Access Center.
In Large Icons or Small Icons view, select Ease of Access Center.
2. In the Quick access to common tools section, select Set up High Contrast
to open the Make The Computer Easier To See window.
3. In the High Contrast section, select or clear the check boxes for the
keyboard shortcut, warning message, and sound alert.
To revert to a regular contrast theme
Press left Alt+left Shift+Print Screen.
In the High Contrast settings pane, select None in the Choose a theme
list, and then select Apply.
Open the Personalization window of Control Panel, and select the theme
you want to apply.
Windows displays a Please wait screen while it applies the theme.
Magnifier settings
You can use the Magnifier tool to magnify all or part of the screen up to 1600
percent of its usual size. For digital artists, in addition to people with vision
problems, this can be very useful. Magnifier has three magnification modes:
Full Screen Magnifies the entire screen. This is the default mode until you

change it.
Lens Magnifies a rectangular portion of the screen behind the pointer. By
default, the lens is 30 percent of the width and height of the screen. You can
set each dimension to from 10 percent to 100 percent of the screen size.
Docked Splits the screen vertically into two panes, one with the standard
view and one with magnification. The magnification pane displays the
content at the pointer location. You can change the height of the
magnification pane.
Magnifier has many configurable options, including:
The zoom level, from 125 to 1600 percent.
The zoom level increments, from 25 percent to 400 percent.
The tracking options, which by default follow the pointer, keyboard focus,
text insertion point, or Narrator cursor.
Automatic start options.
Optional color inversion and bitmap smoothing.
The appearance of the on-screen Magnifier menu.
When Magnifier is running, you control its settings from the Magnifier menu
window. When the window is not in use, it can collapse to a magnifying glass (if

you select this option). You redisplay the menu by selecting the magnifying
glass.
To turn on Magnifier
Press Win+Plus sign (on the numeric keypad) or Win+Equal sign (on the
numeric key row above the letters).
On the Ease of Access settings page, select Magnifier. Then in the
Magnifier settings pane, turn on Magnifier.
In the Ease of Access Center, in the Quick access to common tools
section, select Start Magnifier.
To turn off Magnifier
On the Magnifier menu bar, select the Close button (the X).
In the Magnifier settings pane, turn off Magnifier.
Press Win+Esc.
To change the Magnifier mode
On the Magnifier menu bar, select Views, and then select Docked, Full
screen, or Lens.
In the Magnifier settings pane, in the Magnifier mode section, expand the
list, and then select Docked, Full screen, or Lens.
Press any of the following keyboard shortcuts:
To display the Docked view of Magnifier, press Ctrl+Alt+D.
To display the Full Screen view of Magnifier, press Ctrl+Alt+F.
To display the Lens view of Magnifier, press Ctrl+Alt+L.

To change the Magnifier Lens size
1. With Magnifier turned on or off, use any of the above methods to set the
Magnifier mode to Lens.
2. Display the Magnifier settings pane. In the Magnifier mode section, drag
the scroll boxes below and to the right of the Change lens size preview.
To change the Magnifier level of magnification
On the Magnifier menu bar, select the Plus sign (+) or Minus sign (-).
In the Magnifier settings pane, select the plus sign or minus sign adjacent
to the current magnification zoom level.

Press Win+Plus sign or Win+Minus sign.
The magnification changes in the increments that are set in the Magnifier
Options dialog box. The default increment is 100%.
To change the Magnifier magnification increment
1. Display the Magnifier settings pane.
2. In the Magnifier options section, expand the Zoom level increments list,
and then select 25%, 50%, 100%, 150%, 200%, or 400%.
To change the appearance of the inactive Magnifier menu bar window
In the Magnifier settings pane, in the Magnifier options section, select or
clear the Collapse to magnifying glass icon check box.
To automatically start Magnifier
In the Magnifier settings pane, in the Magnifier options section, do either
of the following:
To automatically start Magnifier when you sign in to Windows, select the
Start Magnifier after sign in check box.
To automatically start Magnifier after Windows starts, from the Lock
screen, select the Start Magnifier automatically before login for all
users check box.

TIP You can start Magnifier manually from the Lock screen by
selecting the Ease Of Access icon and then Magnifier.
To invert the colors of the magnified area to their color spectrum opposites
In the Magnifier options section of the Magnifier settings pane, select the
Invert colors check box.
Narrator and Audio Description settings
Windows 10 includes two tools that can provide descriptions of visual content:
Narrator and Audio Descriptions.
Narrator reads out loud the labels, descriptions, and instructions for on-screen
elements. For example, when you select a category in the Settings window,
Narrator might tell you the name of the category, how many category options
there are, and that you can double-click to open the category pane. You can
select from multiple Narrator voices and adjust the speed of the voice to match
your listening speed. You can also specify the interface items that you want
Narrator to identify for you.
For those people who sign in to multiple computers with Microsoft accounts,
and synchronize settings across those computers, here’s a warning: turning on
Narrator on one computer turns on Narrator on all the computers, and you’ll
have to turn it off individually on each computer. This might be exactly what you
want, but be prepared, if you’re signed in to four separate computers around the
house, that things can get a bit noisy. If you want to turn on Narrator (or any of
the Ease Of Access tools) on only one computer, turn off the synchronization of
Ease Of Access settings on that computer first.
SEE ALSO For more information about synchronizing settings among
computers, see “Customize your sign-in options” in Chapter 11,
“Manage user accounts and settings.”

Audio Descriptions are spoken descriptions of video content that are provided
with the video. In the television and movie industries, these supplemental audio
tracks (also referred to as video descriptions) are often provided with special
versions of films that are called Descriptive Video Service (DVS) versions.
Sometimes the audio is provided by professional voiceover performers reading
scripted descriptions of the film activity, and other times it’s simply a recording
of the actors and director watching the film and talking about it.
In Windows 10, you can turn on the Audio Description feature, and if a video
has an audio description, it will play with the video. No additional configuration
is possible.
To turn on Narrator
On the Ease of Access settings page, select Narrator. Then in the
Narrator settings pane, turn on Narrator.
In the Ease of Access Center, in the Quick access to common tools
section, select Start Narrator.
To select a Narrator voice
1. Display the Narrator settings pane.
2. In the Voice section, expand the list, and then select the voice you want.
3. Drag the Speed and Pitch sliders to adjust the Narrator voice until you can
understand it best.
TIP If you’ve installed additional languages, the Voice list includes
voices for those languages with language and region designations. For
more information about installing languages, see “Manage regional and
language settings” in Chapter 12, “Manage computer settings.”
You configure the Narrator voice separately from the text-to-speech
voice, so changing one doesn’t change the other. For information about
configuring text-to-speech settings, see “Manage speech settings,” also
in Chapter 12.

To configure audio narration options
1. Display the Narrator settings pane, and scroll to the Sounds you hear
section.
2. Turn on the features you want Narrator to read aloud.

To configure visual narration options
1. Display the Narrator settings pane, and scroll to the Cursor and keys
section.
2. Turn on the features you want Narrator to display.
To turn on Audio Description for videos
1. In the Ease of Access Center, select Make the computer easier to see.
2. In the Hear text and descriptions read aloud section, select the Turn on
Audio Description check box. Then select Apply or OK to apply the
change.
Keyboard and mouse settings
The traditional method of entering text into an app or other computer interface is
by typing it on an external keyboard. However, mobility problems can make
typing difficult. Windows 10 includes a variety of tools to help with entering
text, including the following:
Filter Keys Causes Windows to ignore brief or repeated keystrokes, or
slows the repeat rate.

Mouse Keys Enables you to move the cursor around the screen by pressing
the arrow keys on the numeric keypad.
On-Screen Keyboard Displays a visual representation of a keyboard on
which you can tap individual keys by using your finger, tablet pen, or other
pointing device.
Speech Recognition Allows you to control Windows, control running apps,
and dictate text by speaking into a microphone.
SEE ALSO For information about speech recognition, see
“Manage speech settings” in Chapter 12, “Manage computer
settings.”
Sticky Keys Makes it easier to use the keyboard with one hand by making
the Ctrl, Shift, and Alt keys “stick down” until you press the next key.
Toggle Keys Sounds an audio signal when you press the Caps Lock, Num
Lock, or Scroll Lock key. A high-pitched sound plays when the keys are
activated, and a low-pitched sound plays when the keys are deactivated.
The mouse is an integral part of most desktop computer experiences. By default,
the mouse pointer is represented by a small arrow that moves around the screen
as quickly as you move the mouse, and sometimes fades out of sight when the
mouse is still. It can be difficult not only to find the pointer, but also to track its
progress across the screen. If you’re working in a screen-presenting situation—
for example, sharing your screen in an online meeting, or presenting content on a
large screen in a conference room, it is even more difficult for your audience
members to follow the mouse movements because they aren’t controlling the
mouse.
You can simplify things for yourself and for other people by enlarging the
pointer and changing its color. If you have difficulty moving the mouse, you can
opt to control it by using the numeric keypad.
In addition to these Ease Of Access features, you can configure other useful
mouse features such as “mouse trails” that can be very helpful. For information
about keyboard and mouse configuration options that aren’t related to the Ease

Of Access features, see Chapter 7, “Manage peripheral devices.”
To turn on keyboard accessibility features
1. In the Settings window, select Ease of Access, and then select Keyboard.
2. In the Keyboard settings pane, turn on any of the following options:
On-Screen Keyboard
Sticky Keys
Toggle Keys
Filter Keys
TIP You can also display a taskbar icon for the On-Screen
Keyboard by rightclicking an empty area in the taskbar and
selecting Show Touch Keyboard Button. You can then select that
icon to display the keyboard when you need it.
3. In the Other Settings section of the Keyboard pane, turn on the
accessibility options you want for keyboard shortcuts.

To configure mouse accessibility features
1. In the Settings window, select Ease of Access, and then select Mouse.
2. In the Mouse settings pane, select the pointer size and color you want.
3. To start Mouse Keys, turn on Use numeric keypad to move mouse
around the screen.
4. When Mouse Keys is turned on, turn on or off Hold down Ctrl to speed
up and Shift to slow down and Use mouse keys when Num Lock is on.

Key points
You can control the brightness of your screen manually or automatically. A
dimmer screen saves power and causes less eyestrain.
The Night Light feature changes the screen light to warmer tones to lessen
eyestrain and the increase in brain activity caused by blue light–emitting
devices.
Turning off the screen and putting your computer to sleep are two ways to
conserve power when you’re not actively using the computer. You can
specify the length of inactivity after which Windows should automatically
take these actions. On a battery-powered device, you can configure separate
settings for when the computer is plugged in and when it’s running on
battery.
Windows 10 has many accessibility features that help users to interact with
the computer.
 Practice tasks
No practice files are necessary to complete the practice tasks in this chapter.

Change the screen brightness
Perform the following tasks:
1. Display the Action Center, and then cycle through your brightness changes.
2. Adjust the screen brightness to suit your current working environment.
3. Turn on Night Light.
4. Experiment with the Night Light color temperature setting to understand the
difference between colors on the warm and cool ends of the spectrum.
5. Turn off Night Light.
6. If you want to, configure Night Light to turn on automatically from sunset
to sunrise. If necessary, turn on Location Settings to support this.
Configure power options
Perform the following tasks:
1. Display the Power & sleep settings pane, and configure the screen and
sleep times as you want them. If your computer is running on battery
power, configure the settings for when the computer is plugged in and when
it is running on battery power.
2. Open the Power Options window of Control Panel. If Show additional
plans appears near the bottom of the window, select it to display any hidden
power-management plans.
3. Display the settings for each plan on your computer, and consider which is
best for you.
4. Modify a built-in power plan. Then reset the plan to its defaults.
5. If none of the power-management plans fits your needs, create a custom
plan. Otherwise, apply a standard plan.
Configure Windows accessibility features
Display the Ease Of Access Center, and then perform the following tasks:
1. Complete the Get recommendations to make your computer easier to
use wizard to familiarize yourself with the situations in which you might

benefit from using the various accessibility tools.
2. Locate a webpage that contains text and graphic elements, and display it in
your default internet browser.
3. Apply a high contrast theme. Look for differences in the user interface
elements and in the webpage content.
4. Start Narrator, and then configure Narrator to use the voice and speech
cadence that you prefer.
5. Display a webpage, the Start screen, the Settings window, any category
page, and then any apps or files you want, to gain experience with the
information Narrator provides. (Wait each time as Narrator provides you
with information.)
IMPORTANT To select a button when Narrator is on, you must
first select once to read the description, and then twice to invoke
the select event.
6. Exit Narrator, and display the Ease of Access settings page.
7. Start Magnifier, and experiment with using it to view different screens and
documents. Then exit Magnifier.
8. Display the touch keyboard, and experiment with navigating around
Windows and entering text without using an external keyboard. Then close
the touch keyboard.
9. Display the Ease Of Access Center, and explore other settings that interest
you. Select the links, and try out these features:
Turn on Sticky Keys, and experiment with using it to enter text that
contains capital letters.
Turn on Mouse Keys, and practice using it to move the cursor around on
the screen.
Turn on Filter Keys, and try using it with an app of your choice.
10. Exit any running accessibility tools.

14. Work more efficiently
In this chapter
Configure Quick Action buttons
Search your computer and the web
Specify default apps
Organize apps on multiple desktops
Monitor apps and system tasks
Manage app startup
Many features of Windows 10 are designed to help you do things faster and
more efficiently—or in some cases to do them for you.
The Action Center is a central location for reviewing notifications from many
sources, including Windows, Cortana, email, and even text messages sent to
your mobile phone. It also contains action buttons that provide shortcuts to
settings that you access often.
Another interesting development is virtual desktops, which provide a way for
multitaskers to organize apps in separate views of the desktop. This isn’t a
feature that all Windows 10 users will use, but it’s certainly handy for people
who want to compartmentalize tasks.
Two other topics discussed in this chapter are configuring your settings so that
files always open in the app you want them to, and finding helpful information
in Task Manager.
This chapter guides you through procedures related to configuring Quick Action
buttons, searching your computer and the web, specifying default apps,
organizing apps on multiple desktops, monitoring apps and system tasks, and
managing app startup.
Configure Quick Action buttons
The Windows 10 Action Center is a full-height pane that slides out from the
right side of your screen when you select its taskbar icon. After Windows

displays notifications about recent events on your computer, such as incoming
email messages, security and maintenance alerts, and updates, those notifications
are available from the Action Center for your review. The Action Center icon
displays a count of your unread messages.

In addition to notifications, the Action Center displays several rows of Quick
Action command tiles at the bottom of the pane. The top row is always visible
when the pane is open; you can expand or collapse the remaining rows.
Chapter 1, “Get started using Windows 10,” includes procedures for previewing,

opening, and removing messages in the Action Center. Chapter 2, “Personalize
your working environment,” provides procedures for managing the color and
transparency of the Action Center pane. Chapter 4, “Work with apps and
notifications,” covers procedures for configuring app notifications that appear in
the Action Center, and for temporarily turning off notifications by turning on
Quiet Hours.
This topic covers the action buttons available at the bottom of the Action Center
pane. By default, this section is collapsed to display only the top row of buttons.
You can choose which of the action buttons appear in this row (and are available
when the other action buttons are hidden).
When expanded, the section contains about a dozen action buttons, depending on
the functions that are available on your computer or device.
The action buttons provide quick access to the following Windows 10 tools and
settings:

Airplane mode Available only on portable computers and tablets, airplane
mode turns off all wireless connections from your device, including Wi-Fi,
Bluetooth, and cellular data if you have that service. The action button turns
this feature on or off.
All settings Opens the Settings window.
Battery Saver Available only on battery-powered devices, Battery Saver is
a feature introduced in Windows 10 that reduces background activity to
extend the time the device can run on the battery charge. You can turn on
Battery Saver at any time; Windows turns it on automatically when the
battery charge drops below 20% or the setting you specify. The action
button turns this feature on or off.
Bluetooth Turns the Bluetooth connection on or off.
Brightness Cycles through 25%, 50%, 75%, and 100% screen brightness
settings.
Connect Searches for wireless display and audio devices (including those
that support Miracast connections).
Location Available only on devices with built-in GPS, this action button
turns location services on or off. You can configure location settings from
the Privacy page of the Settings window.
Mobile Hotspot Makes an internet connection through your device
available over Wi-Fi or Bluetooth to other devices.
Network Displays the list of available networks with a link to the Network
& Internet Settings window and the Wi-Fi, Airplane Mode, and Mobile
Hotspot action buttons (if applicable to your device).
Night Light Changes the screen light to a warmer color temperature.
Project Controls the display of desktop content on multiple screens. You
can choose from PC Screen Only, Duplicate, Extend, and Second Screen
Only.
Quiet hours Turns on or off the Quiet Hours feature, which temporarily
disables sound and banner notifications.
Tablet mode Available only on touchscreen devices, Tablet mode makes
the device interface more touch-friendly by enlarging user interface
elements and hiding taskbar buttons. You can configure Tablet mode
settings from the System page of the Settings window.

VPN Starts a virtual private network (VPN) connection or walks you
through the configuration of a connection if one doesn’t already exist.
Wi-Fi Available only on mobile devices. Turns the wireless network
connection on and off.
Buttons that represent features that are simply on or off are a different color
(when the feature is turned on) from those that open apps or configure settings.
You can add and remove action buttons in the Quick Action area so that the
actions you need are easily available.
SEE ALSO For more information about the Settings window, see
“Explore Windows settings” in Chapter 1, “Get started using Windows
10.” For more information about the Quiet Hours feature, see “Manage
app notifications” in Chapter 4, “Work with apps and notifications.” For
more information about the screen brightness, see “Change the screen
brightness” and “Configure power options” in Chapter 13, “Manage
power and access options.” For more information about Battery Saver,
see the sidebar “Make your battery last longer,” also in Chapter 13.
A final thing to note about the Action Center is that you can hide its taskbar icon
if you want to free up space on your taskbar (or always use the keyboard
shortcut). The Action Center is always available regardless of whether the
taskbar icon is visible.
To display the Action Center pane
At the right end of the taskbar, select the Action Center icon, which is
empty or filled, depending on whether you have unread messages.
Press Win+A.
On a touchscreen device, swipe in from the right edge of the screen.

To display all current action buttons
1. Display the Action Center pane.
2. At the bottom of the pane, select Expand.
To add and remove action buttons in the Quick Action area
1. Open the Settings window. Select System, and then select Notifications &
actions.
2. In the Quick actions section of the Notifications & actions settings pane,
select Add or remove quick actions to display a list of the action buttons
available on your computer.
3. In the Add or remove quick actions list, turn on the buttons that you want
to display in the Quick Action area, and turn off the buttons that you want
to hide.
4. Select the Back button to return to the Quick Actions preview pane. In the

pane, drag the buttons to rearrange them. Position the four buttons that you
will use most often in the top row.
To display or hide the Action Center taskbar icon
1. In the Settings window, select Personalization, and then select Taskbar.
2. In the Notification area section of the Taskbar pane, select Turn system
icons on or off.
3. Turn on Action Center to display the taskbar icon, or turn it off to hide it.
Search your computer and the web
The technology that supports rapid searching through massive amounts of
information has improved tremendously over the past few years. We can
probably thank cloud computing and the proliferation of massive data centers for
this technology, which has worked its way down to the personal computer level.
Chapter 1, “Get started using Windows 10,” included procedures for searching
for settings from the Settings window search box. Chapter 5, “Explore files and
folders,” included procedures for searching for files from the File Explorer
search box. Both of these processes search the content on your computer (or the
storage location you’re displaying in File Explorer). To speed up these search
processes, Windows indexes information on your computer hard drive, and
complex processes in the Microsoft cloud index information in your OneDrive
storage folders. You can refine the indexing parameters to include or exclude
specific storage locations; for example, if you have folders in which you store
duplicate backups or older versions of files, you can remove those from the
indexing process so that search results reflect only the current files.
Search storage locations and the web
When you’re searching for a broader range of information, you can do so from
the taskbar search box. Windows 10 search can quickly locate items on your
computer, in connected storage locations, and across the web. You can filter the
search results by category. When your search locates the item, app, or
information you want, select the search result to open, start, or display it.


If you‘re looking for online search results, such as you‘d get from searching
directly in a web browser, select See Web Results to display Bing web search
results in your default browser.
To search for anything
Activate the taskbar search box, and then enter the search term.
If Cortana is enabled, select the microphone icon in the search box, and
then speak the search term.
If Cortana is configured for voice cuing, say Hey, Cortana followed by your
search request.
TIP When speaking a search term, you can quickly filter contents by
specifying parameters such as file type and contents. For example, if
you search for Find PowerPoint presentations on my computer that
contain Contoso and Sales, the search results include a snapshot of the
content that includes your specified search terms.
To specify the file type you want to search for
Activate the taskbar search box, select Apps, Documents, or Web, and
then enter your search term.
To filter search results in the search results pane
At the top of the search results pane, select the Apps, Documents, or Web
icon to filter by that category.
At the top of the search results pane, select Filters, and then select All,
Apps, Documents, Folders, Music, Photos, Settings, Videos, or Web to
filter on the type and locations shown.

TIP If you’re getting search results that you find offensive, you can
configure the SafeSearch settings to control the level of adult content
that is filtered from or allowed through in search results. For more
information, see “Manage Cortana information and notifications” in
Chapter 9, “Get assistance from Cortana.”
Manage File Explorer search processes
Chapter 5, “Explore files and folders,” provided an introduction to File Explorer
and to searching for files by using Windows Search and File Explorer Search.
Searching is often the fastest way to locate a file or settings pane on your
computer. This is primarily because you‘re searching the index rather than all the
available content and metadata.

The search engine is fast, but you can improve the efficiency of your search by
applying a bit of logic and forethought. Here are some hints to help you rapidly
locate the files you need:
The search index includes all the common locations in which users store
files. If you want to improve the search time in other locations, either add
them to the indexed locations, or add them to Libraries, which is
automatically included in the index.
When searching in File Explorer, select a specific folder in which to start
your search, or restrict the search to likely locations, such as Libraries.
If a simple search from the File Explorer window doesn‘t locate the item
you are looking for, you can perform more advanced searches in the Search
Results folder. Your search criteria can include the date a file was created,
its size, part of its name or title, its author, and any tags you might have
listed as properties of the file.
SEE ALSO For information about file properties, see “Work with
folder and file properties” in Chapter 6, “Manage folders and
files.”
If search processes don‘t return all the pertinent results, or return old results that
no longer lead to the correct location, you might need to do a bit of maintenance
work. You can change some basic search parameters, and adjust the indexing
options and the locations that are being indexed to increase the efficiency of your
searches. Ensure that the index includes the locations where you frequently store
files.

From the Advanced Options dialog box, you can also do the following things,
which require administrator permission:
Include encrypted files in the index.
Add a type of file to the index.
Change the indexing level for a type of file.
Change the location of the index file.
Restore the default settings.
Rebuild the index file from scratch.
If you continue to have trouble, you can run the indexing troubleshooter to look
for problems and recommend solutions.

To filter File Explorer search results
1. Perform a search.
2. On the Search tool tab, select one of the following:
Kind In the list that appears, select the appropriate kind if it is listed.
Other Properties Select one of the options: Name is a good choice if you
know part of the name. If you are sure about the start of the name, enter
that. If you are sure only that some characters are somewhere in the name,
enter ~= and the characters. For example, if the search term is
name:~=dog, the search will return all files with the letters “dog”
anywhere in the name.
Date Modified and Size You can specify parameters for either of these
options, if you know that information.
3. If you want to further refine the search, you can enter criteria directly into
the search box; for example, kind:=music, datemodified:last week, or
authors:joan. You can also use Boolean operators such as AND and OR, for
example, authors:joan AND authors:steve.
To set File Explorer search options
1. In File Explorer, display the View tab and then at its right end, select
Options.
2. In the Folder Options dialog box, select the Search tab. Only a few
options are available, but their settings can impact the time required to
perform a search in File Explorer.

3. Make any changes you want, and then select OK.
To change the locations that are being indexed
1. Perform a search.
2. On the Search tool tab, in the Options group, select Advanced options,
and then select Change indexed locations.
3. In the Indexing Options dialog box, add or exclude specific locations
(folders). Then select Close.
To change advanced indexing options
1. Perform a search.
2. On the Search tool tab, in the Options group, select Advanced options,
and then select Change indexed locations.
3. In the Indexing Options dialog box, select Advanced.
4. In the Advanced Options dialog box, configure the options on the Index
Settings and File Types tabs.

5. Select OK and then select Close to return to File Explorer.
To rebuild the index
1. Perform a search.
2. On the Search tool tab, in the Options group, select Advanced options,
and then select Change indexed locations.
3. In the Indexing Options dialog box, select Advanced.
4. In the Advanced Options dialog box, select Rebuild. Then in the Rebuild
Index message box, select OK.
IMPORTANT Rebuilding the index can take quite a while. You might
want to put it off until a time when you don’t need the full attention of
your computer for a few hours.

Specify default apps
When you open a file by using any of the standard methods, Windows opens it
in the default app for that type of file (as specified by the file name extension).
The default app might be set when you install an app, or you can set it in
Windows independently of the app. In File Explorer, the default app is often
apparent from the icon that is associated with the file.
If you uninstall the app that is set as the default for a file type, or don‘t have an
app that associates itself with that file type, Windows will prompt you to choose
the app you want to use to open the file. You can select an installed app, or
install an app from the Store.
TIP In some cases, you have the option of browsing to an app
executable file. This option is necessary only if the app hasn’t provided
a list of file extensions it can associate, or a problem prevents Windows
from detecting the app/file type association.
A clean installation of Windows 10 automatically sets a lot of defaults for you.
When it comes to setting default apps, if Microsoft has an app that will open a

type or class of file, it generally assigns that as the default app.
During an upgrade from an earlier version of Windows, Windows 10 might leave
the defaults as you previously set them or, if there is a change in the apps (for
example, the change from Internet Explorer to Microsoft Edge as the default
browser) it might change them.
Windows 10 provides several ways for you to change these default settings. You
can match category to apps, apps to file types, or file types to apps. As with
many Windows configuration processes, there are simple and complicated ways
of going about this that provide varying levels of control.
The simplest method for assigning default apps is by category. In the Default
Apps pane, you can choose a default email app, map app, music player, photo
viewer, video player, and web browser. You can choose from the apps that are
already installed on your computer, or display a list of Store apps that you can
install.

Each of the categories is associated with a specific set of file types, but you don‘t
interact with those directly.
Another way you can assign default apps is by file type. The Choose Default
Apps By File Type pane displays a long list of file extensions, and you can set
the default app for each. It isn‘t necessary to assign a default app to every type of
file. The list is not based on the files that are installed on your computer—you
might never encounter some of these file types. This method is useful if you set
the default app for a category—for example, a photo viewer—and then want to
specify a different default app for only one type of photo file.

The Choose Default Apps By File Type list is sorted alphabetically by file
extension. You can‘t sort it by default app (which might be somewhat useful).
Another way to assign default apps is by protocol. Protocols aren‘t something
that most of us think about frequently (if at all), but the word might be familiar
to you from Hypertext Transfer Protocol, the full name of the HTTP protocol
that is used to connect to most websites. The Choose Default Apps By Protocol
pane displays a long list of protocols. Unlike the file extension list, each protocol
is assigned to a default app.
From the protocol list, you can assign default apps to different protocols that are
associated with the same general kind of file. This creates a relationship between
the protocol and the app in the Windows Registry. A file type is also associated
with a protocol. So when you double-click a file, Windows can get the file
protocol and then locate the default app in the registry.

Another way to assign a default app is when you‘re opening a file. You can
specify a non-default app to open the file with, and at that time, you can also
specify whether to set the non-default app as the default for that type of file.
Using this method, you‘re setting default apps for files that you definitely work
with.
Another way to assign default apps is by assigning file types and protocols for
each app.

To open a file in the default app from File Explorer
Double-click the file.
Right-click the file, and then select Open.
Select the file. Then on the Home tab, in the Open group, select the Open
button.
To open a file in a non-default app
In File Explorer, do either of the following:
Right-click the file, select Open with…, select More apps if the app you
want to use isn‘t shown, and then select the app you want.
Select the file. On the Home tab, in the Open group, select the Open
arrow, and then in the list, select the app you want.
Start the app. Then from within the app, browse to and open the file.
To specify the default app for a type of file
1. In File Explorer, right-click the file, and then select Open with… to display
a list of apps that can open the file.

TIP The available file types depend on the apps installed on your
computer.
IMPORTANT Some file types display the shortcut menu in the
blue and white format shown after the next step. We show you both
formats in this procedure so you’re not surprised to see one or the
other.
2. Select Choose another app to display additional options. If the app you
want to use isn‘t in the list, select More apps to expand the list.

3. Select the app you want to use to open the selected type of file.
4. Select the Always use this app to open … files check box (the label
includes the file extension of the file you‘re opening), and then select OK
to open the file and set the default app for the file type.
Or
1. Open the Settings window, select Apps, and then select Default apps.
2. At the bottom of the Choose default apps section, select Choose default
apps by file type to display a long list of file type extensions.
3. Locate the extension for the type of file that you want to change the default
app for.
TIP Multiple file extensions are associated with each category of

file. For example, if you want to set a default app for all types of
images you must set the default for .bmp, .gif, .jpeg, .jpg, .jpg, .tif,
and all other image file types. You can assign a different default
app to each file type, if you have apps that can handle them
differently.
4. Select the icon to the right of the extension, and then do either of the
following:
Select the installed app that you want to use.
Select Look for an app in the Store to open the Store and display a list
of apps that can open a file of that type. Install an app from the Store, and
then return to the Choose default apps by file type pane and select that
app as the default for the file type.
To specify the default app for a category
1. Display the Default apps pane.
2. In the Choose default apps section, select each task, and then do either of
the following:
Select the installed app that you want to use.
Select Look for an app in the Store to open the Store and display a list
of apps that can open a typical file of that type. Install an app from the
Store, and then return to the Default apps pane and select that app as the
default for the category.
To choose default apps by protocol
1. Display the Default apps pane. At the bottom of the Choose default apps
section, select Choose default apps by protocol to display the protocol list.
2. Locate the protocol that you want to change the default app for.
3. Select the current default app, and then do either of the following:
Select the installed app that you want to use.
Select Look for an app in the Store to open the Store and display a list
of apps that can handle that protocol. Install an app from the Store, and
then return to the Choose default apps by protocol pane and select that

app as the default for the protocol.
To set the file types and protocols for a specific app
1. Display the Default apps pane. At the bottom of the Choose default apps
section, select Set defaults by app to display the Set Defaults By App
pane.
2. In the Set your default programs list, select the app for which you want to
specify file types and protocols, and then select the Manage button that
appears.
3. In the app-specific pane, locate the file extension for which you want to
change the app. To the right of the file extension, select the currently
specified app or if no app has been specified, select Choose a default, and
then in the Choose an app pane that opens, do either of the following:
Select the installed app that you want to use.
Select Look for an app in the Store to open the Store and display a list
of apps that can handle that protocol. Install an app from the Store, and
then return to the Set defaults by app pane and select that app as the
default for the protocol.
Organize apps on multiple desktops
Virtual desktops, which were first introduced in Windows 10, are one of those
features that you can‘t quite imagine how you‘re going to use until you take the
plunge. A virtual desktop is a bit like a second monitor, or a second computer:
it‘s a location in which you can put some of the apps or files you‘re working on
to keep your workspace organized. A basic example would be having a work-
centric desktop on which you‘re running Outlook and Word, and a personal
desktop on which you‘re monitoring Facebook and Twitter. If you frequently
work with a dozen app windows open at one time, organizing them on virtual
desktops can be a great way of decluttering and helping you to focus on only one
set of apps and tasks at a time.
You can create and manage virtual desktops from Task View or by using
keyboard shortcuts. The original desktop is number 1. When you add more
desktops, they are numbered consecutively.

After you create a desktop, you can drag open apps to it, or open new apps
directly on that desktop. You can display or work on only one virtual desktop at
a time, but it‘s easy to switch between them from Task View, or more quickly by
using a keyboard shortcut.
Each desktop has a taskbar. Each taskbar displays the same pinned apps, but
only those apps that are active on the current desktop have active buttons on that
desktop taskbar.
TIP If you have multiple instances of an app open on different
desktops, the app button is active on each desktop, but pointing to it
displays only the instances on that desktop.
You open a file or start an app on a virtual desktop by using the same methods
you use on the standard desktop. You can‘t have the same instance of an app (for
example, the same file) open on more than one desktop, but you can move an
app instance to another desktop.
You can run multiple instances of some apps (such as the Internet Explorer,
Google Chrome, and Microsoft Word desktop apps) on the same desktop or on
multiple desktops. From the taskbar on each desktop, you can display
thumbnails of the app instances running on that desktop.
The Store apps we tried support only one instance, whether on one desktop or on
multiple desktops. If you try to open one of these apps on a different virtual
desktop, Windows switches to the desktop where the app is already running.
When you finish working on a desktop, you can close it to free up system
resources. If you close a desktop that contains open applications, those

applications are moved to the desktop immediately to its left (for example, from
Desktop 3 to Desktop 2).
To display desktops in Task View
On the taskbar, to the right of the search box, select the Task View button.
Press Win+Tab.
On a touchscreen device, swipe in from the left edge of the screen.
The desktops are shown at the bottom of the screen.
To create a virtual desktop
Display the Task View of your desktop and then, in the lower-right corner
of the screen, select New desktop.
Press Win+Ctrl+D.
Windows creates a new virtual desktop to the right of the existing desktops,
numbered with the next sequential number. The new desktop becomes the
active desktop.
To move between desktops
Display the Task View of your desktop and then, at the bottom of the
screen, select the desktop you want to move to.
Press Win+Ctrl+Right Arrow or Win+Ctrl+Left Arrow to move to the next
desktop in the direction of the arrow.
To open a new instance of a running app
Press Win+Shift+select the taskbar button.
To move an app to a different desktop
1. Display the Task View of your desktop. The available desktops are at the
bottom of the screen.
2. Point to the desktop that contains the app you want to move, to display each
app that is open on that desktop in the app thumbnail area of Task View.

3. Do either of the following:
Right-click the thumbnail of the app you want to move. Select Move to,
and then select the desktop you want to move the app to.
TIP One of the Move To options is New Desktop. You can create
a new desktop and move an app to it at the same time by
selecting that option.
Drag the thumbnail (not the title above it) to the destination desktop.
To close the current desktop
Press Win+Ctrl+F4.
To close selected desktops
1. Display the Task View of your desktop.
2. Point to the desktop that you want to close. When a Close button (X)
appears in the upper-right corner of the desktop tile, select it.

TIP To quickly move all open windows and running apps to one
desktop, display Task View and then close all open virtual desktops
other than Desktop 1.
Monitor apps and system tasks
Windows 10 and the apps and services that run on it constantly perform an
amazingly complex dance that is set to the rather boring rhythm of your
computer‘s clock.
Every computer has a central processing unit (CPU) and every CPU has a clock
speed, which is generally in the 1 GHz (gigahertz) to 4 GHz range. In very basic
terms, a 2 GHz CPU can carry out two billion instructions per second. That
seems like a lot of instructions, until you realize that an extremely simple task,
such as typing one letter into a Word document, might require thousands of
instructions. CPU speed isn‘t the only factor in assessing the power and
efficiency of your computer, but it is one of them, and one of those that you can
monitor in Task Manager.
One way to monitor the real-time flow of activities on your computer is by using
Task Manager. Task Manager has two views: Fewer Details and More Details.
Fewer Details view displays a simple list of the apps that are currently running
on your computer. If an app is having trouble, you can quickly identify that here.

TIP Task Manager opens in the same view (Fewer Details or More
Details) that you last used.
More Details view offers seven tabs of information: Processes, Performance,
App History, Startup, Users, Details, and Services. A lot of information is
available here, and you might find it interesting to look through it all. The two
tabs with information that is helpful to average computer users are the Processes
and Startup tabs.
The Processes tab displays a list of all the apps and services that are running on
your computer and the computer resources each process is using. Computer
resource statistics include CPU, memory, disk, and network usage. The order of
the processes on the tab updates constantly to sort by resource usage. You can
sort in ascending or descending order of usage by any column.

TIP Some processes have multiple associated files, pages, or services
running. These are indicated by a > to the left of the process name.
Selecting the > expands the full process list.
The Startup tab displays a list of the apps and services that start automatically
when you sign in to Windows, and their impact on the time it takes your
computer to be ready. Many apps and services sneak onto this list when they‘re
installed.
SEE ALSO For information about apps that start automatically, and

working on the Startup tab of Task Manager, see “Manage app startup”
later in this chapter.
To start Task Manager
Right-click an empty area of the taskbar, and then select Task Manager.
Press Ctrl+Shift+Esc.
Press Ctrl+Alt+Del and then, in the list, select Task Manager.
To switch between Fewer Details view and More Details view
In the lower-left corner of the Task Manager window, select More details
or Fewer details.
To display currently running apps
Open Task Manager in Fewer Details view.
To display currently running apps and services
Open Task Manager in More Details view to display the Processes tab.
To identify a nonresponsive app or service
Open Task Manager in Fewer Details view, or display the Processes tab in
More Details view. Nonresponsive apps and services are labeled Not
responding.
To identify resource-intensive processes
1. Open Task Manager in More Details view to display the Processes tab.
The current CPU, memory, storage drive, and network loads are shown at
the top of the window.
2. Identify the system element with the highest load. Select that heading once
to sort the running apps and services in ascending order by their effect on
that load, and again to sort in descending order with the highest usage at the
top. The highest usage is indicated by an orange highlight.
To quit an app or service from Task Manager

1. Open Task Manager in Fewer Details view, or display the Processes tab in
More Details view.
2. Select the app or service you want to quit, and then in the lower-right corner
of the window, select End task.
Manage app startup
Not all the background processes that apps run are necessary to perform every
time you start your computer. It‘s worth your time to periodically review and
refine the items that start automatically. You can identify and manage the startup
of many of these apps in Task Manager.
You can sort items on the Startup tab by any column. The Startup Impact column
indicates the level of delay caused by each item.
SEE ALSO For more information about Task Manager, see “Monitor

apps and system tasks” earlier in this chapter.
There are two groups of apps that Task Manager doesn‘t manage startup for—
Store apps and apps that start automatically because they‘re identified in the
Startup folder that is specific to your user account. If you always use a specific
app and want it to start automatically with Windows, you can put a shortcut to it
in this folder.
To identify apps and services that start automatically
Open Task Manager in More Details view, and then select the Startup tab.
To prevent an app or service from starting automatically
On the Startup tab of Task Manager, select the app or service, and then
select Disable.
To automatically start an app when Windows starts
1. In 
File 
Explorer, 
navigate 
to 
C:\Users\[your 
account
name]\AppData\Roaming\Microsoft\Windows\Start
Menu\Programs\Startup. Windows 10 automatically starts apps by using
the shortcuts in this folder.
IMPORTANT The AppData folder and its contents are visible
only when File Explorer is configured to show hidden items. You
can always display the contents of a hidden folder by entering its
path in the File Explorer Address bar. For information about
configuring File Explorer, see Chapter 5, “Explore files and
folders.”
TIP A quicker way to open the Startup folder in File Explorer is to

press Win+R to open the Run box, enter shell:startup, and then
press Enter.
2. Drag the app from the app list on the Start menu to the Startup folder.
Release the app after the word Link appears next to the app icon.
The next time you restart Windows, your app will start automatically.
Key points
The Quick Action buttons at the bottom of the Action Center pane give you
direct access to frequently used settings. You can display only the actions
you intend to use, and arrange them in whatever order you want.
You can use the Windows search feature to locate information anywhere on
your computer, on storage devices connected to your computer over a
network or in the cloud, and anywhere on the internet. You can search for
specific categories of results and filter the results after searching.
You can easily change the default app that opens a specific type of file—for
example, if you want to open PDF files in Adobe Acrobat instead of
Microsoft Edge.
You can remain focused on a specific task workload by organizing the files
and apps you use for each set of tasks on its own virtual desktop.
From Task Manager, you can monitor the apps and services that are running
on your computer to identify and exit those that are tying up CPU, memory,
disk, or network resources or those that have stopped responding. You can
also identify apps that start automatically when Windows starts, and stop

them from doing so if they are unnecessarily typing up resources.
You can exit an app or stop a service from within Task Manager.
 Practice tasks
No practice files are necessary to complete the practice tasks in this chapter.
Configure Quick Action buttons
Perform the following tasks:
1. Display the Action Center pane, and identify the Quick Action buttons.
2. Expand the action button area to display all the available action buttons.
Review the action buttons that are available on your computer and consider
which you might use. Notice whether any buttons are a different color, and
identify what that means.
3. Select the All settings action button to open the Settings window. Select
System, and then select Notifications & actions.
4. In the Notifications & actions pane, select the four action buttons that you
will most frequently use, and assign these to the four Quick Action button
positions.
5. Open the Action Center pane, collapse the action button area, and ensure
that the Quick Action buttons you selected are visible.
Search your computer and the web
Perform the following tasks:
1. From the taskbar search box, search for a word, simple phrase, or your first
name (anything that will generate a lot of search results).
2. Scroll the search results pane, and notice the types of results the search
returned. Select any category heading to display only the results in that
category.
3. Filter the results to display only one type of file. Then display the remaining
search results in order by date.

4. Display the SafeSearch settings. Notice the other settings that you can
configure from the page.
5. Start File Explorer, and open the Indexing Options dialog box. Notice the
number of indexed items and the locations that are included. If you store
files in a location that isn‘t being indexed, modify the options to include
that location. Then close the dialog box.
Specify default apps
Start File Explorer, and then perform the following tasks:
1. Locate a file of a type that you frequently work with.
2. Display the list of apps that you can use to open the file.
3. Display apps from the Store that you could install and use to open the file.
4. If you want to, change the default app for the file.
5. Display the Default apps pane, and review the options for setting default
apps by category, by file type, and by protocol. If you want to, change the
default apps to suit your preferences.
Organize apps on multiple desktops
Perform the following tasks:
1. Display Task View, and then create a virtual desktop.
2. On Desktop 2, start two apps that aren‘t already running.
3. Switch between the two desktops, and notice any signs of items on the other
desktop.
4. Move one of the apps from Desktop 2 to Desktop 1, and confirm that the
app is open on Desktop 1.
5. Close Desktop 2, and confirm that the remaining app from that desktop
moved to Desktop 1.
6. Close any apps that you aren‘t using.
Monitor apps and system tasks
Perform the following tasks:

1. Open Task Manager. Notice the information that is available in Fewer
Details view.
2. Switch to More Details view, and do the following:
Display each tab, and review the information that is available on the tab.
Notice how the information changes as your computer performs
background processes.
Consider how and when the information will be useful to you.
Manage app startup
Perform the following tasks:
1. Display the Startup tab of Task Manager.
2. Sort the apps and services by their impact on the computer startup time.
3. For each item that has a High startup impact, look at the available
information to determine what the item does.
4. Sort the apps and services by publisher.
5. Identify any app publishers in the list who you aren‘t familiar with.
Examine the startup impact of the items associated with each unfamiliar
publisher.
6. Sort the list by status. Look for any items that are already disabled from
starting automatically.
7. Select one app that starts automatically, and take note of its name. Disable
the app and wait for it to change status. Then enable it for automatic startup
again.
8. Open the Startup folder associated with your user account. Add a shortcut
to the Maps app to the folder so that Maps starts automatically the next time
you start your computer.

15. Protect your computer and data
In this chapter
Manage Windows updates
Configure privacy settings
Restore computer functionality
Back up data
Back up and restore your system
For many people, computers and other “smart” devices have become an integral
part of their lives. Even if you aren’t totally dependent on them, the failure of
one or more of them would be at least inconvenient.
The power of modern laptops and tablets means that you can carry your
information with you and easily access it for work or play. But mobile devices
are more susceptible to being lost or stolen than the clunky desktop computer
you abandoned, and if that happens, you could lose valuable information, and it
might be misused by others.
Modern computers are reasonably robust, but the only absolute guarantee you
can expect from any hardware device is that if you continue to use it long
enough, it will eventually fail. A serious hardware failure might leave you
stranded at a critical point in a work project, or unable to access information you
need from the internet. Fortunately, it’s relatively easy to get back up and
running quickly these days if you make use of the Windows 10 tools that are
available to protect your computer and the data on it, to recover that data if the
hardware fails, and to prevent others from accessing your data if your computer
is stolen.
This chapter guides you through procedures related to updating system files,
configuring update options, configuring privacy settings, restoring computer
functionality, backing up data manually or automatically, and restoring your
system.
Manage Windows updates

The code behind operating systems is usually in a constant state of change. This
might be to resolve internal or external issues—for example, threats from new
viruses or the need to improve drivers for the devices you can connect to your
computer. Microsoft has stated that Windows 10 will be the last version of
Windows (a great reason to buy this book!), but the actual meaning of that
statement is that the company plans to maintain and update this version of
Windows for the foreseeable future rather than to immediately begin the
development of a new version. This is in part a reflection of the agile software
development methodology that Microsoft has embraced. The methodology
involves multiple function-specific teams completing rapid, collaborative
development cycles and continually refining processes, rather than one long-
term development process driven by management.
Update Windows system files
Windows Update is part of the Update & Security category of settings. Windows
Update automatically checks for, downloads, and installs updates to the
operating system (including the built-in Windows Defender security software),
and related files, such as device drivers, on a regular basis. If your computer is
turned off or is offline when the time comes to check, you might not get an
update when it first becomes available to you, but you can manually check for
updates whenever you want; this is an especially good idea if your computer has
been turned off for a while (for example, if you don’t use it often or go on a long
vacation).
If Windows Update locates available updates, it starts the process of
downloading and installing them. Sometimes Windows Update delays certain
update processes until a time that you’re not using your computer. You can
choose to run those processes immediately if you want to.
If you install an update and later wish you hadn’t, you can uninstall it.
To display the Windows Update settings pane
Open the Settings window, select Update & Security, and then select
Windows Update.

To check for and install Windows updates
1. Display the Windows Update settings pane.
2. In the Update status area, do one of the following:
If no updates are currently shown, select Check for updates.
If updates are available, select Install Now.
If Windows needs to restart the computer to complete the installation of
updates, first ensure that you don’t need to use the computer for the next
15–60 minutes. Then save any files you’re working in, close any running
apps, return to this pane, and select Restart Now.
To display your update history
In the Windows Update settings pane, at the bottom of the Update status
area, select View installed update history.

To uninstall an update
1. Display the View installed update history settings pane.
2. At the top of the pane, select Uninstall updates.
3. In the Installed Updates window, select the update that you want to
remove, and then on the menu bar, select Uninstall.

TIP The View Installed Update History pane displays updates installed
since the last major release of Windows. If you’ve recently installed the
Fall 2017 Creators Update or another major update, the update history
might be empty.
Configure update options
Unlike previous versions of Windows, Windows 10 automatically checks for and
installs updates to ensure that the security measures on your computer are
current. Depending on the advanced option settings, if updates are available for
Windows, the computer will either quietly install them while you aren’t using it,
or ask you to initiate the installation.
You also have some options for the types of updates you get and the way they’re
delivered to your computer. For example, Windows Update can also check for
updates to other Microsoft products (such as Word, Outlook, and Skype) that are
installed on your computer, and can optimize the delivery of updates by
downloading them to your computer through other computers connected to yours

through a local network or internet connection.
You can configure the following advanced options for Windows Update:
When the computer restarts Updates are automatically downloaded and
installed, but you can specify the times that you use the computer so that
Windows Update will not restart your computer during your workday, if a
restart is necessary. Windows Update displays a reminder when a restart is
necessary, but you can opt to display additional notifications.
What products you get updates for In addition to updating operating
system files and drivers, you can update other Microsoft products and
featured apps through Windows Update. It’s a good idea to select this
option because many apps and tools don’t automatically update.
How soon you get upgrades With some Windows 10 editions, including
Professional, Enterprise, and Education (but not Home), you can defer
upgrades to your computer. When you defer upgrades, new Windows
features won’t be downloaded or installed for several months after they’re
available. Deferring upgrades doesn’t defer security updates, but it does
prevent you from getting the latest Windows features as soon as they’re
available.
How updates are delivered This is a new and interesting feature for
Windows 10. If you have several Windows 10 computers on your network
and you enable this option, one computer does the download, caches the
files on the network, and then sends the files to the other computers. This
can substantially reduce the bandwidth you consume each month.
There is also an option, called Delivery Optimization, that allows your local
computers to pass updates to and from known computers on your local
network and unknown computers through the internet. This is the default
update distribution model for Windows 10 Home and Windows 10
Professional. (The Enterprise and Education editions of Windows 10 are
configured to pass updates to and from local network computers only.) This
process helps to distribute security updates faster, but can increase your
bandwidth usage. If you want more information about this, you can select
the Learn More link.
Get Insider Builds You can sign up with the Windows Insider program to
receive preview builds of upcoming Windows 10 versions. These builds
have been tested by the product team, but they have not been released to the

general public yet. You’ll have earlier access to new features, but you might
also have to deal with issues in those features. Microsoft suggests that you
do not install a preview build on a computer that is critical to your
happiness or business. If something is drastically wrong with the preview
build, you might end up having to reformat and reinstall Windows from
scratch.
IMPORTANT If you decide to get Insider builds, be sure to read
the topics “Restore computer functionality” and “Back up data”
later in this chapter.
Windows chooses a time to install updates and restart your computer based on
your activity on the computer and the working hours you stipulate, so there’s less
chance of interrupting your work. You can configure a time span of up to 18
hours per day during which Windows won’t restart your computer without first
notifying you.

To configure update installation options
1. In the Windows Update settings pane, in the Update settings section,
select Advanced options.
2. In the Advanced options pane, do any of the following:
Select or clear the Give me updates for other Microsoft products when
I update Windows check box.
If available, select or clear the Defer upgrades check box.
Select Delivery Optimization, and turn on or off Allow downloads from
other PCs. If you turn it on, select whether you want to accept only
downloads from computers on your network (the safest option) or also
from computers on other networks (the potentially faster option).
To specify times that Windows should not restart your computer
1. Display the Windows Update settings pane.
2. In the Update settings area, select Change active hours.

3. Set the Start time and End time to indicate the time during which you
don’t want Windows to automatically restart. Then select Save.
To set a specific restart time
1. In the Windows Update settings pane, in the Update settings section,
select Restart options.
2. Turn on Schedule a time, and then set the time and day you want Windows
to restart your computer.
To configure restart notifications
1. In the Windows Update settings pane, in the Update settings section,
select Restart options.
2. Turn on Show more notifications.
Configure privacy settings

Privacy, or at least some illusion of privacy, is important to most people. When
you use a computer regularly, much of your life takes place inside that box. The
operating system, the apps you use, and the sites you visit all have access to bits
of information about you. Windows 10 privacy settings can limit how much of
that information the apps and devices that are connected to your computer can
see, and, to some extent, what the apps and devices can use that information for.
Much of the emphasis of the privacy settings is on how Microsoft and other
companies can use any information they gather to present you with advertising
that is theoretically more pertinent to your lifestyle than random advertising
might be. From that point of view, because you are going to be presented with
ads anyway, it seems like a benefit to have those ads more accurately related to
your interests.
In the end, it is up to you to consider the benefits, or lack thereof, in sharing your
information.
TIP The placement of ads on websites provides a way to defray the
expense of offering you free information. If the site is useful to you and
the ads aren’t too distracting, then this might be acceptable. But a lot of
sites show up in web searches that exist only to barrage people with ads.
Your browser can block pop-up ads, but it can’t automatically block
inline ads. If you are tired of waiting for these ads to load before you
can start scrolling through the page, search the internet for “remove ads
from your browser” and peruse the results. Some of the options are
pretty amazing.
In Windows 10, you can configure general privacy settings and additional
settings for the following 18 categories of information:
Account info
Camera
Microphone
App diagnostics
Contacts
Notifications
Automatic file downloadsEmail
Other devices
Background apps
Feedback & diagnosticsRadios
Calendar
Location
Speech, inking, & typing

Call history
Messaging
Tasks
Instead of going into a lot of detail about all of these privacy settings, this
chapter takes you on a quick tour and leaves it up to you to explore those areas
that interest you. Sharing some of this information can be beneficial to you, and
most is not harmful. Here is a bit of information that might be helpful:
Your advertising ID is a unique ID that is connected to the email address
you use to sign in to Windows 10. If you use a Microsoft account to sign in
to OneDrive, Office 365, email, and other computers, Microsoft will
accumulate information from all sources of these under this one ID.
Many settings refer to apps that might use your information.
Windows 10 preinstalls a lot of apps that you might never use. You can turn
off the ability for the app to access your data in the settings, but if you don’t
want to use the app at all, it is better to uninstall it.

TIP This works only for apps that came from the App Store. If the
app is part of Windows, such as Mail or Maps, then you can’t
uninstall it.
You can control settings specific to each category, and within many
categories you can turn on or off access for specific apps. For example, in
the Microphone category, you can either prevent all apps from using your
device’s microphone or allow the use of the microphone and then turn
access on or off for specific apps.
After you select a privacy category, there is generally a pause as Windows
scans your installed apps to identify those that might need access to this
category. Windows then lists these below the heading Choose Apps That
Can… use or access the feature. If no apps are listed, then no currently
installed apps need the feature in this category. Only Store apps appear in
this list; desktop apps don’t. So you could, for example, turn off camera

access for the OneNote or Skype Store app, but not for the corresponding
desktop app.
Some location features, such as geofencing, are applicable only if you have
installed apps that use them.
The Speech, inking, & typing options include features that allow Windows
and Cortana to “get to know you better.” If you plan to use Cortana, don’t
turn off Getting To Know You.
Additional settings that are related to privacy and advertising in Microsoft
products are available at account.microsoft.com/privacy/ad-settings. That page
also includes links to more information about how Microsoft might use your
information.
If you use your computer to manage your life, especially if that computer is
portable, leaving many of the privacy settings enabled makes sense. It is useful
to you if your computer (and Cortana) know where you are and which meetings
you have scheduled and who you are exchanging email with. And sharing
information about typing, voice recognition, and other activities with Microsoft
can certainly help them improve Windows and their apps in the future. Give
some thought to what is useful to you to share, and what isn’t.
To manage privacy settings
1. In the Settings window, select Privacy.
2. Review the options in each pane. Consider how each might impact you.
3. Turn on each option you want to use, and turn off those you don’t.
Restore computer functionality
Computer software tends to be updated frequently, in an effort to improve its
operation, introduce new features, or increase security. But every update is also
an opportunity for a little bug to creep in and cause problems. And a few years
of updates, even when perfectly harmless on their own, can have the effect of
scrambling the computer’s brain to the point that it performs at less than ideal
speeds.
Windows 10 offers several options for recovering from system problems. In
order of impact, these include:

Reverting to a system restore point, which rolls back app and driver
changes that have occurred since the restore point was created but retains
documents and other files created by those apps. This is often a simple fix
when a problem is introduced with an app or driver update.
Resetting the PC, which offers three levels of change:
Removing all apps and reverting to default settings, but retaining files.
Removing all apps and files, and reverting to default settings.
Removing all apps and files, reverting to default settings, and cleaning the
hard drive. If you’re planning to physically part ways with your computer,
this option provides the highest level of security for your personal
information.
Reverting to a clean installation of Windows by using the Fresh Start
feature, which reinstalls and updates Windows 10 and retains your files and
settings, but removes any apps that aren’t installed with Windows. This is
almost like having a brand-new computer.
TIP Depending on your computer system and whether you participate
in the Windows Insider program, it might also be possible to revert to a
previous version of Windows 10. On systems that support this option, it
is available in the Recovery pane of the Update & Security settings
page.
Regardless of the option you select, take the time to consider the steps you need
to take to protect any software licenses that have been activated on your
computer. If you use Office 365 apps, you can easily reinstall them from the
cloud. However, if you select a restore process that uninstalls an Adobe app, for
example, the license that is assigned to your computer will be void, and it’s a
relatively difficult process to regain access. Before initiating a process that
uninstalls an Adobe app, be sure to start the app and use the command on the
Help menu to deactivate it on your computer, thus making the license available
for reuse.
Create and revert to restore points

The internet is a wonderful resource, but it also exposes your computer to
viruses, hackers, and other potentially harmful things.
If your computer starts performing poorly, especially if that happens just after
performing updates or perhaps downloading something that installed obnoxious
adware that you can’t seem to get rid of, you can restore Windows to an earlier
point in time, called a restore point. Doing this doesn’t change your personal
files, but it might remove recently installed apps and drivers (which could be a
good thing if they are the cause of the problem).
System restore points are automatically added before significant changes are
made, but if you are about to do something that makes you a bit nervous, it
doesn’t hurt to set one manually.
You create restore points from the System Protection tab of the System
Properties dialog box.
TIP You can create a restore point for any drive but generally need to
do so for only your system drive.

When you want to restore your computer to an earlier restore point, you open the
System Properties dialog box and display the System Protection tab. From there,
you select the System Restore button to start the System Restore wizard.

Only the last few restore points are displayed. You can select the Show More
Restore Points check box to display any others that exist.
To create a system restore point
1. Open File Explorer. In the Navigation pane, right-click This PC, select
Properties, and then select System protection to display the System
Protection tab of the System Properties dialog box.
2. In the Protection Settings section, select the drive you want to create a
restore point for, and then select Create….
3. In the Create a restore point dialog box, enter a description, and then
select Create. Windows creates the restore point, and informs you after it is
done.

To revert to a saved system restore point
1. Open the System Properties dialog box and display the System Protection
tab.
2. Select System Restore… to start the System Restore wizard. Read the
introduction message, and then select Next to display the Restore Your
Computer To The State It Was In Before The Selected Event page.
3. Select a restore point from the list, or if the restore point you want to use
isn’t listed, select the Show more restore points check box to add
automatic restore points to the list, and then select a restore point.
4. Select Scan for affected programs to have the wizard search and display a
list of programs and drivers that will be deleted or restored. Make a note of
any programs or drivers you might need to reinstall after you restore your
computer, and then select Close to return to the wizard.

5. Repeat steps 3 and 4 until you locate the checkpoint that you want to restore
to. Then select Next to restore your computer to the selected restore point.
Refresh or reset your computer
The ability to reset your computer was first introduced with Windows 8, and has

proven to be a good recovery path that requires less effort than wiping your
computer, reinstalling Windows and all your apps, and recovering all your data.
Refreshing retains your personal files, and resetting removes them. These two
options have been rolled into the Reset This PC wizard.
Resetting your computer is a more serious action than restoring to a saved
restore point; it is a bit like upgrading to a fresh version of Windows 10. Here’s
what happens when you reset your computer:
You have the option of keeping your personal files (files stored in your My
Documents folder).
Your computer settings are reset to the defaults.
Your Store apps remain installed, and your desktop apps are uninstalled.
Desktop apps that were installed by the computer manufacturer might be
reinstalled. A list of the removed apps is saved as a file on your desktop.
Resetting your computer reinstalls Windows and deletes all apps that weren’t
included in the original installation. This is a drastic action. If you plan to
continue using this computer, you will want to back up all files to another
location and make sure you have setup files for any desktop apps you will want
to reinstall. Your computer should restart and then take a while (10 minutes to
several hours, depending on various things) to complete the reset. After the reset
is done, you will need to re-create your account and reinstall any missing apps.
If you’re experiencing problems with your computer, first try restoring it to a
saved restore point. If that doesn’t solve the problem, you can escalate to
resetting the computer but keeping your files, and then to resetting it completely
(removing everything).
To reset your computer and keep your files
1. In the Settings window, select Update & Security, and then select
Recovery.
2. In the Reset this PC section, select Get started to display your reset
options.

3. Select Keep my files. Windows scans your computer in preparation for the
reset, and displays a list of apps that will be removed.
4. Review the list of apps that will be removed. If any of the apps are from
Adobe or another manufacturer that requires you to release the license
before you can reuse it, deactivate the apps before continuing the Reset
process. When you’re ready to continue, select Next.

If you upgraded to Windows 10 within the past 30 days, the wizard warns
you that resetting your computer will prevent you from being able to roll
back to the previous version of Windows.
IMPORTANT If you want to retain the ability to roll back to your
previous version of Windows using your current license, select
Cancel at this point.
5. When you’re ready to commit to the process, select Next, and then select
Reset.
Your computer should restart and then take a while (10 to 60 minutes, depending
on variables such as your internet connection speed) to complete the reset.
To reset your computer without keeping your files
1. In the Settings window, select Update & Security, and then select
Recovery.
IMPORTANT If you have any installed apps from Adobe or
another manufacturer that requires you to release the license before
you can reuse it, deactivate the apps before continuing the Reset
process.
2. In the Reset this PC section, select Get started to display your reset
options.
3. Select Remove everything.

4. If you want to ensure that all personal data is removed from the computer,
select Remove files and clean the drive. Otherwise, select Just remove
my files.
If you upgraded to Windows 10 within the past 30 days, the wizard warns
you that resetting your computer will prevent you from being able to roll
back to the previous version of Windows.
IMPORTANT If you want to retain the ability to roll back to your
previous version of Windows using your current license, select
Cancel at this point.
5. When you’re ready to commit to the process, select Next, and then select
Reset.
To revert to a clean installation of Windows 10
1. In the Settings window, select Update & Security, and then select
Recovery.

2. In the More recovery options section, select Learn how to start fresh
with a clean installation of Windows. Then if prompted to do so, provide
permission to switch to Windows Defender.
3. In the Windows Defender Security Center, on the Fresh start page,
select Get started. In the User Account Control dialog box that prompts
you to allow Windows Defender to make system changes, select Yes.
4. In the Fresh start window that opens, read the description, and then select
Next. Windows scans your computer in preparation for the refresh, and
displays a list of apps that will be removed.
5. Review the list of apps that will be removed. If any of the apps are from
Adobe or another manufacturer that requires you to release the license
before you can reuse it, deactivate the apps before continuing the Reset
process. When you’re ready to continue, select Next.
If you upgraded to Windows 10 within the past 30 days, the wizard warns
you that resetting your computer will prevent you from being able to roll
back to the previous version of Windows.

IMPORTANT If you want to retain the ability to roll back to your
previous version of Windows using your current license, select
Cancel at this point.
6. When you’re ready to commit to the process, select Next, and then select
Start.
Back up data
Although it would be nice to believe that every “new and improved” computer
will be the last one we need, the reality is that your computer will eventually
wear out, be unable to support the latest technologies, fall off the kitchen
counter, or get left at an international airport (and you’ll never get that one back).
If you maintain a fresh backup of your data and have a system recovery drive,
you will recover from a device disaster a lot faster and with less data loss than
someone who isn’t prepared.
Your computer, operating system, and apps are important, but they can be
replaced. The personal files that are on your computer—the documents you have
written, pictures you have taken, and other data—are much harder to replace.
They might be worth many times the cost of a new computer. It is ironic that
backing up data is so easy, and that so few people do it consistently.
These days, it’s reasonably simple to store all your data in the cloud. If your
organization uses Office 365, you can store work files in SharePoint and
OneDrive for Business, and personal files in OneDrive. Even if you’re
committed to the online lifestyle, though, you probably have a few files that
remain on your hard drive. It’s good to have a process in place for backing up
these files either manually or automatically. This topic discusses the tools you
can use to do that.
Back up data to OneDrive
OneDrive is free online storage that comes with your Microsoft account. If you
have a Microsoft account, and use it to sign in to your computer, a link to your
OneDrive 
cloud 
storage 
is 
automatically 
created 
in 
C:\Users\[your

account]\OneDrive.
TIP At the time of the Windows 10 Fall 2017 Creators Update release,
Microsoft is providing 5 GB of free OneDrive storage with your
Microsoft account, or 1 terabyte (TB) for Office 365 subscribers. But
Microsoft offers various ways to accumulate more storage. Go to
onedrive.live.com/ about and select See Plans to see the available plans
for your location.
If your organization uses Office 365, you might have both a personal OneDrive
account and a OneDrive for Business account. This topic is specific to personal
OneDrive accounts, but much of the information also applies to OneDrive for
Business accounts.
OneDrive is more than just a storage location; it is a storage location you can use
to synchronize access to your files from every computer you sign in to with your
Microsoft account, and from which you can share files with other people.
Every computer you sign in to with your Microsoft account credentials should
automatically display your OneDrive folder in File Explorer and keep the files
synchronized with those on your other devices. If you have OneDrive and
OneDrive for Business accounts, these are differentiated by name in File
Explorer, and by icon color in the taskbar notification area.

The Files On Demand feature of OneDrive makes it possible to see all your
online files from your computer without filling your storage space with local
copies. In File Explorer, the Status icon indicates whether you have an offline
copy on your computer that syncs with the online version.
Icon Status
Description
Online only
Available to edit if your device is connected to the
internet; available locally thereafter
Locally available Offline copy that can be removed to free up storage
space
Always keep on
this device
Offline copy that you want to retain offline
The online/offline status of a file is specific to the device you’re working on. If
you don’t want files to take up space on your device, change them to Online
Only to retain the version on OneDrive and any other devices you’ve
downloaded it to. Don’t delete the file, because doing so deletes the online
version and any other offline versions! If you do accidentally delete a file, you
can recover it from OneDrive online.
You can also sign in to your OneDrive online account and from there connect to
the hard drive of any other Windows 10 computer that you sign in to with the

same account, and that has OneDrive set up properly. You sign in to OneDrive
online by using your Microsoft account credentials. From here you can view and
share the files that are backed up to OneDrive from the computers you sign in to
by using your Microsoft account.
You can access your files on OneDrive from pretty much any device, including
Windows, Android, Mac OSX, iOS, Windows Phone, and Xbox systems. All
you have to do is install the OneDrive app (or OneDrive for Business if you have
an account of that type) from the appropriate app store.
If you work on multiple computers, you can store all your files on OneDrive so
that you have access to the most up-to-date versions from any computer. If you
store files locally on computers, OneDrive can help you to access those files, if
you need to, by using the Fetch feature. Fetching files is a method of remotely
accessing a Windows 10 computer from another computer by using your
OneDrive account. You must enable the fetching of files on the computer that
you intend to access remotely, and the computer must be turned on and
connected to the internet.
To display your synchronized files on a connected computer
Open File Explorer. In the Navigation pane, select OneDrive or OneDrive
– Personal if you have the personal and business versions.
In the taskbar notification area, select the OneDrive icon. Then on the title
bar of the OneDrive pane, select the Open folder icon.
TIP If the OneDrive icon isn’t on the taskbar, select the Show
Hidden Icons icon and then select the OneDrive icon from the
hidden icons panel.
In the taskbar notification area, right-click the OneDrive icon, and then
select Open your OneDrive folder.
To open OneDrive online
Open your browser and go to onedrive.live.com.

In the taskbar notification area, right-click the OneDrive icon, and then
select View online.
In the taskbar notification area, select the OneDrive icon. On the title bar of
the OneDrive pane, select the menu button (⋮), and then select View
online.
To quickly access OneDrive files you’ve recently worked with
1. In the taskbar notification area, select the OneDrive icon.
2. In the OneDrive pane, point to the file you want to open, select the menu
button that appears to the right of the file name, and then select Open.

TIP From the file-specific menu, you can open or share files or open
the online storage location.
To store files on OneDrive
Drag, or copy and paste, files from other locations to your OneDrive folder
in File Explorer.
You can place your original working files, such as Word documents, on
OneDrive, and access and edit them there. Or you might want to work on
your files elsewhere on your hard drive and drop a copy in OneDrive
occasionally.
To recover a file deleted from OneDrive
1. Open OneDrive online.
2. In the left pane, select Recycle bin.
3. In the recycle bin, do either of the following:
To restore all the deleted files to their original locations, on the menu bar,
select Restore all items.
To restore one or some of the files, select the check box to the left of each
file you want to restore. Then on the menu bar, select Restore.
To manage OneDrive settings
1. In the taskbar notification area, right-click the OneDrive icon.

2. On the OneDrive shortcut menu, select Settings to open the Microsoft
OneDrive dialog box.

To specify the folders you want to synchronize to a computer
1. Open the Microsoft OneDrive dialog box.
2. On the Account tab, select Choose folders to display a list of the folders on
your OneDrive site, the amount of data that is stored in each folder, and the
amount of storage space that is available on your computer.
3. In the folder list, select the check boxes for the folders you want to
synchronize with the computer, and clear the check boxes for the folders
you don’t want to synchronize. As you change your selections, OneDrive
keeps track of the storage space requirements.

4. Select OK in each of the open dialog boxes to implement your changes.
TIP You configure folder synchronization independently on each
computer that you connect to OneDrive, and you can make different
selections on different computers. For example, you might want to
synchronize your Pictures folder on your personal laptop and not on
your work computer.

To enable the fetching of files from a computer
1. Open the Microsoft OneDrive dialog box.
2. On the Settings tab, select the Let me use OneDrive to fetch any of my
files on this PC check box.
3. Select OK to close the dialog box.
4. Exit and then restart the OneDrive app by following these steps:
a. In the taskbar notification area, right-click the OneDrive icon, and then
select Exit.
b. On the Start menu, in the app list, scroll or jump to the OneDrive entry,
and select it.
IMPORTANT You must enable file-fetching on each computer that
you want to be able to fetch files from.
To fetch files remotely
1. Open OneDrive online.
2. In the left pane, select PCs to display a list of the computers associated with
your Microsoft account that the OneDrive app is installed on.
3. In the PCs list, select the name of the computer you want to fetch files from
to display a list of the files available on that computer.

4. Navigate to the file you want to fetch, right-click it, and select Download.
It is a good idea to go through this process a few times before you really need to
use it, to become familiar with the process when you aren’t under pressure.
Automatically back up data by using File History
If you use your Microsoft account to sign in to Windows 10, you can take
advantage of OneDrive to back up files to the cloud and share them among your
computers. But it is also nice to have an offline backup that maintains versions
and allows you to restore earlier versions. The File History feature in File

Manager helps you with this task.
File History can automatically back up each version of files that are in your
libraries, contacts, favorites, and on your desktop. If you have files or folders
elsewhere that you want backed up, you can move them into one of your existing
libraries or create a new library. If you have a OneDrive account that is
associated with your account, it is technically included under your Users
account, so it is also included in the File History backup.
To activate File History
1. In the Settings window, select Update & Security, and then select Backup
to display the File History controls.
TIP Before you configure a File History storage location, the
Backup pane displays an Add A Drive button. After you select a
drive, the button changes to an Automatically Back Up My Files
toggle button that is set to On.
2. To begin using File History, select Add a drive. Windows searches your
computer and displays a list of the connected drives that you can back up
files to by using File History.

3. Do either of the following:
To configure File History to use a connected external drive, select the
drive from the list.
To configure File History to use a shared network folder, select Show all
network locations, and then select the network folder.
4. In the Backup pane, select More options to display the backup frequency
and scope settings.
5. In the Backup options pane, review the Back up these folders list. If you
want to exclude any of these folders from the backup, select the folder, and

then select Remove.
TIP If the Back Up These Folders list includes your local
OneDrive or OneDrive for Business folders or subfolders, or other
folders that contain files that are backed up elsewhere, it’s probably
a good idea to remove them.
6. To add a folder to the Back up these folders list, select Add a folder. In
the Select Folder dialog box, browse to and select the folder you want to

include, and then select Choose this folder.
7. If you want to specifically exclude a subfolder of a folder that you’re
backing up, scroll to the Exclude these folders section near the bottom of
the Backup options pane, and select Add a folder. In the Select Folder
dialog box, browse to and select the folder you want to exclude, and then
select Choose this folder.
8. When you finish adding and removing folders, scroll to the top of the
Backup options pane, and do the following:
Ensure that the Total Space available in the selected backup location
exceeds the Size Of Backup. If it doesn’t, change the backup location or
remove folders from the backup.
Expand the Back up my files list, and then select a frequency between
Every 10 minutes and Daily.
Expand the Keep my backups list, and then select a retention period
from 1 month to Forever, or select Until space is needed to have File
History manage the retention period based on available storage space.
9. To start using File History, select Back up now.
TIP You can also set up and manage File History from Control Panel. A
few advanced settings there are not yet available in Settings.
To view versions of a file that has been backed up
1. In File Explorer, browse to and select a file that has been backed up.
2. On the Home tab, in the Open group, select History.
A file viewer displays the most recently backed up version of the file. The
day, date, and time of the file backup, and the number of available backups,
are displayed at the top of the window.

3. You can do any of the following:
Select the Restore button (the circular arrow in the green circle) to restore
that version of the file to its original location.
Select the Previous version or Next version button (to the left and right
of the Restore button) to display a different version of the file.
To manage file versions
1. In File Explorer, select a file you have previously backed up. Right-click
the file, and then select Restore previous versions to display the Previous
Versions tab of the file’s Properties dialog box.

2. Select a file version to enable the Open and Restore buttons, and then do
any of the following:
Select Open to open a read-only version of the file in its default app.

Select the Open arrow, and then select Open in File History to display
the versions in the File History viewer.
Select Restore to restore the selected version to the file’s original
location.
Select the Restore arrow, and then select Restore To to select a different
location.
Back up and restore your system
You can back up an entire drive (or drives) to a system image that contains all
operating system and user files, configuration information, and apps. The system
image includes everything required to restore the drive to the state you capture in
the image. This is a complete restoration to the imaging point, unlike the
restorations provided by File History, restore points, or Reset Your PC, which
bring back specific portions of the information that is stored on your hard drive.
If you create a system image before your hard drive crashes, you can install a
new hard drive, restore that image, and be ready to work with all your apps and
data that you saved with that image.
IMPORTANT Because a system image is generally needed only if the
hard drive crashes and you can’t boot up, its usefulness depends on
having the image files available on some form of external media. If the
old hard drive is still functional, you can restore the system image to
that hard drive to return it to the state it was in at the imaging point. If
the hard drive no longer functions, it might not be practical to install a
new hard drive and restore the image to it. You should consult an expert.
You might choose to create periodic system images to ensure that you have a
recent one available. When you do, the first image you create is a complete
image of the drive, and each subsequent image stores only the changes from the
previous image. Because of this layered storage model, it is possible to restore
the most recent image or an earlier one. In this way, restoring to a system image
is similar to reverting to a specific restore point.
Backup images safeguard your data in the event of system failure, but you need

to be able to start up (boot) your computer after you wipe the hard drive clean.
You can start up your computer from a bootable DVD that contains installation
files. You might have received a DVD from your computer manufacturer when
you bought the computer. If you didn’t, you will need to create some kind of
boot media. Windows 10 allows you to create a bootable USB recovery drive.
You can quickly and easily create a recovery drive that you can use to boot up
and troubleshoot problems with your computer. The recovery information is
stored on a USB drive. The USB drive must have a capacity of at least 8 GB,
although it might require as much as 16 GB or 32 GB. Windows will scan your
computer at the beginning of the imaging process and tell you how large a drive
you need. The drive doesn’t have to be blank, but the process of creating the
boot image reformats the drive and deletes its contents, so be sure to back up
anything you want that is on the drive.
IMPORTANT A bootable recovery drive must be created in the same
operating system type (32-bit or 64-bit) that you will boot into later.
Ideally, you will create it on the same operating system you have backed
up.
If you ever need to restore from a system image, the process will depend on
whether your computer can still boot into Windows.
If the computer can boot into Windows, follow the process described in “To
restore a system image from within Windows 10,” later in this topic.
If the computer can’t boot from the hard drive and you created a USB
recovery drive as described in the procedure “To create a bootable USB
recovery drive,” you should be able to boot from that; however, the process
takes a bit of effort and varies based on the specific computer.
If the computer can’t boot into Windows at all, follow the process described
in “To boot from a recovery drive or disc,” later in this topic.

TIP If you are using a wireless or USB keyboard, your ability to get in
to the BIOS will depend on the order in which the drivers for it are
loaded. After you do get in, touch controls and the mouse most likely
will not work.
To create a system image backup
1. Open Control Panel, and then do one of the following:
In Category view, in the System and Security area, select Backup and
Restore (Windows 7).
In Large Icons or Small Icons view, select Backup and Restore
(Windows 7).
2. In the left pane, select Create a system image to start the Create A System
Image wizard. The wizard scans your system for storage devices that meet
the requirements.

3. Select the location for the image. If you have created previous images, it is
best to use the same location, if there is room, so all your images are in one
place. Then select Next to display the backup settings.

4. Review and confirm the backup settings, and then select Start backup to
start the backup. Windows displays a progress bar during the backup
process. You can stop the process from the progress bar if you need to.
After the backup is complete, the wizard asks whether you want to create a
system repair disc.
TIP Creating a system repair disc is a good idea. You can boot
your computer from it, and it contains Windows system recovery
tools that you can use to restore your computer from a system
image.

5. Select Yes, insert a blank disc in your CD/DVD drive, and then select
Create disc.
6. After the disc is complete, select Close and then select OK to finish the
process.
TIP Your first backup will take quite a while. Subsequent ones to the
same location take less time.
To restore a system image from within Windows 10
1. Shut down all running apps.
2. Do one of the following to restart your computer in troubleshooting mode:
On the Start menu, select Power. Then hold down the Shift key and
select Restart.
In the Settings windows, select Update & Security, select Recovery,
and then in the Advanced startup section, select the Restart now button.
3. On the Choose an option screen, select Troubleshoot.
4. On the Troubleshoot screen, select Advanced options.
5. On the Advanced options screen, select System Image Recovery. Your
screen will briefly go blank, and then display the message that Windows is
preparing System Image Recovery.
6. If the computer is configured with user accounts for more than one
Microsoft account, follow the System Image Recovery instructions to select
your account and enter the password.
7. The system locates and displays drives that contain image files. Select the
image you want to use, select Next, and then continue to the end of the
wizard.
To create a bootable USB recovery drive
1. Do either of the following:

On the Start menu, in the app list, select the Windows Administrative
Tools folder, and then select Recovery Drive.
Open Control Panel in Large Icons or Small Icons view, and then select
Recovery.
2. A User Account Control message box opens. Agree to the request to allow
the Recovery Media Creator to make changes to your computer. The
Recovery Drive wizard starts.
3. If you want to boot from a USB flash drive, clear the Back up system files
to the recovery drive check box.
4. If you haven’t already done so, insert the flash drive into a USB port and
wait until it is recognized. Then select Next.

5. If multiple drives are available, select the one you want to use, and then
select Next.
IMPORTANT Everything on the drive you select will be deleted.
If you routinely back up files to an external USB hard drive, it
might be among the USB drives listed. If you select the wrong
device, all your backups will be gone.
6. Read and heed the warning that everything on the drive will be deleted.
Make sure this is what you intend to do. Then select Create to start the
process. A progress bar displays the progress.
7. After the process completes, select Finish to close the window.
TIP You can follow the first few steps in the recovery process to
confirm that you can boot from this drive.
To boot from a recovery drive or disc
1. Power your computer all the way down and then turn it back on.
2. If the boot process goes far enough to display the key to press to enter
Setup, press it. This may be F8 or Del or some other key.
IMPORTANT Read the instructions on the screen, read your
computer documentation, and search the web for more information
before you make any changes in Setup. Making changes that you
don’t fully understand can cause problems.

3. In the BIOS Setup Utility, press your keyboard arrow keys to select an
option such as Boot Options, Boot Order, or something else that includes
the word Boot.
IMPORTANT The BIOS Setup Utility varies by computer make
and model, so instructions are necessarily a bit vague. Basic
instructions are usually included on the BIOS setup screen. If you
have problems, search the web for information specific to your
computer.
4. In the Boot Priority Order section (or something similar), select 1st Boot
Device and press Enter to display a list of devices.
5. Select Removable Device or CD&DVD, depending on what you want to
boot from, and then press Enter.
IMPORTANT Depending on your hardware and BIOS, there
might be other changes. It is best to read your computer manual or
search for information about that model.
6. After making the changes, press F10 to save and exit.
7. Your computer should now boot from the USB drive and display the
Options screen that appears in step 1 of the procedure “To restore a system
image from within Windows 10.” Follow those directions from this point
forward.
Two-factor authentication
For the past several years, Microsoft has offered two-step identity
verification as a method of protecting access to sensitive information
that is associated with your Microsoft account.

If you try to sign in to your account from an unknown computer, or
access sensitive information, such as advanced security settings, you
are asked to verify your identity. You could initially do this by
entering a key that was sent to you by email, phone, or text. More
recently Microsoft has added the ability to verify your identity by
using a smartphone authentication app.
If you are using the app, when you try to access a webpage that
requires verification, your smartphone beeps, and when you sign in
to the app, it displays, the security key and an Accept button. Tap the
button and you are done.
If you are in a location where cellular access is not available, you
can use the app to generate a key that you can then enter in the
webpage that is requesting verification.
Starting with Windows 10, Microsoft is offering the same
verification process for use when signing in to your computer and
other devices. If you choose to enable this on a device, each time you
sign in you will need to use one of the verification methods to
complete the action.
This might seem like an unnecessary complication for a desktop
computer in a secure location (though in reality there are very few
such locations), but it seems like a really good idea for laptops and
tablets that sometimes seem to wander off on their own.
Along with the verification methods that have been available for a
while, Microsoft is planning to accept biometric information, such as
facial recognition or a scanned fingerprint or eye, to access your
Windows device. This option is managed by the biometric login
feature, Windows Hello.
Unfortunately, this technology is dependent on hardware that few
people have at the time of this writing. You can check the status of
this service and find lists of compatible hardware by searching for
Windows 10 Hello.
Key points
Windows 10 self-manages the update process. You can configure update

options to control how and when your computer gets updates.
You can specify which apps have access to your calendar, camera, contacts,
and other information to protect your privacy.
If a software change causes a problem, you can revert to a system restore
point to undo the change. If your computer becomes truly sluggish, you can
reset it or revert to a clean installation of Windows.
You can use the free OneDrive storage that comes with your Microsoft
account to store files or file backups that you want to keep safe or have
available from multiple computers.
If you turn on file fetching, you can access files stored on any Windows 10
computer through OneDrive.
The File History feature will automatically back up selected folders on a
regular basis; you can restore older versions of files that are saved by File
History.
You can create a system image backup that allows you to do a complete
restoration of your computer system in the event of a hardware failure.
 Practice tasks
No practice files are necessary to complete the practice tasks in this chapter.
Manage Windows updates
Perform the following tasks:
1. Display the Windows Update pane.
2. Check for updates, or, if there are updates waiting, install them.
3. Display the update installation options, and configure the settings the way
you want them.
Configure privacy settings
Perform the following tasks:
1. Display the Privacy page of the Settings window.

2. Review the settings in each pane. Consider the implications of sharing that
information, and configure the settings the way you want them.
Restore computer functionality
Perform the following tasks:
1. Create a restore point.
2. In the Settings windows, select Update & Security, select Recovery, and
then in the Advanced startup section, select the Restart now button to
display the Troubleshooting screen. Investigate the options that are
available from this screen so you’re familiar with them if you need them in
the future.
3. Display the Recovery pane of the Update & Security settings page.
Explore the options to reset your computer, but do not complete the process.
Back up data
Perform the following tasks:
1. In the notification area of the taskbar, locate the OneDrive icon.
2. From the OneDrive shortcut menu, open the Microsoft OneDrive dialog
box. Display each tab in turn, and consider the available options.
3. Review the folders that are synchronized to this computer, and configure
OneDrive to synchronize only the folders you want.
4. If you work on multiple computers and want to be able to fetch files from
this computer, enable that feature. (Don’t forget to exit and restart the
OneDrive app.)
5. Open OneDrive online and review the site options, which change from time
to time and might be different from those shown in this book.
6. Display the File History pane.
7. If File History has not yet been configured, scan your computer system for
a storage drive. If File History locates a suitable drive, do the following:
a. Add the storage drive to File History.
b. Display the File History options. Review the list of folders that File

History backs up. Modify the list as necessary to include the folders that
you want to back up, and exclude folders that you don’t want to back up.
c. Set the backup frequency, and specify how long you want to keep each
version.
d. Start the File History backup process.
8. If File History has been configured, do the following:
a. Display the File History options. Review the list of folders that File
History backs up, and modify the list as necessary.
b. Review the backup frequency and the length of time File History retains
each version. Modify these as necessary.
c. Open one of the folders that File History backs up, and display a previous
version of a file.
Back up and restore your system
There are no practice tasks for this topic.

Appendix. 
Keyboard 
shortcuts 
and
touchscreen tips
The standard method of working with content on a Windows computer is to click
the relevant commands. You can perform some tasks faster by pressing specific
key combinations or, on a touchscreen device, by using specific gestures.
Keyboard shortcuts
Keyboard shortcuts provide a quick way to perform actions on the computer
without taking your hands off the keyboard. Many keyboard shortcuts have
become commonplace over the years, to the extent that they perform the same
function in apps from almost any publisher. For example, Ctrl+C, Ctrl+X, and
Ctrl+V will copy, cut, and paste in File Explorer and in many apps.
To differentiate keyboard shortcuts that control Windows from keyboard
shortcuts that are specific to apps, many Windows keyboard shortcuts include
the Windows logo key, which is located near the lower-left corner of the
keyboard and labeled with the Windows icon. (Some keyboards have two
Windows logo keys, one on each side of the spacebar.) The appearance of the
icon varies based on the version of Windows that was active when the keyboard
was manufactured.
The simplest Windows 10 keyboard shortcut is to simply press and release the
Windows logo key to display or hide the Start menu.
TIP Because we refer to the Windows logo key a lot in this appendix,
we’ve abbreviated the key name in multi-key keyboard shortcuts to Win.

Most keyboard shortcuts require that you hold down one key and then press
another key. These keyboard shortcuts are presented in the form Win+C. Some
keyboard shortcuts combine three keys; these are presented in the form
Win+Shift+M. When invoking a three-key shortcut, press and hold the first and
second keys, press the third key, and then release all three.
New in Windows 10
Most of the Windows 10 shortcuts are the same as those in previous versions of
Windows, but there are a few new keyboard shortcuts that simplify interactions
with features that are new or different in Windows 10. If you’re familiar with the
older shortcuts and just want the new ones, they are:
Win+A Open the Action Center
Win+S Open search
Win+C Open Cortana in listening mode
IMPORTANT This shortcut is turned off by default. To turn it on,
open the Settings window, select Cortana, and then in the Keyboard
Shortcut section, turn on Let Cortana Listen For My Commands
When I Press The Windows Logo Key + C.
Win+Tab Open Task View
Win+Ctrl+D Add a virtual desktop
Win+Ctrl+Right arrow Switch between virtual desktops you’ve created
on the right
Win+Ctrl+Left arrow Switch between virtual desktops you’ve created on
the left
Win+Ctrl+F4 Close the virtual desktop you’re using
Windows keyboard shortcuts
The following table lists Windows 10 keyboard shortcuts, including some that
are new since the initial release of WIndows 10. Some of these keyboard
shortcuts are valid only when the Windows user interface is active (not in

individual apps).
To do this
Press
Display or hide the Start menu
Windows logo key
Open the Action Center
Win+A
Move the focus to the notification area
Win+B
Open or close the Cortana Listening mode window
Win+C
Display or hide the desktop
Win+D
Display the date and time pane
Win+Alt+D
Create a new virtual desktop
Win+Ctrl+D
Open the Quick Access folder in File Explorer
Win+E
Open the Feedback Hub and take a screenshot
Win+F
Open the Find Computers dialog box (in which you
search for domain-joined computers)
Win+Ctrl+F
Open the Game bar (from which you capture screen
shots and record video clips in games)
Win+G
Start dictation
Win+H
Open the Settings window
Win+I
Set focus to a Windows tip when one is available
Win+J
Open the Connect pane (in which you connect to
wireless display and audio devices)
Win+K
Lock the computer
Win+L
Minimize all app windows (but not system windows) Win+M
Restore minimized windows
Win+Shift+M
On a mobile device, lock the device orientation
Win+O
Open the Project pane and then cycle through
presentation display modes
Win+P
Activate the taskbar search box/open Cortana
Win+Q
Open the Run dialog box
Win+R

Activate the taskbar search box
Win+S
Cycle through taskbar buttons from left to right
Win+T
Cycle through taskbar buttons from right to left
Win+Shift+T
Open the Ease of Access page in Settings
Win+U
Cycle through notifications
Win+V
Cycle through notifications in reverse order
Win+Shift+V
Display the Quick Link menu
Win+X
Switch input between Windows Mixed Reality and
the desktop
Win+Y
Show available commands in an app when in full-
screen mode
Win+Z
Open the emoji panel
Win+Period 
(.) 
or
Win+Semicolon (;)
Peek at the desktop
Win+Comma (,)
Switch to or start the app that is in the taskbar
position indicated by the number
Win+number (1–0)
Start a new instance of the app that is in the taskbar
position indicated by the number, if that app supports
multiple instances
Win+Shift+number (1–
0)
Start a new instance of the app that is in the taskbar
position indicated by the number, if that app supports
multiple instances, as an administrator
Win+Ctrl+Shift+number
(1–0)
Switch to the last active window of the app that is in
the taskbar position indicated by the number
Win+Ctrl+number (1–0)
Open the jump list of the app that is in the taskbar
position indicated by the number
Win+Alt+number (1–0)
Capture an image of the current screen and save the
image in the Pictures\Screenshots folder
Win+Print Screen
Display the System window of Control Panel
Win+Pause/Break
Display the Task View of all open windows
Win+Tab

Switch to the next input language and keyboard (on
devices configured for multiple languages or
keyboards)
Win+Spacebar
Change to a previously selected input
Win+Ctrl+Spacebar
Switch to the previous input language and keyboard
(on devices configured for multiple languages or
keyboards)
Win+Shift+Spacebar
Start or stop Narrator
Win+Ctrl+Enter
Magnify the screen by using Magnifier
Win+Plus sign
Decrease the screen magnification when Magnifier is
running
Win+Minus sign
Exit Magnifier
Win+Esc
Maximize a non-snapped window, or Snap a half-
screen window to the upper corner
Win+Up arrow
Restore a non-snapped window, or Snap a half-screen
window to the lower corner
Win+Down arrow
Maximize the height of the active window
Win+Shift+Up arrow
Restore or minimize the active window without
changing its width
Win+Shift+Down arrow
Move a window through the left, center, and right of
each screen, or move a quarter-screen window to
another corner
Win+Left 
arrow
Win+Right arrow
Move an open window to a different display
Win+Shift+Right arrow
Win+Shift+Left arrow
Minimize or restore all windows other than the active
window
Win+Home
Search for Windows 10 help online
Win+F1
Close the current virtual desktop
Win+Ctrl+F4
Switch to the next virtual desktop
Win+Ctrl+Left arrow
Win+Ctrl+Right arrow

Taskbar keyboard shortcuts
The following shortcuts interact with taskbar buttons of pinned or running apps
or groups of apps.
To do this
Press
Start a new instance of a pinned or running app Shift+click
Start a new instance of a pinned or running app
as an administrator
Ctrl+Shift+click
Open the window menu for the app
Shift+right-click
Open the window menu for the group
Shift+right-click 
(grouped
taskbar button)
Cycle through the windows of the group
Ctrl+click (grouped taskbar
button)
General keyboard shortcuts
The following shortcuts are applicable in multiple interfaces that might include
system windows, app windows, File Explorer, dialog boxes, and panes.
To do this
Press
Cycle through thumbnails of open apps
Alt+Tab
Close the current app
Alt+F4
Select all content
Ctrl+A
Copy
Ctrl+C 
or
Ctrl+Insert
Switch to the search box or Address bar
Ctrl+E
Open a new browser window
Ctrl+N
Create a new folder in File Explorer
Ctrl+Shift+N
Refresh a browser window
Ctrl+R
Paste
Ctrl+V 
or
Shift+Insert
Close the current app window
Ctrl+W

Cut
Ctrl+X
Redo
Ctrl+Y
Undo
Ctrl+Z
Close the current file or active browser tab
Ctrl+F4
Select multiple noncontiguous items
Ctrl+click
Select contiguous items
Shift+click
Open Task Manager
Ctrl+Shift+Esc
Capture an image of the current screen and save the image in
short-term memory
Print Screen
Touchscreen tips
Many computers, tablets, and phones have touchscreen interfaces that you can
interact with using your finger or a tablet pen, and some computer keyboards
have touchpads that allow many of the same types of interactions as
touchscreens.
The following table describes some specific terms that we use when describing
interactions with a touchscreen.
Term
Action
Mouse
equivalent
Tap
Touch your finger to the screen one time and then lift it Click
Double-
tap
Quickly tap the screen twice in the same location
Double-
click
Flick
Touch your finger to the screen and quickly move it in a
specific direction as you lift it
None
Press
and hold
Touch the screen and wait for about one second
Right-click
Pinch
Touch the screen with two fingers and then move the
fingers toward each other
None
Stretch
Touch the screen with two fingers and then move the
fingers away from each other
None

Slide
Drag your finger on the screen
None
Swipe
Briefly drag your finger across an item
None
On a touch device, you can set the permitted time and distance between taps for
the double-tap action, and the minimum and maximum length of hold that
performs a right-click equivalent. You configure these settings in the Pen And
Touch dialog box.
You can use the gestures described in the following table to manage Windows 10
user interface elements on a screen that supports 10-point touch. Other
touchscreen gestures might be available on your device, depending on the
hardware and drivers.
Action
Touchscreen gesture
Display the Task View of all
open windows
Swipe from the left of the screen
Display the Action Center
Swipe from the right edge of the screen
Display the taskbar when it is
hidden
Tap or swipe the inside edge of the screen where
the taskbar is docked
You can use the gestures described in the following table to move around on the
screen.
Action
Touchscreen gesture
Scroll
Swipe up, down, left, or right
Scroll quicklyFlick up, down, left, or right, and then tap to stop scrolling
Zoom in
Stretch two fingers apart
Zoom out
Pinch two fingers together
You can use the gestures described in the following table to work with text
content.
Action
Touchscreen gesture
Select a word
Double-tap the word
Select a paragraph
Triple-tap the paragraph

Expand or contract a selectionDrag the selection handles

Glossary
absolute path A path that defines the exact position of a file or folder on a
computer or network. See also path; relative path.
Action Center A pane that maintains a running list of notifications that you
can review and take action on, if necessary. It also includes Quick Action
buttons that provide access to common Windows 10 features.
activation The process of validating software with the manufacturer.
Activation confirms the genuine status of a product and that the product key
has not been compromised. It establishes a relationship between the software’s
product key and a specific installation of that software on a device.
active window The window in which a user is currently working or directing
input.
Address bar In File Explorer, a text box at the top of the window, under the
title bar, containing the navigation path to the current folder. Selecting the
arrow after each folder name displays a list of its subfolders. In Microsoft
Edge and Internet Explorer, a text box containing the web address of the
currently displayed webpage.
Administrator account A type of Windows user account with access to all
system files and settings, and with permission to perform all operations. Every
computer must have at least one Administrator account. This account type is
not recommended for daily use. See also Standard User account; user account.
All-in-One PC A desktop computer that has the internal components
incorporated into the same case as the monitor.
app See desktop app; Universal Windows app.
app icon See icon.
aspect ratio The ratio of the width of an image, screen, or other visual element
to its height.
background In a graphical user interface such as Windows, a pattern or
picture that can be applied to various screen elements, such as the desktop or

lock screen. Other elements, such as text, icons, and apps, are displayed on top
of this background.
bandwidth The rate of data transfer, in bits per second.
bitmap (.bmp) A patent-free digital image file format that does not support
transparency. A bitmap image consists of pixels in a grid. Each pixel is a
specific color; the colors within the color palette are governed by the specific
bitmap format. Common formats include Monochrome Bitmap, 16 Color
Bitmap, 256 Color Bitmap, and 24-bit Bitmap.
blog Short for web log. An online journal or news/opinion column.
Contributors post entries consisting of text, graphics, or video clips. When
permitted by the blog owner, readers can post comments responding to the
entries or to other people’s comments. Blogs are often used to publish personal
or company information in an informal way.
.bmp See bitmap.
broadband connection A high-speed internet connection such as those
provided by DSL or cable modem services. Broadband connections typically
transfer data at 10 megabits per second (Mbps) or faster.
browse To search for a folder or file by navigating through the hierarchical
storage structure of a computer. Alternatively, to search for information on the
web by following links between webpages.
browser See web browser.
byte A unit of measurement for data; a byte typically holds a single character,
such as a letter, digit, or punctuation mark. Some single characters can take up
more than 1 byte.
central processing unit (CPU) The main circuit chip in a computer. It
performs most of the calculations necessary to run the computer. Also called a
processor.
click To point to an interface element and then press the primary mouse button
one time.
command An instruction you give to a computer or app.
compress To reduce the size of a set of data, such as a file or group of files,

inside a compressed folder that can be stored in less space or transmitted with
less bandwidth.
compressed folder A folder containing files whose contents have been
compressed. Also called a zip file.
Content pane In File Explorer, the pane that displays files and folders stored
in the currently selected folder or storage device. See also Details pane;
Navigation pane; Preview pane.
contextual tabs See tool tabs.
Control Panel A Windows app that contains items through which you can
control system-level features of the computer and perform related tasks,
including hardware and software setup and configuration.
CPU See central processing unit.
credentials Information that provides proof of identification that is used to
gain access to local and network resources. Examples of credentials are user
names and passwords, smart cards, and certificates.
cursor The on-screen image that moves around the screen when you move
your mouse. Also called a pointer or mouse pointer.
desktop The work area on a computer screen, on which you can arrange
windows, icons, and shortcuts to apps, folders, and data files. The contents of
the Desktop folder of your user profile appear on the desktop. You can control
the appearance of the desktop by changing the theme or the desktop
background, and you can add and remove files, folders, and shortcuts on the
desktop.
desktop app An application that is designed to run in the Windows desktop
environment.
desktop computer A computer that must be plugged in to an external power
source. A typical desktop computer system includes the computer case
containing the actual computer components, a monitor, a keyboard, a mouse,
and speakers. See also device.
desktop shortcut See shortcut.
Details pane In File Explorer, the pane that displays details about the folder or

selected items. See also Content pane; Navigation pane; Preview pane.
device A piece of equipment, such as a laptop, tablet, or smartphone, that runs
an operating system. See also desktop computer.
device driver See driver.
dialog box A window that appears when you give a command that requires
additional information. Also used to provide information or feedback about
progress.
Disk Cleanup A Windows app that reduces the number of unnecessary files on
your drives, which can help your computer run faster. It can delete temporary
files and system files, empty the Recycle Bin, and remove a variety of other
items that you might no longer need.
Disk Defragmenter See Optimize Drives.
domain In Windows, a logical (rather than physical) group of resources—
computers, servers, and other hardware devices—on a network, that is
centrally administered through Windows Server. On the internet, a name used
as the base of website addresses and email addresses that identifies the entity
owning the address.
double-click To point to an interface element and press the primary mouse
button two times in rapid succession.
drag To move an item on the screen by pointing to it, holding down the
primary mouse button, and then moving the mouse.
driver An app that enables Windows to communicate with a software app or
hardware device (such as a printer, mouse, or keyboard) that is attached to your
computer. Every device needs a driver in order for it to work. Many drivers are
built into Windows, and most others are available through Windows Update.
dynamic Changing in response to external factors.
Edge See Microsoft Edge.
Ethernet A system for exchanging data between computers on a local area
network by using coaxial, fiber optic, or twisted-pair cables.
executable file A computer file that starts an app, such as a word processor,

game, or Windows tool. Executable files can often be identified by the file
name extension .exe.
expansion card A printed circuit board that, when inserted into an expansion
slot of a computer, provides additional functionality. There are many types of
expansion cards, including audio cards, modems, network cards, security
device cards, TV tuner cards, video cards, and video processing expansion
cards.
expansion slot A socket on a computer’s motherboard, designed to establish
the electrical contact between the electronics on an expansion card and on the
motherboard. Many form factors (physical dimensions) and standards for
expansion slots are available. An expansion slot accepts only expansion cards
of the same form factor.
Extensible Markup Language (XML) A text markup language, similar to
HTML, used to define the structure of data independently of its formatting so
that the data can be used for multiple purposes and by multiple apps.
extension See file name extension.
Favorites bar In Microsoft Edge or Internet Explorer, a toolbar located below
the Address bar that provides buttons for storing web locations for easy future
access, obtaining add-ons, and accessing sites that match your browsing
history.
File Explorer The Windows 10 app through which users locate, open, and
manage files and folders.
File History A Windows feature that allows you to recover files by
maintaining a record of file versions as you make changes and backing up files
to a secondary storage location.
file name extension Characters appended to the name of a file by the app that
created it and separated from the file name by a period. Some file name
extensions identify the app that can open the file, such as .xlsx for Microsoft
Excel workbooks; and some represent formats that more than one app can
work with, such as .jpg graphic files.
file recovery Reconstructing or restoring lost or unreadable files on your hard
drive.

filter To display only items that match specified criteria.
flash drive See USB flash drive.
flick A quick, straight stroke of a finger or pen on a screen. A flick is
recognized as a gesture, and interpreted as a navigation or an editing
command.
Flip A feature you can use to quickly preview all open windows without
selecting the taskbar. Press Alt+Tab to invoke Flip, and then to move between
previews. To display the previewed window, release both keys.
folder A named storage area on a computer or device containing files and
other folders. Folders are used to organize information electronically, the same
way actual folders in a filing cabinet do.
frame The outer border of a window.
gadget A type of app designed to display information on the desktop. Gadgets
were popular in Windows Vista and Windows 7, but have been discontinued in
Windows 10 because they were vulnerable to malicious attacks.
GB See gigabyte.
Gbps Gigabits per second; a unit of data transfer equal to 1,000 Mbps
(megabits per second).
gesture A quick movement of a finger or pen on a screen that the computer
interprets as a command, rather than as a mouse movement, writing, or
drawing.
.gif See Graphics Interchange Format.
gigabyte (GB) 1,024 megabytes of data storage; often interpreted as
approximately 1 billion bytes.
glyph A graphical representation of either a character, a part of a character, or
a sequence of characters.
graphical user interface (GUI) A user interface that incorporates visual
elements such as a desktop, icons, and menus, so that you can perform
operations by interacting with the visual interface rather than by typing
commands.

Graphics Interchange Format (.gif) A digital image file format developed by
CompuServe that is used for transmitting raster images on the internet. An
image in this format may contain up to 256 colors, including a transparent
color. The size of the file depends on the number of colors actually used.
Guest account A built-in Windows user account that allows limited use of the
computer. When logged on to a computer with the Guest account, a user can’t
install software or hardware, change settings, or create a password. The Guest
account is turned off (unavailable) by default; you can turn it on from the User
Accounts window of Control Panel.
GUI See graphical user interface.
hardware Physical items such as computers and monitors. See also software.
Hibernate mode A shut-down option similar to Sleep mode, except that it
saves any open files and the state of any running apps on your hard drive
instead of in memory and then completely turns off the computer. When you
turn on your computer to resume working, Windows retrieves information
from the hard drive and restores your previous computing session.
home page In a web browser, the page or pages that open automatically when
you start the browser, and that open when you select the Home button. For
websites, the first page displayed when you connect to a site.
homegroup A password-protected connection among a group of computers
through which you can share files and printers. A homegroup can exist only on
a private network. A private network doesn’t require a homegroup, and it is not
necessary to join a homegroup to use the private network.
homegroup member A computer that is joined to a homegroup.
hotspot A public place (such as a coffee shop, airport, or hotel) with a wireless
network that you can use to connect to the internet.
HTML See Hypertext Markup Language.
hub A device used to connect multiple devices of one type. See also network
hub and USB hub.
hyperlink A link from a text, graphic, audio, or video element to a target
location in the same document, another document, or a webpage.

Hypertext Markup Language (HTML) A text markup language used to
create documents for the web. HTML defines the structure and layout of a web
document by using a variety of tags and attributes.
icon A visual representation of an app, folder, file, or other object or function.
IM See instant messaging.
Information bar A bar that appears to notify you that there is a security issue
or that a pop-up window has been blocked. You can select the bar to display a
menu of actions appropriate to the situation.
information 
technology 
(IT) 
The 
development, 
installation, 
and
implementation of computer systems and apps.
InPrivate Browsing A browsing mode available in Microsoft Edge and
Internet Explorer that opens a separate browser window in which the places
you visit are not tracked. The pages and sites do not appear on the History tab,
and temporary files and cookies are not saved on your computer.
input device A peripheral device whose purpose is to allow the user to provide
input to a computer system. Examples of input devices are keyboards, mice,
joysticks, and tablet pens.
insertion point The point where you can insert text or graphics. It usually
appears as a blinking vertical line.
instant messaging (IM) A real-time electronic communication system that
you can use to “chat” and interact in other ways with other people by typing in
a window on your computer screen.
interface See user interface.
internet service provider (ISP) A company that provides internet access to
individuals or companies. An ISP provides the connection information
necessary for users to access the internet through the ISP’s computers. An ISP
typically charges a monthly or hourly connection fee.
IP address An address that identifies a computer that is connected to the
internet or a network. There are two types of IP addresses: IP version 4 (IPv4)
and IP version 6 (IPv6). An IPv4 address usually consists of four groups of
numbers separated by periods; an IPv6 address has eight groups of

hexadecimal characters (the numbers 0–9 and the letters A–H) separated by
colons.
ISP See internet service provider.
IT See information technology.
Joint Photographic Experts Group (.jpeg) A digital image file format
designed for compressing either full-color or grayscale still images. It works
well on photographs, naturalistic artwork, and similar material. Images saved
in this format have .jpg or .jpeg file extensions.
.jpeg See Joint Photographic Experts Group.
.jpg See Joint Photographic Experts Group.
jump list A feature of Windows that provides right-click access from Start
menu app links to the documents, pictures, songs, or websites a user frequently
accesses.
KB See kilobyte.
Kbps Kilobits per second; a unit of data transfer equal to 1,000 bits per second
or 125 bytes per second.
keyword A word or phrase assigned to a file or webpage so that it can be
located in searches for that word or phrase. See also tag.
kilobyte (KB) 1,024 bytes of data storage. In reference to data transfer rates,
1,000 bytes.
laptop A term for a portable computer, referring to the fact that portable
computers are small enough to set on your lap. Also called a notebook or
portable computer.
library A virtual folder that isn’t physically present on the hard drive but that
displays the contents of multiple folders as though the files were stored
together in one location.
local Located on or attached to your computer.
local account An account you can use to sign in to a computer. A local
account is not connected to a Microsoft account and isn’t tracked beyond the
scope of the computer it exists on.

local printer A printer that is directly connected to one of the ports on a
computer. See also network printer; remote printer; shared printer.
lock To make your Windows desktop inaccessible to other people. Most
effective when your user account is protected by a password.
Lock screen The screen that appears when a user locks the computer.
Magnifier A display tool that makes the computer screen more readable by
magnifying a portion of the screen in a separate window.
mail server A computer that stores email messages.
malware Software designed to deliberately harm your computer. For example,
viruses, worms, and Trojan horses are malware. Also called malicious
software.
map a drive To assign an available drive letter to a specific computer or
shared folder; usually a folder located on another computer on the network.
This is commonly done to create a constant connection to a network share but
can also be used to maintain a connection to an internet location.
maximize To increase the size of a window so that it completely fills the
screen. A maximized window cannot be moved or resized by dragging its
frame.
MB See megabyte.
Mbps Megabits per second; a unit of data transfer equal to 1,000 Kbps
(kilobits per second).
media Materials on which data is recorded or stored, such as CDs, DVDs, or
USB flash drives.
megabyte (MB) 1,024 kilobytes or 1,048,576 bytes of data storage; often
interpreted as approximately 1 million bytes. In reference to data transfer rates,
1,000 kilobytes.
menu A list from which you can give an instruction by selecting a command.
menu bar A toolbar from which you can access menus of commands.
metadata Descriptive information, including keywords and properties, about a

file or webpage. Title, subject, author, and size are examples of a file’s
metadata.
Microsoft Edge A Microsoft web browser released with Windows 10 that
includes built-in features such as Inking, Reading view, Sharing, and Cortana
integration.
minimize To reduce a window to a button on the taskbar.
Miracast A wireless technology built in to Windows 10 that projects your
screen display to TVs, projectors, and streaming media players that also
support Miracast. You can use this to share what you’re doing on your
computer, present a slide show, or even play your favorite game on a larger
screen. Previously known as Wireless Display (WiDi).
modem A device that allows computer information to be transmitted and
received over a telephone line or through a broadband service such as cable or
DSL.
motherboard The main printed circuit board of a computer. Electronic
components such as the central processing unit (CPU), memory, and peripheral
expansion slots are connected to and communicate through the motherboard.
Also known as a mainboard, system board, or logic board.
multi-touch gesture An extension of the conventional touch input feature to
support gestures involving multiple fingers touching the computer or device
screen at the same time.
Narrator A feature that audibly reads the text on the screen aloud and
describes some events to users.
navigate To move around in a document.
Navigation pane In File Explorer, the left pane of a folder window. It displays
favorite links, libraries, and an expandable list of drives and folders. See also
Content pane; Details pane; Preview pane.
network In Windows, a group of computers connected to each other through a
wired or wireless connection. A network may be as small as two computers
connected directly to each other or as large as the internet.
network adapter An expansion card or other device used to provide network

access to a computer or other device, such as a printer. Mediates between the
computer and physical media, such as cabling, over which transmissions
travel.
Network and Sharing Center A Control Panel window from which users can
get real-time status information about their network, and also make changes to
settings.
network discovery A network setting that affects whether your computer can
find other computers and devices on the network and whether other computers
on the network can find your computer.
network domain A network whose security and settings are centrally
administered through Windows Server computer and user accounts.
network drive A shared folder or drive on your network that you assign a
drive letter to so that it appears in the This PC window of File Explorer as a
named drive.
network hub A device used to connect computers on a network. The
computers are connected to the hub with cables. The hub sends information
received from one computer to all other computers on the network.
network printer A printer that is connected directly to a network through a
wired (Ethernet) or wireless network connection, or through a print server or
printer hub. See also local printer; remote printer; shared printer.
network profile Information about a specific network connection, such as the
network name, type, and settings.
network router A hardware device connecting computers on a network and
connecting a network to the internet.
network share A shared folder on a computer on your network (not your local
computer).
notification area The area at the right end of the Windows taskbar that
displays system icons (such as those for the clock, volume, network
connection, power, and Action Center) and system and app notification icons.
On Windows 10 computers, the user can control the display of both system
icons and app notifications in the notification area.

OEM See original equipment manufacturer.
offline Not connected to a network or to the internet. Also used to describe
time that you will be away from your computer.
OneDrive The Microsoft cloud storage service that lets users access and share
documents, photos, and other files from anywhere.
online Connected to a network or to the internet. Also used to describe time
that you will be working on your computer.
on-screen keyboard A keyboard representation on the screen that allows users
to type using touch, a tablet pen, or other input device.
operating system The underlying programs that tell your computer what to do
and how to do it. The operating system coordinates interactions among the
computer system components, acts as the interface between you and your
computer, enables your computer to communicate with other computers and
peripheral devices, and interacts with apps installed on your computer.
Optimize Drives A Windows tool that arranges fragmented data so your drives
can work more efficiently. Optimize analyzes and organizes drives on a
schedule, but can also be started manually. Optimize is available on the Drive
Tools tab when you select your hard drive in File Explorer.
option One of a group of mutually exclusive values for a setting, usually in a
dialog box.
option button A standard Windows control that you use to select one of a set
of options.
original equipment manufacturer (OEM) A company that assembles a
computer from components, brands the computer, and then sells the computer
to the public. The OEM might also preinstall an operating system and other
software on the computer.
parallel port The input/output connector for a parallel interface device. Some
types of printers connect to the computer through a parallel port.
partition A section of space on a physical hard drive that functions as if it
were a separate drive.
password A security measure used to restrict access to user accounts,

computer systems, and resources. A password is a unique string of characters
that you must provide before access is authorized.
password hint An entry you record when you create or change your password,
to remind you what the password is. Windows displays the password hint if
you enter an incorrect password.
password reset disk A file you create on a flash drive or other removable
media to enable you to reset your Windows password if you forget it.
path A sequence of drive and folder names, separated by backslashes (\), that
leads to a specific file or folder. See also absolute path; relative path.
peer-to-peer A network, such as a workgroup, where computers and resources
are connected directly and are not centrally managed by a server.
peripheral device A device, such as an external DVD drive, printer, modem,
or joystick, that is connected to a computer and is controlled by the computer’s
microprocessor, but is not necessary to the computer’s operation.
personal folder In Windows, a storage folder created by Windows for each
user account and containing subfolders and information that is specific to the
user profile, such as Documents and Pictures. The personal folder is labeled
with the name used to log on to the computer.
phishing A technique used to trick computer users into revealing personal or
financial information. A common online phishing scam starts with an email
message that appears to come from a trusted source but actually directs
recipients to provide information to a fraudulent website.
picture password A picture-based sign-in method that authenticates a user by
checking gestures made on a picture of the user’s own choosing.
PID See product key.
pin To fix an item, such as a tile, library, movie, game, or app, in a given area
of the Windows screen, so it is always accessible in that area (for example, to
pin an app to Start or to the taskbar).
PIN A numeric identification code similar to a password that a user can enter
to validate his or her credentials.
pinned taskbar button A button representing an app, which appears

permanently next to the search box on the taskbar. A button that is not pinned
appears only when its app is running. See also taskbar button.
pixel The smallest element used to form an image on a computer monitor.
Computer monitors display images by drawing thousands of pixels arranged in
columns and rows. Each pixel displays one color. See also screen resolution.
plug and play A technology that enables the computer to automatically
discover and configure settings for a device connected to the computer through
a USB or IEEE 1394 connection.
.png See Portable Network Graphic.
point To position the mouse pointer over an element. Also called hover or
mouse-over.
pointer The on-screen image that moves around the screen when you move
your mouse. Also called a cursor.
pointing device A device such as a mouse that controls a pointer with which
you can select objects displayed on the screen.
pop-up window A small web browser window that opens on top of (or
sometimes below) the web browser window when you display a website or
select an advertising link.
port An interface through which data is transferred via cable between a
computer and other devices, a network, or a direct connection to another
computer.
Portable Network Graphic (.jpg) A digital image file format that uses
lossless compression (compression that doesn’t lose data) and was created as a
patent-free alternative to the .gif file format.
Power button The button near the bottom of the Windows 10 Start menu that
provides access to the commands for putting the computer into Sleep mode
and shutting down or restarting the computer.
Preview pane In File Explorer, a pane used to show a preview of a file
selected in the Content pane. See also Content pane; Details pane; Navigation
pane.
primary display In a multiple-monitor system, the monitor that displays the

Welcome screen and taskbar. Most app windows appear on the primary display
when they first open. See also secondary display.
printer driver See driver.
private network A network that requires specific credentials for access and is
not available to the general public.
product key A unique registration code issued by the manufacturer of an app.
The key must be supplied during the setup process to verify that you have a
valid license to install and use the app. Also called a product ID, PID,
registration key, or CD key.
program icon See icon.
progress bar or ring An animated visual indicator of the percentage of
completion of a process.
property Identifying information about a file, folder, drive, device, or other
computer system element. Some properties are supplied automatically and
others are supplied by you. For example, the properties of a file include
information such as its file name, size, modification date, title, tags, and
comments.
Public folder In Windows, a storage folder system created by Windows and
accessible to all user accounts on the computer. Public folders are shared by all
user accounts on the computer and can be shared with other network users.
public network A network that permits anyone to connect and does not
require specific credentials.
Quick Link menu The menu that appears when you right-click the Start
button.
random access memory (RAM) A data storage area a computer uses to run
apps and temporarily store information. Information stored in RAM is erased
when the computer is switched off.
ReadyBoost See Windows ReadyBoost.
Recycle Bin The folder on your hard drive where Windows temporarily stores
files you delete. By default, the Recycle Bin is represented by an icon on the
desktop. You can recover deleted files from the Recycle Bin until you empty it.

refresh your PC To reset an operating system by using a method that restores
computer settings to the defaults but retains user files and settings.
registration key See product key.
registry A repository for information about the computer’s configuration. The
registry stores settings related to the hardware and software installed on the
computer. Registry settings are typically updated through the proper install and
uninstall procedures and apps. You can manually update the registry, but only
experienced users should undertake this task because mistakes can be
disastrous.
relative path A path that defines the position of a file or folder in relation to
the current location. Relative paths are frequently used in website navigational
code. See also absolute path; path.
Remote Desktop Connection The client software that enables users to
connect to a remote computer that has the Remote Desktop feature enabled or
to a remote desktop server.
remote printer A printer that is not connected directly to your computer. See
also local printer; network printer; shared printer.
removable media Anything used for information storage that is designed to be
easily inserted into and removed from a computer or portable device. Common
removable media include CD and DVD discs, in addition to removable
memory cards.
reset your PC To reset an operating system by using a method that restores
computer settings to the defaults and removes user files and settings.
resolution See screen resolution.
restore down To return a window from a maximized state to its previous size.
restore point A snapshot of your computer system settings taken by Windows
at regular intervals and before any major change, such as installing an app or
updating system files. If you experience problems with your system, you can
restore it to any saved restore point without undoing changes to your personal
files.
ribbon An area in a window in which commands and other controls are

displayed in functionally related groups. A ribbon can be divided into multiple
views, known as tabs, and every tab can contain multiple groups of controls.
Typically, a ribbon appears at the top of a window.
right-click To point to an interface element and press the secondary mouse
button one time.
right-drag To move an item on the screen by pointing to its title bar or handle,
holding down the secondary mouse button, and then moving the mouse. A
shortcut menu displaying possible actions appears when you release the mouse
button.
root Short for root folder or root directory. The highest or uppermost level in a
hierarchically organized set of information. The root is the folder from which
all other folders branch.
router See network router.
screen resolution The fineness or coarseness of detail attained by a monitor in
producing an image, measured in pixels, expressed as the number of pixels
wide by the number of pixels high. See also pixel.
screen saver A blank screen, picture, or moving images that Windows displays
after a specified period of inactivity. A screen saver can be used to save power
or to hide information while you are away from your desk.
ScreenTip Information that appears when you point to an item.
scroll bar A vertical or horizontal bar that you move to change the position of
content within a window.
search The process of seeking a particular file or specific data. A search is
carried out by an app through comparison or calculation to determine whether
a match to some pattern exists or whether some other criteria have been met.
search provider A company that provides a search engine that you can use to
find information on the internet.
search term The term you type in the search box of the taskbar, Settings
window, or any File Explorer window. Windows then filters the contents of the
available storage locations or of the folder window’s Content pane to include
only the items that contain the search term.

secondary display In a multiple-monitor system, the monitor onto which you
can expand apps so that you can increase your work area. See also primary
display.
share To make local files or resources available to other users of the same
computer or other computers on a network.
shared component A component, such as a DLL file, that is used by multiple
apps. When uninstalling an app that uses a shared component, Windows
requests confirmation before removing the component.
shared drive A drive that has been made available for other people on a
network to access.
shared folder A folder that has been made available for other people on a
network to access.
shared printer A printer connected to a computer that has been shared with
other computers on a network. See also local printer; network printer; remote
printer.
shortcut A link, usually represented by an icon, that opens an app, data file, or
device. For example, selecting a shortcut to Microsoft Word starts Word.
shortcut menu A menu displayed when you right-click an object, showing a
list of commands relevant to that object.
shut down To initiate the process that closes all your open apps and files, ends
your computing session, closes network connections, stops system processes,
stops the hard drive, and turns off the computer.
sign in To start a computing session by entering your credentials.
sign out To stop your computing session without affecting other users’
sessions.
single sign-on (SSO) account An account type that permits a user to log on to
a system once with a single set of credentials to access multiple apps or
services.
Sleep mode A Windows feature that saves any open files and the state of any
running apps to memory and then puts your computer into a power-saving
state.

SmartScreen An intelligent spam-filtering solution integrated across all
Microsoft email platforms.
Snap A Windows feature that enables users to easily display two documents
side by side, maximize a single document, and expand a window vertically by
simply dragging window borders to the edge of the screen.
Snipping Tool A Windows tool used to capture a screen shot, or snip, of any
object on the screen, and then annotate, save, or share the image.
software Apps that you use to do things with hardware. See also hardware.
software piracy The illegal reproduction and distribution of software.
sound card Hardware that enables audio information and music to be
recorded, played back, and heard on a computer.
Sound Recorder The app that facilitates recording voice from a microphone,
in addition to saving, editing, playing and sharing recorded audio clips.
spam An unsolicited and typically unwelcome message, often commercial or
political in nature, transmitted via the internet as a mass mailing (sometimes as
if from a fictitious user or domain) to a large number of recipients.
speech recognition The ability to interpret vocal commands or convert spoken
words into computer-readable text. Speech recognition apps enable you to
control an application or enter text by speaking into a microphone, rather than
by using a keyboard.
spyware Software that can display advertisements (such as pop-up ads),
collect information about you, or change settings on your computer, generally
without appropriately obtaining your consent.
Standard User account A type of Windows user account that allows the user
to install software and change system settings that do not affect other users or
the security of the computer. This account type is recommended for daily use.
See also Administrator account; user account.
Start menu A list of options displayed when you select the Start button. The
Start menu is your central link to all the apps installed on your computer, in
addition to all the tasks you can carry out with Windows 10.
Start screen An alternative full-screen version of the Start menu that displays

either pinned tiles or the app list.
Store See Windows Store.
subfolder A folder nested within another folder.
surf the web To browse information on the internet.
sync To reconcile the differences between files, email, appointments, and other
items stored on one computer, device, or in the cloud with versions of the same
files on another computer, device, or in the cloud. After the differences are
determined, both sets of items are updated.
system cache An area in the computer memory where Windows stores
information it might need to access quickly, for the duration of the current
computing session.
system drive The hard drive on which the operating system is installed.
system folder A folder created on the system drive that contains files required
by Windows 10.
System Restore A tool used to restore your computer to a previous state, if a
problem occurs, without losing your personal data files (such as Microsoft
Word documents, browsing history, drawings, favorites, or email).
tab In a dialog box, a separate page of settings within the dialog box window;
the tab title indicates the nature of the group. You can display the settings by
selecting the tab.
tabbed browsing An internet browser feature that enables you to open and
view multiple webpages or files in one window by displaying them on
different tabs. You can display a page by selecting its tab, or display a shortcut
menu of options for working with a page by right-clicking its tab.
tag In File Explorer, a keyword assigned to a file. See also keyword.
tap (touch) A gesture represented by placing a finger or tablet pen on the
screen and then lifting it up.
Task Manager A tool that provides information about apps and processes
running on the computer. Using Task Manager, you can end or run apps, end
processes, and display a dynamic overview of your computer’s performance.

task pane A fixed pane that appears on one side of an app window, containing
options related to the completion of a specific task.
taskbar A bar on the desktop that displays buttons you can select to run apps,
tools, and commands, in addition to buttons representing the windows of open
apps and files.
taskbar button A button on the taskbar representing an open window, file, or
app. See also pinned taskbar button.
taskbar search A search box from which you can locate apps, Control Panel
items, settings, files, email messages, and web results containing the search
string, grouped by category.
terabyte (TB) 1 trillion bytes, often incorrectly used to denote
1,099,511,627,776 (10244) bytes of data storage. (The correct term is
tebibyte.) In reference to data transfer rates, 1,000 GB.
theme A set of visual elements and sounds that applies a unified look to the
computer user interface. A theme can include a desktop background, screen
saver, window colors, and sounds. Some themes might also include icons and
mouse pointers.
tile A moveable object on the Start screen that opens apps or other customized
content, such as pinned websites.
tile folder An expandable group of Start screen tiles represented on the Start
screen by a single tile that displays the icons of the tiles within.
title bar The horizontal area at the top of a window that displays the title of
the app or file displayed in the window, in addition to buttons for controlling
the display of the window.
tool tabs In an app that uses the ribbon command structure, a ribbon tab that
hosts tools for working with a specific type of file or folder and appears when
a file or folder of that type is selected.
toolbar A horizontal or vertical bar that displays buttons representing
commands that can be used with the content of the current window. When
more commands are available than can fit on the toolbar, chevrons (>>) appear
at the right end of the toolbar; selecting the chevrons displays the additional
commands.

UAC See User Account Control.
UNC See Universal Naming Convention.
Uniform Resource Locator (URL) An address that uniquely identifies the
location of a website or page. URLs are used by web browsers to locate
internet resources.
Universal Naming Convention (UNC) A system for identifying the location
on a network of shared resources such as computers, drives, and folders. A
UNC address is in the form \\ComputerName\SharedFolder.
Universal Serial Bus (USB) A connection that provides data transfer
capabilities and power to a peripheral device. See also USB hub; USB port.
Universal Windows app An app that is built by using the Universal Windows
Platform (UWP), which was first introduced in Windows 8 as the Windows
Runtime. Universal Windows apps should run on any Windows 10 device,
from a phone to a desktop computer.
upgrade To replace older hardware with newer hardware or an earlier version
of an app with the current version.
URL See Uniform Resource Locator.
USB See Universal Serial Bus.
USB flash drive A portable flash memory card that plugs into a computer’s
USB port. You can store data on a USB flash drive or use all or part of the
available drive space to increase the operating system speed. See also Windows
ReadyBoost.
USB hub A device used to connect multiple USB devices to a single USB
port, or to connect one or more USB devices to USB ports on multiple
computers. The latter type of USB hub, called a sharing hub, operates as a
switch box to give control of the hub-connected devices to one computer at a
time. See also Universal Serial Bus; USB port.
USB port A connection that provides both power and data transfer capabilities
to a hardware device. See also Universal Serial Bus; USB hub.
user account On a Windows computer, a uniquely named account that allows
an individual to gain access to the system and to specific resources and

settings. Each user account includes a collection of information that describes
the way the computer environment looks and operates for that particular user,
in addition to a private folder not accessible by other people using the
computer, in which personal documents, pictures, media, and other files can be
stored. See also Administrator account; Standard User account.
user account button The button on the Start menu that provides access to the
commands for changing user account settings, locking the computer, or
logging off from Windows.
User Account Control (UAC) A Windows security feature that allows or
restricts actions by the user and the system to prevent malicious apps from
damaging the computer.
user account name A unique name identifying a user account to Windows.
user account picture An image representing a user account. User account
pictures are available only for computer-specific user accounts and not on
computers that are members of a network domain.
user credentials See credentials.
user interface (UI) The portion of an app with which a user interacts. Types of
user interfaces include command-line interfaces, menu-driven interfaces, and
graphical user interfaces.
video projector A device that projects a video signal from a computer onto a
projection screen by using a lens system.
virtual Representative of an object that doesn’t exist. Examples are virtual
folders (called libraries) and virtual printers.
virtual desktop A work area on a computer screen that contains different
groups of apps or content open and available for different tasks or aspects of
your life.
virtual printer An app that “prints” content to a file rather than on paper.
When viewed in the file, the content looks as it would if it were printed.
virus Malware that replicates, commonly by infecting other files in the system,
thus allowing the execution of the malware code and its propagation when
those files are activated.

web An abbreviation of World Wide Web. A worldwide network consisting of
millions of smaller networks that exchange data.
web browser A software app used to display webpages and to navigate the
internet, for example, Microsoft Edge or Internet Explorer.
web log See blog.
webcam A camera for use with a computer to transmit a video picture.
website A group of related webpages that is hosted by an HTTP server on the
World Wide Web or an intranet. The pages in a website typically cover one or
more topics and are interconnected through hyperlinks.
Welcome screen The screen that appears when you start your computer,
containing a link to each active user account.
WEP See Wired Equivalent Privacy.
WiDi See Miracast.
Wi-Fi Protected Access (WPA) A security method used by wireless networks.
WPA and WPA2 encrypt the information that is sent between computers on a
wireless network and authenticate users to help ensure that only authorized
people can access the network. WPA2 is more secure than WPA.
wildcard character In a search operation, a keyboard character, such as an
asterisk (*), a question mark (?), or a pound sign (#), that represents one or
more characters in a search term.
window A frame within which your computer runs an app or displays a folder
or file. Several windows can be open simultaneously. Windows can be sized,
moved, minimized to a taskbar button, maximized to take up the entire screen,
or closed.
Windows Defender Initially provided in earlier versions of Windows as anti-
spyware, an app that now serves as anti-virus software in Windows 10.
Windows Firewall A security feature that is used to set restrictions on what
traffic is allowed to enter your network from the internet.
Windows ReadyBoost A feature introduced in Windows 7 that makes it
possible to increase the available system memory by using a USB flash drive

as a memory-expansion device. See also USB flash drive.
Windows Store The online store where users can learn about and download
apps, games, music, and more for Windows devices.
Windows To Go A feature of Windows 10 Enterprise and Windows 10
Education that provides a predefined image of a computer from a USB flash
drive instead of installing the image on the computer.
Windows Update A feature through which Windows catalogs your computer’s
hardware and software components, communicates with the Microsoft Update
online database, and identifies any updates that are available for your operating
system, software, or hardware drivers.
Wired Equivalent Privacy (WEP) An algorithm-based security protocol
designed for use with wireless networks. WEP was the original wireless
network security protocol and, although not as secure as the more recent Wi-Fi
Protected Access (WPA) protocol, is still an option in most wireless router
configurations.
Wireless Display (WiDi) See Miracast.
wizard A tool that walks you through the steps necessary to accomplish a
particular task.
workgroup A peer-to-peer computer network through which computers can
share resources, such as files, printers, and internet connections.
WPA See Wi-Fi Protected Access.
XML See Extensible Markup Language.
XML Paper Specification (XPS) A digital file format for saving documents.
XPS is based on XML, preserves document formatting, and enables file
sharing. XPS was developed by Microsoft but is platform-independent and
royalty-free.
XPS See XML Paper Specification.
zipped folder See compressed folder.

Index
Symbols
3D Text screen saver 70
A
About Me menu (Cortana Notebook) 315
absolute paths, defined 577
accent colors
applying to Windows elements 64
configuring 63
desktop 62
setting 62, 64
accessibility features
configuring 470
configuring device hardware shortcut 473
getting Windows recommendations 472
High Contrast settings 473
keyboard and mouse settings 482
Magnifier settings 476
Narrator and Audio Description settings 479
previewing/applying High Contrast settings 474
turning on keyboard features 483
turning on mouse features 484
accessibility settings 30
accessing
desktop icon settings 102
Microsoft account settings 140
Store (Windows Store) 136
accessory apps 134
accounts
local 6

Microsoft 6
settings 30
Store (Windows Store) 138
action buttons (Action Center) 492, 494
Action Center 16
action buttons 490–491
applying accent color to 64
app notifications 145
colors 62
defined 577
displaying pane 493
managing messages 19
opening 149
taskbar icon, displaying/hiding 495
activating built-in Guest accounts 401
activation, defined 577
active apps, displaying 515
active network adapters 258
active windows, defined 577
adapters, networks 258
Add Notes tool (Microsoft Edge) 343
Add Printer wizard 248
Address bar 169, 577
Address toolbar (taskbar) 115
administrative permissions, revoking 402
Administrator accounts 380, 382, 400, 577
administrators, creating user accounts and changing properties 388
Adult user accounts 381
advanced indexing options 501
advanced search options 498, 499
advanced settings
Microsoft Edge 351
power plans 466
Advanced Sharing Settings window (Control Panel) 271, 275
advertising ID 532

Airplane Mode action button 492
Alarms & Clock app 128, 425
All-in-One computers 577
allowing changes to taskbar 112
alphabet-specific fonts 434
annotating webpages 343
app buttons, multiple, changing display of 114
app icons 581
app info/status, displaying on Lock screen 73
app lists
contextual, displaying on Start menu 55
displaying 127
index letters (Start menu) 126
jump lists, displaying/hiding 55
scrolling to specific app letter 127
Start menu 54–55, 124
app-management icons, displaying 18
app notifications, turning on/off 147
app shortcuts 93, 96, 101
app tiles, displaying/hiding live content 93
AppData folder 157, 517
applying themes 75
built-in 76
customization 78
from Store 80–91
panoramic backgrounds 78
Windows website 82
appointments, Cortana reminders 326
apps
arranging shortcuts to on taskbar 95
automatically starting 517
built-in 128
creating shortcuts for currently running 95
creating shortcuts to on taskbar 95
default 502

defined 578, 590
desktop 134
displaying active and nonresponsive 515
displaying info on Lock screen 73
displaying purchased/installed 143
files 156
installing 142
installing purchased on different computer 144
installing Store apps 135
live information 133
locating and starting 124
managing default 334
managing startup 127, 516
notifications 145
People bar 130
pinning to taskbar 94
preventing automatic startup 517
running as an administrator 128
searching Store for 136
settings 30
shortcuts 92
starting 128, 517
switching among from taskbar 96
uninstalling/reinstalling Store 141
virtual desktops 509
arranging
desktop icons 101
desktop shortcuts 98
shortcuts on taskbar 95
windows 37
windows in grid 40
aspect ratio 451, 577
assistance, Cortana See Cortana
Audio Description feature, turning on 482
Audio Description settings 479

audio devices 228
managing playback device settings 232
notifications 231
switching playback devices 231
switching recording devices 233
audio narration options, configuring 481
audio notifications
apps, turning off 149–150
Microsoft Edge 337
audio output jacks 230
authentication
two-factor 564
Welcome screen methods 416
automatic app updates 144
automatically starting apps 517
B
backgrounds
defined 577
desktop 11, 56
Lock screen, customizing 66
backing up
computer systems 557
creating system image for 558
data, using File History 551
drives to system images 557
files to OneDrive 544
with system images 557
Balanced power plan 461
bandwidth, defined 577
banners, turning off 149–150
Battery Saver
action button 492
feature 468

Bing (search engine) 497
biometric identification 410, 564
BIOS
accessing 558
Setup Utility 563
bitmap (.bmp), defined 577
blank screen saver 70
blocking pop-up windows 365–366
blogs, defined 577
Bluetooth action button 492
.bmp (bitmap), defined 577
booting
boot images 558
bootable USB recovery drives 557, 561
from bootable DVD 557
from recovery discs 563
from recovery drives 563
wiped computers 557
broadband connections, defined 577
browsers
defined 591
displaying websites in Microsoft Edge 335
emulating different 369
opening tabs in Microsoft Edge 337
pinning Hub to window (Microsoft Edge) 348
browsing
apps 137
defined 577
history (Microsoft Edge) 348
built-in accounts 401
built-in apps 128
built-in power plans 461
built-in themes 76
button options, mice 236
buttons xvi

bytes, defined 578
C
Camera Roll library 158
capturing user account picture 407
caret browsing 368–369
cascading windows 38–40
centering images (desktop background) 58
central processing units (CPUs), defined 578
Change Homegroup Sharing Settings wizard 295
check boxes, displaying (File Explorer) 167
Child user accounts 381, 390
children and online safety 363
Children’s Online Privacy Protection Act (COPPA) 363
clean installation of Windows 10, reverting to 542
clearing exceptions for pop-up windows 366
clicking, defined 578
Clipboard 199–201
clocks 432–433
Closed Captions (Ease Of Access) 470
cloud storage 544
collapsing folders 170
colors, desktop background 61–62
columns, Details view, resizing 180
Command Prompt tool 135
commands, defined 578
community-created themes 78
component information, displaying 222
compressed folders 196
defined 578
displaying contents of 197
extracting files 198
working with files in 197
compressing files or folders 196–197, 578

computer configuration, file sharing 294
computer dictation 443
computer functionality, restoring 534
Computer Management console 387
computer name, changing 290
computer settings 423
accessibility features 470
device displays 448
Lock screen 65
power 461
region and language 433
speech 443
computer systems, backing up 557
computing sessions
ending 41
starting 5
configuration settings, locating 31
configuring
accessibility features 470
audio narration options 481
browser security settings 363
computers, file sharing 294
Cortana 310–312
Cortana information preferences 325
desktop system icons 102
device hardware shortcut for accessibility tool 473
language options 438
network connection security 270
Night Light screen color 459
Night Light start/end times 460
power management settings 462
power options 461
privacy settings 531
Quick Action buttons 490–491
Reading view settings 362

screen savers 70–71
settings, Control Panel 32
settings, Settings window 28, 32
setting synchronization 417
Start menu 50
visual narration options 482
voice recognition 445
Windows Hello 414
Connect action button 492
Connect pane 225
Connected Accounts menu (Cortana Notebook) 315
Connected Home menu (Cortana Notebook) 316
connecting Cortana, to services 319–320
connecting local accounts to Microsoft accounts 403
connecting your computer to networks 258
connections
expanding capacity 216
icons 259
printers 245
contacts, pinning to People bar 16, 130
content filters, Bing 497
Content pane (File Explorer) 162, 578
Content view 178
contextual tabs 578, 589
control levels, UAC (User Account Control) 385
Control Panel 26
defined 578
displaying home page 34
Ease Of Access Center 471
settings 32–33
Speech Recognition page 444
views 32
COPPA (Children’s Online Privacy Protection Act) 363
copying
folders/files 199

folders/files to Clipboard 200
selected items to folder 201
Cortana 14, 20, 307
activating 308
adding reminders 326
configuring 308
configuring connections 314
configuring for keyboard prompt 311
configuring for Lock screen listening 312
configuring for voice prompt 310
configuring information preferences 325
configuring phone notifications 330
connecting to services 319–320
countries and regions 313
displaying/hiding 312
displaying settings page 309
enabling skills 322
history settings 330
information saved by 328
information tracking 323
managing access to info 328
managing information/settings 327
Notebook 314–315
privacy settings 533
providing your name 316
saved locations 318
saving locations 317
search settings 329
Cortana settings 30
Cortana Tips information-tracking options (Cortana) 323
country/region, specifying for local content 436
CPUs (central processing units), defined 578
Credential Manager 358
credentials, defined 578
cursors, defined 578

custom power plans 466
D
data
backing up using File History 551
displaying transfer information 269
data usage, displaying by app 269
date and time
changing formats 430
changing format to specific region 441
changing time zones 429
displaying current 426
displaying multiple clocks 432–433
manually setting 427
overview 424
synchronizing with internet time servers 428
taskbar 17
Date & Time settings 426–427
default apps
choosing 504
managing 334
specifying 502
default search engine, changing 355
deleting
account passwords 408
custom power plans 469
folders and files 202–203
homegroups 289
saved information (Microsoft Edge) 358
turn off confirmation when 203
user accounts 395, 399
deletion confirmation, turning off 203
Descriptive Video Service (DVS) 480
desktop

accent colors 62
accessing icon settings 102
background; See desktop background 61
configuring desktop system icons 102
creating shortcuts on 100
defined 578
displaying in Task View 510
displaying on multiple screens 222
extending/duplicating display of 225
hiding/displaying icons on 101
icon organization 98, 101
icon sizing 101
Peek function turning on/off 114
Recycle Bin 11
removing shortcuts from 101
shortcuts 12, 97
showing on only one display 223
desktop apps
defined 124, 578
running as an administrator 128
tools 134
desktop background 11, 56
basing accent colors on 63
centering images 58
colors 57, 61
displaying images 59
pictures as 57
positioning images on 57
setting image for 58
slideshow 57
desktop computers, defined 578
desktop icon settings, accessing 102
desktop icons, displaying/hiding 101
desktop shortcuts 12
Desktop toolbar (taskbar) 115

desktops (virtual) 511–512
Details pane (File Explorer) 162, 166
defined 578
displaying 176
Details view (File Explorer) 176, 178
adding/rearranging/emoving properties 179
resizing columns 180
Details view, sorting folder content in 182
device display settings, customizing 448
device drivers
checking compatibility of 217
defined 579
device information, displaying 221, 268, 269
Device Manager window 220
devices, defined 578
Devices settings 29
contents 219
Printers & Scanners pane 246
dialog boxes, defined 578
dictating to your computer 443
dictation toolbar 443
disabling
family user accounts 395
network adapters 279
non-family user accounts 398
disconnecting
all computers from homegroup 288
from wired networks 264
from wireless networks 264
discovering networks 261, 270
Disk Cleanup, defined 578
Disk Defragmenter, defined 584
display names, family accounts 394
display options (File Explorer)
changing folder options 183

displaying different views of folders/files 176
displaying/hiding panes 175
grouping/sorting/filtering folder content 180
sort/filter folder content 181
display settings 448, 450
Display settings pane 224, 451
orientation of on-screen content 453
screen brightness 458
screen orientation/resolution 451
size, user interface elements 452
displays, adjusting relative position of 227
DLLs (dynamic-link libraries) 156
Docked view (Magnifier tool) 476
Documents library 158, 171
domain name (website addresses) 360
domains, defined 579
double-clicking, defined 579
downloading practice files xvii
Downloads And Updates page 142, 144
downloads, managing 144
dragging
defined 579
windows 39
drivers 217, 579
drives, sharing 299
duplicating displays 223, 225
DVI monitor ports 216
DVS (Descriptive Video Service) 480
dynamic, defined 579
dynamic-link libraries (DLLs) 156
E
Ease Of Access features 470
Ease Of Access settings 30

displaying 472
synchronizing 417
Easy Access menu (Home tab) 165
Eat & Drink information-tracking options (Cortana) 323
e-book edition xix
Edge See Microsoft Edge
editing advanced settings, power plans 466
emulating different browsers 369
enabling
Cortana skills 322
disabled user accounts 395, 398
ending computing sessions 41
errors, reporting xix
Ethernet
defined 579
ports 216, 258
executable files 156, 579
expanding
connection capacity 216
folders 170
expansion cards 216, 579
expansion slots, defined 579
extending displays 223, 225
Extensible Markup Language (XML), defined 579
extensions, defined 579
external devices 215–216
adding/removing 220
audio 228
displaying desktop on multiple screens 222
installing 217
keyboard management 242
locating device information 219
mice 236
printers 245
terminology 216

external hard drives 162
external removable storage devices 162
extracting files, compressed folders 198
Extra Large Icons view (File Explorer) 177
F
Family & Other People settings 388
Family Safety 390
family user accounts 383
creating 390–391
deleting 395
disabling 395
enabling disabled account 395
Family Safety 390
managing 394
Favorites bar (Microsoft Edge)
defined 579
displaying/hiding 349
Favorites list (Microsoft Edge) 341
displaying 348
importing to Microsoft Edge 347
organizing 349
Federal Trade Commission, children and online safety 363
feedback, submitting xix
fetching files to OneDrive 550
File And Printer Sharing settings, network security profiles 271
file downloads (Microsoft Edge), displaying 348
File Explorer 155
See also File Explorer Details pane; File Explorer Navigation pane; File
Explorer Preview pane
advanced searches 498
changing default starting folder 185
changing folder options 183
changing views in 178

content pane 162
Content pane, defined 578
copying to Clipboard 200
defined 579
Details view 176
display/hide items 180
display options 175
displaying different views of folders/files 176
File menu 164
filtering search results 500
grouping/sorting/filtering folder content 180
Homegroup node (Navigation pane) 161
Home tab 164–165
Navigation And Search bar 169
online/offline file indicator icons 545
panes, displaying 175
Preview pane 162, 585
refining searches in 187
ribbon 163–164
searching in 187, 498
selecting folders/files in 199–200
setting search options 500
Share tab 165
sort/filter folder content 181
starting 170
views 177
View tab 165
window layout 162
File Explorer Details pane 162, 177
defined 578
displaying/hiding 176
File Explorer Navigation pane 162
defined 583
displaying/hiding 176
Libraries node 161, 171

Network node 161
Quick Access node 160
This PC node 160–162
File Explorer Preview pane, displaying/hiding 176
File History
activating 552
backing up data 551
backups 171
defined 579
displaying 166
viewing previous versions 554
File menu (File Explorer) 164
file name extensions 167, 361, 579
file properties, removing 207
file sharing
in homegroups 293
with other network users 294
File Sharing Connections settings, network security profiles 271
file storage folders 160–161
files
backing up to OneDrive 547
backing up using File History 551
compressing 196–197
copying to Clipboard 200
created by apps 156
created by you 156
creating and renaming 194
cutting to Clipboard 200
deleting large 204
deleting/restoring 202–203
displaying properties 208
displaying recent files 25
displaying synchronized 546
display options (File Explorer) 175
File Explorer See File Explorer

managing versions 555
moving/copying 199
naming conventions 194
OneDrive, accessing recent 547
opening 506
optimizing folders for 174
properties 205
recovering from OneDrive when deleted 547
recovery, defined 579
removing personal information from 209
renaming 195
searching 186
selecting 199–200
sharing network files 289, 292
sorting in any view 182
viewing backed up versions 554
Files On Demand (OneDrive) 545
filling images (desktop background) 57
Filter Keys (Ease Of Access) 482
filters
Bing 497
defined 579
filtering
File Explorer search results 500
folder content 180–181
taskbar search results 497
Finance information-tracking options (Cortana) 323
fingerprint authentication 410
fingerprint identification, configuring 414
fitting images (desktop background) 58
flash drives, defined 590
flicking
defined 580
touchscreen interaction 575
Flip feature, defined 580

folder content (File Explorer)
displaying 170
displaying as icons 178
displaying as list 179
filtering 181, 183
grouping 182
sorting in Details view 182
ungrouping 182
folder icons
changing for libraries 175
settings 207
folder list options 53
folder name (website addresses) 361
folder options 183–185
folder properties, customizing 206–207
folder view (File Explorer), changing 178
folders 156
adding/removing on Start menu 54
adding to libraries 173–174
AppData 157
app list 126
changing icon of a library 175
changing options 183
changing view (File Explorer) 178
compressing 196, 197
copying selected items to 201
copying to Clipboard 200
creating/renaming 194–195
cutting to Clipboard 200
defined 580
deleting/restoring 202–203
displaying content as icons 178
displaying content as list 179
displaying properties 208
display options (File Explorer) 175

File Explorer See File Explorer
grouping content 180
libraries 158
moving/copying 199
moving selected items to 201
optimizing for a file type 174
Program Files 156
properties 205
Public 157
removing from a library 175
renaming 195
searching 186
selecting 199–200
sharing 300
Users 157
Windows 158
font features, displaying supplemental 439
form entries (Microsoft Edge) 357
formats, date and time settings 430
frames, defined 580
fresh start for computer 542
Full Screen view (Magnifier tool) 476
full-size screen configuration, Start menu 50
full-size Start screen 23
G
gadgets, defined 580
games
displaying purchased/installed 143
installing 142
purchased, installing on different computer 144
gaming settings 30
GB (gigabytes) 196, 580
Gbps, defined 580

general keyboard shortcuts 574
geofencing 533
gestures, defined 580
gestures (touchscreen tips) 576
Getting Around information-tracking options (Cortana) 323
.gif (Graphics Interchange Format), defined 580
gigabytes (GB) 196, 580
glyphs, defined 580
graphical user interface (GUI), defined 580
Graphics Interchange Format (.gif), defined 580
grouping folder content 180, 182
Guest accounts 400–401, 580
GUI (graphical user interface), defined 580
H
handwriting recognition, language-specific features 434
hard drives, managing 168
hardware
defined 580
displaying information 222
Hardware Compatibility Checker 217
HDMI ports 216
headphone jacks 230
height, taskbar 113
help, with Microsoft software and hardware xix
help, with this book xix
Hibernate mode, defined 580
hidden folders, AppData 157
hidden items, displaying 167, 180
hidden windows, retrieving 225
hiding
Action Center taskbar icon 495
Cortana 312
custom taskbar toolbars 116–117

desktop icons 101
Details pane (File Explorer) 176
File Explorer panes 175
items in Quick Access list 185
libraries 173, 175
library folders from Navigation pane 175
live content, app tiles 93
Navigation pane (File Explorer) 176
Preview pane (File Explorer) 176
security profile settings 277
standard taskbar buttons 113
taskbar 114
taskbar toolbar item names 117
taskbar toolbar names 117
taskbar toolbars 116
thumbnails 18
High Contrast (Ease Of Access) 470, 473
applying most recent/default 475
modifying settings 475
previewing/applying 474
High Performance power plan 461
history settings (Cortana), managing for devices/searches 330
home pages 352, 580
Home tab (File Explorer) 164–165
homegroup connections 281–283
HomeGroup connection settings, network security profiles 271
homegroup members, defined 580
Homegroup node (File Explorer) 161
HomeGroup troubleshooter 289
HomeGroup window
Control Panel 284
File Explorer 283
homegroups
connecting/removing computers 288
connecting to resources 288

creating 284
defined 580
deleting 289
disconnecting all computers 288
joining computers to 287
passwords 285–286
resources 295
sharing files 293
sharing folders/libraries 296
hotspots, defined 581
HTML (Hypertext Markup Language), defined 581
HTTP (Hypertext Transfer Protocol) 360
HTTPS protocol 360
Hub, pinning to browser (Microsoft Edge) 348
hubs 216, 581
hyperlinks, defined 581
Hypertext Markup Language (HTML), defined 581
Hypertext Transfer Protocol (HTTP) 360
I
ICANN (the Internet Corporation for Assigned Names and Numbers) 360
icons
defined 581
hiding/displaying on desktop 101
setting size of on desktop 101
identity verification 564
IEEE 1394 ports 216
images
as desktop background 57
displaying one on Lock screen 66
panoramic backgrounds, themes 78
IM (instant messaging), defined 581
index letters on app list (Start menu) 126
index, search 498

changing advanced indexing options 501
changing indexed locations 501
rebuilding 502
information-analysis tools, Cortana 20
information apps 133
Information bar, defined 581
information management apps 129
information services, connecting to Cortana 319
information technology (IT), defined 581
inline ads, blocking 532
InPrivate browsing 367
defined 581
starting session 368
Input devices, defined 581
insertion points, defined 581
Insider Builds 528
Install The Printer Driver page (Add Printer wizard) 249
installing
additional system languages 436
apps or games 142
Language Interface Packs 438
peripheral devices 217
plug-and-play printers 247
purchased apps/games on different computer 144
Store apps 135
supplemental font features 434
updates 527
instant messaging (IM), defined 581
interface, defined 590
internal hard drives 162
internal peripheral devices 216
internal removable storage drives 162
International Atomic Time 424
internet connections, versus network connections 260
Internet Corporation for Assigned Names and Numbers (ICANN) 360

Internet Explorer 132, 369
Internet Protocol (IP) addresses 360, 581
internet service provider (ISP), defined 581
internet settings 29
internet time servers 424, 428
IP (Internet Protocol) addresses 360, 581
ISP (internet service provider), defined 581
IT (information technology), defined 581
J
.jpg (JPEG) file format, defined 581
jump lists 24–25
defined 581
displaying/hiding 55
pinning items to 97
taskbar buttons 96
K
KB (kilobytes), defined 582
Kbps, defined 581
key repeat delay/rate, changing 244
keyboard accessibility features, turning on 483
keyboard language, changing 440
keyboard management
changing key repeat delay/rate 244
configuring text input settings 243
peripheral devices 242
settings 482
shortcuts 569
turning on accessibility features 483
keyboard properties 244
keywords, defined 582
keys xvi
kilobytes (KB), defined 582

L
Language Interface Packs 433, 438
language preferences, synchronizing 416
language settings 30, 433
changing Windows display language 440
configuring options 438
installing additional system languages 436
laptop computers, defined 582
layout options (File Explorer) 166
Lens view (Magnifier tool) 476, 478
levels of control, UAC (User Account Control) 385
libraries 158
adding folders 173–174
changing folder icon 175
creating 160, 173
defined 582
displaying/hiding 173
displaying properties 173
File Explorer See File Explorer
hiding 175
hiding folders from Navigation pane 175
managing 158
opening 173
optimizing for a file type 174
optimizing for specific file types 172
removing folders from 175
Libraries node (File Explorer) 161
backups 171
displaying/hiding 173
limiting system notifications 149
Links toolbar (taskbar) 115
live content, displaying/hiding on app tiles 93
live information apps 133
Live Tiles 93, 104

local accounts 6, 380
connecting to Microsoft accounts 403
creating 397
defined 582
passwords 405, 408
pictures 404
switching to, from a Microsoft account 403
local, defined 582
local printers 247, 582
local user accounts, creating 397
Location action button 492
location-specific language variations 433
Lock screen 4
customizing 65
defined 582
displaying app status information on 73
displaying one image on 66
slideshow 68, 72
tips 73
Windows Spotlight 72
locking
computer 41–42
defined 582
M
Magnifier tool 470
changing Lens size 478
changing mode 477
changing tool appearance when inactive 479
colors, inverting 479
configuring settings 476
defined 582
magnification level, changing 478–479
magnification views 476

starting automatically 479
turning on/off 477
mail servers, defined 582
malicious sites, SmartScreen Filter 364
malware
defined 582
guarding against with Microsoft Edge 364
mapping drives, defined 582
Math Input Panel 134
maximizing windows 35–36, 582
MB (megabytes), defined 582
Mbps, defined 582
media
defined 582
management apps 132
streaming settings, network security profiles 271
Meetings & Reminders information-tracking options (Cortana) 323
megabytes (MB), defined 582
memory expansion using ReadyBoost 218
menu bars, defined 582
menus
app list 124
defined 582
Store account 139
messages, displaying/managing 19
metadata, defined 582
Microphone Setup Wizard 234
microphones
Cortana verbal cues 308
types of 230
USB-connected 229
Microsoft accounts 6, 380
accessing settings 140
and Store purchases 139
connecting to local accounts 403

identity verification 564
passwords 405, 409
pictures 404, 407
switching to a local account 403
Microsoft Edge 132, 334
changing to different default search engine 355
configuring Reading view settings 362
configuring security settings 363
customizing content 354
defined 582
deleting saved information 358
displaying browsing history 348
displaying Favorites list 348
displaying file downloads 348
displaying Reading list 348
displaying webpages 338–339
displaying websites 335
finding/saving/sharing information 340
guarding against malware 364
importing Favorites list to 347
managing passwords 357
managing settings 351
moving between webpages on tabs 339
opening new browser tabs in 337
pinning webpages to Start menu 350
previewing all open webpages 338
printing webpages 350
reading articles 349
Reading view 336
refreshing webpages 339
removing webpages from Reading list 349
saving passwords 357
starting 337
switching site display to Internet Explorer 369
switching webpage display to/from Reading view 339

toolbar 335
troubleshooting browsing issues 368
Microsoft Family Safety 390
minimized windows, restoring 37
minimizing windows 19, 37–38, 582
Miracast 222, 225, 583
Mobile Hotspot action button 492
modems, defined 583
monitoring system tasks 512
monitors, displaying desktop on multiple screens 222
More Details view (Task Manager) 513, 515
most used apps, on Start menu 24, 54, 55
motherboards, defined 583
mouse accessibility features 482, 484
Mouse Keys (Ease Of Access) 482
mouse management
button settings 238
button/wheel options 236
pointer appearance 239
pointer functionality 240
pointer icons 240
wheel functionality 241
mouse ports 216
Movies & TV app 132
moving
apps to different desktops 511
between desktops 511
directly to locations 170
folders/files 199
selected items to folder 201
taskbar 110, 113
taskbar buttons 96
through list of recent locations 170
tile groups, Start menu 109
tiles on Start menu 106

up one folder 170
windows 37, 39
multiple app buttons, changing display of 114
multiple display devices 222
moving mouse between 224
specifying position of taskbar on 228
Multiple Displays settings 225
multiport hubs 216
multi-touch gestures, defined 583
Music library 158
Music menu (Cortana Notebook) 315
music streaming services, connecting to Cortana 320
My Library (Store) 141
Mystify screen saver 70
N
name of computer, changing 290
naming Start menu tile groups 108
Narrator (Ease Of Access) 470
configuring audio options 481
configuring settings 479
configuring visual options 482
defined 583
selecting voice 480
turning on 480
Navigation And Search bar (File Explorer) 169
navigation, defined 583
Navigation pane (File Explorer) 162, 170
defined 583
displaying/hiding 176
hiding library folders from 175
options 166
renaming files/folders in 195
Network action button 492

network adapters 258
defined 583
disabling 279
displaying status 270
enabling 279
resetting 280
Network And Sharing Center
defined 583
displaying connection info in 269
network connections
changing security profile assigned to 277
configuring security 270
displaying detailed info about 269
displaying info in Network And Sharing Center 269
displaying info in Settings 269
displaying information about 264
displaying speed of 269
sharing files 289, 292
troubleshooting 277–278
versus Internet connections 260
network discovery 261, 292
defined 583
settings, network security profiles 271
turning on 262
network domains, defined 583
network drives, defined 583
network hubs, defined 583
network interface cards 258
Network & Internet settings page 260
Network node (File Explorer) 161
network printers 246, 583
network profiles, defined 583
network routers, defined 583
network security profile settings 271
network settings 29

network share, defined 584
network troubleshooting tools, displaying 280
Network window 264–265, 268
networks
connecting to 258
connecting to wired/wireless 261
connection icons 259
defined 258, 583
disconnecting from wired/wireless 264
News app 133
news feed (Microsoft Edge), customizing 354
News information-tracking options (Cortana) 323
Night Light
configuring screen color 459
configuring start/end times 460
turning on/off 459
Night Light action button 492
non-family user accounts See also accounts
creating 396
deleting 399
enabling/disabling 398
nonresponsive apps, displaying 515
Notebook (Cortana) 314–315
Notepad 134
notification area 16
defined 584
displaying optional buttons for 113
notification icons, standard 16
notifications
apps 145
audio devices 231
displaying 19
temporarily turning off 150
turning off 149
Notifications & Actions settings 146

O
OEM (original equipment manufacturer), defined 584
offline, defined 584
OneDrive
accessing files 545, 547
backing up files to 547
defined 584
fetching files 550
managing settings 548
opening online 546
overview 544
recovering deleted files from, accessing recent 547
shortcut to 544
signing in 545
storage size 544
storing files 545
synchronizing folders 549
online, defined 584
online safety for children 363
on-screen content, orientation 453
On-Screen Keyboard (Ease Of Access) 482, 584
On The Go information-tracking options (Cortana) 324
opaque/transparent UI elements, switching between 65
operating systems, defined 584
optical character recognition, language-specific features 434
Optimize Drives, defined 584
option buttons, defined 584
Options button, touchscreen tile management 94
options, defined 584
organizing
desktop shortcuts 98, 101
Favorites list 349
orientation, on-screen content 453
original equipment manufacturer (OEM), defined 584

P
Packages information-tracking options (Cortana) 324
page name (website addresses) 361
panoramic images, themes 78
parallel ports 216, 584
partitions, defined 584
password hints, defined 584
Password Protected Sharing settings, network security profiles 271
password reset disks, defined 584
passwords
defined 584
homegroups 285–286
local accounts 408
Microsoft accounts 409
picture 410, 415
saving and managing (Microsoft Edge) 357
synchronizing 416
system power settings 465
user accounts 388, 405
pasting items from Clipboard 201
paths, defined 584
pattern screen saver 70
Peek function, turning on/off 114
peer-to-peer networks, defined 584
People bar 16, 113, 130
peripheral devices 215
adding/removing 220
audio 228
defined 584
displaying desktop on multiple screens 222
installing 217
internal/external 216
keyboard management 242
locating device information 219

mice 236
printers 245
terminology 216
permission levels, sharing files 292
permissions
dialog box 301
overview 380
revoking administrative permissions 402
user accounts 382, 401
personal files and folders 156–157, 585
personal identification number (PIN) 410
changing 413
creating 412, 414
defined 585
personal information, removing 207, 209
personalization settings 29
phishing 364, 585
photos
as desktop backgrounds 57
Microsoft accounts 407
user accounts 404
Pick Up Where I Left Off information-tracking options (Cortana) 324
picture passwords 410, 415, 585
pictures
as desktop backgrounds 57
Microsoft accounts 407
user accounts 388, 404
Pictures library 158
PID, defined 586
PIN (personal identification number) 410
changing 413
creating 412
defined 585
pinching (touchscreen interaction) 575
pinned taskbar buttons, defined 585

pinned tiles
colors 62
displaying 52
moving on Start menu 106–107
resizing on Start menu 107
pinning
apps to desktop 97
apps to Start screen 93
apps to taskbar 94
contacts to People bar 130
defined 585
folders to the Quick Access list 165
Hub to browser (Microsoft Edge) 348
items to jump lists 97
webpages to Start menu 350
piracy, defined 588
pixels
defined 585
screen resolution and 449–450
playback devices
managing settings 232
switching between 231
plug-and-play devices 217, 247, 585
.jpg (Portable Network Graphic), defined 585
pointers (mice) 239–240, 585
pointing devices, defined 585
pointing (mouse), defined 585
pop-up windows
blocking 365, 366
clearing granted exceptions 366
defined 585
Portable Network Graphic (.jpg), defined 585
ports 216, 585
Power button, defined 585
power options

Battery Saver feature 468
configuring 461
editing advanced settings 466
management settings 462
password requirements 465
resetting plan to defaults 468
shutdown settings and triggers 465
power plans
built-in 461, 463
creating custom 466
deleting custom 469
modifying 463
Power Saver power plan 461
practice files, downloading xvii
preventing changes to taskbar 112
Preview pane (File Explorer) 162, 166
defined 585
displaying/hiding 176
previewing open webpages (Microsoft Edge) 338
prices, Store apps 137
primary displays 223, 226–227, 585
printer sharing 250
printer drivers, defined 579
printer ports, parallel 216
printers 245
displaying status 250
local printers, installing 247
managing settings 251
network printers 246
plug-and-play printers 247
virtual printers 252
Printers & Scanners settings 246
printing webpages 350
privacy, browsers 367
privacy settings 31

advertising ID 532
categories 531
configuring 531
Cortana 533
managing 534
private networks 273–274
defined 585
homegroups and 281, 289
processes
identifying resource-intensive 515
startup, managing 516
product icons, defined 581
product keys, defined 586
productivity apps 129
profiles, users 381
Program Files folder 156
progress bars, defined 586
Project action button 492
properties
adding/removing/rearranging 179
defined 586
files and folders 205–207
Recycle Bin 204
removing 208
protocol (website addresses) 360
PS/2 keyboard ports 216
Public Desktop folder 12
Public Folder Sharing settings, network security profiles 271
Public folders 157
defined 586
preventing access to 294
sharing 292
public networks 272–274
defined 586
homegroups and 289

sharing Public folders on 293
purchased apps/games 143–144
putting computer to sleep 41–42
Q
Quick Access list 185
Quick Access node (File Explorer) 160
Quick Action buttons 490–491
Quick Assist 134
Quick Link menu 13
defined 586
displaying 34
Quiet Hours 148
Quiet Hours action button 492
R
RAM (random access memory), defined 586
Read permission 292
reading articles, Microsoft Edge Reading list 349
Reading list 341, 344, 348–349
Reading view (Microsoft Edge) 336
configuring 362
switching to/from display of 339
Read-only attribute 205
Read/Write permission 292
ReadyBoost 218, 591
rearranging properties, Details view 179
rebuilding search index 502
recently added apps, displaying on Start menu 55
recently added apps (Start menu) 24, 54
Recently Opened Items setting 55
reconnecting computers to homegroup 288
recording devices, switching between 233
recovering from system problems 534

recovery discs, booting from 563
recovery drives
bootable USB 557, 561
booting from 563
creating 558
Recycle Bin 11
bypassing 202
defined 586
restoring items from 202–203
size 204
turning off deletion confirmation 203
Recycle Bin Tools group (tool tabs) 169
refining File Explorer searches 187
refreshing webpages 339
refreshing your computer 539
refreshing your PC, defined 586
Region & Language settings 435–436
regional settings 433
copying to Windows system screens 442
date and time formats 441
registration keys, defined 586
registries, defined 586
reinstalling Store apps 141
relative paths, defined 586
relative position of displays, adjusting 227
reminders, Cortana 326
Remote Desktop Connection, defined 586
remote printers, defined 586
removable media, defined 586
removable storage devices 162
removing
app shortcuts 93, 96, 101
computers from homegroup 288
file properties 207
folders, libraries 175

folders, Start menu 54
personal information 207, 209
properties, Details view 179
system languages 440
themes 82
toolbars from taskbar 117
webpages from Reading list 349
renaming
computer 290
folders and files 194–195
Start menu tile groups 108
Repeat Delay settings, keyboard 244
Repeat Rate settings, keyboard 244
reporting errors xix
reporting unsafe websites to Microsoft 365
resetting network adapters 280
resetting your computer
but keeping files/apps 539
completely 541
defined 586
resizing
columns, Details view 180
Start menu 52
tiles on Start menu 107
windows 35–36
resolution, defined 587
resources, homegroups 288, 295
restarting a computer 41, 43
configuring restart notifications 530
specifying timeframe 530
Restore button 35
restore, defined 589
restore points
creating 536–537
defined 535, 586

displaying all 537
reverting to 538
restoring
cascaded, stacked, or side-by-side windows 40
computer functionality 534
folders and files 202–203
from system images 557, 561
minimized windows 37
tab sets (Microsoft Edge) 346
to restore points 536
windows 36
restoring down windows, defined 586
restoring folders and files 202
restricting user accounts 402
reverting to clean installation of Windows 10 542
revoking administrative permissions 402
ribbon command interface (File Explorer) 162
ribbon, defined 587
Ribbon screen saver 70
ribbon tabs 163
right-clicking, defined 587
right-dragging, defined 587
rolling back updates 526
roots, defined 587
routers, defined 583
Run As Administrator command, desktop apps 128
running
desktop apps as an administrator 128
HomeGroup troubleshooter 289
Troubleshooters 280
S
safeguards, user profiles 381
SafeSearch (Bing), configuring settings 497

safety settings, Microsoft Family Safety 390
saved information, deleting (Microsoft Edge) 358
Saved Pictures library 158
saving
customized themes 80
information (web browsers) 340
Microsoft Edge passwords and form entries 357
searches 187
webpages to Reading list 344
screen brightness 458
screen resolution 449–451
aspect ratio 451
defined 587
screen savers 70–71, 587
ScreenTips, defined 587
scroll action gesture 576
scroll bars, defined 587
scrolling app list to specific app letter 127
search box 14, 18
search engines, changing default 355
search index 498
changing advanced indexing options 501
changing indexed locations 501
rebuilding 502
search providers, defined 587
search terms, defined 587
searches 495
Bing content filters 497
defined 587
filtering results 497, 500
in File Explorer 498
in Microsoft Edge 340
saving 187
specifying file type 497
storage locations 495

web 495
searching
for apps in Store 136
with Cortana 496
files and folders 186
Recycle Bin contents 202
with taskbar search box 496
secondary clocks, displaying 433
secondary displays 223, 227, 587
security
blocking pop-up windows 365–366
browsers, configuring settings 363
browsing privacy 367
configuring network connections 270
Family Safety 390
SmartScreen Filter 364
user profile safeguards 381
wireless networks 276
security profile settings 277
security settings 31
selecting folders/files 199–200
services preventing automatic startup 517
sessions (computing)
ending 41
starting 5
Set Default Programs window 505
Set Defaults By App pane 508
Set Up Your Mic wizard 446
setting
accent colors, desktop background 63
default apps 502
desktop background color 61–62
desktop background image 58
File Explorer search options 500
home page (Microsoft Edge) 352

Microsoft account pictures 407
mouse button/wheel options 236
size of desktop icons 101
user account pictures 406–407
setting aside tab sets (Microsoft Edge) 346
setting up audio devices 228
settings
accessibility 30
accessibility features 470
accessing in Control Panel 33
account 30
apps 30
browser security 363
configuring in Settings window 32
configuring synchronization 417
Control Panel 32
Cortana 30
desktop background and color 56
device displays 448
devices 29
displaying categories of 34
displaying for specific features 34
gaming 30
Lock screen 65
Microsoft Edge 351
network & internet 29
network security profiles 271
personalization 29
power 461
printers 251
privacy 31
regional and language 433
security 31
Settings window 26–28
speech 443

Store (Windows Store) 138
synchronizing 416
system 29
time & language 30
updates 31
user accounts 400
Xbox 30
Settings And More menu (Microsoft Edge)
displaying 337, 352
managing settings 351
Settings window 26–28
Background pane 58
Colors pane 63
configurable features 28
configuring settings in 32
Date & Time pane 426
Devices page 219
displaying network connection info in 269
Display pane 224
Family & Other People pane 388
Notifications & Actions pane 146
opening 33, 221
Region & Language pane 435
Settings window (Store) 139
Share pane (Microsoft Edge) 340
Share tab (File Explorer) 165
shared components, defined 587
shared drives, defined 587
shared folders, defined 587
shared homegroup resources 295
shared printers, defined 587
shared resources, making available to others 298
sharing
files, defined 587
information (web browsers) 340

network files 289, 292
printers 250
webpages 344
sharing drives 299
sharing files
in homegroups 293
with other network users 294
sharing folders 293, 297
stopping 298
through homegroup 296
Shopping information-tracking options (Cortana) 324
shortcut menus 13
defined 587
taskbar 111
shortcuts
apps 92
arranging on taskbar 95
creating for currently running app 95
creating on desktop 100
creating on Start menu 93
creating on taskbar 95
defined 587
desktop 12, 97
keyboard 569
moving on taskbar 96
organizing on desktop 98, 101
overview 102
pinning to taskbar 94
removing from desktop 101
removing from Start screen 93
Start menu 92
taskbar 15
showing hidden items (File Explorer) 167
showing the desktop on only one display 223
shutting down

action triggers 465
computer 41–42
configuring settings 465
defined 588
side-by-side windows, restoring 40
signing in 9, 588
signing out 41–42, 588
sign-in options, user accounts 410
single sign-on (SSO) accounts, defined 588
size
Recycle Bin 204
Start menu 51
user interface elements 452
sizing desktop icons 101
Skills menu (Cortana Notebook) 316
Sleep mode 41–42
defined 588
waking computer from 43
slideshow
as desktop background 57
on Lock screen 68, 72
sliding (touchscreen interaction) 575
smart device hubs, connecting 320
smartphone authentication app 564
SmartScreen Filter 364
defined 588
turning on/off 365
snapping
defined 588
windows 38, 40
Snipping Tool 134, 588
software
defined 588
displaying information 222
piracy, defined 588

solid colors, as desktop background 57
solid-state drives (SSDs) 218
sorting
files 182
folder content 180, 181
sound cards, defined 588
Sound Recorder, defined 588
spam, defined 588
spanning images (desktop background) 58
speaker icon on webpage tab 337
Special Days information-tracking options (Cortana) 324
specifying default apps 502
by category 503, 508
by file type 504, 506
by protocol 504, 508
opening a file 505
Set Default Programs window 505
Set Defaults By App pane 508
speech recognition
defined 588
displaying tools 447
language-specific features 434
Speech Recognition feature 482
Speech Recognition feature 230
Speech Recognition page (Control Panel) 444
Speech Recognition window 233
speech settings 443
configuring voice recognition 445
displaying Speech pane 445
turning off services and typing suggestions 448
speed
displaying for network connection 269
text-to-speech 447
spelling
language-specific features 434

text input feature 242
Sports app 133
Sports information-tracking options (Cortana) 324
spyware, defined 588
SSDs (solid-state drives) 218
SSO (single sign-on) accounts, defined 588
stacked windows, restoring 40
standard libraries 158
standard power-management plans 463
Standard User accounts 380, 382, 588
standard Windows notification icons 16
Start menu 13, 22
adding tiles to tile group 107
app list options 54
applying accent color to 64
changing size 51
changing to full-size screen 23
colors 62
configuring 50
creating/naming tile groups on 108
creating shortcuts on 93
customizing tiles on 104
default 50
defined 588
displaying 25
displaying contextual app lists 55
displaying/hiding jump lists 55
folder list options 53
folders, adding/removing 54
hiding the app list 55
jump lists 24–25
Live Tiles 93
Most Used section 24
moving tile groups on 109
moving tiles on 106

Recently Added section 24
removing app shortcuts from 93
renaming tile groups on 108
resizing 52
resizing tiles on 107
scrolling 52
shortcuts 92
tile folders 105, 109
tile management 103
tile sizes 92, 103
user account information 23
Start screen 23, 588
starting
apps 124, 128
computing sessions 5
File Explorer 170
InPrivate browsing sessions 368
Microsoft Edge 337
second instance of app 128
Store apps 138
Task Manager 515
startup apps, management 127, 516
Sticky Keys tool 483
Sticky Notes app 134
storage locations, searches 495
Store apps
automatic updates 144
defined 124
installation 135
Store (Windows Store) 124
accessing 136
account menu 139
app details 138
applying theme from 81
apps, uninstalling/reinstalling 141, 145

defined 591
managing accounts and settings 138
Microsoft account info and 139
searching for apps in 136
settings 139
shopping 136
starting 138
storing files on OneDrive 545
stretching images (desktop background) 58
stretching (touchscreen interaction) 575
subdomains (website addresses) 361
subfolders 157, 588
supplemental font features
displaying 439
installing 434
support, for Microsoft software and hardware xix
support, for this book xix
surfing the web, defined 588
swiping (touchscreen interaction) 575
switching site display from Microsoft Edge to Internet Explorer 369
switching user accounts 23–25
switching views (Task Manager) 515
synchronized files, displaying on connected computers 546
synchronizing
date and time settings 428
files, defined 588
OneDrive folders to computers 549
settings 416
system cache, defined 589
system drives, defined 589
system failure, booting from recovery drives 557
system files, updating 524
system folders, defined 589
system icons, configuring 102
system images

creating backups 557–558
periodic 557
restoring from 557, 561
System Information window 221
system languages 436, 440
system notifications, limiting 149
system, recovering from problems 534
system repair disc 560
System Restore, defined 589
system restore points 535
creating 537
reverting to 538
system settings 29
system tasks, monitoring 512
T
tab sets (Microsoft Edge) 346
tabbed browsing, defined 589
Tablet Mode action button 493
tabs
defined 589
Microsoft Edge 354
moving between webpages visited on tabs 339
opening in Microsoft Edge 337
ribbon 163
tool 167–168
tags, defined 589
tapping (touchscreen interaction) 575, 589
task management 489
configuring Quick Action buttons 490–491
Cortana 307–308
searches 495
specifying default apps 502
Task Manager 512

virtual desktops 509
Task Manager 512
defined 589
managing startup processes 516
quitting app/service from 515
starting 515
task panes, defined 589
Task View 15–16, 18
displaying desktops 510
hiding/displaying button for 113
managing windows 18
taskbar 12
app jump lists 96
applying accent color to 64
changing appearance of 109
changing behavior of 113
colors 62
Cortana 20
creating shortcuts on 95
customizing 109–110
date and time information 424
defined 589
displaying app-management icons 18
displaying app window thumbnails 18
displaying Favorites bar below 349
displaying/hiding Action Center icon 495
displaying/hiding jump lists 55
displaying/managing toolbars 115
displaying notifications 19
effects of moving 110
height 113
hiding 114
managing notifications in the Action Center 19
moving 113
notification area 16

Peek, turning on/off 114
pinning contacts to 16
pinning items to jump lists 97
pinning shortcuts to 94
preventing/allowing changes to 112
Quick Link menu 13
removing app shortcuts from 96
search box 14, 589
searching for content 18
shortcut menu, displaying 111
specifying position of on multiple displays 228
Start button 13
switching among apps 96
Task View 15
time and date settings 17
taskbar buttons
arranging 95
colors 62
combining/separating 114
defined 589
displaying/hiding 15, 113
moving 96
small buttons 113
Taskbar pane 112
taskbar shortcut menu 111
taskbar toolbars 115
Address 115
custom 116–117
Desktop 115
displaying/hiding 116–117
Links 115
removing 117
taskbar keyboard shortcuts 574
text input 242–243
text prediction, language-specific features 434

text screen saver 70
text-to-speech
changing voice and speed 447
language-specific features 434
Narrator tool 470
theme elements, modifying 80
themes 75
applying 80–82
built-in 76
customizing 78
decorative 75–76
defined 589
displaying installed 80
high contrast 75
modifying elements of 80
on Windows website 77
panoramic backgrounds 78
removing 82
reverting to regular contrast 475
saving customized themes 80
synchronizing 416
third-party apps 124
This PC node (File Explorer) 160–162
thumbnails, displaying 18
tile folders
creating 109
defined 589
tile groups
adding tiles to 107
managing 108
moving on Start menu 109
renaming 108
tiles
adding to tile groups 107
colors 62

configuration 103
defined 589
displaying/hiding live content 93
displaying pinned 52
folders 105, 109
live, content sources 104
live (Start menu) 93
sizes 92, 103
Start menu, managing 104, 106, 107
touchscreen management 94
tiling images (desktop background) 58
time servers 424, 428
time settings 17, 30
time zones 424–425, 429
tips, displaying on Lock screen 73
title bars
applying accent colors to 64
colors 62
defined 589
TLDs (top-level domains) 360
toast popups 123
Toggle Keys tool 483
tool tabs 167–168, 589
toolbars
Address (taskbar) 115
custom (taskbar) 116
defined 589
Desktop (taskbar) 115
displaying/hiding item names (taskbar) 117
displaying/hiding name (taskbar) 117
Links (taskbar) 115
Microsoft Edge 335
removing from taskbar 117
taskbar 115
top-level domains (TLDs) 360

touch keyboard 242, 435
touchpad button, displaying in notification area 113
touchscreens
tile management 94
tips 575
transparent/opaque UI elements, switching between 65
travel information-tracking options (Cortana) 324
troubleshooting
browsing issues 368
displaying tools for 280
Homegroup troubleshooter 289
network connections 277–278
Speech troubleshooter 445
troubleshooter apps 280
using recovery drives 558
two-factor authentication 564
typing, text input feature 242
U
UAC (User Account Control) 384
changing settings 385
defined 590
levels of control 385
UI (user interface), defined 590
ungrouping folder content 182
Uniform Resource Locator (URL), defined 590
uninstalling Store apps 141, 145
uninstalling updates 526
Universal Serial Bus (USB), defined 590
Universal Windows apps, defined 590
unpinning
apps from Start screen 93
app shortcuts from taskbar 96
unread messages, displaying 19

unsafe websites, reporting to Microsoft 365
update history, displaying 525
update settings 31
updates
caching 528
checking for 525
configuring 527, 529
configuring restart notifications 530
displaying settings 524
installing 525
managing 144
specifying restart timeframe 530
system files 524
timing installation 528
turning off automatic app updates 144
uninstalling 526
upgrading 590
URL (Uniform Resource Locator), defined 590
USB-connected microphones 229
USB flash drives 218, 590
USB hubs, defined 590
USB ports 216, 590
USB recovery drives 561
USB (Universal Serial Bus), defined 590
User Account Control (UAC) 384
changing settings 385
defined 590
levels of control 385
user account menu 23
user accounts See also accounts
adding passwords 408
Administrator 382, 400
Adult 381
capturing/setting picture 407
changing display name of family 394

changing passwords 408
Child 381
choosing type of 5
creating 388, 390–391, 396
defined 590
deleting 395, 399, 408
disabling 395, 398
displaying controls 25
enabling disabled accounts 395, 398
family 383
Guest 400
local 6, 380, 397, 403
managing 388
Microsoft 6, 380, 403
names 388, 590
overview 380
passwords 388, 405
permissions 382, 401
pictures 388, 404, 406, 590
properties 388
restricting 402
settings 400
sign-in options 410
Standard 380, 382, 588
Start menu settings 23
switching 23–25
UAC (User Account Control) 384
user profiles 381
user credentials, defined 578
user interface (UI)
defined 590
elements 452
user profiles 381
Users folder 157
UTC time 424

V
verbal cues, Cortana and 308
VGA ports 216
video projectors, defined 590
Videos library 158
View tab (File Explorer) 165
views (File Explorer) 177
virtual desktops 15, 509–510, 590
virtual printers 252, 591
virtual systems, defined 590
viruses, defined 591
visual narration options, configuring 482
voice recognition, configuring 445
VPN action button 493
W
waking computer from Sleep mode 43
Weather information-tracking options (Cortana) 324
web browsers 132
configuring security settings 363
defined 591
managing Microsoft Edge settings 351
Microsoft Edge 334
privacy 367
synchronizing settings 416
troubleshooting issues 368
web logs, defined 577
web searches 340, 495
web (World Wide Web), defined 591
web browsers
finding information on 340
webcams, defined 591
webpages (in Microsoft Edge)
annotating 343

displaying 338–339
finding text 342
moving between on tabs 339
pinning to Start screen 350
printing 350
Reading view 339
refreshing 339
removing from Reading list 349
saving to Reading list 344
sharing 344
website addresses, anatomy of 360
websites
defined 591
displaying in Microsoft Edge 335
reporting unsafe to Microsoft 365
websurfing, defined 588
Welcome screen 5, 416, 591
WEP encryption 276
WEP (Wired Equivalent Privacy), defined 591
wheel options, mice 236, 241
WiDi (Wireless Display), defined 583
Wi-Fi Protected Access (WPA), defined 591
wildcard characters, defined 591
window layout (File Explorer) 162
window title bars, colors 62
windows
arranging 37, 40
cascading 38–39
closing 35, 37
defined 591
dragging 39
managing in Task View 18
maximizing 36
minimizing 19, 37
moving 37, 39

resizing 35–36
restoring 36, 37, 40
retrieving hidden 225
snapping to screen 40
Windows 10, reverting to clean installation of 542
Windows Defender 363, 591
Windows display language, changing 440
Windows Firewall, defined 591
Windows folder 158
Windows Hello 410, 564
Windows Insider builds 528
Windows keyboard shortcuts 571
Windows logo key 569
Windows Media Player 133
Windows PowerShell 135
Windows PowerShell ISE (Integrated Scripting Environment) 135
Windows ReadyBoost, defined 591
Windows Search 186
Windows settings, synchronizing 417
Windows Spotlight Lock screen 72
Windows Store See Store (Windows Store)
Windows Update 524
configuring 527
defined 591
settings pane 524
Windows updates
checking for 525
configuring installation options 529
configuring restart notifications 530
displaying history 525
installing 525
specifying restart timeframe 530
timing installation 528
uninstalling 526
window-management buttons 35

Windows To Go, defined 591
Wired Equivalent Privacy (WEP), defined 591
wired networks
connecting to 261
disconnecting from 264
wireless devices 217
Wireless Display (WiDi), defined 583
wireless networks
connecting to 261
disconnecting from 264
security 276
wireless screen extensions 225
wizards, defined 592
WordPad 134
workgroups, defined 592
World Clock page (Alarms & Clock app) 425
World Wide Web (web) 591
WPA encryption 276
WPA (Wi-Fi Protected Access), defined 591
X
Xbox settings 30
XML (Extensible Markup Language), defined 579
XML Paper Specification (XPS) 135, 592
XPS (XML Paper Specification) 135, 592
Y
Your Apps page (My Library) 141
Your Games page (My Library) 141
Your Info settings 406
Z
zipped folders, defined 578
zipper, compressed folders 196

zoom gestures 576

About the author
Joan Lambert has worked closely with Microsoft technologies since 1986, and
in the training and certification industry since 1997. As President and CEO of
Online Training Solutions, Inc. (OTSI), Joan guides the translation of technical
information and requirements into useful, relevant, and measurable resources for
people who are seeking certification of their computer skills or who simply want
to get things done efficiently.
Joan is the author or coauthor of more than four dozen books about Windows
and Office apps (for Windows, Mac, and iPad), five generations of Microsoft
Office Specialist certification study guides, video-based training courses for
SharePoint and OneNote, QuickStudy guides for Windows and Office apps, and
the GO! series book for Outlook 2016.
Blissfully based in America’s Finest City, Joan is a Microsoft Certified
Professional, Microsoft Office Specialist Master (for all versions of Office since
Office 2003), Microsoft Certified Technology Specialist (for Windows and
Windows Server), Microsoft Certified Technology Associate (for Windows),
Microsoft Dynamics Specialist, and Microsoft Certified Trainer.
Windows 10 Step by Step, Second Edition, is based on the original book
coauthored by Joan and her father, Steve Lambert. Joan’s first publishing
collaboration with Steve was the inclusion of her depiction of Robots in Love in

one of his earliest books, Presentation Graphics on the Apple Macintosh
(Microsoft Press, 1984).
Steve Lambert started playing with computers in the mid-1970s. As computers
evolved from wire-wrap and solder to consumer products, he evolved from
hardware geek to programmer and writer.

Steve has written or coauthored more than 20 books on developing technologies,
including 
Presentation 
Graphics 
on 
the 
Apple Macintosh, 
Creative
Programming in Microsoft Basic, the CD-ROM The New Papyrus, and Internet
Basics: Your Online Access to the Global Electronic Superhighway. Steve is also
the author of Built by Anhalt, a biographical exploration into the life and
architecture of the famed Seattle architect Fred Anhalt.
Steve has specialized for many years in the conversion of content from one
format to another, including projects such as the Microsoft Programmer’s
Library in 1988 and the conversion of the 25-volume Funk & Wagnalls
Encyclopedia for the initial Microsoft Encarta CD-ROM. He has created several
content authoring and delivery systems, including those used by the Microsoft
Mastering Series, the Quick Course Series, and numerous pubStudio titles that
are published by Microsoft and several US government agencies. He is a strong
advocate of good template design and of using Microsoft Visual Basic for
Applications (VBA) automation to smooth out the conversion, assembly,
formatting, and validation of content for delivery via print, e-book, or web.
Acknowledgments
I am extremely thankful for the unflagging support and contributions of Jaime
Odell, Kathy Krause, and Susie Carr at OTSI—this book (and so many others)
wouldn’t exist without America’s Finest Publishing Team! Thank you also to
Jeanne Craver and Laura Acklen for catching visual and technical glitches, and
to Laura Norman at Pearson Education and Kim Spilker and the team—past and
present—at Microsoft Press for the opportunity to continue doing what I love to
do.
Finally, I am so very grateful for the support of my daughter, Trinity, and my
stepmom, Grace, for taking care of me, us, the dogs, and the House of
Awesomeness, while I took care of business.
OTSI specializes in the design and creation of Microsoft Office, SharePoint, and
Windows training solutions and the production of online and printed training
resources. For more information about OTSI, visit www.otsi.com.
We hope you enjoy this book and find it useful! Updates to this edition were
guided by feedback submitted by readers of previously published Windows Step
by Step books. If you find errors in this book, have a request for the next edition,
or would like to pass along other feedback, you can use the process outlined in
the introduction.


