1
Ch.16 - Wireless WAN System
Architectures
1 Wireless WAN
2 GSM via PSTN
3 GSM via ISDN
4 GPRS
5 Mobitex
6 CDPD
7 PPDC
8 UMTS
9 Future Systems
10 Systems Summary 1
11 Systems Summary 2

Ch.16 - Wireless WAN System Architectures
2
This section will give a closer description of the wireless WAN systems mentioned in the
earlier parts. The system's architecture, time-plans and characteristics are described here. As
a comparison to the packet switching systems, Ericsson's solutions for GSM-data and
HSCSD are included. The terms first, second and third generations cellular systems are
introduced. The greatest importance is given to the systems of the second generation, to give
a feeling of how far the standardization work has come. The section ends with a summary of
the situation.

Ch.16 - Wireless WAN System Architectures
3
Ericsson's solution for GSM connection to a company's Intranet or to the Internet, includes
the use of the PSTN between the GSM network and the access-server on the Intranet, or the
access-server at the Internet Service Provider. Due to modem handshaking, the time for
connection is very long, up to 40 seconds. The unit converting the GSM digital signals to
PSTN analogue signals is called the GSM Interworking Unit (GIWU). It can be integrated in
the MSC, and is then called DTI, Digital Transmission Internetworking Unit. On the
established circuit-switched connection PPP (Point-to-Point protocol) is used. The IP traffic
is carried by PPP. The long time for establishing this connection is a great disadvantage for
both users and network operators alike.
High Speed Circuit Switched Data (HSCSD), which uses more time slots, is available to
circuit switched GSM. The standard is ready and Ericsson are shipping products. The
standard allows for speeds of up to 64 kbps and is intended to be used by, for example,
video conferencing and telemedicine applications.

Ch.16 - Wireless WAN System Architectures
4
Ericsson also has an improved solution for GSM connections to the Intranet/Internet. By
switching the modem link over PSTN to an ISDN PRA (Primary Rate Access) in the MSC,
and a commercial router, analog communications is never required. In this case, the time for
establishing connection drops to less than 10 seconds due to ISDN's fast connection times.
ISDN with rate adaption is run between the router and the MSC according to the V.110
standard. This is a stopgap solution.

Ch.16 - Wireless WAN System Architectures
5
GPRS, General Packet Radio Services, is a standard for packet switched data in GSM. The
gross bit-rate is 33-270 kbps, depending on the number of time slots used. The
standardization is ongoing under the management of ETSI, with the Point-to-Point service
standard fixed in spring of 1998. The biggest news is that you don't establish a connection,
but only use the channels when data is transmitted. It's possible to use more than one time
slot to increase the users bit-rate. The great advantage with GPRS compared to circuit
switched computer communication is that the data communication will be cheaper for the
user, and at the same time more profitable for the network operator. Today the GSM
computer communication is debited for the time the connection is established. If several
users share the channel, a lower price could be given to each user, based on the amount of
data transmitted. The network operator can earn more money from the packet switched
channel than from a circuit switched computer communication.
The intention of the GPRS was that it should support all the possible network protocols
like IP, X.25, etc. In phase one of the standardization only X.25 and IP are supported. For
the support of GPRS, two new switching nodes are introduced: a "Serving Node", called
SGSN, and a "Gateway Node", called GGSN. The terms SGSN and GGSN have already
been explained in the lesson "GSM and GPRS". Even though the GPRS standardization
procedure is not complete, Ericsson has started work on the implementation of these nodes.

Ch.16 - Wireless WAN System Architectures
6
Mobitex is a well established, widely deployed dedicated, packet switched system. It is a
narrow-band network offering a gross bit-rate of 8 kbps on 12.5 kHz channels. Note that
several users may have to share this available bandwidth. Ericsson is the only supplier of
network equipment for Mobitex, but radio modems, software and network add-ons are
available from third party vendors.
The specification for 8 kbps was ready in 1990. In Sweden and Nigeria the systems are run
on an older specification from 1986, which only offers 1.2 kbps. Because of this low bit-
rate, you don't hear so much about Mobitex in Sweden. The biggest network, run by RAM
Mobile Data in the US, consists of about 1200 base stations with 93 % coverage of the
urban business population.
The interface towards the net is specified in an open specification, developed by Telia, and
nowadays administrated by the Mobitex Operators Association (MOA). The network layer
is specially adapted to mobile computer communication, making it possible to develop
applications for the vertical market. For the horizontal market, where you would rather use
standard protocols and standard APIs, a specially adapted network layer is a disadvantage,
but standard protocols can be run over the Mobitex network layer. These solutions are not
specified in the interface specification. A number of products to solve the problem of
standard protocol communication have emerged on the market.
To make connections to the X.25 environment easier, a network integrated X.25 gateway has
been developed, and an integrated IP solution is under development.

Ch.16 - Wireless WAN System Architectures
7
The network architecture is hierarchic. There are two levels of switches, main switch and
area switch. For large networks a subdivision in subnets, inter-connected with a backbone,
can be used. On the backbone, TCP/IP is used, leaving the Mobitex provider free to choose
the backbone supplier.

Ch.16 - Wireless WAN System Architectures
8
Cellular Digital Packet Data is a packet switched computer communication network built on
top of the AMPS-system. The system offers a gross bit-rate of 19.2 kbps over 30 kHz
channels. The standard was arrived at by a committee made up of several Bell-companies,
IBM and other data communication players. The standard was ready in 1993, and the
construction of CDPD is ongoing in the US, but the coverage is still inadequate.
The interest in CDPD has become an important selling point for AMPS. Vendors use the
existence of CDPD solutions to push AMPS networks. Ericsson has had a CDPD product
since the end of 1996, and several other suppliers also offer CDPD solutions, the earliest of
which were introduced in 1994.
The CDPD standard defines both an IP and a ConnectionLess Network Protocol (CLNP)
interface. (CLNP is the OSI equivalence of IP.) Ericsson has no CLNP service in the system,
and has no intention to introduce it. The mobility solution is similar to that found in Mobile-
IP. There is a base node that controls all it's subscribers' location, i.e. which Serving Node
they are under. The Serving Node knows only which subscriber is under it for the moment.

Ch.16 - Wireless WAN System Architectures
9
Packet Personal Digital Cellular is a standard for packet switched data in PDC. The gross
bit-rate is 14-42 kbps depending on the number of time slots available. A maximum of three
can be allocated to a single user. The carrier width is 25 kHz. The standardized interfaces are
the radio interface and interface towards other nets. The radio interface standard was ready
in the beginning of 1997, and the other standard (towards other networks) was also ready
during 1997.

Ch.16 - Wireless WAN System Architectures
10
The Universal Mobile Telecommunications System, UMTS, will take the personal
communications user into the Information Society of the 21st century. It will deliver
advanced information directly to people and provide them with access to new and innovative
services.
The fundamental difference between GPRS and UMTS resides in the support of high bit rate
bearer services with the notion of negotiated traffic and QoS characteristics. This shall allow
UMTS  to support single- and multi-media N-ISDN applications and single- and multi-
media IP applications. In the final stage UMTS supports packet switched data service
capabilities of at least 2 Mbps peak bit rate per user in urban areas and 384 kbps in wider
areas along with Point-to-Multipoint communication. Moreover, the core network allows
one mobile terminal to handle more than one bearer service simultaneously and to have bearer
services of different connection modes. It is nevertheless expected that the terminal and
network capabilities will put some limitations on the number of bearer services that can be
handled simultaneously. Each connection has independent traffic and performance
characteristics in the sense of throughput, delay and packet loss. The core network is IP
based while the network between SGSN and RNC is ATM based.
Standardization will have been finished in fall 1999 and the first releases are expected on the
marked by summer 2000. Licensing is under progress and Japan might be the first country
ready to introduce UMTS.

Ch.16 - Wireless WAN System Architectures
11
The first generation cellular telephone systems were introduced up to the mid-80's and they
are analogue systems. These include NMT450 and 900, AMPS and TACS.
The second generation of cellular systems came in the beginning of the 90's, they are digital
systems and they behave almost identically. These systems include GSM and PDC.
Future systems, also called the third generation, will have to cope with very high demands
on voice traffic and data rates much higher than today's systems are able to handle.
Furthermore, it must be easy to introduce new services, and the cellular phones must be
cheap and consume very little energy. It is likely that they will also have to handle roaming
between traditional ground-based cellular systems and satellite-based PCS (Personal
Communication Systems).
In a few years we could have this scenario: your car breaks down in a desolate area, you call
your local garage and ask for help. You put on your Virtual Reality-helmet, and a repairman
can, using real-time audio and video, guide you through the whole repair. The pictures may
show what bolt to unscrew, what tools you need in different stages, etc. This puts high
demands on the transmitting capacity of the cellular system and is only one example of what
kind of situation the third generation of cellular systems would have to handle.

Ch.16 - Wireless WAN System Architectures
12
In this table you can compare the different packet based wireless WAN systems.
The first commercially available Mobitex services offered a bitrate of 1.2 kbps. This was
available in 1986 - a long way ahead of it's current competitors. A new Mobitex standard
appeared in 1990 offering a gross bit-rate of 8 kbps.
Of the packet data systems that build on mobile telephone infrastructures, CDPD was the
first to be standardized in 1993.
The gross bit-rate is 19.2 kbps and the net bitrate is approximately 10 kbps. Although the
CDPD standard specifies both an IP and a CLNP interface, Ericsson's CDPD product offers
only the IP version. The first CDPD networks went into operation in 1994. Ericsson's first
CDPD network went into operation in 1997 in New Zealand.
PPDC was standardized in 1997. It offers a net bit-rate of between 9 and 26 kbps. This
flexibility derives from the ability to utilize more than a single time-slot. The PPDC standard
specifies an IP interface. The first PPDC networks was in operation in 1996 - before the
standard was officially complete!
The GPRS standard will be the last to be completed with phase 1 standardized in spring of
1998 and phase 2 standardization ongoing. The net bit-rate offered is between 9 and 168
kbps, depending on the number of timeslots used. Phase 1 of the standard calls for both an
IP and an X.25 interface, phase 2 may specify others.

Ch.16 - Wireless WAN System Architectures
13
Here we can compare the characteristics of some of the circuit switched systems.
The GSM standard was completed in 1990 with the first networks in operation in 1991. The
maximum user bit-rate for GSM is 9.6 kbps. As GSM is primarily a voice based digital
system then no data interface is specified. Remember that because GSM is circuit switched a
call setup is required before data is transmitted - this can take up to 40 seconds.
The High-Speed Circuit Switched Data standard was completed in 1997 and Ericsson’s
product is on the market. HSCSD offers higher speeds than GSM by utilizing several
timeslots simultaneously; using all 8 timeslots in a single frame means a net bitrate of about
64 kbps. It's envisaged that the market for HSCSD will be quite small. Essentially, HSCSD
makes several GSM calls simultaneously which means that a single user can hog a large
portion of the air interface. Add that to the fact that making multiple GSM telephone call
simultaneously is not a cheap pastime and it is easy to see that HSCSD is likely to be a
niche market.
The Universal Mobile Telephone System is scheduled to be specified by 1999. The channel
separation is undecided as of yet, but the channel access method will be Wideband-CDMA.
The planned net bit-rate is between 144 kbps to 2 Mbps, depending on the users location.
Remote areas with lower coverage should offer the minimum bit-rates, while urban areas
with higher coverage should provide the higher bit-rates.  The plan is to have UMTS in
operation by the year 2002. To achieve this ambitious goal and to protect current network
operators from capital dis-investment it is likely that UMTS will utilize the existing GSM
infrastructure in some way.

