123
Ifiok Otung
Prashant Pillai
George Eleftherakis
Giovanni Giambene (Eds.)
Wireless and Satellite 
Systems
8th International Conference, WiSATS 2016
Cardiff, UK, September 19–20, 2016
Proceedings
186

Lecture Notes of the Institute
for Computer Sciences, Social Informatics
and Telecommunications Engineering
186
Editorial Board
Ozgur Akan
Middle East Technical University, Ankara, Turkey
Paolo Bellavista
University of Bologna, Bologna, Italy
Jiannong Cao
Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hong Kong, Hong Kong
Geoffrey Coulson
Lancaster University, Lancaster, UK
Falko Dressler
University of Erlangen, Erlangen, Germany
Domenico Ferrari
Università Cattolica Piacenza, Piacenza, Italy
Mario Gerla
UCLA, Los Angeles, USA
Hisashi Kobayashi
Princeton University, Princeton, USA
Sergio Palazzo
University of Catania, Catania, Italy
Sartaj Sahni
University of Florida, Florida, USA
Xuemin Sherman Shen
University of Waterloo, Waterloo, Canada
Mircea Stan
University of Virginia, Charlottesville, USA
Jia Xiaohua
City University of Hong Kong, Kowloon, Hong Kong
Albert Y. Zomaya
University of Sydney, Sydney, Australia

More information about this series at http://www.springer.com/series/8197

Iﬁok Otung
• Prashant Pillai
George Eleftherakis
• Giovanni Giambene (Eds.)
Wireless and Satellite
Systems
8th International Conference, WiSATS 2016
Cardiff, UK, September 19–20, 2016
Proceedings
123

Editors
Iﬁok Otung
Faculty of Computing
University of South Wales
Cardiff
UK
Prashant Pillai
University of Bradford
Bradford
UK
George Eleftherakis
The University of Shefﬁeld
Thessaloniki
Greece
Giovanni Giambene
University of Siena
Siena
Italy
ISSN 1867-8211
ISSN 1867-822X
(electronic)
Lecture Notes of the Institute for Computer Sciences, Social Informatics
and Telecommunications Engineering
ISBN 978-3-319-53849-5
ISBN 978-3-319-53850-1
(eBook)
DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-53850-1
Library of Congress Control Number: 2017933560
© ICST Institute for Computer Sciences, Social Informatics and Telecommunications Engineering 2017
This work is subject to copyright. All rights are reserved by the Publisher, whether the whole or part of the
material is concerned, speciﬁcally the rights of translation, reprinting, reuse of illustrations, recitation,
broadcasting, reproduction on microﬁlms or in any other physical way, and transmission or information
storage and retrieval, electronic adaptation, computer software, or by similar or dissimilar methodology now
known or hereafter developed.
The use of general descriptive names, registered names, trademarks, service marks, etc. in this publication
does not imply, even in the absence of a speciﬁc statement, that such names are exempt from the relevant
protective laws and regulations and therefore free for general use.
The publisher, the authors and the editors are safe to assume that the advice and information in this book are
believed to be true and accurate at the date of publication. Neither the publisher nor the authors or the editors
give a warranty, express or implied, with respect to the material contained herein or for any errors or
omissions that may have been made. The publisher remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in
published maps and institutional afﬁliations.
Printed on acid-free paper
This Springer imprint is published by Springer Nature
The registered company is Springer International Publishing AG
The registered company address is: Gewerbestrasse 11, 6330 Cham, Switzerland

Preface
There is an exciting range of activities around the world to develop smart, resilient, and
innovative wireless and satellite communication systems with capabilities to ﬁnally
deliver the dream of “broadband anytime, anywhere on earth” and cope with the
upcoming data transmission deluge arising from smart homes and cities, driverless
vehicles, connectivity for countless billions of sensors and functional items and assets –
the so-called Internet of Things (IoT) – and data-rich multimedia services to billions of
small mobile devices and ﬁxed larger units anytime anywhere.
The inherent capacity of satellites for broad area coverage makes them an indis-
pensable component of the suite of communication technologies required to achieve
truly ubiquitous broadband connectivity by the next decade and satisfy the on-going
exponential growth in data consumption around the world. An approach that is both
technically sound and economically feasible will have to build on existing telecom-
munication infrastructure to create a seamless integration of 5G wireless terrestrial
networks and smart satellite systems, augmented by wire-line links (including power-
line, digital subscriber loop, DSL, cable modem and optical ﬁber) that provide timely
ample-speed data delivery tailored to each service. Such a fully satellite-integrated
global telecommunication network will enable smart mobile devices to remain always
connected anytime anywhere on earth by automatically switching between Wi-Fi in
hotspots, mobile data in areas with adequate terrestrial communication provision, and
satellite data in remote or inaccessible locations such as mid-air or mid-ocean. Imagine
that passengers on the ill-fated Malaysia Airline Flight 370 that disappeared on March
8, 2014 were able to send text and video messages during their ﬂight. The mystery of
what happened to the aircraft might have been easier to solve.
There are, however, signiﬁcant challenges, not least of which include overcoming
the digital divide that still exists within nations and across geographical regions, and
delivering broadband services in extreme-latitude regions that are invisible to geosta-
tionary satellites and uneconomic by terrestrial means. Furthermore, innovative solu-
tions are needed to facilitate super-efﬁcient utilization of the radio spectrum, security
and reliability, use of radio frequencies above Ka-band and dealing effectively with the
attendant increased propagation impairments, design of intelligent link-adaptable
transmitters,
building
high-throughput
satellite
(HTS)
systems
with
capacities
approaching one terabit per second (Tbps), interference mitigation, energy efﬁciency
and resource management, and so on.
The 8th International Conference on Wireless and Satellite Systems (WiSATS 2016)
was held during September 19–20, 2016, at Hotel Novotel Cardiff Centre, Cardiff, UK;
to explore the aforementioned challenges and discuss some of the emerging technical
solutions. WiSATS 2016 brought together new and experienced researchers, devel-
opers, and leaders of thought within academia, industry, and regulatory bodies in
Europe, India, and Japan to cross-fertilize ideas and discuss new work and innovative
techniques and solutions that advance the state of the art in wireless and satellite

systems. The technical program of WiSATS 2016 was rich and varied, with one major
talk to kick off each day followed by technical paper presentations spread across both
general and dedicated sessions. Day one of the conference opened with a keynote
speech on 5G wireless systems delivered by Prof. Rahim Tafazolli, Director of the
Institute of Communication Systems (ICS) at University of Surrey, UK. This was
followed by two general technical sessions featuring presentations of various new
developments in wireless and satellite systems, and then two special sessions dedicated
to the speciﬁc areas of “Communications Application in Smart Grid” (CASG) and
“Wireless, Computing and Satellite Systems Security” (WCSSS). The day concluded
with a conference dinner. Day two began with a talk on the latest developments in
mobile satellite communications given by Kyle Hurst, Director of Maritime Business at
Iridium, Stevenage, UK. Punctuated with coffee and lunch breaks, the rest of the day
was then devoted to various paper presentations and discussions within two general
technical sessions. The conference concluded with an awards ceremony for best paper
and outstanding contributions to WiSATS 2016.
This publication is a collection of revised articles from the most signiﬁcant peer-
reviewed full papers presented within the two special and four general technical ses-
sions of WiSATS 2016. The articles cover a broad range of related state-of-the-art
topics in antennas and mobile terminals, symbol precoding and network coding
schemes, energy-efﬁcient strategies in satellite communication and cloud radio access
networks, smart grid communication and optimization, security issues in vehicular
ad-hoc networks (VANET) and delay-tolerant networks (DTN), interference mitigation
in high-throughput geostationary and non-geostationary satellite systems, etc. We hope
that this represents a timely contribution to ongoing research and development efforts
toward the realization of a fully ubiquitous heterogeneous broadband communications
network.
Any international conference on the scale of WiSATS 2016 owes its success to the
dedicated work of a great team. We would like to thank all the many volunteers who
contributed in various ways to bring WiSATS 2016 to fruition. In particular, we thank
members of the conference Organizing and Technical Program Committees and all
session chairs and speakers for their invaluable contributions, which helped to make
WiSATS 2016 a fantastic, stimulating, enjoyable, and enriching experience for all
participants. We are immensely grateful to the reviewers, who gave freely of their time
to evaluate submitted papers and make suggestions for improvement. We are also
hugely indebted to the contributing authors who submitted high-quality papers and
responded positively to reviewers’ comments. A ﬁnal thank you goes to the University
of South Wales for their in-kind support and to the European Alliance for Innovation
(EAI) for their excellent administration and management of WiSATS 2016.
February 2016
Iﬁok Otung
Prashant Pillai
George Eleftherakis
Giovanni Giambene
VI
Preface

Organization
WiSATS 2016 was organized by the University of South Wales in cooperation with the
European Alliance for Innovation (EAI), the Institute for Computer Sciences, Social
Informatics and Telecommunications Engineering (ICST), and CREATE-NET.
General Chair
Iﬁok Otung
University of South Wales, UK
General Co-chairs
Sastri Kota
Sohum Consulting, USA
Naoto Kadowaki
NICT, Tokyo, Japan
Technical Program Committee Chairs
Prashant Pillai
University of Bradford, UK
George Eleftherakis
University of Shefﬁeld International Faculty,
City College, Greece
Steering Committee
Imrich Chlamtac
CREATE-NET, Italy
Kandeepan Sithamparanathan
RMIT, Australia
Agnelli Stefano
ESOA/Eutelsat, France
Mario Marchese
University of Genoa, Italy
Publications Chair
Giovanni Giambene
University of Siena, Italy
Web Chair
Kufre Ekerete
University of South Wales, UK
Publicity and Social Media Chair
Andikan Otung
Ciena, London, UK
Workshops Chair
Bamidele Adebisi
Manchester Metropolitan University, UK

Local Chair
Francis Hunt
University of South Wales, UK
Sponsorship and Exhibits Chair
Martin Coleman
sIRG, UK
Conference Manager
Barbara Fertalova
EAI, European Alliance for Innovation
Special Session Organizers
Special Session on Communication Applications in Smart Grid (CASG)
Organized by
Haile-Selassie Rajamani
University of Bradford, UK
Special Session on Wireless, Computing and Satellite Systems Security (WCSSS)
Organized by
Prashant Pillai
University of Bradford, UK
Sponsoring Institutions
University of South Wales
European Alliance for Innovation (EAI)
Institute for Computer Sciences, Social Informatics and Telecommunications
Engineering (ICST)
CREATE-NET
VIII
Organization

Contents
Technical Session 1
A Compact CSRR Loaded Monopole Antenna with Defected Ground
Structure for Mobile WLAN and WiMAX Applications. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
N.A. Jan, A.M. Saleh, M. Lashab, F.M. Abdussalam, L. Djouablia,
and R.A. Abd-Alhameed
Development Status of Small-Sized Ka-band Mobile Terminal for Maritime
Broadband Communications . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
Norihiko Katayama, Naoko Yoshimura, Hideo Takamatsu,
Susumu Kitazume, Yosuke Takahara, Marshall Lewis,
and Rowan Gilmore
New and Less Complex Approach to Estimate Angles of Arrival . . . . . . . . .
18
Mohammed A.G. Al-Sadoon, Abdulkareem S. Abdullah,
Ramzy S. Ali, Ali S. Al-Abdullah, Raed A. Abd-Alhameed,
Steve M.R. Jones, and James M. Noras
MIMO Based Multi Band Antenna for Wireless Communication
in C-Band, X-Band, K-Band and Ku Band. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
Kunal Srivastava, Ashwani Kumar, Binod Kanaujia, Santanu Dwari,
A.K. Verma, Mukul Yadav, Josyula Lalita, and S. Chamarthi
A Staircase-Shaped DGS Structure Monopole Antenna
for UWB Operations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
Naeem A. Jan, Mohammed Lashab, Nazar T. Ali, Fathi M. Abdussalam,
Embarak M. Ibrahim, Raed A. Abd-Alhameed, and M.B. Child
Technical Session 2
Implementation of a Low-Rate Linear Step FM Transceiver
on a Software Defined Radio Platform. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
Yih-Min Chen, Shin-Chi Liao, and Ying-Chang Chen
High Reliability Light Weight Multi-mission Amplifier System. . . . . . . . . . .
55
Susumu Kitazume, Yosuke Takahara, Chihiro Hayashi,
and Rowan Gilmore

Examination of Power Consumption Reduction and Sampling Behavior
of Envelope Detection Based Wake-up-Receiver
with Duty Cycling Scheme. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
Josua Arndt, Lukas Krystofiak, Vahid Bonehi, Ralf Wunderlich,
and Stefan Heinen
Bit Synchronization and Delayed Decision Feedback Equalization
for EDGE BTS - Hardware Implementation on TMS320C6424 TI DSP. . . . .
73
Laxmaiah Pulikanti, Pradeep Goutam, Bipsa Purushothaman,
K.G. Dileep, and S.V. Hari Prasad
Precoding of Correlated Symbols for STBC Systems Design . . . . . . . . . . . .
83
Kelvin Anoh, Bamidele Adebisi, and Godfrey Okorafor
Communication Applications in Smart Grid (CASG) Special Session
Optimization of Community Based Virtual Power Plant with Embedded
Storage and Renewable Generation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
95
Oghenovo Okpako, Paul Inuwa Adamu, Haile-Selassie Rajamani,
and Prashant Pillai
Assessment of Effective Radiated Power of the Partial Discharge Emulator
Source . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
108
Adel Jaber, Pavlos Lazaridis, Bahghtar Saeed, Yong Zhang,
Umar Khan, David Upton, Hamd Ahmed, Peter Mather,
Robert Atkinson, Martin Judd, Maria Fatima Queiroz Vieira,
and Ian Glover
Wireless, Computing and Satellite Systems Security (WCSSS) Special Session
Experimental Privacy Analysis and Characterization for Disconnected
VANETs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
119
Chibueze P. Anyigor Ogah, Haitham Cruickshank, Philip M. Asuquo,
Ao Lei, and Zhili Sun
A Mobility-Aware Trust Management Scheme for Emergency
Communication Networks Using DTN. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
130
Philip Asuquo, Haitham Cruickshank, Chibueze P. Anyigor Ogah,
Ao Lei, and Kunle Olutomilayo
Technical Session 3
Effective Doppler Mitigation in Critical Satellite Communications. . . . . . . . .
145
Alessio Fanfani, Simone Morosi, Luca Simone Ronga,
and Enrico Del Re
X
Contents

Interference Mitigation for Multi Spot Beam Satellite Communication
Systems Incorporating Spread Spectrum. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
156
Abdulkareem Karasuwa, Jon Eastment, and Ifiok Otung
Specific Rain Attenuation Derived from a Gaussian Mixture Model
for Rainfall Drop Size Distribution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
167
K’ufre-Mfon E. Ekerete, Francis H. Hunt, Judith L. Jeffery,
and Ifiok E. Otung
Cognitive Interference Management Techniques for the Spectral
Co-existence of GSO and NGSO Satellites. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
178
Ameneh Pourmoghadas, Shree Krishna Sharma, Symeon Chatzinotas,
and Björn Ottersten
Technical Session 4
A 15.5 W Si-LDMOS Balanced Power Amplifier with 53% Ultimate PAE
for High Speed LTE . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
193
B.A. Mohammed, N.A. Abduljabbar, M.A.G. Al-Sadoon, K. Hameed,
A.S. Hussaini, S.M.R. Jones, F. Elmegri, R.W. Clark,
and R. Abd-Alhameed
Energy Efficient Adaptive Network Coding Schemes for Satellite
Communications . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
202
Ala Eddine Gharsellaoui, Samah A.M. Ghanem, Daniele Tarchi,
and Alessandro Vanelli Coralli
Distribution of SDTV and HDTV Using VLC Techniques for Domestic
Applications . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
213
Timothy J. Amsdon, Martin J.N. Sibley, and Peter J. Mather
On the Energy Minimization of Heterogeneous Cloud Radio Access
Networks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
223
Tshiamo Sigwele, Atm Shafiul Alam, Prashant Pillai,
and Yim Fun Hu
Author Index . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
235
Contents
XI

Technical Session 1

A Compact CSRR Loaded Monopole Antenna
with Defected Ground Structure for Mobile WLAN
and WiMAX Applications
N.A. Jan1(✉), A.M. Saleh1, M. Lashab2, F.M. Abdussalam1, L. Djouablia2,
and R.A. Abd-Alhameed1
1 Faculty of Engineering and Informatics, University of Bradford, Bradford, UK
kakarnayeem@yahoo.com, {A.M.S.Saleh,R.A.A.Abd}@bradford.ac.uk
2 Skikda University, Skikda, Algeria
Abstract. A physically compact dual band antenna design is presented for use
in mobile WLAN and mid-band WiMAX applications. The antenna design is
based on a monopole, with a combination of metamaterial inspired features, based
on a defected ground structure (GDS) and a complementary split-ring resonator
(CSRR). A single CSRR unit cell is placed over a pentagonal monopole antenna,
producing a narrow stop-band frequency in the range from 2.40 GHz to 2.49 GHz.
The second operating frequency ranges from 3.44 GHz to 6.25 GHz, the broad-
banding being due to the inﬂuence of the defected ground structure. The antenna
design was optimized using HFSS, paying close attention to size constraints, and
ease of integration with the radio front end. Simulation results for return loss, gain
and radiation pattern are analyzed and presented.
Keywords: Defected ground structure (DGS) · High frequency structure
simulator (HFSS) · Complementary split ring resonator (CSRR) · Metamaterial-
inspired antenna · Double negative (DNG) behavior
1
Introduction
The antenna design proposed in this paper is intended to address the need for dual-band
antennas for use in overlapping WLAN (2.4 GHz, 5.2 GHz, 5.8 GHz) and mid-band
WiMAX (3.5 GHz) applications, which do not intefere with one another [1]. Various
techniques have been investigated to achieve a suitable miniaturization of the radiating
elements. Of interest are etched L-shaped. U-shaped and G-shaped metalization patches
[4, 5, 6]; loading planar surfaces with complementary split ring resonator (CSRR) meta‐
material [7]; and placing insertions such as shortening pins or resonators in the neigh‐
bourhood of the radiating element [8]. The complementary split ring resonator (CSRR)
is the dual of the split ring resonator (SRR) [3].
In [9] CSRR along with EBG is used for miniaturization but the antenna is resonatiing
in 2.6 GHZ and 3.23 GHz with limited bandwidth and gain results. The antenna design
presented in this paper is said to be metamaterial inspired in the sense that only a unit cell
of the CSRR metamaterial is needed to realize the design. As compared to [9], the antenna
© ICST Institute for Computer Sciences, Social Informatics and Telecommunications Engineering 2017
I. Otung et al. (Eds.): WiSATS 2016, LNICST 186, pp. 3–10, 2017.
DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-53850-1_1

presented here has better and widen bandwidth and both the frequencies are adjusted for
WLAN and WiMax applications at the cost of small increase in size. The CSRR unit cell
structure was designed in HFSS, with the constutuitive parameter extraction being
performed through matlab. This design suggests a double negative result at a resonance
frequency of 2.45 GHz, which is then utilised to provide the lower band (WLAN) require‐
ment, and to achieve a miniaturised radiator structure. A defected ground structure is then
utlised to provide the mid-band WiMAX (3.5 GHz) and upper WLAN (5.2 GHz and
5.8 GHz) service bands, and also constributes to a stable radiation pattern.
2
Metamaterial Unit Cell Design
The geometrical conﬁguration of the CSRR unit cell is shown in Fig. 2. The unit cell is
designed and simulated using HFSS. Matlab is used here to retrieve constitutive param‐
eters i.e. eﬀective permeability and permittivity of the unit cell, which determine the
response of the material to electromagnetic radiation. The single unit cell, which has no
periodicity, normally generates negative permeability only [2]. Unit cell or metamate‐
rial-inclusion can be used for diﬀerent applications. In [2] though the application of the
unit cell is to increase the isolation between MIMO, but in this paper the unit cell is used
to attain miniaturization and to make antenna resonate at lower frequency of ISM
2.45 GHz. The unit cell analysed here produces negative permittivity and permeability
values from the introduction of symmetrical periodicity in the armatures, and lengths of
the unit cell. This unit cell of size 9 mm × 5.5 mm is then etched on top of the monopole
to make antenna electrically small and resonant in the ISM 2.45 GHz service band. The
optimized parameters of the unit cell are given in Table 1.
Table 1. The optimized parameter of the proposed CSRR unit cell
Parameter
Value (mm)
Parameter
Value (mm)
H
5.5
Wp
4
F
9.75
Wu
2.5
h1
1.5
gu
0.5
h2
1.5
s
0.5
The transmission coeﬃcient of the metamaterial unit cell is given in Fig. 3, it can be
seen that the unit cell has a resonance at 2.45 GHz. Extracted values of the eﬀective
constitutive parameters with negative real parts at the resonance frequency were
observed for this resonance, as shown in Figs. 4 and 5, respectively.
3
Antenna Design and Results
The geometrical conﬁguration of the metamaterial inspired antenna structure is shown
in Fig. 1. A ﬁnite element model of the antenna was analysed using HFSS. The substrate
was a 1.6 mm thick FR4 material with a relative permittivity of 4.4 and loss tangent of
0.02. The pentagonal monopole is loaded with a CSRR unit cell. This metamaterial unit
4
N.A. Jan et al.

cell displays double negative (DNG) behaviour at a resonant frequency of 2.45 GHz.
The feed line is a 50 Ω microstrip stub, with a width of 3 mm. The overall antenna
volume is 26 × 25 × 1.6 mm3. The defected ground structure has dimensions of
22 mm × 12 mm, and a further 3 mm-radius semi-circle was cut from each side of the
ground to enhance the wideband performance in the upper WLAN frequency range. The
optimised CSRR parameters are given in Table 2. Figure 6 shows the ‘three step evolu‐
tion’ of the metamaterial inspired design.
Fig. 1. Monopole antenna loaded with CSRR and DGS.
A Compact CSRR Loaded Monopole Antenna
5

Fig. 2. Geometrical conﬁguration of CSRR unit cell
Fig. 3. Transmission/Reﬂection Coeﬃcient of a unit cell
Fig. 4. Eﬀective extracted permittivity of a unit cell
6
N.A. Jan et al.

Fig. 5. Eﬀective extracted permeability of a unit cell
Table 2. The optimized parameter of the proposed Metamaterial-inspired antenna
Parameter
Value (mm)
Parameter
Value (mm)
L
25
C
4
W
26
R
3
L1
12
G
2
W1
22
Wm
3
a
4
Lw
12
b
4
Lp
8
Fig. 6. Metamaterial-inspired antenna design evolution; (a) conventional antenna, (b) Monopole
With CSRR, (c) Monopole CSRR with DGS
The results of all the three antennas were simulated in HFSS, these are summarised
in Fig. 7. This indicates that the antenna with CSRR loading and DGS has an overall
better performance in terms of the realized impedance bandwidth and return loss, as
compared to the conventional and CSRR loaded monopole antennas.
A Compact CSRR Loaded Monopole Antenna
7

Fig. 7. Reﬂection coeﬃcient of the conventional, CSRR and CSRR along DGS monopole
antenna
Simulated gain values of the Monopole CSRR with DGS antenna is given in the
Fig. 8 throughout the whole operational band.
Fig. 8. Total gain of the Monopole CSRR with DGS antenna
The simulated E-plane and H-plane radiation patterns are shown in Fig. 9. This shows
a very stable radiation pattern in the frequency band of interest.
8
N.A. Jan et al.

Fig. 9. Simulated E-Plane and H-Plane at (a) 2.45 GHz, (b) 3.5 GHz, (c) 5.2 GHz.
4
Conclusions
A CSRR loaded dual-band monopole antenna with a defected ground structure has been
presented for combined WLAN/WiMAX applications. The antenna is fed by a micro‐
strip feed line. The forecasted antenna volume is 26 mm × 25 mm × 1.6 mm. The
simulation model suggests an impedance bandwidth of 3.86% centred on 2.45 GHz for
the ﬁrst band, and a wide upper band from 3.44 GHz to 6.25 GHz. Both bands display
a good omni-directional monopole radiation pattern.
A Compact CSRR Loaded Monopole Antenna
9

Acknowledgments. This work was partially supported by Yorkshire Innovation Fund, Research
Development Project (RDP); and Engineering and Physical Science Research Council through
Grant EP/E022936A, both from United Kingdom.
References
1. Behera, S.S., Singh, A., Sahu, S., Behera, P.: Compact tapered fed dual-band monopole antenna
for WLAN and WiMAX application. In: International Conference for Convergence of
Technology (I2CT), pp. 1–6, Pune (2014)
2. Ketzaki, D.A., Yioultsis, T.V.: Metamaterial-based design of planar compact MIMO
monopoles. IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag. 61(5), 2758–2766 (2013)
3. Pendry, J.B., Holden, A.J., Robbins, D.J., Stewart, W.J.: Magnetism from conductors and
enhanced nonlinear phenomena. IEEE Trans. Microw. Theor. Tech. 47, 2075–2084 (1999)
4. Srivastava, A., Chaudhary, R.K., Biswas, A., Akhtar, M.J.: Dual-band L-shaped SIW Slot
antenna. In: International Conference on Microwave and Photonics (ICMAP), pp. 1–3,
Dhanbad (2013)
5. Shaalan, A.A., Ramadant, M.I.: Single and dual band-notched UWB monopole antennas with
U-shaped slot. In: Antennas and Propagation (MECAP), Conference on IEEE Middle East, pp.
1–8, Cairo (2010)
6. Pan, C.Y., Huang, C.H., Horng, T.S.: A novel printed G-shaped monopole antenna for dual-
band WLAN applications. In: IEEE Antennas and Propagation Society International
Symposium, vol. 3, pp. 3099–3102 (2004)
7. Sharma, S.K., Chaudhary, R.K.: Metamaterial inspired dual-band antenna with modiﬁed CSRR
and EBG loading. In: IEEE International Symposium on Antennas and Propagation & USNC/
URSI National Radio Science Meeting, pp. 472–473D, Vancouver, BC (2015)
8. Ntaikos, K., Bourgis, N.K., Yioultsis, T.V.: Metamaterial-based electrically small multiband
planar monopole antennas. IEEE Antennas Wireless Propag. Lett. 10, 963–966 (2011)
9. Sharma, S.K., Chaudhary, R.K.: Metamaterial inspired dual-band antenna with modiﬁed CSRR
and EBG loading, IEEE International Symposium on Antennas and Propagation & USNC/
URSI National Radio Science Meeting, pp. 472–473, Vancouver, BC (2015)
10
N.A. Jan et al.

Development Status of Small-Sized Ka-band Mobile
Terminal for Maritime Broadband Communications
Norihiko Katayama1, Naoko Yoshimura1, Hideo Takamatsu2(✉), Susumu Kitazume2,
Yosuke Takahara2, Marshall Lewis3, and Rowan Gilmore3
1 National Institute of Information and Communication Technology (NICT),
4-2-1 Nukui-Kitamachi Koganei, Tokyo  184-8795, Japan
{n.katayama,naoko}@nict.go.jp
2 JEPICO Corporation,
Shinjuku Front Tower 2-21-1, Kita-Shinjuku Shinjuku-Ku, Tokyo  169-0074, Japan
hideotak@yahoo.co.jp,
{h_takamatsu,kitazume,y_takahara}@jepico.co.jp
3 EM Solutions, 55 Curzon Street,   Tennyson  QLD 4105, Australia
{Marshall.Lewis,Rowan.Gilmore}@emsolutions.com.au
Abstract. Most recent development status of small-sized Ka-band mobile commu‐
nications terminal is presented. The terminal is designed to operate at a minimum
target speed of 5 Mbps to/from a Ka-band geostationary satellite, and will eventually
be used for the purpose of research activity to explore marine resources within the
Exclusive Economic Zone (EEZ) of Japan. The terminal is placed on Autonomous
Surface Vehicle (ASV). Because the ASV is “unmanned” and is primarily controlled
from a remote ground control station, several mechanisms are embedded into the
design for safe and successful operations of the Ka-band terminal. Those key mech‐
anisms are introduced in this paper as they make fault diagnosis easier and increase
overall system reliability in case of primary communication channel failure.
Keywords: Mobile communications · Ka-band terminal · Auto-tracking antenna
1
Introduction
Autonomous Surface Vehicle (ASV), as shown in Fig. 1, is an unmanned vessel on the
ocean and is currently under development by JAMSTEC (Japan Agency for Marine-
Earth Science and Technology) [1]. Target speciﬁcations of ASV are tabulated in
Table 1.
The primary function of ASV is to relay a communication signal to/from one or
multiple Autonomous Underwater Vehicles (AUVs) which can cruise 3,000 m deep
seaﬂoors in search for precious marine resources or evidence for earthquake. For this
purpose, every ASV has a Ka-band terminal with auto-tracking antenna onboard and is
designed to communicate with Ka-band geostationary satellite. The AUV weighs a few
tons and can be remotely controlled by ground control station or directly controlled by
Research Vessel (RV). On the other hand, Remotely Operated Vehicle (ROV) works at
much deeper ocean ﬂoors, taking high-deﬁnition class pictures and sampling marine
© ICST Institute for Computer Sciences, Social Informatics and Telecommunications Engineering 2017
I. Otung et al. (Eds.): WiSATS 2016, LNICST 186, pp. 11–17, 2017.
DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-53850-1_2

resources. ROV is mechanically cabled to RV and communicates with RV through
optical ﬁber. Figure 2 shows a conceptual view of those operations.
The Ka-band mobile communications terminal will be mounted on ASV, and RF
system of the terminal consists of beacon-tracking antenna subsystem and transmit/
receive RF subsystem. The antenna subsystem tracks a Ka-band geostationary satellite
(WINDS satellite [3] in this case) with tight pointing accuracy and, if the error exceeds
the limit, it is designed to immediately cease RF transmission and avoid unnecessary
RF interference to neighboring satellites.
The Ka-band terminal is also equipped with a commercially available Machine to
Machine (M2M) remote access system, capable of changing a transmission data rate to
a lower data rate, for instance, during a heavy rain fade to ensure communication
connectivity with a Ka-band satellite. The remote access system also accepts a switch‐
over command to a redundant Block Up Converter (BUC) in case of a primary BUC
failure for some reason.
Table 1. ASV speciﬁcations (target values) [2]
Parameter
Spec
Dimension (L, W, H)
6 m × 2.6 m × 3.2 m
Weight
<3 tons
Operating hours
48 h
Vessel speed
2 knot (cruise), 5 knot (max)
Operating condition
≤Sea State 4, ≤Wind speed
15 m/s
AUV
AUV
ASV
ASV
RV
Real-time communication is 
possible  between AUV and 
ground station  (or between 
AUV and RV).
Ground station can monitor  
a real-time HDTV-class video 
taken by ROV at seafloor.
ROV
AUV
Geostationary Satellite
Ground 
Station
Fig. 1. ASV, AUV, RV, and ROV operations (conceptual view)
12
N. Katayama et al.

2
Overall System Diagram
Figure 2 shows overall system diagram of Ka-band communications terminal. The
system is mainly divided into Communications On The Move (COTM) and Machine to
Machine (M2M) Remote Access System. The COTM is further divided into Antenna
Auto-Tracking System and RF Transmit/Receive system and they are explained in the
following paragraphs. See legend in Fig. 2 for acronyms used in the paragraph.
2.1
Antenna Auto-tracking System
Beacon tracking system (BTS) is employed for Ka-band antenna auto-tracking to realize
the tight antenna pointing requirement (i.e. +0.2°) while operating on the ocean. It is
commonly known that BTS uses three axis control (i.e. azimuth, elevation, and polari‐
zation) and the reason for having the fourth axis, or ex-elevation axis, is to avoid a
“Keyhole Eﬀect”. During a primary mode of antenna pointing control, Antenna Control
Unit (ACU) drives a motor in each axis based on the sum and diﬀerence signals supplied
from the BTS system.
The antenna system is also designed to have an “interlock function”, which allows
RF transmission only when the system locks onto the stable Ka-band beacon and
pointing error stays within +0.2° limit. Outside the limit, the system is designed to cease
RF transmission to avoid unnecessary RF interference to neighboring satellites. Antenna
Auto-Tracking System has the following three modes of operations:
Ka-band geostationary satellite (WINDS)
Primary Communication Channel
GPS 
Antenna
Dual GPS Antenna 
(for GPS compass)
M2M Iridium Satellites
Redundant Communication 
Channel
M2M Antenna 
and
Modem
Management 
(serial)
Ethernet
Switch
COTM 
Management
(Ethernet)
User Data + COTM Management
(Ethernet)
(Legend)
COTM:  Communications On the Move
ODU:  Out Door Unit
BUC:  Block UpConverter
RX:  Receive
TX:  Transmit
COTM 
ODU
User Data
Position
Direction
Gyro
BUC-a
BUC-b
Satellite
Modem
Antenna Interface Unit 
(AIU)
Waveguide
Switch
TX                    RX
TX 
Satellite Tracking 
Antenna
RX 
Beacon 
Track 
System
TX                     RX
Management (serial)
M2M Remote Access 
System 
Fig. 2. Overall system diagram of Ka-band terminal
Development Status of Small-Sized Ka-band Mobile Terminal
13

Open Loop Pointing Mode: Based on the information from Inertial Navigation Unit
(INU, or Gyro), the system scans a tracking antenna in Az/El directions and captures a
target satellite in quite a short time. Once beacon lock is conﬁrmed, the system auto‐
matically transfers to Beacon Tracking Mode.
Beacon Tracking Mode: Antenna tracks a satellite beacon by beacon track system (or
mono-pulse tracking system). The system constantly monitors a small pointing error
from the satellite beacon and corrects the error by adjusting antenna directions in closed
loop control. When the beacon is lost for any reasons, the system automatically transfers
to Gyro-based Holding Mode.
Gyro-Based Holding Mode: When the satellite beacon signal is lost or in poor signal
quality, the system maintains the last antenna position. When the beacon is received
again, the system automatically transfers to Beacon Tracking Mode. When this mode
continues beyond timeout period and does not regain beacon lock, it automatically
transfers to Open Loop Pointing Mode and starts searching for a satellite.
2.2
RF Transmit/Receive System
The RF Transmit/Receive System mainly consists of a driver ampliﬁer and BUC. The
BUC mainly consists of up-conversion mixer and solid state power ampliﬁer (SSPA)
and shows a slightly higher failure rate than other components in the RF Transmit/
Receive system. Since whole Ka-band terminal requires higher level of operational reli‐
ability and survivability on severe sea state conditions, we have decided to incorporate
a “redundancy scheme” (BUC-a and BUC-b) into the BUC design as shown in Fig. 2.
Selecting GaN SSPA, instead of GaAs SSPA, is a part of those eﬀorts because GaN
shows a better power added eﬃciency (typically 25%) and lower heat dissipation,
leading to a smaller failure rate. Table 2 shows GaAs and GaN performances in Ka-band
frequency. Estimated value of system MTBF (Mean Time Between Failures) is exam‐
ined in Sect. 3.
Table 2. GaAs and GaN performances (Ka-band)
Parameter
GaAs
GaN
Supplier
Triquint
Triquint
DC input
36 W (6 A at 6 V)
36 W (1.5 A at 24 V)
RF output (saturation)
6 W
9 W
Thermal dissipation
30 W
27 W
Power Added Eﬃciency
(PAE)
15%
25%
Format
Chip or package, 6 W
Chip, 9 W
Linear RF power
1–2 W (backed oﬀ)
3 W (backed oﬀ)
3–4 W (with lenealizer)
6 W (with lenealizer)
As a result, the Ka-band terminal has “dual BUCs” as shown in Fig. 2 with a primary
BUC (i.e. BUC-a in the ﬁgure) producing 20 W of RF power by combining four RF
14
N. Katayama et al.

outputs of GaN device and a redundant BUC (BUC-b in the same ﬁgure) in standby
mode. If a failure occurs in primary BUC, then redundant BUC automatically comes on
line. Redundant BUC can also be commanded on line by remote operator’s command
through Iridium Short Burst Data Service (SBD), which is explained in Sect. 2.3. A
waveguide-type RF power combiner is used for combining GaN RF outputs because of
its lower RF combining loss and excellent design heritage.
A design method to produce a target EIRP was discussed in detail in a previous paper
[4]. Therefore, using the same method described in the reference, EIRP, G/T, and satel‐
lite link margin are estimated to establish a 5 Mbps satellite link. Result is shown in
Table 3 (below) for a Ka-band terminal having a 54 cm diameter antenna. Note that
EIRPASV = 51 dBW in Table 3 is operational EIRP with output back-oﬀ of 1.8 dB
included.
Table 3. Estimated EIRP, G/T, and satellite link margin
Parameter
Value (predicted)
Notes
EIRPasv
51 dBW
GTX = 41.9 dBi@28.33 GHz,
Psat = 20 W (13 dBW),
OBO = 1.8 dB
G/Tasv
13 dB/K
D = 0.54 m
Satellite link margin for
5 Mbps
3.3 dB (ASV to land) 4.9 dB
(land to ASV)
FEC 1/2 QPSK;
Assumed a 3 dB rain
attenuation in satellite uplink
link calculation (ASV to land).
The same amount of rain eﬀect
is assumed in satellite
downlink calculation (land to
ASV)
2.3
M2M Remote Access System
Machine to Machine (M2M) communication is a technology that allows both wireless
and wired machines to speak to, monitor, and control other machines of the same type.
There are many M2M services available today, oﬀering superior geographical service
coverage with an extremely aﬀordable cost for users.
The reason a redundant communication channel is introduced into our Ka-band terminal
design is that M2M communication can provide an alternative communication path in case
of a primary communication channel failure. The failure could be a Ka-band transponder
failure, hardware failure, and/or software malfunction of Ka-band terminal. Without M2M
communication, those situations can be serious for ASV operations: Those failures may
leave an unmanned ASV in a helpless situation on the ocean, and it is certainly a problem
not knowing where the troubled ASV is located and what kind of operational state the ASV
is in. Therefore, to increase overall system availability and reliability, Iridium Short Burst
Data Service (SBD) is selected and implemented. Note that Iridium SBD is mainly used to
diagnose and recover the overall system performance, and is not suitable for transferring a
large amount of data of the primary communication channel.
Development Status of Small-Sized Ka-band Mobile Terminal
15

The following are what redundant M2M communication channel can perform:
Normal Operations: The redundant M2M channel is active and critical system status
messages (i.e. current values and alarm status) for each subsystem (i.e. COTM terminal,
Ethernet Switch, Satellite Modem, and redundant communication channel) are sent via
Iridium SBD once a day. Critical parameters are to be deﬁned. Self-test on Iridium SBD
is performed several times a day. System generates alarms/notiﬁcations if faults/failures
are detected.
Failures: Catastrophic failure prevents the system from being accessed remotely via
the primary communication channel, and it can be detected by the system or by human
operators. A failure in COTM terminal can be detected and diagnosed by ﬁrmware.
Operation After Failure: If a failure occurs, Iridium SBD messages indicating failure
will be sent via Iridium satellite network periodically. Remote host may receive a status
message or the host can detect a loss of communication over the primary channel. In
either case, operator sends diagnostic commands or system recovery commands via
Iridium system.
Operation After System Recovery: The system sends SBD message indicating failure
is cleared.
3
System MTBF Calculation
Table 4 shows an MTBF (Mean Time Between Failures) value calculated in accordance
with MIL-HDBK-217F Notice 2 in a 40°C Naval Sheltered environmental condition.
The failure rate is determined by calculating and summing the failure rate of each
component in the terminal. Each component has a base failure rate depending on its type
(resistor, capacitor, etc.) which is then multiplied by coeﬃcients based on variables such
as temperature, component quality, environmental conditions and power rating, as part
of the MIL-HDBK-217F Notice 2 standard. Once failures per million hours (fpmh) are
thus estimated, MTBF is obtained by calculating 106 (h)/fpmh.
Table 4. MTBF of Ka-band Terminal
Dual BUC, redundant DC converters
Commercial
Experimental
Failure rate (fpmh)
352
110
MTBF (hours)
2,838
9,035
During experimental phase of ASV operations, it is assumed that every ASV will go
to the ocean and work continuously for two weeks and that the operation repeats six
times a year. In the meantime, there is a chance of periodic maintenance for each ASV,
which is scheduled four times a year. Based on the operational scenario, 9,035 h is
believed to be a good number for the current operational purpose.
16
N. Katayama et al.

The commercial MTBF, on the other hand, assumes continuous operation of ASV
in a Naval Sheltered state, showing a smaller value than experimental.
4
Summary
The most recent development status of small-sized, Ka-band mobile communications
terminal was discussed for successful operations of Autonomous Surface Vehicle
(ASV). The goal is to establish reliable broadband mobile communications between
ASV vessel and ground station through a Ka-band geostationary satellite. Having
“redundancy scheme” in a BUC design is considered useful to increase overall system
survivability of the Ka-band terminal. The authors also believe that incorporating M2M
communication into Ka-band terminal design greatly enhances fault diagnosis capa‐
bility. Finally, MTBF is computed for Ka-band terminal equipped with dual BUC and
redundant DC convertor system. Calculated MTBF value is considered adequate for
current experimental purpose.
Acknowledgements. The authors greatly appreciate useful and kind advices, comments, and
supports made by JEPICO and EM Solutions. It is emphasized that this development work of Ka-
band mobile communications terminal is one of the critical element of Next-generation
Technology for Ocean Resources Exploration, which constitutes one of the highly-prioritized
Strategic Innovation Promotion Programs (abbreviated as “SIP programs”) of Cabinet Oﬃce,
Government of Japan. Ten SIP programs have been implemented since 2014 and they plan to
continue until March 2019.
References
1. JAMSTEC. Research vessels, facilities and equipment. http://www.jamstec.go.jp/e/about/
equipment/ships/
2. Workshop on Next Generation Experimental Test Satellite (2015)
3. JAXA. High-speed internet will be available anytime, anywhere. http://global.jaxa.jp/article/
interview/vol32/index_e.html
4. Katayama, N., Yoshimura, N., Takamatsu, H., Kitazume, S., Takahara, Y., Logan, J., Ness, J.:
Development of Ka-band mobile communications platform for ocean broadband
communications. In: AIAA ICSSC (2015)
Development Status of Small-Sized Ka-band Mobile Terminal
17

New and Less Complex Approach to Estimate
Angles of Arrival
Mohammed A.G. Al-Sadoon1, Abdulkareem S. Abdullah2, Ramzy S. Ali2,
Ali S. Al-Abdullah1, Raed A. Abd-Alhameed1(✉), Steve M.R. Jones1,
and James M. Noras1
1 School of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science,
University of Bradford, Bradford BD7 1DP, UK
r.a.a.abd@bradford.ac.uk
2 Department of Electrical Engineering, University of Basrah, Basra, Iraq
Abstract. Accurate angle/direction of arrival (AOA/DOA) estimation is an
important issue which, helps mobile communications, wireless positioning and
signal processing systems to improve their performance signiﬁcantly. This paper
proposes a new method to estimate the direction of arrival of signals. The
proposed estimator is dependent on applying the eigenvalue decomposition
(EVD) approach on the covariance matrix of the received signals and then
selecting the eigenvector which corresponds to the largest eigenvalue. This
method is called Maximum Signal Subspace (MSS). In a novel step, the sidelobes
of the pseudo-spectrum are supressed. The theoretical and mathematical model
of the proposed method is proved and then veriﬁed by computer simulation. The
computer simulation is applied to linear antenna array to demonstrate and justify
the validity of the new method. The estimation performance and execution time
of this method are compared with three AOA methods.
Keywords: Direction of arrival · Angle of arrival · Eigen decomposition method ·
Wireless communication · Antenna array · Positioning systems
1
Introduction
Direction ﬁnding (DF) relates to estimating the DOA of signal sources that impinging
on an antenna array either in the form of acoustic or electromagnetic waves. The need
for DOA estimation stems from the requirements of tracking and locating signal emitters
in both military and civilian applications, for example, radar systems, public security,
seismology, sonar and emergency call locating [1]. Furthermore, wireless technology
applications have disseminated into several ﬁelds, for instance, sensor networks, envi‐
ronmental monitoring, search and rescue [2]. All these applications motivated and
focussed increased attention towards developing direction of arrival techniques for
wireless communication systems. The AOA method is the heart of smart antenna
systems technology that provides accurate direction information about signal sources
for wireless communication network [3]. Smart antenna systems combine multiple
antenna elements with a digital signal processing to improve and optimize its reception
© ICST Institute for Computer Sciences, Social Informatics and Telecommunications Engineering 2017
I. Otung et al. (Eds.): WiSATS 2016, LNICST 186, pp. 18–27, 2017.
DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-53850-1_3

and transmission pattern adaptively according to signal environment response to
improve signal to interference ratios [4]. This technology had been found useful in
mobile communication systems since it allows increasing the number of mobile users
given limited resources [5]. Several angle of arrival techniques have been proposed and
developed during last ﬁve decades for array signal processing to estimate DOA [6]. The
Bartlett or classical beamformer method is one of the earliest techniques proposed to
estimate the direction of impinging signals by scanning across an angular space of
interest [7]. However, this method suﬀers from poor resolution and high sidelobe levels.
Later, Capon proposed a new approach for the same purpose, which is known as the
minimum variance distortedness response (MVDR) method [8]. The principle of this
method depends on estimating the signal from one direction and supposing that all other
directions are interference. Although this method gives better resolution accuracy than
the Bartlett method, its performance signiﬁcantly drops when arriving signals are corre‐
lated or close to each other in angle. This type of techniques was called non-subspace
since it does not need to decompose the covariance matrix of received signals. Another
class of AOA techniques are called signal subspace methods, which present high accu‐
racy compared with the previous ones. Multiple Signal Classiﬁcation (MUSIC) was a
well-known method, which provides high accuracy for direction estimation [9].
However, this method was a bit complex and required many computational processes
since the size of the matrix increases as the number of the incoming signals increases.
The complexity of the estimator is another issue that algorithm designers must take care
of. Hence, this paper proposes a new and less complex method with good accuracy to
estimate the direction of incident signals. This paper is organized as follows: Sect. 2 the
mathematical modelling of the direction of arrival signals. The proposed estimator and
its mathematical model are given in Sect. 3. Section 4 simulates the proposed estimator
and discuss the simulation results. Lastly, in Sect. 5, conclusion and summarized results
are presented.
2
Direction of Arrival Mathematical Modelling
When the antenna array receives signals from various directions, the angle of arrival
algorithm is implemented to ﬁnd these directions. Let’s assume there are D signals inci‐
dent on M antenna elements as shown in Fig. 1. These signals will be received by M-
elements with M potential weights, wm. Each kth sample of incident signal s(k) contains
on an Additive White Gaussian Noise (AWGN). This can be modelled as in [10].
The received vector signal can be deﬁned as:
̄x(k) = ̄A.̄s(k) + ̄n(k)
(1)
where
̄A
(
θi
)
 is total steering matrix of received signals and deﬁned by
A =
[̄a(θ1) ̄a(θ2) … ̄a(θD)
]
(2)
New and Less Complex Approach to Estimate Angles of Arrival
19

̄s(k) is a vector of incident complex signals at k∆t-time is given by:
̄s(k) = [s1(k), s2(k), … , sD(k)]
(3)
n(k) is a zero mean Gaussian noise for each channel and is expressed by:
̄n(k) = [n1(k), n2(k), … , nD(k)]
(4)
̄a(θi) is the array steering vector and is given by [2]:
̄a(θ) =
⎡
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢⎣
1
exp(jβdsinθ)
.
.
.
exp(jβd(M −1)sinθ)
⎤
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥⎦
(5)
where
d denotes the distance between each two adjacent elements.
β is the spatial frequency and deﬁned by:
β = 2π
𝜆
(6)
The output signal can be expressed as:
y(k) = ̄wH ⋅̄x(k)
(7)
with ̄w, the array weights, given by [10]:
̄w = [w1 w2 … wM
]T
(8)
The calculations depend on time samples of the received signals since these signals
are time varying. Obviously, when the signal emitters are moving from one place to
another, their corresponding arrival angles are changing, and this will cause to change
Fig. 1. M-element array with arriving signals.
20
M.A.G. Al-Sadoon et al.

the steering vectors matrix as well. Thus, the covariance matrix ̄Rxx of uncorrelated
receiving signals case is given as follows.
̄Rxx = E[̄x ̄xH ] = E
[( ̄A ̄s + ̄n)×( ̄sH ̄A
H + ̄nH)
]
̄Rxx = E
[( ̄A ̄s + ̄n)×(̄sH ̄A
H + ̄nH)
]
̄Rxx = ̄AE[̄s. ̄sH] ̄A
H + E[̄n. ̄nH]
(9)
̄Rxx = ̄A ̄Rss ̄A
H + ̄Rnn
(10)
And
̄Rss = E
[̄s ̄sH]
(11)
̄Rnn = σ2
n I
(12)
In this situation, ̄Rss is a diagonal matrix since the incoming signals are assumed as
uncorrelated. When the incoming signals are correlated, the covariance matrix will be
diﬀerent from the previous condition due to ̄Rss matrix is non-diagonal. This situation
is given by [10].
̄Rxx = ̄A ̄Rss ̄A
H + ̄A ̄Rsn ̄A
H + ̄A ̄Rns ̄A
H + ̄Rnn
(13)
And
⌢
Rss(k) ≈1
K
K
∑
k=1
̄s(k)̄sH(k)
(14)
⌢
Rsn(k) ≈1
K
K
∑
k=1
̄s(k)̄nH(k)
(15)
⌢
Rns(k) ≈1
K
K
∑
k=1
̄n(k)̄sH(k)
(16)
⌢
Rnn(k) ≈1
K
K
∑
k=1
̄n(k)̄nH(k)
(17)
3
Proposed Method
After the covariance matrix is computed, a method is required to estimate the DOA of
incoming signals. Hence, this paper suggests a new approach to estimate the direction
of emitters; this approach (i.e. MSS) can be classiﬁed as a subspace method. The method
New and Less Complex Approach to Estimate Angles of Arrival
21

consists of three main steps: ﬁrst, sample the incoming signals and construct the cova‐
riance matrix. Secondly, applying decomposition on this matrix and select the Eigen‐
vector that corresponds to the largest Eigenvalue. Lastly, compute the pseudospectrum
and ﬁnd the location of peaks as shown in Fig. 2.
Fig. 2. Proposed method block diagram for direction estimation.
According to the matrix theory, the ̄Rxx can be diagonalised by a nonsingular orthog‐
onal transformation matrix as follows:
̄Q∗̄Rxx ̄QT = Λ
(18)
where Λ is (M × M) diagonal matrix consists of real Eigenvalues and is given by:
Λ =
⎡
⎢
⎢
⎢⎣
λ1 0
… 0
0 λ2
… 0
⋮
0 0
⋱
⋯
⋮
λM
⎤
⎥
⎥
⎥⎦
(19)
Q is the eigenvectors matrix and can be deﬁned as:
̄Q = [ ̄e1, ̄e2, … ̄eM]
(20)
where ̄ei is the Eigenvector column with size (M × 1). For each Eigenvector (̄ei), there
is a corresponding Eigenvalue λi. These Eigenvalues have to be sorted in descending
way (i.e. from largest to smallest) and then selects the Eigenvector, which is associated
with largest Eigenvalue. Once this eigenvector is obtained, the DOA can be found from
the orthogonality between the Largest Eigenvector (LE) and the antenna array steering
vector as follows:
P(𝜃) = ̄e1 ⋅̄a(𝜃)
(21)
22
M.A.G. Al-Sadoon et al.

The above equation will search on the maximal points, which represent the angles
of arrival. However, these peaks are wide and in addition, there are high sidelobes asso‐
ciated with pseudospectrum of this equation. Therefore, it is better to search for nulls
instead of maximal peaks. This can be achieved by subtracting the maximum value of
P(𝜃) from all other values of P(𝜃) to obtain sharp peaks in the direction of received
signals as follows:
PMSS(𝜃) =
1
P(𝜃)max −P(𝜃) + 𝜀
(22)
where 𝜀 is small scalar value added in order to avoid the singularities.
4
Simulation Results and Discussion
A computer simulation has been performed to verify and demonstrate the theoretical
concepts of the proposed method. This method has been applied to a uniform linear array
(ULA) consisting of ten isotropic elements (M = 10) with a spacing distance equal to
d = 0.5 𝜆. Two Binary Phase Shift Keying (BPSK) signals are assumed impinging on
this antenna array. Four scenarios are considered in the simulation to explain the
performance of proposed technique. The ﬁrst scenario tests the ability of the proposed
method to detect incoming signals when they are close to each other. The second scenario
evaluates the behaviour of this method at diﬀerent signal to noise ratio (SNR). The third
case presents the estimation accuracy of the suggested method by computing the error
between estimated and actual angles. The last one compare the performance and
complexity of the proposed algorithm with three common methods. To estimate DOA
by using this method, the following steps should be achieved:
• Step 1: Generate D signals with N samples for each signal.
• Step 2: Generate the angle of arrival of D signals randomly.
• Step 3: Compute the steering vectors a (θ) for each signal by applying Eq. 5 and then
use Eq. 2 to compute total steering matrix of received signals A(θ).
• Step 4: Generate noise with speciﬁc SNR and then add it to the signal.
• Step 5: Compute the covariance matrix of the received signals by applying Eq. (9)
for uncorrelated signals condition and Eq. (17) for coherent signals condition.
• Step 6: Use Eigen Value Decomposition (EVD) approach to decompose the cova‐
riance matrix and then select the eigenvector that corresponds to the largest eigen‐
value.
• Step 7: Apply Eq. 21 and then determine the value of the maximum point. Subtract
the value from all the values by applying Eq. 22 to obtain sharp peaks in the direction
of arrival angles; 𝜀 is set to 0.01.
• Step 8: Compute the locations of the peaks to detect the arrival angles.
New and Less Complex Approach to Estimate Angles of Arrival
23

4.1
Angular Separation
This section simulates the performance of the suggested method by considering the
angular separation between arrival signals. The SNR is assumed 10 dB and the number
of samples taken for incident signals is 100; the true location of the direction of signals
is represented by “o”. Figure 3a shows the performance of the proposed method when
the arrival signals are far from each other. While in the second case, it is supposed that
there is a small angular separation between received signals as shown in Fig. 3b. It is
obvious from these graphs that the proposed method has the ability to estimate the
direction of arrival signals accurately even when these directions are close to each other.
Fig. 3. The performance of the MSS method when changing the angular separation between
AOAs; (a) Large angular space between AOAs, (b) Small angular space between AOAs.
4.2
Diﬀerent SNR
This section tests the robustness of proposed method and its ability to work eﬃciently
even if one or more of network parameters have failed. This can be achieved by changing
the value of SNR of received signals. Thus, three diﬀerent SNR values have been
considered are SNR = 20 dB, 0 dB, −20 dB; and the number of samples chosen N = 100;
the true direction of arrival signals are represented by “o”. It is clear from this graph
Fig. 4, that this algorithm gives good accuracy even at poor SNR. However, as the SNR
increases, the peaks will be sharper and more accurate.
24
M.A.G. Al-Sadoon et al.

Fig. 4. The performance of MSS method with various SNR.
4.3
Accuracy of Estimation and Error Calculation
The accuracy of estimation is one of the most important factors which should take into
our consideration to evaluate the performance of each technique. Accuracy illustrates
the deviation degree of the estimated angles from the actual angles. Hence, Ten thousand
sets of two angles of arrival have been generated randomly in order to evaluate and
examine the resolution of estimation. This simulation section was achieved with the
number of samples is 100 and SNR = 10 dB. The average absolute error between the
actual and estimated directions is 1.422° and the cumulative distribution function (CDF)
is shown in Fig. 5. It is clear from this ﬁgure, eighty percent of the average error is less
than two degrees and this seems acceptable in most of the application.
Fig. 5. CDF plot of total average error of the MSS algorithm.
New and Less Complex Approach to Estimate Angles of Arrival
25

4.4
Performance Comparsion
Two signals are assumed incident on ULA from diﬀerent directions (θ = −20° and 10°);
the simulation parameters are M = 10, SNR = 10 dB, N = 100 and d = 0.5 𝜆. The
proposed and three other methods namely: Bartlett, MVDR and MUSIC have been
applied to estimate the direction of incident signals. The performance estimation of each
method is shown in Fig. 6. In order to compare the computational complexity of the
proposed technique with these techniques, a MATLAB programme of each method has
been written and then run with ten thousands trials under same conditions. The execution
time of each method is recorded and then plotted as shown in Fig. 7. It is obvious from
these graphs that the proposed technique is the lowest complexity and also gives a good
estimation accuracy.
Fig. 6. Comparison between the proposed and other methods.
Fig. 7. Execution time comparison.
26
M.A.G. Al-Sadoon et al.

5
Conclusion
A maximum signal subspace (MSS) algorithm based on the eigenvector associated with
the largest eigenvalue is has been proposed. The main beneﬁts of the proposed technique
its low computational complexity and does not require to pervious knowledge to the
number of arrival signals since it only utilizes one eigenvector, regardless of the number
of arrival signals. It has been tested and evaluated with diﬀerent SNR and diﬀerent
directions of AOAs to demonstrate the theoretical concepts. In order to examine and test
the proposed method on a wide range of circumstances, ten thousand values for two
diﬀerent AOA have been generated randomly. The error between actual and estimated
angles has been computed and plotted as CDF function. This method has been compared
with three common AOA techniques and the results have veriﬁed the eﬀectiveness of
the proposed method with good resolution, low computational complexity and small
estimation error.
Acknowledgments. This work was partially supported by Antenna, Propagations and Radio
Frequency Research Group, at Bradford University, United Kingdom and Higher Education
Ministry of Iraq.
References
1. Zekavat, R., Buehrer, R.M.: Handbook of Position Location: Theory, Practice and Advances,
vol. 27. Wiley, New york (2011)
2. Chen, Z., Gokeda, G., Yu, Y.: Introduction to Direction-of-Arrival Estimation. Artech House,
Boston (2010)
3. Balanis, C.A., Ioannides, P.I.: Introduction to smart antennas. Synth. Lect. Antennas 2(1), 1–175
(2007)
4. Ghali, M.A., Abdullah, A.S., Mustafa, F.M.: Adaptive beam forming with position and
velocity estimation for mobile station in smart antenna system. In: 2011 7th International
Conference on Networked Computing and Advanced Information Management (NCM),
Gyeongju, pp. 67–72 (2011)
5. Al-Sadoon, M., Abd-Alhameed, R.A., Elfergani, I., Noras, J., Rodriguez, J., Jones, S.: Weight
optimization for adaptive antenna arrays using LMS and SMI algorithms. WSEAS Trans.
Commun. 15, 206–214 (2016)
6. Krim, H., Viberg, M.: Two decades of array signal processing research: the parametric
approach. IEEE Signal Process. Magaz. 13(4), 67–94 (1996)
7. Bartlett, M.: An Introduction to Stochastic Processes with Special References to Methods and
Applications. Cambridge University Press, New York (1961)
8. Capon, J.: High-resolution frequency-wavenumber spectrum analysis. Proc. IEEE 57(8),
1408–1418 (1969)
9. Schmidt, R.: Multiple emitter location and signal parameter estimation. IEEE Trans. Antennas
Propag. 34(3), 276–280 (1986)
10. Gross, F.: Smart Antennas with Matlab: Principles and Applications in Wireless
Communication. McGraw-Hill Professional, New York (2015)
New and Less Complex Approach to Estimate Angles of Arrival
27

MIMO Based Multi Band Antenna for Wireless
Communication in C-Band, X-Band, K-Band and Ku Band
Kunal Srivastava1(✉), Ashwani Kumar2, Binod Kanaujia3, Santanu Dwari4,
A.K. Verma5, Mukul Yadav6, Josyula Lalita1, and S. Chamarthi7
1 Sri Venkateswara College, New Delhi, India
kunal.1211@gmail.com
2 Sri Aurobindo College, New Delhi, India
ashwanikumar7@yahoo.com
3 Ambedkar Institute of Advance Technology, New Delhi, India
4 ISM Dhanbad, Dhanbad, India
5 Delhi University, New Delhi, India
6 Department of Electronics and Information Technology,
Kurukshetra University, Kurukshetra, India
mukul.yadav@deity.gov.in
7 Department of Instrumentation, Kurukshetra University, Kurukshetra, India
Abstract. This paper presents a design of a multiband MIMO microstrip patch
antenna. The isolation between the two ports varies from 12.5 dB to 44 dB for all
the available bands. Proposed antenna is useful for C-Band, X-Band, K-Band and
Ku-Band applications. The proposed antenna shows the circular polarization
behavior at 5.27 GHz (5.26 GHz–5.31 GHz), 6.20 GHz (6.18 GHz–6.22 GHz),
11.89 GHz (11.72 GHz–12.24 GHz), 13.56 GHz (13.46 GHz–13.61 GHz),
16.68 GHz (16.55 GHz–16.85 GHz), 21.17 GHz (21.17 GHz–21.20 GHz) and
22.84 GHz (22.28 GHz–22.93 GHz). The proposed antenna is designed on FR-4
substrate with relative permittivity 4.4 and thickness 1.59 mm.
Keywords: Antenna · Multiple-input–multiple-output (MIMO) · Mutual
coupling · Multiband · Micro strip patch
1
Introduction
Emerging technologies in the modern wireless communication systems require products
that are capable of providing multiple services within a single device. Multiple-input-
multiple-output (MIMO) technology is used to increase the capacity and quality of the
channels, which are used in communications. Recently, MIMO antennas have been
widely studied and used in wireless local area network (WLAN), mobile communica‐
tion, wireless broadband network and other mobile communication networks. MIMO
antennas aim to produce a high isolation among the multi-antenna elements used in the
transmitter and receiver; thus in a limited space the channel capacity of the communi‐
cation system can be increased without increasing bandwidth [1–5].
© ICST Institute for Computer Sciences, Social Informatics and Telecommunications Engineering 2017
I. Otung et al. (Eds.): WiSATS 2016, LNICST 186, pp. 28–36, 2017.
DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-53850-1_4

The data rate, operating distance and link reliability can be highly improved without
using extra spectrum and transmission power in MIMO technology. It helps to handle
large data, video and voice stream. MIMO systems are useful for both Line Of Sight
(LOS) and non-LOS (NLOS) indoor wireless communications; they reduce the chan‐
nel’s multipath and increase the data throughput [3, 4]. To date, huge R&D has been
done to improve underground MIMO channel performances [3–5].
In recent years, lot of work has been done on integrated and multifunctional wireless
communication systems. Multi-band antennas play an important role and are extremely
desired, as they can be simultaneously used for diﬀerent signal frequencies [3, 4]. To
the best of our knowledge the work done on the multi-band MIMO antennas is very less
in the open literature.
This paper presents new design method to design a multi-band antenna with MIMO
for C-Band, X-Band, K-Band and Ku-Band applications.
2
Antenna Design
Proposed antenna has been designed on the FR-4 substrate with relative permittivity 𝜖r = 4.4,
thickness 1.59 mm and loss tangent 0.02. A 3-dimensional EM simulator HFSS (v.11) has
been used to design the antenna. The dimensions of the antenna are: a = 19.5 mm,
b = 11.5 mm, c = 6.5 mm, d = 1.5 mm, e = 13.1 mm, f = 3.0 mm, g = 10.46 mm,
h = i = 4.0 mm, j = 5 mm, and w = L = 40 mm as shown in Fig. 1. The proposed antenna
has a unique combination of two opposite face C-type rings. The radius of the outer ring is
19.5 mm, ring width is 3 mm and gap between two rings is 2 mm. The width of the 50 Ω line
is 10.46 mm, which has been used for feeding the antenna and also for impedance matching.
The gap between two rings plays a major role in optimizing the resonant frequency and
Fig. 1. Layout with dimensions of the proposed antenna (a) Top side (b) Bottom side
MIMO Based Multi Band Antenna for Wireless Communication
29

isolation between two ports. By changing the gap between the two rings, one can increase
the isolation and shift the position of resonant frequency.
Figure 2 shows the |S11| of the antenna while Fig. 3 shows the isolation between two
ports. The resonant frequency, bandwidth and % fractional bandwidth are shown in
Table 1. From the Fig. 2 it is clear that the antenna is useful for diﬀerent frequencies
between 4.5 GHz to 25 GHz, which cover the C-Band, X-Band, K-Band and Ku-Band.
Figure 3 shows the isolation between the Port 1 and Port 2 which is found to vary from
12.5 dB to 44 dB. This shows its eﬀectiveness for the MIMO antenna as well as for
multi-band application.
Fig. 2. |S11| and |S22| frequency response of the proposed antenna
Fig. 3. Isolation between two ports of the antenna |S21| (dB)
30
K. Srivastava et al.

Table 1. Performance of the Proposed antenna
Resonant
Frequency (Fr)
(GHz)
Lower Cutoﬀ of
B.W (Fl) (GHz)
Upper Cutoﬀ of
B.W (Fh) (GHz)
Bandwidth
(GHz)
Percentage
Bandwidth
((Fh – Fl)/
Fr)*100
S11
4.96
4.89
5.08
0.19
3.83
5.47
5.39
5.58
0.19
3.47
6.08
6.04
6.13
0.09
1.48
6.57
6.52
6.77
0.25
3.80
6.96
6.90
7.17
0.27
3.87
7.64
7.58
7.88
0.30
3.92
8.57 & 9.28
8.17
9.45
1.28
14.93 & 13.79
10.14
9.84
10.44
0.60
5.91
11.63
11.37
12.02
0.65
5.58
19.06 & 21.18
17.93
21.56
3.63
20.24 & 17.13
S22
10.45
10.21
10.80
0.59
5.64
11.46
11.18
11.76
0.58
5.06
12.48
12.19
12.72
0.53
4.24
13.39
13.20
13.59
0.39
2.91
14.29
14.19
14.50
0.31
2.16
15.46 & 16.08
15.27
16.31
1.04
6.72 & 6.46
20.57
20.32
20.96
0.64
3.11
21.77 & 23.50
21.25
24.22
2.97
13.64 & 12.63
Fig. 4. |S11| of the Proposed Antenna for diﬀerent gaps.
MIMO Based Multi Band Antenna for Wireless Communication
31

3
Parametric Study
The effect of the gap between the strips of the rings from 1 mm to 2 mm is shown in Fig. 4.
Impedance bandwidth and isolation between the two ports are shown in the Figs. 4, 5 and 6.
Fig. 5. |S22| of the Proposed Antenna for diﬀerent gaps.
Fig. 6. |S21| of the Proposed Antenna for diﬀerent gaps.
From Fig. 4 it is seen that the resonating frequencies of the antenna of port 1 are shifted
towards the higher frequency side by increasing the gap. From the Fig. 5 it can be seen that
the resonating frequencies of port 2 are also shifted toward the higher frequency side while
from Fig. 6 the isolation between the two ports are increased by increasing the gap between
the strip rings.
For more depth analysis of antenna only Port 1 with patch and Port 2 with patch have
been used the individual antenna structures is shown in Fig. 7. The simulated response is
shown in Fig. 8.
32
K. Srivastava et al.

   
(a)
(b) 
Fig. 7. Proposed Antenna structure (a) with Port 1 (b) with Port 2
Fig. 8. Antenna structure with Port 1 and Port 2
From Fig. 8 it is clear that the antenna with individual Port 1 resonates in lower
frequency range from 4.5 GHz to 12 GHz while antenna with Port 2 resonates from 10 GHz
to 22 GHz. As both the ports are connected to the patch, the antenna starts resonating at both
the lower frequency as well as higher frequencies, shown in Fig. 2 and Table 1.
This antenna supports ten frequency bands at Port 1, and eight frequency bands at Port
2. Thus, it shows the usefulness for multi-band applications. Most of the multi-band
antennas are known to suffer with low gain problems [6, 7] this proposed multi-band
antenna, however, is seen to overcome the low gain problems. Gain of the proposed antenna
is shown in the Fig. 9. It varies from 1 dB to 24 dB for the entire spectrum of the antenna.
This antenna also exhibits the circular polarization for different bands, which is very useful
for wireless communication. The axial ratio response of the proposed antenna is shown in
the Fig. 10. The axial ratio at resonant frequencies, bandwidth and percentage bandwidth are
given in Table 2.
MIMO Based Multi Band Antenna for Wireless Communication
33

Fig. 9. Gain of the proposed antenna
Fig. 10. Axial ratio of the proposed antenna
Proposed antenna shows the circular polarization behavior in C-Band, X-Band, K-Band
and Ku-Band. This behavior is suitable for satellite communications, radar, terrestrial broad‐
band, space communications, amateur radio in X-band; satellite communications in K-band;
and radar, satellite communications and astronomical observations. The radiation pattern of
the proposed antenna for the different frequencies are shown in Fig. 11.
34
K. Srivastava et al.

Fig. 11. Radiation pattern of proposed antenna at (a) 5.5 GHz (b) 8.6 GHz (c) 10.5 GHz (d)
14.3 GHz (e) 19.0 GHz & (f) 21.8 GHz
Table 2. Axial Ratio and bandwidth.
Resonant
Frequency (Fr)
(GHz)
Lower Cutoﬀ of
B.W (Fl) (GHz)
Upper Cutoﬀ of
B.W (Fh) (GHz)
Bandwidth
(GHz)
Percentage
Bandwidth
((Fh – Fl)/
Fr)*100
5.27
5.26
5.31
0.05
0.94
6.20
6.18
6.22
0.04
0.64
11.89
11.72
12.24
0.52
4.37
13.56
13.46
13.61
0.15
1.106
16.68
16.55
16.85
0.30
1.79
21.17
21.17
21.20
0.03
0.14
22.84
22.28
22.93
0.65
2.84
From the ﬁgure it is clear that at lower frequency and higher frequency antenna shows
co-polarization. Moreover, at lower frequency E-plane shows unidirectional properties
and H-plane show omni-directional properties but at higher frequency it shows some
distorted behavior.
4
Conclusion
A multi-band MIMO microstrip patch antenna has been presented. The parametric study
has been presented to see the eﬀect of various parameters on the performances of the
MIMO Based Multi Band Antenna for Wireless Communication
35

antenna. The isolation between the two port is varies from 12.5 dB to 44 dB for all the
available bands Proposed antenna could be useful for C-Band, X-Band, K-Band and
Ku-Band applications. Antenna also show the circular polarization behaviors at
5.27 GHz, 6.20 GHz, 11.89 GHz, 13.56 GHz, 16.68 GHz, 21.17 GHz and 22.84 GHz.
References
1. Li, H., Xiong, J., He, S.: A compact planar MIMO antenna system of four elements with similar
radiation characteristics and isolation structure. IEEE Antennas Wireless Propag. Lett. 8, 1107–
1110 (2009)
2. Zhang, S., Pedersen, G.F.: Mutual coupling reduction for UWB MIMO antennas with a
wideband neutralization line. IEEE Antennas Wireless Propag. Lett. 15, 166–169 (2016)
3. Srivastava, K., kumar, A., Kanaujia, B.K.: Compact penta-band microstrip antenna. In: MOTL
(2016)
4. Srivastava, K., kumar, A., Kanaujia, B.K.: Design of compact antenna for Penta-Band and
Hexa-Band application. Frequenz J.
5. Ghaddar, M., Nedil, M., Mabrouk, I.B., Talbi, L.: Multiple-input multiple-output beam-space
for high-speed wireless communication in underground mine. IET Microwave. Antennas
Propag. 10, 8–15 (2016)
6. Yarkan, S., Guzelgoz, S., Arslan, H., et al.: Underground mine communications: a survey. IEEE
Commun. Surv. Tutor. 11(3), 125–142 (2009)
7. Valdesueiro, J.A., Izquierdo, B., Romeu, J.: On 2 × 2 MIMO observable capacity in subway
tunnels at C-band: an experimental approach. IEEE Antennas Propag. Lett. 9, 1099–1102
(2010)
36
K. Srivastava et al.

A Staircase-Shaped DGS Structure Monopole Antenna
for UWB Operations
Naeem A. Jan1, Mohammed Lashab2, Nazar T. Ali1,3, Fathi M. Abdussalam1,
Embarak M. Ibrahim4, Raed A. Abd-Alhameed1(✉), and M.B. Child1
1 Faculty of Engineering and Informatics, University of Bradford, Bradford, UK
kakarnayeem@yahoo.com, {r.a.a.abd,m.b.child}@bradford.ac.uk
2 Electronics Department, Skikda University, Skikda, Algeria
lashabmoh@gmail.com
3 Electrical and Computer Engineering, Khalifa University, Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates
ntali@kustar.ac.uk
4 College of Electronic Technology Bani Walid, Bani Walid, Libya
Abstract. This paper presents a novel, physically compact, miniaturized, ultra-
wideband (UWB) monopole antenna design, which utilizes a defected ground struc‐
ture (DGS). The defected ground design is realized as a spiral staircase-shaped
pattern, and the optimized antenna volume is 26 × 25 × 1.6 mm3. The resultant
antenna operates over the full UWB frequency range from 3.1 GHz to 10.6 GHz, with
predicted gains in the range 0.1 dBi to 3.36 dBi across the band.
Keywords: Defected ground structure (DGS) · Ultra-wideband (UWB) ·
Metamaterial (MTM) antenna · Monopole antenna
1
Introduction
UWB continues to receive widespread attention because of it’s immunity to multipath
interference, and the ever increasing demand for larger bandwidths and higher data rates.
Applications that can beneﬁt from ultra-wideband technology include broadband wire‐
less communication systems, peer-to-peer ultra-fast communications and short range
communication systems and sensor networks.
There are several well established techniques for achieving ultra-wideband antenna
characteristics. These are now routinely supplemented by the use of techniques based
on artiﬁcial metamaterials, with speciﬁc electromagnetic (constituitive) parameters.
Examples include composite righthand/lefthand (CRLH antennas, metamaterial loaded
antenna structures, and metasurfaces or electromagnetic bandgap structures (EBG) [1].
EBG approaches date back to the late 1980 s through the work of Yablonovitch and
Pendry [2].
EBG structures can be classiﬁed into four distinct categories; defected ground struc‐
ture (DGS), photonic band-gap structure (PBG), high impedance electromagnetic
surfaces (HIS) and artiﬁcial magnetic conductors (AMC) [3, 4]. The stop-band charac‐
teristics of EBG and DGS structures are be used for wide range of antenna applications
such as miniaturization, gain enhancement, and promote stable radiation patterns. A
© ICST Institute for Computer Sciences, Social Informatics and Telecommunications Engineering 2017
I. Otung et al. (Eds.): WiSATS 2016, LNICST 186, pp. 37–44, 2017.
DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-53850-1_5

major feature of EBG/DGS antennas is in establishing large bandwidths, and miniatur‐
isation [5, 6] through the modiﬁcation and suppression of surface waves. Various
compact shapes of monopole antennas with defected ground structure (DGS) have been
reported in for UWB applications [7, 8]. However, due to small antenna sizes, the gain
in the lower band is always lower than the upper band [8]. In [8] the bandwidth is wide
because of the CPW feeding - this feeding enhances bandwidth but not the gain. In this
paper a monopole antenna, with a novel defected ground structure, is designed for small
size, with positive gain and stable radiation pattern performance across the full UWB
service band.
2
Antenna Design and Optimization
The geometrical conﬁguration of the defected ground structure (DGS) is shown in
Fig. 1, and the proposed antenna is shown in Fig. 2. The antenna model was simulated
using HFSS. The substrate is FR4, with relative permittivity of 4.4, a loss tangent of
0.02, and a thickness 1.6 mm. The front side of the substrate is patterned with monopole
and the back side is patterned with the DGS. The cloud shape monopole antenna is
chosen for its novelty and a triangular patch is cut on top of the antenna to reduce a
footprint without aﬀecting the characteristic of the antenna, which gives rise to wider
bandwidth and stable radiation pattern.
Fig. 1. Geometry of proposed DGS monopole antenna
38
N.A. Jan et al.

Fig. 2. (a) Simple ground monopole (b) DGS monopole (c) Front (pink) & Back (blue) of
modiﬁed DGS monopole (Color ﬁgure online)
The construction of the defected ground structure was inspired from the arrangement
of spiral staircase inside the ancient Mayan “El Caracol” observatory, which will further
enhance the bandwidth and radiation pattern. Initially only a three quarter simple and
plain ground is etched at the back of the substrate (Fig. 2a), and then the sides of the
ground are carved in stairs on both sides, which gives rise to resonances from 3.1 to
6 GHz and 9 GHz and above (Fig. 2b). The middle of the DGS is then modiﬁed by
cutting a square shape of size (s × p) i.e. (4.1 × 4) mm which produces the UWB
frequency response from 3.1 to 10.6 GHz (Fig. 2c). The antenna is fed by a 50 Ω micro‐
strip line of width 3 mm. The antenna volume is 26 × 25 × 1.6 mm3. The optimized
parameters of the DGS and UWB antenna (shown in Fig. 1) are given in Table 1. The
simulated reﬂection coeﬃcients for the three antenna variants are shown in Fig. 3.
Initially, there is no radiation with the plane ground plane. For the defected structure,
radiation from 3.1 GHz to 6 GHz and then from 9 GHz can be observed. Finally in the
modiﬁed DGS, a square patch is carved in the middle of the upper part of the DGS, a
continuous full band UWB frequency response is obtained.
Table 1. The optimized parameter of the propose UWB antenna
Parameter
Value
mm
Parameter
Value
mm
L
25
h
1.5
W
26
hg
8.5
L1
25.6
g
0.6
Lg
16.5
s
4.1
a
2
p
4
b
2
w1
3
A Staircase-Shaped DGS Structure Monopole Antenna
39

Fig. 3. Reﬂection coeﬃcient of the monopole antenna with simple plain ground, DGS and
Modiﬁed DGS.
3
Discussion of Parametric Performance Analysis
Figure 4 shows the comparison of simulated return loss (S11) of the monopole antenna for
different spacing sizes, “h”, of the defected ground structure (DGS). The structure param‐
eter “h” is the gap between the ground and the upper part of the monopole. Both parts are
on opposite sides of the substrate as shown in Fig. 1. The different “h” values used are
1.2 mm, 1.5 mm, 2 mm and 2.5 mm. The graph indicates that the best results are observed
for “h” equal to 1.5 mm in the frequency range from 3.1 to 10.6 GHz. For this graph the
Fig. 4. Reﬂection coeﬃcient of UWB antenna for diﬀerent “h”
40
N.A. Jan et al.

square shaped cut in the middle of the ground is maintained at 4.1 mm × 4 mm, this
removes any discontinuity in the frequency range from 6 to 7 GHz.
Fig. 6. Current distribution at diﬀerent frequencies (a) 3.2 GHz (b) 7 GHz (c) 10 GHz
Figure 5, shows the parameter study for the DGS monopole antenna for diﬀerent
“s × p” sizes. Here, “s × p” is the square shaped cut in the middle of the defected ground.
Initially a DGS is simulated without any square cut in the middle. Afterwards, four
diﬀerent square cuts of 2 mm × 2 mm, 3 mm × 3 mm, 4.1 mm × 4 mm and 5 mm × 5 mm
are sequentially introduced in the middle of the ground. The graph clearly illustrates that
the best results are observed for “s × p” at 4.1 mm × 4 mm in the frequency range
between 3.1 to 10.6 GHz. From this graph, the gap between the ground and monopole
antenna is kept at h = 1.5 mm, which will remove any discontinuity in the frequency
range from 6 GHz and above.
Figure 6 shows current distribution at three diﬀerent frequencies of 3.2 GHz, 7 GHz
and 10 GHz. Figure 7 shows the antenna gain across the full UWB frequency band from
Fig. 5. Reﬂection coeﬃcient of UWB antenna for diﬀerent s × p
A Staircase-Shaped DGS Structure Monopole Antenna
41

3.1 to 10.6 GHz. The total gain throughout the whole bandwidth is positive and varies
from 0.1 dBi to 3.36 dBi. In most cases e.g. [8] the gain at the lower frequency band has
negative values as it is often diﬃcult to control the gain for smaller antenna sizes. In this
design a positive gain is not only observable at lower band frequencies, but throughout
the band, whilst making the antenna smaller at the same time. The antenna gain at the
higher frequencies is smaller as compared to the lower frequencies, as this phenomenon
is observed in DGS [8] and MTM antennas [9]. As in DGS and MTM antennas, the
resonance is because of the defected ground structure and metamaterial unit cell respec‐
tively rather than the antenna alone itself; these antennas can’t withhold a stable gain
throughout the bandwidth. The peak gain of 3.36 dBi is observed at 5.2 GHz (see
Fig. 7). The far ﬁelds patterns of the proposed antenna are illustrated in Fig. 8 for diﬀerent
frequencies. The radiations patterns were quite stable over a wide bandwidth.
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
Total gain of the DGS monopole Antenna
Frequency (GHz)
Gain (dBi)
Fig. 7. Total Gain of DGS monopole antenna across the UWB
42
N.A. Jan et al.

a) Radiation pattern at 3.2 GHz
b)  Radiation pattern at 5.2 GHz
c) Radiation pattern at 7 GHz
d) Radiation pattern at 10 GHz
Fig. 8. Simulated E-Plane (Red) and H-Plane (Blue) at (a) 3.2 GHz, (b) 5.2 GHz, (c) 7 GHz. (d)
10 GHz (Color ﬁgure online)
4
Conclusion
A miniature monopole antenna, with a novel defected ground structure, has been
presented for WLAN 5.2/5.8 GHz and full-band UWB operations. The simulation model
was analysed using HFSS, and predicts a working bandwidth operating over the full
UWB range from 3.1 GHz to 10.6 GHz. This broad banding is a function of the defected
ground structure, which also contributes to the gains observed from 0.1 dBi to 3.36 dBi
across the range, and associated pattern stability.
A Staircase-Shaped DGS Structure Monopole Antenna
43

Acknowledgments. This work was partially supported by Yorkshire Innovation Fund, Research
Development Project (RDP); and Engineering and Physical Science Research Council through
Grant EP/E022936A, both from United Kingdom.
References
1. Dong, Y., Itoh, T.: Metamaterial-based antennas. Proc. IEEE 100(7), 2271–2285 (2012)
2. Yang, T.Y., Song, C.Y., Lin, W.W., Yang, X.L.: A new band-notched UWB antenna based on
EBG structure. In: International Workshop on Microwave and Millimeter Wave Circuits and
System Technology (MMWCST), pp. 146–149, Chengdu (2013)
3. Elsheakh, D.M., Abdallah, E.A.: Diﬀerent feeding techniques of microstrip patch antennas
with spiral defected ground structure for size reduction and ultra-wide band operation. J.
Electromagn. Anal. Appl. 4(10), 410 (2012)
4. Nashaat, D., Elsadek, H.A., Abdallah, E., Elhenawy, H., Iskander, M.F.: Ultra-wide bandwidth
2 × 2 microstrip patch array antenna by using Electromagnetic BandGap Structure (EBG).
IEEE Trans. Antenns Propag. 59(5), 1528–1538 (2011)
5. Kimouche, H., Oukil, S.: Electrically small antenna with defected ground structure. In: 9th
European Radar Conference (EuRAD), pp. 485–488, Amsterdam (2012)
6. Reghunath, V., Sukumaran, S.K.: Printed monopole UWB antenna with EBG structure for
Wireless Body Area Network. In: International Conference on Contemporary Computing and
Informatics (IC3I), pp. 1310–1314, Mysore (2014)
7. Khalily, M., Rahim, M.K.A., Kamarudin, M.R., Shaneshin, M., Danesh, S.: Ultra wideband
printed monopole antenna with dual-band circular polarization. In: Proceedings of the 5th
European Conference on Antennas and Propagation (EUCAP), pp. 365–368, Rome (2011)
8. Shameena, V.A., Jacob, S., Mridula, S., Aanandan, C.K., Vasudevan, K., Mohanan, P., A
compact modiﬁed ground CPW fed antenna for UWB applications. In: General Assembly and
Scientiﬁc Symposium, 2011 XXXth URSI, pp. 1–4, Istanbul (2011)
9. Lashab, M., Eddine, C., Jan, N.A., Benabdelaziz, F., Abd-Alhameed, R.A., Child, M.B.: CPW-
Fed antenna based on Metamaterial for Broadband application. In: Antennas and Propagation
Conference (LAPC), pp. 144–147, Loughborough (2014)
44
N.A. Jan et al.

Technical Session 2

Implementation of a Low-Rate Linear Step FM
Transceiver on a Software Deﬁned Radio Platform
Yih-Min Chen
(✉), Shin-Chi Liao, and Ying-Chang Chen
Department of Communication Engineering, National Central University,
Taiwan Chung-Da Road 300, Chung-Li, Taoyuan, Taiwan
ymchen@ce.ncu.edu.tw
Abstract. Linear FM (Chirp) signals have the merits of constant envelope and
insusceptibility to significant carrier frequency offset which particularly suit for low-
power low-rate communications. However, the fully digital implementation of the
matched filter for the chirp signals is not economically feasible. A low data-rate
communication technique using linear step frequency modulated (LSFM) signal was
thus proposed which exhibits a complexity reduction in the matched filter implemen‐
tation with an acceptable performance loss compared to the chirp signals. This paper
presents an implementation of such an LSFM transceiver on a realistic commercially
available software-defined radio (SDR) platform. Specific system parameters in the
LSFM are designed for a furthermore complexity reduction. Implementation cost and
experimental results are presented.
Keywords: Chirp communications · Low-rate · Matched-filter · Linear step FM ·
Transceiver · Software-defined radio
1
Introduction
Wireless communication techniques have been evolving at an exceptional rate recently and
will be continually in the near future. Although the mainstream techniques are broadband
wireless communications which satisfy the demand of mobile internet services, there are low
data-rate techniques due to the growing needs of wireless sensor networks deployment [1].
In a low-rate wireless personal area network (LR-WPAN) standard (IEEE 802.15.4a), the
chirp spread-spectrum (CSS) signals are used to support long-range links between sensor
nodes.
Chirp signals, also known as linear frequency modulated (LFM) signals, are tradition‐
ally used in radar/sonar applications due to its special characteristics in ambiguity function,
i.e., pulse compression and Doppler-shift/carrier-frequency-offset (CFO) immunity.
Recently the chirp signal has been exploited in communications mainly for immunity
against multipath/interference or multiple access purposes [2–8]. The generation of the
transmitted chirp signals and the matched filtering in the receiver are mainly relied on the
analog surface acoustic wave (SAW) chirped delay lines [9, 10]. In [10], a full-digital
implementation of radar chirp pulse compression (matched filtering) using FFT processors
is proposed. For a communication system requiring high receiver sensitivity, lower data-rate
is mandated and the carrier frequency offset (CFO) between the transmitter and the receiver
© ICST Institute for Computer Sciences, Social Informatics and Telecommunications Engineering 2017
I. Otung et al. (Eds.): WiSATS 2016, LNICST 186, pp. 47–54, 2017.
DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-53850-1_6

then becomes significant relative to the symbol rate. In this scenario, digital signaling with
long symbol period wideband chirps is feasible, which incurs a greater complexity in the
digital implementation of the corresponding matched filters. In [11, 12] we have proposed
an economic transceiver architecture based on linear step frequency modulated (LSFM)
signals, which approximates the chirp signals, and a specific preamble signal designed for
symbol/frame/CFO synchronization. The proposed transceiver technique is adequate for
physical layer implementation for Low–Power, Wide-Area Networks [13].
This paper presents an implementation of the proposed transceiver on a realistic soft‐
ware-defined radio (SDR) platform which comprises of an RF TX/RX module for RF/
Baseband signal conversion and an FPGA for real-time digital signal processing. Imple‐
mentation cost and experiment results regarding to the receiver performance are given for a
specific LSFM system parameters.
2
Chirp Binary Orthogonal Keying with Linear Step FM Signals
In a digital communication system with chirp binary orthogonal keying (BOK), up-chirp and
down-chirp signals are typically used to transmit binary data correspondingly. The system
model of a chirp BOK communication system with RF frontend and digital modulator/
demodulator is shown in Fig. 1. The transmitted baseband signal formulated by
sB(t) =
∑
k
sak
(
t −k ⋅Tsym
)
(1)
where sak(t) =
{ sup−chirp(t),
ak = 1
sdown−chirp(t) = s∗
up−chirp(t), ak = 0, ak denotes the kth binary data and Tsym
is the symbol period. A chirp BOK communication system based on a linear step FM
(LSFM) signal is proposed in [11, 12] for simplified the digital matched filter implementa‐
tion, 
where 
the 
traditional 
up-chirp 
(LFM) 
signal
sLFM(t) =
⎧
⎪
⎨
⎪⎩
e
j⋅2𝜋
Tsym
⋅Δf
⎛
⎜
⎜
⎜⎝
t2−
Tsym
2
⋅t
⎞
⎟
⎟
⎟⎠, 0 ≤t < Tsym
0,
otherwise
, with Δf denoting the frequency swift range
(−0.5Δf ∼0.5Δf) (chirp span) during the chirp/symbol period Tsym, is replaced with
sLSFM(t) =
M−1
∑
m=0
sm
LSFM
(
t −m ⋅
Tsym
M
)
,
sm
LSFM(t) =
⎧
⎪
⎨
⎪⎩
ej⋅(2𝜋⋅fm⋅t+𝜃m), 0 ≤t <
Tsym
M
0,
otherwise
(2)
48
Y.-M. Chen et al.

where M (m = 0 ∼M −1), fΔ = Δf∕(M −1) and fm = −Δf∕2 + m ⋅fΔ denote the
number of steps, the frequency step and the instantaneous frequency at the mth step, respec‐
tively, while 𝜃m = 𝜃0 +
m−1
∑
l=0
fl ⋅Tsym
/M is the phase adjustment for making the signal
continual in phase.
Fig. 1. The system model of a chirp BOK communication system
3
LSFM Transceiver Architecture
3.1
LSFM Transmitter
Figure 2 shows the hardware architecture of the digital chirp BOK modulator (in Fig. 1)
with LSFM signals, where Δ𝜔= 2𝜋⋅Δf
/
fS and 𝜔Δ = Δ𝜔∕(M −1) denote the chirp
span and frequency step in digital domain with a sampling frequency fS = N/Tsym and
N = M ⋅NM. The frame structure is designed with a speciﬁc preamble, i.e., 10101010,
which facilitates frame/symbol timing synchronization in a scenario with signiﬁcation
CFO, followed by a payload data stream of P bits length. The main cost of the hardware
Fig. 2. Digital chirp BOK modulator with LSFM signals
Implementation of a Low-Rate LSFM Transceiver on a SDR Platform
49

implementation of the digital baseband modulator is thus the phase rotation which can
be typically implemented by a CORDIC processor.
3.2
LSFM Receiver
Figure 3 shows the hardware architecture of the digital chirp BOK demodulator (in
Fig. 1) with LSFM signals, where rdown∕up
M
[n] denote the outputs of up/down-chirp
matched ﬁlter depicted in Fig. 4 [12]. Since the transmission is in burst and CFO will
cause an oﬀset at the maximum timing of up/down-chirp matched ﬁlter outputs, the
function of the preamble-based timing synchronizer is to detect start of frame (SOF)
transmission and ﬁnd the adequate sampling timing for the up/down-chirp matched ﬁlter
outputs. The concept of the preamble-based SOF/symbol timing synchronizer illustrated
in Fig. 5 [12]. Having obtained the estimates of the corresponding up/down-chirp
matched ﬁlter timing based on the particular preamble, i.e., ̂nup
max and ̂ndown
max, given by
̂nup∕down
max
= arg max
n
Np−1
∑
p=0
|||rup∕down
M
[
n −2 ⋅p ⋅N
]|||
2
(3)
the payload data is then detected by the following formula
̂ak = |||rup
M
[̂nup
max + k ⋅N]|||
2
> |||rdown
M
[̂ndown
max + k ⋅N]|||
2
(4)
Fig. 3. Digital chirp BOK demodulator with LSFM signals
50
Y.-M. Chen et al.

Fig. 4. Low-complexity digital matched ﬁlter for up/down-chirp LSFM signals
Fig. 5. Illustration of the preamble-based SOF/symbol timing synchronizer
Implementation of a Low-Rate LSFM Transceiver on a SDR Platform
51

4
Implementation and Experiment Results
The software-defined radio platform used for the implementation of the proposed digital
chirp BOK transceiver with LSFM signals is shown in Fig. 6, which comprises the AD9361
EVM as the RF module [14] and the Xilinx/SMIMS AC701 FPGA Evaluation Board as the
configurable baseband signal processing module. The specification of the implemented
LSFM signals is given as follows: the carrier frequency fC = 3 GHz, the baseband sampling
frequency 
fS = 30.72 MHz, the RF bandwidth B = 20 MHz, the chirp span
Δf = fS
/
4 = 7.68 MHz, the number of frequency steps M = 33, the number of samples per
frequency step NM = 64 symbol period which corresponds to N = M ⋅NM = 2112 and the
symbol (bit) rate fsym = fS
/N = 14.5 Ksymbols/sec. With this specification, the
complexity of the matched filter is further reduced since exp
(
j𝜔D,m ⋅NM
)
∈{±1} and
𝜃m ∈{0, 𝜋}, where 𝜔D,m = 2𝜋⋅fm
/fS denotes the digital frequency at the mth frequency
step. The hardware implementation costs of the digital chirp modulator and demodulator are
listed in Table 1. Figure 7 shows the real experimental results of the transceiver with
received signal power PR of −88 dBm, −108 dBm and −118 dBm, respectively. For the
PR = −88 dBm case, which is calibrated with a transmission scenario of transmission
attenuation 60 dB and E
{
||sB[n]||
2}
= (1800)2, the signal spectrum is noticed to rise up from
the noise floor. For cases of PR = −108 dBm and −118 dBm, which is achieved by setting
the transmission attenuation to the maximum of 70 dB and additional attenuation in digital
signal domain with E
{
||sB[n]||
2}
= (1800)2/
10 and E
{
||sB[n]||
2}
= (1800)2/
100,
respectively, the signal spectrum is submerged in the noise spectrum. The noise power
spectral density of the receiver chain in the AD9361 EVM is thus measured to be
N0 ≈−170 dBm/Hz. For the cases of PR = −88 dBm and −108 dBm, which corresponds
to Eb
/
N0 = PR,min ⋅Tsym
/
N0 ≈40 dB and 20 dB, respectively, no bit detection error is
found in the transceiver experiments. While for the cases of PR = −118 dBm, which corre‐
sponds to Eb
/
N0 = PR,min ⋅Tsym
/
N0 ≈10 dB, a bit detection error rate is found to be
≈10−2. With the maximum TX power of AD9361 known to be PT,max = 4 dBm, the real‐
istic transceiver thus has a margin of channel loss around 122 dB with Pb = 10−2.
Table 1. Hardware costs of the implemented digital chirp BOK modem with LSFM signal.
XC7A200T
Slices
DSP48E
RAMB18E
Modulator
943
0
0
Demodulator
1274
160
65
52
Y.-M. Chen et al.

Fig. 7. Experimental results with received signal power of −88/−108/−118 dBm (a) signal power
spectrum; (b) real part of received baseband signal; (c) start-of-frame synchronizer output; (d)
BOK matched ﬁlter output
5
Conclusions
A low data-rate chirp BOK communication technique based on linear step frequency
modulated (LSFM) signals exhibits a merit in the matched ﬁlter implementation with
an acceptable performance loss compared to the traditional chirp signals. In this paper,
we present an implementation of such an LSFM transceiver on a realistic commercially
available software-deﬁned radio (SDR) platform. Speciﬁc system parameters in the
Fig. 6. Software deﬁned radio platform with AD9361 EVM and Xilinx/SMIMS AC701
evaluation board
Implementation of a Low-Rate LSFM Transceiver on a SDR Platform
53

LSFM are designed for a furthermore complexity reduction. The implemented trans‐
ceiver demonstrates a low-rate wireless data communications which can sustains a
margin of channel loss around 120 dB with a bit-error rate lower than 10−2.
References
1. Karapistoli, E., Pavlidou, F., Gragopoulos, I., Tsetsinas, I.: An overview of the IEEE 802.154a
Standard. In: IEEE Communications Magazine, pp. 47–53, January 2010
2. Shen, H., Machineni, S., Gupta, C., Papandreou-Suppappola, A.: Time-varying multichirp
rate modulation for multiple access systems. IEEE Sig. Process. Lett. 11, 497–500 (2004)
3. Dao, L.M.: Wireless communications using chirp signals. Master thesis. Waseda University,
Japan (2008)
4. Takeuchi, Y., Yamanouchi, K.: A chirp spread spectrum DPSK modulator and demodulator
for time shift multiple access communication system by using SAW devices. In: IEEE MTT-
S Microwave Symposium Digest (1998)
5. Gugler, W., Springer, A., Weigel, R.: A chirp-based wideband spread spectrum modulation
technique for WLAN applications. In: IEEE 6th International Symposium on Spread Spectrum
Techniques and Applications (2000)
6. Khan, M., Rao, R., Wang, X.: Non-linear trigonometric and hyperbolic chirps in multiuser
spread spectrum communication systems. In: IEEE 9th International Conference on Emerging
Technologies (2013)
7. He, C., Huang, J., Zhang, Q., Lei, K.: Reliable mobile underwater wireless communication
using wideband chirp signal. In: International Conference on Communications and Mobile
Computing (2009)
8. Liu, H.: Multicode ultra-wideband scheme using chirp waveform. IEEE J. Sel. Areas
Commun. 24, 885–891 (2006)
9. Springer, A., Huemer, M., Reindle, L., Ruppel, C., Pohl, A., Seifert, F., Gugler, W., Weigel,
R.: A rubuster ultra broadband wireless communication system using SAW chirped delay
lines. IEEE Trans. Mircowave Theory Techn. 46, 2213–2219 (1998)
10. Torroli, P., Guidi, F., Atzeni, C.: Digital vs. SAW matched ﬁlter implementation for radar
pulse compression. In: IEEE Ultrasonic Symposium Proceedings, pp. 199–202 (1994)
11. Chen, Y.-M.: A low-rate wireless spread-spectrum communication technique using linear step
FM signal. J. Adv. Inf. Technol., 44–47 (2014)
12. Chen, Y.-M.: A low-complex digital demodulator for low-rate chirp spread-spectrum
communications. In: The 3rd Annual Conference on Engineering and Information
Technology, Osaka, Japan, March 2015
13. https://www.lora-alliance.org/portals/0/documents/whitepapers/LoRaWAN101.pdf
14. http://www.analog.com/en/design-center/evaluation-hardware-and-software/evaluation-
boards-kits/EVAL-AD-FMCOMMS3-EBZ.html#eb-overview
54
Y.-M. Chen et al.

High Reliability Light Weight Multi-mission
Ampliﬁer System
Susumu Kitazume1(✉), Yosuke Takahara1, Chihiro Hayashi1, and Rowan Gilmore2
1 JEPICO Corporation, Shinjuku Front Tower,
2-21-1, Kita-Shinjuku Shinjuku-ku, Tokyo  169-0074, Japan
{Kitazume,y_takahara,c_hayashi}@jepico.co.jp
2 EMSolutions, 55 Curzon Street, Tennyson  QLD 4105, Australia
Rowan.gilmore@emsolutions.com.au
Abstract. In support of a future ocean broadband projects, a Ka-band mobile
satellite communications platform is proposed. To establish a high speed commu‐
nications link, a high reliability and high power light weight RF ampliﬁer is a key
component of the subsystem. The Ka-band High Reliability Light Weight Multi
Mission Ampliﬁer system now under development is presented with the technical
design and results of ongoing hardware testing. The purpose of this study is to
demonstrate that the high reliability of a combined solid state multi-mission
power ampliﬁer consisting of many MMIC ampliﬁers.
Keywords: Ocean broadband · Multi-mission light weight ampliﬁer system · Ka-
band · MMIC · High reliability
1
Introduction
As part of continual research in the oceans and seas surrounding Japan, Autonomous
Surface Vehicles (ASVs) are proposed to operate at points beyond the horizon and far
from land based communication links. To provide high speed communication between
these ASV, related research vessels and the land-based research facility, a Ka-band
satellite uplink is proposed. Due to the remote nature of ASVs, the RF power ampliﬁer
within the communication subsystem will require high reliability and performance that
is similar to that commonly needed for satellites.
Currently, Monolithic Microwave Integrated Circuit (MMIC) power ampliﬁers
using GaAs or GaN FET technologies are used in a typical Solid State Power Ampliﬁer
(SSPA) for microwave and submillimeter wave applications. In order to realize high
power outputs, ampliﬁers using these solid state elements are required to combine the
output power of numerous devices. For the Wideband Internetworking engineering test
and Demonstration Satellite (WINDS), the National Institute of Information and
Communications Technology (NICT) in Japan developed a SSPA for the Ka-band
Broadband Mobile Earth Station. This SSPA combined eight GaAs MMIC devices in
parallel to generate 25 W of output power. However, current requirements demand more
eﬃciency light weight and higher output power from ampliﬁers than the recent tech‐
nology allows in order to provide a high data rate communication satellite system.
© ICST Institute for Computer Sciences, Social Informatics and Telecommunications Engineering 2017
I. Otung et al. (Eds.): WiSATS 2016, LNICST 186, pp. 55–62, 2017.
DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-53850-1_7

Additionally, high reliability with a long Mean Time Between Failure (MTBF) is
required in order to meet the requirement for continual satellite communications from
remote ASVs, even when operated far away from land-based communication links. It
is required high reliability and light weight because using remote access operation.
2
Redundant Conﬁgurations
Generally, for a reliable microwave ampliﬁcation system, a fully redundant backup unit
is employed. A fully redundant conﬁguration with a redundant backup unit similar to
that currently commonly used is shown in Fig. 1. Power Ampliﬁer 1 (AMP-1) is used
under normal operation, but upon failure of AMP-1, Power Ampliﬁer 2 (AMP-2) enters
normal operation mode by toggling of both the switches RF(IN) and RF(OUT).
Fig. 1. 100% redundant systems (Normal redundant conﬁguration)
Fig. 2. An example of a power combiner without redundant
A common method to generate higher power output from a SSPA is to use a power
combiner to merge several individual MMIC devices. As the output power of each
MMIC device is much smaller than the desired output, around 2 or 3 W each as compared
56
S. Kitazume et al.

to the ﬁnal output power of 20 to 30 W. For example, four parallel 2 W MMIC ampliﬁers
are required to generate 10 W of output power as shown in Fig. 2. An example of a
power combiner with 50% redundant system is shown in Fig. 3. In this case, 33% of
ampliﬁers are not operated during normal operation. Thus the usable output power of
this system, in normal operation, is just 2/3 of total system capability.
Fig. 3. An example of a power combiner with 50% redundancy.
3
Features of this Multi-mission Light Weight Ampliﬁer System
In order to achieve a highly reliable conﬁguration for microwave ampliﬁcation operating
at a higher output power, both power combining and redundant technology are required.
A redundant conﬁguration of 100% or 50% is commonly used. In the case of a 50%
redundant conﬁguration, for every two operational channels a redundant channel is not
in use during normal operations (no failures). Thus, fully one third of the total system
capacity is not used, and implies that this one third can be considered to be superﬂuous
during normal operations. In order to reduce this occurrence within the Multi Mission
Light weight Ampliﬁer System (MMLAS) design, all equipment – including redundant
parts – are used during all modes of operation. In the other words, all equipment for
primary and redundant channels should be active in both cases of normal and failure
operation. We are proposing this MMLAS for Ka-band Satellite Communications
between ASVs or ocean-going research vessels and a satellite relay system.
This MMLAS is conﬁgured to operate all channels – both primary and redundant –
during operation, resulting in 150% output power as compared to a 50% redundant
system with the same available source capacity. In the event of the failure of an MMIC
ampliﬁer, it will be disconnected individually from the ampliﬁer system and the system
will still operate normally.
High Reliability Light Weight Multi-mission Ampliﬁer System
57

It means that total weight of this ampliﬁer required to get 100% ampliﬁcation is just
2/3 of weight in case of 50% redundant system. And we can say that the required weight
is just half, in case of 100% redundant system.
When a failure occurs within the MMIC ampliﬁer system there is an imbalance of
power entering the combiner. This requires that power balancing technology be applied
to the system in order to keep the power ampliﬁer operating normally. In order to correct
the imbalance of MMIC ampliﬁer output power entering the combiner circuit in the case
of failure, a bias control circuit for MMIC ampliﬁer was designed. This involves the
adjusting the phase of the MMIC ampliﬁer output port and is eﬀective to resolve unbal‐
anced input power to combiner circuits, thus maintaining a reasonable total output power
from the solid state power ampliﬁer.
Alternatively, there is several method of resolving unbalanced input power from
MMIC ampliﬁer to combiner circuits are investigated and are evaluated. In order to
conﬁrm the basic performance how to adjust the output power of MMIC ampliﬁer, a
bread board model of one portion of this MMLAS is used, such as bias control of MMIC
ampliﬁer and phase control circuits between output of MMIC ampliﬁer and power
combiner circuits.
4
Multi Mission Light Weight Ampliﬁer System (MMLAS)
The block diagram of the proposed MMLAS is shown in Fig. 4. Feature of this MMLAS
is as follows. In the case of normal operation without any failures, all output power from
the ampliﬁers is combined to generate the maximum possible output power of this
ampliﬁer system.
However, when a failure occurs on any one channel within the combiner, the active
circuit is changed to the operation as same as redundant system operation.
In other words, the proposed MMLAS, in the case of no MMIC failures, operates
with all ampliﬁer system equipment operating at 100%. In the case of a failure occurring,
the ampliﬁer system is operates the same as are 50% redundant system circuit without
any weight increase.
5
Block Diagram of Tested Design
Symbolic block diagram of MMLAS is shown in Fig. 4, Case-B. A more detailed block
diagram of the MMLAS with switch operation is shown in Fig. 5, which was used for
our trial purpose.
6
Case Study of Circuit Operation in the Case of Key Operation
One of key technical issues for the MMLAS is how to combine output powers where
the value of individual MMIC ampliﬁers has changed or where the ratio between two
routes of individual MMIC ampliﬁers has changed. The output power at key points
within the power combiner of the Multi-mission Ampliﬁer was studied (see Fig. 5) and
58
S. Kitazume et al.

the results are shown in Table 1. This test uses a unit test case in which the output power
from each MMIC ampliﬁer is 1 W.
From this case study, we can see that only one combiner hybrid (Hyb-1) requires
adjustment of the input power value to compensate for a single route failure occurring
within each channel A and B. We believe that it is enough to consider the case of one
route failure for the analysis of this system, although this failure can occur in either or
both of the channels. This is the key point which should be reviewed for further study
to practically implement this design: how to reasonably operate Hyb-1 in order to
combine the two unbalanced input power channels into one output without loss. This
will need to be shown experimentally.
Case A : Modified from Fig. 3 
Case B : No input Switch (SW) required 
Fig. 4. Symbolic block diagram of a MMLAS with combiner
High Reliability Light Weight Multi-mission Ampliﬁer System
59

Table 1. Power unbalance estimation in the case of normal and failure
Location
Hyb-1
Hyb-2
Hyb-3
Hyb-4
Hyb-5
A
B
C
D
C`
E`
E
F
G
H
G`
H`
Normal
3
3
2
1
–
–
2
1
1
1
1
1
Failure
(A)
2
3
–
–
2
–
2
1
1
1
1
1
Failure
(B)
3
2
2
1
–
2
–
–
1
1
1
1
Failure
(A&B)
2
2
–
–
2
2
–
–
1
1
1
1
Fig. 5. Block diagram of high reliable MMLAS using combiner
One possibly means to adjust the unbalanced combiner input power is to adjust the
bias control for supplying MMIC ampliﬁer devices. To recover the output power back
to the original values, bias control for MMIC Ampliﬁer device presents the most reason‐
able and simplest method.
7
Howe to Operate Output Switch Circuit
Output switch circuit is shown in Fig. 6 as below. In case of normal operation, all three
output terminals have equal output power. In the case of failure, where any one of the
three ampliﬁers has failed, the circuit is adjusted such that the output of the two
remaining MMIC ampliﬁers is maximized, with the failed MMIC device having no
output.
60
S. Kitazume et al.

Fig. 6. Output switch circuit operation
8
Test Result
According to the results of the study deﬁned above we have deﬁned how to operate the
ﬁnal combiner hybrid (Hyb-1) within in the proposed ampliﬁer system. This operation
should work to combine the two unbalanced input powers at the output of the hybrid
only a negligible loss. This is a key point which should be studied to take this idea into
practice. The results of the experimental study which compared several circuit condi‐
tions is shown in Fig. 7 and Table 2. This test compares the combined input unbalanced
power vs measured ﬁnal output power and calculated values.
Table 2. Input vs output power of typical combiner, measured vs calculated value
Case
Pa [W]
Pb [W]
Tp [W]
MDV [dB]
CV [dB]
Delta [dB]
1
3.0
3.0
6.0
0
0
0
2
2.8
3.0
5.8
−0.15
−0.15
0.00
3
2.3
3.0
5.8
−0.54
−0.15
−0.39
4
2.0
3.0
5.0
−0.88
−0.79
−0.09
5
1.5
3.0
4.5
−1.41
−1.25
−0.16
6
1.0
3.0
4.0
−2.10
−1.76
−0.34
MDV – Measured Degraded Value.
CV – Calculated Value - CV = 10 log(Tp/Tp0); Tp0 = 6 W.
Delta – Diﬀerence between MDV and CV – Delta = MDV-CV.
Most probable case of failure happened in this ampliﬁer should be case-4.
High Reliability Light Weight Multi-mission Ampliﬁer System
61

Fig. 7. Hybrid-1
9
Conclusions and Acknowledgement
In conclusion, in support of future ocean broadband projects that require continual, high
bandwidth communications to the mainland, we are trying to develop an eﬀective, high
power and light weight high reliability MMLAS. Total weight of power ampliﬁer is
about half compared with 100% redundant system. Key to this technology is how to
combine the unbalanced output power of MMIC ampliﬁers without any additional loss
of power. Proposed is the bias control for MMIC ampliﬁers and/or phase control for
MMIC ampliﬁers by phase shifter. The bias control of MMIC device is simple way to
adjust unbalanced output power in order to adjust the output power to meet required
value of combined power. In order to further clarify the test results, investigation into
this system will continue. In order to make the test result clear in theoretical, we continue
further study.
This is acknowledgement that this study work is developed for NICT (National
Institute of Information and Communications Technology) under research and devel‐
opment funding provided by NICT Japan.
References
1. Cross-ministerial Strategic Innovation Promotion Program (SIP), Next-generation technology
for ocean resources exploration, 23 January 2015
2. Kuroda, et al.: Ka-b and high power Multi-port Ampliﬁer (MPA). J. Nat. Inst. Inform. Commun.
Technol. 54(4) (2007)
3. Kitazume: Ka-band on-board repeater technologies for communications satellite. ISU Summer
Session SLS Houston, 25 July 1997
4. Takagi: GaN HEMTs are still ongoing. In: Asia-Paciﬁc Microwave Conference 2014
5. Szczepaniak, Z.R.: Special power combining techniques for semiconductor power ampliﬁers.
In: Zhurbenko, V. (ed.) Advanced Microwave Circuits and Systems (2010)
62
S. Kitazume et al.

Examination of Power Consumption Reduction
and Sampling Behavior of Envelope Detection
Based Wake-up-Receiver with Duty
Cycling Scheme
Josua Arndt(B), Lukas Krystoﬁak, Vahid Bonehi,
Ralf Wunderlich, and Stefan Heinen
Integrated Analog Circuits and RF Systems,
RWTH Aachen University, 52074 Aachen, Germany
{jarndt,ias}@ias.rwth-aachen.de
http://www.ias.rwth-aachen.de
Abstract. In most communication scenarios where the transmission
time is short compared to the idle listening time for a data transmission,
most power is consumed by the receiver. This brings up the need for a
wake-up-receiver (WuRx) embedded in the system. This work presents
a WuRx designed out of commercial components in order to investigate
the needs of an WuRx embedded in a WPAN in a real environment
setup including WLAN and LTE communication and considering inter-
ferer rejection. A system design is presented that fulﬁlls all requirements
and is designed with regard to enabling a duty cycle scheme for the reduc-
tion of the power consumption. Investigation of the duty cycling behavior
is shown, technical diﬃculties are named and the resulting sampling rate
and the power saving capability are analyzed.
Keywords: Wake-up-Receiver · WPAN · Duty cycling
1
Investigating a Wake-up-Receiver
Personal area networks, as speciﬁed in [1], applications like lightning control,
monitoring temperature, moisture etc. or IoT (Internet of Things) devices can
demand a fast reaction. If the user activates the light it has to react in millisec-
onds as we are used to the light switching on instantly. For those applications
the receiver has always to listen to the channel. In beacon-enabled networks
a fast reaction time can be achieved by a big duty-cycle, resulting in a high
beacon number to send and the end devices have to wake up frequently. This
results in a high energy consumption. A WuRx designed to support a low data
rate modulation can be very simple and consume less energy than a high data
rate modulation like BPSK or O-QPSK. In this paper, to gain insight in the
switching behavior for an integrated design, a WuRx is used which is build out
c
⃝ICST Institute for Computer Sciences, Social Informatics and Telecommunications Engineering 2017
I. Otung et al. (Eds.): WiSATS 2016, LNICST 186, pp. 63–72, 2017.
DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-53850-1 8

64
J. Arndt et al.
of commercial components on PCB to investigate the needs of a system that
includes a WuRx and uses the IEEE802.15.4 transmitter to generate the wake-
up frame [2]. Some content of this paper is repeated and summarized from the
publication [2] in regard to give a better introduction to the topic. The selection
of the components was made with regard to the ability to shut-down, to be able
to analyze the behavior when a duty cycle scheme is applied. Challenges will
be discussed and solutions presented. In Sect. 2 an overview of the requirements
will be given and basics of path loss and link margin calculations are presented.
In Sect. 3 the system setup, ﬁlter design and resulting link margin is presented.
In Sect. 4 the measurements of the WuRx are shown. In Sect. 5 the duty cycling
of the wake up receiver is explained and results of measurements are presented
which substantiate power savings. Section 6 concludes the paper.
2
Design Requirements
A tuned RF is one of the simplest receiver architectures [3]. It accepts incoming
RF signals which are ﬁltered, ampliﬁed and converted from RF to baseband by
an envelope detector (ED). This eliminates the need for a power consuming local
oscillator (LO) completely, which is usually the most power hungry component
in a receiver. However, this means that this receiver can only process amplitude
modulated signals and the architecture calls for a very high selectivity at RF,
which will be explained later in detail. This is a result of the behavior of the ED
converting all signals at its input directly to Baseband without selectivity.
The designated transmit distance of our WPAN networks with wake-up
receivers is between 5 m and 30 m indoors. In our scenario the wake-up receiver
works at the same frequency as the main transceiver. To reduce hardware com-
plexity, the main transceiver will be used to generate the OOK signal. As widely
known, a higher carrier frequency enables broader bandwidth and therefore a
faster data rate as well as reduced diﬀraction loss, smaller antenna size and over-
all increased level of integration. But a higher carrier frequency also increases
the path loss and therefore the necessary sensitivity of the receiver. Moreover,
additional ﬁltering and ampliﬁcation at high frequencies is more complex and
power hungry. The formula for free space path loss in decibel is:
Ls
dB = 20 log10

4πfd
c

= 20 log10(d) + 20 log10(f) −147.55
(1)
with the carrier wavelength λ[m], the carrier frequency f[Hz], the speed of light
c[ms−1] and the link distance d[m]. To calculate the path loss we consider a
direct line of sight and no walls and ﬂoors, which is equal to a large room. As
shown by [4] the path loss exponent then is smaller than 2, so for simplicity we
can use the simple path loss equation formula. Hence with a carrier frequency
of 2.48 GHz and a link distance of 10 m the path loss would be 70 dB, at 30 m
roughly 80 dB. A better insight of indoor wireless coverage can be found in [5].
For WLAN at 2.467 GHz and a distance of 1 m we get Ls = −40.29 dB which is a

Duty Cycling WuRx
65
attenuation of 40 dB. Inserting the system speciﬁc transmit power PT X[dB] and
the ED sensitivity SED[dB] we can calculate the resulting link margin LM[dB].
This can be interpreted as the additional gain necessary to be able to detect a
signal at the inserted frequency and distance.
LM
dB = PT X −SED −20 log10(d) −20 log10(f) + 147.55
(2)
Setting the link margin to zero and solving the equation for d gives the
distance at which the signal can be detected.
d = 10(PT X−SED−20 log10(f)+147.55)/20
(3)
Also considering the overall gain G[dB] and interferer attenuation AI[dB] of
the system and solving the equation for AI[dB] we can calculate the necessary
attenuation for an interferer in a dedicated distance.
AI
dB = PT X −SED + G −20 log10(d) −20 log10(f) + 147.55
(4)
For our test system we choose to use the WPAN channel with fewest interfer-
ences which is channel 26 at 2.48 GHz. Figure 1 illustrates the down conversion
of the RF band to baseband by an ED containing the wake-up signal on WPAN
Channel 26 and the two closest interferers, WLAN Channel 13 and LTE Band
7. As shown in the illustration the interferers have potentially higher transmit
power than our WPAN node, which has 4 dBm speciﬁed as output power of
the AT68RF233 transmitter without losses due to the balloon, the antenna or
mismatch. As deﬁned in [6] the maximum transmit power for WLAN is 20 dBm
and for LTE Band 7 24 dBm as deﬁned in [7]. A narrowband ﬁlter in the RF
band is necessary to suppress the interferers and only convert down the band of
interest. The calculation of the attenuation needed to suppress WLAN signals
with transmit power of 20 dBm at a distance of 1 m - for a system using an ED
with a sensitivity of −30 dBm - is approximately 10 dB and for LTE with 24 dBm
transmit power 13.7 dB, according to Eq. 3.
−10
−5
0
5
10·106
0
10
20
30
Power [dBm]
2.46
2.48
2.5
2.52
·109
WLAN
LTE
WPAN
f
Fig. 1. Down conversion of RF signals to baseband by envelop detection with WLAN
and LTE communication as interference

66
J. Arndt et al.
3
System Design
3.1
System Setup
For this work the absolute power consumption of the system is not of interest,
since it cannot compete with integrated solutions anyway. The emphasis is on
the knowledge gained on how and which parts inﬂuence the others. All parts
had to be chosen considering manual soldering for fast adaption of changes and
debugging.
Figure 2 shows the WuRx with diﬀerent stages. To achieve a good interferer
suppression we designed the WuRx using multiple bulk acoustic wave (BAW) ﬁl-
ters with diﬀerent pass characteristics, which will be explained later. The WuRx
sensitivity suﬀers heavily from the additional attenuation of the bandpass ﬁlter
conﬁguration. Increased gain is the only way to compensate for the losses, but
ampliﬁcation comes with the cost of power consumption in general.
Fig. 2. WuRx system concept with overlapping ﬁlters to gain an extremely narrowband
ﬁltering
All active components were selected with regard to the switching on/oﬀtimes
and existence of an enable pin. An extraction of some interesting characteristics
of the used parts stated in the data sheets are listed in Table 1.
Table 1. Data sheet speciﬁcations at 25 ◦C, 3.3 V, 2.481 GHz
Current [mA] Gain [dB] ton [ns] toff [ns]
LNA, SKY67159
45.5
17.2
400
150
PA1 + 2, HMC414
494
34
45
45
ED, LTC5508
0.55
8000
Comparator, MAX9141 0.275
1000
5000
Total
540.3
51.2
3.2
Narrowband Filter
As mentioned earlier the interferers have higher power than the wake-up signal
leading to the necessity of strong suppression. To achieve the necessary inter-
ferer rejection we combined multiple BAW ﬁlters for diﬀerent bands which have

Duty Cycling WuRx
67
an overlapping area in the designated frequency range. We chose two BAW ﬁl-
ters from Triquint, BAW 885033 (fc = 2.442 MHz, BAW3) and BAW 885009
(fc = 2.535 MHz, BAW1/2). The resulting combined attenuation at 2.481 GHz
is 16 dB, at 2.467 GHz 63.7 dB and at 2.5 GHz 41.5 dB. Thus, the minimum dis-
tance to a WLAN transmitter reduces to 0.7 m and to a LTE transmitter to
14.8 m. Adding more attenuation for LTE would add too much attenuation to
our signal. With this conﬁguration the system will still be error prone for LTE,
but suﬃciently robust against WLAN signals.
3.3
Link Margin
The ﬁnal performance so far presented here, is achieved with simulated data of
the architecture and components described before. With a sensitivity of −25 dBm
of the ED, a gain of about 35.2 dB of the ampliﬁer and ﬁlter stage, we get a sen-
sitivity of −47.83 dBm at 2.481 GHz. With an assumed wake-up signal power of
4 dBm the equation for path loss gives an ideal maximum link distance of around
15.6 m. With the maximum radiation power of 20 dBm and an attenuation of
12.5 dB WLAN signals are rejected suﬃciently above a distance of around 0.7 m.
Depending on the distance of the base station the radiation power for mobile
phones can reach up to 24 dBm as speciﬁed in the 3G standard, to which LTE
actually belongs (3.9G). The uplink frequencies for LTE go from 2.5 GHz up to
2.57 GHz in Germany. With a total gain of 10 dB for LTE frequencies, these sig-
nals overshadow the desired signal signiﬁcantly, at equal distance to the receiver.
A minimum distance of 14.8 m to the LTE transmitter is necessary to not corrupt
the wake-up sequence.
4
Implementation and Measurements
Figure 3 shows the measured gain of the system at the output of the last ampli-
ﬁer. With a gain of 26 dB this results in an ideal range of about 3.41 m with a
wake-up signal power of 4 dBm. For 2.467 GHz we have an attenuation of 19 dB
and for 2.5 GHz a gain of 3 dB. Table 2 shows the resulting current consumption,
Gain and on/oﬀtimes measured for each stage.
Considering optimum matching and operating points of the power ampliﬁers
the general functionality of the circuit was tested. For the output DC voltage of
the ED we get a value of about 275 mV for no incoming RF signal. With regard
to the input hysteresis and oﬀset of the comparator the threshold is found to be
at 284 mV. With a signal generator directly connected to the board, a sensitivity
of −20.0 dBm was measured at 2.481 GHz.
Figure 4 shows the PCB. From the SMA connector at the upper left corner
the signal path is routed to the lower right corner and ends in an pin header to
be connected to a microcontroller board.

68
J. Arndt et al.
2.2
2.3
2.4
2.5
2.6
2.7
2.8
30
20
10
0
−10
−20
−30
−40
2.481GHz: 25.95dB
2.467GHz: -19.05dB
2.5GHz: 3dB
Frequency[GHz]
Gain[dB]
Fig. 3. Measured gain of the complete WuRx
Table 2. Measured electric speciﬁcations at 3.3 V supply
Current mA Gain dB ton ns toff ns
BAW 1+2+3 @2.481 GHz
−16
LNA
45.5
13.35
397
292
Power Ampliﬁer 1
71.9
12.82
583
371
Power Ampliﬁer 2
73
12.21
772
400
Envelope Detector
0.55
6800
150
Comparator
0.165
3300
5000
Total
191
22.38
Fig. 4. Wake-up-Receiver PCB

Duty Cycling WuRx
69
5
Duty Cycling the WuRx
Figure 5 shows the processing of an incoming signal at the input of the ﬁrst
stage. In (a) the incoming wake-up sequence is shown, which is modulated by
the transmitter using OOK. The presence of the carrier frequency represents a
“1” and the absence a “0”. In this example the length of the signal for a bit was
chosen to be 200 µs. Therefore, the receiver has a data rate of 5 kb/s. (b) shows
the duty cycle for the wake-up-receiver components, that will be switched on
and oﬀ. One fundamental design aspect of this work is the ability to switch all
active components. Thus, the power consumption can be reduced by the factor
of the duty cycle, while the receiver is still able to detect a wake-up signal with-
out latency. In this example the on-time was chosen to be 20 µs and the oﬀ-time
30 µs, which would decrease power consumption by 60 % The duty cycle has to be
adjusted to the used components and the achievable on-oﬀswitching times. (c)
depicts the ﬁltered and ampliﬁed signal and (d) shows the ED output, thus the
conversion to DC by the ED. The signal is now nearly reproduced as OOK. The
demodulation signal has a low amplitude so it has to be ampliﬁed again. After-
wards a comparator converts the signal to an interpretable, digital form. Two
diﬀerent approaches can be taken here. The comparator can be included in the
duty-cycle, which decreases power consumption further, leaving the recreation of
the wake-up sequence to the following stage, e.g. a logic or microcontroller. This
approach is shown in (e). The comparator can also stay on constantly and use
its sample-and-hold function to recreate the signal lowering the requirements for
the following stage, as shown in (f). At the end of the on-time of the duty-cycle
the comparator samples the steady state of the signal and holds it till the next
period. As a ﬁrst value for the sample time 5 µs was chosen, which makes the
hold-time of the comparator 45 µs long in this example.
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
900
1000
f)
e)
d)
c)
b)
a)
t [µs]
Fig. 5. Sampling wake-up signal with duty cicled WuRx

70
J. Arndt et al.
For the duty cycle all active components were triggered individually, while
the rest of the circuit important for the propagation remained constantly on. The
signal was measured at the output of the last gain stage, after the ED and after
the comparator, to gain insight in inﬂuences resulting from the duty cycling.
Therefore, a signal generator was connected and adjusted to send a constant
signal with a frequency of 2.481 GHz and the output power was set in steps from
−47 dBm to −40 dBm to −30 dBm. Additionally, a microcontroller was used to
apply the duty cycle to the tested component and served also as trigger source
for the oscilloscope. The LNA has an enable time of around 397 ns and a disable
time of around 292 ns for all tested output power settings. While the enable time
is close to the value given in the data sheet, the disable time is nearly twice as
long. For the ﬁrst power ampliﬁer an enable time of 583 ns and a disable time
of 371 ns are measured again for all tested output powers. These values diﬀer
heavily from the given 45 ns in the data sheet. Respectively, the second power
ampliﬁer has an enable time of 772 ns and a disable time of 400 ns. The ED’s
measured wake-up time is around 6.8 µs, which is even lower than speciﬁed in
the data sheet, but still dominates the minimum enable time of the duty cycle.
The comparator’s enable time is about 3.3 µs, which is again longer than the
1 µs speciﬁed in the data sheet and the disable time is around 5 µs.
−5
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
265
275
285
Vout [mV]
ED Output
−5
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
0
2
4
t [µs]
Vout [V]
Comp Output
Fig. 6. Swing-in and -out behavior of the circuit
Figure 6 shows the output of the ED when the previous stages are duty
cycled. It can be observed that the ED’s output drops at 0 µs and than performs
a swing in of 12 µs. This causes a wrong detection by the comparator at approx.
7 µs. A second overshoot happens at a falling edge of the duty cycle. The input
of the ED had a constant input voltage. This output voltage swing is caused by
the power consumption of the ampliﬁer that causes a voltage drop at the ED
supply and could not be solved by buﬀer capacitors. The comparator should be
adjusted to sample after the swing-in, stopping shortly before the on-time of the
duty cycle, in this setup at 13 µs till 14 µs. Thus it is made sure, that wrong
peaks and swing-in behavior caused by the duty cycle have no impact. If the ED
is duty-cycled as well, the long wake-up time of about 6.8 µs prevents ringing

Duty Cycling WuRx
71
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
0
2
4
Vout [V]
a) Wake-Up Sequence
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
0
2
4
Vout [V]
b) Duty Cycle
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
0
200
400
Vout [mV]
c) Output ED
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
0
2
4
t [ s]
Vout [V]
d) Output Comparator
Fig. 7. Sampling wake-up signal with duty cycled WuRx measurement
nearly completely, but for the integrated design which possibly enables a faster
activation this should be considered.
Figure 7 shows the measured results of the signal reconstructed by the wake-
up receiver. A periodic square wave signal with a length of 200 µs was produced
with a signal generator, plot (a). The duty cycle, shown in plot (b), was adjusted
to 30 % with an on-time of 12 µs and an oﬀ-time of 20 µs. The second trace in b),
dotted line, shows the period during which the comparator samples the signal,
adjusted here to be in the last microsecond during on-time. Plot (c) shows the
output of the ED and plot (d) the output of the comparator, the recovered signal.
It is noticeable, that the ﬁrst pulse is longer than 200 µs by around 24 µs and
the second pulse is shorter by about 8 µs. The reason for this is on the one hand
the shift between the signal and the sample time of the comparator and on the
other hand the period of the duty cycle. The recovered signal will always be a
multiple of the duty cycle plus or minus the sample time of the comparator. If
the quotient of the bit length of the signal divided by the period of the duty
cycle is not an integer, the recovered pulse will therefore vary in length, which
has to be considered during detection. The minimum on-time of the circuit to
successfully sample the input signal is 8 µs, with a sample time of 0.8 µs. Based
on this values diﬀerent duty cycles can be adjusted and examined, where only
the oﬀ-time of the circuit is varied and thus the sample rate is changed. To
successfully reconstruct the signal pattern with 5 samples at 100 % duty cycle a
minimum bit time of 40 µs is needed. To get at least 50 % power saving by the

72
J. Arndt et al.
duty cycle scheme the resulting bit length is 80 µs. Changing the bit length to
longer time and keep the samples at 5 samples for a bit, which basically means
reducing the sample rate, increases the power saving. With a bit length of 1 ms
and a sample rate of 5 kHz the resulting duty cycle and power needed is 0.04 %
compared to the no duty cycling scheme.
6
Conclusion
In this work we showed the implementation of a WuRx with commercial com-
ponents to investigate the needs of such a system. It uses discrete oﬀ-the-shelf
components and was built on a FR4 PCB to have the possibility to measure and
analyze the state of the signal after every processing step. Measurements showed
a sensitivity of −47 dBm. The WuRx was used to investigate the achievable sam-
pling rate when using a duty cycle scheme. We achieved a maximum on time
of 8 µs for one sample and are able to reduce the power consumption to 0.04 %
when using a bit time of 1 ms which results in a bitrate of 1 kHz. The behavior of
the components working together could be analyzed and lessons from that can
be taken into account when integrating a WuRx on silicon.
Acknowledgment. The authors acknowledge the support of the German Federal
Ministry of Education and Research (BMBF) through the “TreuFunk” project (FKZ:
16KIS0234).
References
1. Gutierrez, J.A., Callaway, E.H., Barrett, R.: IEEE 802.15.4 Low-Rate Wireless Per-
sonal Area Networks: Enabling Wireless Sensor Networks. IEEE Standards Oce,
New York, NY, USA (2003)
2. Arndt, J., et al.: Implementation of envelope detection based wake-up-receiver for
IEEE802.15.4 WPAN with commercial components. Advances in Radio Science
(2016)
3. Griggs, J.D.: Ultra-Low Power Wake up Receiver for Medical Implant Communi-
cations Service Transceiver. Ph.D. thesis, North Carolina A&T State University
(2012)
4. Heereman, F., Joseph, W., Tanghe, E., Plets, D., Martens, L.: Prediction of range,
power consumption and throughput for IEEE 802.11n in large conference rooms.
In: Proceedings of the 5th European Conference on Antennas and Propagation
(EUCAP), pp. 692–696 (2011)
5. Plets, D., Joseph, W., Vanhecke, K., Tanghe, E., Martens, L.: Simple indoor path
loss prediction algorithm and validation in living lab setting. Wireless Pers. Com-
mun. 68(3), 535–552 (2013)
6. 802.11b, IEEE: Ieee standard for information technology - telecommunications and
information exchange between systems - local and metropolitan networks - speciﬁc
requirements - part 11: Wireless lan medium access control (mac) and physical layer
(phy) speciﬁcations: Higher speed physical layer (phy) extension in the 2.4 ghz band.
IEEE Std 802.11b-1999, January 2000
7. ETSI TS 136 101, T.S.: Etsi ts 136 101 v12.5.0 (2014-11). LTE; Evolved Universal
Terrestrial Radio Access (E-UTRA); User Equipment (UE) radio transmission and
reception (3GPP TS 36.101 ver. 12.5.0 rel. 12) (2014)

Bit Synchronization and Delayed Decision Feedback
Equalization for EDGE BTS - Hardware Implementation
on TMS320C6424 TI DSP
Laxmaiah Pulikanti
(✉), Pradeep Goutam, Bipsa Purushothaman,
K.G. Dileep, and S.V. Hari Prasad
Centre for Development of Telematics,
Electronic City Phase-1, Hosur Road, Bangalore  560100, India
{laxman_p,pradeepg,bipsap,dileepkg,svhari}@cdot.in
Abstract. This paper demonstrates the implementation of bit synchronization
and delayed decision feedback equalization for Enhanced Data rates for GSM
Evolution (EDGE) system on TMS320C6424 DSP. EDGE makes use of training
sequence for channel estimation and inter symbol interference (ISI) cancellation
by use of delayed decision feedback equalization. Modulated baseband in-phase
(I) and quadrature (Q) signals are generated using Agilent E4438C Vector signal
generator and faded using Agilent fading simulator, is used as input to the DSP.
Bit Error Rate (BER) performance of uncoded bits for Packet Data Traﬃc
Channel (PDTCH) meets the EDGE standards. Software implementation uses
ﬁxed-point C and Integrated Development Environment (IDE) used for develop‐
ment is code composer studio (CCS). Prototyped our design in Texas Instrument
TMS320C6424 DSP and veriﬁed for all propagation models as per the EDGE
standards. The design and hardware implementation of this Demodulator is done
for C-DOT indigenous Shared GSM Radio Access Network (SGRAN) Base
Transceiver Station (BTS) project.
Keywords: Viterbi equalizer · SGRAN BTS · The design prototyped in DSP ·
DDFSE · MMSE · DFE · CCS · Centre for Development of Telematics (C-DOT)
1
Introduction
To increase the data transmission rate and to improve network capacity, EDGE was
introduced, which uses higher order modulation scheme 8-PSK (phase shift keying) i.e.
three bits per RF modulated symbol as opposed to the original one bit per symbol in
Global system for mobile communication (GSM). GSM is a digital cellular communi‐
cations system and one of the most popular personal communication systems which is
ubiquitous in the world, especially in Asia. It operates in the 900 MHz and 1800 MHz
frequency band, each carrier is spaced 200 kHz and supports eight traﬃc and data chan‐
nels per Time division multiple access (TDMA) frame.
The purpose of a detection algorithm is to produce a reliable decision of the input
sequence given the received data. With higher modulation scheme used in EDGE, a
maximum likelihood sequence equalizer (MLSE), which gives optimum performance,
© ICST Institute for Computer Sciences, Social Informatics and Telecommunications Engineering 2017
I. Otung et al. (Eds.): WiSATS 2016, LNICST 186, pp. 73–82, 2017.
DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-53850-1_9

become unsuitable for cost eﬀective implementation. Since computational complexity
of an MLSE increases with channel spread and signal constellation size. Therefore sub
optimal technique such as decision feedback equalization followed by reduced state
Viterbi algorithm becomes ideal candidate.
In this paper, we present an economical hardware realization of the Delayed decision
feedback equalization in EDGE receiver on Texas Instrument (TI) DSP TMS320C6424
[7]. The multipath propagation of a mobile radio channel may lead to a ﬂat fading or
frequency selective fading. In the frequency selective fading case, the width of the
multipath delay proﬁle exceeds the bit period which results in a time varying ISI span‐
ning over several bits period. To mitigate this ISI a hardware realization of the MMSE
DFE [2] followed by reduced state Viterbi algorithm is discussed.
2
EDGE Transmitter
The modulating symbol rate is 1/T = 1625/6 ksymb/s (i.e. approximately 270.833
ksymb/s), which corresponds to 3 × (1625/6) kbit/s (i.e. 812.5 kbit/s) [5]. T is the symbol
period.
The modulating bits are Gray mapped in groups of three to 8-PSK symbols by the rule
si = ej2𝜋l∕8
(1)
Where l is symbol parameter given by Table 1. The 8-PSK symbols are continuously
rotated with 3p/8 radians per symbol before pulse shaping. The rotated symbols are
deﬁned as
̂si = si ⋅eji3𝜋∕8
(2)
Table 1. Mapping between modulating bits and 8-PSK symbols parameter l
Modulating bits d3i,, d3i+1, d3i+2
Symbol parameter l
(1,1,1)
0
(0,1,1)
1
(0,1,0)
2
(0,0,0)
3
(0,0,1)
4
(1,0,1)
5
(1,0,0)
6
(1,1,0)
7
These symbols are ﬁltered by linearized Gaussian minimum shift keying (GMSK)
pulse. Figure 1 shows the mapping of bits into 8-PSK symbols.
74
L. Pulikanti et al.

(0,0,1)
(1,0,1)
(d3i, d3i+1, d3i+2)=
(0,0,0)
(0,1,0)
(0,1,1)
(1,1,1)
(1,1,0)
(1,0,0)
I
Q
Fig. 1. Symbol mapping of modulating bits into 8-PSK symbol
3
Channel Estimation and Bit Synchronization
The channel estimation and timing synchronization utilize the knowledge of the 78- bit
training sequence code (TSC) present in the EDGE burst as in Fig. 2. The channel esti‐
mator as in Fig. 3 has the sampled received signal yk as input. yk is a sampled sequence
which is expected to contain the received EDGE burst. There are eight training sequence
codes deﬁned for the normal burst. All the training sequences have good autocorrelation
properties.
                                              One Radio frame 
Burst
0 
Burst
1 
Burst
2 
Burst
3
Burst
 4 
Burst
5 
Burst
6 
Burst
7 
Guard 
bits 
9  
tail 
174 
data 
78 
TSC 
174 
data 
    9 
   tail 
Guard 
bits 
Fig. 2. EDGE Normal burst structure
A sliding window technique is used as in [3, 6] for searching start of the burst. The
Eq. (3) represents received signal as y(t), the channel-input data symbols as xk and the
channel-impulse response as h(t); where n(t) is additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN)
and T is the symbol duration
y(t) =
∑
m xmh(t −mT) + n(t)
(3)
The channel output as given by (3) is sampled at l times of the symbol rate. By grouping
l = OSR (oversampling ratio) successive samples into vectors in the channel out, noise and
channel impulse response, we can write the sampled output of the channel as
Bit Synchronization and Delayed Decision Feedback Equalization
75

yk =
𝜂∑
m=0
hmxk−m + nk
(4)
Where 𝜂 is called the channel memory. The ﬁrst step in the sliding window technique
is to convolute received signal yk with conjugate of known training sequence Tseq.
p = yk ⊗𝐓∗
seq
(5)
Here, p is an intermediate result, and all samples in p are immediately squared to
yield an energy estimate e.
e[n] = p[n]2
(6)
Now the window energy ‘we’ is found using as in (7),
we[m] =
m+Len
∑
k=m
e[k]2
(7)
Where Len = 𝜂× OSR −1. The sample mmax in we containing the highest energy
value is estimated as directly corresponding to the ﬁrst sample of the channel impulse
response in p. From mmax in we and the known OSR, it is now possible to extract an
estimate of the channel impulse response and also calculate the beginning of the burst.
The number of samples in the estimated h is (𝜂+ 1) × OSR. In the described procedure
the entire yk sequence is processed. In the actual implementation, however, only a sub-
sequence is processed. This is possible since the location of the training sequence within
an EDGE burst is known.
Sync 
Feed 
forward   
filter wk
kxˆ
+ 
Buffering 
(312 samples) 
Channel estimation & 
bit Synchronization 
Reduced 
state  
Viterbi  
algorithm 
    De- rotation 
Base
band 
(I&Q) 
Feedback filter 
      bk
yk 
TSC
Fig. 3. Functional block diagram of EDGE Receiver
76
L. Pulikanti et al.

4
MMSE-DFE Filter Coeﬃcient Calculation
The name MMSE-DFE [2] implies that the DFE coeﬃcients are derived under MMSE
criteria. Here bk and wk are the feedback and feed forward ﬁlter coeﬃcients derived in
minimum-mean square-sense, by making the error orthogonal to the received sequence.
The Eq. (4) can be written as follows:
yk =
⎡
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢⎣
y((k + l −1
l
T))
.
.
.
y(kT)
⎤
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥⎦
≡
⎡
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢⎣
yl−1,k
.
.
.
y0,k
⎤
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥⎦
; hm =
⎡
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢⎣
h((m + l −1
l
T))
.
.
.
h(mT)
⎤
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥⎦
≡
⎡
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢⎣
hl−1,m
.
.
.
h0,m
⎤
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥⎦
; nk =
⎡
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢⎣
n((k + l −1
l
T))
.
.
.
n(kT)
⎤
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥⎦
≡
⎡
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢⎣
nl−1,k
.
.
.
n0,k
⎤
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥⎦
;
By combining Nf (number of feed forward coeﬃcients) output vectors (each
containing l samples) together, (4) can be cast in matrix form as follows [2]:
⎡
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢⎣
yk+Nf −1
yk+Nf −2
.
.
.
yk
⎤
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥⎦
=
⎡
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢⎣
h0h1 … h𝜂0 … 0
0h0h1 … h𝜂0 …
.
.
.
0 … 0h0h1 … h𝜂
⎤
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥⎦
⎡
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢⎣
xk+Nf −1
xk+Nf −2
.
.
.
xk−𝜂
⎤
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥⎦
+
⎡
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢⎣
nk+Nf −1
nk+Nf −2
.
.
.
nk
⎤
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥⎦
more compactly
yk+Nf −1:k = Hxk+Nf −1:k−𝜂+ nk+Nf −1:k
(8)
the error sequence is given by
errk = xk −
Nf −1
∑
i=0
w∗
−iyk+i +
𝜂∑
j=1
b∗
j xk−j
(9)
where (.)∗ denotes the complex-conjugate transpose. Using the orthogonality principle
which states that
E
[
errk y∗
k+Nf−1:k
]
= 0
when the MSE is minimized, we get
b∗Rxy = w∗Ryy
(10)
where Rxy is input-output cross correlation matrix and Ryy is autocorrelation matrix.
For minimized error the feed forward ﬁlter is given by [2]
w∗
opt = b∗
optRxyR−1
yy
(11)
Bit Synchronization and Delayed Decision Feedback Equalization
77

w∗
opt = [ 0 b∗
opt
]H∗(
HH∗+ (1∕SNR′)IlNf
)−1
(12)
where SNR′ = SNR∕l.
The following is the “Cholesky” (lower-diagonal-upper) factorization:
R ≡(1∕SNR
′)INf +𝜂+ H∗H = LDL∗
(13)
By performing the cholesky factorization of Eq. (12) and ﬁnd the Nf th column of
L, that is required to compute the feedback ﬁlter. Once the feedback ﬁlter is computed,
the feed forward ﬁlter is calculated using (12).
4.1
Computing the Feedback Filter [2]
Initial Condition (T/2 Spaced case):
G0(D) = G(D) =
[
1
√
SNR′ h∗
1(D∗) h∗
0(D∗)
]
where SNR′ = SNR∕2.
Recursion:
For i = 0, 1 … Nf −1
di = ||Gi(0)||
2
li(D) = DiGi(D)G∗
i (0)d−1
i
[ 𝛼i 𝛽i 𝛾i
] = d−1∕2
i
Gi(0)
DGi+1(D) = Gi(D)
⎡
⎢
⎢⎣
𝛼iD
−𝛽i
−𝛾i
𝛽∗
i D (𝛼i + ||𝛾i||
2∕(𝛼i + 1))
−𝛽∗
i 𝛾i∕(𝛼i + 1)
𝛾∗
i D
−𝛽i𝛾∗
i ∕(𝛼i + 1)
(𝛼i + ||𝛽i||
2∕(𝛼i + 1))
⎤
⎥
⎥⎦
Output:
bopt(D) = lNf −1(D).
4.2
Computing the Feed Forward Filter [2]
From (12) the feed forward ﬁlter is given by
w∗
opt = [0 … .010 … 0]L∗(
H∗H + (1∕SNR
′)INf +𝜂
)−1
H∗
= d−1
Nf −1u∗
Nf −1H∗
(14)
78
L. Pulikanti et al.

where u∗
Nf −1 is the Nfth row of L−1
(Nf +𝜂)×(Nf +𝜂). Since L is a monic lower triangular matrix,
we have
w∗
opt = d−1
Nf −1
[
v∗
Nf −1 01×𝜂
]
H∗
(15)
where v∗
Nf −1 is the Nfth row of the inverse of the Nf × Nf leading sub matrix of L. w∗ can
be computed eﬃciently using the following relation [2]:
w∗
i = d−1
Nf −1
min(𝜂,Nf −1−i)
∑
k=0
v∗(k + i)h∗
k:i = 0, 1, … Nf −1
(16)
5
DDFSE
The delayed decision feedback sequence estimation (DDFSE) [1] can be regarded as a
hybrid between MLSE and DFE. It’s like a Viterbi algorithm working on a truncated
(at a length 𝜇) channel impulse response and using a DFE on each branch of the trellis
subtracting the post cursor ISI caused by samples xk−𝜇−1, xk−𝜇−2, … .., xk−𝜂. Where 𝜂 is
the length of the channel and 𝜇 can vary between zero and 𝜂.
Equation (17) gives the calculation of branch metric, B, where rk (feed forward
ﬁltered and down sampled of yk) is the observation at time k, xk is the symbol at time k
and bk is the feedback ﬁlter response.
B = (rk −tk)2
(17)
Where tk =
𝜇∑
i=0
bixk−i + ̃zk−𝜇−1 and ̃zk =
𝜂−𝜇−1
∑
i=0
bi+𝜇+1xk−i
Description of the Algorithm [1]:
The DDFSE algorithm recursively ﬁnds an approximation to the maximum likeli‐
hood sequence estimation problem. It is based on a trellis with a reduced number of
states. At time k + 1, the algorithm stores for each possible state (for ﬁrst 𝜇 taps)
(1) the best path leading to that state,
(2) the metric of that path,
(3) an estimate of the partial state (using 𝜂−𝜇 taps).
The recursion step involves the following.
(a) Computing for each (state, next state) pair the sum of the path metric plus the branch
metric given by (17). The estimate, ̃zk−𝜇−1, is obtained from the estimate of the partial
state (using 𝜂−𝜇 taps).
(b) For each value of (next state) the best (smallest) metric sum is determined and the
(state) which gives rise to the best (smallest sum) edge is selected.
(c) For each value of (next state) an estimate of the partial state is made by applying
the partial state estimator the (state) chosen in (b). As in the Viterbi algorithm,
Bit Synchronization and Delayed Decision Feedback Equalization
79

the path leading to each (next state) is found by extending the best path deter‐
mined in (b).
6
Hardware Realization
The hardware realization of the receiver is done on a 10 layer PCB board with combination
of Altera Cyclone 3 FPGA as in [8] and fixed-point TI DSP TMS320c6424 processor [7]
that runs at 700 MHz as shown Fig. 4.
Burst type, Training Seq. &Frame    
Sync. 
Demodulated  
data output 
FPGA (Cyclone  III)
I&Q Baseband 
input 
DSP    
McBSP1
McBSP0
DSP    
McBSP1
McBSP0
DSP    
McBSP1
McBSP0
Fig. 4. Hardware realization Architecture
Here FPGA acts as glue logic for interfacing between DSP with other cards of SGRAN
BTS. FPGA receives two samples per symbol input data (interleaved I&Q), from down
converter (converts RF signal to Baseband). Baseband I and Q samples of 16-bit each is
serially buffered to DSP using multi-channel buffered serial port (McBSP) @17.33 MHz.
Received samples are aligned to uplink radio frame (3 times offseted from downlink
radio frame) considering all hardware delays in the system using master frame sync of the
BTS in DSP. Further DSP performs channel estimation, bit synchronization and DDFSE
equalization. Selected parameters for DDFSE are channel memory length (𝜂) of 7 and 𝜇 of
1. The total number of 8-PSK modulation symbols is 8 and therefore number of Viterbi
states is 8𝜇 i.e. 8 states. The equalized and demodulated data is streamed back to FPGA using
same McBSP interface. Currently the system is able to implement two Transceivers (TRX)
in one TI C6424 DSP.
The interface rate calculation is as follows:
{[16-bit (I) + 16-bit (Q)] × 2(over-sampling) × 156.25(no. of samples in burst)}/
0.577 ms (burst period)) = 17.34 Msps. For two TRX, total Bandwidth required:
17.34 × 2 = 34.68 Msps. Each McBSP port of DSP can handle maximum up to 51
Msps. Hence two McBSPs can efficiently handle the required data rate for two TRX.
DSP Resource requirements:
The synchronization and equalization algorithm requires 145 K cycles per burst. So per
TRX, the computation required: 145 K × 1733.33 (no. of bursts per sec) = 251.33 M cycles
per sec (Mcps). So for two TRX, the computation required: 251.33 × 2 = 502.66 Mcps. DSP
can process up to 700 Mcps hence single DSP can easily process synchronization and
equalization for two TRX.
80
L. Pulikanti et al.

7
Performance Analysis and Results
Performance analysis test setup of the system is shown in Fig. 5. The Digital signal inter‐
face module (DSIM) receives the uplink EGPRS signal as per the standard from Agilent ESG
through PCI card. DSIM digitizes the faded data for different profiles as per settings in
Fader Simulator Application on computer as in Fig. 6. The DUT serially receives the digi‐
tized I&Q from DSIM and demodulate data bits as explained above sections and feeds back
the bits to Agilent ESG.
Agilent E4438C ESG Vector Signal 
Generator  
DSIM
module 
DUT
Computer 
with Fading 
PCI cards 
Demodulated data, 
clock and 
sync(Gated pulse)
Clock (8.66 MHz) 
& sync (541 kHz) 
Fig. 5. Measurement Test setup
Fig. 6. Agilent fading proﬁles
The ESG performs the BER measurements on payload PRBS that it has generated for
uplink. The BER of the uncoded bits (PDTCH) shall have the limits as in [4] and the meas‐
urements for all propagation profiles are given in Table 2.
Table 2. BER performance
Propagation proﬁle
Speciﬁcation
(PDTCH)
Measured
Static
<2%
0.01780%
RA130(1)
<7%
3.55840%
RA130(2)
<7%
3.84180%
HT100(1) 12 tap
<9%
5.56870%
HT100(1) 6 tap
<9%
3.72750%
HT100(2) 6 tap
<9%
4.86170%
TU50(1) 12 tap
<8%
1.45160%
TU50(2) 12 tap
<8%
1.42030%
TU50(1) 6 tap
<8%
1.92890%
TU50(2) 6 tap
<8%
2.44850%
EQ100
≤3%
2.9250%
Agilent ESG setting:
Frequency = 1.8 GHz, Amplitude = 2 dBm, Payload = PN9, Total bits = 1 Mbits.
Bit Synchronization and Delayed Decision Feedback Equalization
81

8
Conclusions
The implemented demodulator is able to successfully demodulate the data bits meeting
the GSM recommendation for all propagation proﬁle as in [4]. Uplink Frame alignment
in DSP helps to save signiﬁcant buﬀer space requirement in down converter, improving
the system design. Viterbi is performed in forward and reverse path from the middle of
the burst to reduce the trace back time in trellis. Apart from main DSP which supports
two TRX, two more DSP’s are added in Architecture for more capacity and ﬂexibility
of supporting six TRX. External memory access is not required since code size is less
than DSP RAM size of 128 KB. Optimum use of resources in DSP helps to incorporate
the implementation of GSM receiver diversity in future.
References
1. Duel-Hallen, A., Heegard, C.: Delayed Decision-Feedback sequence estimation. IEEE Trans.
Commun. 37(5), 428–436 (1989)
2. Al-Dhahir, N., Cioﬃ, J.M.: Fast computation of channel-estimate based equalizers in packet
data transmission. IEEE Trans. Signal Process. 43(11), 2462–2473 (1995)
3. Steele, R.: Mobile Radio Communications. Pentech Press, London (1992)
4. GSM Recommendation 05.05.: Radio Transmission and Reception. Version 8.5.1 (1999)
5. GSM Recommendation 05.04.: Modulation. Version 8.5.1 (1999)
6. Goutam, P., Babu, K.M.N.: Bit synchronization and viterbi equalization for GSM BTS-
hardware implementation on TMS320C6424 TI DSP. In: Digital Information and
Communication Technology and it’s Applications, pp. 319–323. IEEE Press, Thailand (2012)
7. Texas Instruments. http://www.ti.com
8. Altera Corporation. http://www.altera.com
82
L. Pulikanti et al.

Precoding of Correlated Symbols for STBC
Systems Design
Kelvin Anoh1(&), Bamidele Adebisi1, and Godfrey Okorafor2
1 School of Engineering, Manchester Metropolitan University, Manchester, UK
{k.anoh,b.adebisi}@mmu.ac.uk
2 Novena University, Kwale, Nigeria
nwajigo@novenauniversity.edu.ng
Abstract. A problem with transmitting correlated symbols over multiple
transmit channel paths is that there is no diversity gain achieved at the receiver.
Precoding technique provides a smart approach to achieving diversity gains at
the receiver even when correlated symbols are transmitted; by phase variation,
amplitude variation or both provided by the precoder. The space-time block
code (STBC) technique, for example, is well-known when transmitting the same
symbols by making them appear as different symbols using conjugation. We
observe that correlated symbols can be transmitted over multiple transmit
channel paths over STBC scheme while still achieving diversity. The correlated
symbols can be made to appear as different symbols by using precoders; this
enables diversity and improves data rate. Combining the proposed with the
equivalent channel matrix (EVCM) permits the proposed design to outperform
the conventional precoding of uncorrelated symbols technique by 2 dB at all bit
error ratio (BER) for 2  1 and 2  2 antenna conﬁgurations. This is useful in
increasing data rates with better BER performance.
Keywords: STBC  Correlated  MIMO  Precoding
1
Introduction
Since the advent of 4G technology, a lot of work has been done towards achieving a 5G
design [1–3]. Most of these works have been done on beamforming especially for
mmWave and 5G [3, 4]. Beamforming is a precoding technique that involves
weighting some input symbols to enable some transmissions in the desired directions or
to speciﬁc users [5]. The beamforming precoding technique has been investigated
widely for STBCs [6–8]. In the use of STBC to design multi-antenna systems, the
scheme enables that the same symbol is sent to the receiver more than once by making
that same symbol look like another one; by conjugation. To transfer decoding com-
plexity from the receiver to the transmitter, an equivalent channel matrix (EVCM) is
usually derived. This technique also enables linear processing and simpliﬁes receiver
design. With the EVCM, the implementation of STBC reduces to sending NT-unique
symbols to the receiver over the channel (EVCM) matrix. When combined with pre-
coding, the preocder weights are multiplied by these symbols and equivalently received
in the receiver. Conventional transmit precoding, for instance angular beamforming
© ICST Institute for Computer Sciences, Social Informatics and Telecommunications Engineering 2017
I. Otung et al. (Eds.): WiSATS 2016, LNICST 186, pp. 83–91, 2017.
DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-53850-1_10

differentiates among these symbols by assigning different phases to each transmit
symbol block [9]. If these possibilities and differentiations already exist among the
symbols (e.g. EVCM and phase difference), we consider that these differences already
provided enough diversity for transmitting different symbols than transmitting the same
symbols as different symbols over many timeslots as in [10]. Consequently, suppose
that the NT-transmit symbols are correlated. One, the data rate is increased, the
amplitude of the symbols are also ampliﬁed accordingly but not reduced to K \ L
symbol lengths like when using the conventional STBC technique; K ¼ ðL=NTÞ. We
investigate these in this paper for standard orthogonal-STBC (OSTBC) with two
transmit antennas ðNT ¼ 2Þ.
In Sect. 2, we present the system model and discuss the method of multi-antenna
precoding that we propose in Sect. 3. The simulation method and results are described
in Sect. 4 with the conclusions following.
2
System Model
In our design, we consider an STBC system equipped with two transmit antennas
ðNT ¼ 2Þ and some NR receivers. Since there are NT transmitting branches and NR
receivers, we summarize the NR  NT MIMO system in linear form as follows
Y ¼ HC þ Z
ð1Þ
where Y is the received signal at the receiver, HCNRNT is a ﬂat fading multi-path
channel and Z  CN ð0; r2
zINRÞ is the additive white Gaussian noise with zero mean
and variance r2
z. The received signal Y is YCNRL. The multi-spatial data, CCNTL is
formed from weighting some un-precoded phase-shift keying (PSK) input symbols.
These weights of the multi-spatial data constitute the precoders and can be discussed as
C ¼ w  c
ð2Þ
where wCNT1 is the transmit precoder and cC1L is the un-precoded PSK symbols.
Since the precoder enables the realization of multi-spatial data streams in (2), then one
can easily rewrite (1) as
Y ¼ H
X
NT
i¼1
ðwiciÞ þ Z
ð3Þ
Each of the ci 8i ¼ 1;    ; NT, constitutes the ith transmitting branch symbol corre-
sponding to the ith precoder. Let the un-precoded symbols be the standard STBC code
described in [10], we rewrite c as
C ¼
c1
c2
c
2
c
1


ð4Þ
84
K. Anoh et al.

where ðÞ represents complex conjugate. Herein (4), each of the ci 8i ¼ 1;    ; NT
constitutes the ith transmitting timeslot symbol of the OSTBC Alamouti code. It can
easily be veriﬁed that (4) enables orthogonal processing such as jCj2 ¼ diag ðjc1j2 þ
jc2j2; jc1j2 þ jc2j2Þ: Using (4) an EVCM can be derived so that the linear system in (1)
can be rewritten as
Y ¼ HC þ Z
ð5Þ
where H ¼ ½H1jH2 represents the channel states at two different timeslots and C ¼
w  c; ciðlÞCNTL8l ¼ 1;    ; L: We showed in [11] that an equivalent channel matrix
can be derived to simplify detection in the receiver as
H ¼
h1
h2
h
2
h
1


ð6Þ
Both (4) and (6) are used for NT ¼ 2 and NR ¼ 1 designs. We described designs that
enable (6) to be used for MIMO system in [11]. Using (6) in (5) for a conventional STBC
[10], CCNTK and 8NT Ci 6¼ Cj because ci 6¼ cj 8i ¼ 1;    ; NT and ci;jðkÞC1K 8k ¼
1;    ; K; K ¼ ðL=NTÞ: Note that 8NT; i 6¼ j.
Since there are NT separate beams sequel to the precoder ðwÞ each equipped with a
unique phase angle and amplitude, we consider the case where 8i ¼ 1;    ; NT ci ¼ cj
where ci;jðlÞC1L8 l ¼ 1;    ; L; 8NT; i 6¼ j: We argue that since the precoder has
uniquely different phases and amplitudes, then 8NT Cik 6¼ Cj still holds thus achieving
diversity that does not exist when only ci ¼ cj; 8i ¼ 1;    ; NT is used. We maintain
that although Rcicj ¼ P ðci  lciÞðcj  lcjÞ ¼ I when the precoder is applied, then
RCiCj ¼ P ðCi  lCiÞðCj  lCjÞ 6¼ I; lx ¼
R
xpðxÞdx is the statistical mean and I is an
identity matrix. Moreover, since K \ L, then the proposed scheme provides higher data
rate advantage with the amplitude improved so that the BER becomes better than the
traditional STBC combined with the precoding scheme.
3
Method of Multi-antenna Precoding
Singular value decomposition (SVD) provides an elegant method for realizing
well-performing precoders [5]. For instance, the precoder weights are unitary matrices
that are also positive deﬁnitive. When used with the channel matrix, the SVD provides
unitary matrices (or the precoders) that simplify channel compensation at the receiver. As
an example, consider the EVCM channel matrix, H, its SVD can be expressed as [12–14]
H ¼ UXVH
ð7Þ
where U and V are unitary matrices of the NT  NT dimension of the transmitter and
NR  NR dimension of the receiver respectively. It is easy to verify that UHU ¼ INRNR
and also VHV ¼ INTNT. Given the EVCM in (6), H is a square matrix. Then, the
Precoding of Correlated Symbols for STBC Systems Design
85

diagonal matrix XRNTNT corresponds to the power allocated to each of the NT
channels. The input signal ðCÞ can also be represented, following (3), as
C ¼ V  ðINT  cÞ
ð8Þ
where  is the Kronecker product operator, CCNTL and VH is a vector of the
eigen-decomposition of the channel HCNRNT for a ﬂat fading channel model. At the
receiver, the detection of the transmitted symbols can be explored that by using (7)
in (5)
^c ¼ UHY
¼ UHHC þ UHZ
¼ UHðUXVHÞC þ UHZ
¼ UHðUXVHÞVc þ UHZ
¼ Xc þ UHZ
ð9Þ
The result provides NT parallel independent subchannels. Suppose that VH is used at
the transmitter for precoding the input symbols, it is clear that VH provides different
phase and amplitudes for each transmitting branch. Thus, if the input symbols are
correlated, then precoding each symbol with VH provides uncorrelation among these
symbols. Then, if we rewrite wt ¼ VH as the precoder at the transmitter and wr
H ¼ U
for compensation at the receiver, the received signal can be expressed as
^c ¼ wH
r Y
¼ wH
r HC þ wH
r Z
¼ wH
r Hwtc þ wH
r Z
ð10Þ
On the other hand, since wH
r is a unitary matrix, the estimated noise term ^Z ¼ ðwH
r ZÞ
remains Gaussian. For MIMO systems, if the detecting matrix wH
r
maximizes the
objective function jwH
r Hwtj at the receiver given wt, then the receiver is said to attain
maximum ratio combining (MRC) [15]. Clearly, given the objective function
jwH
r Hwtj, the detecting matrix wH
r enables the receiver to achieve maximal output for
NT ¼ 2. This may not be necessarily true for higher order designs of STBC systems
except when the scheme has been enabled to achieve full-diversity such as in [16–19].
The SNR at the receiver can be well-described as
86
K. Anoh et al.

c ¼
E jwH
r Hwtcj2
n
o
E jwH
r ZZHwrj

 ¼ E jwH
r Hwtj2
n
o Ec
r2
z
ð11Þ
where Ec ¼ E jcj2
n
o
and r2
z ¼ E
ZZH




; Efg is the statistical expectation mean of
the precoded symbols at the receiver. For MIMO designs, the exact SNR at the receiver
can be expressed as cMIMIO ¼ PNR
j¼1
PNT
i¼1 ci;j. Considering M-ary PSK symbols, the
error probability can be described as [6]
Ppsk ¼ 1
p
Z ðM1Þp=M
0
Y
NT
i¼1
niðci; bpsk; hÞdh
where h ¼ p=2; niðci; bpsk; hÞ ¼ bpskc= sin2 h and bpsk ¼ sin2ðp=MÞ. Deﬁne the orig-
inal un-precoded PSK symbol, s ¼ C1L where L is the length of the input symbols. For
multiple antennas dispensing with correlated symbols CðlÞCNTL; C ¼ V  ðINT  cÞ.
For conventional STBC symbols, CðkÞCNTK
where K \ L and K ¼ L=NT;
k ¼ 1;    ; K. For the precoded conventional STBC design equipped with NT ¼ 2 and
NR ¼ 1; the SNR is as deﬁned in (11). On the other hand, for correlated symbols
similarly equipped, then
ccorr ¼
NTE jwH
r Hwtcj2
n
o
E jwH
r ZZHwrj

 ¼ NTE jwH
r Hwtj2
n
o Ec
r2
z
ð12Þ
Comparing (11) and (12), it can be observed that the received SNR for the cor-
related symbols is better than the uncorrelated symbols by NT. If the system operates
with NR [ 1 then CðkÞCNRNT L
NT for the uncorrelated and the SNR is
cuncorr; MIMO ¼
X
NR
n1
X
NT
i¼1
ci;n
while CðlÞCNRNTL so that the SNR for the correlated input symbols becomes
ccorr ¼ NTcuncorr;MIMO ¼
X
NR
n¼1
X
NT
i¼1
ðNTci;nÞ
ð13Þ
The above results show that the SNR increases with increasing both the number of
transmitting antennas and the number of receivers. If the receiver is constrained in size,
for example mobile phones, tablets or laptops in such a way that the integration of
many multiple receiving antennas is problematic due to mutual coupling, then the
number of transmitting antennas can be increased to improve throughput at the
receiver. These results are demonstrated using simulation described in Sect. 4.
Precoding of Correlated Symbols for STBC Systems Design
87

4
Simulation Results and Discussions
The simulation environment involves a randomly generated input symbols of length L
demultiplexed into NT branches to realize some uncorrelated symbols; this reduces the
symbol length for each branch to K ¼ ðL=NTÞ such that K \ L. Thus, the ith-branch
input symbol constitutes a symbol vector ciC1 L
NT 8i ¼ 1;    ; NT and ci 6¼ cj for all
transmitting branches; this enables the standard STBC symbols that are uncorrelated.
A multipath ﬂat fading channel with H  CN ð0; r2
hIÞ distribution was generated and
used to construct an EVCM. With the EVCM only the ciC1K 8i ¼ 1;    ; NT
uncorrelated symbols are used and these are precoded before combining them with the
EVCM channel. On the other hand, since the precoding involves different weights of
different amplitudes and phases, the default input symbols of L length are used when
realizing the correlated symbols. This fact enables that the gain in the receiver can be
increased by NT. As a consequence, this technique doubles the data rate against the
uncorrelated design for NT ¼ 2 and improves the processing time since the multiple
conjugation operations to recover the original symbols are not required. The receiver
involves only a linear processing which further makes the design elegant.
Using simulation we show that with the precoding, multiplying the received signal
Y with wH
r is equivalently a diagonal matrix as the conventional channel compensation
if the channel matrix can be derived; meanwhile only wH
r Hwt ¼
H
1
2

H
H
1
2. In Fig. 1
the results for transmitting correlated and uncorrelated precoded symbols are compared.
Alongside, the result of default OSTBC is presented also. Since wH
r Hwt is only
equivalent to
H
1
2

H
H
1
2, then the received SNR of the default STBC will be slightly
better than that of the uncorrelated precoded design and correspondingly their BER.
These are achieved in Figs. 1 and 2.
First, observe that our results in Fig. 1 are consistent with the ones reported in [10]
for 2  1 mid 2  2 antenna conﬁgurations. Comparing the proposed design with the
standard OSTBC for 2 antennas with one receiver, it can be seen that the correlated
symbol consistently achieved 2 dB performance gain over the standard OSTBC
equipped with one receiver. In (12) and (13), we showed that the received SNR is a
function of both NT and NR. Consequently, comparing the designs for 2  2 antenna
conﬁgurations, the correlated symbol precoding technique achieves 2 dB better than the
uncorrleated symbols. These investigations are limited to BPSK modulation. Next, we
investigate these designs for higher spectral efﬁciency using QPSK modulation in Fig. 2.
With a similar design environment as in Fig. 1 for a QPSK design in Fig. 2, it can
be seen that the proposed consistently outperformed the default-OSTBC by 2 dB for
2  1 and 2  2 antenna conﬁgurations. If the EVCM is considered in terms of the
standard STBC matrix, there are 2 timeslots and 2 antenna spaces so that the system
attains
full
spatial
rate
(and
also
full
diversity
since
wH
r Hwt ¼ kINT
and
HHH ¼ r2
hINT, where k is the eigenvalue from the SVD decomposition of the
EVCM). In each of the timeslots, more symbols are transmitted with the correlated
symbols than in the uncorrelated symbols per timeslot thus achieving a higher data rate.
It follows also that in addition to achieving diversity gain, the SNR is improved in the
order of transmitting antennas.
88
K. Anoh et al.

5
Conclusion
In this paper we have introduced the concept of precoding correlated symbols over
STBC scheme. Although corrected symbols sent over many transmitting channels do
not provide any diversity at the receiver, we introduced a novel approach to enabling
Fig. 1. Comparison of Precoded Correlated and uncorrelated symbols for MIMO STBC with 2
Transmit antennas (BPSK)
Fig. 2. Comparison of Precoded Correlated and uncorrelated symbols for MIMO STBC with 2
Transmit antennas (QPSK)
Precoding of Correlated Symbols for STBC Systems Design
89

diversity by transmitting precoded symbols over uncorrelated channels. The correlated
symbols are made uncorrelated by precoding them before transmission over multipath
channels. These precoding weights provide variations in both phases and amplitudes of
the symbols so that diversity gain and some coding performance gain are achieved. We
found that the data rates of the correlated symbols are NT multiples of those of the
uncorrelated symbols over an OSTBC scheme. These translated into 2 dB gain when
we used BPSK and QPSK modulation schemes for 2  1 and 2  2 antenna conﬁg-
urations. Thus, although STBC provides a smart method of transmitting the same
signals as uncorrelated different signals by conjugation, precoding of correlated signals
over an STBC scheme realized through EVCM reduced the error probability by NT and
doubles the BER performance of an STBC design. This translates to increased data
over the same spectral conditions and lower signal power required to drive more data
symbols with improved BER. The proposed has the potential for better performances
with higher order antenna conﬁgurations.
References
1. Razavizadeh, S.M., Ahn, M., Lee, I.: Three-dimensional beamforming: a new enabling
technology for 5G wireless networks. IEEE Sig. Process. Mag. 31(6), 94–101 (2014)
2. Obara, T., Suyama, S., Shen, J., Okumura,Y.: Joint ﬁxed beamforming and eigenmode
precoding for super high bit rate massive MIMO systems using higher frequency bands. In:
IEEE 25th Annual International Symposium on Personal, Indoor, and Mobile Radio
Communication (PIMRC), pp. 607–611 (2014)
3. Roh, W., Seol, J.-Y., Park, J., Lee, B., Lee, J., Kim, Y., Cho, J., Cheun, K., Aryanfar, F.:
Millimeter-wave beamforming as an enabling technology for 5G cellular communications:
theoretical feasibility and prototype results. IEEE Commun. Mag. 52(2), 106–113 (2014)
4. Alkhateeb, A., Mo, J., Gonzalez-Prelcic, N., Heath, R.W.: MIMO precoding and combining
solutions for millimeter-wave systems. IEEE Commun. Mag. 52(12), 122–131 (2014)
5. Jay Kuo, C.-C., Tsai, S.-H., Tadjpour, L., Chang, Y.-H.: Precoding Techniques for Digital
Communication Systems. Springer, London (2008)
6. Zhou, S., Giannakis, G.B.: Optimal transmitter eigen- beamforming and space-time block
coding based on channel correlations. IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory 49(7), 1673–1690 (2003)
7. Liu, L., Jafarkhani, H.: Application of quasi-orthogonal space-time block codes in
beamforming. IEEE Trans. Signal Process. 53(1), 54–63 (2005)
8. Jöngren, G., Skoglund, M., Ottersten, B.: Combining beam- forming and orthogonal
space-time block coding. IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory 48(3), 611–627 (2002)
9. Innok, A., Uthansakul, P., Uthansakul, M.: Angular beamforming technique for MIMO
beamforming system. Int. J. Antennas Propagation (2012)
10. Alamouti, S.M.: A simple transmit diversity technique for wireless communications.
IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun. 16(8), 1451–1458 (1998)
11. Anoh, K.O.O., Abd-Alhameed, R.A., Okorafor, G.N., Noras, J.M., Rodriguez, J., Jones, S.
M.R.: Performance evaluation of spatial modulation and QOSTBC for MIMO systems. EAI
Endorsed Transactions on Mobile Communications and Applications 15(6), e5 (2015)
12. Du, K.-L., Swamy, M.N.S.: Wireless communication systems: from RF subsystems to 4G
enabling technologies. Cambridge University Press, New york (2010)
13. Goldsmith, A.: Wireless communications. Cambridge University Press, New york (2005)
90
K. Anoh et al.

14. Proakis, J.G., Salehi, M.: Digital Communications. 5th edn. (2008)
15. Love, D.J., Heath Jr., R.W., Strohmer, T.: Grassmannian beamforming for multiple-input
multiple-output wireless systems. IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory 19(10), 2735–2747 (2003)
16. Anoh, K.O.O., Jones, S.M.R., Abd-Alhameed, R.A.A., Mapoka, T.T., Okorafor, G.N.,
Ngala, M.J.: A simple space-time coding technique for wireless communication systems.
Internet Technol. Appl. (ITA) 2015, 405–410 (2015)
17. Park, U., Kim, S., Lim, K., Li, J.: A novel QOSTBC scheme with linear decoding for three
and four transmit antennas. IEEE Commun. Lett. 12(12), 868–870 (2008)
18. Pham, V.-B., Qi, Bo-Yu., Sheng, W.-X., Wang, M.: An improved full rate full diversity
qostbc with linear decoding in mimo systems. Wireless Pers. Commun. 69(1), 121–131
(2013)
19. Pham, V.-B., Sheng, W.-X.: No-zero-entry full diversity space-time block codes with linear
receivers. Annals of telecommunications-annales des télécommunications 70(1–2), 73–81
(2015)
Precoding of Correlated Symbols for STBC Systems Design
91

Communication Applications in Smart
Grid (CASG) Special Session

Optimization of Community Based Virtual Power Plant
with Embedded Storage and Renewable Generation
Oghenovo Okpako
(✉), Paul Inuwa Adamu, Haile-Selassie Rajamani,
and Prashant Pillai
Faculty of Engineering and Informatics, University of Bradford, Bradford, UK
{ookpako,p.i.adamu,H.S.Rajamani,P.Pillai}@bradford.ac.uk
Abstract. The current global challenge of climate change has made renewable
energy usage very important. There is an ongoing drive for the deployment of
renewable energy resource at the domestic level through feed-in tariﬀ, etc.
However, the intermittent nature of renewable energy has made storage a key
priority. In this work, a community having a solar farm with energy storage
embedded in the house of the energy consumers is considered. Consumers within
the community are aggregated in to a local virtual power plant. Genetic algorithm
was used to develop an optimized energy transaction for the virtual power plant
with respect to diﬀerential pricing and renewable generation. The results show
that it is feasible to have a virtual power plant setup in a local community that
involve the use of renewable generation and embedded storage. The results show
that both pricing and renewable generation window should be considered as a
factor when setting up a virtual power plant that involve the use of storage and
renewable generation at the community level. Also, when maximization of battery
state of charge is considered as part of an optimization problem in a day ahead
market, certain trade-oﬀ would have to be made on the proﬁt of the virtual power
plant, the incentive of the prosumer, as well as the provision of peak service to
the grid.
Keywords: Prosumer · Battery · Virtual power plant (VPP) · Genetic algorithm
(GA) · Smart grid · State of charge · Solar generation
1
Introduction
Access to clean energy is becoming important. This is due to the current global challenge
of climate change caused by the emission of greenhouse gases from fossil fuel. The need
for clean energy has ensured that vital consideration is given to energy produced from
renewable energy sources. There is a current drive to promote much use of renewable
energy, for example, the European Union has renewable energy usage as part of its
strategy to cut down greenhouse gas emission by 80% by the year 2050 [1]. Also, most
governments are currently encouraging the use of renewable energy through the provi‐
sion of feed-in tariﬀ, etc. However, renewable energy sources like solar, wind etc. are
intermittent in nature, and would require energy storage devices. Energy storage
© ICST Institute for Computer Sciences, Social Informatics and Telecommunications Engineering 2017
I. Otung et al. (Eds.): WiSATS 2016, LNICST 186, pp. 95–107, 2017.
DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-53850-1_11

becomes key in maximizing the use of renewable energy. It can be used to smoothen
peak and trough of renewable generation.
There is a current global restructuring of electric power utilities [2, 3]. This is envis‐
aged to change the consumer role to that of a prosumer, and as well promote the deploy‐
ment of distributed generation. The prosumer role involves both energy consumption
and energy production. Energy storage becomes an asset to the prosumer as it could be
to buy cheap energy from the grid during oﬀ-peak period, or store excess renewable
generation, which could later be sold at peak period for better prices [4–6].
The concept of using small unit of energy storage at the domestic side of the elec‐
tricity grid to participate in the power market was proposed by Kempton [7]. According
to Kempton, the battery electric vehicle is not just a load on the utility grid, but an
alternative power source. Work on diﬀerent energy management strategies for dealing
with battery electric vehicles has been done by these authors [8–10]. However, battery
electric vehicles are usually mobile and could be limited in their potentials to maximize
the use of renewable energy. As a result, it is proposed in this work to have battery
energy storage embedded inside the home of the prosumer.
At the domestic side of the grid, prosumers lack the capacity to participate directly
at the wholesale power market. Prosumers would need to be aggregated by a virtual
power plant (VPP) at the community level. The VPP aggregates small units of distributed
energy resource and ﬂexible load for participation in the power market by oﬀering
ﬂexibility. Prosumers participation in the power market is done through the VPP. In [11],
it is demonstrated that it is possible to have a pricing scheme that provides ﬁnancial
incentive for both the VPP and the prosumer. However, there was no clarity on how
VPP operation is aﬀected with both pricing and renewable energy generation. Also the
possibility and eﬀect of including battery state of charge as part of an optimization
problem for a community VPP was clearly not understood.
In this paper, it is proposed to use genetic algorithm to optimize the energy transac‐
tion of a community VPP with respect to diﬀerential pricing and renewable generation.
The algorithm was tested under various scenarios. These includes an objective function
where only the prosumer net cost is considered, and also an objective function where
both the prosumer net cost and battery state of charge were considered.
This paper is organized as follows; Sect. 2 is a description of the model, Sect. 3 is
the mathematical modelling, Sect. 4 is the VPP optimization, Sect. 5 is the results and
discussion, and Sect. 6 is the conclusion.
2
Framework of Virtual Power Plant Model
Figure 1, is a diagram describing the VPP model developed in this work. From Fig. 1,
N is the total number of prosumers within the community aggregated as a VPP. Ed1 to
EdN is the discharge energy from prosumer 1 to N battery. Ec1 to EcN is the charge energy
for prosumer 1 to N battery. Ppsell is the prosumer sell price of energy from battery, or
the price at which the VPP buys energy from the prosumer’s battery. L1 to LN is the load
demand of prosumer 1 to N. Ppbuy is the price at which the prosumer buy energy from
the VPP to meet its load, or the price at which VPP sells energy to the prosumer to meet
96
O. Okpako et al.

load demand. Eimp and Eexp are the amount of energy imported from the grid, and
exported to the grid by the VPP. Pvimp and Pvexp are the VPP import and export price of
energy to the grid. Epv is the solar energy generation from the community solar farm
which is assumed to be free for both parties (prosumer and VPP).
Prosumer 1
Virtual Power Plant
BaƩery 
storage
Load
Prosumer 2
BaƩery 
storage
Load
Prosumer N
BaƩery 
storage
Load
G
R
I
D
Community
Solar Farm
Ec1 Ppbuy
Ed1 Ppsell
Ed2 Ppsell
Ec2 Ppbuy
EcN Ppbuy
EdN Ppsell
L1 Ppbuy
L2 Ppbuy
LN Ppbuy
Eimp Pvimp
Eexp Pvexp
Epv
Fig. 1. Architecture of the virtual power plant model.
2.1
Virtual Power Plant
In Fig. 1, the VPP can buy energy in bulk from the grid (Eimp) at price Pvimp and from
the prosumers (Ed1 to EdN from prosumer 1 to prosumer N) at price Prsell respectively.
The energy bought from the grid is use to meet the prosumer’s energy demand (L1 to
LN) as well as to charge their battery. The energy bought from each prosumer’s battery
(Ed1 to EdN from prosumer 1 to prosumer N) are aggregated by the VPP. The aggregated
energy is ﬁrst used within the community to meet each prosumer’s load demand respec‐
tively before its excess can be sold to the VPP and then exported (traded in the power
market). The solar farm is owned by the community. Energy produced from the solar
farm is only use for charging of the prosumers battery and meeting of their load demand.
The VPP only imports energy from the external grid when the energy produced from
the community solar farm is not enough to meet the prosumers battery charging and load
requirement.
In this work, the VPP was considered as having a day ahead forecast of the energy
produced from the community solar farm. The VPP has a day ahead forecast of each
prosumer half hourly load proﬁle. In addition, the VPP has a day ahead forecast of the
price Pvexp at which the external grid would buy its energy (i.e. the day ahead forecast
price paid by the grid to the VPP for exporting energy), as well as the day ahead forecast
Optimization of Community Based Virtual Power Plant
97

of the price Pvimp at which the grid would sell energy to the prosumer (i.e. the day ahead
forecast price paid by VPP to the external grid for importing energy). Both import and
export prices for energy are agreed between the VPP and the grid in the wholesale power
market. Based on the day ahead import and export price, the VPP agrees a day ahead
prosumer buy and sell price of energy. Thereafter, the VPP has to optimally allocate
energy resource by determining its day ahead schedule assuming no error band during
forecasting. The day ahead energy resource allocation is done by determining the day
ahead charge/discharge energy from each prosumer battery. The charge/discharge
energy is use to control the amount of energy to be imported from grid and exported to
the grid by the community, which is subject to the availability of energy from the
community solar farm. The incentives for encouraging the VPP as a business entity is
proﬁt.
2.2
Prosumer
A community consisting of three prosumers (N = 3) was considered in this model. Each
prosumer was considered as having battery energy storage embedded inside their home.
Each battery is considered as having a state of charge of 30% respectively. The day ahead
half hourly load proﬁle of each prosumer is shown in Fig. 2. Figure 2, is a typical half-
hourly load proﬁle of three diﬀerent class of domestic energy consumers within a resi‐
dential community. This data was obtained from Xcel Energy [12].
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Time interval (Half-Hour)
Load (Per Unit)
Prosumer 1
Prosumer 2
Prosumer 3
Fig. 2. Forecasted hourly load proﬁle of each prosumer.
Each of the prosumers has a diﬀerent hourly load proﬁle. The motivation of the
prosumer as a participant in the VPP, is to minimize its net cost (energy purchasing cost).
In this work, a lower net cost represents an incentive received by the prosumer for
participating as part of a VPP in its local community.
98
O. Okpako et al.

3
Mathematical Tool Used in Modelling
3.1
The VPP Energy Balance
The VPP energy balance equation during the time interval t is calculated in (1) as follows.
Eimpt + Epvt +
∑
Edi,t = Eexpt+E
npvt +
∑(
Eci,t + L
i,t
)
(1)
⎧
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎪
⎪⎩
if (Epvt + ∑(
Edi,t −Eci,t −Li,t
)
< 0, Eimpt = +ve
if (Epvt + ∑(
Edi,t −Eci,t −Li,t
)
> 0), Eimpt = 0, Enpvt = +ve
if
(∑(
Edi,t −Li,t
))
> 0, Eexpi,t = +ve
if
(∑(
Edi,t −Li,t
))
< 0, Eexpi,t = 0
Where i is an integer. t is the time interval. Eimpt and Eexpt are the amount of import
energy and the amount of export energy in per unit during t. Eci,t and Edi,t are the amount
of charge and discharge energy in per unit respectively allocated to prosumer i battery
by the VPP during t. L
i,t is the load of prosumer i in per unit during t. The load is ﬁxed.
Epvt is the amount of energy in per unit produced from community solar farm. Enpvt is
the amount of energy produced from the community solar farm that is not used by the
community.
3.2
VPP Proﬁt
The VPP proﬁt Vppproﬁt, at each time interval t over the day’s total number of time
interval (T) is calculated as follows.
T
∑
t=1
Vppproﬁtt =
T
∑
t=1
(Vpprevt −Vppcostt
)
(2)
Where Vpprevt and Vppcostt are the VPP revenue and cost respectively during the time
interval t. T is the day’s total number of time interval. Both VPP revenue and cost are
calculated based on the amount of energy imported and exported. This is because it does
not cost the VPP to get energy from the solar farm, also the prosumers only sells excess
energy to the VPP for export after their load demand have been met. VPP revenue and
cost are calculated in (3) and (4) respectively as follows.
T
∑
t=1
Vpprevt =
T
∑
t=1
Ppbuyt ⋅Eimpt + Pvexpt ⋅Eexpt
(3)
Optimization of Community Based Virtual Power Plant
99

T
∑
t=1
Vppcostt =
T
∑
t=1
Pvimpt ⋅Eimpt + Ppsellt ⋅Eexpt
(4)
Where Ppsellt, Ppbuyt, Pvimpt, and Pvexpt are the prosumer selling price of energy,
prosumer buy price of energy, the VPP import price of energy, and the VPP export price
of energy respectively during t. All measured in pence/per unit.
3.3
Prosumer Net Cost
The prosumer net cost is calculated using both the import and export energy. During
energy import, only energy imported from the grid is paid for by the prosumer. Energy
used from the community solar farm is not paid for by the prosumer. The import energy
represents a deﬁcit in energy production from the community solar farm. During energy
export, the energy discharge from the prosumer battery is ﬁrst used internally to meet
the prosumer’s load demand, only its excess is sold to the VPP for export. The prosum‐
er’s net cost Ppcost, at each time interval t over T is calculated as follows.
T
∑
t=1
Ppcostt =
T
∑
t=1
Ppbuyt ⋅Eimpt −Ppsellt ⋅Eexpt
(5)
3.4
Battery State of Charge
The battery state of charge (SOC) gives an information on the battery energy level. In
this work, the battery energy level is measured in per unit. Usually the battery SOC
cannot be measured directly, but can be inferred from the battery energy level. Therefore,
the battery state of charge of charge is a measure of the battery energy level in compar‐
ison to the battery actual capacity, assuming an ideal battery with no peukert eﬀect, no
losses (self-discharge) and whose actual capacity is the same as its nominal capacity.
The SOC is measured in percentage. It gives an information on the battery depth of
discharge. The battery energy level measured during t is calculated as follows.
Estoredi,t = Eoi +
T
∑
t=1
Ecdi,t
(6)
Ecdi,t =
⎧
⎪
⎨
⎪⎩
Eci,t, if battery charging occur
−Edi,t, if battery discharging occur
0, if battery is idle
Estoredi,t is prosumer i battery energy level in per unit measured at t. Eoi is prosumer i
initial battery energy level in per unit before participation in the day ahead power market.
Each prosumer battery SOC at t is calculated as follows.
100
O. Okpako et al.

SOCi,t = 100
Estoredi,t
Ebatti
(7)
SOCi,t is the state of charge of prosumer i battery measured in percentage at t. Ebatti,
is the actual battery capacity in per unit of prosumer i.
3.5
Battery Constraints
Each prosumer battery discharge constraint is represented as follows.
Ed,mini ≤Edi,t ≤Ed,maxi
(8)
Where Ed,mini and Ed,maxi are the minimum and maximum discharge energy that can
be allocated to prosumer i battery. Each prosumer battery charge constraint is repre‐
sented as follows.
Ec,mini ≤Eci,t ≤Ec,maxi
(9)
Where Ec,mini and Ec,maxi are the minimum and maximum charge energy that can be
allocated to prosumer i battery. Each prosumer battery state of charge constraint is
represented as follows.
SOCmini ≤SOC
i,t ≤SOCmaxi
(10)
Where SOCmini and SOCmaxi are the minimum and maximum SOC limit of prosumer
i battery.
4
Optimizations of the Community Virtual Power Plant
To understand the optimization problem, the number of prosumer chosen to participate
in the community VPP was kept at three. The optimization problem is formulated
considering both the prosumer net cost and the battery SOC. This is gotten from (5) and
(7) and is represented as follows.
[Min]F = w1
T
∑
t=1
Ppcostt −w2
T
∑
t=1
N
∑
i=1
SOCi,t
(11)
F is the objective function to be minimize. It represents both the prosumer net cost
and the battery state of charge. w1 and w2 are the weighting factor. Eo was chosen to be
5.4 per unit. T was chosen to be 48. Ebatt (actual battery capacity) was chosen to be 18
per unit. Given the day ahead pricing, solar generation, and prosumer’s load proﬁle,
genetic algorithm was used to solve the optimization problem [11].
Optimization of Community Based Virtual Power Plant
101

5
Results and Discussion
In Fig. 3, is the modiﬁed pricing scheme used by the VPP in this work [11, 13]. The
modiﬁed pricing scheme was extended to 48 time intervals. It was considered to use the
modiﬁed pricing scheme because its business incentives favors both the VPP and the
prosumer [11, 13] while meeting the VPP objective. This is detailed in [11, 13].
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
-2
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
Time interval (Half-Hour)
Price (Per Unit)
Import
Export
Buy
Sell
Fig. 3. Modiﬁed pricing scheme.
Figure 4, is the day ahead solar generation from the community solar farm. The data
was gotten from [14], and was normalized to a peak solar generation of 3.2 per unit.
This would be a more realistic value for the community considered (considering their
load and charging requirements).
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
Time interval (Hour)
Solar Generation (Per Unit)
Fig. 4. Day ahead solar generation from community solar farm.
The modiﬁed pricing scheme, solar generation, and load proﬁle were used as the
input data. GA was used to perform the optimization and was initially tested by selecting
w1 = 1 and w2 = 0. The simulation was done with these weighting factor, and the results
are presented as follows.
102
O. Okpako et al.

In Fig. 5, the prosumer net cost decreases as the algorithm optimizes until it
converges. Also, the VPP makes proﬁt. Though the objective function with the given
weighting factor purely considers the prosumers net cost minimization, the modiﬁed
pricing scheme favors both the prosumer and the VPP.
0
100
200
300
400
500
0
5
10
15
20
25
Battery Energy Level (Per Unit)
30
35
40
45
50
55
60
65
VPP Profit (Pence)
0
100
200
300
400
500
100
150
200
250
300
350
Prosumer Net Cost (Pence)
Number of Iteration
Battery Energy Level (Per Unit)
Prosumer Net Cost (Pence)
VPP Profit (Pence)
Fig. 5. Eﬀect of optimization on community (at w1 = 1, w2 = 0).
In Fig. 6, the area above the reference point represents the charge energy while the
one below the reference point represent the discharge energy. It is noticed that the
batteries are charging during the period of solar generation and are discharging during
the grid’s peak demand. This is good, because the prosumers are actually using the
energy produced from solar generation for charging of their battery, and are also
discharging their battery during peak period to support their load. In Fig. 7, it is observed
that the battery state of charge at the end of the day is zero percent. This is not good for
the battery life and state of health. This is attributed to the optimization problem which
only considers the prosumer net cost for one day period. Figure 8, is the energy exchange
between the community and the grid.
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
-1.5
-1
-0.5
0
0.5
1
1.5
Time interval (Half-Hour)
Charge Energy (Per Unit)
Reference point
Prosumer 1
Prosumer 2
Prosumer 3
Fig. 6. Battery charge.
Optimization of Community Based Virtual Power Plant
103

0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Time interval (Half-Hour)
State of Charge (Percentage)
Prosumer 1
Prosumer 2
Prosumer 3
Fig. 7. Battery state of charge.
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
-1
-0.5
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
Time interval (Half-Hour)
Energy Exchange  (Per Unit)
Reference point
Energy exchange
Fig. 8. Energy exchange between community and external grid.
In Fig. 8, the area above the reference point is the import energy, while below the
reference point is the export energy. It is noticeable that the community is actually
importing energy from the grid during oﬀ-peak period. The energy imported from the
grid during the oﬀ-peak period is much lower when energy from community solar farm
is available. This import is because the total load and the charging requirement of the
community is slightly higher than the energy produced from the community solar farm.
During the peak period, energy is exported to the external grid for grid peak support.
Both peak and oﬀ-peak scenarios are good for the grid in terms of energy balancing.
However, as earlier discussed, the battery SOC is still an issue. To address this low
battery SOC issue, the optimization was then run with w1 = 0.2 and w2 = 0.8. The results
obtained are presented as follows.
In Fig. 9, when compared to Fig. 5, it is noticed that the battery energy level has
increased. The prosumer net cost is higher and the VPP proﬁt is lower. This is because
of the battery SOC which was considered as part of the optimization function. Figure 10,
and Fig. 11 are the battery charge and state of charge respectively.
104
O. Okpako et al.

0
100
200
300
400
500
10
20
30
40
Battery Energy Level (Per Unit)
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
VPP Profit (Pence)
0
100
200
300
400
500100
200
300
400
Prosumer Net Cost (Pence)
Number of Iteration
Battery Energy Level (Per Unit)
Prosumer Net Cost (Pence)
VPP Profit (Pence)
Fig. 9. Eﬀect of optimization on community (at w1 = 0.2, w2 = 0.8).
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
-1.5
-1
-0.5
0
0.5
1
1.5
Time interval (Half-Hour)
Charge Energy (Per Unit)
Reference point
Prosumer 1
Prosumer 2
Prosumer 3
Fig. 10. Battery charge.
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Time interval (Half-Hour)
State of Charge (Percentage)
Prosumer 1
Prosumer 2
Prosumer 3
Fig. 11. Battery state of charge.
Optimization of Community Based Virtual Power Plant
105

In Fig. 10, the batteries are actually charging during the grid oﬀ-peak period and
during the period of renewable energy generation. This is good for the grid as grid oﬀ-
peak service is provided. Also, it is good for the community as renewable energy
produced from the community solar farm is utilized for charging the batteries. In Fig. 11,
it is observed that the battery SOC are much higher compared to that observed in Fig. 7.
This is because maximization of the battery SOC was formulated as a part of the objec‐
tive function. One noticeable observation is that the SOC of prosumer 2 is much higher
than others. This is because of its lower load demand. The energy exchange between
the community and the grid is shown in Fig. 12.
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
-0.5
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
Time interval (Half-Hour)
Energy Exchange  (Per Unit)
Reference point
Energy exchange
Fig. 12. Energy exchange between community and external grid.
In Fig. 12, it is observed that energy is imported from the grid during the oﬀ-peak
period. Also, during the period of renewable generation, very little or no amount of
energy is imported from the grid. However, during the peak period, energy is not
exported to the grid, though the prosumer batteries are discharging. The discharge energy
is used within the community to meet the prosumer load demand. This is attributed to
the battery SOC maximization that was included as part of the objective function as well
as the battery initial SOC.
This experiment has shown the feasibility of setting up a virtual power plant in a
local community that would involve renewable generation and embedded storage. It has
been demonstrated that both pricing and solar generation window can aﬀect the technical
operation of the VPP in terms of the charge and discharge time period as well as the
amount of energy imported from the external grid. Also, it has been shown with clarity
that preventing the battery from attaining a very low SOC is possible for a one-day
optimization period. However, certain tradeoﬀ would have to be made on the prosumer’s
incentive, VPP proﬁt, and grid peak/oﬀ-peak support.
6
Conclusion
In this paper, it has been demonstrated that it is possible to have a virtual power plant
set up that involves the use of embedded energy storage and renewable generation at a
106
O. Okpako et al.

community level. It has been demonstrated that both pricing and solar generation
window can aﬀect the technical operation of the VPP in terms of the charge and discharge
time period as well as the amount of energy imported from the external grid. It has been
shown that battery state of charge should be accounted for in an optimization algorithm
particularly for day ahead market. However, in considering battery state of charge as
part of an optimization problem, certain tradeoﬀs in terms of provision of grid peak/oﬀ-
peak support and incentives for the prosumer and the virtual power plant would have to
be made.
References
1. Carvalho, M.G.: EU energy and climate change strategy. J. Energy 40(1), 19–22 (2012)
2. Vallvé, X., Graillot, A., Gual, S., Colin, H.: Micro storage and demand side management in
distributed PV grid-connected installations. In: 9th IEEE International Conference on
Electrical Power Quality and Utilisation 2007, pp. 1–6 (2007)
3. Ihbal, A., Rajamani, H., Abd-Alhameed, R., Jalboub, M., Elmeshregi, A., Aljaddal, M.:
Development of electricity pricing criteria at residential community level. Univers. J. Electr.
Electron. Eng. 2(2), 81–89 (2014)
4. Ferreira, H.L., Garde, R., Fulli, G., Kling, W., Lopes, J.P.: Characterisation of electrical energy
storage technologies. J. Energy 53, 288–298 (2013)
5. Boicea, V.A.: Energy storage technologies: the past and the present. Proc. IEEE 102(11),
1777–1794 (2014)
6. IEA: Technology roadmap: energy storage, Paris (2014)
7. Kempton, W., Letendre, S.E.: Electric vehicles as a new power source for electric utilities.
Transp. Res. Part D Trans. Environ. 2(3), 157–175 (1997)
8. Wu, D., Aliprantis, D.C., Ying, L.: Load scheduling and dispatch for aggregators of plug-in
electric vehicles. IEEE Trans. Smart Grid 3(1), 368–376 (2012)
9. Pang, C., Aravinthan, V., Wang, X.: Electric vehicles as conﬁgurable distributed energy
storage in the smart grid. In: Power Systems Conference (PSC) 2014, Clemson University,
pp. 1–5 (2014)
10. Brooks, A., Lu, E., Reicher, D., Spirakis, C., Weihl, B.: Demand dispatch. IEEE Power Energ.
Mag. 8(3), 20–29 (2010)
11. Okpako, O., Rajamani, H., Pillai, P., Anuebunwa, U., Swarup, K.: Evaluation of community
virtual power plant under various pricing schemes. In: Proceedings of 2016 IEEE Smart
Energy Grid Engineering Conference, Oshawa, pp. 72–78 (2016)
12. Xcel Energy Hourly Load Proﬁle. https://www.xcelenergy.com/staticﬁles/xe/Corporate/
Corporate%20PDFs/AppendixD-Hourly_Load_Proﬁles.pdf
13. Okpako, O., Rajamani, H., Pillai, P., Anuebunwa, U., Swarup, K.: Investigation of an
optimized energy resource allocation algorithm for a community based virtual power plant.
In: Proceedings of 2016 IEEE PES Power Africa Conference, Livingstone, pp. 153–157
(2016)
14. The University of Sheﬃeld Solar. http://www.solar.sheﬃeld.ac.uk/pvlive
Optimization of Community Based Virtual Power Plant
107

Assessment of Eﬀective Radiated Power of the Partial
Discharge Emulator Source
Adel Jaber1(✉), Pavlos Lazaridis1, Bahghtar Saeed1, Yong Zhang1, Umar Khan1,
David Upton1, Hamd Ahmed1, Peter Mather1, Robert Atkinson2, Martin Judd3,
Maria Fatima Queiroz Vieira4, and Ian Glover1
1 Department of Engineering and Technology,
University of Huddersﬁeld,   Huddersﬁeld HD1 3DH,   UK
Adel.Jaber@hud.ac.uk
2 Department of Electronic and Electrical Engineering,
University of Strathclyde,   Glasgow G1 1XW,   UK
3 High Frequency Diagnostics and Engineering Ltd, Glasgow  G3 7JT, UK
4 Department of Electrical Engineering,
Universidade Federal de Campina, Campina Grande, Brazil
Abstract. Two eﬀective partial discharge (PD) measurement techniques are
used; a galvanic contact measurement technique similar to the IEC 60270
standard measurement and free-space radiometric (FSR) measurement. Several
types of PD sources are specially constructed: two internal PD emulators and an
emulator of the ﬂoating-electrode type. An AC power supply is applied to the PD
source and the radiated signal is captured using a wideband biconical antenna.
The calibration of PD sources is demonstrated. Eﬀective radiated power (ERP)
of the PD sources using a PD calibration device is determined.
Keywords: Absolute partial discharge intensity · Eﬀective radiated power · Free
space radiometric measurement · Galvanic contact measurement
1
Introduction
Measurement of PD activity can be used to diagnose substation insulation faults and
predict the catastrophic failure of high voltage (HV) equipment. Free-space radiometric
measurement has been proposed as a particularly convenient technique for PD source
location and monitoring, at least in part, because it requires no physical connection to
electrical components. The FSR technique uses remotely located antennas to receive the
radio frequency (RF) signal radiated by transient PD pulses [1, 2]. Traditionally, it has
been the temporal evolution of FSR-derived data that has been used to ﬂag PD of imme‐
diate engineering concern since the absolute PD intensity (in pC) has been thought
impractical to assess. Here, we report work in progress which targets to link FSR PD
data to absolute PD intensity.
© ICST Institute for Computer Sciences, Social Informatics and Telecommunications Engineering 2017
I. Otung et al. (Eds.): WiSATS 2016, LNICST 186, pp. 108–115, 2017.
DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-53850-1_12

2
Apparatus
The apparatus used to simultaneously capture galvanic contact, and FSR PD measurements
is shown in Fig. 1. More information about PD measurements can be found in [3–6].
AC
H.V. 
Source
4 Ω
Oscilloscope
1000 pF
Biconical antenna
RF coaxial cable
Electromagnetic 
wave
d
ch1
ch2
Floating-electrode PD 
emulator 
Fig. 1. Measurement apparatus.
PD is generated by applying an AC HV to the PD source. Three PD emulators have
been constructed. An emulator of the ﬂoating-electrode type, an acrylic tube internal
emulator (PD discharge in the air and in the oil) and an epoxy dielectric internal PD
emulator, that are shown in Fig. 2. The voltage rating of the 1 nF coupling capacitor
(shown in Fig. 1) used to make the galvanic PD measurements is 40 kV [5]. When the
electric ﬁeld is suﬃciently large, PD occurs across the electrode gaps. More details about
PD sources can be found in [7–10].
The radiometric measurements were made using a wideband biconical antenna
connected to a 4 GHz, 20 GSa/s, digital sampling oscilloscope (DSO). The antenna was
vertically polarised. The frequency range of the antenna is 20 MHz to 1 GHz and its
nominal impedance is 50 ohms. The antenna gain at 100 MHz is around −9 dBi and its
dimensions are 540 mm × 225 mm × 225 mm. A commercial PD calibration device has
been used to assess the eﬀective radiated power of the emulator as a function of PD
apparent charge. The oﬀ-line HVPD pC calibrator is designed to provide a range of
current pulses of speciﬁed charge from 1 pC up to 100 nC [11, 12].
3
Example Event
Example FSR and galvanic contact measurements for the same PD event are compared
in Fig. 3(a). The PD source used for the comparison in this paper is a ﬂoating electrode
PD emulator. The voltage at which this PD event occurred was 6.2 kV. The frequency
spectra, obtained using an FFT, are compared in Fig. 3(b).
Assessment of Eﬀective Radiated Power
109

High voltage 
electrode  
Nylon screw 
to manage 
electrodes 
separation 
Perspex 
insulator 
sample
Electrical 
connection 
Acrylic 
tube 
     (b)
Nylon screw 
 to manage 
electrodes
 separation 
Earth brass 
electrode
Epoxy glass 
insulator plates 
High voltage 
electrode  
Electrical 
connection 
a cavity in the 
middle of plate
     (c)
HV 
electrode
Insulating 
(polypropylene)
Floating  
electrode
    (a)
Fig. 2. (a) Floating electrode PD emulator (b) Acrylic tube internal PD emulator and (c) Epoxy
dielectric internal PD emulator (dimensions in mm).
110
A. Jaber et al.

Fig. 3. (a) PD normalised time-series (b) PD spectra.
4
PD Sources Calibration
The oscillatory nature of the PD time-series makes assessing apparent charge non-trivial,
even in a galvanic measurement. The example of experimental setup measuring circuit
in Fig. 4 was used for calibrating PD sources. The artiﬁcial PD sources have therefore
been calibrated by injecting a narrow calibration pulse of known charge. The calibration
pulse emulates a PD event of a particular (known) intensity. A typical observed wave‐
form is shown in Fig. 5. The measured charge has been estimated by integrating the ﬁrst
half-cycle of the PD source time-series current.
Epoxy dielectric internal 
PD emulator 
HVPD pC
 Calibrator
1000 pF
4 Ω
Oscilloscope
ch1
ch2
50 Ω
Fig. 4. PD source calibration.
Assessment of Eﬀective Radiated Power
111

Fig. 5. Example of current waveform for an injected charge of 1 nC.
Figure 6 shows the charge calculated from the galvanic contact measurement against
the speciﬁcation of the charge injection device.
Fig. 6. Measured charge versus speciﬁed charge of charge injection device.
112
A. Jaber et al.

Regarding the Free-Space radiometric measurements, diﬀerent distances were used
in measurement system shown in Fig. 1 between the three PD emulators and the biconical
antenna. Figure 7 shows an example of the variation with distance of received peak
voltage, received ﬁeld-strength and apparent eﬀective radiated power. The radiated
signal amplitude is decreasing by increasing the distance between the PD source and the
biconical antenna, due to radiation losses [5]. In free-space, and in the far-ﬁeld, apparent
ERP would be independent of source-antenna range. The variation observed may be due
to near-ﬁeld and/or multipath eﬀects. This is under investigation. The relationship
between calculated charge and average ERP for diﬀerent PD emulator source types is
presented in Table 1. The ERP of the PD source emulator is estimated from the received
electric ﬁeld strength according to the formula for free space propagation formula (1)
as follows [5]:
E(dB𝜇V/m) = 107 + ERP (dBm) −20 log10 d(m)
(1)
where: E is the electric ﬁeld strength, ERP is the eﬀective radiated power and d is the
PD source distance from the receiving antenna.
Fig. 7. (a) Received peak voltage, (b) Electric ﬁeld strength and (c) ERP as a function of PD
source–antenna range.
Assessment of Eﬀective Radiated Power
113

Table 1. Relationship between calculated charge and eﬀective radiated power of PD sources.
Floating-
electrode PD
source
Acrylic tube
internal PD
source
without oil
ﬁlling
Acrylic tube
internal PD
source with
oil ﬁlling
Epoxy
dielectric
internal PD
source
Calculated
charge (nC)
5.3
3.8
2.1
0.9
Average peak
ERP (dBm)
25
12
7
1.4
Figure 8 relates ERP (estimated from radiometric measurements) and absolute PD
intensity (estimated from galvanic measurement of the PD current transient). The
convincing nature of this relationship suggests a useful estimate of absolute PD intensity
from a remote measurement of PD radiation is possible.
Fig. 8. Determined ERP of diﬀerent types of PD sources versus calculated charge.
5
Conclusions
Estimated charge, peak voltage amplitude and eﬀective radiated power of FSR meas‐
urements against the location of the PD emulator are used for the calibration of PD
sources. By using the proposed method an apparent charge in picocoulombs can be
inferred for a PD source from FSR measurements.
114
A. Jaber et al.

Acknowledgments. The authors acknowledge the Engineering and Physical Sciences Research
Council for their support of this work under grant EP/J015873/1.
References
1. Zhang, Y., Upton, D., Jaber, A., Ahmed, H., Saeed, B., Mather, P., Lazaridis, P., Mopty, A.,
Tachtatzis, C., Atkinson, R., Judd, M., Vieira, M.F.Q., Glover, I.A.: Radiometric wireless
sensor network monitoring of partial discharge sources in electrical substations. Hindawi Int.
J. Distrib. Sens. Networks 2015, 179 (2015)
2. Neto, J.M., Upton, D., Jaber, A., Ahmed, H., Saeed, B., Mather, Tachtatzis, C., Atkinson, R.,
Judd, M., Vieira, M.F.Q., Glover, I.A.: Radiometric location of partial discharge sources for
the future smart grid. In: General Assembly and Scientiﬁc Symposium (URSI GASS), XXXIth
URSI, Beijing, pp. 1–4 (2014)
3. Jaber, A., Lazaridis, P., Saeed, B., Zhang, Y., Khan, U., Upton, D., Ahmed, H., Mather, P.,
Vieira, M.F.Q., Atkinson, R., Judd, M., Seviour, R., Glover, I.A.: Frequency spectrum analysis
of radiated partial discharge signals. In: IET EUROEM 2016 Conference (European
Electromagnetics Symposium), London, pp. 1–2 (2016)
4. Reid, A.J., Judd, M.D., Fouracre, R.A., Stewart, B.G., Hepburn, D.M.: Simultaneous
measurement of partial discharges using IEC60270 and radio-frequency techniques. IEEE
Trans. Dielectr. Electr. Insul. 18, 444–455 (2011)
5. Jaber, A., Lazaridis, P., Saeed, B., Zhang, Y., Khan, U., Upton, D., Ahmed, H., Mather, P.,
Vieira, M.F.Q., Atkinson, R., Judd, M., Glover, I.A.: Comparative study of partial discharge
emulators for the calibration of free-space radiometric measurements. In: 22nd IEEE
International Conference on Automation and Computing (ICAC 2016), Colchester, pp. 1–4
(2016)
6. Jaber, A., Lazaridis, P., Saeed, B., Zhang, Y., Khan, U., Upton, D., Ahmed, H., Mather, P.,
Vieira, M.F.Q., Atkinson, R., Judd, M., Glover, I.A.: Comparison of contact measurement
and free-space radiation measurement of partial discharge signals. In: 2015 21st International
Conference on Automation and Computing (ICAC), pp. 1–4. IEEE Press, Glasgow (2015)
7. Jaber, A., Lazaridis, P., Saeed, B., Zhang, Y., Khan, U., Upton, D., Ahmed, H., Mather, P.,
Vieira, M.F.Q., Atkinson, R., Judd, M., Glover, I.A.: Validation of partial discharge emulators
simulation using free-space radiometric measurements. In: International Conference for
Students on Applied Engineering (ICSAE 2016), Newcastle, pp. 1–4 (2016)
8. Hampton, B.F.: UHF diagnostics for gas insulated substations. In: Eleventh International
Symposium on High Voltage Engineering (Conf. Publ. No. 467), London, pp. 6–16 (1999)
9. de Souza Neto, J.M.R., de Macedo, E.C.T., da Rocha Neto, J.S., Da Costa, E.G., Bhatti, S.A.,
Glover, I.A.: Partial discharge location using unsynchronized radiometer network for
condition monitoring in HV substations-a proposed approach. J. Phys. Conf. Ser. 364, 012053
(2012)
10. Niasar, M.G., Taylor, N., Janus, P., Wang, X., Edin, H., Kiiza, R.C.: Partial discharges in a
cavity embedded in oil-impregnated paper: eﬀect of electrical and thermal aging. IEEE Trans.
Dielectr. Electr. Insul. 22, 1071–1079 (2015)
11. HVPD. http://www.hvpd.co.uk
12. Jaber, A., Lazaridis, P., Zhang, Y., Saeed, B., Khan, U., Upton, D., Ahmed, H., Mather, P.,
Vieira, M.F.Q., Atkinson, R., Judd, M., Glover, I.A.: Assessment of absolute partial discharge
intensity from a free-space radiometric measurement. In: URSI Asia-Paciﬁc Radio Science
Conference (URSI AP-RASC), Seoul, Korea, pp. 1011–1014 (2016)
Assessment of Eﬀective Radiated Power
115

Wireless, Computing and Satellite
Systems Security (WCSSS) Special
Session

Experimental Privacy Analysis
and Characterization for Disconnected VANETs
Chibueze P. Anyigor Ogah(B), Haitham Cruickshank, Philip M. Asuquo,
Ao Lei, and Zhili Sun
5G Innovation Centre (5GIC), Institute for Communication Systems,
University of Surrey, PATS Driveway, Guildford, Surrey GU2 7XS, UK
{c.anyigorogah,h.cruickshank,p.asuquo,a.lei,z.sun}@surrey.ac.uk
Abstract. Intelligent Transport Systems (ITS) are special applications
of Vehicular Ad-hoc Networks (VANETs) for road safety and eﬃcient
traﬃc management. A major challenge for ITS and VANETs in all its
ﬂavours is ensuring the privacy of vehicle drivers and the transmitted
location information. One attribute of ITS during its early roll-out stage
especially in rural areas and challenged environments is low vehicle den-
sity and lack of end-to-end connectivity akin to the attribute of Vehicular
Delay Tolerant Networks (VDTNs). This means that contact duration
between network entities such as vehicles and road-side units (RSUs)
are short-lived. Three popular solutions are the use of pseudonyms, mix-
zones, and group communication. Privacy schemes based on the mix-
zone technique abound for more conventional VANETs. A critical privacy
analysis of such scenarios will be key to the design of privacy techniques
for intermittent networks. We are not aware of any work that analyse the
privacy problem in intermittent VANTEs. In this paper, we add our voice
to eﬀorts to characterize the privacy problem in disconnected VANETs.
Keywords: Anonymity · Evaluation · ITS · Privacy · VANETs ·
Vehicular delay tolerant networks · VDTN
1
Introduction
With the application of VANETs for Intelligent Transport Systems (ITS),
enhancing road safety and traﬃc management becomes more eﬀective and cost
eﬃcient. Already, there are a handful of driver-less car projects all over the
world, with examples such as the Google Car project [1]. Self-driving cars have
been tested in Europe when a ﬂeet of trucks made a voyage journey across the
continent from Rotterdam with no incidents [2]. Google Cars are also driving
across California in pilot test-drives on a regular basis with only one incident of
error on the part of the vehicles reported so far. The IEEE deﬁnes ITS as those
systems utilizing synergistic technologies and systems engineering concepts to
develop and improve transportation systems of all kinds. These include appli-
cations that depend on vehicle-to-vehicle (V-to-V) and vehicle-to-infrastructure
c
⃝ICST Institute for Computer Sciences, Social Informatics and Telecommunications Engineering 2017
I. Otung et al. (Eds.): WiSATS 2016, LNICST 186, pp. 119–129, 2017.
DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-53850-1 13

120
C.P.A. Ogah et al.
(V-to-R) communication for road safety and improved traﬃc management [3]. A
variety of ITS exist and have been well researched on. Traditional disconnected
VANETs such as Delay Tolerant Networks (DTNs) do not make use of infrastruc-
ture support such as Road-Side Units (RSUs). However, recent eﬀorts towards
improving reliability and security have inspired the introduction of infrastructure
[4], thereby creating such as ﬂavors as Vehicular Delay Tolerant Networks [5].
Despite its advantages, there is yet no consensus on how to exactly address
the key issues of security and privacy [6]. Privacy issues results from the fact
that a malicious user can intercept the location information contained in safety
messages to track a driver’s location. In reality, tracking a vehicle is as good as
tracking its driver or owner. Again, when these technologies are fully developed,
there will be the problem of inadequate infrastructure to support thousands of
vehicle in both urban and rural areas especially at the early stages of deployment.
Hence, it will not be possible to conduct a thorough roll-out especially in rural
areas due in part to lack of adequate infrastructure. Therefore, performance
evaluation from a pilot-phase study will be compulsory to understand its viability
for large-scale deployment. While a big chunk of the pilot study may concern
bandwidth support for thousands of vehicle, there is also the need to understand
and address security and privacy related issues. The above issues forms the crux
of privacy problems in VANETs. Our focus on this paper is to add our voice
towards characterizing and evaluating privacy in a disconnected VANET. This
is a progressive eﬀort towards proﬀering adequate solutions.
A variety of schemes have been proposed in literature to address pri-
vacy in VANETs. In the United States and Europe for instance, the Dedi-
cated Short Range Communications/Wireless Access in Vehicular Environments
(DSRC/WAVE) speciﬁes the formats of Basic Safety Messages for ITS. Within
the IEEE 802.9 family of standards, the IEEE 1609.2 makes provisions for
location privacy but does not specify its modalities. Three popular Privacy-
Enhancing Techniques (PETs) in VANETs include pseudonymous communica-
tion, mix-zones, and group communication [7–9]. A number of other schemes
exist, most of which are indeed variants of those mentioned here; these include
Silent Periods [10], Virtual Mix-Zones [11], and pseudonym management tech-
niques such as [12]. In this work, we criticize group communication on the basis
that it is diﬃcult to easily to ﬁnd group collaborators especially in light traﬃc
situations such as in rural areas. Again, pseudonym-based privacy schemes espe-
cially in disconnected VANETs have a direct relationship with vehicle density,
traﬃc load and generation, and mobility pattern [11,12]. The peculiar operating
environment of VANETs for ITS especially in its pilot and early deployment
phases can best be described as disconnected, hence even traditional PETs such
as those mentioned above will fail [13]. For the same reasons, conventional mix-
zones techniques are not eﬃcient because they are limited by the number of vehi-
cles that can potentially collaborate for pseudonym change around pseudonym
changing spots [12]. While pseudonym and mix-zone techniques remains one of
the most popular and documented PETs, more eﬀort is needed in ensuring their
eﬀectiveness in disconnected environments. In order not to re-invent the wheel,

Experimental Privacy Analysis and Characterization
121
we leverage these established techniques and rather focus on discussing their
application in disconnected networks.
To this end, we set out to characterize and analyse the privacy behavior in
a disconnected VANETs. Our research here extends our initial idea in [13] for
group-based communication in VDTNs. We characterize the mobility dynamics
in our network and relation to privacy. Our analysis is based on a formal model
and compared with existing literature. The rest of this paper is organized as
follows. We describe our scheme and it’s attributes in Sect. 2. In Sect. 3, we
provide a summary of the problem we set out to solve and outline key deﬁnition
of terms. Our detailed simulation and system analysis is provided in Sect. 4, and
ﬁnally, we conclude and present our future work in Sect. 5.
2
Model Description
In this section, we present a detailed description of our model, assumptions and
the attributes of the adversary.
2.1
Network Model
We consider disconnected VANET deployment in a rural area as described in
[5,14] comprised of mobile vehicles, stationery RSUs, and a central administra-
tive authority known as the Trusted Key Manager (TKM). Our network can
be modelled as a directed multi-graph, G = (V,E) where V and E denote some
ﬂeet of vehicles and contact edges respectively. The RSUs act as stationary relay
nodes that facilitate packet routing in addition to assisting with the security and
privacy administration of the TKM. We only deploy RSUs at strategic locations
which we regard as density zones as in [15].
2.2
Adversary Model
We consider a global passive adversary in our model. The adversary can iso-
late sections of the network and monitor communication and beacon messages
exchanged between vehicles within each density zone to resolve vehicle and driver
identity. We assume that the RSUs are trustworthy and tamper-proof while
the vehicles are not. Hence, the vehicles can deviate in behaviour and act as
adversaries (e.g. by reporting wrong location information). Examples of spe-
ciﬁc location privacy related attacks the adversary can execute include tracking
and packet analysis attacks. To be able to execute packet analysis attacks, the
adversary can delay the message delivery for a considerable amount of time while
analysing it to divulge information regarding source and destination vehicles.
3
Problem Description and Deﬁnition of Terms
Our main objective is to characterize and analyse the privacy problem in our
model in relation to the disconnectedness and mobility pattern of the network.
We deﬁne some terms and describe the privacy problems in the following section.

122
C.P.A. Ogah et al.
3.1
Privacy Analysis
Our analysis is based on Shanon’s information theory. We take into account
the fact that location privacy depends on vehicle density [16]. The relationship
between vehicle density and location privacy is easily understood from the point
of view of changing pseudonyms - higher vehicle density means its a higher
probability for a vehicle to ﬁnd potential pseudonym collaborators. Since our
network is disconnected, the density and mobility pattern of vehicles in the net-
work and around the density zones will be key to how much privacy is achieved.
The following usual deﬁnitions relate to the privacy analysis of our model.
3.1.1
Anonymity, Entropy, Anonymity Set, and Anonymity Duration
Anonymity. The anonymity of a vehicle, Vi ∈V can be deﬁned as a state of
being unidentiﬁable among k-1 other vehicles. Anonymity is usually related to
the unlinkability property. Unlinkability is a term used to describe the notion that
the adversary cannot link the vehicles identity, Vi to two actions say, Actions1
and Actions2 executed at diﬀerent times t1 and t2 in relation the locations l1
and l2 where the actions took place with ease. A typical example of an action
can be a vehicle changing pseudonyms or sending a message. This means that a
vehicle cannot be linked to its identity for a duration of time due to its activity
on the network. The IEEE 1609.2 measures location privacy using anonymity
[17,18].
Anonymity Set. The anonymity set, AS is the average number of vehicles
that are indistinguishable from k-1 other vehicles from the privacy attacker PA’s
point of view. Naturally, it follows that the larger the AS, the better the privacy.
This also means that in a given vehicle traﬃc situation, heavy vehicle traﬃc
situation tend to ensure more privacy due to the number of vehicles participating
in communication and pseudonym change [16,19]. The entire AS in our case
would comprise the set of all V. However, it is not possible to have the entire
vehicle population as the AS since our network is disconnected as we shall explain
later.
Tracking Probability. The tracking probability, Tp of the PA over a vehicle,
Vi, is the probability that the anonymity of a vehicle in a density zone is equal
to 1. The tracking probability, Tp can be derived as follows, suppose we have
DZ = {Z1, Z2, Z3, . . . Zn} density zones, where a vehicle Vi is located in a zone
Zi during a short duration of time, t = IA where IA is the anonymity duration
(described later), then the probability of tracking by the adversary within zone
Di can be expressed as
Tp = Pr(|AS| = 1)
(1)
In practical terms, from the PA’s point of view, this means that a vehicle has no
anonymity when the system has |AS| = 1. Similarly, the composite anonymity

Experimental Privacy Analysis and Characterization
123
of the vehicles within a zone can be calculated by the number of vehicles that
meets the |AS| = 1 criteria. A density zone where 30% of the vehicles have an
|AS| = 1 (i.e. Tp = 0.30) can be said to guarantee an anonymity of 70% (i.e. 1 -
Tp = 0.70 cannot be tracked).
Entropy. Although entropy generally means the degree of disorderliness of a
system as deﬁned in set theory. In the context of location privacy, it is a measure
of anonymity according to Shanon’s theory of information. Shanon’s theory have
been widely used in the evaluation of location privacy for vehicular networks. The
uncertainty in the connection rate, the random mobility and unpredictability of
our system allows us to model entropy based on Shanon’s equation as [20] as
follows. Let V be a discrete random variable, which is the number of vehicles,
with a probability mass function P(V = Vi) where i = {1, 2, . . . , n}, then the
entropy HV of the AS can be expressed as below where pi is the probability
of each vehicle being the target of the adversary, where N represents the total
number of observed vehicles by the adversary.
HV = −
N

i=1
pi log2 pi.
(2)
Usually, the value of entropy can be normalized to have values with the
domain of [0, 1]. This makes it possible to compare the entropy value with the
maximum entropy of the system which is the uppermost limit of of HV as follows
Hmax = −
N

i=1
pi log2 pi = log2 |N|
if ∀i : pi =
1
|N|
(3)
The degree of anonymity is then
dA =
HV
Hmax
(4)
Anonymity Duration. In characterizing the anonymity of our system, we
derive the anonymity duration, IA as the time taken by a vehicle Vi to negotiate
and change pseudonyms within a zone, Zi. Note that our system is disconnected,
hence we can only eﬀectively evaluate the activity around each mix-zone in
isolation. For this reason, we assume that the PA is running some tracking
algorithm with which it tries identify target vehicles by matching their identities
with diﬀerent probability values.
There is an RSU located at every point-of-interest (PoI) location in our simu-
lation area which are indeed the density zones described earlier. The connection
rate is assumed to follow a Poisson process as in [12,15]. Let T= IA be the
average time interval within which the RSU records vehicles connection activ-
ities to it. Again, let V be a random variable which is the number of vehicles
that come in contact with RSUi at density zone Zi during IA (i.e. during T),

124
C.P.A. Ogah et al.
V being the AS. Finally, let the inter-arrival time between connections have an
exponential distribution with a mean value of 1/λ. The anonymity interval is the
time duration within which vehicles try to change pseudonym. It is also during
this time that the PA monitors vehicles for tracking and possible identiﬁcation.
For a disconnected network, this time is not continuous but can be measured
in snapshots of minutes or a few hours. Indeed, we regard (T as the anonymity
interval IA deﬁned earlier), then the probability that (V = Vi) at (T = IA) can
be expressed as the Poisson process in (5).
P(V = vi|T = TA) = (λt)vi
vi!
e−λt
(5)
The adversary’s intention is to identify a target after pseudonym change in
the mix-zone within the anonymity duration, IA. However, not all vehicles within
a density zone can successfully change pseudonyms. This can be attributed to
such vehicles not being qualiﬁed enough to be considered pseudonym change
candidates by other vehicles due to poor reputation records. Hence, we can
deﬁne the expected anonymity set of vehicles, VE as
PEx(VE = Vi|T = IA) =
∞

i=1
vi
(λIA)vi
vi!
e−λIA = λIA
(6)
VE is essentially, the average number of vehicles expected to connect and dis-
connect with the RSU during IA can be expressed as
EX(V |T = IA) =
∞

i=1
vi
(λIA)vi
vi!
e−λIA = λIA
(7)
4
Simulation and Anonymity Analysis
In this section, we describe our experiments and conduct performance evaluation
of our scheme to understand its eﬀectiveness. Our analytical model is supported
by simulation results.
4.1
Simulation Setup
We implement our scheme using a popular and widely used network simulator
for delay tolerant networks namely the Opportunistic Networking Environment
(ONE) simulator [21]. The ONE simulator has been used to investigate several
application scenarios for VANETs [5,22]. We evaluate the performance of our
system under a speciﬁc use case of an intermittent/disconnected VANET. Our
simulation runs involves 400 vehicles and 7 stationary relay nodes as RSUs.
Table 1 presents a detailed summary of our key simulation parameters. The
vehicles move on the map of the City of Helsinki which is the default map in
the ONE simulator measuring 4500 × 3400 m2. The RSUs are placed at chosen
intersections which are the epicentres of density zones as shown in Fig. 1.

Experimental Privacy Analysis and Characterization
125
Fig. 1. Snapshot of the Helsinki city map
In accordance with Finnish traﬃc regulations, the average lower and upper
speed bounds for vehicles is 30 to 60 kmh−1. We set all vehicles in our experi-
ments to drive at the uniform upper bound limit of 60 kmh−1 to ensure a uniform
arrival rate at the density zones. Since vehicles usually follow deﬁned routes in
the form of roads, our model assumes each vehicle follows the shortest path map-
based movement mobility model where vehicles are ﬁrst situated randomly on
diﬀerent spots on road and then allowed to travel along predeﬁned routes to their
destinations. Diﬀerent from our benchmark model, we deployed 400 vehicles and
ran an extended simulation of 1 and 2 h respectively for values of the IA. This is
due to nature of our disconnected network environment that requires adequate
number of vehicles to generate the desired statistics for analysis. We conduct our
experiment only on top of the inbuilt PRoPHET routing protocol in the ONE
simulator [23].
Table 1. Simulation settings
Simulation parameter
Settings/Description
Sim duration
1 & 2 h
Number of vehicles and RSUs 400 vehicles; 7 RSUs
Vehicle speed
30 kmh−1 – 60 kmh−1
Transmission coverage
100 m
Mobility model
Shortest path map based movement
Packet size
500 k – 1 M
Message generation interval
25 s – 35 s

126
C.P.A. Ogah et al.
4.2
Analysis and Evaluation
The results from our experiments (marked Sim) are compared with our analytical
model (marked Theory) as shown in Fig. 2 for diﬀerent values of vehicle arrival
rate, λ. We assumed a vehicle arrival of 5 vehicles per second up to 25 vehicles
(i.e. 1/λ = {5, 10, 15, 20, and 25} with an increment of 5 and IA = 3600
(1 h) and 7200 (2 h) seconds. In both Figs. 2a and b, we observe that the AS
gradually depreciates as the vehicle arrival rate increases for both IA values.
This is because less frequent arrival rates means that fewer vehicles arrive at a
density zone. The behavior of the graph also corroborates with the known fact
that in reality, vehicles can avoid density certain zones that are notorious for low
vehicular density since they have less chances of meeting pseudonym candidates
in such zones compared to those known for more vehicular density. Again, we
see that the values of the AS for IA = 7200 is higher than that for IA = 3600
which is in agreement the fact that the higher the vehicle density in a network,
the higher the achievable privacy, and by extension the more chances of vehicles
ﬁnding pseudonym change partners in a network. According to the work in [12],
vehicles wishing to enjoy high privacy should take advantage of density zones
that are notorious for high vehicle arrival rate and density to negotiate and
change pseudonyms.
From existing literature, it is established that the distribution of the AS has
a direct ratio to the IA. Hence The decrease in the AS reﬂects the nature of
our network where vehicles have temporary and intermittent connections. When
compared to our baseline model [12,15] where the authors analysed pseudonym
change at a small social spot, our analysis agrees with their model. A small social
are temporary meeting points such as traﬃc intersections as against large social
spots such as parking lots and shopping where vehicles meet for a longer duration
of time running into hours. Note that the anonymity is based on the premise
that connections can be sustained for the duration of IA, hence the 40 s duration
yields better values for the AS. This supports the notion that larger vehicle
density due to a more frequent arrival rate favours a better anonymity where
(a) IA = 3600 seconds
(b) IA = 7200 seconds
Fig. 2. Anonymity analysis for diﬀerent anonymity intervals IA

Experimental Privacy Analysis and Characterization
127
vehicles encounter more potential candidates with which to change pseudonyms
at a density zone. Less frequent arrival rates means that fewer vehicles choose
to use a density as pseudonym change points.
The use of live traﬃc information from navigation platforms such as Google
Map for travel route planning is quite popular these days through which vehicle
drivers can avoid certain routes based on the estimated traﬃc delay. Again, this
suggests that higher arrival rate and more waiting time yields less anonymity. As
we can see from both ﬁgures of the anonymity curve, the simulation results agree
with previous work where longer (infrequent) arrival rates reduces the number
of vehicles that aggregate at a zone. This leads to a situation where vehicles are
discouraged from using a density that is prone to low vehicle density.
5
Conclusion and Future Work
In this paper, we added our voice to eﬀorts to characterize and analyse privacy for
a disconnected VANET using the use-case of a ventricular delay tolerant network.
Our analysis follows established schemes for anonymity analysis in VANETs with
varying vehicular density. We validate our analytical model with experimental
results. Diﬀerent from other schemes, to the best of our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst
attempt to analyse the privacy in a disconnected VANET. We note that our work
is in progress, albeit has provided a new scope for further research in this area.
In the light of this, in our future work, we are interested in developing a scheme
to validate and analyse the anonymity of vehicles users using empirical data
to compare with our experimental results. We also intend to develop a privacy
solution more suited for disconnected network environments. Our experiments
can also be performed on more robust and heterogeneous mobility scenarios such
as those combining vehicles and pedestrians.
Acknowledgement. The funding for this work is from the Overseas Scholarship
Scheme (OSS) of the Petroleum Technology Development Fund (PTDF) of the Federal
Government of Nigeria with support from the PETRAS Project (in conjunction with
IoTUK) and the Institute for Communication Systems, home of The 5G Innovation
Center (5GIC), University of Surrey, Guildford, United Kingdom.
References
1. Greenblatt, N.A.: Self-driving cars and the law. IEEE Spectr. 53(2), 46–51 (2016)
2. Ryan, P.: The driverless truck is coming, and its going to automate mil-
lions of jobs (2016). https://techcrunch.com/2016/04/25/the-driverless-truck-is-
coming-and-its-going-to-automate-millions-of-jobs/
3. Raya, M., Papadimitratos, P., Hubaux, J.-P.: Securing vehicular communications.
IEEE Wirel. Commun. Mag. 13, 8–15 (2006). Special Issue on Inter-Vehicular
Communications
4. Banerjee, N., Corner, M.D., Towsley, D., Levine, B.N.: Relays, base stations,
and meshes: enhancing mobile networks with infrastructure. In: Proceedings of
the 14th ACM International Conference on Mobile Computing and Networking,
San Francisco, California, USA, pp. 81–91. ACM, New York (2008)

128
C.P.A. Ogah et al.
5. Pereira, P.R., Casaca, A., Rodrigues, J.J.P.C., Soares, V.N.G.J., Triay, J., Cervello-
Pastor, C.: From delay-tolerant networks to vehicular delay-tolerant networks.
IEEE Commun. Surv. Tutorials 14(4), 1166–1182 (2012). IEEE Press, New York
6. Mohamed, N.M., Jalel, B.-O., Mohamed, H.: Survey on VANET security challenges
and possible cryptographic solutions. Veh. Commun. 1(2), 53–66 (2014)
7. Freudiger, J., Raya, M., F´elegyh´azi, M., Papadimitratos, P.: Mix-Zones for location
privacy in vehicular networks. In: Proceedings of the First International Workshop
on Wireless Networking for Intelligent Transportation Systems (Win-ITS) (2007)
8. Verma, M., Dijiang, H.: SeGCom: secure group communication in VANETs.
In: 6th IEEE Consumer Communications and Networking Conference (CCNC),
pp. 1–5 (2009)
9. Beresford, A.R., Stajano, F.: Location privacy in pervasive computing. IEEE Per-
vasive Comput. 2(1), 46–55 (2003). IEEE Educational Activities Department,
Piscataway, NJ, USA, ISSN: 1536-1268
10. Leping, H., Matsuura, K., Yamane, H., Sezaki, K.: Enhancing wireless location
privacy using silent period. In: IEEE Wireless Communications and Networking
Conference (WCNC), vol. 2, pp. 1187–1192 (2005). ISSN: 1525-3511
11. Suguo, D., Haojin, Z., Xiaolong, L., Ota, K., Mianxiong, D.: MixZone in motion:
achieving dynamically cooperative location privacy protection in delay-tolerant
networks. IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol. 62(9), 4565–4575 (2013). ISSN
12. Rongxing, L., Xiaodong, L., Luan, T.H., Xiaohui, L., Xuemin, S.: Pseudonym
changing at social spots an eﬀective strategy for location privacy in VANETs.
IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol. 61(1), 86–96 (2012). ISSN: 0018-9545
13. Chibueze, P.A.O., Haitham, C., Zhili, G., Ganesh, C., Yue, C., Philip, M.A.,
Masoud, A.T.: Privacy-enhanced group communication for vehicular delay tolerant
networks. In: 9th International Conference on Next Generation Mobile Applica-
tions, Services and Technologies (NGMAST), pp. 193–198 (2015)
14. Soares, V.N.G.J., Farahmand, F., Rodrigues, J.J.P.C.: A layered architecture for
vehicular delay-tolerant networks. In: IEEE Symposium on Computers and Com-
munications (ISCC), pp. 122–127 (2009)
15. Rongxing, L., Xiaodong, L., Luan, T.H., Xiaohui, L., Xuemin, S.: Anonymity analy-
sis on social spot based pseudonym changing for location privacy in VANETs. In:
IEEE International Conference on Communications (ICC), pp. 1–5 (2011). ISSN:
1550-3607
16. Tomandl, A., Scheuer, F., Federrath, H.: Simulation-based evaluation of techniques
for privacy protection in VANETs. In: IEEE 8th International Conference on Wire-
less and Mobile Computing, Networking and Communications (WiMob), pp. 165–
172 (2012). ISSN: 2160-4886
17. George, P.C., Huirong, F., Abdelnasser, B.: Evaluating location privacy in vehicular
communications and applications. IEEE Trans. Intel. Transp. Syst. 9(17) (2016).
ISSN: 2658-2667
18. IEEE Standard for Wireless Access in Vehicular Environments Security Services
for Applications, Management Messages. In: IEEE Std 1609.2-2013 (Revision of
IEEE Std 1609.2-2006), pp. 1–289 (2013)
19. Hassan, A., Noor, A.: A pseudonym management system to achieve anonymity in
vehicular ad hoc networks. IEEE Trans. Dependable Secure Comput. 13, 106–119
(2016). ISSN: 1545-5971
20. Claude, E.S.: A mathematical theory of communication. Bell Syst. Tech. J. 27(3),
379–423 (1948). ISSN: 0005-8580

Experimental Privacy Analysis and Characterization
129
21. Ari, K., J¨org, O., Teemu, K.: The ONE simulator for DTN protocol evaluation. In:
SIMUTools 2009: Proceedings of the 2nd International Conference on Simulation
Tools and Techniques, New York, NY, USA. ICST, Rome (2009). ISBN: 978-963-
9799-45-5
22. Rongxing, L., Xiaodong, L., Xuemin, S.: SPRING: A social-based privacy-
preserving packet forwarding protocol for vehicular delay tolerant networks. In:
Proceedings of the 29th Conference on Information Communications, pp. 1–9
(2010). ISSN: 0743-166X
23. Lindgren, A., Doria, A., Schel´en, O.: Probabilistic routing in intermittently con-
nected networks. SIGMOBILE Mob. Comput. Commun. Rev. 7(3), 19–20 (2003).
New York, USA, ISSN: 1559-1662

A Mobility-Aware Trust Management Scheme
for Emergency Communication Networks
Using DTN
Philip Asuquo1,2(B), Haitham Cruickshank1,2, Chibueze P. Anyigor Ogah1,2,
Ao Lei1,2, and Kunle Olutomilayo1,2
1 5G Innovation Centre, Institute for Communication Systems,
University of Surrey, Guildford, UK
p.asuquo@surrey.ac.uk
2 Department of Electrical/Electronics and Computer Engineering,
University of Uyo, Akwa Ibom, Nigeria
Abstract. In the aftermath of a disaster, collecting and disseminat-
ing critical information is very challenging. The damage to telecommu-
nication infrastructures makes its extremely diﬃcult to have an eﬀec-
tive recovery and relief operation. In this paper, we consider the use
of DTN as an alternative measure to temporarily disseminate emer-
gency information in a post disaster scenario using the Post Disaster
Model recommended by IETF. We consider internally motivated attacks
where responder nodes are compromised thereby dropping packets for-
warded to them. We design a Mobility-Aware Trust Management Scheme
(MATMS) to mitigate this routing misbehaviour. We evaluate our pro-
posed scheme through extensive simulations and compare our results
with existing benchmarks schemes. Our results show that the use of
adequate collaborative strategies can improve the performance of DTNs
under attack taking into consideration the delivery probability and mes-
sage delay from source node to the destination node.
Keywords: Disaster · Trust · Subjective logic · DTN
1
Introduction
Public safety organizations increasingly rely on wireless technology to provide
eﬀective communications during emergency operations such as earthquake relief,
ﬁre rescue or traﬃc accidents [1]. This natural or man-made disaster demands
an eﬃcient communication and coordination among ﬁrst responders to save lives
and other community resources which requires the generation and exchange of
current information among ﬁrst responders and emergency management cen-
tres in real time for making life saving decisions. Traditional communication
infrastructures such as landlines or cellular networks are damaged and do not
provide adequate services to support ﬁrst responders for exchanging emergency
c
⃝ICST Institute for Computer Sciences, Social Informatics and Telecommunications Engineering 2017
I. Otung et al. (Eds.): WiSATS 2016, LNICST 186, pp. 130–141, 2017.
DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-53850-1 14

Trust Mangement
131
related information during large scale disaster scenarios such as earthquakes
[2]. Certain factors such as power outages and infrastructure collapse can aﬀect
emergency communications. Power outage has been pointed out as a common-
place consequence during and after disaster which often result in the inability
to use communication systems. In RFC 7476 −2.72 [3], the disaster rescue and
relief operation is clearly described under baseline scenarios for Information-
Centric Networks. Apart from emergency scenarios, DTN has a wide range of
applications including Inter-Planetary Network (IPN), Pocket Switched Net-
works (PSN), Under Water Networks (UWN), Vehicular Ad-hoc Networks now
known as Intelligent Transportation System (ITS) [4].
Previous works done using DTNs show that when there is a breakdown in
communication infrastructure, DTN can provide an alternative solution for emer-
gency communication. A disaster map generator DTN-MapEx which operates
over a DTN with emergency responders and other emergency site actors carrying
mobile devices has been shown to eﬀectively enable information availability in
disaster stricken areas [5]. Another strategy which uses distributed computing
over DTN has been proposed. This strategy uses a task algorithm technique
which is based on diﬀerent connectivity scenarios where nodes collaborate for
task allocation and task monitoring functions [6]. Similar to the approach by [6],
a decision method using a DTN-based message relay has been proposed by [7] for
disaster scenarios with unreliable wireless communication links. This technique
is based on the relay sequence and has been shown to reduce redundant transmis-
sion and increase the delivery probability of emergency information propagated
in DTN-based emergency communication network. The remainder of this work
is organised as follows. In Sect. 2, we provide a background and related work
on various mitigating schemes for routing misbehaviour in DTN. We present
our proposed model in Sect. 3 and evaluate the performance of our proposed
scheme compared to other existing schemes in Sect. 4. We conclude the paper
and present our future work in Sect. 5.
2
Related Work
There has been a lot of trust management schemes proposed for peer-to-peer and
ad hoc networks including [8–11]. A few authors [12–14], have proposed trust
and reputation models to enhance security in DTNs to enable nodes to assess
their neighbours directly and indirectly through recommendations from other
nodes.
A Cooperative Watchdog Scheme (CWS) proposed by [12] for VDTNs assigns
a reputation score to each node in the network. When a node comes in contact
with another node based on the evaluation of three modules (classiﬁcation, neigh-
bour’s evaluation and decision), the classiﬁcation module categorises the nodes
into diﬀerent groups based on their reputation score and calculates the cooper-
ative value of each node. The cooperative value is sent to decision module for
punishment or reward while the neighbour’s evaluation module determines how
the reputation of a node is evaluated on the network.

132
P. Asuquo et al.
A dynamic trust management for DTN is proposed by [13] to deal with black-
hole attacks. This protocol uses a novel methodology based on Stochastic Petri
Net (SPN) for the analysis and validation of trust protocol. The authors aim at
designing and validating a dynamic trust management protocol to optimise the
routing performance of DTN. In a comparative analysis with PROPHET, Epi-
demic and Bayesian trust-based routing, their simulation results show that the
dynamic trust management protocol outperforms Bayesian trust based routing
and PROPHET routing protocols without incurring a high message overhead.
As pointed out in a comprehensive survey [15] that trust metrics must reﬂect
unique properties of trust for building trust management systems, the proposed
scheme uses a synthetic model which does not reﬂect mission context scenarios
which are typical applications of DTNs.
A probabilistic misbehaviour detection scheme [14] is proposed to establish
trust in DTNs which is inspired by the inspection game in [16]. In this scheme,
a misbehaviour detection framework is used based on series of newly introduced
data forwarding evidences called iTrust to establish trust management in DTN,
simulation results from this research work shows that iTrust reduces the trans-
mission cost that is incurred by the misbehaviour detection scheme and eﬀec-
tively detects the malicious nodes in single and multi-copy routing protocols in
DTN. The proposed scheme is a reputation-based detection technique, however
authors have not compared the proposed scheme with any existing detection
scheme and the performance metrics does not reﬂect if the scheme has improved
delivery probability in the network.
A novel approach in opportunistic data forwarding proposed by [17] uses
encounter tickets which are generated when two nodes come in contact. How-
ever, malicious nodes can still boost its time of interaction through collecting
redundant encounter tickets from a one-time tailgate attack. In such attacks,
malicious nodes tailgate the destination once and move around the data source
to intercept the data. Encounter tickets that are redundant with similar gener-
ation time can be removed by this approach, there is a risk of uncertainty in
a non-controlled mobility pattern as an adversary can perform a non location-
dependent attack where it frequently moves in and out of communication range
to collect encounter records that are not redundant and wanders around the
destination node to intercept data by multi-tailgating.
3
Proposed Trust Management Scheme
In this section, we describe the network deployment of an intermittently con-
nected network with no end-to-end connectivity using a DTN scenario, we
assume the DTN Gateway provides communication support via a geo-stationary
satellite that connects to a ground station as shown in Fig. 1. We also describe
the behaviour of normal nodes and misbehaving nodes.

Trust Mangement
133
3.1
System Model
In this paper, we adopt a system model proposed by [2] which is a commu-
nity based mobilty model for Post Disaster Scenarios recommended by IETF
for ICN baseline scenarios for disaster recovery operations [18] and the Work-
ing Day Map-Based Movement model which captures reliably the properties
of movement in the real life scenarios [19]. We consider a DTN deployed in
mission context scenario as shown in Fig. 1. We assume that the DTN consist
of a group of nodes deployed in an open and hostile environment such as the
Great East Earthquake where over 375 base stations were destroyed, over 90
routes were disconnected from the relay transmission lines and the traditional
telecommunication services were unavailable [20,21]. In our scenario, we con-
sider a community of interest where there is a DTN with several wireless devices
(i.e. nodes) moving in a community which are either held by people or ﬁxed on
vehicles. To protect a network from a wide range of attacks, traditional security
mechanisms are not robust enough especially with networks that lack end-to-end
connectivity and a pre-deﬁned network architecture. In DTNs, malicious nodes
aim to break routing capabilities in addition to dropping packets and exhibiting
selﬁsh behaviours. A malicious node can be an internal attacker with the aim of
disrupting the operation of a mission such as disaster recovery operations and
in tactical warfare operations. In addition to packet dropping attacks (blackhole
and grayhole), other related attacks that can be performed by malicious nodes in
a DTN environment include location-dependent attacks, time-dependent attacks
as well as ballot- stuﬃng and bad-mouthing attacks.
Fig. 1. An emergency communication network
3.2
Trust Computation
The trust computation is based on the history of encounters known as the
Encounter Record (ER). Suppose two nodes i and j come in contact with
each other, ER generated by node i about node j is denoted by ERi→j =
(ER1, ER2, .....ERn) where ER1 is a single interaction record with node j. We

134
P. Asuquo et al.
describe how trust can be derived with the belief of subjective logic which uses
opinion as a belief metric.
Subjective logic is suitable for the analysis of trust networks as trust rela-
tionships can be expressed as opinions with degrees of uncertainties to monitor
the behaviour of responder nodes. To establish trust using subjective logic, we
express binomial opinions as trust T = (B, D, U) where B,D and U represent
belief, disbelief and uncertainty. With accumulated forwarding evidences from
encounter records, malicious nodes may provide computed trust values that does
not reﬂect the node’s behaviour if each record is treated equally regardless of
the time of encounter. We express the probability density over binary event as a
Beta Probability Density Function (PDF) denoted by (α, β) which is expressed
as:
α = s + 2a
and
β = f + 2(1 −a)
(1)
where s and f represent positive and negative observations and a is the relative
atomicity. We adopt [22] to bijectively map between the opinion parameters and
the beta PDF given in (2)
⎧
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎩
B =
s
s+f+2
D =
f
s+f+2
U =
2
s+f+2
⇐⇒
⎧
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎩
s = 2B
U
f = 2D
U
1 = B + D + U
(2)
Transitivity is used to compute trust along a chain of trust edges, for example
two nodes i and j where i’s trust towards j is denoted by Tij for evaluating the
trust worthiness of k as shown in Fig. 2. Node j has a direct trust in k which
is denoted by Tjk, node i can derive its trust in k by discounting j’s trust in k
which is expressed as
Tij→k = Tij ⊕Tjk
(3)
where
Tij ⊕Tjk =
⎧
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎩
Bij→k = BijBjk
Dij→k = DijDjk
Uij→k = Dij + Uij + BijUjk
The belief discounting approach does not detect misbehaving nodes eﬀec-
tively, the eﬀect of transitivity is a general increase in the number of uncertainty
and not necessarily an increase in disbelief. We adopt the cumulative fusion which
is equivalent to Bayesian updating in statistics which reﬂects conﬂicting opinions
in an equal and fair strategy. Let Tik and Tjk be node i and j’s trust in k respec-
tively. The fused trust between Tik = [Bik, DikUik] and Tjk = [Bjk, Djk, Ujk]
can be expressed as:
Tij→k = Tik ⊕Tjk
(4)

Trust Mangement
135
Fig. 2. An emergency communication network
where
Bij→k =
(BikUjk + BjkUik)
(Uik + Ujk −UikUjk)
Dij→k =
(DikUjk + BjkUik)
(Uik + Ujk −UikUjk)
Uik→k =
(UikUjk
(Uik + Ujk −UikUjk)
(5)
Here we express the trust value as subjective opinions instead of using one inte-
grated trust value to depict the overall trustworthiness of a node which includes
the recommended trust as described in [17]. The generated trust opinions are
stored locally in the buﬀer. Upon an encounter, a node generates its trust opin-
ion about an encountered node based on the cumulative ﬁssion. The gener-
ated trust opinions are combined trust opinions at diﬀerent time intervals, for
instance for every encounter ER1, ER2, ER3....ERn node i generates trust met-
ric at T t1
ij , T t2
ij , T t3
ij , T tn
ij about node j so that at t1, t2, t3...tn, the opinions are
stored as;
Tij = T △t
ij
= T t1,t2,t3...tn
ij
(6)
3.3
Trust in Mobility Aware Scenario
In a Post disaster response scenario, rescue workers are the main moving agents
as well as the vehicles running between centres and camps for transportation
of supplies or evacuation of victims from incident area to the temporary care
centre or casualty collection point as described by [2,23,24]. We establish a trust
transitive path with the mobility pattern undertaken by emergency responders
and data mules such as centre to centre, centre to events, convergence move and
the cyclic route as explained in [2] in form of trust arcs from the ERs generated.
In RFC 4838 [25], a DTN network is described abstractly as a multi-graph
where vertices may be connected to more than one edge. Although these edges
are time varying with respect to their delay and buﬀer space, we introduce an

136
P. Asuquo et al.
edge splitting approach so that each node is connected to an independent edge.
From Fig. 2, if node i wants to send a message to node l, we use edge splitting
as opinion splitting to apply subjective logic. We express Til as;
Til = [i, l] = ([i, j] : [j, l])
= ([i, k] : [k, l])
= ([i, j] : [j, k] : [k, l])
(7)
To produce independent paths by edge splitting in 7, we express Til as;
Til = [i, l] = ([i, j1] : [j1, l])
= ([i, k1] : [k1, l])
= ([i, j2] : [j2, k2] : [k2, l])
(8)
We use edge splitting to produce independent paths so that each opinion can
be expressed exclusively as shown in 8 which can be used further to derive the
uncertainty for the independent paths as;
Uij1 →l = Bij1Uj1l + Dij1 + Uij1
Uik1 →l = Bik1Uk1l + Dik1 + Uik1
Uij2k2 →l = Bij2Dj2k2 + Dij2 + Uij2 + Bij2Uj2l + Bij2Bj2k2Uk2l
(9)
We refer readers to the early works of [22] on ﬁssion of opinion where an opinion
can be bijectively mapped into probability density function and used as a func-
tion of the ﬁssion factor φ. This enables the trust transitivity to be computed
as two simpliﬁed graphs as shown in 10:
Til = (Tij ⊗Tjl) ⊕(Tik ⊗Tkl)
= Tij ⊗Tjk ⊗Tkl
(10)
Given the ERs from historical opinion of node i about l, the base rate which is
the relative atomicity a can be expressed as
Til = b‵
il + aU ‵
il
(11)
where T ‵
il, b‵
il and U ‵
il represent the independent path produced by opinion
splitting.
4
Performance Evaluation
To demonstrate the performance of DTN in a disaster scenario, we implemented
our scheme on the Post Disaster Mobility model proposed by Uddin et al. [2]
using the ONE simulator which is speciﬁcally developed for evaluating DTN

Trust Mangement
137
application protocols and routing [26]. In our experimental methodology, we
consider 4 neighbourhoods, 2 main centres, 10 relief and evacuation camps, 20
supply vehicles, 200 rescue workers, 10 police patrol and 20 emergency vehi-
cles. The communication messages have an average of 500 KB to 2 MB and are
generated every 2 min. For our scheme, we use a message delivery time-out of
360 min with each node having a buﬀer size of 50 MB. Given the same simulation
time and ﬁxed message generation rate, the total messages created remains the
same for all experiments. In our scenario, Malicious responders launch black hole
attacks randomly by intercepting data from other nodes and dropping them.
4.1
Performance Metrics
1. Delivery Probability: This is the ratio of the total number of delivered mes-
sages to the total number of messages created.
DP = MD
MC
(12)
where DP is the delivery probability, MD is the total number of messages
delivered and MC is the total number of created messages.
2. Latency: This is the average delivery delay which is measured as the average
period of time that a message needs to travel from the source node to the
destination node.
L =
MD
i=1(TMn −TCi)
MD
(13)
In the equation above, TMn is the time when the message reached its ﬁnal
destination node n, TCi is the time when the message was created by the
source node i and MD is the total number of messages delivered.
4.2
Result Analysis
Impact of Blackhole Attacks on Message Delivery: To evaluate the eﬃciency of
our proposed trust-based scheme, we compare its performance with MaxProp,
Spray-and-Wait and Prophet schemes with respect to the delivery probability and
message delay from source node to the destination. We analyse the impacts of
the blackhole attacks by evaluating the percentage of the delivered messages in
the diﬀerent mobility patterns including the Responder-Centre movement (R-C),
Centre-Centre movement(C-C) which is mainly made up of movement of rescue
vehicles and police patrol, Responder-Responder movement (R-R). The MATMS
proposed reduces the negative impact of malicious nodes and performs better than
other benchmark schemes as shown in Fig. 3(a), (b) and (c). It can also be seen
that in our worst case scenario with 50% of malicious responders, MATMS out-
performs the other schemes considered in the evaluation.

138
P. Asuquo et al.
(a) Delivery Probability R-C
(b) Delivery Probability C-C
(c) Delivery Probability R-R
Fig. 3. Delivery Probability for movement models under blackhole attack in PDM
Impact of Blackhole Attacks on Message Delay: In Fig. 4(a), (b) and (c), we
compare the delay in message delivery of our proposed scheme with existing
benchmark schemes. In evaluating the message delivery delay, our results show
that MATMS reduces delivery delay as result of the mobility pattern of the nodes
which enables them to have more inter-contact times in the movement models.
Since nodes consider the reputation value of encountered nodes to relay packets,
only nodes with reputation values above the predeﬁned threshold are considered
cooperative nodes hence packets are forwarded to them. In our future work, we
will carry out a performance comparison on subjective logic and beta distribution
under best trust formation and evaluate their impact on power consumption of
responder nodes.

Trust Mangement
139
(a) Delivery Delay R-C
(b) Delivery Delay C-C
(c) Delivery Delay R-R
Fig. 4. Delivery Delay for movement models under blackhole attack in PDM
5
Conclusion
In this work, we have proposed the use of a mobility-aware trust management
scheme for disaster scenarios. Simulation results show that our proposed scheme
can mitigate routing misbehaviour such as packet dropping. We investigated the
use of DTN in disaster relief operations using the PDM model recommended
by IETF (RFC 7476) for baseline scenarios on disaster recovery and emergency
support. We evaluated existing benchmark routing schemes together with our
proposed scheme under blackhole attacks. Our results show that our proposed
scheme can mitigate blackhole attacks when compared to the other schemes
considered in this analysis.
References
1. Han, B., Li, J., Su, J., Cao, J.: Self-supported cooperative networking for emergency
services in multi-hop wireless networks. IEEE J. Selected Areas Commun. 30(2),
450–457 (2012)

140
P. Asuquo et al.
2. Uddin, M.Y.S., Nicol, D.M., Abdelzaher, T.F., Kravets, R.H.: Simulation Confer-
ence (WSC). In: Proceedings of the 2009 Winter, pp. 2785–2796 (2009)
3. Davies, E., Tyson, G., Ohlman, B., Eum, S., Molinaro, A., Corujo, D., Pentikousis,
K., Boggia, G.: Information-centric Networking Baseline Scenarios, IETF, RFC
7476 (2015)
4. Asuquo, P., Cruickshank, H., Ogah, C.P.A., Lei, A., Sun, Z.: A Collaborative trust
management scheme for emergency communication using delay tolerant networks.
In: 8th Advanced Satellite Multimedia Systems Conference and the 14th Signal
Processing for Space Communications Workshop (ASMS/SPSC), pp. 1–6, Sep-
tember 2016
5. Trono, E.M., Arakawa, Y., Tamai, M., Yasumoto, K.: DTN MapEx: disaster area
mapping through distributed computing over a Delay Tolerant Network, In: Eighth
International Conference on Mobile Computing and Ubiquitous Networking ICMU,
pp. 179–184 (2015)
6. Shi, C., Lakafosis, V., Ammar, M.H., Zegura, E.W.: Serendipity: enabling remote
computing among intermittently connected mobile devices. In: Proceedings of the
Thirteenth ACM International Symposium on Mobile Ad-Hoc Networking and
Computing MobiHoc 2012, pp. 145–154, New York (2012)
7. Kawamoto, M., Shigeyasu, T.: Message relay decision algorithm to improve mes-
sage delivery ratio in DTN-based wireless disaster information systems. In: IEEE
29th International Conference on Advanced Information Networking and Applica-
tions (AINA), pp. 822–828 (2015)
8. Shabut, A.M., Dahal, K.P., Bista, S.K., Awan, I.U.: Recommendation based trust
model with an eﬀective defence scheme for MANETs. IEEE Trans. Mobile Comput.
14, 2101–2115 (2015). doi:10.1109/TMC.2014.2374154. ISSN 1536-1233
9. Wang, K., Wu, M.: Cooperative communications based on trust model for mobile
ad hoc networks. IET Inf. Secur. 4(2), 68–79 (2010). doi:10.1049/iet-ifs.2009.0056.
ISSN 1751-8709
10. Chatterjee, P., Ghosh, U., Sengupta, I., Ghosh, I.S.K.: Approach for modelling
trust in cluster-based wireless ad hoc networks. IET Networks 3(3), 187–192 (2014).
doi:10.1049/iet-net.2012.0212. ISSN 2047-4954
11. Can, A.B., Bhargava, B.: SORT: a self-organizing trust model for peer-to-peer
systems. IEEE Trans. Dependable Secure Comput. 10(1), 14–27 (2013). doi:10.
1109/TDSC.2012.74. ISSN 1545-5971
12. Dias, J., Rodrigues, J., Mavromoustakis, C., Xia, F.: A cooperative watchdog sys-
tem to detect misbehavior nodes in vehicular delay-tolerant networks. IEEE Trans.
Ind. Electron. PP(99), 1 (2015)
13. Chen, I., Bao, F., Chang, M., Cho, J.: Dynamic trust management for delay tolerant
networks and its application to secure routing. IEEE Trans. Parallel Distrib. Syst.
25(5), 1200–1210 (2014)
14. Zhu, H., Du, S., Gao, Z., Dong, M., Cao, Z.: A probabilistic misbehavior detec-
tion scheme toward eﬃcient trust establishment in delay-tolerant networks. IEEE
Trans. Parallel Distrib. Syst. 25(1), 22–32 (2014)
15. Cho, J.H., Swami, A., Chen, I.R.: A survey on trust management for mobile ad
hoc networks. IEEE Commun. Surv. TUTORIALS 13(4), 562–583 (2011). doi:10.
1109/SURV.2011.092110.00088. ISSN 1553–877X
16. Fudenberg, D., Tirole, J.T.: Game Theory. MIT Press, Cambridge (1991)
17. Li, F., Wu, J., Srinivasan, A.: Thwarting blackhole attacks in disruption-tolerant
networks using encounter tickets. IEEE INFOCOM 2009, 2428–2436 (2009)

Trust Mangement
141
18. Davies, E., Tyson, G., Ohlman, B., Eum, S., Molinaro, A., Corujo, D., Pentikousis,
K., Boggia, G.: Information-centric Networking: Baseline Scenarios, ICNRG, Inter-
net Draft, RFC 7476 (2015)
19. Ekman, F., Ker¨anen, A., Karvo, J., Ott, J.: Working day movement model. In:
Proceedings of the 1st ACM SIGMOBILE Workshop on Mobility Models, Mobility
Models 2008, pp. 33–40. ACM, New York (2008). acmid. 1374695, doi:10.1145/
1374688.1374695, ISBN 978-1-60558-111-8
20. Umeda, S.: Japan: Legal Responses to the Great East Japan Earthquake of 2011
(2013). http://www.loc.gov/law/help/japan-earthquake/
21. Yamashita, R., Takami, K.: Safety information gathering via information carriers
through a DTN in a disaster-stricken area, In: International Conference on ICT
Convergence (ICTC), pp. 429–434 (2013)
22. Jsang, A., Bhuiyan, T.: Optimal trust network analysis with subjective logic. In:
Second International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and
Technologies, pp. 179–184 (2008). doi:10.1109/SECURWARE.64, ISSN 2162-2108
23. Aschenbruck, N., Gerhards-Padilla, E., Martini, P.: Modeling mobility in disaster
area scenarios. J. Perform. Eval. 66(12), 773–790 (2009)
24. ETSI TS. 103 260.: Satellite Earth Stations and Systems (SES); Satellite Emer-
gency Communications (SatEC); Emergency Communication Cell over Satellite
(ECCS), ETSI, Technical Speciﬁcation ETSI TR 103 166, F-06921 Sophia Antipo-
lis Cedex - FRANCE (2015)
25. Cerf, V., Burleigh, S., Hooke, A., Torgerson, l., Durst R., Scott K., Fall K., Weiss,
H.: Delay Tolerant Networking Architecture, Internet Engineering Task Force,
Internet Draft, RFC 4838 (2007)
26. Kernen, A., Ott, J., Krkkinen, T.: The ONE simulator for DTN protocol eval-
uation. In: Proceedings of the 2nd International Conference on Simulation Tools
and Techniques, ICST, Brussels, Belgium, pp. 55:1–55:10. ICST (Institute for Com-
puter Sciences, Social-Informatics and Telecommunications Engineering, Simutools
2009 (2009)

Technical Session 3

Eﬀective Doppler Mitigation in Critical Satellite
Communications
Alessio Fanfani, Simone Morosi(B), Luca Simone Ronga, and Enrico Del Re
Information Engineering Department (DINFO), University of Florence,
Via S. Marta 3, 50139 Florence, Italy
{alessio.fanfani,simone.morosi,enrico.delre}@unifi.it,
luca.ronga@cnit.it
Abstract. The modems for telemetry and telecommand applications
are a key component in each satellite system: they shall guarantee reli-
able and eﬀective performance during every mission phases including also
critical scenarios such as the control operation of the satellite while it
is placed into its orbit, the disposal of a satellite at the end of its life
or the deep-space missions. In these scenarios, the link could be unsta-
ble and with a rapid variability and the communication become bursty
and be characterized by poor performance. This paper introduces an all-
digital implementation of a receiver, which is based on the Diﬀerential
PSK (D-PSK) modulation and an enhanced version of the Digital Delay
and Multiplier frequency estimator and compensator for mitigating the
Doppler eﬀect, and that results to be perfectly compliant with the afore-
mentioned requirements. The performance of the proposed receiver is
extensively studied and compared with an incoherent technique which
is based on the Double Diﬀerential PSK (DD-PSK) modulation and is
known to be suitable for sat-com in critical scenarios.
1
Introduction
The goal of the development of advanced heterogeneous satellite systems [1,2]
requires innovative and robust technological solutions. Telemetry and telecom-
mand (TM/TC) systems along with electrical power, on-board data handling
and attitude and determination control modules are essential for a spacecraft.
The reliability and robustness are key features for a satellite communication
system, particularly during critical satellite mission phases, like the early opera-
tions after separation from upper launcher stages or the end of life manoeuvres
[3,4]. In these scenarios, the spacecraft may have reduced functionalities and
uncontrolled attitude and consequently, the communication link could be weak,
unstable and with a rapid variability e.g., signal’s amplitude could drop down
or go up according to satellite tumbling rate [5,6]. In this context, the commu-
nication becomes bursty and the link reliability harms the bit rate performance.
This paper proposes an advanced radio receiver for Low Earth Orbit (LEO)
satellite communication system. The proposed modem is based on a robust and
eﬃcient frequency compensator to mitigate the Doppler eﬀect, which is one of
the main channel impairments in a LEO mission.
c
⃝ICST Institute for Computer Sciences, Social Informatics and Telecommunications Engineering 2017
I. Otung et al. (Eds.): WiSATS 2016, LNICST 186, pp. 145–155, 2017.
DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-53850-1 15

146
A. Fanfani et al.
The problem of Doppler compensation has been deeply discussed in literature
[8,16]. Non coherent techniques are attractive due to their simple architecture;
an example is the diﬀerential PSK (DD-PSK) that does not require a reference
carrier since it performs the demodulation by processing the phase of the received
signal in two successive intervals and estimating the relative diﬀerence [9,10].
On the contrary, coherent techniques guarantee a better performance but are
based on complex architectures because all the communication channel parame-
ters (channel delay, frequency oﬀset and phase) must be evaluated before the
bit decision [11]. For instance, a receiver for LEO mission needs a frequency
recovery circuit to reduce the frequency oﬀset due to Doppler within the acqui-
sition range of the carrier recovery. A typical frequency recovery system performs
two functionalities, namely the estimate of the carrier frequency oﬀset and the
compensation by counter-rotating.
In the case of large frequency shift, an open-loop maximum likelihood (ML)
scheme which is called the Delay and Multiply Method has been proposed in
[7]. This method is suitable for burst communications thanks to the very short
acquisition time; moreover, it is characterized by a mean square error that is com-
parable with the one of the closed-loop techniques [8]. Open-loop ML schemes
only need one observation time to get the estimation whereas closed-loop require
up to 5 observation times to complete the acquisition [12,13].
Because of these interesting features, the Delay and Multiply estimator has
been selected for our receiver. The proposed solution is also inﬂuenced by the
idea of using a coarse and a ﬁne estimation sequentially as used in the receiver
realization described in [14].
The features of a receiver which is based on Delay and Multiply (D&M)
estimator will be compared with a receiver implementing an incoherent Double
Diﬀerential PSK whose performance and implementation have been described
in a previous contribution [5].
The paper is organized as follows: Sect. 2 provides an overview of the appli-
cation’s scenario including a characterization of the Doppler shift and of the
link budget in a critical scenario. Section 3 proposes a complete description of
the modem architecture and an analytical analysis of its operative principles
Sect. 4 compares the performance of the whole receiver architecture with the
one proposed in [5]. Finally, conclusive remarks are given in Sect. 5.
2
Channel Characterization
2.1
Doppler Eﬀect
One of the main channel impairments in TM/TC link for a satellite placed
in non-geostationary orbit is the large and time-variant Doppler shift within a
visibility window of satellite.

Eﬀective Doppler Mitigation
147
−600
−400
−200
0
200
400
600
−60
−40
−20
0
20
40
60
Time [sec]
Frequency Shift [kHz]
Doppler S−curve
θmax = 15°
θmax = 30°
θmax = 45°
θmax = 60°
θmax = 75°
θmax = 90°
Fig. 1. Doppler shift S-curve
The Doppler Eﬀect is caused by the relative motion of the satellite with
respect to the ground station. It mainly depends on satellite orbit, ground station
position (latitude) and the frequency value of the link.
The characterization of Doppler shift is a well debated argument in literature.
In [15] I. Ali et al. show an exhaustive explanation of Doppler equations that
are used in next sections to compare the performance of diﬀerent receivers in
the case of variable Doppler shift.
The frequency shift is represented by the S-curve, which is shown in Fig. 1.
The shift is function of the time and of the maximum elevation angle θmax. The
shift is equal to zero in the middle of the visibility window when the elevation
angle has the maximum value. The maximum shift is within ±60 kHz and it
occurs when the elevation angle approaches the minimum elevation angle which
is evaluated equal to 10◦.
2.2
Link-Budget
A communication system for satellite TM/TC applications usually requires low
or medium channel capacity. A bit rate of about 32 kbps is enough for a Satellite
Ground Operator to control and monitor the satellite within a visibility window.
The operative frequency is in S-Band: in particular ITU radio regulation and
satellite standard [17] reserves the following sub-ranges:
– Frequency range: 2025–2110 MHz for Earth to space link;
– Frequency range: 2200–2290 MHz for space to Earth link.
The satellite is usually equipped with a hemispherical patch antenna that
is dedicated to the TM/TC link and placed on yaw satellite’s face. When the
satellite correctly points to Ground, the received power is easily computed by
means the link budget equation; a detailed case study is described in [5].
An example of signal to noise ratio Eb/N0 for a TM/TC link within a visibil-
ity window is represented by the curves in Fig. 2. The minimum Eb/N0 ≃14 dB
is in the downlink curve at the beginning and end of each visibility window,

148
A. Fanfani et al.
−250
−200
−150
−100
−50
0
50
100
150
200
250
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
Time [sec]
Eb / N0 [dB]
Uplink
Downlink
Fig. 2. Link budget curve in stable attitude condition
−250
−200
−150
−100
−50
0
50
100
150
200
250
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
Time [sec]
Eb / N0 [dB]
Uplink
Downlink
Fig. 3. Link budget curve at the satellite’s end of life
when the satellite is closer to the horizon. Nevertheless, in a scenario with dam-
aged attitude control system, the channel results becomes extremely unstable
and the signal strength would follow the antenna radiation pattern dropping
out completely when the antenna rotates away from ground station [6]. Figure 3
reports the values of the previously considered curves as given by the link bud-
get curves in a possible critical scenario. A high tumble rate has been supposed
around all satellite’s axes. The presumed angular rotation velocities are 4 deg/s
around Pitch axis, 14 deg/s around Roll axis and 10 deg/s around Yaw axis.
A sequence of impulses underline the signal instability and an adequate signal
power is obtained only in short burst intervals whose duration is often less than
few seconds.
3
Receiver Architectures
The following section introduces the receiver architecture, that is oriented to a
Software-Deﬁned Radio (SDR) realization. A simulated implementation and a
performance evaluation of the architecture have been performed in Simulink.
The receiver that is based on the use of the Digital D&M estimator and
compensator is a direct-conversion receiver [7], also known as zero-Intermediate

Eﬀective Doppler Mitigation
149
Frequency (zero-IF) receiver: as it is known, it allows the Radio Frequency (RF)
signal to be demodulated by a local oscillator whose frequency is as close as
possible to the carrier frequency fc, of the received signal.
The strategy which is pursued by the receiver is to estimate the Doppler
frequency shift by evaluating the average frequency of the zero-IF input signal.
In fact, that signal is frequency shifted away from zero hertz by the Doppler
eﬀect.
The implementation and the simulations that are described in this paper are
based on the following assumptions:
– the signal delay and the clock recovery are performed before the carrier syn-
chronization. The symbol delay is assumed zero;
– the pulse shape is an ideal rect and satisﬁes the Nyquist criterion for zero
interference;
– the carrier fc is a deterministic parameter;
– the arbitrary phase shift is a uniformly distributed random variable;
– the channel is non frequency selective and has a ﬂat frequency response.
3.1
D&M Estimator and Compensator
The D&M Estimator, that is represented in Fig. 4, matches to the phase variation
to determine the instantaneous frequency of the input signal. The rate of change
is computed by using the Euler’s method of approximating diﬀerential equations.
The instantaneous phase is generated by the arctangent function (arg) of the
complex-valued input signal x(t). The delay block ΔT which is used to compute
the discrete diﬀerential is equal to the sampling time and T0 is the symbol
period. The block indicated with the ()* symbol represent the complex conjugate
operator.
The analytical operating principle of the D&M Estimator is deﬁned by the
following equations:

Δf =
1
2πΔT arg{
 T0
0
z(t)dt}
(1)
where:
z(t) = x(t)x∗(t −ΔT)
(2)
The output signal w(t) which is produced by the Direct Digital Synthesizer
(DDS) has the form:
w(t) = A exp(−j(2π 
Δft))
(3)
and the acquisition range of the estimator is equal to
1
2ΔT [7].

150
A. Fanfani et al.
Fig. 4. D&M estimator and compensator
3.2
Baseband Decoder Block
The base band section is based on the scheme of the D-BPSK demodulator that
is depicted in Fig. 5.
The performance of the Delay and Multiply scheme depends on the Frequency
value of the input signal: the greater the Frequency, the greater the variance
of the estimation. For this reason, the receiver uses two Delay and Multiply
estimators: The ﬁrst D&M is indicated as A and is a “coarse” estimator working
on r(t) signal: it performs a rough estimation of the frequency shift 
Δf A. The
second one is deﬁned as D&M B: it is a “ﬁne” estimator working on e(t) signal,
that is the signal with a frequency shift which is equal to the estimation error of
D&M A. Thanks to this mechanism the total estimator has a good performance
also with large frequency shift of the input signal.
The r(t) signal, that is aﬀected by the Doppler shift is mixed with the com-
pensation signals in order to translate the baseband message signal spectrum
closer to the zero hertz value. After the Frequency compensation, an Integrate
and Dump and a D-BPSK decision complete the receiving chain. The receiver
doesn’t need phase recovery scheme before the bit decision because the trans-
mitted signal r(t) is D-PSK modulated.
The input signal is deﬁned by the following equation:
r(t) = A exp(j(2πΔft + θn + ϕn) + n(t)
(4)
where:
– ϕn is the diﬀerentially coded modulation information;
– ΔfDn is the Doppler shift on n-th symbol;
– θn is the phase error on n-th symbol.
– ϕn is the phase contribution associated to the transmitted data, ϕn = nkπ →
n ∈Z, k = [0, 1];
The x(t) signal, that is obtained after frequency compensation and ﬁltering,
is equal to:
x(t) = A exp(j(2π(Δf −
Δf A −
Δf B)t + θn + ϕn) + n(t)
= A exp(j(2π(θn + ϕn) + n(t))
(5)
The performance of the Digital Delay-and-Multiply estimator is demon-
strated through a complete simulation of the receiver performed in Simulink.

Eﬀective Doppler Mitigation
151
Fig. 5. Baseband decoder block diagram
−200
−150
−100
−50
0
50
100
150
200
10
−3
10
−2
10
−1
10
0
BER
Shift Doppler [% Rb]
EbNo=0 dB
EbNo=3 dB
EbNo=6 dB
EbNo=9 dB
EbNo=12 dB
EbNo=15 dB
Fig. 6. Digital D&M receiver performance
The curves in Fig. 6 show the bit error rate value as a function of the Doppler
shift. The results show a constant BER and proves the eﬀectiveness of the pro-
posed solution. When the Eb/N0 is greater than 12 dB the Bit Error Rate is
lower than 10−4.
4
Performance Comparison
The previous section has shown the reason why a receiver that is based on the
D&M estimator is robust against the Doppler shift. In this section the perfor-
mance of the proposed receiver will be compared with those obtained by DD-
PSK [5]. The performance are evaluated in three diﬀerent scenarios. The ﬁrst
one, which is called ﬁxed Doppler, is an ideal scenario with constant frequency
Doppler shift, i.e., no time variation is assumed. The second scenario simulates
a link that is aﬀected by a real Doppler shift as deﬁned in Sect. 2.1. Finally, the
last scenario takes into account, in addition to the Doppler shift, an extremely
variable Signal to Noise ratio due to the satellite tumbling as depicted in Fig. 3.
4.1
Fixed Doppler
The bit errors rate curves are nearly constant for diﬀerent Doppler conditions
but the DD-PSK Bit Error Probability is much higher than the other. The Fig. 7
clearly highlights a better performance of the receiver based on Delay and Multi-
ply estimation within the assumption of time-invariant frequency Doppler shift.

152
A. Fanfani et al.
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
10
−4
10
−3
10
−2
10
−1
10
0
BER
 Eb/N0 [dB]
Theoretical BER D−BPSK
DD−BPSK, Δ f = 0 Hz
DD−BPSK, Δ f = 1 kHz
DD−BPSK, Δ f = 10 kHz
Delay Multiply, Δ f = 0 Hz
Delay Multiply, Δ f = 1 kHz
Delay Multiply, Δ f = 10 kHz
Fig. 7. Bit error rate for diﬀerent modulation
The presented performance could be further improved by introducing eﬃcient
channel coding techniques.
4.2
Variable Doppler
This scenario considers a Doppler shift corresponding to the S-Curve in Fig. 1
with a maximum elevation angle θmax equal to 90◦and a minimum elevation
angle equal to 20◦. The visibility windows duration is 560 s during which are
transmitted about 18350080 bit.
The selected S-curve is the worst operative case because it is characterized
by the greatest Doppler shift Rate in the centre of the visibility windows.
The performance of both the receiving schemes is measured in terms of num-
ber of bit errors during a satellite visibility window. The curves in Fig. 8 shows
the cumulative distribution of bit errors for diﬀerent values of Signal to Noise
ratio. The graphs conﬁrms that the receiver based on Delay and Multiply fre-
quency compensator has a very robust performance. That receiver has a constant
bit error rate during all the visibility time; otherwise the DD-PSK has perfor-
mance that depends on the Doppler shift Rate. Indeed, the greater growing rate
0
100
200
300
400
500
10
2
10
3
10
4
10
5
10
6
10
7
10
8
Time [s]
Number of Bit Error
D&M RX, Eb/N0=12dB
D&M RX, Eb/N0=14dB
D&M RX, Eb/N0=16dB
DD−BPSK, Eb/N0=12dB
DD−BPSK, Eb/N0=14dB
DD−BPSK, Eb/N0=16dB
Fig. 8. Cumulative bit error for diﬀerent modulation

Eﬀective Doppler Mitigation
153
Table 1. Bit error rate with time variant Doppler shift
Eb/N0, dB BER of D&M receiver BER of DD-PSK receiver
12
1.46 · 10−3
12 · 10−2
14
9.43 · 10−6
7.9 · 10−2
16
5.61 · 10−6
6.98 · 10−2
of the cumulative distribution is obtained for the maximum value of Doppler
Rate. In Table 1 the average bit error rates are summarized for diﬀerent values
of Signal to Noise ratios that are computed at the end of a satellite visibility
windows. In the case of receiver based on Delay and Multiply frequency com-
pensator the BER performance that is obtained for the variable Doppler shift
are similar to the ones of the constant Doppler scenario. The D&M BER curves
show an initial step due to the wrong bit decoding during the ﬁrst observation
time of the D&M estimator.
4.3
Tumbling Scenario
In order to complete the comparison, the scenario with a tumbling satellite has
to be considered. The results that are shown in Fig. 9 still prove the eﬀectiveness
of the receiver based on the D&M. The curves represent the Bit Error Rate
over the visibility windows for both the receivers. As expected, the BER is very
high when the Eb/N0 is poor, but as soon as the signal quality increases, the
performance of D&M is better than the one of the DD-PSK.
Also this graph conﬁrms that the DD-PSK solution is weak when the Doppler
rate is high: particularly, in the center of the visibility windows, the DD-PSK
BER values are about 50%.
The results of the simulation become clearer if, in the BER evaluation, only
the bits with an acceptable signal to noise ratio are considered, i.e. when Eb/N0
is greater than 12 dB. In this case, the simulation shows that the BER of the
0
100
200
300
400
500
10
−3
10
−2
10
−1
10
0
Time [s]
BER Distribution
D&M RX
DD−BPSK
Fig. 9. Bit error rate over the time for diﬀerent modulation

154
A. Fanfani et al.
receiver which is based on D&M is equal to 8·10−5 against a BER of the DD-PSK
equal to 0.1.
5
Conclusion
Space applications, such as the satellite decommission, have recently requested
reliable and robust telecommunication systems in order to guarantee TM/TC
communications also in emergency scenarios. This paper provides a possible
channel model and proposes a possible transceiver implementation for these
applications that is compared to diﬀerent solutions.
The solution which is based on a frequency estimator and compensator named
D&M has a more complex architecture than the DD-PSK receiver but allows
a very good performance. The results shows that D&M receiver guarantees a
reliable link also with fast channel variations and strong Doppler shift as shown
in the paper. Therefore, the proposed D&M receiver is a suitable implementation
for communication in emergency scenario as the TM/TC for decommissioning
device.
References
1. Del Re, E., Morosi, S., Ronga, L.S., Jayousi, S., Martinelli, A.: Flexible heteroge-
neous satellite-based architecture for enhanced quality of life applications. IEEE
Commun. Magaz. 53(5), 186–193 (2015)
2. Del Re, E., Morosi, S., Jayousi, S., Sacchi, C.: Salice satellite-assisted localiza-
tion and communication systems for emergency services. In: Proceedings of the
1st International Conference on Wireless Communications, Vehicular Technol-
ogy, Information Theory, Aerospace and Electronic Systems (WVITAE), Aalborg,
Denmark (2009)
3. IADC Space Debris Mitigation Guidelines (2002)
4. European Code of Conduct for Space Debris Mitigation: Issue 1.0 (2004)
5. Del Re, E., Fanfani, A., Morosi, S., Ronga, L.S.: Robust modem design for satellite
communications in emergency scenarios. In: 2014 7th Advanced Satellite Multime-
dia Systems Conference and the 13th Signal Processing for Space Communications
Workshop (2014)
6. Bruzzi, J.R., Jensen, J.R., Fielhauer, K.B., Royster, D.W., Srinivasan, D.K.:
Telemetry recovery and uplink commanding of a spacecraft prior to three-axis
attitude stabilization. In: Proceedings of the 2006 IEEE Aerospace Conference
(2006)
7. Mengali, U., D’Andrea, A.N.: Synchronization Techniques for Digital Receivers.
Springer, Heidelberg (1997)
8. Classen, F., Meyr, H.: Two frequency estimation schemes operating independently
of timing information. In: Conference Recreation (GLOBECOM 1993), Houston,
TX (1993)
9. Yuce, M.R., Wentai, L., Damiano, J., Bharath, B., Franzon, P.D., Dogan, N.S.: SOI
CMOS implementation of a multirate PSK demodulator for space communications.
IEEE Trans. Circ. Syst. I Regul. Papers 54(2), 420–431 (2007)

Eﬀective Doppler Mitigation
155
10. Ma, C., Wang, D.: The performance of DDPSK over LEO mobile satellite channels.
In: Proceedings of the 2000 Asia-Paciﬁc Microwave Conference (2000)
11. Gardner, F.: Hangup in phase-lock loops. IEEE Trans. Commun. 25, 1210–1214
(1977)
12. Mengali, U., Morelli, M.: Data-aided frequency estimation for burst digital trans-
mission. IEEE Trans. Commun. 45(1), 23–25 (1997)
13. Fitz, M., Lindsey, W.: Decision-directed burst-mode carrier synchronization tech-
niques. IEEE Trans. Commun. 40, 1644–1653 (1992)
14. van der Westhuizen, E., van Rooyen, G.: Baseband Carrier Recovery and Phase
Tracking as a Doppler Compensation Technique for a zero-IF SDR (2009)
15. Ali, I., Bonanni, P.G., Al-Dhahir, N., Hershey, J.E.: Doppler Application In LEO
Satellite Communication Systems. Springer, Heidelberg (2002)
16. Ah-Thew, G.P.: Doppler Compensation for LEO Satellite Communication Systems
(1998)
17. ECSS-E-ST-50-05C Rev. 2: Radio Frequency and Modulation, ESA-ESTEC,
October 2011

Interference Mitigation for Multi Spot Beam Satellite
Communication Systems Incorporating Spread Spectrum
Abdulkareem Karasuwa1(✉), Jon Eastment2, and Iﬁok Otung1
1 Mobile and Satellite Communications Research Group,
University of South Wales, Pontypridd  CF37 1DL, UK
{abdulkareem.karasuwa,ifiok.otung}@southwales.ac.uk
2 STFC Rutherford Appleton Laboratory, Harwell Oxford,  Didcot OX11 0QX, UK
jon.eastment@stfc.ac.uk
Abstract. Nonlinear precoding techniques have robust transmit power stability
and achieve superior interference suppression when compared to their linear
counterparts. Tomlinson-Harashima Precoding (THP) is a suboptimal version of
Costa’s well-known work on writing on dirty paper (DPC). Implementing these
precoding techniques in a multi spot beam satellite communications system that
employs frequency reuse can signiﬁcantly reduce co-channel interference (CCI).
In this paper, we investigate and compare the performance of linear and nonlinear
precoding techniques on the forward link of a multiple spot beam satellite link.
In addition, we examine the potential beneﬁts of integrating the novel spread
spectrum (SS) technique with the existing precoding techniques. The new
system’s performance is evaluated and compared with that of standard precoding
techniques, and the beneﬁts of incorporating SS are weighed against the extra
bandwidth requirements.
Keywords: High throughput satellite · Frequency reuse · Multi spot beam ·
Co-channel interference · Precoding · Spread spectrum
1
Introduction
The desire to support increasing growth in multimedia applications and services poses
a challenge to satellite communication operators to ﬁnd solutions to the scarcity of
bandwidth resources in the legacy frequency bands allocated for satellite services.
Options considered include transition to higher frequency bands, such as Ka and above,
and adoption of advanced signal processing techniques, such as Digital Video Broad‐
casting second generation (DVB-S2) adaptive modulation and coding (MODCOD), for
eﬃcient spectrum utilisation. Systems operating at higher frequencies have to contend
with atmospherically-induced propagation perturbations by using fade mitigation tech‐
niques [1]. A promising strategy to increase the capacity of satellite systems is the
multiple spot beam transmission scheme, which reuses the available spectrum resources,
thereby expanding the system’s capacity by up to an order of magnitude [2]. This has
led to the emergence of so-called high throughput satellite (HTS) systems, deploying
large numbers of spot beams (for example, Ka-Sat and ViaSat-1) [3]. The number of
© ICST Institute for Computer Sciences, Social Informatics and Telecommunications Engineering 2017
I. Otung et al. (Eds.): WiSATS 2016, LNICST 186, pp. 156–166, 2017.
DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-53850-1_16

spot beams and frequency reuse factor (Nreuse) dictates the level of co-channel interfer‐
ence (CCI) amongst beams reusing the same colour (i.e. portion of the bandwidth). The
highest capacity can be achieved when neighbouring spot beams share the same colour;
however, the level of CCI may be severe and can limit system performance [4]. There
is, therefore, a compromise between CCI level and system capacity.
Multiple spot beam satellite systems are considered as multiple-input multiple-
output (MIMO) systems, with the forward link (for example, gateway via satellite to the
user terminal) as a broadcast channel (BC) and the return link (for example, user terminal
via satellite to the gateway) as a multiple access channel (MAC) [5]. In order to reduce
the impact of CCI in the forward link, precoding can be implemented at the transmitter
(gateway or satellite). The beneﬁts of this approach are to relieve the receiver from
processing burden, computational complexity and power constraints, leading to simpler,
power-eﬃcient and cheaper end-user receivers [6]. On the other hand, for the reverse
link, it is well known that multi-user detection (MUDs) techniques, such as successive
interference cancellation (SIC), can be used to suppress the eﬀect of CCI [5].
This paper focuses on precoding techniques, which are broadly classiﬁed into linear
and nonlinear approaches. Linear precoding includes the zero-forcing (ZF) and the
minimum mean squared error (MMSE) schemes. They are less complex than nonlinear
precoding but oﬀer inferior performance. This is due to the adverse eﬀect of channel
matrix inversion, which causes the precoded signal’s average energy to exceed that of
the original transmitted signal [7]. Alternatively, nonlinear precoding techniques, based
on Costa’s optimal dirty paper method (DPC) [8], oﬀer superior performance at the
expense of extra computational complexity. A simple approach is the Tomlinson-Hara‐
shima precoding (THP) [9, 10] which delivers a performance close to that of DPC with
moderate computational complexity. An important feature of the nonlinear scheme is
that the energy of the precoded signal is approximately the same as that of the original
transmitted signal, due to the modulo arithmetic operation introduced by the THP.
The use of linear precoding in the forward link of a broadband multiple spot beam
satellite system to curb the eﬀect of CCI has been presented in [11], and shows a signif‐
icant improvement in system capacity. On the other hand, some popular THP approaches
[12, 13] have their implementations extended to multiple spot beam satellite system
in [14].
The technical considerations and implications of spread spectrum (SS) techniques
over satellite, like multiplexing, coding, and transmission of direct-sequence SS (DS-
SS), have been described in detail in [15]. In SS systems, information symbols are
encoded using diﬀerent spreading codes (known as signatures) at the transmitters, the
chip-rate of which is signiﬁcantly higher than that of the information stream. The same
bandwidth resource is used by multiple users to simultaneously transmit their SS signals,
while the receiver recovers the desired transmitted data by correlating the incoming SS
signal with the appropriate user’s signature.
In this work, the various implementations of linear and nonlinear precoding are
discussed, and an implementation of THP on a multiple spot beam satellite system, based
on combining the well-known precoding techniques with SS, is proposed. To the best
of our knowledge, the incorporation of SS with THP over multiple spot beam satellite
systems is a novel approach. While the method requires increased system complexity
Interference Mitigation for Multi Spot Beam Satellite
157

and higher bandwidth utilisation, enhanced overall performance is the goal. The
performance of the new system is analysed via extensive simulations on a MATLAB
platform, and results are compared with the performance of existing methods that are
based on precoding alone.
2
The Multiple Spot Beam Satellite Channel
In this case, the satellite antenna feeds (spot beams) represents the transmit antenna
elements and the user terminals’ antennas can be considered as the elements of the
receive antennas of a virtual MIMO system. The MIMO channel, with number of
transmit antennas, NT, and number of receive antennas, NR, is modelled as [16]:
𝐲= 𝐇𝐛+ 𝐧.
(1)
where b is the transmitted signal column vector of size NT, 𝐛= [b1, b2, b3, … , bT
]T each
with variance E
{
||𝐛i||
2}
= 𝜎2
b, 𝐲 is the received signal symbols column vector of size NR,
𝐲=
[
y1, y2, y3, … , yR
]T, and n is additive white zero-mean complex noise (AWGN)
column vector of size NR, 𝐧= [n1, n2, n3, … , nR
]T with variance E{|𝐧𝐧|H} = 𝜎2
n𝐈.
(where (⋅)T and (⋅)H stand for transpose and conjugate transpose (Hermitian) operations,
respectively). The channel matrix H has dimension NT by NR and its hij elements repre‐
sents the complex attenuations from the j-th beam to the i-th receiving terminal, with
i = 1, 2, …, NR and j = 1, 2, …, NT. For example, consider the i-th element of y which
is given by:
𝐲i =
NT
∑
j=1
hij𝐛j + 𝐧i.
(2)
The channel delivers the interfering signal emanating from the spot beams into each
of the user terminals via the side-lobe. Note that when NT = NR = NSB, (NSB is the number
of spot beams), H is an NSB × NSB invertible square matrix. Therefore,
𝐲i = hii𝐛i +
NSB
∑
j=1
j≠i
hij𝐛j + 𝐧i.
(3)
The wanted user signal is modiﬁed by the gain hii, and distorted by the combined
eﬀect of all interference power from co-channel beams which are the oﬀ-diagonal
elements of H, and the AWGN.
CCI in multiple spot beam systems is inﬂuenced by the number of reuse colours,
inter-beam spacing and the taper values of the satellite transmit antenna side-lobe levels.
The interference decreases with increasing reuse number and decreasing antenna side-
lobe level. The total CCI power on the forward link, If, in dBW, is given by
158
A. Karasuwa et al.

NCC
∑
k = 1
If = EIRPSAT + GES,max −PBO −LATM −LM −LFS + X.
(4)
Where,
X = 10log10
NCC
∑
k = 1
|||fR
(θk
)2|||
LS
.
(5)
In (4) and (5), EIRPSAT is the eﬀective isotropically radiated power of the satellite in
dBW, GES,max is the earth station antenna maximum gain (dBi), PBO is the transmitter
power ampliﬁer back-oﬀ (dB), LATM is the atmospheric losses (dB), LM is the miscella‐
neous losses (dB), LS is the antenna scan losses (dB), LFS is the free-space path loss (dB),
fR(θk) is the normalised antenna pattern with taper and NCC is the number of neighbouring
co-channel cells.
The forward link of a typical Geostationary (GEO) satellite located at 19.2° East
longitude covering Europe with a total of 96 spot beams is used for this analysis, as
detailed in [5]. The half-beam width, θ3dB is 0.2°, and a frequency of 20 GHz is used
with seven beams (NSB = 7) with universal frequency reuse adopted (Nreuse = 1) so that
the six neighbouring co-channel spot beams can contribute maximum interference
power possible to the user in the centre of the wanted beam, as indicated in Fig. 1.
Fig. 1. Location of 7 co-channel beams (each of radius 125 km)
The interferers here are the static co-channel spot beams. Therefore, the distance
between each interfering source and the user is the same. This gives rise to the same
path loss and oﬀ-axis interfering antenna gain towards the user earth station. The antenna
Interference Mitigation for Multi Spot Beam Satellite
159

pattern, and interferer angular-oﬀset position, is shown in Fig. 2. In addition, this means
the phase shift between the beams is constant for each realisation of H. The coeﬃcients
of H and phase shift are obtained using [5]:
𝐇= |||hi,j|||𝚽.
(6)
Fig. 2. Normalised satellite antenna gain pattern showing interferer oﬀset angle
Absolute values of the channel coeﬃcients and phase shift are determined by:
|||hi,j||| =
√
Gi,j
LFS,j
.
LFS,u
GES,max
.
(7)
𝚽= ejθi,j.
(8)
Where Gi,j is the gain of the interferers towards the user, LFS,j is the interferers path-
loss, LFS,u is the user path-loss and GES,max is the user maximum gain.
3
Linear and Nonlinear Precoding Techniques
In linear precoding, as shown in Fig. 3, the transmit modulated symbols (QPSK or QAM)
are multiplied by a precoding matrix W and a positive scalar factor β−1 at the transmitter.
The inverse of β is applied at the receiver in order to meet the total transmitted power
constraint after precoding, ETX.
160
A. Karasuwa et al.

Fig. 3. Block diagram of linear precoding transmitter and receiver
The precoding matrix W and its transmit power constraint factor β can be expressed
as follows, with subscripts ZF denoting zero-forcing [13]:
𝐖ZF = 1
𝛽𝐇+ = 1
𝛽𝐇𝐇(𝐇𝐇𝐇)−1.
(9)
𝛽ZF =
√
√
√
√
√Tr
((𝐇𝐇H)−1𝜎2
b
)
ETX
.
(10)
where Tr(⋅) means trace operation and ETX is the transmit energy.
The MMSE precoding matrix WMMSE and its transmit power constraint factor βMMSE
are given by:
𝐖MMSE = 1
𝛽
(𝐇H𝐇+ 𝜉𝐈)−1𝐇H.
(11)
βMMSE =
√
√
√
√
√Tr
((
HHH + 𝜉I
)−2HHH𝜎2
b
)
ETX
.
(12)
Where 𝜉= NSB𝜎2
n
/
𝜎2
b.
The MMSE precoding takes into consideration the noise variance, 𝜎2
n, to improve
performance in the low-SNR region.
The block diagram depicting a THP nonlinear precoding system is shown in Fig. 4.
Fig. 4. Block diagram of THP precoding transmitter and receiver
The insertion of the modulo operation into the linear precoding scheme provides the
nonlinearity that ensures the amplitude of signal bi is maintained within the bounds of
Interference Mitigation for Multi Spot Beam Satellite
161

the original constellation. For M-QAM modulation, the modulo operation MOD ( ⋅) is
deﬁned as [7]:
M(bi
) = b −
⌊
𝐑𝐞(bi
)
𝜏
+ 1
2
⌋
𝜏−j
⌊
𝐈𝐦(bi
)
𝜏
+ 1
2
⌋
𝜏.
(13)
where τ is a constant for the periodic extension of the constellation, depending on the
modulation scheme employed. However, the modulo operation causes a small increase
in transmit energy, known as precoding loss, γp, which is given by [7]:
𝛾p =
M
M −1.
(14)
In this case, the output of the modulo operation ̃𝐱 is fed into the feed-forward matrix
F yielding the precoded signal x. An extra gain, represented by a diagonal matrix G, is
then applied to the rescaled received signal. Finally, the modulo operation is applied to
the signal ̃𝐲 and then the estimate ̃𝐛 of the original signal is computed by the decision
device Q( ∙).
4
The Proposed System
The proposed system incorporates spread spectrum with precoding (see Fig. 5). The
modulated symbols bi are precoded as described in Sect. 3. The output xi of the precoder
is then multiplied by a spreading code ci to yield the spread signal si, which is then
transmitted via the satellite antenna spot beams and encounters additive white Gaussian
noise (AWGN) ni in the channel. There is no cooperation amongst the user terminals,
so each sees only its own channel and is aﬀected by CCI due to side-lobe radiation from
co-channel spot beams. The received signal ssi is de-spread by the dci of each receiver
yielding xxi, which is then decoded, reversing the precoding (plus modulo operation –
in the case of nonlinear), to give an estimate bbi of the original transmit symbols.
Fig. 5. Block diagram of Precoding plus SS
162
A. Karasuwa et al.

The advantage of the spreading techniques comes as a processing gain Gp which can
be seen as the ratio of the spreading chip’s rate Rc over the transmit information rate
Rb. This implies the use of signiﬁcantly wider bandwidth, far more than the usual amount
conventionally employed for regular transmission. Higher processing gain also means
that lower power is needed for the transmission of information. In essence, bandwidth
is traded-oﬀ for power - as proposed by Shannon’s law. Spreading the information signal
with a pseudo-noise (PN) code, which is known to have good auto- and cross-correlation
properties [17], can be used to provide interference mitigation. The Gp tends to improve
the carrier-to-noise-plus-interference ratio (CNIR) in such a way that will strengthen the
diagonal elements and lower the oﬀ-diagonal elements of the channel matrix H. If we
deﬁne CNR as the carrier-to-noise ratio, and CIR as the carrier-to-interference ratio,
then:
CNIR = (
(CNR)−1 + GP(CIR)−1)−1.
(15)
Gp = Rc
Rb
.
(16)
With modern HTS systems such as Hylas 2 [18] employing transponder bandwidth
up to 230 MHz, there is ample scope for SS processing gains in excess of 10 dB to be
realised. This translates into signiﬁcant CCI mitigation that can oﬀset the deﬁciencies
in precoding performance due to an imperfect knowledge of the channel state informa‐
tion (CSI). Therefore, assuming an information bit rate of 40 Mb/s in 20 MHz (QPSK),
with this available transponder bandwidth, a chip rate that could oﬀer up to a 7 dB
processing gain can be achieved.
5
Results and Discussion
Computer simulations of linear and non-linear precoding were implemented for the
satellite system described earlier in this paper. The results shown in Fig. 6 indicate that,
where no precoding has been employed, the BER curve exhibits a ﬂoor which shows
that the system is interference-limited. This is not unexpected, due to the fact that the
six neighbouring cells reuse the same frequency spectrum as the wanted user’s earth
station. It is also clear from the results that the linear precoding techniques improve the
system’s performance in a manner consistent with the ﬁndings of other workers, as
reported in the existing literature. The MMSE approach slightly outperformed the ZF
approach, with about 1.5 dB additional improvement in the high-SNR region.
Interference Mitigation for Multi Spot Beam Satellite
163

Fig. 6. Comparison of linear and non-linear ZF and MMSE – for QPSK modulation
The non-linear techniques introduce further improvement compared to that oﬀered
by the linear approach. The ZF-THP and MMSE-THP are almost 2 dB better than their
linear counterparts in the high-SNR region. At lower SNRs, performance of the linear
techniques is slightly better than the non-linear techniques; this is, however, not uncon‐
nected to the impact of the precoding loss prevalent in the non-linear approach, espe‐
cially for lower-order modulation schemes like QPSK. This loss is expected to be negli‐
gible for higher-order modulation schemes, such as 16-QAM. The no-precoding curve
shows better performance at low SNRs, due to the absence of both energy enhancement
(for the case of the linear approach) and precoding loss (for the non-linear approach).
Figure 7 shows the results of the impact of the spreading processing gain, Gp on the
system performance for the non-linear precoding approach. Due to the reduction of
transmit power, there is no signiﬁcant change in performance between the system with
and without spreading for the ZF-THP approach. This is not unconnected with the pecu‐
liar eﬀect of the increase in average transmit power, which leads to relatively poor
performance. However, for the MMSE-THP approach, the performance improvement
due to spreading processing gain is signiﬁcant. For a BER of 10−2, there is a 4 dB gain
in favour of the system that incorporates spread spectrum.
164
A. Karasuwa et al.

Fig. 7. Comparison of non-linear ZF and MMSE, with and without SS – for QPSK modulation
6
Conclusion
In this work, the impact of co-channel interference on multiple spot beam satellite
systems employing extensive frequency reuse has been presented and some methods of
mitigating the interference eﬀects have been reviewed and implemented. A new method
of improving the performance of precoding techniques has been proposed, and the
expected beneﬁts have been discussed. The preliminary results show that incorporating
spread spectrum techniques with precoding has the potential to improve interference
mitigation performance. It is recognised, however, that this improved performance
comes at the expense of both increased complexity and extra bandwidth utilisation. Our
future work will concentrate on investigating the system conﬁgurations and operational
parameters under which the combination of spread spectrum with the various precoding
techniques provides maximum scope for improved overall satellite communications
system performance.
Acknowledgments. The Authors would like to acknowledge the Petroleum Technology
Development Fund (PTDF), Abuja Nigeria which has supported this work.
References
1. Panagopoulos, A.D., Arapoglou, P.M., Cottis, P.G.: Satellite communications at KU, KA, and
V bands: propagation impairments and mitigation techniques. IEEE Commun. Surv. Tutorials
6(3), 2–14 (2004)
Interference Mitigation for Multi Spot Beam Satellite
165

2. Lutz, E.: Co-channel interference in high-throughput multibeam satellite systems. In: IEEE
International Conference on Communications (ICC) (2015)
3. Lutz, E.: Towards the Terabit/s satellite – interference issues in the user link. Int. J. Satellite
Commun. Netw. 34(4), 461–482 (2015)
4. Karasuwa, A., Eastment, J., Otung, I.: Design considerations for high throughput satellite
communication systems. In: 21st Ka and Broadband Communications, Navigation and Earth
Observation, Bologna, Italy (2015)
5. Boussemart, V., Berioli, M., Rossetto, F., Joham, M.: On the achievable rates for the return-
link of multi-beam satellite systems using successive interference cancellation. In: Military
Communications Conference - MILCOM (2011)
6. Joham, M., Utschick, W., Nossek, J.A.: Linear transmit processing in MIMO communications
systems. IEEE Trans. Signal Process. 53(8), 2700–2712 (2005)
7. Fischer, R.F.H.: Precoding and Signal Shaping for Digital Transmission. Wiley, New York
(2002)
8. Costa, M.H.M.: Writing on dirty paper (Corresp.). IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory 29(3), 439–441
(1983)
9. Tomlinson, M.: New automatic equaliser employing modulo arithmetic. Electron. Lett. 7(5),
138–139 (1971)
10. Harashima, H., Miyakawa, H.: Matched-transmission technique for channels with
intersymbol interference. IEEE Trans. Commun. 20(4), 774–780 (1972)
11. Cottatellucci, L., Debbah, M., Gallinaro, G., Mueller, R., Neiri, M., Rinado, R.: Interference
mitigation techniques for broadband satellite systems. In: 24th Proceedings of AIAA
International Communication Satellite Systems Conference (ICSSC), San Diego, CA, vol. 1,
pp. 1–13 (2006)
12. Fischer, R.F.H., Windpassingre, C., Lampe, A., Huber, J.B.: MIMO precoding for
decentralized receivers. In: Proceedings of the IEEE International Symposium on Information
Theory (2002)
13. Joham, M., Brehmer, J., Utschick, W.: MMSE approaches to multiuser spatio-temporal
Tomlinson-harashima precoding. In: 5th International Conference on Source and Channel
Coding (SCC 2004), Erlange, Germany (2004)
14. Diaz, M.A., Courville, N., Mosquera, C., Gianluigi, L., Corazza, G.E.: Non-linear interference
mitigation for broadband multimedia satellite systems. In: International Workshop on Satellite
and Space Communications (IWSSC 2007) (2007)
15. Gaudenzi, R.D., Giannetti, F., Luise, M.: Advances in satellite CDMA transmission for mobile
and personal communications. Proc. IEEE 84(1), 18–39 (1996)
16. Cho, Y.S., Kim, J., Yang, W.Y., Kang, C.G.: MIMO-OFDM Wireless Communications with
MATLAB. Wiley, Singapore (2010)
17. Fazel, K., Kaiser, S.: Multi-carrier Spread Spectrum Systems: From OFDM and MC-CDMA
to LTE and WiMAX, 2nd edn. John Wiley and Sons Ltd., Chichester (2008)
18. Avanti Communications Group plc. http://www.avantiplc.com/sites/default/ﬁles/hylas-2-
tech-sheet.pdf
166
A. Karasuwa et al.

Speciﬁc Rain Attenuation Derived from a Gaussian
Mixture Model for Rainfall Drop Size Distribution
K’ufre-Mfon E. Ekerete1, Francis H. Hunt1(✉), Judith L. Jeﬀery2, and Iﬁok E. Otung1
1 Mobile and Satellite Communications Research Group,
University of South Wales, Pontypridd  CF37 1DL, UK
{kufre-mfon.ekerete,francis.hunt,ifiok.otung}@southwales.ac.uk
2 STFC Rutherford Appleton Laboratory, Harwell Oxford, Didcot  OX11 0QX, UK
judith.jeffery@stfc.ac.uk
Abstract. Precipitation, particularly rain aﬀects the millimetre and sub-milli‐
metre frequencies more severely than it does for lower frequencies in the Earth-
space path. There is therefore a need for accurate models that will enable the
rainfall drop size distribution (DSD) to be better predicted for better planning and
improved service delivery. Using data captured at Chilbolton Observatory, this
paper looks at modelling the DSD using the Gaussian Mixture Model (GMM),
and attempts to predict the speciﬁc attenuation due to rain based on this model
and compares the result with other well-established statistical models (lognormal
and gamma). Results show that speciﬁc attenuation tends to increase with the
drop sizes, and the smaller drops contribute little to the overall attenuation expe‐
rienced by signals. Speciﬁc attenuation was computed based on several standard
statistical distributions, and compared with that derived from the ITU recom‐
mendation.
Keywords: Theoretical modelling · Space and satellite communications ·
Estimation and forecasting · Probability distributions · Rainfall drop size
distribution (DSD) · Gaussian Mixture Model (GMM) · Speciﬁc attenuation
1
Introduction
Modernity requires vast exchange of information, mostly digital. Information service
providers constantly seek new ways and methods to transmit these information eﬃ‐
ciently and reliably. In the search for the better transmission of these information, the
lower frequency bands are congested, and providers now seek to transmit information
using increasingly higher frequencies, where more data can be transmitted more
economically.
In the higher frequencies, precipitation, particularly rain plays a great role in the
dispersion of transmitted signals, causing attenuation in the received signals. Signals are
scattered by raindrops since the transmitted wavelengths are much smaller than the
raindrop sizes. There have been several studies [1–3] showing how signals are aﬀected
by diﬀerent sizes of raindrops, and a thorough understanding of the distribution of these
© ICST Institute for Computer Sciences, Social Informatics and Telecommunications Engineering 2017
I. Otung et al. (Eds.): WiSATS 2016, LNICST 186, pp. 167–177, 2017.
DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-53850-1_17

raindrops enables the systems designer to design mitigation plans to ensure a better
quality of service delivery.
Kumar et al. [1] discusses the eﬀect of ignoring the smaller drop bin sizes, and
reaches the conclusion that since the smaller drops contributes little to the overall DSD,
hence the attenuation and the removal of the smaller-sized bins have little impact on
attenuation. Thurai et al. [2] suggests that even with the more sophisticated 2D Video
Disdrometer, the readings of the smaller drops are still not good enough to be considered
reliable, as it under-estimates the drop densities. Åsen and Gibbins [3] while suggesting
that the disdrometer is not sensitive to small drop diameters, and thus mis-estimates the
attenuation, goes on to suggest that the diﬀerence between measured and modelled
attenuation may be due to wind drafts.
Rainfall data collected from the disdrometer located at the Chilbolton Observatory,
is analysed and the rainfall drop size distribution (DSD) is determined. The data some‐
times suggests the presence of underlying multimodal distribution [4–7]. As well as
standard statistical distributions like the lognormal and gamma, the Gaussian Mixture
Model (GMM) is used to model the rainfall data.
This work attempts to compute the speciﬁc attenuation based on the ITU P R 838
model, and compares the speciﬁc attenuation derived from the GMM as well as the other
statistical models aforementioned. Section 2 discusses the statistical modelling of rain‐
fall DSDs, looking at the commonly used statistical models for the derivation of the
DSDs, and introduces the Gaussian Mixture Model (GMM) as a solution to model
multimodal distributions encountered in the data. Section 3 discusses speciﬁc attenua‐
tion – how the ITU recommendation derives speciﬁc attenuation for a given rain rate,
as well the derivation of speciﬁc attenuation from the distributions by integrating the
DSD and the extinction cross section of the drops over the entire bin. Section 4 deals
with the data collection and procedures, giving insight into the experimentation and the
analyses carried out. Section 5 presents and discusses the results, with Sect. 6 concluding
the report.
2
Rainfall DSDs
2.1
Statistical Modelling of DSDs
The rainfall DSD, N(D) is taken as the number of raindrops per unit volume per unit
diameter centered on D the drop diameter (in mm), measured in m−3 mm−1, where N(D)
dD, (in m−3), is the number of such drops per unit volume having diameters in the
inﬁnitesimal range (D − dD/2, D + dD/2) [7]. The DSD is signiﬁcant in the computation
of rain rates and signal attenuation. The DSD may vary signiﬁcantly, yet result in the
same rain rate given that a large number of small drops may yield the same rain volume
(rain rate) as a small number of large drops. And this may explain why two diﬀerent
DSDs with the same rain rate may give two diﬀerent attenuation values.
Given that D is a continuous and non-negative, various statistical distributions have
been used to model N(D). Marshall and Palmer [8] suggested that DSD is distributed
exponentially, and can be represented as
168
K.-M.E. Ekerete et al.

N(D) = N0 exp(−𝛬D), 0 < D ≤Dmax
(1)
and
𝛬= 𝛼R𝛽
(2)
with Dmax being the biggest drop diameter measured, where N0 and Λ (in mm−1) are the
intercept and slope parameters respectively, and Λ is dependent on the rainfall rate R (in
mm/h). This relationship is however valid for D < 1.5 mm [8].
Other studies [9–12] modelled the DSD using the lognormal distribution, given as
N(D) =
NT
√
2𝜋𝜎g(D −𝜃)
exp
[
−
(ln (D −𝜃) −𝜇g
)2
2𝜎2
g
]
(3)
with σg and μg being the geometric standard deviation and geometric mean respectively,
and θ, the oﬀset value.
The gamma distribution yields more accurate rainfall rate computations than the
exponential distribution, especially when combined with radar data [13]. The gamma
distribution is given as
N(D) = NTD𝜇exp (−ΛD),
0 ≤D ≤Dmax
(4)
with Λ, μ, and NT as the slope, shape and scaling parameters respectively, and these allow
for the characterisation of a wide range of rainfall scenarios. The exponential distribution
is a special case of the gamma distribution with μ = 0.
However, these distributions do not describe all DSDs, as it has been suggested that
diﬀerent rain types [14, 15] and regions [13, 16, 17] may be described by diﬀerent
statistical models. Previous works [5–7, 18–20] present cases where these unimodal
distributions do not adequately describe distributions that are distributed multimodally.
Ekerete, et al. [6] proposes that these distributions be modelled with a Gaussian Mixture
Model (GMM) in the log domain.
The GMM probability density function is given as [7]
p(D) =
∑k
i=1 wi ⋅1
D exp
[
−
(ln(D) −𝜇i
)2
2𝜎2
i
]
(5)
where μi and σi are the mean and standard deviation of the ith mode respectively and the
weights wi have the property ∑k
i=1 wi = 1.
Speciﬁc Rain Attenuation Derived from a Gaussian Mixture Model
169

3
Attenuation Due to Rain
3.1
Speciﬁc Attenuation
Radio signals travelling through the earth-space paths are attenuated, the severity
depending on many factors; frequency, temperature, pressure, as well as the presence
of precipitation, chieﬂy raindrops. The higher the frequency, the higher the signal
impairment as the wavelength to raindrop diameter ratio becomes smaller.
Speciﬁc rain attenuation, measured in dB/km, is the attenuation of the signal due to
rain per unit distance. At any given point in the earth-space path, the speciﬁc attenuation
is largely dependent on the rain rate at that point. Integrating the speciﬁc attenuation
along the path gives the total attenuation [21]. The speciﬁc attenuation can be estimated
by assuming spherical raindrops and using Mie’s scattering theory [22].
The received power, Pr, on a uniformly distributed spherical water drop of radius r
with transmitted power, Pt, over length L is given as
Pr = Pt ⋅exp(−kL)
(6)
where k is the attenuation coeﬃcient for the rain volume expressed in units of reciprocal
length.
The attenuation, A (in dB) will be given as
A = 10 ⋅log10
(Pt∕Pr
) = 10 ⋅log10 exp (kL) = 4.343 ⋅kL
(7)
where the attenuation coeﬃcient, k, is
k = N(D) ⋅Qt
(8)
and N(D) is the drop density, and Qt is the extinction cross section of the drop with
diameter D [23].
An alternative approach to estimating the speciﬁc attenuation is given by the ITU-
R P.838-3 [24], where the speciﬁc attenuation, γ in (dB/km), is given as a power law
relationship dependent on the rain rate, R.
𝛾= a ⋅Rb
(9)
where the coeﬃcients a and b are dependent on the frequency, f (GHz), and given in [24].
3.2
Extinction Cross Section
The extinction (or attenuation) cross section, Qt, is dependent on the wavelength, λ, the
complex refractive index of water, m = p + iq and the drop diameter, D. Qt = Qt(λ, m,
D). A deeper treatment of the extinction cross section is given by [25].
The attenuation coeﬃcient is determined by integration over all the drop sizes since
the drop sizes are not all equal, the attenuation coeﬃcient is given as
170
K.-M.E. Ekerete et al.

k = ∫
∞
0
Qt(𝜆, m, D) N(D) dD
(10)
The speciﬁc attenuation is then given as [14]
𝛾= 4.343 ∫
∞
0
Qt(𝜆, m, D) N(D) dD dB/km
(11)
According to Mie’s theory for a plane wave radiation on an absorbing sphere, the
wave number x = π D/λ.
The complex forward scattering amplitude for the spherical raindrop function is
given as [26]
S(0) = 1
2
∑∞
n=1 (2n + 1)(an + bn)
(12)
This gives the extinction cross section as
Qt = 4𝜋
k2 Re S(0) = 2
x2
∑∞
n=1 (2n + 1) Re(an + bn)
(13)
where an and bn are the Mie scattering coeﬃcients, complex functions of λ, m and D.
3.3
How Speciﬁc Attenuation Scales with Drop Size
It is interesting to see how the ITU speciﬁc attenuation scales theoretically as drop size
varies, whilst keeping rain rate constant. To do this, it is assumed the drops are all
identically sized spheres of diameter D. Then the number of drops falling on a plane
surface at a constant rain rate R scales proportional to D−3. The speciﬁc attenuation
depends on the spatial distribution of drops in the atmosphere, which is the number of
drops per unit volume. This depends on the fall speed of drops. A common approxima‐
tion to this is that the terminal velocity of drop is proportional to D0.67 [27]. Thus the
number of rain drops per unit volume scales as D−3.67. Mie scattering theory says that
the speciﬁc attenuation is proportional to the number of drops multiplied by the extinc‐
tion cross section Qt. At 20 GHz, Qt can be approximated as proportional to D4 [28].
Hence the speciﬁc attenuation at constant rain rate scales approximately as D1/3, i.e.
attenuation at constant R increases with drop size. This suggests that the attenuation
predicted by the ITU-R model, which is of the form kRα (for constants k and α), will be
high for small drop sizes and low for large drop sizes.
Speciﬁc Rain Attenuation Derived from a Gaussian Mixture Model
171

4
Data and Procedures Used in the Study
4.1
Data Collection and Processing
Data from the Chilbolton Observatory (51.14° N, 1.44° W) were collected and analysed.
This data is from a RD69 JWD impact disdrometer, and a co-located rain gauge’s data
from 2010 to 2013.
The JWD impact disdrometer, with a sampling cross-sectional area of 50 cm2 meas‐
ures the size of raindrops falling on its top Styrofoam® cup by converting the impact
into electrical pulses, and the amplitude of the impulse is then used to determine the
diameter of the drops. The measurements are sorted into 127 increasingly non-uniform
groupings termed channels or bins depending on the amplitude of the impacting rainfall.
Algorithms convert the recorded amplitude to drop diameters. This is accurate to
±5% [29].
The disdrometer and the rain gauge collects data at 10 s interval, but this study merges
this into 1 min samples with the assumption that the underlying distribution does not
change radically over the 1 min period considered. This study only considered rain
events with rates greater than 0.1 mm/h.
The drop velocities for rain with diameter Di, was taken to be [30]:
vi = 9.65 −10.3 ⋅exp(−0.6Di)
(14)
The rain rate (in mm/h) at time instant t, (in seconds) was derived as:
Rt = 3600 ⋅∑Vi ⋅ni(t)
Δt ⋅A
(15)
where Vi is the drop volume, ni is the drop counts, Δt is the integration time and A is the
disdrometers’s cross section.
The parameters for the disdrometer at Chilbolton are as follows (Table 1):
Table 1. Parameters for the disdrometer at Chilbolton Observatory for ITU-R P.838
Parameter
Value
Latitude
51.14°N
Longitude
357.74°E
Frequency
19.7 GHz
Elevation angle
29.9°
Tilt angle
13°
Height above sea level
84 m
Given the above, the a and b, as derived from the suggestions of ITU-R P.838-3 are
0.0907 and 1.0229 respectively.
172
K.-M.E. Ekerete et al.

4.2
Procedures
Six consecutive 10 s samples were merged. This was done to achieve a larger sample
size, with the implicit assumption that the underlying distribution is approximately
stationary over the one minute period under consideration. This is similar to the
approaches adopted by Montopoli et al. [31], Townsend et al. [32] and Islam et al. [33].
Given the doubt about the reliability of the smaller drops measurements [1, 34, 35],
especially in the JWD, this work considered only bins with drop diameters greater
0.6 mm. This consideration resulted in a sample of 93 super bins, with the boundaries
determined by the ETH re-calibration given in McFarquhar and List [36].
Based on the rain rates computed from Eq. (16) and the k and α determined, the
speciﬁc attenuation based on the ITU-R P. 838-3 recommendation was computed using
the relationship γ = a Rb (Eq. 9).
The method of Mätzler [37] was used to determine the extinction cross section, Qt,
from the Mie’s coeﬃcients at 19.7 GHz (the radio wave frequency), with the refractive
index of water taken as m = 6.867 + 2.630i [38].
For each 1 min sample above the rainfall threshold, (taken here to be 0.1 mm/h), the
DSD was computed from the disdrometer’s rain drop counts, and each was compared
to a co-located rain gauge to ensure accuracy.
The lognormal and gamma (using the method of moments, MoM) were ﬁtted to the
1 min spatial drop density data. Equally, the GMM, using the number of modes speciﬁed
in Ekerete et al. [6] were ﬁtted for the observed number of modes.
For each of these distributions (spatial drop densities, lognormal, gamma (MoM),
and the GMMs based on the observed number of modes), the speciﬁc attenuation were
computed for each one minute sample, showing how each drop diameter volume aﬀects
the signals. The results were compared with that derived from the ITU-recommended
speciﬁc attenuation calculations.
5
Results and Interpretations
Based on the methodology described in 4.2 above, the rainfall DSD (shown in the upper
panels of Figs. 1 and 2) were used to derive the speciﬁc attenuation for a 1-minute time
slice. The speciﬁc attenuation was derived from the drop densities, shown as bars in the
lower panel and the computed speciﬁc attenuation for 1st May, 2012 at 0037 and 0053
gave the following:
Speciﬁc Rain Attenuation Derived from a Gaussian Mixture Model
173

0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
Drop diams (mm)
N(D) (/mm /m3)
DSD for 01-May-2012 @ 00:37
Drop densities
Lognormal
Gamma (MoM)
GMM:4 mode(s)
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
0
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
0.05
0.06
Drop diam (mm)
Spec Atten (dB/km)
Drop Count= 414, Gauge/Disd rate=9.84/8.85 mm/h, Wind speed=1.300 m/s, Temp=283.617 K
Sp Atten (dB/km): ITU=0.844, QAtt=0.837, logn=0.919, GammaMoM=0.825, GMM=0.851
Drop densities
Lognormal
Gamma (MoM)
GMM
Fig. 1. DSD and speciﬁc attenuation, with corresponding meteorological readings for
1-May-2012/0037
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
2
2.2
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
Drop diams (mm)
N(D) (/mm /m3)
DSD for 01-May-2012 @ 00:53
Drop densities
Lognormal
Gamma (MoM)
GMM:4 mode(s)
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
2
2.2
0
0.005
0.01
0.015
0.02
0.025
0.03
0.035
0.04
0.045
Drop diam (mm)
Spec Atten (dB/km)
Drop Count= 591, Gauge/Disd rate=9.84/6.19 mm/h, Wind speed=2.600 m/s, Temp=283.600 K
Sp Atten (dB/km):  ITU=0.585, QAtt=0.487, Logn=0.583, GammaMoM=0.463, GMM=0.471
Drop densities
Lognormal
Gamma (MoM)
GMM
Fig. 2. DSD and speciﬁc attenuation, with corresponding meteorological readings for
1-May-2012/0053
Results show that the small-sized drops contribute little to the overall attenuation,
as seen by the near ﬂat curve in the graphs. The larger drops contribute more to the
174
K.-M.E. Ekerete et al.

overall attenuation, even when the number of drops are small. This is shown clearly in
Fig. 2, where attenuation is high (right side lower panel) even with very few drops.
Using the speciﬁc attenuation drawn from the drop densities, it can be seen (from
Table 2) that speciﬁc attenuation computed from the GMM may be better than those
derived from other statistical models. This may be explained from the fact that the GMM
models the multimodality present in the data better than the other unimodal distributions.
Table 2. Summary of results for the speciﬁc attenuation
Date
01-May-2012
01-May-2012
Time
00:37
00:53
Drop count
414
591
Disdrometer rain rate
8.85
6.19
mm/h
Rain gauge rain rate
9.84
9.84
mm/h
Speciﬁc attenuation
ITU
0.844
0.585
dB/km
Drop density
0.837
0.487
dB/km
Lognormal
0.919
0.583
dB/km
Gamma (MoM)
0.825
0.663
dB/km
GMM
0.851
0.471
dB/km
6
Conclusions
This work has shown that the small drops in the DSD contribute little to the overall
attenuation of signals as it passes through the earth-space path. It also demonstrated that
larger drops, even in small numbers contribute greatly to the overall attenuation of
signals. Results equally suggest that the Gaussian Mixture Model may sometimes model
speciﬁc attenuation better than unimodal statistical models, as the GMM gives a better
ﬁt to multimodality encountered in rainfall DSD data.
While the data set used in this work is small, there is a need to investigate further
the seasonal variation of the ﬁt of the attenuation, as well as the variation of the speciﬁc
attenuation in diﬀerent rain regimes. The authors are working on realizing the above in
the next phase of the research.
References
1. Kumar, L.S., Lee, Y.H., Ong, J.T.: Truncated gamma drop size distribution models for rain
attenuation in Singapore. IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag. 58(4), 1325–1335 (2010)
2. Thurai, M., Bringi, V.N., Shimomai, T.: 20 GHz Speciﬁc attenuation calculations using drop
size distributions and drop shape measurements from 2D video disdrometer data in diﬀerent
rain climates. In: 6th International Conference on Information, Communications & Signal
Processing. IEEE, Singapore (2007)
3. Åsen, W., Gibbins, C.J.: A comparison of rain attenuation and drop size distributions measured
in Chilbolton and Singapore. Radio Sci. 37(3), 6-1–6-15 (2002)
Speciﬁc Rain Attenuation Derived from a Gaussian Mixture Model
175

4. Ekerete, K.-M.E., Hunt, F.H., Otung, I.E., Jeﬀery, J.L.: Multimodality in the rainfall drop size
distribution in southern England. In: Pillai, P., Hu, Y.F., Otung, I., Giambene, G. (eds.)
WiSATS 2015. LNICSSITE, vol. 154, pp. 177–184. Springer, Heidelberg (2015). doi:
10.1007/978-3-319-25479-1_13
5. Ekerete, K.E., et al.: Experimental study and modelling of rain drop size distribution in
southern England. In: IET Colloquium on Antennas, Wireless and Electromagnetics, London
(2014)
6. Ekerete, K.E., et al.: Variation of multimodality in rainfall drop size distribution with wind
speeds and rain rates. J. Eng. (2016)
7. Ekerete, K.E., et al.: Modeling rainfall drop size distribution in southern England using a
Gaussian Mixture Model. Radio Sci. (2015)
8. Marshall, J.S., Palmer, W.M.K.: The distribution of raindrops with size. J. Meteorol. 5(4),
165–166 (1948)
9. Levin, L.M.: The distribution function of cloud and rain drops by sizes. Dokl. Akad. Nauk
SSSR 94(6), 1045–1048 (1954)
10. Markowitz, A.H.: Raindrop size distribution expressions. J. Appl. Meteorol. 15(9), 1029–
1031 (1976)
11. Feingold, G., Levin, Z.: The lognormal ﬁt to raindrop spectra from frontal convective clouds
in Israel. J. Appl. Meteorol. 25(10), 1346–1363 (1986)
12. Owolawi, P.: Raindrop size distribution model for the prediction of rain attenuation in Durban.
PIERS Online 7(6), 516–523 (2011)
13. Ulbrich, C.W., Atlas, D.: Assessment of the contribution of diﬀerential polarization to
improved rainfall measurements. Radio Sci. 19(1), 49–57 (1984)
14. Adimula, I.A., Ajayi, G.O.: Variations in raindrop size distribution and speciﬁc attenuation
due to rain in Nigeria. Ann. Telecommun. 51(1–2), 87–93 (1996)
15. Maitra, A., Chakravarty, K.: Raindrop size distribution measurements and associated rain
parameters at a tropical location in the Indian region (2005)
16. Ajayi, G.O., Olsen, R.L.: Modeling of a tropical raindrop size distribution for microwave and
millimetre wave applications. Radio Sci. 20(2), 193–202 (1985)
17. Maciel, L.R., Assis, M.S.: Tropical rainfall drop-size distribution. Int. J. Satell. Commun. 8,
181–186 (1990)
18. McFarquhar, G.M.: Raindrop size distribution and evolution. In: Rainfall: State of the Science,
Geophysical Monograph Series, vol. 191, pp. 49–60 (2010)
19. Radhakrishna, B., Rao, T.N.: Multipeak raindrop size distribution observed by UHF/VHF
wind proﬁlers during the passage of a mesoscale convective system. Mon. Weather Rev.
137(3), 976–990 (2009)
20. Sauvageot, H., Koﬃ, M.: Multimodal raindrop size distribution. J. Atmos. Sci. 57, 2480–2492
(2000)
21. Olsen, R.L., Rogers, D.V., Hodge, D.B.: The aRb relation in the calculation of rain attenuation.
IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag. AP-26(2), 318–329 (1978)
22. Mie, G.: Beiträge zur Optik trüber Medien, speziell kolloidaler Metallösungen. Ann. Phys.
330, 377–445 (1908)
23. Ippolito, L.J.: Satellite Communications Systems Engineering: Atmospheric Eﬀects, Satellite
Link Design and System Performance. Wiley, Washington, DC (2008)
24. ITU-R: R-REC-P.838-3 - Speciﬁc attenuation model for rain for use in prediction methods
(2005)
25. Mishchenko, M.I., et al.: On deﬁnition and measurement of extinction cross section. J. Quant.
Spectrosc. Radiat. Transfer 110, 323–327 (2009)
26. van de Hulst, H.C.: Light Scattering by Small Particles. Wiley, New York (1957)
176
K.-M.E. Ekerete et al.

27. Ulbrich, C.W.: Natural variations in the analytical form of the raindrop size distribution. J.
Clim. Appl. Meteorol. 22, 1764–1775 (1983)
28. Odedina, M.O., Afullo, T.J.: Determination of rain attenuation from electromagnetic
scattering by spherical raindrops: theory and experiment. Radio Sci. 45(1) (2010)
29. Distromet: Disdrometer RD-80, D. Ltd, Editor, Switzerland (2002)
30. Atas, D., Srivastava, R.C., Sekhon, R.S.: Doppler radar characteristics of precipitation at
vertical incidence. Rev. Geophys. Space Phys. 11, 1–35 (1973)
31. Montopoli, M., et al., Statistical characterization and modeling of raindrop spectra time series
for diﬀerent climatological regions. IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens. 46(10) (2008)
32. Townsend, A.J., Watson, R.J.: The linear relationship between attenuation and average rainfall
rate for terrestrial links. IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag. 59(3), 994–1002 (2011)
33. Islam, T., et al.: Characteristics of raindrop spectra as normalized gamma distribution from a
Joss-Waldvogel disdrometer. Atmos. Res. 108, 57–73 (2012)
34. Thurai, M., et al.: Towards completing the rain drop size distribution spectrum: a case study
involving 2D video disdrometer, droplet spectrometer, and polarimetic radar measurements
in Greely, Colorado. In: AMS Conference on Radar Meteorology, Norman, Oklahoma, USA
(2015)
35. Tokay, A., Kruger, A., Krajewski, W.F.: Comparison of drop size distribution measurements
by impact and optical disdrometers. J. Appl. Meteorol. 40, 2083–2097 (2001)
36. McFarquhar, G.M., List, R.: The eﬀect of curve ﬁts for the disdrometer calibration on raindrop
spectra, rainfall rate, and radar reﬂectivity. J. Appl. Meteorol. 32, 774–782 (1993)
37. Mätzler, C.: MATLAB Functions for Mie Scattering and Absorption. Institut für Angewandte
Physik (2002)
38. Segelstein, D.: The Complex Refractive Index of Water, University of Missouri, Kansas City,
USA (1981)
Speciﬁc Rain Attenuation Derived from a Gaussian Mixture Model
177

Cognitive Interference Management Techniques
for the Spectral Co-existence of GSO and NGSO
Satellites
Ameneh Pourmoghadas(B), Shree Krishna Sharma,
Symeon Chatzinotas, and Bj¨orn Ottersten
SnT - Securityandtrust.lu, University of Luxembourg,
Luxembourg, Luxembourg
ameneh.pourmoghaddaslangroudi@uni.lu
Abstract. One of the main challenges in the co-existence of geostation-
ary satellite orbit (GSO) and non-geostationary satellite orbit (NGSO)
satellite networks is to mitigate the in-line interference caused by an
NGSO satellite to the GSO earth terminal, while the NGSO satellite is
crossing the GSO satellite’s illumination zone. The method recommended
in ITU-R S.1325-3 involves utilizing a range-based power control on the
NGSO satellite for downlink communication to the NGSO earth termi-
nals. In this paper, we investigate a cognitive range-based power con-
trol algorithm while taking into account the imposed interference level
to the GSO ﬁxed satellite service (FSS) system. Results show that the
proposed cognitive power control algorithm can mitigate the harmful in-
line interference on the GSO terminal receiver, while also providing the
desired link quality for the NGSO system. More importantly, we formu-
late and solve an optimization problem with the objective of minimizing
the inter-site distance (ISD) of the GSO-NGSO earth user-terminals.
Finally, we develop an analytical method to calculate the ISD between
GSO and NGSO earth terminals and validate this with the help of sim-
ulation results.
1
Introduction
Satellites communications today provide many possibilities and opportunities
to achieve better quality of service and extend backhaul services to anywhere
and any-time [1]. However, ﬁxed satellite service (FSS) involves deployment of
a large number of user terminals on the earth. Further study on uncoordinated
techniques for satellite systems is required to mitigate the interference caused by
an adjacent satellite network to FSS systems. In general, the main contribution
of the networking solutions for satellite networks are involved in techniques for
satellite energy saving [2], eﬃcient resource allocation [3], and FSS system inter-
ference mitigation [1,4]. Studies on eﬃcient usage of satellite resources and their
co-existence with either terrestrial systems or other satellite networks exist in the
literature [5,6]. The co-existence of satellite systems with either other satellite
systems or terrestrial networks can be achieved by employing suitable resource
c
⃝ICST Institute for Computer Sciences, Social Informatics and Telecommunications Engineering 2017
I. Otung et al. (Eds.): WiSATS 2016, LNICST 186, pp. 178–190, 2017.
DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-53850-1 18

Interference Mitigation in Co-existence of GSO and NGSO Systems
179
allocation and interference mitigation techniques [7,8]. Apart from the require-
ment of ﬁnding intelligent (or cognitive) resource allocation, it is important to
ensure that the co-existence of multi-satellite systems does not cause interference
to other co-channel systems such as FSS systems, mobile satellite services (MSS),
or terrestrial systems. In particular, the interference mitigation is more compli-
cated considering a practical dual satellite system (DSS) scenario, in which two
satellites (e.g., GSO-NGSO satellites) operate over the same coverage area while
sharing the spectrum bands [9]. In the co-existence scenarios of GSO-NGSO net-
works, in-line interference arises whenever an NGSO satellite passes through a
line of sight path between an earth station and a GSO satellite [10]. It occurs
due to the fact that an NGSO satellite may create/receive interference through
its sidelobe or mainlobe to the GSO system (please see Fig. 1). To understand
this scenario better, we can consider the co-existence of O3b satellites within
±5◦latitude from the equator and GSO Eutelsat KA-SAT satellite [longitude:
9.0◦, inclination: 0.01◦]. The O3b satellite which uses the medium earth orbit
(MEO) constellation and shares the frequency 18.8–19.3 GHz in downlink com-
munication with the GSO system, has a high potential to cause interference to
the GSO FSS system. In this context, one of the key challenges that has been
identiﬁed in ITU Radio Regulations and European Space Agency is the need to
explore eﬃcient techniques to mitigate the in-line interference for the spectral
co-existence of GSO-NGSO satellite networks.
1.1
Related Literature
Various studies have been conducted to address challenges in interference mitiga-
tion in the literature and ITU-R reports [5–10]. Concerning the uncoordinated
(cognitive) techniques some of these approaches are: satellite selection strate-
gies with the largest angular discrimination [11]; spot turnoﬀmethod [12,13];
and power control technique [10]. In the last technique, a cognitive transmission
power algorithm is used to provide the required signal to noise ratio (SNR) at
the receiver and maintain the interference level at the victim receiver. Most of
the studies on dynamic transmission power controls on satellite stations involves
on-board energy saving, without attention to investigations on controlling the
imposed interferences on the victim receiver [17,18]. Besides, majority of the
research works in the literature have been carried out for individual satellite
systems. Wherein, the integration between diﬀerent satellite constellations plays
a key role in moving towards the next generation of the satellite networks. A
more related work to the objective of current paper can be found in [10,19].
Authors in [19] ﬁnd the minimum separation distance between terrestrial base
station (BS) and FSS earth station by considering the interference caused from
terrestrial BS to the FSS earth station. In [10] a cognitive transmission power
algorithm is used to provide the required signal to noise ratio (SNR) at the
receiver and maintain the interference level at the victim receiver. Nevertheless,
the impact of the inter-site distance (ISD) between GSO-NGSO earth terminals
on the interference level of the victim GSO earth receiver is not studied.

180
A. Pourmoghadas et al.
1.2
Motivation and Contributions
According to the ITU-R S.1325-3 recommendation, adaptive power control on
range in the downlink is one of the useful interference mitigation techniques in
facilitating spectrum sharing between GSO and NGSO networks. This technique
is left for further investigation in ITU-R S.1325-3. Besides, studies on earth
terminal deployment strategies (such as inter-site distance among terminals) is
one of the possible approaches for the eﬃcient use of limited spectrum bands
and network’s capacity improvement [19]. In this context, the main contributions
of this paper are as follows: (1) We utilize the cognitive power control in [10]
based on the range (distance between NGSO satellite and NGSO earth terminal)
in the co-existence scenario of GSO and NGSO FSS systems. (2) We analyse
the feasibility of the cognitive range-based power control method in terms of
GSO-NGSO geometry. (3) More importantly, we develop a theoretical model for
minimum possible between the GSO and NGSO FSS earth terminals through
analysis. (4) We present the improvements on the minimum ISD between FSS
earth terminals using the proposed model, in which the NGSO satellite does not
utilize any dynamic power control method on-board.
The rest of the paper is as follows: Sect. 2 provides the system model and the
in-line interference scenario. The cognitive range-based power control is deﬁned
in Sect. 3. We propose a method to determine the minimum ISD between FSS
earth terminals in Sect. 4. Section 5 provides the analysis and simulation results.
Finally, we draw the conclusion in Sect. 6.
2
System Model and Interference Scenario
In accordance with the co-existence of GSO-NGSO FSS systems while sharing
spectrum on downlink1 and uplink, the following in-line interference scenarios
are probable to occur [10]: (1) Interference from the NGSO satellite to the GSO
earth terminal in the downlink. (2) Interference from the GSO earth terminal
to the NGSO satellite in the uplink. (3) Interference from the GSO satellite
to the NGSO earth terminal in the downlink. (4) Interference from the NGSO
earth terminal to the GSO satellite in the uplink. In this paper, we consider the
GEO and MEO constellations, where an O3b satellite in MEO orbit is chosen
as the use case scenario causing harmful in-line interference to the GSO earth
terminal. Earth terminals are the user terminals operating in Ka-band in the FSS
system such as VSAT. Reports in ITU-R S.1325-3 indicate that the number of
interference events from NGSO satellite on GSO earth terminals observed more
in downlink communication. Therefore, in this work, we focus on the downlink
in-line interference from NGSO satellite to the GSO earth terminal (item (1)
from the above listed bullets, please see Fig. 1), and we leave the rest of the
scenarios for future work. Throughout this paper, we have assumed that the
transmitters of the NGSO satellite communicate with their wanted receivers
1 Throughout this article, the interference in downlink refers to the user-link interfer-
ence.

Interference Mitigation in Co-existence of GSO and NGSO Systems
181
Az
h'
h'
N-GSO terminal
el
el
N-GSO satellite
GSO satellite
ISD
Wanted signal
Interfere signal 
2
GSO terminal
1
Fig. 1. The interference scenario between GSO and NGSO FSS systems.
(NGSO earth terminal) along the boresight direction (i.e., oﬀ-axis angle = 0◦);
which means that the antenna gain of the NGSO satellite and the NGSO earth
terminal remains ﬁxed in the downlink communication. In our system model, we
have assumed free space loss (FSL) on the direct or interference channels, and
fading phenomena such as diﬀraction or tropospheric propagation eﬀects etc.,
are not taken into account.
3
Cognitive and Range-Based Power Control Algorithms
According to the ITU-R S.1325-3 recommendation, NGSO satellite can decrease
or increase the transmission power based on the range, while providing the
desired SNR level to the NGSO earth terminal. This is known as a range-based
power control method. To enhance this method, we propose a cognitive range-
based power control algorithm at the NGSO satellite. In the proposed algorithm,
the NGSO satellite will decrease or increase its transmission power while its dis-
tance to the NGSO earth terminal is getting shorter or longer accordingly. We
have considered two threshold values for optimizing the transmission power of
the NGSO satellite. The minimum SNR level at the wanted receiver, SNRmin,
and the tolerable interference threshold at the victim receiver, Ith. We deﬁne
two power control methods in the following subsections. In the rest of this work,
the following subscripts are used: e for the earth system, s for the satellite, n for
the NGSO system, and g for the GSO system.
3.1
Range-Based Power Control Method
To compute the transmission power on the NGSO satellite as a function of
range, dne,ns (see Fig. 1), we ﬁrst need to ﬁnd the SNR level at the NGSO earth
terminal. Using the FSL model, the received power at the NGSO earth terminal
from the NGSO satellite can be computed as:
Prxne = Ptxns(dne,ns)Gtxns(0)Grxne(0)FSL(λ, dne,ns),
(1)

182
A. Pourmoghadas et al.
where Prxne [W] is the desired receive power at the input to the NGSO earth
terminal antenna, Ptxns [W] is the transmit power of the NGSO satellite sta-
tion, and function FSL(λ, d) =
 λ
4πd
2, in which λ is the wavelength. Gtxns(0),
Grxne(0) are the transmit and receive antenna gains of the NGSO satellite and
earth terminal along the boresight direction, respectively. The received SNR at
the NGSO earth terminal is deﬁned as:
SNR = Ptxns(dne,ns)Gtxns(0)Grxne(0)
N

λ
4πdne,ns
2
,
(2)
where N [W] is the thermal noise power at the receiver and can be expressed as:
N = k × Tne × BW,
(3)
where k is the Boltzmann’s constant (1.38 × 10−23 [J/K]), and Tne [K] is the
noise temperature at the NGSO earth terminal, and BW [Hz] is the receiver
bandwidth. In order to guarantee SNRmin at the NGSO earth terminal the
transmit power on the NGSO satellite as a function of range can be computed
as follows.
Ptxns(dne,ns) =
SNRmin × N
Grxne(0) × Gtxns(0)
4πdne,ns
λ
2
.
(4)
3.2
Cognitive Range-Based Power Control Method
The range-based power control technique in Eq. (4) satisﬁes the required
SNRmin at the NGSO earth terminal receiver to close the link. To apply the
range-based power control in the considered coexistence scenario, we re-write
this technique by taking into account the interference threshold level (Ith) of the
GSO earth terminal as following optimization problem2.
minimize
Ptx(dne,ns)
C.1.
SNR ≥SNRmin
C.2.
I ≤Ith
C.3.
Ptx(dne,ns) ≤Ptxmax,
(5)
where Ptxmax is the available maximum transmission power on NGSO satellite
board. In Eq. (5), conditions C.1 is to take care of the NGSO FSS QoS require-
ment, C.2 is to avoid harmful interference on the GSO earth terminal, and C.3
is to make sure the range-based transmission power allocation does not exceed
Ptxmax. I is the interference ratio with respect to the wanted signal SNR at the
GSO earth terminal as follows.
I = Ptx(dne,ns)Gtxns(θns)Grxge(θge)
FSL(λ, dge,ns)
,
(6)
2 In this technique we have assumed that Ith level at the victim GSO earth termianl
is known in public domain.

Interference Mitigation in Co-existence of GSO and NGSO Systems
183
where Ptx(dne,ns) [W] is the available transmit power at the NGSO satellite
computed in Eq. (4), dge,ns [m] is the distance between the GSO earth terminal
and NGSO satellite, and Gtxns(θns), Grxge(θge) are the transmit and receive
antenna gains at the oﬀ-axis angles of the NGSO satellite and GSO earth termi-
nal respectively. The values of the parameters are given in the Table 1. Depend-
ing, on the geometry of the considered earth stations and satellites, it is obvious
that the optimization problem in Eq. (5) may not be feasible when NGSO satel-
lite is closer to the GSO earth station and far from the NGSO earth station.
In this case, although the NGSO satellite can use the maximum power for its
transmission to close the link with the NGSO earth station receiver, it may not
satisfy the interference threshold level at the GSO earth station. Therefore, it is
better to handover the transmission to the next NGSO satellite that has better
link conditions. This challenge motivates us to ﬁnd the possible minimum ISD
between the GSO-NGSO earth terminals such that the threshold constraints (in
Eq. (5)) are satisﬁed.
In following, we ﬁrst discuss the geometry determination of ISD between
earth stations; then we follow the optimization problem for computing the min-
imum distance, ISDmin, between GSO and NGSO earth terminals.
4
Proposed ISD Determination Method
In this section, we develop an analytical method for ﬁnding the minimum ISD
between the GSO and NGSO earth terminals by formulating an optimization
problem. Our optimization problem will take into account the interference level
from NGSO satellite to the GSO earth terminal in downlink communication.
We have assumed that the position of GSO earth terminal is ﬁxed, and we can
only control the repositioning of the NGSO earth terminal. In this analysis it is
assumed that satellite communication system operators have complete freedom
in determining the geographical location of ground stations. First, let’s ﬁnd a
relation between the ISD and the wanted range between NGSO satellite and
Fig. 2. Geometry of GSO and NGSO FSS systems with respect to the ISD.

184
A. Pourmoghadas et al.
earth terminal, dne,ns (please see Fig. 2). Having the altitude, longitude and
latitude of each earth terminal and satellite we can compute distance between
any earth terminal to any given satellite (d∗e,∗s), as follows.
d∗e,∗s = rsat

1 +
 R2
E
rsat
2
−2
 R2
E
rsat

cos ω cos Γ,
(7)
where rsat is the satellite radius, RE is the earth radius, ω is the diﬀerence
in longitude, in degrees, between the earth station and the satellite, and Γ is
the earth station latitude in degrees. Let’s denote local heights of the GSO and
NGSO earth terminals as h′
1 and h′
2 respectively. Then, we have:
L =
h2
tan(ε2), h2 = dne,ns × sin(ε′
2) + H, H = |h′
1 −h′
2|,
(8)
where L is the horizontal distance of the NGSO satellite from the GSO earth
terminal, h1 and h2 are the altitudes of the GSO and NGSO satellites from
the horizontal plane of the GSO terminal. ε2 is the elevation angle of the NGSO
satellite from the GSO earth terminal, and, ε′
2 is the elevation angle of the NGSO
satellite from the NGSO earth terminal. From Eq. (8), we can compute L as:
L = dne,ns × sin(ε′
2) + H
tan(ε2)
.
(9)
Since L is known, we can compute the horizontal distance between NGSO and
GSO earth terminals, D, as follows.
D = dne,ns + sin(ε′
2) + H
tan(ε2)
+ dne,ns × cos(φ)cos(ε′
2).
(10)
where φ is the azimuth angle of the NGSO earth terminal from the GSO earth
horizon in degrees. ISD can be computed as
ISD(ε2, ε′
2, φ, dne,ns) =

D2 + a2;
a = dne,ns × cos(ε′
2)sin(φ).
(11)
As ISD is a function of dne,ns, we propose an optimization problem for minimiz-
ing the ISD as follows.
minimize
dne,ns
ISD(ε2, ε′
2, φ, dne,ns)
subject to C.1, C.2, and C.3 in Eq. (5)
(12)
By replacing SNR with SNRmin in Eq. (4), and from Eq. (6), the conditions
C.1 and C.2 in Eq. (12) give us the following restriction on the distance between
the NGSO satellite and earth terminal systems.
dne,ns ≤

Ith
SNRmin
×
F(dge,ns, θsn, θge)
C

.
(13)

Interference Mitigation in Co-existence of GSO and NGSO Systems
185
Table 1. System parameters
Parameter
Value
Downlink frequency channel
18.8 GHz
BW
125 MHz
Grxen(θ), Grxeg(θ)
ITU-R S.1428
Gtxsn(θ), Gtxsg(θ)
ITU-R S.1528, ITU-R S.672-4
h′
1, h′
2
7 m, 12 m
GSO earth antenna diameter
0.9 m
NGSO earth antenna diameter
1.2 m
NGSO satellite antenna diameter
0.361 m
Tne, Tge
275 K
GSO (Eutelsat) satellite [lat, lon, alt]
[0◦S ± 0.1◦, 9◦E ± 0.1◦, 35, 794 km]
NGSO (O3b) satellite [lat, lon, alt]
[1.55◦S, 31.1◦E, 8, 062 km]
GSO terminal [lat, lon]
[7.79◦S, 24.25◦E]
NGSO satellite EIRP in the direction of the
NGSO receiver earth station
10 dBW
Ith
–10 dB
SNRmin
10 dB, 15 dB
By assuming the oﬀ-axis angles (θsn, θge), and dge,ns are not changing, F can
be considered as a constant term. The constant term C contains antenna gains
of NGSO systems on boresight angle (θ = 0). Therefore, by substituting dne,ns
from Eqs. (13) into (11), the minimum value for ISD can be computed.
In next section, we provide results for the cognitive and range-based mecha-
nisms in the co-existence of GSO-NGSO FSS systems. Besides, we provide the
results in terms of the link (SNR) outage probability for the NGSO link. We also
compare the results for ISDmin, using the analytical model in Eq. (11), and the
simulation results.
5
Numerical and Simulation Results
In this section, ﬁrst, we compare results of the range-based power control with
the cognitive range-based power control method. Then, we explain a Monte Carlo
technique, which is conducted for computing the ISDmin in our simulation, and
we compare this result with the analytical model provided in Sect. 4. We have
assumed that the traﬃc statistics do not vary with geographic location or ser-
vice type. Throughout our numerical results, it is assumed that the NGSO earth
terminal is in association with the constellation, and tracks the corresponding
NGSO space station once a communication link is established. We increased
the range, dne,ns, by moving the NGSO satellite on its longitude. The range
between NGSO satellite and earth systems is in associate with the elevation

186
A. Pourmoghadas et al.
Fig. 3. (a) Comparison of the power transmission on the NGSO satellite, (b) Inter-
ference level comparison at GSO earth terminal; SNRmin = 15 dB, Ith = −10 dB,
EIRP = 10 dBW.
Fig. 4. (a) CDF of interference for GSO earth terminal, SNRmin = 10 dB, (b)
Probability of outage in SNR for NGSO earth terminal from single NGSO satellite,
EIRP = 10 dBW.
angle on the NGSO earth terminal, ε′
2. Once the elevation angle of the NGSO
earth terminal is lower than the minimum elevation angle, the NGSO earth ter-
minal communicates with the next available NGSO satellite with highest eleva-
tion angle (90◦). The minimum elevation angle is considered to be 5◦for NGSO
earth terminal. Figure 3(a) shows the transmission power of the NGSO satel-
lite operating with the range-based algorithm, in comparison with the NGSO
satellite that does not utilize any power control mechanism. As it is depicted in
Fig. 3(a), the NGSO satellite without any dynamic power control, operates with
the maximum transmission power constantly3. Wherein, with the range-based
3 Note that in our numerical calculation, we have used the eﬀective isotropically radi-
ated power (EIRP) of the NGSO satellite, which is calculated as EIRP [dBW] =
10 × (log10 Ptxmax[W] + log10 Gtxsn(0)).

Interference Mitigation in Co-existence of GSO and NGSO Systems
187
power control, the transmission power of the NGSO satellite gradually increases
with respect to the distance range, dne,ns. To evaluate the eﬀect of the cognitive
range-based power control on the interference level of the GSO earth terminal,
please see Fig. 3(b). As it comes from the Fig. 3(b), interference level decreases
when the range between NGSO satellite station and GSO earth terminal, dge,ns,
increases. However, the range-based power control has no limit on the inter-
ference level of the GSO earth terminal, and it can reach above the Ith with
smaller dge,ns. Whereas, with the cognitive range-based power control, the GSO
doesn’t receive harmful in-line interference above the threshold level. As it is
depicted in Fig. 3(b), Eq. (5) has no-feasible solution when the NGSO satellite is
getting closer to the GSO earth terminal and getting far from the NGSO earth
terminal. Cumulative distribution function (CDF) of the interference level at the
GSO earth terminal with respect to the same distances in Fig. 3(b), is shown in
Fig. 4(a). To evaluate the eﬀect of the no-feasible solution results on the SNR
level of the NGSO earth terminal, please see Fig. 4(b). Using simulation results
we have compared the probability of outage in SNR for NGSO earth terminal
in this ﬁgure. The probability of outage in SNR is calculated as the ratio of
the total number of no-feasible solutions and the number of the NGSO satellite
movement in the arc between [5◦≤ϵ′
2 ≤90◦]. As it comes from the Fig. 4(b),
the outage probability on NGSO earth terminal increases for smaller Ith require-
ments, whereas, in the range-based power control method the outage probability
does not vary with Ith.
5.1
Monte Carlo Method for Choosing ISDmin Between Earth
Terminals and Their Associated GSO-NGSO Satellite Coverage
In this method, for N number of times, we simulate a GSO earth terminal loca-
tion randomly distributed with an associated GSO satellite, which is at a ﬁxed
location. The GSO earth terminal locations are computed by choosing a random
latitude from −45◦to 45◦and a random longitude within 0◦to 45◦, which is
the coverage of the earth from an O3b satellite, that can be interfered with the
GSO satellite coverage. The longitude of the GSO earth terminal is chosen by
a uniform probability distribution within [0◦, 45◦]. Whereas, to take care of the
spherical shape of the earth, the latitude distribution of the GSO earth terminal
is chosen from following function
F(x, 45◦) = (180/π) arcsin(sin(45 × π/180)(2x −1)),
(14)
where x is an uniformly distributed variable between [0, 1]. Once the GSO earth
terminal location is chosen, it is tested to see if the elevation angle, ε1, is within
the minimum operating elevation angle of the GSO network or not. The mini-
mum elevation angle at the GSO earth terminal location should be greater than
or equal to 10◦(ITU-R S.1325-3). If not, this location is not included as one of
the locations simulated. To ﬁnd the minimum distance between the GSO and
NGSO earth terminals, we locate the associated NGSO satellite in random lon-
gitudes such that it has minimum elevation angle to the NGSO earth terminal.

188
A. Pourmoghadas et al.
The minimum elevation angle deﬁnes the worst case scenario, where dne,ns is at
the maximum distance. Once the GSO earth terminal location is selected, then,
with respect to azimuth angle of the GSO terminal, 0◦≤φ ≤360◦, NGSO earth
terminal will be localized. For each azimuth angle, the ISDmin will be found
such that its elevation angle with the associated NGSO satellite is 5◦, and the
optimization problem in Eq. (12) is satisﬁed. We have assumed that the com-
puted ISDmin in this worst case scenario, in which ε′
2 = 5◦, is always greater
than the minimum required distance between the two earth terminals. We have
compared the result of this simulation with the results of the analysis formula
for ISD, using Eqs. (11) and (13) in Fig. 5. This result is compared with when
the NGSO satellite operates with the maximum transmission power in Fig. 5. As
it comes from this ﬁgure, the cognitive range-based power control method can
signiﬁcantly reduce the ISDmin between FSS earth terminals.
Fig. 5. ISDmin between GSO and NGSO earth terminals.
6
Conclusions
In this work, we proposed to employ a cognitive range-based power control mech-
anism for an NGSO satellite operating in the downlink mode. We have examined
the proposed power control method with the range-based power control mecha-
nism suggested by ITU-R S.1325-3. The results verify that the cognitive power
control method avoids the harmful in-line interference on the victim receiver. We
note that although ﬁnding the distance from the satellite to an adjacent earth
terminal is not practically possible, still our optimization problem can beneﬁt
the victim receiver by maintaining Ith as a constant all the time. This threshold
value lessens the imposed harmful interference on the adjacent earth terminals.
We also proposed an optimization problem for ﬁnding the minimum inter-side
distance between the FSS earth stations. The proposed ISD optimization tech-
nique can play a critical role in optimizing the network planing strategies.

Interference Mitigation in Co-existence of GSO and NGSO Systems
189
Acknowledgement. This work was supported by the National Research Fund,
Luxembourg under the project “HSBNet”.
References
1. Evans, B., Werner, M., Lutz, E., Bousquet, M., Corazza, G.E., Maral, G.: Inte-
gration of satellite and terrestrial systems in future multimedia communications.
IEEE Wirel. Commun. 12(5), 72–80 (2005)
2. Mohammed, H., Jakllari, G., Paillassa, B.: Network pruning for extending satellite
service life in LEO satellite constellations. Wirel. Netw. 1–13 (2015)
3. Kolodzy, P.: Interference avoidance spectrum policy task force. Technical report,
Federal Commun 02–135 (2002)
4. Laurent, C., Alamaac, A., Bousquet, M.: Interference and fade mitigation tech-
niques for Ka and Q/V band satellite communication systems. In: Proceedings of
the 2nd International Workshop of COST Action, vol. 280 (2008)
5. Dae-Sub, O., Ku, B.J., Kim, S.: Compatibility study on terrestrial radio system
operated in the coverage of multi-beam satellite system. In: 17th Asia-Paciﬁc Con-
ference on Communications (APCC). IEEE (2011)
6. Koletta, M., Milas, V.: Determination of the coordination area for mobile earth
stations operating with geostationary space stations in the frequency band shared
with the terrestrial services. In: IEEE VTC, pp. 2707–2710 (2005)
7. Chatzinotas, S., Ottersten, B., De Gaudenzi, R.: Cooperative and Cognitive Satel-
lite Systems. Academic Press, New York (2015)
8. Sharma, S.K., et al.: Satellite cognitive communications: interference modelling
and techniques selection. In: ASMS Conference and 12th SPSC Workshopp, pp.
111–118 (2012)
9. Chatzinotas, S., Sharma, S.K., Ottersten, B.: Frequency packing for interference
alignment-based cognitive dual satellite systems. In: Vehicular Technology Confer-
ence (VTC Fall), pp. 1–7. IEEE (2013)
10. Sharma, S.K., Chatzinotas, S., Ottersten, B.: In-line interference mitigation tech-
niques for spectral coexistence of GEO and NGEO satellites. Int. J. Satell. Com-
mun. Netw. 34(1), 11–39 (2016)
11. Wang, A.W.: Method and apparatus for providing wideband services using medium
and low earth orbit satellites. US Patent No. 7,627,284 (2009)
12. Vatalaro, F., Corazza, G., Caini, C., Ferrarelli, C.: Analysis of LEO, MEO, and
GEO global mobile satellite systems in the presence of interference and fading.
IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun. 13(2), 291–300 (1995)
13. Reed, A., Posen, M.: Interference in the ﬁxed satellite service bands between the
feeder-links of networks using nongeostationary satellites and network using geo-
stationary satellites. In: 3rd European Conference on Satellite Communications
(ECSC-3), Manchester, pp. 251–256 (1993)
14. Sharma, S.K., Chatzinotas, S., Ottersten, B.: Transmit beamforming for spectral
coexistence of satellite and terrestrial networks. In: 8th International Conference
on CROWNCOM, pp. 275–281 (2013)
15. Lei, S., Sung, K.W., Zander, J.: Controlling aggregate interference under adjacent
channel interference constraint in TV white space. In: 7th International Conference
on CROWNCOM, pp. 1–6. IEEE (2012)
16. Farrokhi, R., Liu, K.J., Tassiulas, L.: Transmit beamforming and power control for
cellular wireless systems. IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun. 16(8), 1437–1450 (1998)

190
A. Pourmoghadas et al.
17. Alvin, F., Eytan, M., Tsitsiklis, J.N.: Optimal energy allocation and admission
control for communications satellites. ACM Trans. Netw. 11(3), 488–500 (2003).
IEEE
18. Ganho, F., et al.: Energy-eﬃcient QOS provisioning in demand assigned satel-
lite NDMA schemes. In: 21st International Conference on ICCCN, pp. 1–8. IEEE
(2012)
19. Dae-Sub, O., et al.: A study on the separation distance for frequency sharing
between GSO network and terrestrial network in Ka band. In: Vehicular Technol-
ogy Conference, VTC Spring, pp. 2967–2971. IEEE (2008)

Technical Session 4

A 15.5 W Si-LDMOS Balanced Power Ampliﬁer with 53%
Ultimate PAE for High Speed LTE
B.A. Mohammed, N.A. Abduljabbar, M.A.G. Al-Sadoon, K. Hameed, A.S. Hussaini,
S.M.R. Jones, F. Elmegri, R.W. Clark, and R. Abd-Alhameed
(✉)
School of Engineering, Design and Technology, University of Bradford, Bradford, UK
{mbabuba1,r.a.a.abd,nabeel}@bradford.ac.uk, ash@av.it.pt
Abstract. In this paper, a 15.5 W Si-LDMOS balanced power ampliﬁer (PA)
technique operating in the 2.620–2.690 GHz frequency band for LTE systems is
presented. The ampliﬁer was designed using large signal Si-LDMOS models,
which demonstrated saturation P1dB of 41 dBm and 53% PAE. The AM-AM and
AM-PM measured data of the balanced ampliﬁer is extracted and embedded in
the device under test (DUT) based on IEEE 802.16 OFDM WLAN Transceiver
system. A simple linear model was design for behavioral modelling of memory-
less baseband digital pre-distorter. The nonlinearity of the balanced ampliﬁer has
been compensated using the Simulink version R2011a.
Keywords: Balanced power ampliﬁer (BPA) · Linearity · Power added
eﬃciency (PAE) · Long term evolution (LTE) · Digital pre-distortion (DPD)
1
Introduction
A number of modern wireless communication systems, adopt highly-eﬃcient modula‐
tion schemes to enhance spectral eﬃciency and increase multiple spectral user channels
for a wide range of data and voice services. These include orthogonal frequency division
multiplexing (OFDM) transceiver systems, such as long term evolution (LTE), wide‐
band code division multiple access (WCDMA), IEEE 802.16 OFDM WLAN transceiver
system and numerous IEEE wireless communication systems [1, 2]. These systems are
highly sensitive to nonlinear distortion eﬀects in the transmission path, due to their non-
constant envelope. Such systems produce high peak-to-average-power-ratio (PAPR).
Subsequently, the source of the nonlinear distortion eﬀects in the transceiver conﬁgu‐
ration is the RF power ampliﬁer; this research focuses on the design and modelling of
a high energy-eﬃcient power ampliﬁer with high linearity [1–3].
The RF power ampliﬁer is an important device not only in wireless communication
systems, but also in TV transmission, radar systems and RF heating. The amplitude of
radio frequency signal is increase to a certain level of ampliﬁcation [4, 5]. Spectral
eﬃciency and linearity are the main elements driving the design of power ampliﬁer. The
most challenging aspect of power ampliﬁer concept is achieving an excellent eﬃciency
with linearity [6]. However, the design of a power ampliﬁer has to be accomplished in
accordance with the system speciﬁcations, such as operating frequency, bandwidth,
output power, gain, linearity, eﬃciency and return loss [7]. According to [8, 9], linearity
© ICST Institute for Computer Sciences, Social Informatics and Telecommunications Engineering 2017
I. Otung et al. (Eds.): WiSATS 2016, LNICST 186, pp. 193–201, 2017.
DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-53850-1_19

is required to sustain information for error free transmission. Eﬃciency reduces power
consumption and improves battery life span at the mobile terminal [5, 10].
The eﬀect of spectral regrowth in power ampliﬁers has become a major concern in
communication systems engineering [11]. Spectral regrowth is the result of non-linearity
in the transmission path and leads to in-band and adjacent channel interference [3]. To
reduce the eﬀect of nonlinearity and achieve a state-of-the-art system, the power ampli‐
ﬁer must be designed carefully to give high data rate and spectral eﬃciency for high
speed broadband services. The best of these technologies embrace higher data rate and
higher spectral eﬃciency from 20 MHz signal bandwidth, downlink data rate of
100 Mbps, with the uplink rate of 50 Mbps obtainable [5, 12] (Fig. 1).
2-way 
Signal
SpliƩer
2-way 
Signal 
Combiner
Input
Internally Matched 
Class AB
Internally Matched
 Class AB
Output
50Ω 
Memory-less 
Nonlinear 
Baseband Digital 
Pre-distorter
Fig. 1. Balanced power ampliﬁer architecture.
This work is an extension of author’s previous work [3] where a design of balanced
RF power ampliﬁer is discussed. The amplitude-to-amplitude and amplitude-to-phase
characteristics (AM-AM/AM-PM) of the ampliﬁer is used in the modelling of nonli‐
nearities for a wireless metropolitan area network IEEE 802.16 OFDM transceiver.
Simulink version R2011a conﬁguration is introduced. Section 2 presents a balanced PA
conﬁguration; results will be discussed in Sect. 3. This section also covers the extraction
and modelling of AM-AM and AM-PM polynomials in the pre-distorter. Conclusions
from the work are drawn in Sect. 4.
2
Balanced Ampliﬁer Design
A balanced power ampliﬁer has been demonstrated in this paper and designed using two
transistor models for high data rate, providing eﬃciency with dynamic range of linearity.
Dynamic load adaptation is conveyed by the use of a 50 Ω, quarter wavelength
194
B.A. Mohammed et al.

transmission line impedance inverter. In the design of the balanced power ampliﬁer,
there are stages that must be followed to achieve high level performance [13, 14]. The
ﬁrst stage of the design is DC circuit design and simulation. Simulation of the DC circuit
determines the bias point and bias network. This is according to the class of operation
and power requirement. The bias condition set drain source voltage Vds = 28 V, drain
source current (Ids) = 422 mA and gate source voltage Vgs = 2.7 V. The bias network
is however designed based on class-AB carrier. The DC simulation results specify the
class of operation. The main purpose of good biasing is to prevent signal reﬂection. The
DC quiescent current is obtained to prevent signal distortion [5]. The radio frequency
is prevented from going back to the DC source. For the matching network, this transistor
requires no matching process, as indicated in the data sheet of the component, input and
output impedance are internally matched. The 21 mm length of micro-strip line are
connected using line-calc from Agilent advanced design system simulator (ADS) with
RT 5880 substrates, parameters; 𝜀r = 2.2, H = 0.508 mm, zo = ohms, T = 3 μm and tan
𝛿 = 0.017. The 50 Ω line impedance of open and short circuit is incorporated to right
angle of the RF blocking transmission lines. A class-AB power ampliﬁer element values
have been positioned using tune tool of the ADS simulator for best performance of the
proposed system.
Linear and nonlinear simulation was performed for class-AB design. The design and
simulation process for a class-AB ampliﬁer is necessary in order to prepare the single
stage class-AB design into a multiple stage balanced power ampliﬁer. The linear simu‐
lation shows a good ﬂat gain, where the S21 is almost 14 dB, the return loss, S11 and
S22 are also good. The nonlinear single tone simulation result for the class-AB ampliﬁer
was obtained. However, it achieved up to 29% PAE at 39 dBm P1dB. A 3 dB 2-ways
900 hybrid splitter was designed using 100 Ω impedance for optimum resistance. This
is to achieve 90° phase diﬀerence between the carrier class-AB and the peaking class-
AB ampliﬁer. For a two-stage balanced PA, the carrier and peaking bias points are in
the same mode, the input-output matching circuitry and the output impedances are
similar as well. For the two-way splitter, various simulation tests were performed such
as isolation response over the operating bandwidth, phase diﬀerence across port 1–2 and
1–3, and insertion loss response of the splitter [3]. From the 3 dB splitter design, the
insertion loss achieved is reasonably low due to the high return loss, the phase diﬀerence
of two signals are parallel to each other by 100 Ω, which means they are separated by
90° and have equal magnitude, and the isolation between 2 and 3, which results in
−48.56 dB at 2.655 GHz centre frequency. Consequently, these results represent a
response to protect the ampliﬁer with all the instruments connected to it and allow
measurement with reasonable accuracy. At the output of the two-stage ampliﬁer is a
combiner coupling the carrier and peaking ampliﬁer signals to the output of the balanced
ampliﬁer [3, 15].
Table 1 shows the performance of the present work in comparison with a few selected
PAs reported in the literature, taking account of operating frequency, output power,
eﬃciency and gain. In [4] a power ampliﬁer consisting of up to 54% PAE at 2.14 GHz
operating frequency is presented. The design presented a two stage line-up Doherty
ampliﬁers, consisting of a High Voltage HBT Doherty ﬁnal design is cascaded with a
20 W LDMOS Doherty driver, exhibiting up to 325 W (55 dBm) power to improve the
A 15.5 W Si-LDMOS Balanced Power Ampliﬁer with 53% Ultimate PAE
195

gain to 30 dB. In the case of [10] a high power hybrid envelope elimination and resto‐
ration transmitter was design using gallium arsenide high electron mobility transistor
(GaN-HEMT) at 2.655 GHz operating frequency. The design introduced a conventional
hybrid switching ampliﬁer with up to 71.2% PAE. However, the eﬃciency of H-EER
transmitter reduced down to 37.04% at 41.18 dBm Pout. In [11] a conventional balanced
ampliﬁer with 90° branch line hybrid coupler (BLHC) was used to achieve power
matching rather than maximum high gain. The impedance matching is not excellent and
there is inherent out-of-phase characteristic cause from the properties of 90° BLHC. To
improve the performance and correct the high signal reﬂection, an auxiliary ampliﬁer
was added to the conventional balanced ampliﬁer design, only to increase the PAE to
33.4%. The design for [13] use up to 250 W output power at saturation to achieve drain
eﬃciency of 60%. The ﬁnal 40 W GaN-HEMT Doherty power ampliﬁer design used a
digital pre-distorter to enhance linearity, as a result experienced reduction in PAE to
48%. Finally, in [14] a 10 W, Si-LDMOS transistor power ampliﬁer was presented with
50% PAE, 14.5 dB gain achieved at 41.8 dBm saturation within 1.8 to 2.0 GHz operating
frequency. The drawback of [14] is that heat sink is used due to excessive heating
produced by the ampliﬁer, which extensively aﬀect the general performance of the
system.
Table 1. Performance comparisons for various power ampliﬁers.
Device
fc [MHz]
PAE [%]
Pout [dBm]
Gain [dB]
Reference
LDMOS
2655
51
41
14.6
Balanced
LDMOS
2655
29
39
15
Class-AB
LDMOS
2140
54
48.77
30
[4]
G-HEMT
2655
37.14
41.18
12.78
[10]
G-HEMT
2125
33.4
34.9
7.7
[11]
G-HEMT
2500
48
46
13.4
[13]
LDMOS
1900
50
40
14.5
[14]
However, this work presents a simpliﬁed balanced ampliﬁer using Si-LDMOS tran‐
sistor while achieving up to 53% PAE, 14 dB gain at 41 dBm P1dB. This design is
matched perfectly due to the internal input and output matching network in the transistor
device. There is no evidence of leakage or signal reﬂection from the ﬁrst stage of the
design to the design of balanced ampliﬁer. Another advantage of this design is its
simplicity, requiring no auxiliary ampliﬁer or additional cascade Doherty device to
improve the eﬃciency. Additional circuitry accounts for extra power consumption and
results in negligible impact to the overall eﬃciency of the ampliﬁer [3].
3
Results and Discussion
The proposed balanced ampliﬁer consisting of two similar class-AB ampliﬁers has been
measured and discussed. The results show a useful extension of dynamic range with
good PAE, making this approach the best choice for LTE base station applications.
Figure 2 has shown the results of the balanced ampliﬁer in comparison with conventional
196
B.A. Mohammed et al.

class-AB ampliﬁer. The result have shown good performance from the balanced ampli‐
ﬁer, achieving up to 53% PAE with 14 dB gain at 41 dBm P1dB, as against the conven‐
tional class-AB ampliﬁer with 29% PAE, 39 dBm Pout and 15 dB gain.
24
26
28
30
32
34
36
38
40
42
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
Output Power [dBm]
Transducer Power Gain [dB]                     PAE [%]
Eff(Balanced Amp)
Eff(AB Amp)
Gain(Balanced Amp)
Gain(AB Amp)
Fig. 2. PAE and gain characterization for class AB and the proposed balanced PA.
In the one-tone nonlinear simulation test, AM-AM and AM-PM characterisation
parameters are also achieved as illustrated in Fig. 3. These are very important parameters
in the characterisation of PA. However, the AM-AM distortion appears in a nonlinear
PA, while the AM-PM distortion appears in MOSFET PAs and produce memory eﬀects.
The AM-AM and AM-PM transfer functions are used in the MATLAB curve ﬁtting to
generate coeﬃcients. The extracted AM-AM and AM-PM data are measured in ampli‐
tude and phase in the context of normalized input voltage as a function of output voltage
of the balanced ampliﬁer. These are AM-AM extracted data, exported to the MATLAB
curve ﬁtting to generate the following coeﬃcients: a6 = 33.066, a5 = −85.52, a4 = 82.06,
a3 = −34.052, a2 = 2.85, a1 = 3.21 and a0 = −0.01. The AM-AM distortion is eﬀected
by the device reaching a saturation point. The normalized input voltage as a function of
output phase of the balanced ampliﬁer is also considered with the following AM-PM
MATLAB ﬁtted coeﬃcients: b6 = 3.5485, b5 = −5.7836, b4 = 3.0384, b3 = −0.8434,
b2 = 0.1826, b1 = −0.0225 and b0 = 0.1001. The AM-PM distortion is eﬀected by the
device reaching a saturation point. These data will be embedded in the device under test
of a transmitter device, in a Simulink simulation based on IEEE 802.16 OFDM WLAN
transceiver system. The polynomial functions for AM-AM and AM-PM are respectively
given by the following equations:
y(t) = a5u5 + a4u4 + a3u3 + a2u2 + au + a0
(1)
A 15.5 W Si-LDMOS Balanced Power Ampliﬁer with 53% Ultimate PAE
197

z(t) = b5n5 + b4n4 + b3n3 + b2n2 + bn + b0
(2)
Simple linear formulas are presented for the functions involved in the amplitude and
phase nonlinear models of the balanced ampliﬁer, and are shown in Eqs. (1) and (2) to
ﬁt measured data very well. This model is exported to the memory-less baseband digital
pre-distorter to linearize the DUT at the front-end of the OFDM transceiver system.
Figure 4 illustrates results of a multiple-input-single-output (MISO) transceiver system
which is set to run on simple linear model with baseband digital pre-distortion to
compensate the nonlinearity of balanced power ampliﬁer. Figure 4a and b depict AM-
AM and AM-PM responses of the DUT without pre-distorter. Figure 4c and d is the
same amplitude and phase results of the DUT after switching on the baseband digital
pre-distorter of the transceiver system. The memory-less nonlinearity of the balanced
ampliﬁer has been compensated by the use of the digital pre-distortion mechanism. This
has proven that the simple linear model used on the IEEE 802.16 OFDM WLAN trans‐
ceiver system can model the AM-AM and AM-PM characteristics of the balanced
ampliﬁer.
10
12
14
16
18
20
22
24
26
28
30
32
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Input Power [dBm]
AM-AM [dBm]                                AM-PM [Deg]
  AM-AM
  AM-PM
Fig. 3. AM-AM and AM-PM characterization of balanced ampliﬁer.
198
B.A. Mohammed et al.

a.
b.
c.
d.
Fig. 4. a and b are the AM-AM/AM-PM responses of the DUT without pre-distortion, while c
and d the pre-distortion is included.
4
Conclusion
In this paper, a balanced RF power ampliﬁer was presented with a two class-AB ampli‐
ﬁers. The design used free-scale n-channel enhancement mode lateral MOSFET tran‐
sistor. Linear and nonlinear simulation was achieved with ADS simulator and on the
performance metric result is presented with considerable improvement. Comparison was
made between the conventional class-AB ampliﬁer and the double stage balanced RF
ampliﬁer. The balanced ampliﬁer exhibited acceptable improvement in-terms of PAE
and P1 dB by 22% and 2 dBm, with the gain decreasing by 1 dB. A relative comparison
was made with power ampliﬁers of various types and the present work has proven a
good choice of device.
This paper also conducted research on the eﬀect of balanced ampliﬁer AM-AM and
AM-PM characteristics, when the coeﬃcients are loaded onto the digital pre-distortion.
AM-AM and AM-PM coeﬃcients were converted to generate polynomials, using
A 15.5 W Si-LDMOS Balanced Power Ampliﬁer with 53% Ultimate PAE
199

MATLAB in the presence of a Simulink WLAN IEEE 802.16 OFDM transceiver system
for pre-distortion. The pre-distortion technique was able to properly correct the nonlinear
behaviour of the balanced RF power ampliﬁer using the simple linear model to model
the nonlinear characteristics of the balanced power ampliﬁer.
Acknowledgments. This work was partially supported by Yorkshire Innovation Fund, Research
Development Project (RDP) from United Kingdom; and Nigerian Communications Commission,
Abuja, Nigeria.
References
1. Helaoui, M., Boumaiza, S., Ghazel, A., Ghannouchi, F.M.: Low-IF 5 GHz WLAN linearized
transmitter using baseband digital predistorter. In: Proceedings of the 2003 10th IEEE
International Conference on in Electronics, Circuits and Systems, ICECS, vol. 1, pp. 260–263
(2003)
2. Raab, F.H., Asbeck, P., Cripps, S., Kenington, P.B., Popovic, Z.B., Pothecary, N., et al.: Power
ampliﬁers and transmitters for RF and microwave. IEEE Trans. Microw. Theory Tech. 50,
814–826 (2002)
3. Mohammed, B.A., Abduljabbar, N.A., Abd-Alhameed, A.A., Hussaini, A.S., Nche, C.,
Fonkam, M., et al.: Towards a green energy RF power ampliﬁer for LTE applications. In:
Internet Technologies and Applications (ITA), Wrexham, pp. 388–392 (2015)
4. Page, P., Steinbeiser, C., Landon, T., Burgin, G., Hajji, R., Branson, R., et al.: 325 W HVHBT
Doherty ﬁnal and LDMOS Doherty driver with 30 dB gain and 54% PAE linearized to −55 dBc
for 2c11 6.5 dB PAR. In: IEEE Circuit Symposium in Compound Semiconductor Integrated
(CSICS), pp. 1–4 (2011)
5. Hussaini, A.S., Sadeghpour, T., Abd-Alhameed, R., Child, M.B., Ali, N.T., Rodriguez, J.:
Optimum design of Doherty RFPA for mobile WiMAX base stations. In: Rodriguez, J.,
Tafazolli, R., Verikoukis, C. (eds.) MobiMedia 2010. LNICSSITE, vol. 77, pp. 700–705.
Springer, Heidelberg (2012). doi:10.1007/978-3-642-35155-6_59
6. Deguchi, H., Ui, N., Ebihara, K., Inoue, K., Yoshimura, N., Takahashi, H.: A 33 W GaN
HEMT Doherty ampliﬁer with 55% drain eﬃciency for 2.6 GHz base stations. In: IEEE MTT-
S International in Microwave Symposium Digest, pp. 1273–1276 (2009)
7. Wang, Z.: Demystifying envelope tracking: use for high-eﬃciency power ampliﬁers for 4G
and beyond. IEEE Microwave Mag. 16, 106–129 (2015)
8. Deguchi, H., Watanabe, N., Kawano, A., Yoshimura, N., Ui, N., Ebihara, K.: A 2.6 GHz band
537 W peak power GaN HEMT asymmetric Doherty ampliﬁer with 48% drain eﬃciency at
7 dB. In: IEEE MTT-S International Microwave Symposium Digest (MTT), pp. 1–3 (2012)
9. Ismail, A.A., Younis, A.T., Abduljabbar, N.A., Mohammed, B.A., Abd-Alhameed, R.A.: A
2.45-GHz class-F power ampliﬁer for CDMA systems. In: Internet Technologies and
Applications (ITA), pp. 428–433 (2015)
10. Ildu, K., Junghwan, M., Jangheon, K., Jungjoon, K., Cheol Soo, Kae-Oh, S.S., et al.: Envelope
injection consideration of high power hybrid EER transmitter for IEEE 802.16e mobile
WiMAX application. In: IEEE MTT-S International Microwave Symposium Digest, pp. 411–
414 (2008)
11. Jongsik, L., Chunseon, P., Jakyung, K., Hyeonwon, C., Yongchae, J., Sang-Min, H., et al.: A
balanced power ampliﬁer utilizing the reﬂected input power. In: IEEE International
Symposium on Radio-Frequency Integration Technology (RFIT), pp. 88–91 (2009)
200
B.A. Mohammed et al.

12. Markos, A., Bathich, K., Tanany, A., Gruner, D., Boeck, G.: Design of a 120 W balanced
GaN Doherty power ampliﬁer. In: Microwave Conference (GeMIC), German, pp. 1–4 (2011)
13. Sano, H., Ui, N., Sano, S.: A 40 W GaN HEMT Doherty power ampliﬁer with 48% eﬃciency
for WiMAX applications. In: IEEE Symposium in Compound Semiconductor Integrated
Circuit (CSIC), pp. 1–4 (2007)
14. Dai, D., Sun, L., Wen, J., Su, G., Guo, L.: A 10 W broadband power ampliﬁer for base station.
In: 2012 International Conference on Microwave and Millimeter Wave Technology
(ICMMT), pp. 1–4 (2012)
15. Kim, S., Moon, J., Lee, J., Park, Y., Minn, D., Kim, B.: Mitigating phase variation of peaking
ampliﬁer using oﬀset line. IEEE Microwave Wirel. Compon. Lett. 2, 1–3 (2016)
A 15.5 W Si-LDMOS Balanced Power Ampliﬁer with 53% Ultimate PAE
201

Energy Eﬃcient Adaptive Network Coding
Schemes for Satellite Communications
Ala Eddine Gharsellaoui1(B), Samah A.M. Ghanem2, Daniele Tarchi1,
and Alessandro Vanelli Coralli1
1 Department of Electrical, Electronic and Information Engineering,
University of Bologna, Bologna, Italy
{ala.gharsellaoui2,daniele.tarchi,alessandro.vanelli}@unibo.it
2 Huawei R&D Labs, Stockholm, Sweden
samah.ghanem@huawei.com
Abstract. In this paper, we propose novel energy eﬃcient adaptive net-
work coding and modulation schemes for time variant channels. We eval-
uate such schemes under a realistic channel model for open area envi-
ronments and Geostationary Earth Orbit (GEO) satellites. Compared to
non-adaptive network coding and adaptive rate eﬃcient network-coded
schemes for time variant channels, we show that our proposed schemes,
through physical layer awareness can be designed to transmit only if a
target quality of service (QoS) is achieved. As a result, such schemes can
provide remarkable energy savings.
Keywords: Energy eﬃciency · Network coding · Satellite communica-
tions
1
Introduction
Network coding is a transmission technique that, by performing algebraic oper-
ations across transmitted packets rather than relying on packet repetition or
replication, allows to reliably transmit with lower end to end delays in a com-
munication system. Additionally, network coding mechanisms are key enablers
to energy eﬃcient communications. Due to the steady increase in energy con-
sumption and energy costs in mobile communication systems, more eﬃcient
schemes are required. In particular, with higher reliability obtained via network
coding, less re-transmissions are required. Consequently, more energy savings
can be achieved [1]. Moreover, when the network coded schemes are speciﬁcally
designed for enhancing their awareness with respect to the system character-
istics, higher performance gains can be achieved in terms of delay, throughput
or energy eﬃciency [2,3]. One of the most important issue to be considered in
satellite communications is energy eﬃciency. In [4], several factors that have a
direct impact on energy eﬃciency of satellite and mobile terminals have been
discussed, including dynamic spectrum access and cross layer design. In [2,5],
c
⃝ICST Institute for Computer Sciences, Social Informatics and Telecommunications Engineering 2017
I. Otung et al. (Eds.): WiSATS 2016, LNICST 186, pp. 202–212, 2017.
DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-53850-1 20

Energy Eﬃcient Adaptive Network Coding Schemes for Satellite Scenarios
203
the authors show that channel-aware transmission schemes jointly with network
coding, can serve to reduce the delay and allow for energy performance gains.
In [3], the authors propose novel adaptive network coding schemes and show a
clear trade-oﬀbetween energy-driven channel-aware schemes, that remain silent
when channel encounter high erasures, and rate-driven channel-aware schemes
that chose to transmit more to account for erasures.
In this work, various aspects of energy eﬃciency using network coding and
modulation schemes are proposed. The schemes are evaluated in a realistic satel-
lite channel model for open area environments and Geostationary Earth Orbit
(GEO) satellites. Simulation results demonstrate clear trade-oﬀs among average
number of transmissions, delay, throughput and energy eﬃciency. We highlight
that adaptation through channel-aware policies allows for silence periods or less
transmissions which leads to signiﬁcant energy savings compared to non-adaptive
network coding or adaptive network coded schemes that are rate eﬃcient.
2
System Model
Our focus is on a GEO satellite communications system forward link trans-
mission, by considering a mobile terminal with constant speed in a open area
environment. In such system, the transmitter performs a Random Linear Net-
work Coding (RLNC), which is a Network Coding (NC) scheme that relies on
coding across the packets using random linear coeﬃcients in order to increase the
transmission reliability mimicking the wireless diversity concept. The open area
environment is modeled by resorting to the Land Mobile Satellite (LMS) model
in [6], that is one of the most known in the literature. This model is based on a
joint exploitation of a state based and a Loo based distribution [7] that allow to
eﬃciently reproduce the shadowing and fading eﬀects of a forward link satellite
channel under mobile terminal assumptions. In this paper, we capitalize on the
coded/uncoded packet transmission over the Markov model proposed in [2] to
analyze our proposed schemes that rely mainly on channel variation awareness.
Each state in the Markov model is represented by the couple (i, hj) that stands
for the number i of coded/uncoded packets to be sent and the channel state hj,
whose value varies over time. Therefore, such Markov model can be expressed
by a one-step transition probability matrix P, whose size is deﬁned by a ﬁnite
number of states, and its components are deﬁned by using two transition proba-
bility components: p(i,hj)→(i−1,hj+1) = 1 −Pe(hj), and p(i,hj)→(i,hj+1) = Pe(hj),
where Pe(hj) is the packet erasure probability at the channel state hj for the
duration of the packet transmission, and the probability of transitioning from
the channel state and back to itself equals zero due to channel variation over
time. This means that for a packet of size B bits, and with bit error proba-
bility Pb(hj) at a given channel state hj, the erasure probability is given as,
Pe(hj) = 1 −(1 −Pb(hj))B. We resort to the approximation of the delay under
network-coded transmission provided in [2], where the expected time to deliver

204
A.E. Gharsellaoui et al.
Ni coded packets is given as:
T(i, hj) = Td(Ni, hj) +
i

l=1
P Ni
(i,hj)→(l,hj+Ni) T(l, hj+Ni+1),
(1)
with Td(Ni, hj) = NiTp + Tw, where Tp is the duration of one packet, and Tw is
the waiting time for acknowledgment. P Ni
(i,hj)→(l,hj+Ni), corresponds to the tran-
sition probability between states at the N th
i
transition of matrix P. Finally, in
j + Ni + 1 the term +1 appears due to acknowledgment. Figure 1 illustrates
the Markov chain as proposed in [2]. This model of coded and uncoded packet
transmission over time varying channels assumes a ﬁnite number of time slots
for sending a given number of packets. Thus, the model and the delay approxi-
mation inherently constraints the number of re-transmissions of packets, but has
suﬃciently large number of slots for a reliable approximation.
3, h0
3, h1
3, h2
3, h3
...
2, h1
2, h2
2, h3
...
1, h2
1, h3
...
AbsorptionState
Pe(h0)
Pe(h1)
Pe(h2)
Pe(h1)
Pe(h2)
Pe(h2)
1 −Pe(h0)
1 −Pe(h1)
1 −Pe(h2)
1 −Pe(h1)
1 −Pe(h2)
1 −Pe(h3)
Pe(h3)
1 −Pe(h2)1 −Pe(h3)
1 −Pe(hj )
Pe(h3)
Pe(h3)
1 −Pe(h3)
Fig. 1. Time varying channel model of 3 packets transmission in [2]
3
Energy Eﬃcient Adaptive Network Coding Schemes
The main objective is to propose energy eﬃcient schemes by the exploitation of
the adaptation of the coded packets transmission to the channel awareness under
diﬀerent levels of algorithm complexities. We discuss three proposed schemes and
compare them to non-adaptive network coding scheme for time varying channels
and to the rate driven adaptive network coded scheme in [2].

Energy Eﬃcient Adaptive Network Coding Schemes for Satellite Scenarios
205
3.1
Adaptive Network Coding with Energy Eﬃciency (ANCEF)
This scheme adapts the transmission for achieving the energy eﬃcient, by fol-
lowing the observation of the channel erasure; the strategy is to transmit small
batches of coded packets if the observation of channel erasure is high (applies
to low SNR), and to transmit larger batches of coded packets if erasure is less
(applies to high SNR). Through this, the system can reduce transmissions and
re-transmissions and save energy. Furthermore, QoS measure has been intro-
duced to design such algorithm. In particular, if a bit error probability Pb less
than 10−5 is not met1, the transmitter will choose to be silent with no transmis-
sions. Therefore, much energy savings can be obtained. The following equation
illustrates the number of coded packets Ni required to be sent at the channel
state hj when i degrees of freedom (dof)2 are required at the receiver,
Ni =
j+i−1

s=j
(1 −Pe(hs)).
(2)
It’s worth mentioning that Ni required to be rounded to nearest decimal or
integer number, because it represents the number of coded packets. Moreover,
it is worth to note that the sum is expressed with a shifted start of the state of
measurements. This is due to the channel evolution over time, thus, a new round
of transmission/re-transmission is associated to shift in the channel window.
When erasures are high (at low SNR) such sum vanishes to zero corresponding
to no transmission. However, when erasures are very low (at high SNR) such
sum converges to the transmission of i degrees of freedom almost surely.
3.2
Self-Tracing Adaptive Network Coding with Energy Eﬃciency
(STANCEF)
In this scheme, we propose a self-tracing ANCEF scheme, which improves
ANCEF by adding to the observation of the channel erasure the capability of
looking-forward into the channel erasures if, looking-backwards, the packets at
earlier transmissions are lower than the dof. Thus, the transmission strategy of
such algorithm is similar to the ANCEF discussed in previous section, where less
coded packets will be transmitted adaptively at high erasures, and more packets
will be transmitted adaptively at low erasures. However, there is an amount of
coded packets Δi needed to be as additional amount of future re-transmissions
to establish all lost dof. Therefore, such Δi decreases as we move towards higher
SNR, until it vanishes to zero when the transmission strategy of Ni = i. Once
again, a certain QoS measure needs to be met, otherwise, the transmitter remains
1 The acceptable bit error rate acceptable by the ITU ranges between 10−3 to 10−6
based on the rate and service expected at the mobile terminal.
2 A degree of freedom corresponds to the number of linear combinations that are
required at the receiver to allow decoding the RLNC combined packets.

206
A.E. Gharsellaoui et al.
silent. The following equation represents the STANCEF transmission strategy of
the number of coded packets Ni required to be sent at a certain channel state hj:
Ni =
j+i+Δi−1

s=j
(1 −Pe(hs)),
(3)
where Δi is the foreseen losses due to self-tracing which is the diﬀerence between
i dof required at preliminary transmission at state hj∗and the number of coded
packets Ni adapted to the channel at the same state. It is given by, Δi = i−Ni,
where Δi equals 0 at the initial state of ﬁrst transmission. However, Δi is higher
or equal to 0, at h∗
j corresponds to zero or more coded packets contributed at a
re-transmission stage one step ahead of its previous transmission. Thus, Δi at h∗
j
will contribute to Ni at a forward channel state hj∗+Ni+1+1, where the addition
of one represents the one step ahead due to ACK after preliminary transmission
and before re-transmission.
3.3
Adaptive Network Coding and Modulation with Energy
Eﬃciency (ANCMEF)
In this scheme, we integrated adaptive modulation to the ANCEF scheme. The
rationale behind this, is that, on the one hand, a higher modulation order m
allows for transmitting the same amount of information in shorter packets due
to the concatenation of more bits in the real and imaginary spaces. On the
other hand, a higher modulation order is associated with higher energy per
symbol, and less energy per bit, i.e. Eb/N0 = Es/(N0 ∗log m). Thus, a higher
bit error probability suggests that higher number of packets need to be sent
due to adaptation. Such trade-oﬀbetween the packet length and the number of
coded packets for a given modulation scheme is of particular interest to address
when taking into account energy eﬃciency. ANCMEF transmission strategy of
coded packets Nim is given by,
Nim =
j+i∗log m−1

s=j
(1 −Pem(hs)),
(4)
Resorting to the energy eﬃciency of the proposed scheme, the lower bound
on random linear network coding, with Nim ≥i, i.e. with equality, is used,
this was reﬂected in the sum range, by scaling the degrees of freedom i by a
factor log m that uniﬁes the energy per symbol for each modulation scheme.
Pem(hs) is the erasure probability of that modulation which can be derived as
Pem = 1 −(1 −Pbm)B, where Pbm is the bit error probability for the given
modulation order m, and B is the number of bits per packet.
Indeed the aim of the scheme is to ﬁnd the optimal number of coded pack-
ets N m
i
for a given modulation order m to be transmitted/re-transmitted for
assuring successful reception of a given number of i dof along the way with
energy eﬃciency; hence when Pbm of m-th modulation order is derived, for fair
energy comparison among the diﬀerent modulation schemes, Es is supposed to
be constant for each modulation scheme.

Energy Eﬃcient Adaptive Network Coding Schemes for Satellite Scenarios
207
4
Numerical Results
We shall now provide a set of illustrative results that cast further insights to the
proposed schemes. Particularly, we focus on a satellite scenario and its related
LMS channel considering GEO satellite with delay Tw equals 0.2388 s, open area,
and a mobile terminal with speed of 10 m/s. To construct the simulation environ-
ment, we consider to transmit 4 coded packets/dof, the maximum batch length
due to channel adaptation of the schemes is constrained to 16 coded packets/dof,
and the number of transmission/re-transmission trials is constrained to 10. This
corresponds to a transition matrix of maximum size equals 401 × 401 including
one additional slot for absorption state, which changes entries and size according
to the transmitted packets.
The performance of the proposed schemes is compared in terms of average
number of sent packets, delay, throughput, and energy eﬃciency.
The two benchmark schemes are the non-adaptive network coding scheme
for time variant channels and the adaptive rate-eﬃcient network coding scheme,
both schemes are in [2]. In the non-adaptive network coding scheme, it is
clear that the number of coded packets are ﬁxed along the transmission/re-
transmission with no adaptation considered. The rate eﬃcient adaptive network
coding scheme is self explanatory, as it favors reliable transmission/reception and
higher rates over energy eﬃciency. Contrary to the non-adaptive network coding
scheme, the three proposed schemes adapt the number of coded packets for each
batch of transmission based on the missing dof and on the channel erasures at
a given window of estimated channel.
The modulation scheme considered is the BPSK in case of NC, ANC, ANCEF
and STANCEF, while the ANCMEF exploits four possible modulation schemes,
i.e., BPSK, QPSK, 8PSK and 16QAM, in order to eﬃciently exploit the channel
behavior. The selection of modulation order is driven by the Es/N0 level.
The number of bits per packet is considered to be 1000, and since the max-
imum number of packets per batch equals 16, the maximum possible batch of
packet size equals 16000 bits. This number of bits corresponds to the same, the
half, the one-third, and the one-forth number of samples in BPSK, QPSK, 8PSK,
and 16QAM, respectively.
First, the average number of coded packets sent back to back for the diﬀerent
schemes is compared; under diﬀerent Es/N0 values and with mobility speed
equals 10 m/s, this can be seen in Fig. 2. In general, we can see that the average
number of packets for all the schemes at low SNR is greater than those at
high SNR due to the higher probability of re-transmission at low SNR. Due to
energy eﬃciency rule, the average number of packets will be as much small as
to commensurate with the higher erasure probability at low Es/N0 values, since
they are designed to limit the number of sent packets in case of bad channel
conditions i.e., there is no need to spend more energy in such low chance of
delivery. This can be emphasized looking into the low SNR, where the erasure
probability is high such that energy eﬃcient schemes favor not to send anything
in order to avoid energy wasting; this is the contrary for the ANC benchmark
that has been designed to achieve the highest possible rates. It is worth to note

208
A.E. Gharsellaoui et al.
that the average number of coded packets in ANCMEF gets larger for higher
Es/N0 values; this is expected since we aim to adapt the number of sent packets
for achieving target reliability, keeping into account the energy eﬃciency.
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
Es/No (dB)
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
Average Number of Packets
NC
ANC
ANCEF
STANCEF
ANCMEF
Fig. 2. Average number of sent packets for variable Es/N0 values and 10 m/s mobility
speed.
However, the maximum constrained batch size in ANCMEF is aﬀected not
only by Es/N0 but also by modulation method and energy consumption, so at
low SNR it behaves similarly to the NC, then, going to higher SNR, it selects
a higher modulation order allowing to increase the transmission reliability by
the exploitation of higher diversity or modulation order. However, the increase
of number of packets of ANCMEF is associated to shorter size packets that
allows for equivalent energy per symbol for all modulation orders and across all
schemes.
In Fig. 3, we can see the behavior in terms of transmission delay for the
proposed schemes in a GEO satellite scenario. The proposed schemes have the
higher delay for low SNR values; this is due to the fact that the energy eﬃcient
adaptive schemes adapt its transmission to small size batches at the low Es/N0
associated with high erasures. Therefore, the transmission suﬀers from extra
waiting times for acknowledgment at the end of each short batch. Thus, as
illustrated in Fig. 3, the time spent waiting for acknowledgment is very large
compared to the time of delivering the coded packets. After a certain Es/N0
value, the schemes have similar performance due to the number of packets in each
batch that has been increased and then converged to the exact dof value of the
non-adaptive NC scheme. ANCMEF is not an exception since a normalization on
the average number of packets with log m matches with the dof for such shorter

Energy Eﬃcient Adaptive Network Coding Schemes for Satellite Scenarios
209
length packets. It is indeed straightforward to understand the delay saturation
of all schemes to its minimal value at the high SNR.
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
Es/No (dB)
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Delay (sec)
NC
ANC
ANCEF
STANCEF
ANCMEF
Fig. 3. Transmission delay in a GEO satellite scenario for variable Es/N0 values and
10 m/s mobility speed.
Figure 4 presents the throughput for the measured schemes NC and ANC
with the proposed ones, i.e., ANCEF, STANCEF and ANCMEF. For low and
intermediate Es/N0 values, the schemes show remarkable diﬀerences but all of
them give less throughput than ANC and NC schemes due to the reduced num-
ber of transmitted packets. However, we emphasize that the main aim of these
schemes is to avoid any source of energy consumption that rise due to bad
channel conditions, hence, our schemes favors to be silent from transmission,
than consuming energy by limiting the transmitted packets, and its utilization
to adaptive coding techniques allows for reliable transmission and less energy
due to decreased re-transmissions encountered. Thus, achieving less throughput
is understandable. Furthermore, its worth to observe that at a certain Es/N0, all
the schemes converge to maximum saturation throughput independent of mobile
speed or channel variation. While, ANCEF and ANCMEF almost coincide in the
performance behavior but not the reliability, we can see that STANCEF tries to
build a trade-oﬀthat resonates just in a limited throughput gain due to its dof
one step loss tractability. In fact, such a small gain in throughput is shown to be
associated with a small cost in the energy. For medium Es/N0 the extra com-
plexity due to self tractability and excess transmissions has no gains, therefore,
we see that STANCEF throughput performance deteriorate with respect to the
ANCEF and ANCMEF. Finally, Fig. 5 presents the most important part of this
study, the total energy consumption that has been calculated using both the

210
A.E. Gharsellaoui et al.
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
Es/No (dB)
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
Throughput (packets/sec)
NC
ANC
ANCEF
STANCEF
ANCMEF
Fig. 4. Throughput in a GEO satellite scenario for variable Es/N0 values and 10 m/s
mobility speed.
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
Es/No (dB)
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
200
Energy (mW/Hz)
NC
ANC
ANCEF
STANCEF
ANCMEF
Fig. 5. Energy consumed in a GEO satellite scenario for variable Es/N0 values and
10 m/s mobility speed.
spectral noise level as N0 = −107 dBm and the expected time needed to send 4
coded packets/dofs for each Es/N0 of each scheme. It is possible to note that all
the proposed schemes allow signiﬁcant gains in terms of energy consumption with
respect to the benchmarks. Its clear that at the low SNR we can see STANCEF

Energy Eﬃcient Adaptive Network Coding Schemes for Satellite Scenarios
211
gains roughly 15 mWatt/Hz with respect to the NC scheme. Moreover, it is worth
to see that ANCEF and ANCMEF reduce remarkably the energy consumption
by gaining up to roughly 20 mWatt/Hz with respect to the NC scheme; such an
amount might seem to be small, however, this represents very high ﬁgure in a
large scale system with multiple receivers. Furthermore, at the moderate Es/N0
we can see that due to the shorter sizes of the packets length used for higher
modulation orders, the ANCMEF continues to have highest energy eﬃciency
with further gains. Finally, at the high Es/N0 beyond 10 dB, is associated with
an increase in the transmitted message which necessarily increases the overall
system energy consumption.
5
Conclusions
This paper addresses energy eﬃcient adaptive network coding schemes for land
satellite mobile with time varying channel. We proposed three novel adaptive
physical layer aware schemes for coded packet transmission over LMS channel.
Those schemes compensate for the lost degrees of freedom by tracking the packet
erasures over time. The novelty of such schemes is expressed by their remarkable
energy savings due to adaption to a set of various factors such as channel qual-
ity, that inherently adapts to the mobile speed, and thus allows due to smart
silence/transmission periods to signiﬁcant energy savings. Finally, we emphasize
that, at SNR values high enough for reliable transmission, the schemes can be
switched oﬀto allow for a reduction in the processing power at the transmitter
side.
References
1. Fragouli, C., Widmer, J., Boudec, J.Y.L.: A network coding approach to energy
eﬃcient broadcasting: from theory to practice. In: Proceedings of 25th IEEE Inter-
national Conference on Computer Communications (IEEE INFOCOM 2006), pp.
1–11, April 2006
2. Ghanem, S.A.M.: Network coding mechanisms for Ka-band satellite time varying
channel. In: Proceedings of 2013 IEEE 24th Annual International Symposium on
Personal, Indoor, and Mobile Radio Communications (PIMRC), London, UK, pp.
3291–3296, September 2013
3. Gharsellaoui, A., Ghanem, S.A.M., Tarchi, D., Vanelli-Coralli, A.: Adaptive net-
work coding schemes for satellite communications. In: Proceedings of 8th Advanced
Satellite Multimedia Systems Conference and the 14th Signal Processing for Space
Communications Workshop (ASMS/SPSC 2016), Palma De Mallorca, Spain,
September 2016
4. Alagoz, F., Gur, G.: Energy eﬃciency and satellite networking: a holistic overview.
Proc. IEEE 99(11), 1954–1979 (2011)
5. Lucani, D.E., Kliewer, J.: On the delay and energy performance in coded two-
hop line networks with bursty erasures. In: Proceedings of 2011 8th International
Symposium on Wireless Communication Systems (ISWCS), pp. 502–506, November
2011

212
A.E. Gharsellaoui et al.
6. Fontan, F.P., Vazquez-Castro, M., Cabado, C.E., Garcia, J.P., Kubista, E.: Statis-
tical modeling of the LMS channel. IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol. 50(6), 1549–1567
(2001)
7. Loo, C.: A statistical model for a land mobile satellite link. IEEE Trans. Veh.
Technol. 34(3), 122–127 (1985)

Distribution of SDTV and HDTV Using VLC Techniques
for Domestic Applications
Timothy J. Amsdon, Martin J.N. Sibley
(✉), and Peter J. Mather
School of Computing and Engineering, The University of Huddersﬁeld, Queensgate,
Huddersﬁeld  HD1 3DH, UK
{timothy.amsdon,m.j.n.sibley,p.j.mather}@hud.ac.uk
Abstract. This paper presents a visible light communication system that enables
ﬂat-panel TVs to receive DVB terrestrial, cable and satellite digital content wire‐
lessly. The beneﬁts of VLC over Wi-Fi and power-line networking based solu‐
tions are discussed, and the physical requirements of the system are deﬁned. The
paper also discusses how the MPEG transport stream of a set-top-box can be re-
encoded for transmission over a free-space optical channel using a novel PPM
modulation scheme.
Keywords: DVB-T · DVB-T2 · Digital TV · H.264 LED · MPEG · Offset PPM · VLC
1
Introduction
The International Telecommunication Union (ITU) reported in 2013 that there were over
1.4 billion households worldwide with at least one TV set, and that this represented 79%
of the total worldwide households [1]. The ITU also reported that approximately 55%
of these TV households are capable of receiving digital transmissions, meaning that at
least 770 million TV sets are capable of receiving digital transmissions.
The deployment of consumer digital TV sets and digital broadcast services to support
them is increasing. TV technology has evolved signiﬁcantly over the last 20 years, and
in particular, there has been a shift away from TV sets ﬁtted with cathode-ray tube (CRT)
technologies, to ﬂat-panel, plasma, liquid crystal display (LCD), and more recently,
OLED based technologies. These technologies have brought about signiﬁcant reduc‐
tions in power consumption, weight, bulk and the cost of TV sets, whilst increasing the
reliability and the range of display screen sizes available. Flat-panel technologies have
also facilitated the trend in wall-mounted sets, which has enabled consumers to reclaim
ﬂoor space and enhance their viewing experience. However, in consumer premises,
where solid wall construction techniques are used, routing of the signal and power cables
to the rear panel of the set is problematic. In such cases, conduit or chasing is necessary
to route the cables, which is potentially disruptive and expensive.
The rear panel of a modern, high-end TV sets has numerous connector interfaces,
ranging from legacy analogue baseband video and audio inputs, to state-of-the-art digital
HDMI interfaces. There are also RF connector inputs that feed broadcast content from
terrestrial, cable and satellite services to an internal tuner/demodulator sub-system, the
© ICST Institute for Computer Sciences, Social Informatics and Telecommunications Engineering 2017
I. Otung et al. (Eds.): WiSATS 2016, LNICST 186, pp. 213–222, 2017.
DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-53850-1_21

type and speciﬁcation of which is deﬁned by the region of the world the set operates.
Furthermore, modern sets now provide access to digital content via USB, Ethernet, Wi-
Fi and, in some cases, power-line networking. The inclusion of TCP/IP enables
consumers to access online services such as video streaming and web-browsing.
Given modern TV sets have access to digital broadcasting and internet services, and
that the support for legacy analogue baseband devices such as VCRs is declining, TV
manufacturers have the opportunity to eliminate all of the connector interfaces, including
the RF connectors, from the rear panel of the set and use completely all-digital, wireless
based connectivity. This leads to a number of desirable beneﬁts. Firstly, this approach
beneﬁts the consumer by simplifying wall-mount installation. Secondly, and most obvi‐
ously, it reduces the cost of the TV set. Not only does the elimination of the connectors
reduce cost, so too does the elimination of their associated internal support circuitry and
PCB area. In addition, any software overhead associated with this circuitry is also elim‐
inated. In particular, the elimination of the RF connectors is signiﬁcant, since it leads to
the removal of the tuner/demodulator sub-system that enables reception of broadcast
services. As already stated, this sub-system is deﬁned by the reception type and region
of the world the set operates. By removing it and sourcing the content by alternate means,
the set eﬀectively becomes a region-less monitor, enabling TV manufacturers to produce
generic TV sets that operate in any region of the world.
This paper presents a visible light communication (VLC) based system to address
this opportunity, presenting the case for VLC over Wi-Fi and power-line networking
based solutions. The physical requirements of the system are deﬁned, and a novel
modulation scheme for the system is also presented. The paper is primarily focused on
the distribution of digital based terrestrial, cable and satellite broadcasting services
wirelessly to a consumer TV set in a domestic setting.
2
DVB Standards
Digital broadcasting standards and the function of the tuner/demodulator is easily
explained using the all-digital DVB broadcasting model used in Western Europe [2].
The standards applicable to terrestrial, cable and satellite services are shown in Table 1.
The modulation schemes employed by each of the broadcast standards are very diﬀerent,
with each chosen to achieve optimal data transmission over channels with speciﬁc char‐
acteristics and impairments. However, all three DVB modulation schemes are encoded
with the same underlying digital transport stream, namely the MPEG transport stream
(MPEG TS). MPEG is a digital compression codec that is used to compress video and
audio to facilitate transmission across band-limited channels. The key compression
standards applicable to DVB are MPEG-2 for standard-deﬁnition TV (SDTV) and H.
264 for high-deﬁnition TV (HDTV). DVB standards with suﬃx ‘2’ e.g. DVB-T2, are
capable of receiving SDTV and HDTV, and standards without the suﬃx e.g. DVB-T
are only capable of receiving SDTV.
214
T.J. Amsdon et al.

Table 1. DVB standards: terrestrial, cable and satellite broadcasts
Broadcast type Standard
Bit-rate
(Mbit/s)
Modulation and conditions
Terrestrial
DVB-T
31.7
COFDM: Constellation 64-
QAM, code rate 7/8, guard
interval 1/32, 8 K FFT, BW
8 MHz
DVB-T2
50.2
COFDM: Constellation 256-
QAM, code rate 5/6, guard
interval 1/128, 32 K FFT, BW
8 MHz
Cable
DVB-C
51.3
Constellation 256-QAM, BW
8 MHz
DVB-C2
83.1
Constellation 4096-QAM, BW
8 MHz
Satellite
DVB-S
42.9
Constellation QPSK, BW
36 MHz
DVB-S2
64.5
Constellation 8PSK, BW
36 MHz
A simpliﬁed block diagram of each DVB standards transmit and receive path is
shown in Fig. 1. The basic principle of operation begins at the transmitter where video
and audio are compressed by the MPEG encoder. The subsequent multiplexer inter‐
leaves multiple video, audio and data streams into a single MPEG TS. This is done by
assigning programme identiﬁcation (PID) sequences to the content so the receiver can
reconstruct the original independent streams (demultiplexing). Scrambling (encrypting)
data streams is also possible to restrict access to subscriber based services. The resultant
MPEG TS is then presented at the speciﬁc modulator i.e. QPSK, QAM, COFDM, for
optimal transmission over a speciﬁc channel [3].
At the TV receiver, the process of the transmitter is reversed. The desired transmis‐
sion channel is ﬁrst selected and isolated from other channels by the tuner. The selected
channel is then presented to the demodulator where appropriate demodulation techni‐
ques recover the MPEG TS. The transport stream is then demultiplexed using PIDs, and
descrambled as necessary, to recover the independent MPEG video and audio streams.
The required video and audio streams are then decoded by the MPEG decoder so that
the original video and audio is reproduced.
By removing the tuner/demodulator function from the TV set, and integrating it into
a wireless transmitter, the most convenient place to access the digital broadcast content
is at the MPEG TS interface, since the stream is highly compressed and potentially
encrypted. The transport stream is available at the output of the DVB demodulator, and
is conﬁgurable for either serial or parallel output mode. The former mode is preferable
for transmission over a wireless channel, and is composed of a four key lines. The ﬁrst
is the transport streams 50% duty cycle reference clock. The second is the serial data
line, which transports payloads of 188 bytes (188 × 8 = 1504 bits). The third is the valid
line which indicates the beginning and ending of each payload, this line remains high
Distribution of SDTV and HDTV Using VLC Techniques
215

during the transmission of payload bytes d0 to d187. The fourth is the synchronisation
line, which remains high only for the duration of d0 byte, or the ﬁrst bit of the payload [4].
These lines can be combined into a single data stream using digital processing tech‐
niques and then re-encoded for transmission over a wireless channel to a TV set. The
receiving TV set then only needs to decode the transmitted signal and use an MPEG
decoder to reproduce the audio and video.
3
Wi-Fi and Power-Line
The superﬁcially obvious candidate for transmitting the MPEG TS is Wi-Fi, but given
that the demand placed on Wi-Fi is growing, bandwidth capacity is becoming an issue.
Wi-Fi transmissions also suﬀer from an inherent security weakness caused by the fact
that RF signals can penetrate the walls of buildings and therefore can be broadcast
beyond the consumer premises. Indoor coverage ranges for Wi-Fi standards 802.11b
and 802.11g are typically 50 m, and 802.11n around 100 m, meaning that transmissions
can be intercepted and the content accessed by eavesdroppers. Power-line networking,
although not a wireless based system, is also an attractive candidate as it provides dual
purposing of the power cable to the set. This scheme enables both mains power and data
transmission to coexist on the same cable, and is achieved by superimposing a digitally
modulated OFDM signal onto the mains supply voltage. However, domestic power
distribution systems are not designed to support data transmission, and this system is
limited by multipath dispersion and the impulsive noise [5]. Wi-Fi and power-line
DVB-T/T2
(CODFM)
DVB-S/S2
(QPSK)
DVB-C/C2
(QAM)
MulƟplexing
Scrambling
Scrambling 
Key
MPEG
Encoding
Video
Audio Data
DVB-T/T2
(CODFM)
DVB-S/S2
(QPSK)
DVB-C/C2
(QAM)
DemulƟplexing
Descrambling
Descrambling 
Key
MPEG
Decoding
Video
Audio
Data
MPEG
Satellite Channel
Terrestrial Channel
Cable Channel
MPEG TS
Fig. 1. DVB standards: terrestrial, cable and satellite transmit and receive paths
216
T.J. Amsdon et al.

systems are also required to meet stringent regulatory compliance due to both systems
radiating RF energy which can interfere with other electrical devices.
4
VLC
A visible light based solution is compelling as it overcomes some of the problems
encountered with Wi-Fi. Firstly, VLC uses a region of the electromagnetic (EM) spec‐
trum which is unlicensed and unregulated (375 nm and 780 nm) [6]. This eliminates the
regulatory compliance required by Wi-Fi and powerline solutions. Secondly, visible
light has inherent security, since it cannot penetrate walls, ceilings and ﬂoors. Thirdly,
VLC is immune to electrical interference, and therefore transmissions are not impaired
by electrical noise or spurious signals. Finally, the alignment of a VLC transmitter and
receiver is intuitive, given that the light in this range is visible, the emission can be
positioned and focused onto the receiver’s photodetector (PD) to achieve maximum
signal to noise performance.
The ﬁrst free-space optical wireless system was demonstrated in 1979 by Gfeller and
Bapst [7], and operated in the near-IR (950 nm) range. The system achieved a bit-rate
of 1Mbit/s using diﬀuse transmission and On-oﬀ keying (OOK) modulation to commu‐
nicate with a cluster of computer terminals. However, it was not until 2003 that Tanaka
et al. demonstrated a visible white-light LED based dual purpose illumination and
communication system. This also used diﬀuse transmission and OOK modulation,
achieving a bit-rate of 400 Mbit/s [8].
Diﬀuse transmission relies on the reﬂections from walls, ceiling, ﬂoor and other
surfaces to increase the coverage area of the radiating source. Diﬀuse transmission is
desirable for mobile applications, but results in signiﬁcant multipath, and inter-symbol
interference (ISI). In order to overcome this, robust modulation schemes such as direct-
current-biased optical OFDM (DCO-OFDM) [9] and discrete multitones (DMT) [10]
have been developed. These schemes reportedly achieve gigabits/s rates, but have
complicated architectures compared to OOK and PPM schemes.
Research has demonstrated that bit-rates are limited by the power output and the
bandwidth of the LED. Typical LED bandwidth is in excess of 10 MHz, but is extendable
using electrical equalisation and optical ﬁltering. Li et al. presented a system using
combination of blue optical ﬁltering, and passive and active equalisation at the receiver
(post-equalisation) to achieve bandwidths in excess of 150 MHz, and enabling bit-rates
of 340 Mbit/s using OOK [11]. The blue optical ﬁltering is used to increase the band‐
width of LEDs by removing the slower yellow component introduced by LEDs that use
yellow phosphor.
4.1
Directed LOS Transmission
As described, most VLC research is focused on the diﬀuse transmission model because
it provides the widest coverage area. However, due to multipath, robust modulation
schemes and complex system architectures are required. The transmission model
proposed here is the directed LOS channel model, since this model assumes that there
Distribution of SDTV and HDTV Using VLC Techniques
217

are no reﬂections from walls, ceiling, ﬂoor and other surfaces present at the receiver’s
PD, enabling a simpler OOK and PPM schemes to be used. The transmitter and receiver
in this case are also assumed to be static.
The directed LOS transmission function is deﬁned by Eq. 1.
H(∅)LOS =
⎧
⎪
⎨
⎪⎩
ARx
d2 Ro(∅) cos (𝜓) for 0 ≤𝜓≤𝜓c
0
for 0 ≤𝜓≤𝜓c
(1)
Where ARx is deﬁned as the PD area, d is the distance between the LED and the PD,
𝜓 is the angle of incidence, and 𝜓c is the ﬁeld of view (FOV) of the PD. Ro(∅) is the
radiant intensity of the LED which is assumed to be Lambertian [12] as shown in Eq. 2.
Ro(∅) =
[m + 1
2𝜋
]
cosm(∅)
(2)
Where m is the order of the Lambertian emission, and is related to the semi-angle
(half power) ∅1∕2 of the LED emission. Equation 3 deﬁnes m.
m = −
ln 2
ln (cos(∅1∕2))
(3)
4.2
Channel Model
Figure 2 shows the basic block diagram of the transmitter and receiver elements of an
optical communications system. At the transmitter a transconductance ampliﬁer (TCA)
converts the voltage levels of data stream into current changes that intensity modulates
the LED. At the receiver, the PD detects these intensity changes and converts them back
to current changes. A transimpedance ampliﬁer (TIA) then converts the current back
into voltage changes.
..1110101
Data
Noise
PD
TCA
hLED(t)
TIA
Transmitter
Receiver
Free-space Optical Channel
Fig. 2. Optical communications transmitter and receiver elements
The received signal y(t) is a distorted and noisy representation of the intensity modu‐
lating signal x(t). The transfer function [13] of the system is given by Eq. 4.
218
T.J. Amsdon et al.

y(t) = R ⋅PLED ⋅H(∅)LOS ⋅[x(t) ⊗h(t)] + n(t)
(4)
R is the responsivity of the receiving PD, PLED is the average output power of the
LED, and H(∅)LOS is the directed LOS transmission function. The symbol ⊗ denotes
convolution, where x(t) is the intensity modulating signal that is convolved with the
optical impulse response h(t) of the channel (Gaussian). Additive noise is represented
by n(t), and is the root mean square noise current introduced by the receiver.
4.3
Physical Requirements
Based on the directed LOS model, the physical requirements of the VLC system can be
deﬁned. A set-top-box (STB) capable of receiving DVB broadcasts and providing the
necessary MPEG TS can be integrated with the VLC transmitter. This integrated VLC
STB is then located in the plenum space above the room containing the TV set. The
transmitting LED is mounted on a gimbal suspended from the ceiling, and providing
360° rotation. The wireless TV is now mountable on any wall in the room, and only the
power cable needs consideration. A lens mounted on the LED, can then be used to
provide focusing of the transmitted light onto TVs PD. Installation of the VLC STB in
the plenum space is less disruptive, as power and RF feed cables for terrestrial, cable
and satellite services are more readily accessible in this location. Figure 3 shows the
physical interpretation of the system. Programme selection is possible through the TV
using IR remote control. The TV is also be ﬁtted with an IR transmitter to facilitate
communication with the VLC STB.
Wall-mounted flat panel TV
Gimbal
White light LED
360° rotation
Optical transmission
Photodetector
Alternative mounting locations for the TV
Fig. 3. Optical communications transmitter and receiver elements
Distribution of SDTV and HDTV Using VLC Techniques
219

5
Inversion Oﬀset PPM Scheme
A novel PPM scheme, inverse oﬀset PPM (IOPPM), is proposed for the system. This
scheme is to be used to re-encode the serial MPEG TS, provided by a DVB STB, and
then use the modiﬁed data stream to intensity modulating the LED.
As described earlier, the primary limiting factors of a VLC system are the output
power and the bandwidth of the LED. Based on the DVB standards for terrestrial, cable
and satellite broadcasts, the highest bit-rate is generated by the DVB-2 standard which
is 83.1 Mbits/s (shown in Table 1). This is inside the bandwidth of 150 MHz achieved
with electrical equalization and optical ﬁltering. Also, the optical signal power at the
PD is increased by using directed LOS transmission and lens focusing at the LED.
However, the modulation scheme should maximise sensitivity and minimise bandwidth.
Table 2. 3-bit coding table: digital PPM, OPPM and IOPPM
PCM word
Digital PPM
codeword
OPPM codeword
IOPPM
codeword
𝐈𝐎𝐏𝐏𝐌+
𝐈𝐎𝐏𝐏𝐌−
000
0000 0001
0 000
100+
001−
001
0000 0010
0 001
001+
000−
010
0000 0100
0 010
010+
000−
011
0000 1000
0 100
100+
000−
100
0001 0000
1 000
001+
100−
101
0010 0000
1 001
000+
001−
110
0100 0000
1 010
000+
010−
111
1000 0000
1 100
000+
100−
IOPMM is a tertiary coding scheme based on offset PPM (OPPM), originally devel‐
oped by Sibley [14]. OPPM was found to have similar performance to digital PPM, but at
half the line rate and 3.1 dB higher sensitivity. Table 2 shows the coding of a 3-bit PCM
word for digital PPM, OPPM and IOPPM. OPPM achieves the line rate reduction by intro‐
ducing a sign bit to the received PCM word (denoted in italic). However, the bandwidth of
the transmitted codeword is higher than the PCM word due to the addition of an extra slot
time to accommodate the sign bit. IOPPM uses two signal paths, IOPPM+ and IOPPM− to
220
T.J. Amsdon et al.

convey the sign bit. This enables the bandwidth of the IOPPM codeword to equal that of the
PCM word, but has the consequence of reducing sensitivity by 3 dB.
Figure 4 demonstrates how the IOPPM+ and IOPPM− codeword paths are used to
intensity modulate the LED. The LED is biased at a mid-point radiant intensity set by
R1, R2 and Q1. If IOPPM+ is at logic ‘0’, as shown, Q2 is oﬀ and no increase in Q1
base bias occurs. However, if IOPPM− is at logic ‘1’ Q3 is forward biased and Q1 base
bias is reduced, resulting in a decrease in the radiant intensity of the LED. This push-
pull based driver approach divides the LED radiant intensity in two, thereby enabling
the transmission of the IOPPM+ and IOPPM− streams.
Fig. 4. Optical communications transmitter and receiver elements
6
Results
Most of the work underway on this research investigation is of a practical nature. Thus
far a DVB-T/T2 tuner/demodulator reference design from Silicon Labs has been used
and conﬁgured to generate a serial MPEG TS output. Oﬀ-air testing has revealed that
the HDTV multiplex for C41 (634 MHz) from Emley Moor transmitter (Kirklees,
England) is operating at a bit rate of 40.21 Mbits/s, and this stream is currently being
used to develop an FPGA implementation of the IOPPM encoder and decoder. A DVB-
T2 STB has also been successfully reverse engineered in order to access its MPEG
decoder. Successful testing of the MPEG TS interface between the Silicon Labs refer‐
ence board and STB MPEG decoder has been carried out. Design work is also underway
on the LED drive circuitry using HEXFET devices.
Distribution of SDTV and HDTV Using VLC Techniques
221

7
Conclusions
A VLC system for wireless connectivity to ﬂat-panel TVs using LOS transmission has
been presented. LOS transmission was chosen as it eliminates multipath, thereby
reducing ISI. The concept of a VLC STB has been presented, where DVB broadcast
content for terrestrial, cable and satellite can be accessed at the MPEG TS interface and
the re-encoded using a novel coding scheme (IOPPM), and then used to intensity modu‐
late an LED. The IOPPM scheme has been shown to have a line rate equal to input word
when 3-bit encoding is used, but incurs a 3 dB loss in sensitivity as a result. It has also
been indicated that LED bandwidth can be extended from 10 MHz to 150 MHz using a
combination of post-equalisation and blue optical ﬁltering.
References
1. ITU: International Telecommunications Union (ITU) Measuring Information Society,
Geneva, Switzerland (2013)
2. DVB Project Oﬃce: 2nd Generation Terrestrial: The World’s Most Advanced Digital
Terrestrial TV System. DVB Project Oﬃce (dvb@dvb.org) (2015)
3. ETSI: ETSI EN 300 429 v1.2.1. EN 300 429 V1.2.1 (1998-04); European Standard
(Telecommunications series); Digital Video Broadcasting (DVB); Framing structure, channel
coding and modulation for cable systems. ETSI, Valbonne (2004)
4. ETSI: ETSI EN 300 744 V1.6.1. ETSI EN 300 744 V1.6.1 (2009-01); European Standard
(Telecommunications series); Digital Video Broadcasting (DVB); Framing structure, channel
coding and modulation for digital terrestrial television. ETSI, Cedex (2009). http://
www.nordig.org/pdf/NorDig-Uniﬁed_ver_2.4.pdf
5. Zhang, H., Yang, L., Hanzo, L.: IET communications: performance analysis of orthogonal
frequency division multiplexing systems in dispersive indoor power line channels inﬂicting
asynchronous impulsive noise institution of engineering and technology (2016). doi:10.1049/
iet-com.2015.0702
6. Lee, C.: Advanced trends in wireless communications, pp. 327–338 (2011)
7. Gfeller, F.R.: Wireless in-house data communication via diﬀuse infrared radiation. Proc. IEEE
67, 1474–1486 (1979)
8. Tanaka, Y.K.: Indoor visible light data transmission system utilizing white LED lights. IEICE
Trans. Commun. E86-B, 2440–2454 (2003)
9. Afgani, M.H.: Visible light communication using OFDM. In: Proceedings of the 2nd
International Conference Testbeds and Research Infrastructures for the Development of
Networks and Communities (TRIDENTCOM), pp. 129–134 (2006)
10. Vucic, J.K.: 513 Mbit/s visible light communications link based on DMT-modulation of a
white LED. J. Lightwave Technol. 28, 3512–3518 (2010)
11. Li, H.C.: High bandwidth visible light communications based on a post-equalization circuit.
IEEE Photonics Technol. Lett. 26, 119–122 (2014)
12. Haigh, P.A.: Transmitter Distribution for MIMO Visible Light Communication Systems.
PGNet (2011)
13. Ghassemlooy, Z.: Indoor Optical Wireless Communication Systems – Part I: Review (2003)
14. Sibley, M.: Analysis of oﬀset pulse position modulation - a novel reduced bandwidth coding
scheme. IET Optoelectron. 5, 144–150 (2010)
222
T.J. Amsdon et al.

On the Energy Minimization of Heterogeneous
Cloud Radio Access Networks
Tshiamo Sigwele(B), Atm Shaﬁul Alam, Prashant Pillai, and Yim Fun Hu
Faculty of Engineering and Informatics, University of Bradford, Bradford, UK
{t.sigwele,a.s.alam5,p.pillai,y.f.hu}@bradford.ac.uk
Abstract. Next-generation 5G networks is the future of information
networks and it will experience a tremendous growth in traﬃc. To meet
such traﬃc demands, there is a necessity to increase the network capacity,
which requires the deployment of ultra dense heterogeneous base stations
(BSs). Nevertheless, BSs are very expensive and consume a signiﬁcant
amount of energy. Meanwhile, cloud radio access networks (C-RAN) has
been proposed as an energy-eﬃcient architecture that leverages the cloud
computing technology where baseband processing is performed in the
cloud. In addition, the BS sleeping is considered as a promising solution
to conserving the network energy. This paper integrates the cloud tech-
nology and the BS sleeping approach. It also proposes an energy-eﬃcient
scheme for reducing energy consumption by switching oﬀremote radio
heads (RRHs) and idle BBUs using a greedy and ﬁrst ﬁt decreasing
(FFD) bin packing algorithms, respectively. The number of RRHs and
BBUs are minimized by matching the right amount of baseband com-
puting load with traﬃc load. Simulation results demonstrate that the
proposed scheme achieves an enhanced energy performance compared to
the existing distributed long term evolution advanced (LTE-A) system.
Keywords: Base station sleep · Bin packing · Cloud computing ·
C-RAN · Energy eﬃciency · HetNets · Virtualization
1
Introduction
Everyday, the number of connected devices are growing into billions and today’s
mobile operators are facing a serious challenge. For example, according to Huawei
Technologies, in the year 2020, 100 billions of devices will be connected [1]. This
will cause an increase in traﬃc from smart phones like iphone, android and
other high-end devices like the iPad, kindle and gaming consoles spawning a raft
of data intensive applications, Internet of Things (IoT) and machine-to-machine
connections. As a result, ﬁfth-generation (5G) networks have targeted to increase
capacity by 1000 times, data rates by 100 times and millisecond-level delay [2].
To fulﬁl the capacity demands, more base stations (BSs) with a mixture of macro
and small cells forming a heterogeneous network (HetNet) have to be deployed
by operators, which results to a signiﬁcant amount of energy consumption.
c
⃝ICST Institute for Computer Sciences, Social Informatics and Telecommunications Engineering 2017
I. Otung et al. (Eds.): WiSATS 2016, LNICST 186, pp. 223–234, 2017.
DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-53850-1 22

224
T. Sigwele et al.
This contributes to the mobile network’s operating expenditure (OPEX) and
emits large amounts of CO2 which causes a greater impact to the environment.
A large amount of power within a base station (BS) is consumed by the
power ampliﬁer (PA) and baseband unit (BBU) [3]. The energy consumption
of BBU implementation is getting more and more dominant in small cells due
to gradual shrinking of cell size and the growing complexity of signal process-
ing [3]. The traditional distributed long term evolution advanced (LTE-A) BSs
architecture consumes a signiﬁcant amount of energy and waste a lot of com-
puting power as the BBU servers are not shared but serve each individual cell
[7]. The BSs have been traditionally preconﬁgured to provide peak capacities to
reduce outages. Nevertheless, the mobile traﬃc varies signiﬁcantly, irrespective
of the either the time of day or traﬃc proﬁle and is rarely at its peak in prac-
tical scenarios [8]. Many energy-eﬃcient schemes for wireless systems have been
implemented such as BS sleeping [4–6] where oﬄoading traﬃc to neighbouring
BSs and then completely turning oﬀthe BS during low traﬃc, discontinuous
transmission (DTX) where a BS is temporally switched oﬀwithout oﬄoading
and cell zooming. However, current BS processing capacity is only being used for
its own coverage rather than being shared within a large geographical area. As a
result, during the evening, BSs in residential areas are over-subscribed while BSs
in business areas stay under-subscribed. These under-subscribed BSs still con-
sume a signiﬁcant amount of energy even when they are not necessarily required
to be kept active. Therefore, it is imperative to solve this problem and free up
the processing capacity and save the corresponding energy.
Meanwhile, cloud radio access networks (C-RAN) have been proposed as a
promising solution for minimizing energy within the cellular networks by lever-
aging cloud computing virtualization technology. With virtualization, baseband
workload is consolidated on a minimum number of BBU servers and base-
band processing is performed on virtual BBUs (vBBU) and resources are pro-
visioned in accordance to traﬃc demands. C-RAN comprise of three parts: (i)
remote radio head (RRH), which performs lower layer analogue radio frequency
functions, (ii) BBU for digital signal processing, and (iii) fronthaul connection
between the BBU and RRH. The C-RAN architecture is shown in Fig. 1. Fur-
thermore, more energy savings can be gained from reduced air conditioning cost
and reduced equipment room size. This paper integrates C-RAN in HetNets and
proposes an energy eﬃcient scheme for reducing energy consumption in C-RAN
HetNets by switching oﬀRRHs using a greedy algorithm and also switching
oﬀidle BBUs using the ﬁrst ﬁt decreasing (FFD) bin packing algorithm. The
number of RRHs and BBUs are minimized by matching the right amount of
baseband computing load with traﬃc load. The cloud based energy minimiza-
tion is formulated as a bin packing problem where BS traﬃc items are to be
packed into compute servers, called bins, such that the number of bins used are
minimized. The simulations results validates the energy eﬃciency improvement
of the proposed scheme and is compared with the distributed LTE-A system.
This paper is structured as follows: Sect. 2 discusses the related works while
the system model and problem formulation is described in Sect. 3. The proposed

On the Energy Minimization of Heterogeneous Cloud Radio Access Networks
225
BBU server
Small cell BS
Macro BS
Fiber link
Base StaƟon Cloud
HetNet
Fig. 1. An illustration of a C-RAN architecture.
scheme with computational resource models and greedy BS switching algorithm
are formally are also described in Sect. 3. Section 4 provides the simulation results
and discussion, while Sect. 5 provides some concluding comments.
2
Related Works
There are a plethora of solutions towards energy-eﬃcient BSs ranging from energy-
eﬃcient hardware design, BS sleeping, to the optimal deployment of BSs [4,9].
This paper will concentrate on BS sleep which is a promising solution for min-
imizing energy consumption in both the radio side and cloud side of C-RAN
HetNet. Authors in [10] proposed a BBU-RRH switching scheme for C-RAN
that dynamically allocates BBUs to RRHs based on the imbalance of subscribers
in business and/or residential areas. Even though the scheme in [10] reduces
the number of BBUs required, the model performs poorly during high-traﬃc
periods and thus still consumes a lot of energy because more BBUs are allo-
cated to meet traﬃc demands. Authors in [11] developed a BBU pool test-
bed using virtualization technology on general purpose processors (GPPs). The
BBUs are dynamically provisioned according to traﬃc load. However, the paper
fails to show how the number of BBUs are reduced while traﬃc load varies.
L. Jingchu et al. [12] presented a mathematical model to quantify the statis-
tical multiplexing gain of pooling virtual BSs. The author use a multi dimen-
sional markov model to evaluate pooling gain considering both compute and radio
resources. Nevertheless, the author have not considered energy consumption in the
BS-Cloud. In [13], the authors considers the energy-delay trade-oﬀs of a virtual BSs
considering the BS sleeping approach in general IT platforms. The paper does not
show how the energy savings of the virtual BSs model scales with traﬃc load. S.
Namba et al. [14] proposed a network architecture, called colony-RAN, which has
the ability to ﬂexibly change cell layout by changing the connections of BBUs and

226
T. Sigwele et al.
RRHs in respect to the traﬃc demand. However, the proposed method has frequent
reselections of RRH to BBU, i.e., ping-pong eﬀects.
Since this paper combines HetNet and C-RAN, research on BS sleep in Het-
Nets will be also studied. The author in [15] introduce energy-eﬃcient sleep
mode algorithms for small cell BSs in a bid to reduce cellular network power
consumption by switching OFF some BS equipments in idle conditions in accor-
dance to variations in traﬃc load. However, the author assume that the pico
and macro cells consume constant power of 12 W and 2.7 kW respectively irre-
spective of traﬃc load. The author in [16] combines the sleep mode feature of
picocells and load balancing between the diﬀerent types of base stations in Het-
Net, hence improving up to 68% for low traﬃc load and up to 33% for medium
traﬃc load. However, users are assumed to be uniformly distributed whereas
users are non-uniformly distributed in reality.
3
System Model and Problem Formulation
3.1
System Model
The proposed system model is shown in Fig. 2. Consider an LTE-A C-RAN
HetNet downlink system consisting of a single macro RRH (MRRH) and overlaid
by several small cell RRHs (SRRHs). Assume a set of RRHs R = {RRHj : j =
1, 2, ..., N} where N is the maximum number of RRHs and RRH1 is the center
MRRH. Deﬁne a set of users in the entire network as U. Moreover, assume a set
of computing servers in the pool M = {GPPi : i = 1, 2, ..., M} where M is the
number of physical computing servers for processing baseband signals of N cells.
The global cloud controller (GCC) is located in the BS cloud and it is where
the greedy BS switch oﬀand the FFD algorithms are located. The baseband
processing procedure of each RRH is divided into L tasks with a set L = {Tk :
k = 1, 2, ..., L} where Tk is the kth baseband task for RRHj. The computing
processing power is measured in Giga Operations Per Second (GOPS). Each
server has maximum capacity C GOPS. The total computing resources required
by RRHj is denoted ρreq
j
GOPS such that:
Global cloud controller
Fig. 2. System Model.

On the Energy Minimization of Heterogeneous Cloud Radio Access Networks
227
ρreq
j
=
L

k=1
ρreq
j,k ;
ρreq
j,k ϵ(0, 1]
(1)
where ρreq
j,k is the computing resource requirement for Tk from RRHj.
Therefore, the computing resource at server Si used by RRHj can be calcu-
lated as:
ρserver
i,j
=
L

k=1
ξi,j,kρreq
j,k ;
ξi,j,kϵ{0, 1}
(2)
where ξi,j,k = 1 when Tk from RRHj is processed by server Si and ξi,j,k = 0
otherwise. Tasks from RRHj can be processed by a single server or distributed
among diﬀerent serves such that the constraint below hold:
M

i=1
L

k=1
ξi,j,k = L
(3)
And the BBU server processing is limited by server capacity C as:
N

j=1
ρserver
i,j
≤C
(4)
The energy minimization in the cloud for M BBU servers can be formulated
from two components [8]: dynamic and static power consumption. The dynamic
energy consumption is dependent on the amount of processing resources on the
server while the static part comprises the energy consumption irrespective of
traﬃc load, but other purposes such as coolings, etc. Now, the energy minimiza-
tion problem can be formulated as:
min
ξi,j,k
M

i=1
⎛
⎝δ
N

j=1
ρserver
i,j
+ εiPstatic
⎞
⎠
(5)
εi =

0
N
j=1
L
k=1 ξi,j,k = 0
1
Otherwise
(6)
where δ is the power factor in GOPS/watts. εi shows the status factor of server
Si whether Si is ON or OFF. Pstatic denotes the static power that is constant
for every BBU server. Constraints are from (3) and (4).
3.2
Computational Resource Model
The baseband tasks from cells need to be quantiﬁed, i.e., they need to be mapped
into computing processing in GOPS. The computing resource requirement per

228
T. Sigwele et al.
user per task is calculated based on the energy consumption model in [17]. The
model provides energy modelling for diﬀerent types of BSs such as macro, micro,
pico and femto BSs. In this paper, the power equation in [17] for calculating the
computing resources required for baseband tasks is adopted. Deﬁning L as the
set of baseband tasks and X = {BW, Ant, Mod, Cod, R} is the list of parameters
aﬀecting the scaling of baseband processing tasks, where BW, Ant, Mod, Cod
and R are the system bandwidth, number of antennas used by a user, modulation
bits, coding rate and number of PRBs respectively. The power equation is written
as [17]:
Pu =

iϵL
Pi,ref
	
xϵX

 xact
xref
si,x
(7)
where Pu and Pi,ref are the processing power required by user u and the process-
ing power of reference system in [17]. The variables xact and xref denotes the
actual and reference values of parameters aﬀecting baseband scaling. The vari-
able si,x denotes the scaling exponents. Users that generate traﬃc are ran-
domly distributed in the cell area and the generated traﬃc are mapped into
processing resources as per user per task. Even though there are many baseband
tasks processed by a BS, this paper considers two baseband tasks for simplicity,
i.e., k = 2: (i) Frequency-Domain (FD) processing for mapping/demapping and
MIMO equalization, and (ii) Forward Error Correction (FEC) denoted by the
following equations, respectively, in GOPS:
P F D
u
=

30Ant + 10Ant2 R
100
(8)
P F EC
u
= 20Mod
6
Cod ∗Ant ∗R
100
(9)
where P F D
u
and P F EC
u
are FD and FEC processing requirements, respectively,
per user u per task k in GOPS. Ant is the number of antennas used per user,
Mod is the modulation bits, Cod is the coding rate used and R is the number
of PRBs used by u at time t. In the bin packing algorithm, the tasks per cell
are packed on servers hence the processing requirements per task per cell for the
two tasks is calculated as follows:

ρreq
j,1 = 
uϵU P F D
u,t ,
when k = 1
ρreq
j,2 = 
uϵU P F EC
u,t
,
when k = 2
(10)
where U is the set of users within a cell.
3.3
FFD Bin Packing Scheme
A classical bin packing problem consists of packing a series of items with diﬀer-
ent sizes into a minimum number of bins with capacity C. The C-RAN resource

On the Energy Minimization of Heterogeneous Cloud Radio Access Networks
229
allocation problem can be modelled as the bin packing problem where the aim is
to pack items, called baseband tasks L, from cell areas R into a set of servers M
such that the number of servers used are minimized and hence the energy con-
sumption reduction. Since the problem of ﬁnding optimal packings is NP-hard,
i.e., there is no way of being guaranteed the best solution without checking every
possible solutions. Amongst many other solutions, the approximation algorithm
is the mostly used because of fast heuristics that generate good but not neces-
sarily optimal packings. The approximation algorithms of FFD is considered.
The FFD algorithm illustrated in Algorithm 1 is adopted, which is a natural
way of ﬁnding the approximation bin packing. In this algorithm, all bins are
initially empty. Sort all item tasks in descending order. Starts with the current
number of bins M and item k. Consider all bins GPPi : i = 1, ..., M and place
item task ρreq
j,k baseband task in the ﬁrst bin that has suﬃcient residual capacity.
If there is no such bin, increment i and repeat until all items is assigned.
Algorithm 1. First-Fit Decreasing Algorithm
Input: a set of RRH cells R, a set of tasks L within RRHj, their
resource requirements ρreq
j,k , and GPP list M , GPP capacity Ci
cap
Output: Number of BBUs M
Sort all RRH tasks in decreasing order of ρreq
j,k .
Launch one GPP of capacity i
cap.
for each ρreq
j,k that arrives do
if there is a server where ρreq
j,k will ﬁt then
Place ρreq
j,k into the left most GPP;
else
Launch a new GPP;
Place ρreq
j,k into that GPP
end
end
end
Return M
3.4
Radio Side Energy Consumption Model
The power consumption model in [17] is modiﬁed to come up with a generalized
component based power consumption model of a C-RAN RRH, denoted Pj,
which is formulated as:
Pj =
⎧
⎨
⎩
NT RX
ρj Pmax
ηP A
+PRF
(1−σDC)(1−σMS);
if 0 < ρj ≤1
Psleep;
if ρj = 0
(11)

230
T. Sigwele et al.
where NT RX, ρj and Pmax denotes the number of transmitter chains, the nor-
malised traﬃc load of RRHj and maximum transmission power of RRHj. The
variables PRF and PBB denotes the RF and BBU power consumption, respec-
tively. The variables ηP A, σfeeder, σDC, σMS, σcool denotes power ampliﬁer eﬃ-
ciency, RF feeder losses, DC losses, MS losses and cooling losses, respectively.
3.5
Greedy BS Switch OFF Algorithm
The proposed algorithm is called the greedy RRH switch OFF algorithm and it is
centralised and runs in the BS cloud inside the GCC where network information
is available. In the algorithm, only the small cell RRHs are to be switch oﬀbased
on a utility function Fj(PRB), while maintaining quality of service (QoS) i.e.,
maintaining the minimum datarate, rmin.
Fj(PRB) = number of RRHj PRBs occupied
Total number of RRHj PRBs
(12)
It is assumed that there are Nchn available channels in every cell for transmission
with each having bandwidth BW = B/Nchn where B is the cell bandwidth.
In this regard, a channel means one PRB which is allocated to each user per
scheduling interval. For simplicity it is assumed that diﬀerent frequency bands
are used by adjacent BS so inter channel interference (ICI) has been taken care
of. Thus, the minimum data rate of a user u can be formulated as:
rmin = BW.log2

1 + η0.Pu
dα

(13)
where α is the path-loss exponent and η0 = G0/N0 includes the eﬀect of antenna
gain G0 and thermal noise N0, and d is the distance from the RRH to the user.
Pu is the transmission power per user. The MRRH is always kept on to maintain
coverage. The algorithm runs in the BS cloud on the GCC where all information
(e.g., traﬃc load) about other RHHs is present. At constant time intervals of 1
hour, the algorithm is invoked where the utility of all the SRRHs is calculated
and the SRRH with the lowest utility ﬁrst is then tested for switching OFF.
The test involves checking if the SRRH traﬃc can be oﬄoaded to neighbouring
SRHHs or to the MRRH while maintaining the minimum datarate. If the traﬃc
can be oﬄoaded, then oﬄoading is perfomed and the SRRH is then switched
OFF. If the oﬄoading can not be perfomed due to violation of QoS or due to
not enough resources, the SRRH is kept active.

On the Energy Minimization of Heterogeneous Cloud Radio Access Networks
231
Algorithm 2. Greedy RRH switch oﬀalgorithm
Input: RRH traﬃc load information
Output: Number of switched OFF SRRHs
Deﬁne Roff as a set of switched OFF RRHs.
Deﬁne Ron as a set of active RRHs
for each RRH do
Calculate the RRH utility function F(ρj)
end
Sort RRHs by their increasing utility function
Test the lowest utility RRHj for switching OFF
while j ̸= N do
if RRHj can be oﬄoaded then
oﬄoad RRHj traﬃc
switch OFF RRHj
Roff = Roff + {RRHj}
end
else
do not oﬄoad RRHj traﬃc
keep RRHj on
Ron = Ron + {RRHj}
end
j = j + 1
end
4
Simulation Results and Discussion
4.1
Parameter Settings
To analyse the performance of the proposed scheme, a simulation layout of one
MRRH overlaid with 10 small cells is considered. Bandwidth of 10 MHz was
considered with up to 50 users randomly generated within the MRRH and up to
5 users within the SRRH. All results using the proposed scheme are compared
with the baseline distributed LTE-A system which comprises of distributed BSs
with 10 individual BBU processing servers for 10 cells. The users are allocated
PRB in a proportional-fair manner. Adaptive modulation and coding (AMC)
scheme is used to adapt to the changing channel conditions. As the simulation
runs, the values of Ant, Mod, R were captured and mapped into processing
requirements and loaded into the bin packing scheme to reduce the number
of servers M. For calculating the power consumption, the power factor used
is δ = 40 GOPS/watt and Pstatic = 200 GOPS as in [17]. Other simulation
parameters are shown in Table 1.
4.2
Results Evaluation
Figure 3 shows the power consumption of both schemes for diﬀerent traﬃc loads.
The results show that for both schemes, as the traﬃc load increases, the power

232
T. Sigwele et al.
Table 1. Parameters used in the simulations.
Parameter
Value
Bandwidth B
10 MHz
No. of antennas Ant
2
Modulation mod
2, 4, 6 bits
Coding rate Cod
1/3-1
Number of MRRH
1
Number of SRRH
10
Number of users per MRRH up to 50
Number of users per SRRH
up to 5
MRRH radius
500 m
SRRH radius
40 m
MRRH transmission power
46 dBm
SRRH transmission power
30 dBm
Inter-BS distance
>1 km
BS antenna gain G0
16 dBi
Noise Power N0
−141 dBm/Hz
Pathloss Exponent, α
4
power factor, δ
40 GOPS/watt
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
3000
3500
4000
4500
Traffic load
Power consumption [watts]
Distributed LTE−A HetNet
Proposed
Fig. 3. Power consumption versus traﬃc load.

On the Energy Minimization of Heterogeneous Cloud Radio Access Networks
233
consumption increases. The proposed scheme consumes less power compared to
the baseline since the proposed scheme combines RRH switch oﬀscheme at the
radio side with BBU reduction scheme at the BS cloud which both signiﬁcantly
reduce the overoll system power consumption. The proposed scheme saves up to
44% and 78% of power at during low traﬃc and peak traﬃc respectively as
compared to the baseline scheme.
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
5
5.5
6
Traffic load
Statistical multiplexing gain
Fig. 4. Statistical multiplexing gain.
Figure 4 illustrate the statistical multiplexing gain for increasing traﬃc load
which is calculated as the ratio of number of BBU servers used by the baseline
scheme to those used by the proposed scheme. The graph shows that at low
traﬃc period the multiplexing gain is 5 which means the baseline uses 5 times
the number of BBUs compared the proposed scheme. During peak traﬃc, the
multiplexing gain is 1.4 which means the baseline uses 1.4 times the number
of BBUs as the proposed scheme due to more traﬃc being proposed for both
schemes.
5
Conclusion
This paper presents an energy eﬃcient scheme for reducing energy consumption
in C-RAN by switching oﬀremote radio heads (RRHs) using a greedy algorithm
and also switching oﬀidle BBUs using the ﬁrst ﬁt decreasing (FFD) bin packing
algorithm. The number of RRHs and BBUs are minimized by matching the right
amount of baseband computing load with traﬃc load. The proposed scheme
saves up to 44% and 78% of power during low traﬃc and peak traﬃc periods
respectively. The proposed scheme will be extended to include the separation of
data and control signalling to further minimize energy consumption.

234
T. Sigwele et al.
References
1. Huawei: 5G: a technology vision. In: White Paper of Huawei Tech (2013)
2. Chih-Lin, I., Rowell, C., Han, S.: Toward green and soft: a 5G perspective. IEEE
Commun. Mag. 52(2), 66–73 (2014)
3. Auer, G., Giannini, V., Desset, C., Godor, I.: How much energy is needed to run
a wireless network? IEEE Wireless Commun. 18(5), 40–49 (2011)
4. Yaacoub, E.: A practical approach for base station on/oﬀswitching in green LTE-A
hetnets. In: IEEE 10th International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Comput-
ing, Networking and Communications (WiMob). IEEE, pp. 159–164 (2014)
5. Cheng, J.-F., Koorapaty, H., Frenger, P., Larsson, D., and Falahati, S.: Energy
eﬃciency performance of LTE dynamic base station downlink DTX operation. In:
2014 IEEE 79th Vehicular Technology Conference (VTC Spring), pp. 1–5. IEEE
(2014)
6. Niu, Z., Wu, Y., Gong, J., Yang, Z.: Cell zooming for cost-eﬃcient green cellular
networks. IEEE Commun. Mag. 48(11), 74–79 (2010)
7. Sigwele, T., Pillai, P., Hu, F.: Call admission control in cloud radio access networks.
In: International Conference on Future Internet of Things and Cloud (FiCloud),
pp. 31–36. IEEE (2014)
8. Alam, A.S., Dooley, L. S., Poulton, A.S.: Energy eﬃcient relay-assisted cellular net-
work model using base station switching. In: Global Telecommunications Workshop
(GLOBECOM 2012) on Multicell Cooperation (MuCo). IEEE, Anaheim, CA, USA
(2012)
9. Alam, A.S., Dooley, L.S.: A scalable multimode base station switching model for
green cellular networks. In: IEEE Wireless Communication and Networking Con-
ference (WCNC), pp. 1–6 (2015)
10. Namba, S., Warabino, T., Kaneko, S.: BBU-RRH switching schemes for centralized
ran. In: 7th International ICST Conference on Communications and Networking
in China (CHINACOM), pp. 762–766. IEEE (2012)
11. Kong, Z., Gong, J., Xu, C.-Z., Wang, K., Rao, J.: eBase: a baseband unit clus-
ter testbed to improve energy-eﬃciency for cloud radio access network. In: IEEE
International Conference on Communications (ICC), pp. 4222–4227. IEEE (2013)
12. Liu, J., Zhou, S., Gong, J., Niu, Z.: On the statistical multiplexing gain of vir-
tual base station pools. In: Global Communications Conference (GLOBECOM),
pp. 2283–2288. IEEE (2014)
13. Zhao, T., Wu, J., Zhou, S., Niu, Z.: Energy-delay tradeoﬀs of virtual base stations
with a computational-resource-aware energy consumption model. In: IEEE Inter-
national Conference on Communication Systems (ICCS), pp. 26–30. IEEE (2014)
14. Namba, S., Matsunaka, T., Warabino, T., Kaneko, S., Kishi, Y.: Colony-ran
architecture for future cellular network. In: Future Network & Mobile Summit
(FutureNetw), pp. 1–8. IEEE (2012)
15. Ashraf, I., Boccardi, F., Ho, L.: Sleep mode techniques for small cell deployments.
IEEE Commun. Mag. 49(8), 72–79 (2011)
16. Abdulkaﬁ, A.A., Kiong, T.S., Koh, J., Chieng, D., Ting, A.: Energy eﬃciency of
heterogeneous cellular networks: a review. J. Appl. Sci. 12(14), 1418 (2012)
17. Desset, C., Debaillie, B., Giannini, V., Fehske, A., Auer, G., Holtkamp, H., Wajda,
W., Sabella, D., Richter, F., Gonzalez, M.J.: Flexible power modeling of LTE
base stations. In: Wireless Communications and Networking Conference (WCNC),
pp. 2858–2862. IEEE (2012)

Author Index
Abd-Alhameed, Raed A.
3, 18, 37, 193
Abduljabbar, N.A.
193
Abdullah, Abdulkareem S.
18
Abdussalam, Fathi M.
3, 37
Adamu, Paul Inuwa
95
Adebisi, Bamidele
83
Ahmed, Hamd
108
Al-Abdullah, Ali S.
18
Alam, Atm Shaﬁul
223
Ali, Nazar T.
37
Ali, Ramzy S.
18
Al-Sadoon, Mohammed A.G.
18, 193
Amsdon, Timothy J.
213
Anoh, Kelvin
83
Anyigor Ogah, Chibueze P.
119, 130
Arndt, Josua
63
Asuquo, Philip M.
119, 130
Atkinson, Robert
108
Bonehi, Vahid
63
Chamarthi, S.
28
Chatzinotas, Symeon
178
Chen, Yih-Min
47
Chen, Ying-Chang
47
Child, M.B.
37
Clark, R.W.
193
Cruickshank, Haitham
119, 130
Del Re, Enrico
145
Dileep, K.G.
73
Djouablia, L.
3
Dwari, Santanu
28
Eastment, Jon
156
Ekerete, K’ufre-Mfon E.
167
Elmegri, F.
193
Fanfani, Alessio
145
Ghanem, Samah A.M.
202
Gharsellaoui, Ala Eddine
202
Gilmore, Rowan
11, 55
Glover, Ian
108
Goutam, Pradeep
73
Hameed, K.
193
Hari Prasad, S.V.
73
Hayashi, Chihiro
55
Heinen, Stefan
63
Hu, Yim Fun
223
Hunt, Francis H.
167
Hussaini, A.S.
193
Ibrahim, Embarak M.
37
Jaber, Adel
108
Jan, Naeem A.
3, 37
Jeffery, Judith L.
167
Jones, Steve M.R.
18, 193
Judd, Martin
108
Kanaujia, Binod
28
Karasuwa, Abdulkareem
156
Katayama, Norihiko
11
Khan, Umar
108
Kitazume, Susumu
11, 55
Krystoﬁak, Lukas
63
Kumar, Ashwani
28
Lalita, Josyula
28
Lashab, Mohammed
3, 37
Lazaridis, Pavlos
108
Lei, Ao
119, 130
Lewis, Marshall
11
Liao, Shin-Chi
47
Mather, Peter J.
108, 213
Mohammed, B.A.
193
Morosi, Simone
145
Noras, James M.
18
Okorafor, Godfrey
83
Okpako, Oghenovo
95

Olutomilayo, Kunle
130
Ottersten, Björn
178
Otung, Iﬁok E.
156, 167
Pillai, Prashant
95, 223
Pourmoghadas, Ameneh
178
Pulikanti, Laxmaiah
73
Purushothaman, Bipsa
73
Rajamani, Haile-Selassie
95
Ronga, Luca Simone
145
Saeed, Bahghtar
108
Saleh, A.M.
3
Sharma, Shree Krishna
178
Sibley, Martin J.N.
213
Sigwele, Tshiamo
223
Srivastava, Kunal
28
Sun, Zhili
119
Takahara, Yosuke
11, 55
Takamatsu, Hideo
11
Tarchi, Daniele
202
Upton, David
108
Vanelli Coralli, Alessandro
202
Verma, A.K.
28
Vieira, Maria Fatima Queiroz
108
Wunderlich, Ralf
63
Yadav, Mukul
28
Yoshimura, Naoko
11
Zhang, Yong
108
236
Author Index

