
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Wireless Technology Prospects and Policy Options 
Committee on Wireless Technology Prospects and Policy Options
Computer Science and Telecommunications Board
Division on Engineering and Physical Sciences
WIRELESS TECHNOLOGY
PROSPECTS AND POLICY OPTIONS

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Wireless Technology Prospects and Policy Options 
THE NATIONAL ACADEMIES PRESS 
500 Fifth Street, N.W. 
Washington, DC 20001
NOTICE: The project that is the subject of this report was approved by the Govern­
ing Board of the National Research Council, whose members are drawn from the 
councils of the National Academy of Sciences, the National Academy of Engineer­
ing, and the Institute of Medicine. The members of the committee responsible 
for the report were chosen for their special competences and with regard for 
appropriate balance.
Support for this project was provided by the National Science Foundation under 
award number CNS-0238131. Any opinions, findings, conclusions, or recom­
mendations expressed in this publication are those of the authors and do not 
necessarily reflect the views of the organization that provided support for the 
project.
International Standard Book Number-13: 978-0-309-16398-9
International Standard Book Number-10: 0-309-16398-6
Copies of this report are available from:
The National Academies Press
500 Fifth Street, N.W., Lockbox 285
Washington, DC 20055
(800) 624-6242
(202) 334-3313 (in the Washington metropolitan area)
Internet: http://www.nap.edu
Copyright 2011 by the National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Printed in the United States of America

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Wireless Technology Prospects and Policy Options 
The National Academy of Sciences is a private, nonprofit, self-perpetuating 
society of distinguished scholars engaged in scientific and engineering research, 
dedicated to the furtherance of science and technology and to their use for the 
general welfare. Upon the authority of the charter granted to it by the Congress 
in 1863, the Academy has a mandate that requires it to advise the federal govern­
ment on scientific and technical matters. Dr. Ralph J. Cicerone is president of the 
National Academy of Sciences.
The National Academy of Engineering was established in 1964, under the charter 
of the National Academy of Sciences, as a parallel organization of outstanding 
engineers. It is autonomous in its administration and in the selection of its mem­
bers, sharing with the National Academy of Sciences the responsibility for advis­
ing the federal government. The National Academy of Engineering also sponsors 
engineering programs aimed at meeting national needs, encourages education 
and research, and recognizes the superior achievements of engineers. Dr. Charles 
M. Vest is president of the National Academy of Engineering.
The Institute of Medicine was established in 1970 by the National Academy of 
Sciences to secure the services of eminent members of appropriate professions 
in the examination of policy matters pertaining to the health of the public. The 
Institute acts under the responsibility given to the National Academy of Sciences 
by its congressional charter to be an adviser to the federal government and, upon 
its own initiative, to identify issues of medical care, research, and education. 
Dr. Harvey V. Fineberg is president of the Institute of Medicine.
The National Research Council was organized by the National Academy of 
Sciences in 1916 to associate the broad community of science and technology 
with the Academy’s purposes of furthering knowledge and advising the federal 
government. Functioning in accordance with general policies determined by the 
Academy, the Council has become the principal operating agency of both the 
National Academy of Sciences and the National Academy of Engineering in pro­
viding services to the government, the public, and the scientific and engineering 
communities. The Council is administered jointly by both Academies and the 
Institute of Medicine. Dr. Ralph J. Cicerone and Dr. Charles M. Vest are chair and 
vice chair, respectively, of the National Research Council.
www.national-academies.org

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Wireless Technology Prospects and Policy Options 

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Wireless Technology Prospects and Policy Options 
v
COMMITTEE ON WIRELESS TECHNOLOGY 
PROSPECTS AND POLICY OPTIONS
DAVID E. LIDDLE, U.S. Venture Partners, Chair
YOCHAI BENKLER, Harvard University
DAVID BORTH, Motorola Labs
ROBERT W. BRODERSEN, University of California, Berkeley
DAVID D. CLARK, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
THOMAS (Ted) DARCIE, University of Victoria
DALE N. HATFIELD, University of Colorado, Boulder
MICHAEL L. KATZ, New York University
PAUL J. KOLODZY, Kolodzy Consulting
LARRY LARSON, University of California, San Diego
DAVID P. REED, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
GREGORY ROSSTON, Stanford University
DAVID SKELLERN, National ICT Australia
Staff
JON EISENBERG, Director, Computer Science and  
Telecommunications Board

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Wireless Technology Prospects and Policy Options 
vi
COMPUTER SCIENCE AND TELECOMMUNICATIONS BOARD
ROBERT F. SPROULL, Oracle Corporation, Chair 
PRITHVIRAJ BANERJEE, Hewlett-Packard Company 
STEVEN M. BELLOVIN, Columbia University 
SEYMOUR E. GOODMAN, Georgia Institute of Technology 
JOHN E. KELLY III, IBM
JON M. KLEINBERG, Cornell University 
ROBERT KRAUT, Carnegie Mellon University 
SUSAN LANDAU, Radcliffe Institute for Advanced Study 
DAVID E. LIDDLE, U.S. Venture Partners 
WILLIAM H. PRESS, University of Texas, Austin 
PRABHAKAR RAGHAVAN, Yahoo! Labs 
DAVID E. SHAW, D.E. Shaw Research 
ALFRED Z. SPECTOR, Google, Inc. 
JOHN A. SWAINSON, Silver Lake
PETER SZOLOVITS, Massachusetts Institute of Technology 
PETER J. WEINBERGER, Google, Inc. 
ERNEST J. WILSON, University of Southern California
Staff
JON EISENBERG, Director 
VIRGINIA BACON TALATI, Associate Program Officer
SHENAE BRADLEY, Senior Program Assistant
RENEE HAWKINS, Financial and Administrative Manager 
HERBERT S. LIN, Chief Scientist
EMILY ANN MEYER, Program Officer 
LYNETTE I. MILLETT, Senior Program Officer 
ERIC WHITAKER, Senior Program Assistant
ENITA A. WILLIAMS, Associate Program Officer
For more information on CSTB, see its website at  
http://www.cstb.org, write to CSTB, National Research Council, 
500 Fifth Street, N.W., Washington, DC 20001, call (202) 334-2605, 
or e‑mail the CSTB at cstb@nas.edu.

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Wireless Technology Prospects and Policy Options 
vii
The use of radio-frequency communication—commonly referred to 
as wireless communication—is becoming more pervasive as well as more 
economically and socially important. Technological progress over many 
decades has enabled the deployment of several successive generations 
of cellular telephone technology, which is now used by many billions 
of people worldwide; the near-universal addition of wireless local area 
networking to personal computers; and a proliferation of actual and pro­
posed uses of wireless communications. The flood of new technologies, 
applications, and markets has also opened up opportunities for exam­
ining and adjusting the policy framework that currently governs the 
management and use of the spectrum and the institutions involved in it, 
and models for allocating spectrum and charging for it have come under 
increasing scrutiny. 
Yet even as many agree that further change to the policy framework is 
needed, there is debate about precisely how the overall framework should 
be changed, what trajectory its evolution should follow, and how dramatic 
or rapid the change should be. Many groups have opinions, positions, 
demands, and desires related to these questions—reflecting multiple com­
mercial, social, and political agendas and a mix of technical, economic, and 
social perspectives. 
The development of technologies and associated policy and regula­
tory regimes are often closely coupled, an interplay apparent as early as 
the 1910s, when spectrum policy emerged in response to the growth of 
radio communications. As outlined in this report, current and ongoing 
Preface

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Wireless Technology Prospects and Policy Options 
viii 
PREFACE
technological advances suggest the need for a careful reassessment of the 
assumptions that inform spectrum policy in the United States today. 
This report of the Committee on Wireless Technology Trends and 
­Policy Options (Appendix A) thus seeks to shine a spotlight on 21st-
­century technology trends and to outline the implications of emerging 
technologies for spectrum management in ways that the committee hopes 
will be useful to those setting future spectrum policy. Speakers at the 
meetings held by the committee are listed in Appendix B. The detailed 
statement of task for the study is given in Appendix C.
The committee was not in a position to examine details of the numer­
ous specific areas of contention that are the subject of frequent debate 
today or to evaluate the merits of opposing claims. This report thus 
does not offer specific prescriptions for how particular frequency bands 
should be used or seek to resolve conflicting demands for spectrum use 
for particular services. Instead, the committee offers a discussion of the 
technology trends and related policy options relevant to addressing these 
conflicts, both today and in the future.
The development of this report was not without its own challenges, 
and the report was a long time in the making. Early on, the committee’s 
work expanded in scope following a request from the National Tele­
communications and Information Administration to convene a forum 
on spectrum policy reform options. Later, a variety of circumstances 
­unrelated to the substance or the work of the committee led to unexpected 
delays. Throughout the project, there were also reminders that its subject 
is inherently complex and challenging. The technology and policy issues 
are tightly intertwined, and the study involved experts from multiple 
disciplines, including economics, law, public policy, electrical engineer­
ing, and computer science. The multidisciplinary approach sought yields 
a more comprehensive view of a problem, but more time and effort are 
needed to establish a common view of the issues, a common vocabulary, 
and so forth. Finally, the technical and policy perspectives of the mem­
bers of the committee were, by design, diverse. As a result, the technol­
ogy considerations, enablers of a more nimble policy framework, and 
policy options developed by the committee are the products of a multi­
dimensional examination of the issues and negotiation of agreements 
among members holding often-contrasting opinions.
  National Research Council, Summary of a Forum on Spectrum Management Policy Reform, 
The National Academies Press, Washington, D.C., 2004.

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Wireless Technology Prospects and Policy Options 
ix
This report has been reviewed in draft form by individuals chosen 
for their diverse perspectives and technical expertise, in accordance with 
procedures approved by the National Research Council’s Report Review 
Committee. The purpose of this independent review is to provide candid 
and critical comments that will assist the institution in making its pub­
lished report as sound as possible and to ensure that the report meets 
institutional standards for objectivity, evidence, and responsiveness to 
the study charge. The review comments and draft manuscript remain 
confidential to protect the integrity of the deliberative process. We wish 
to thank the following individuals for their review of this report:
Vinton G. Cerf, Google, Inc.,
John M. Cioffi, Stanford University,
Gerald R. Faulhaber, University of Pennsylvania,
Kevin C. Kahn, Intel Corporation,
Teresa H. Meng, Stanford University,
Dipankar Raychaudhuri, Rutgers University,
David H. Staelin, Massachusetts Institute of Technology,
Andrew J. Viterbi, The Viterbi Group, and
Steven S. Wildman, Michigan State University.
Although the reviewers listed above have provided many construc­
tive comments and suggestions, they were not asked to endorse the con­
clusions or recommendations, nor did they see the final draft of the report 
Acknowledgment of Reviewers

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Wireless Technology Prospects and Policy Options 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT OF REVIEWERS
before its release. The review of this report was overseen by R. Stephen 
Berry, University of Chicago. Appointed by the National Research Council, 
he was responsible for making certain that an independent examination 
of this report was carried out in accordance with institutional procedures 
and that all review comments were carefully considered. Responsibility 
for the final content of this report rests entirely with the authoring com­
mittee and the institution.

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Wireless Technology Prospects and Policy Options 
xi
SUMMARY	
1
1	
INTRODUCTION: TRENDS AND FORCES RESHAPING 	
14 
THE WIRELESS WORLD	
	
Advances in Radio Technology, 15
	
Expansion in Applications and Users, 17
	
Changing Market Dynamics, 20
	
The Evolving Policy and Regulatory Framework, 21
2	
KEY TECHNOLOGY CONSIDERATIONS	
33
	
Technological Advances in Radios and Systems of Radios, 34
	
Low-Cost, Portable Radios at Frequencies of 60 GHz and  
Above, 52
	
Interference as a Property of Radios and Radio Systems,  
Not Radio Signals, 53
	
Enduring Technical Challenges, 55
	
Timescales for Technology Deployment, 57
	
Talent and Technology Base for Developing Future Radio 
Technology, 58
	
Measurements of Spectrum Use, 59
	
Challenges Facing Regulators, 63
	
Engineering Alone Is Often No Solution, 66
Contents

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Wireless Technology Prospects and Policy Options 
xii 
CONTENTS
3	
POLICY OPTIONS	
67
	
Pressures on Today’s Wireless Policy Framework, 67
	
Key Considerations for a Future Policy Framework, 68
	
Technology-Enabled Policy Options, 76
APPENDIXES
A	
Biographies of Committee Members and Staff	
87
B	
Speakers at Meetings 	
96
C	
Statement of Task	
 99

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Wireless Technology Prospects and Policy Options 
1
Today’s framework for wireless policy—which governs the opera­
tion of devices that make use of radio-frequency (RF) transmissions—has 
its roots in the technology of 80 years ago and the desire at that time for 
governmental control over communications. It has evolved to encompass 
a patchwork of legacy rules and more modern approaches that have been 
added over time. Although views vary considerably on whether the pace 
of reform has been commensurate with the need or opportunity, there 
have been a number of significant policy changes in recent decades to 
adjust to new technologies and to decrease reliance on centralized man­
agement. These developments have included the use of auctions to make 
initial assignments (along with the creation of secondary markets to trade 
assignment rights) and the designation of open bands in which all users 
are free to operate subject only to a set of “rules of the road.”
There remains, nonetheless, much debate about how the overall frame­
work should be changed, what trajectory its evolution should ­ follow, 
and how dramatic or rapid the change should be. Many groups have 
opinions, positions, and demands related to these questions reflecting 
multiple commercial, social, and political agendas and a mix of technical, 
economic, and social perspectives. 
  A variety of terms are used to describe this approach, including “license-exempt” or 
“­license by rule.” The approach is probably most familiar as the basis for operation of wire­
less LANs, cordless telephones, and the like.
Summary

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Wireless Technology Prospects and Policy Options 
2 
WIRELESS TECHNOLOGY PROSPECTS AND POLICY OPTIONS
Pressures on Today’s Wireless Policy Framework
The current framework for wireless policy in the United States is 
under pressure on several fronts:
•	 It continues to rely heavily on service-specific allocations and 
assignments that are made primarily by frequency band and geographic 
location and does not embrace all of the spectrum management approaches 
possible with today’s technologies and expected to be available with 
tomorrow’s technologies. 
•	 Despite revisions aimed at creating greater flexibility, it continues 
to rely significantly on centrally managed allocation and assignment, with 
government regulators deciding how and by whom wireless communica­
tions are to be used despite growing agreement that central management 
by regulators is inefficient and insufficiently flexible.
•	 It will not be able to satisfy the increasing and broadening demand 
for wireless communications that is spurred by interest in richer media, 
seemingly insatiable demand for mobile and untethered access to the 
Internet and the public telephone network, and growing communication 
among devices as well as people.
•	 It does not fully reflect changes in how radios are being built and 
deployed now or in how they could be built and deployed in the future 
in response to different regulations, given that technological innova­
tion has expanded the range of potential wireless services and the range 
of technical means for providing those services and at the same time 
has ­dramatically lowered the cost of including wireless functionality in 
devices. 
Today, the complexity and density of existing allocations, assign­
ments, and uses, and the competing demands for new uses, all make 
policy change difficult. Decisions will necessarily involve (1) addressing 
the costs and benefits of proposed changes that are (often unevenly) dis­
tributed over multiple parties, (2) resolving conflicting claims about costs 
and benefits, and (3) addressing coordination issues, which are especially 
challenging if achieving a particular change requires actions by a large 
number of parties. Moreover, some parties stand to gain by changing—or 
advocating for change—while others stand to gain by delay or retaining 
the status quo.
Forward-looking Policy Directions
The Committee on Wireless Technology Prospects and Policy Options 
believes that, moving forward, the unambiguous goal for spectrum ­policy 

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Wireless Technology Prospects and Policy Options 
SUMMARY  
3
should be to make the effective supply of spectrum plentiful so as to 
make it cheaper and easier to innovate and introduce new or enhanced 
services. Put another way, the goal should be to reduce the total cost—
which includes the cost, if any, of licenses, and the cost of equipment, 
both for the end user and the network—of introducing or enhancing 
services. The financial cost of adverse impacts to existing users and ser­
vices should also be fairly evaluated and debated in advance of regula­
tory changes.
Given the plethora of existing allocations and assignments, and the 
multitude of existing services and users associated with them, it is not 
possible to take a clean-slate approach. Achieving the goal stated above 
will thus involve several parallel efforts:
•	 Leveraging advanced technologies, regulation, and market-based incen-
tives to support sharing, including overlay and underlay approaches, so 
that new services can share spectrum with legacy services.
•	 Streamlining and modernizing the use of bands allocated or assigned to 
old services to free up new areas of “white space” that can be used for new ser-
vices, by using market mechanisms, relinquishing government-controlled 
bands used for obsolete services, and shutting down obsolete services (as 
has happened with analog television). 
•	 Establishing “open” as the default policy regime used at 20 to 100 giga-
hertz (GHz). At these higher frequencies, sparser use and technical charac­
teristics that significantly reduce the chance for interference suggest that 
nontraditional management approaches can predominate. 
The likelihood of ongoing technological change also points to the value of 
establishing a more adaptive learning system for setting policy that would 
be better able to track and even anticipate advances in wireless technology 
and emerging ways of implementing and using wireless services. 
The sections that follow provide a brief description of key technology 
considerations and outline policy options, many enabled by new technol­
ogy, that will be useful in achieving the goal of increasing the supply of 
spectrum for enhanced or new services.
Key Technology Considerations
Radio-frequency communication has been transformed profoundly 
in recent years by a number of technological advances. This section 
outlines key recent advances and associated trends and their implica­
tions for the design of radios and radio systems and for regulation and 
policy. 

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Wireless Technology Prospects and Policy Options 
4 
WIRELESS TECHNOLOGY PROSPECTS AND POLICY OPTIONS
Profound Changes in Radio-Frequency Communication as a 
Result of Technological Advances in Radios and Radio Systems
Digital processing is used increasingly to detect the desired signal and 
to reject interfering signals. The shift to largely digital radios built using 
complementary metal oxide semiconductor (CMOS) technology; (a high-
density, low-power-consumption technology for constructing integrated 
circuits) has made it much cheaper and easier to include wireless capabili­
ties in consumer electronic devices. As a result of the reduction in costs 
for radio technology, the barriers to developing and deploying novel, low-cost, 
specialized radios have become much lower, and more firms and other organiza-
tions have become capable of and potentially motivated to participate. Growth 
in the number of wireless devices of various types and in the demand for 
wireless communications is likely to continue. 
Technological capabilities are also driving the introduction of new 
radio system architectures, including a shift away from centralized systems 
to more localized transmissions in distributed systems that use very small cells 
(the smallest of those being deployed today are called femtocells) or mesh 
networks, and a shift from centralized switching to more distributed, 
often Internet-Protocol-based, networks. 
Another important shift in radios has been the ability to use new 
techniques to permit greater dynamic exploitation of all available degrees of 
freedom—frequency, space, time, and polarization—which makes it possible to 
take greater advantage in a dynamic, fine-grained, and automated fashion 
of all the degrees of freedom to distinguish signals. This capability offers 
the opportunity to introduce new options for assigning usage rights.
The ability to leverage sustained improvements in the performance of 
digital logic also opens up opportunities to build radios that are much more 
flexible and adaptable. Such radios can change their operating frequency 
and modulation scheme, can sense and respond to their environment, 
and can operate cooperatively to create new opportunities to make more 
dynamic, shared, and independently coordinated use of spectrum. (They 
cannot, however, directly sense passive users, which means that special 
measures such as registries or beacons are needed for detection of passive 
users.) The result is that radios and systems of radios can operate and 
cooperate in an increasingly dynamic and autonomous manner. 
Although increased flexibility involves greater complexity, cost, and 
power consumption, it enables building radios that can better coexist with 
existing radio systems, through both underlay (low-power use intended 
to have a minimal impact on the primary user) and overlay (agile use by 
a secondary user of “holes” in the time and space of use by the primary 
user). Moreover, flexibility makes it possible to build radios with operating 
parameters that can be modified to comply with future policy or rule changes or 
future service requirements.

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Wireless Technology Prospects and Policy Options 
SUMMARY  
5
The use of CMOS to build radios and digital processing together with 
other advances in RF technology opens up a new set of opportunities in 
the form of low-cost, portable radios that are becoming increasingly practical at 
frequencies of 60 GHz and above. Radios operating in this domain must con­
front a number of challenges, including limited free-space propagation 
distances (especially in the oxygen absorption bands around 60 GHz) 
and very limited penetration through and diffraction around walls of 
buildings or other obstacles. On the other hand, these characteristics 
make such radios very useful in providing very large bandwidths over 
short range. 
Interference as a Property of Radio Receivers and Radio Systems,  
Not Radio Signals 
It is commonplace to talk about radio signals interfering with each 
other, a usage that mirrors the common experience of hearing broad­
cast radio signals that are transmitted on the same channel overlay each 
another. However, radio signals themselves do not, generally speaking, 
interfere with each other in the sense that information is destroyed. Inter­
ference reflects a receiver’s inability to distinguish between the desired 
and undesired signals. The cost of separating these signals is ultimately reflected 
in design complexity, hardware cost, and power consumption. As a result, any 
practical radio (i.e., one of practical size, cost, and power consumption) 
will necessarily throw away some of the information needed to resolve 
signal ambiguity. As the performance and capabilities of radios continue 
to improve over time, their ability to distinguish between signals can be 
expected to improve. However, power consumption will remain an espe­
cially challenging constraint, especially for portable devices, and even a 
modest additional device cost can jeopardize the commercial viability of 
a product or service. 
Persisting Technical Challenges 
Even as the capabilities and the performance of radios continue to 
improve, several hard technical problems can be expected to persist. These 
technical challenges—discussed in more detail below in this report—
include power consumption, nonlinearity of radio components, support 
for nomadic operation and mobility, and coping with the heterogeneity 
of capabilities, including both legacy equipment and systems that are 
inherently constrained, such as embedded network sensors and scientific 
instruments that passively use spectrum (e.g., for remote Earth sensing 
and radio astronomy). 

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Wireless Technology Prospects and Policy Options 
 
WIRELESS TECHNOLOGY PROSPECTS AND POLICY OPTIONS
Nonuniform Timescales for Technology Replacement 
Different wireless services are characterized by the different time­
scales for removal of old technology from service and deployment of new 
technology. The factors influencing the turnover time include the time to 
build out the infrastructure, the time to turn over the base of end-user 
devices, and the time to convince existing users (who may be entrenched 
and politically powerful) to make—and pay for—a shift, as well as the 
incentives for upgrading and the size of the installed base. 
Considerable Uncertainty About the Rate at Which 
New Technologies Can Be Deployed Practically 
A particular challenge in contemplating changes to policy or regula­
tory practice is determining just how quickly promising new technologies 
will be deployable as practical devices and systems and thus how quickly, 
and in what directions, policy should be adjusted. As is natural with all 
rapidly advancing technologies, the concepts and prototypes are often well 
ahead of what has been proved to be technically feasible or commercially viable. 
At the same time, technical advances sometimes can be commercialized 
quickly, although deployment and use might also require adjustments to 
regulations, a process that historically has taken longer.
Spectrum Use Lower Than Allocations and Assignments Suggest,  
Especially at Higher Frequencies 
Quantifying how well and how efficiently spectrum is used is quite 
challenging. Measurements may miss highly directional or periodic use 
and cannot detect passive uses such as radio astronomy. These caveats 
notwithstanding, measurements suggest that some allocated and assigned 
frequency bands are very heavily used whereas others are only lightly 
used, at least in certain places and at certain times. The published fre­
quency allocation and assignment charts are thus potentially misleading 
in their suggestion that little spectrum is available for new applications 
and services. A good deal of empty space exists in the spectrum; the chal­
lenge is to find ways of safely detecting and using it.
Enablers of a More Nimble, Forward-Looking  
Spectrum Policy Framework
The committee identified the following approaches as enablers of a 
more nimble approach to spectrum policy. 

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Wireless Technology Prospects and Policy Options 
SUMMARY  
7
Abandon the Extremes in the  
“Property Rights” Versus “Commons” Debate
The terms “property rights” and “commons” are shorthand for par­
ticular approaches to spectrum management—approaches that reflect 
philosophical and ideological perspectives as well as technical and policy 
alternatives. The property rights approach relies on a well-specified and 
possibly exclusive license to operate and on rights that can be established 
or transferred through an administrative proceeding, auction, or market 
transaction. It is intended to facilitate the creation of a market in infra­
structure access and use rights. The commons or open-access approach 
relies on establishing license-free bands in which users must comply with 
specified rules, such as limits on transmitted power. It is intended to 
facilitate a market in devices and services based on symmetrically applied 
infrastructure use and access rights.
Each has advantages and disadvantages and associated transaction 
costs. Each involves different incentives, and different and complemen­
tary loci, for innovation. When carefully specified, neither pure version 
can at present be determined to be uniquely “better” than the other. More­
over, there is a much larger space of alternatives, and commercial forces 
can help drive their evolution and selection provided that the regulatory 
structure is not overly rigid. This suggests adopting a policy framework 
that avoids detailed allocation of spectrum in favor of one that uses 
­market mechanisms for spectrum allocation where they make sense and 
uses an open-access mechanism in other instances. Where to draw the line 
between the two general approaches (licensed or exclusive-use allocations 
versus open access)—and which hybrids of the two approaches might be 
useful—will shift as technological capabilities, deployed services, and 
business models continue to evolve. 
Leverage Standards Processes but Understand Their Limitations
Regulators often rely, either explicitly or implicitly, on standards 
­bodies to define the technical standards that are ultimately needed to 
implement rulings for proposed new allocations and services. On the one 
hand, standards-setting organizations are viewed as being more nimble 
and better able than regulatory bodies to focus on technical issues. On 
the other hand, as standards take on greater importance, the number of 
competing players and conflicting interests grows, raising the risks that a 
large player may try to dominate the process, that standards setting may 
deadlock, or that only certain societal interests are reflected. Some ways to 
address these risks have been identified, such as the use of one company, 
one vote to deal with attempts to dominate by sending multiple delegates, 
but such an approach has tradeoffs as well. 

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Wireless Technology Prospects and Policy Options 
8 
WIRELESS TECHNOLOGY PROSPECTS AND POLICY OPTIONS
Collect More Data on Spectrum Use
There are many gaps today in knowledge about the use of spectrum. 
Measuring use is difficult and has not been done systematically, leading 
to uncertainty for policy makers, who are not able to readily assess claims 
and counterclaims about the use or nonuse of spectrum. Advances in 
radio technology, however, make it possible to contemplate new ways 
of collecting data on spectrum use, such as by the deployment of net­
works of sensors and the incorporation of sensing capabilities in equip­
ment deployed for other purposes. Such capabilities would enhance the 
ability of regulators to enforce compliance with operating rules, and to 
more quickly assess conflicting claims about harmful interference and 
provide the data required to implement spectrum management schemes 
that depend on identifying unused spectrum. 
Ensure That Regulators Have Access to Technology Expertise  
Needed to Address Highly Technical Issues 
As this report argues, spectrum policy is entering an era in which 
technical issues are likely to arise on a sustained basis as technologies, 
applications, and services continue to evolve. The committee believes that 
the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) would therefore benefit 
from enhancing its technology assessment and engineering capabilities 
and suggests several ways to gain such expertise:
•	 Make it a priority to recruit top-caliber engineers/scientists to 
work at the FCC, perhaps for limited terms. 
•	 Use an external advisory committee to provide the FCC with out­
side, high-level views of key technical issues. (Indeed, in the past, the FCC 
convened the Technology Advisory Council to play just such a role.) 
•	 Add technical experts to the staff of each commissioner. 
•	 Tap outside technical expertise, including expertise elsewhere in 
the federal government such as at the Department of Commerce’s Insti­
tute for Telecommunication Sciences and the National Institute of Stan­
dards and Technology (NIST), or through a federally funded research and 
development center. 
  The FCC announced the appointment of a new Technology Advisory Council in October 
2010, as this report was being prepared for publication.

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Wireless Technology Prospects and Policy Options 
SUMMARY  
9
Sustain Talent and Technology Base for Future Radio Technology 
The opportunities described in this report rely on innovation in both 
technology and policy. Innovation in wireless technology involves many 
areas of science and engineering—including RF engineering, digital logic, 
CMOS, networking, computer architecture, applications, policy, and 
­economics—and often expertise in combinations of these areas that is dif­
ficult to obtain in a conventional degree program. Research investments 
in wireless technologies by federal agencies such as the National Sci­
ence Foundation, Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency, National 
Telecommunications and Information Administration, and NIST help to 
build the knowledge base for future innovation and to educate and train 
tomorrow’s wireless engineering talent. Research efforts can be buttressed 
by an infrastructure for implementing and testing new ideas in radios and 
systems of radios. Test beds allow radio system architectures to be tested 
at scale, and access to facilities for integrated circuit design and fabrica­
tion makes it possible to build prototypes. 
Forward-Looking Policy Options
Consider “Open” as the Default Policy Regime at a 
Frequency Range of Approximately 20 to 100 GHz
At frequencies of 20 to 100 GHz, the potential for legacy problems 
and for interference (in the classical sense) is lower, suggesting that non­
traditional (open) approaches could predominate for use of spectrum at 
20 to 100 GHz. Adopting an open approach for a frequency domain that 
will become increasingly more technologically accessible and commer­
cially attractive several years from now would set the stage for more flex­
ible and adaptive future spectrum management. FCC policy has already 
moved in this general direction, with an unlicensed regime established 
in a band at 57 to 64 GHz and licensed access to bands at 80 and 95 GHz 
made available on a first-come, first-protected basis. 
Spectrum use is relatively low at 20 to 100 GHz compared to use at 
frequencies below 20 GHz, but existing users are likely to argue vocifer­
ously for ongoing protection, and some exceptions to the open rule will 
probably be needed to protect certain established services and passive 
scientific uses. 
  It would be imprudent to recommend a particular regime for frequencies above 100 GHz 
given today’s limited understanding of how radios might be constructed or operated in that 
domain, and it would be prudent to review policy in this area every several years and make 
adjustments as appropriate.

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Wireless Technology Prospects and Policy Options 
10 
WIRELESS TECHNOLOGY PROSPECTS AND POLICY OPTIONS
Use New Approaches to Mitigate Interference and a 
Wider Set of Parameters in Making Assignments 
Protecting against harm from interference has both technical aspects 
(how well a radio or radio system can separate the desired from undesired 
signals) and economic dimensions (the costs of building, deploying, and 
operating a radio or radio system with particular technical characteristics 
that make it easier to separate the signals). 
Provided that the transaction costs are low enough and that agreed-
upon protocols for coordination exist, usage “neighbors” can negotiate 
mutually satisfactory solutions to interference problems that take into 
account the financial benefits, costs, and technology opportunities. Given 
the complexity of defining the technological options for any given com­
munication in the context of other local attempts to communicate, as well 
the difficulties of determining who is a “neighbor,” particularly for mobile 
and nomadic systems, the transaction costs may be significant. The size 
of these costs and their implications for solutions that rely on negotiations 
will depend on such factors as the number and diversity of systems and 
users and is a subject of ongoing debate.
Receivers are increasingly able to discriminate a desired signal from 
an undesired one, some technologies provide new tools for mitigating 
interference, and other new technologies make it possible to exploit all 
degrees of freedom in a dynamic fashion, opening new avenues for miti­
gating interference. Mitigation of interference can also be addressed in 
terms of the behavior of systems of radios rather than of individual radios 
and by coordinating the behavior of multiple systems. A key question is 
how best to establish incentives for such cooperation. 
Introduce Technological Capabilities That Enable 
More Sophisticated Spectrum Management 
The use of certain technologies, some of them emerging and some of 
them available but not widely deployed, would make it easier to intro­
duce new services into crowded frequency bands. In particular it might 
be possible to overlay unlicensed use onto licensed use if receivers were 
suitably equipped. Another enabling technology is smart antennas that 
could be used to focus transmitted power, scan the environment for other 
transmissions, and spatially separate transmissions to help avoid inter­
ference. Migrating current nondigital services to more efficient digital 
  R.H. Coase, “The Federal Communications Commission,” Journal of Law and Economics 
2(10):1-40, 1959.
  Y. Benkler, “Some Economics of Wireless Communications,” Harvard Journal of Law and 
Technology 16(1):25-83, 2002. 

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Wireless Technology Prospects and Policy Options 
SUMMARY  
11
transmission will be a major challenge, especially for services that have 
large and/or politically powerful legacy bases.
Migrating to higher-quality receivers has a cost in dollars, design 
complexity, and power consumption. Even small additional costs matter 
a great deal when service providers are fighting for pennies. But the addi­
tional investment could have a big payoff for those who seek to introduce 
enhanced or new services.
Trade Near-Absolute Outcomes for Statistically Acceptable Outcomes 
Although statistical models have long been used in spectrum analy­
sis, the underlying conservative assumptions have emphasized avoidance 
of interference to an extent that has significantly affected efficient use of 
spectrum. An alternative is to relax constraints so as to normally (but not 
always) provide good outcomes, as is done in both Internet communica­
tion (best-effort packet delivery) and cellular telephony (which provides 
mobility in exchange for gaps in coverage and lower audio quality). With 
this approach, adverse impacts on users would be rare even though tech­
nical performance might be measurably but tolerably worse for users. A 
relaxation of requirements could significantly open up opportunities for 
nonexclusive use of frequency bands through a rebalancing of the risk 
of interference and the benefits of new services. This approach might 
not be appropriate, however, for services that demand guarantees of 
especially high-quality service (e.g., for certain safety-critical systems). 
Although regulatory proceedings could be used to implement such a 
shift, it might be preferable for licensees to negotiate mutually beneficial 
arrangements. 
Design for Light as Well as Design for Darkness
Many systems, notably cellular phones, have been “designed for 
darkness”—that is, with the assumption that a particular band has been 
set aside for a particular service or operator and that there are no other 
emissions in that band. An alternative is to “design for light,” with the 
assumption that the operating environment will be noisy and cluttered. 
Both approaches are reasonable for certain applications and services, but 
there are tradeoffs between (1) the ease with which higher spectral effi­
ciency can be achieved under design for darkness, thus allowing for lower 
cost and reduced power consumption and (2) the greater flexibility to sup­
port multiple and diverse uses under design for light. The historical pref­
erence has been to design for darkness, but today technological advances 
suggest opening up more bands in the design-for-light modality. 

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Wireless Technology Prospects and Policy Options 
12 
WIRELESS TECHNOLOGY PROSPECTS AND POLICY OPTIONS
Consider Regulation of Receivers and Networks of Transceivers
Much regulation has focused on transmitters, and rules have speci­
fied transmission frequency and bandwidth, geographical location, and 
transmission power. Increasing use of new radio architectures (discussed 
above) suggests that the scope of inquiry can be broadened to look at the 
properties and behaviors of receivers and networks of transceivers. Better 
receiver standards would create an environment in which receiver capa­
bilities present a lower barrier than they do today for implementing new 
spectrum-sharing schemes. Expanding the scope of policy or regulation 
to include a system of radios rather than an individual radio would open 
up new opportunities, such as the possibility of exploiting a network of 
radios to reliably use a listen-before-send protocol to avoid interference 
and thereby avoid the hidden node problem, in which one radio cannot 
detect transmissions from another radio.
Exploit Programmability So That Radio Behavior  
Can Be Modified to Comply with Operating Rule Changes 
Because radios can be made highly programmable, albeit with 
trade­offs in complexity, cost, and power consumption, their operat­
ing ­ parameters can be made modifiable to comply with policy or rule 
changes. Deployment of devices with such capabilities opens up new 
opportunities for more flexible regulation and more incremental policy 
making: (1) policies could be written less precisely up front, (2) policies 
would not have to be homogeneous and could be adapted to local envi­
ronmental conditions such as signal density, (3) the operating rules of 
existing devices could be revised to accommodate new technology, and 
(4) devices could more easily be certified for international use because 
they can readily be switched to comply with local policy. One result could 
be greater speed of deployment for new technologies and services. Over 
time, the introduction of such capabilities could be expected to impose a 
less onerous performance and cost penalty. Future regulations could take 
advantage of this opportunity by specifying, for example, that licenses 
granted after a certain date would require use of devices with a certain 
degree of reprogrammability.
  Caveat: this flexibility could also paradoxically represent a disincentive to deployment 
because it opens up the possibility of future forced sharing, potentially reducing the value 
of a particular license. 

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Wireless Technology Prospects and Policy Options 
SUMMARY  
13
Use Adaptive and Environment-Sensing Capabilities 
to Reduce the Need for Centralized Management
As agility, sensing, and coordination capabilities improve and as 
­etiquettes and standards for these capabilities develop, opportunities 
will arise for scaling back centralized management. Potential advantages 
of this approach include a lower barrier to entry (because neither engage­
ment with a regulator for spectrum assignment nor negotiation with 
an existing license holder would be necessary) and greater flexibility 
of use (because operation would be defined primarily by the attributes of 
radio equipment rather than regulation). Potential disadvantages of this 
approach include uncertainty about the technical feasibility and the costs 
of building more capable radios with the degree of agility, coordination, 
and environmental sensing required for effective decentralized operation. 
Such a shift would also involve assessing tradeoffs between the more 
rapid introduction of services made possible in a decentralized regime 
and the significant capital investment made and efficiencies achieved, at 
least in some instances, under a centralized regime. 
Establish Enhanced Mechanisms for Dealing with Legacy Systems
In recent years, notable efforts to deal with legacy systems have 
included relocating point-to-point microwave services to allow deploy­
ment of personal communications service cellular telephony and the relo­
cation of Nextel cell services out of public safety bands. More recently, 
relocation of government services as well as broadcast radio services 
and fixed services has been undertaken to allow the introduction of new 
3G/advanced wireless services bands. Modifying infrastructure to accom­
modate such change can be difficult and expensive; an even bigger legacy 
challenge is the need to migrate potentially millions of devices owned and 
operated by consumers and other end users. This task has proven easier 
when the market dynamics are such that end-user technology is regularly 
refreshed (as in mobile telephony, where new handsets with new features 
enter the market frequently and where the cost of handsets is often partly 
covered in the services fees and regular upgrades are made available at 
little additional cost to the subscriber) and harder where retrofitting is not 
practical and hardware has historically had a long lifetime (as in aircraft 
and public safety radios). The difficulty of making changes also depends, 
of course, on the relative political clout of the incumbents and those seek­
ing to introduce new services.

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Wireless Technology Prospects and Policy Options 
14
1
Introduction:
Trends and Forces Reshaping 
the Wireless World
This report examines the evolution of radio-frequency ­communication—
commonly referred to as wireless communication—and the framework 
that governs its use (a framework that also extends to uses of radio fre­
quencies for purposes other than communication). An avalanche of new 
technologies, applications, and markets for wireless communications is 
colliding with a well-established and comprehensive but increasingly 
obsolescent framework for the allocation, assignment, and utilization of 
the radio spectrum. Even as demand for wireless services continues to 
grow, much of the radio spectrum has already been allocated and assigned 
by frequency band (and often by geographical location) for a multitude of 
private-sector and government uses. The more recent developments come 
on the heels of many decades of technological progress, notably marked 
by widespread deployment of existing wireless capabilities such as sev­
eral successive generations of cellular telephone technology now used by 
billions of people worldwide and a proliferation of actual and proposed 
uses of wireless communications. 
Significant policy changes in recent decades reflect efforts to adjust 
to new technologies and to decrease reliance on centralized manage­
ment. There is debate about how the overall framework should be 
changed, what trajectory its evolution should follow, and how dramatic 
or rapid the change should be. Many groups have opinions, positions, 
and demands related to these questions, reflecting multiple commercial, 
  This report uses the terms “radio” and “wireless device” synonymously. 

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Wireless Technology Prospects and Policy Options 
INTRODUCTION: TRENDS AND FORCES RESHAPING THE WIRELESS WORLD 
15
social, and political agendas and a mix of technical, economic, and social 
perspectives. 
This report thus seeks to shine a spotlight, in ways the committee 
hopes will be useful to those setting future spectrum policy, on emerging 
technology trends and to outline policy directions that align with those 
trends. It aims to provide a cogent discussion of the overall rationale 
for changing policy, the opportunities afforded by new technologies for 
spectrum management, and some long-term directions for improvement 
in policy. 
The Committee on Wireless Technology Trends and Policy Options 
was not in a position to examine the details of the numerous specific areas 
of contention that are the subject of frequent debate today regarding use 
of the spectrum, or to evaluate the merits of opposing claims. This report 
thus does not offer specific prescriptions for how particular frequency 
bands should be used or seek to resolve conflicting demands for spectrum 
for particular services. Instead, the committee intends that its discussion 
of the relevant technology trends and policy options should be helpful in 
addressing these conflicts, both today and in the future.
Advances in Radio Technology
The development of technologies and the associated policy and 
regulatory regimes that govern their use are often closely coupled. For 
example, from the late 19th century until recently, the roadways for com­
munication and transmission of information (e.g., the telephone system, 
broadcast television, and radio) were, like those for transporting people 
and physical goods, owned, managed, and regulated by a relatively small 
number of institutions. The concerns and assumptions underlying poli­
cies were grounded in the technical realities and economic and political 
imperatives of the time. The interplay between technology and policy was 
apparent as early as the 1910s. The growth of radio communications and 
the spectrum policy that emerged reflected a compromise on a framework 
for spectrum management. 
When spectrum regulation began with the Radio Acts of 1912 and 
1927 and the Communications Act of 1934, the primary obstacle to signal 
reception was noise. Because of the quality of components available at 
that time and the nature of the most popular frequency bands of the day 
(which were selected for their longer propagation distances), noise was a 
significant problem, and interference (i.e., human-generated noise from 
other transmissions) from other sources was regarded as intolerable and 
something to be avoided. Accordingly, a regulatory structure was set 
up that allocated frequencies with specific power levels and bandwidth 
masks uniquely to single broadcasters or services in a given geographic 

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Wireless Technology Prospects and Policy Options 
16 
WIRELESS TECHNOLOGY PROSPECTS AND POLICY OPTIONS
area. For the most part, the environment consisted of a small number of 
high-power transmitters separated by frequency and geography, and a 
very large number of mute receivers. Licenses granted the right to broad­
cast using a few kilohertz of spectrum and also provided an “address” 
(in the form of, for example, AM radio channel numbers) in addition to a 
means to avoid interference.
Today, radios routinely operate in frequency ranges where back­
ground noise is limited and dealt with rather easily. The very large num­
ber of active transceivers means that the primary challenge is separating 
the desired signal from the signals of all the other potentially interfering 
transmitters, not avoiding noise. The huge number of devices associated 
with many modern services means that frequencies must be shared (and 
that the particular frequencies in use at any given time are not apparent 
to the user). For example, many cell phones share a particular block of 
spectrum at any given time, with the sharing enabled by separation by 
code (code division multiple access) or time slice (time division multiple 
access) as well as location (which cell the phone is currently in). These 
challenges were not fully anticipated by traditional spectrum allocation 
and licensing schemes. 
Moreover, in the past 50 years, a number of changes—including a 
fundamental new understanding of physics and information theory; vast 
increases in the computation that can be performed by a compact, cheap, 
low-power device; and improvements in analog components—have 
allowed for very inexpensive processing of signals in ways not contem­
plated when many spectrum polices were established and allocations 
were made.
In short, radio-frequency communication today is being profoundly 
changed by a related set of technological advances—both in the capabili­
ties and performance of individual radios and in the design of networks 
and systems of radios. These advances, which are discussed in more detail 
in Chapter 2, include the following:
•	 A shift in favor of digital signal processing and use of low-cost 
complementary metal-oxide-semiconductors integrated circuit technol­
ogy for both digital and analog radio components;
•	 The advent of new radio systems architectures that rely on dis­
tributed (and often Internet-Protocol-based) control and on more local­
ized transmission using microcells and mesh networks, rather than 
­traditional architectures that rely on centralized switching or wide area 
transmission; 
•	 The development of a variety of techniques, including more robust 
receivers, antenna arrays, frequency agility, and new modulation tech­
niques and coding algorithms, to permit dynamic, fine-grained, and 

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Wireless Technology Prospects and Policy Options 
INTRODUCTION: TRENDS AND FORCES RESHAPING THE WIRELESS WORLD 
17
automated exploitation of all available degrees of freedom—that is, not 
just static separation in frequency and space but also dynamic use of 
frequency, time, space, and polarization—along with “code”—to distin­
guish radio signals; and 
•	 The development of technologies that permit flexible and adapt­
able radios that can sense and respond to their operating environment 
and can coordinate their operation in an increasingly dynamic, distrib­
uted, and autonomous fashion. 
The technological advances outlined above and discussed in more 
detail in the next chapter call for a careful reassessment of the assump­
tions that underlie spectrum policy.
Expansion in Applications and Users
The transition from wired and fixed place-to-place communications 
to wireless mobile person-to-person (and device-to-device) communica­
tions has been under way for decades. Radio, once confined to largely 
unidirectional transmissions from a small number of broadcasters to a 
large number of passive receivers, has blossomed to include bidirectional 
communication among a much larger numbers of devices. 
The number of people actively using wireless communications has 
grown dramatically: only a couple of decades ago, there were thousands 
of radio and television broadcasters, a half million amateur radio opera­
tors, and a few million mobile radio users worldwide; today there are 
billions of mobile telephone users, hundreds of millions of wireless local 
area network (WLAN) users, and similarly large numbers of low-power 
in-home and personal devices. Many other services and products ranging 
from satellite television to global positioning systems (used, for instance, 
in automobile navigation systems) to public safety communications make 
use of spectrum licensed to specific companies, government agencies, or 
other entities.
Perhaps most familiar and notable is that there are nearly 300 million 
cell phone subscribers in the United States and 5 billion subscribers world­
  Although it is strictly speaking a technique for exploiting the other degrees of freedom, 
modulation or code is often referred to as another degree of freedom because it can be used 
to allow separation of signals that appear to be at the same frequency, time, and space.
  Donald C. Cox, “Wireless personal communications: What is it?” IEEE Personal Commu-
nications, April 1995, pp. 20-35. This paper notes the transition occurring already as far back 
as 1995 due to wireless communications. 
  “CTIA—The Wireless Association, Wireless Quick Facts: Mid-Year Figures,” available at 
http://www.ctia.org/media/industry_info/index.cfm/AID/10323.

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Wireless Technology Prospects and Policy Options 
18 
WIRELESS TECHNOLOGY PROSPECTS AND POLICY OPTIONS
wide. Many everyday products that have been sold by the hundreds of 
millions—such as cordless phones, baby monitors, security systems, garage 
door openers, keyless entry for automobiles, and a wide variety of WLAN 
products—make use of so-called open bands for which individual licenses 
are not required and only low-power transmissions are permitted. 
These two familiar examples are notable both for their success and 
for their distinct features. WLAN technology enabled the rapid and flex­
ible deployment of a wide variety of devices. Cell phones became nearly 
­ubiquitous as a result of large capital investments and the spectral effi­
ciency achieved by their technology. The success of the cell phone indus­
try was predicated on the solution of an extremely difficult (indeed nearly 
insurmountable) engineering problem in the presence of a huge, visible, 
obvious, well-understood market opportunity—universal mobile tele­
phony. In contrast, WLANs involved solving a simpler engineering prob­
lem for a market with considerable potential but less certain value. 
Many wireless devices use multiple wireless systems and technolo­
gies. Cell phones now often include Bluetooth capability, allowing them 
to connect to wireless headsets and vehicle audio systems as well as the 
cellular telephone system. Laptop computers today may contain wire­
less LAN, Bluetooth, and cellular communications capabilities. A digital 
video recorder might connect to a home wireless network to allow sharing 
photographs and music from other computers on the network while also 
receiving broadcast signals over the air and commercial satellite television 
signals. Both wireless LAN and cellular capabilities are being built into 
new types of consumer electronics such as electronic book readers.
Military applications of wireless technology have expanded well 
beyond voice communications and radar systems, and many applica­
tions initially developed for military purposes have found widespread 
commercial or civilian use. For instance, the Global Positioning System 
(GPS) was launched as a military application and is now used by hikers, 
in-vehicle navigation systems, and even in golf carts. 
More recently, wireless technology has been applied to machine-to-
machine communications, with expectations that such communications 
will exceed those involving humans within the next few years. Fleet 
  Estimates were that by the end of 2010, there would be 5.3 billion mobile subscriptions 
worldwide. See International Telecommunication Union (ITU), The World in 2010: ICT Facts 
and Figures. Geneva.
  Bluetooth wireless technology is one of several short-range communications technologies 
intended to replace the cables connecting portable and fixed devices. 
  The increasing prevalence of laws requiring hands-free operation of cellular phones in 
automobiles in the interest of safety concerns is driving increased interest in this application 
of wireless technology.
  “A World of Connections: A Special Report on Telecoms,” p. 5 in The Economist, April 28, 
2007. 

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Wireless Technology Prospects and Policy Options 
INTRODUCTION: TRENDS AND FORCES RESHAPING THE WIRELESS WORLD 
19
management, supply chain and logistics management, automated meter 
reading, security monitoring systems, vending machines, and sensor net­
works monitoring industrial process are just a few examples of the appli­
cations already in use and being developed. These distributed control 
systems made up of sensors, remote devices, and actuators are linked 
into wireless networks via wireless communications channels. Radio 
frequency identification (RFID) uses wireless communication to identify 
tagged objects. Although this prospect has been anticipated for some 
time,10 such applications are now being more widely adopted. Applica­
tions of wireless technology are moving from any time and any place to 
include any thing.11 
In short, wireless technology is spread broadly across all activities of 
daily life and is becoming an ever more integral and indispensable part 
of those activities. Reports of how the wireless revolution is changing 
everyday life abound in the news, and they include news of the pervasive 
and ubiquitous computing enabled by wireless communications, mak­
ing all sorts of previously impossible things possible. These changes are 
driven by technological advances and by the creation of new applications 
that make use of those advances to provide new services and create new 
markets. The potential is real, but realizing it, with all of its implications 
for more and more wireless communications of all types, will continue to 
strain the spectrum management regime.
Wired Versus Wireless Communication (Propagation Versus Backhaul)
Fiber optics finally led to the demise of Grove’s law, which (con­
trasting the remarkable rate of improvements in computing performance 
with the slower rate of improvements in the performance of deployed 
communications capabilities) forecast a doubling of the bandwidth of the 
telephone system every 100 years.12 The effect of rebuilding the cable and 
telephone industries with an abundance of fiber-optic technology has been 
transformative, as has been the deployment of broadband local access 
infrastructure using fiber, digital subscriber line,13 and cable modem tech­
nology. The most significant impact for wireless of the investment in this 
  Andrea Goldsmith, Wireless Communications, Cambridge University Press, 2005.
10  National Research Council, Embedded, Everywhere, The National Academies Press, Wash­
ington, D.C., 2001. 
11  International Telecommunication Union, Internet Reports 2005: The Internet of Things, 
United Nations, 2005.
12  See, for instance, National Research Council, Defining a Decade: Envisioning CSTB’s 
Second 10 Years, Proceedings of Computer Science and Telecommunications Board’s 10th 
Anniversary Symposium, National Academy Press, Washington, D.C., 1996.
13  Interestingly, digital subscriber line networks pose their own spectrum management 
challenges because wire pairs within the telephone wire plant radiate into each other.

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Wireless Technology Prospects and Policy Options 
20 
WIRELESS TECHNOLOGY PROSPECTS AND POLICY OPTIONS
infrastructure has been a significant reduction in the need for medium- 
and long-range propagation of radio-spectrum signals. In effect, wireless 
technology has become an important (though not exclusively) local access 
technique for interconnection with a huge fiber transport infrastructure 
for voice, data, and, increasingly, video transmission. Fiber-optic connec­
tions frequently provide these “backhaul” services, which are needed to 
connect distributed sites (such as cell towers) to the network. Of course, 
a backhaul role remains for wireless links, such as microwave and satel­
lite communications, but the tremendous breakthrough in the cost and 
capacity of fiber-optic technology has shifted the focus of wireless com­
munications more toward “last-mile” and “last-meters” issues. Another 
consequence is that the market in wireless services is more closely linked 
to the market in last-mile wireline communications services. 
This shift increases the importance of wireless services that operate at 
shorter ranges. At the shortest ranges, near-field communication is used 
in such applications as touchless public transportation passes, and RFID 
is used for communication between, for example, vehicle transponders 
and tollbooths. 
Changing Market Dynamics
Wireless technologies are making possible valuable new services and 
products. Most large-scale commercial applications of wireless technology 
have until recently operated using licensed spectrum—spectrum in which 
only the assigned user can operate and offer services according to the 
terms of its license. Broadcast television and radio, satellite communica­
tions, and cellular telephone systems are prominent examples. As personal 
wireless communications and related data services are improved, demand 
for spectrum to be used by individuals and devices continues to increase. 
As previously discussed, a growing number of devices (including laptops, 
tablets, cell phones, electronic book readers, cameras using WiFi, headsets 
and other devices using Bluetooth, and sensors and controls using such 
protocols as ZigBee) operate in open bands in which defined technical 
rules for both the hardware and the deployment methods are employed 
to enable shared use without license rights or guarantees of protection 
from interference. Such capabilities are being deployed by individual users 
(households with WiFi for sharing a broadband connection throughout 
their house); schools, other organizations, and firms (to provide connec­
tivity within their premises); communications carriers (to complement 
their offerings using licensed spectrum or wireline connections); and local 
governments (for their own use or to extend communications within their 
communities). This complementary approach is often credited with having 
allowed the rapid development of new products and services. Spectrum 

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Wireless Technology Prospects and Policy Options 
INTRODUCTION: TRENDS AND FORCES RESHAPING THE WIRELESS WORLD 
21
policy, service offerings, and business models have all been evolving to 
take advantage of licensed operation as well as operation in open bands. 
Some currently licensed spectrum uses are facing competition or 
replacement by technology-enabled alternatives. For instance, terrestrial 
broadcast television now competes with both cable and satellite trans­
mission, and they all compete with video delivered (by streaming or 
download) over the Internet. Spectrum once dedicated to a particular 
use becomes less valuable as alternative uses become more valuable. 
An obvious example is the spectrum once reserved for analog television 
broadcasting channels and freed when broadcast television completed its 
transition to all-digital transmission. The question of what to do with the 
“white space” created by freeing spectrum previously allocated for televi­
sion channels 2 to 51 has highlighted many of the arguments about the 
merits of licenses, the possibilities for using markets to shift spectrum to 
new uses, and the role of open-band approaches.14 
Still another aspect of shifting market dynamics is related to the 
globalization of markets. Global markets for wireless communications 
devices have been driven not so much by global travelers, which are 
relatively few, as by the global economies of scale associated with com­
mon components, common products, and consistent standards that make 
it possible to develop products and services for large markets. Where 
differences do exist, decreasing component costs and increasing miniatur­
ization have enabled multimode devices such as tri- and quad-mode cell 
phones that sidestep some of the harmonization issues. 
The Evolving Policy and Regulatory Framework
There appears to be a broad consensus that the current framework 
for spectrum policy is ripe for change.15 This attitude reflects recognition 
of the shortcomings of centralized government management of spectrum 
use as well as the need to accommodate present and emerging techno­
logical capabilities such as those discussed in Chapter 2. A number of 
significant policy changes reflect efforts to adjust to new technologies 
and to shift some control from central management to markets and open 
bands. This section reviews the origins of the present policy regime and 
some recent efforts to make changes.
14  See testimony submitted to the Federal Communication Commission, “Unlicensed 
Opera­tion in the TV Broadcast Bands,” ET Docket No. 04-186, and “Additional Spectrum for 
Unlicensed Devices below 900 MHz and in the 3 GHz Band,” ET Docket No. 02-380.
15  FCC, “Report of the Spectrum Policy Task Force,” ET Docket No. 02-135, November 
2002, p. 11; Government Accountability Office (GAO), Telecommunications: Comprehensive 
Review of U.S. Spectrum Management with Broad Stakeholder Involvement Is Needed, GAO-03-
277, Washington, D.C., January 2003, p. 3. 

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Wireless Technology Prospects and Policy Options 
22 
WIRELESS TECHNOLOGY PROSPECTS AND POLICY OPTIONS
History
There are several potential historiographies of the emergence of wire­
less communications policy in the United States. Each represents a par­
ticular perspective on the proper role for government and for markets in 
the management of spectrum. This section starts with a brief summary 
of the official administrative story—that is, the legislative and regulatory 
actions beginning with the Radio Act of 1912. Both the Supreme Court, 
when it initially upheld the role of the Federal Communications Commis­
sion (FCC) in licensing wireless systems, and the FCC in various reports 
(such as the Spectrum Policy Task Force report described below in this 
report) reflect this perspective. Three additional perspectives reflect actual 
or perceived motivations, priorities, and consequences from alternative 
points of view. Often unstated or implied in current spectrum policy 
debates, these stories color the assumptions and arguments made by the 
diverse policy stakeholders, with numerous important implications for 
spectrum policy analysis. They also serve to reveal the many potential 
pitfalls for spectrum policy making. 
Official (Administrative) Story
The administrative story begins with the demise of the Titanic and 
the sense that potential rescuers could not be reached because of a lack 
of coordinated communications. The Radio Act of 1912 was meant to 
address such issues, but a 1926 court decision in United States v. Zenith 
Radio Corp. held that the 1912 act did not allow the secretary of commerce 
(under authority from the President) to refuse licenses.16 That decision 
led to an 8-month period when the law broke down and a cacophony of 
signals was transmitted, so that no one could be heard, followed by the 
rapid passage of the Radio Act of 1927. The provisions of the 1927 act 
were mostly incorporated into the Communications Act of 1934, which 
unified the regulatory regime for nongovernmental use of spectrum for 
telephone, telegraph, and radio under the control of the FCC. Regulation 
of governmental spectrum use was assigned to the executive branch, and 
eventually, in the 1970s, to the National Telecommunications and Informa­
tion Administration (NTIA) of the Department of Commerce. This split 
addressed concerns about concentrating licensing authority, as reflected 
in the 1926 court decision.17 These two agencies, the FCC and the NTIA, 
must coordinate to accommodate the full range of spectrum users since 
no spectrum is specifically mandated for exclusive federal or nonfederal 
16  United States v. Zenith Radio Corp. et al., 12 F. 2nd 614 (N.D. Ill., 1926).
17  GAO, Telecommunications: Better Coordination and Enhanced Accountability Needed to 
­Improve Spectrum Management, GAO-02-906, Washington, D.C., September 2002, p. 2. 

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Wireless Technology Prospects and Policy Options 
INTRODUCTION: TRENDS AND FORCES RESHAPING THE WIRELESS WORLD 
23
use.18 The system put in place in 1934 is largely the system that we have 
to this day.19 
This historiography presents spectrum management as a straight­
forward technical problem, to be solved to the extent possible and neces­
sary by the most direct and straightforward regulatory mechanism. 
Government Control Story
The government story starts with a focus on the Navy’s efforts to con­
trol the airwaves since the early 20th century, efforts that had been almost 
entirely successful as the United States entered the First World War. It then 
follows the battle over the following decade that resulted in direct control 
(through the Independent Radio Advisory Committee and the NTIA) over 
much of wireless communications capacity, and indirect control through 
the private-public arrangement embodied in the FCC over the remainder. 
There are nuances to this story. Early versions focused on overly zealous 
regulation and the scarcity of capacity it caused.20 Newer versions focus 
more heavily on the positive political theory (i.e., the use of game theory 
and other formal methods) of legislation.21 The primary practical lessons 
of this perspective are that any form of regulatory solution, however well 
designed, can have undesired results, including corruption or failure, so 
that the institutional design of the regulatory system aims to minimize the 
role of self-conscious policy making. 
Business Story
The business story focuses on the moves of the industrial players in 
the first quarter of the 20th century. It follows the path from Marconi to 
De Forest, the joining in of AT&T and later GE and Westinghouse, the 
formation of RCA, and the patent pools of 1920.22 In this story, a series 
18  U.S. Department of Commerce, Spectrum Policy for the 21st Century—The President’s 
Spectrum Policy Initiative: Report 1, June 2004, pp. 8-10. 
19  FCC, “Report of the Spectrum Policy Task Force,” ET Docket No. 02-135, November 
2002, p. 7. Additional source: NBC v. U.S. 319 U.S. 190, 1943.
20  R.H. Coase, “The Federal Communications Commission,” Journal of Law and ­Economics 
2(October):1-40, 1959; Jora R. Minasian, “Property Rights in Radiation: An Alternative 
­Approach to Radio Frequency Allocation,” Journal of Law and Economics 18(1; April):221-
272, 1975.
21  Thomas W. Hazlett, “The Rationality of U.S. Regulation of the Broadcast Spectrum,” 
Journal of Law and Economics 33(1):133-175, 1990; Thomas W. Hazlett, “Assigning Property 
Rights to Radio Spectrum Users: Why Did FCC License Auctions Take 67 Years?” Journal of 
Law and Economics 4(2):529-576, 1998. 
22  Yochai Benkler, “Overcoming Agoraphobia: Building the Commons of the Digitally 
Networked Environment,” Harvard Journal of Law and Technology 11(Winter):287, 1997-1998.

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Wireless Technology Prospects and Policy Options 
24 
WIRELESS TECHNOLOGY PROSPECTS AND POLICY OPTIONS
of business decisions by the primary manufacturers of transmission and 
reception equipment in the second and third decades of the 20th century 
led to the emergence of the broadcast model.
Through a variety of techniques, some developed in the market, some 
through the patent system, and some through the regulatory system, the 
broadcasting industry had settled by 1926 on the advertiser-supported 
networks using government-granted exclusive licenses that dominated 
until very recently. The following years of industry consolidation saw a 
shift from what was primarily an equipment-market-driven phenomenon 
in the 1920s (e.g., the need to create demand for receivers as the economic 
rationale for the creation of the National Broadcasting Company) to an 
advertiser-supported entertainment service by the 1930s. It also saw the 
shift from spectrum allocation by the secretary of commerce to allocation 
by an independent agency, the FCC. However, the basic structure was 
set in place even before—and independent of—­formal legislation.23 The 
primary significance of perspective as a guide to contemporary policy 
making is in regard to the need to pay particular attention to the business 
structure of the markets in wireless communications equipment and wire­
less services and their implications for proposed institutional designs. 
Public-Interest Advocates Versus Commercial Broadcasters Story
A third, and final, nonofficial story is the story of the battle between 
entrenched broadcasters and advocates concerned with a public interest 
in spectrum and publicly minded broadcast policy. In this story, much 
of the action that matters most occured later than in either of the two 
other nonofficial stories—in the period between the advent of broadcast 
radio and passage of the Communications Act of 1934. During that time, 
a variety of education, labor, religious, press, and civic groups opposed 
the network-based and advertising-supported system that was emerging 
and advocated for setting aside significant capacity for nonprofit and non­
commercial broadcasting.24 The story is important because its primary ele­
ments continue to describe a fairly broad perception of the political stakes 
in wireless communications policy. Broadcast communications ­policy is 
perhaps the most visible of wireless policies for most Americans. 
The construct of the “public interest” evokes strong political emotions 
and deeply held beliefs. The political power of broadcasters, coupled with 
23  Erik Barnouw, A History of Broadcasting in the United States: Volume 1: A Tower of Babel: To 
1933, Oxford University Press, New York, 1966; Hugh G.J. Aitken, “Allocating the Spectrum: 
The Origins of Radio Regulation,” Technology and Culture 35(4):686-716, 1994. 
24  Robert W. McChesney, Telecommunications, Mass Media, and Democracy: The Battle for the 
Control of U.S. Broadcasting, 1928-1935, Oxford University Press, New York, 1994. 

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Wireless Technology Prospects and Policy Options 
INTRODUCTION: TRENDS AND FORCES RESHAPING THE WIRELESS WORLD 
25
the belief that this particular area of policy is especially important for, and 
amenable to, political action, creates important constraints on the range 
of policies practically open for reform. 
Allocation, Assignment, and Licensing
The allocation of frequencies for a particular use (what is permitted to 
operate in a range of frequencies) is distinct from their assignment (who 
is permitted to use that range of frequencies). Allocation was historically 
made through rule making; recent years have seen a shift from assign­
ment by comparative hearing to auctions and the introduction of second­
ary markets to allow market-based reassignment.
The vast majority of licenses to operate wireless devices and systems 
in the United States are assigned in an administrative process either by 
the FCC, which has jurisdiction over use by private and state, local, and 
tribal users, or by the NTIA, which has jurisdiction over use by federal 
agencies. 
The fundamental principal for regulation of transmitters is that it 
is impermissible to operate a wireless communications transmitter in 
the United States except by license, unless the device has very well 
defined technical characteristics that allow it to be operated under one 
of the FCC’s permissive frameworks for unlicensed operation. Licenses 
typically include limits on the use of the equipment licensed which 
are typically designated in terms of the following:
•	 The frequency of signals transmitted by the system;
•	 The bandwidth of the signals;
•	 The power of the transmitter, given the bandwidth used; 
•	 The antenna location and height or other design characteristics 
(such as direction);
•	 The number of other potential licensees to use equipment with 
equivalent characteristics; and 
•	 The relations among licensees (e.g., license exclusivity and the 
presence of secondary and primary users).
Licenses typically also limit the types of services that can be offered; for 
example, a television band licensee cannot use that spectrum for any 
other use.25 
 Devices that receive and decode but cannot transmit wireless com­
munications are not subject to the same regulatory framework (although 
25  The advantages of not specifying particular services are compellingly illustrated in the 
diversity of services that have been implemented in unlicensed bands.

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Wireless Technology Prospects and Policy Options 
26 
WIRELESS TECHNOLOGY PROSPECTS AND POLICY OPTIONS
some, like police radar detectors, may be regulated in other contexts). 
Note that because receivers contain local oscillators (to detect the signal or 
for their computational elements) that may interfere with other transmis­
sions, they are subject to limits on these unintentional emissions.
Overview of Recent Policy Developments
Starting with changes made to the Communications Act in 1983, 
Congress has sought to encourage competition and innovation and to rec­
ognize the evolving technological reality.26 Today, increasing use is being 
made of less centralized mechanisms using markets in both spectrum 
rights and open bands. Changes to the Communications Act authorize 
the FCC to collect license fees, conduct spectrum auctions, and provide 
for spectrum allocation flexibility.27 Auctions have seen increasing use for 
making assignments, and secondary spectrum markets are emerging. The 
opening of new bands and the auctioning of spectrum rights, together 
with significant technological developments, is credited, for example 
with having enabled tremendous growth in the number of cell phone 
subscribers. 
Complementing these market-based mechanisms has been growing 
use of open bands, in which all users are free to operate subject only to 
rules of the road.28 This development had its origins in the decision to 
establish the so-called industrial, scientific, and medical bands at 900 MHz 
and at 2.4 and 5.8 GHz as open bands, an action that helped pave the way 
for today’s widespread use of WLANs. 
In recent years, two U.S. government initiatives aimed at stimulating 
broad reform were launched—the FCC 2002 Spectrum Policy Task Force 
report and associated ongoing activities, and the President’s Spectrum 
Policy Initiative of 2004.29 
Recent specific policy changes have included approval of ultrawide­
band operation, which represents a new, fundamentally different way 
of thinking about wireless transmission and is also the first instance 
26  47 U.S.C. 157, “New Technologies and Services.” 
27  FCC, “Report of the Spectrum Policy Task Force,” ET Docket No. 02-135, November 
2002, pp. 7-8.
28  A variety of terms describe this approach, including “license-exempt” or “license by 
rule.” This approach is probably most familiar as the basis for operation of WLANs, cord­
less telephones, and the like.
29  FCC, “Report of the Spectrum Policy Task Force,” ET Docket No. 02-135, November 
2002; FCC Spectrum Policy Task Force, Report of the Spectrum Efficiency Working Group, 
Novem­ber 15, 2002; U.S. Department of Commerce, Spectrum Policy for the 21st Century—The 
President’s Spectrum Policy Initiative: Report 1, June 2004.

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Wireless Technology Prospects and Policy Options 
INTRODUCTION: TRENDS AND FORCES RESHAPING THE WIRELESS WORLD 
27
of approval for the overlay of existing services;30 changes in licensing 
procedures to accommodate software-defined radios and proceedings 
regarding adaptive radios;31 a decision to permit low-power devices to 
operate on vacant broadcast television channels;32 issuance of a notice of 
inquiry for a spectrum-sharing test bed to be shared among federal and 
nonfederal users;33 and adoption of rules and development of technical 
measures enabling the sharing of spectrum at 5 GHz between existing 
military radar systems and low-power unlicensed devices.34
Two Recent Federal Policy Initiatives
Several major federal policy initiatives were launched in recent years. 
These include the two described below—the FCC Spectrum Policy Task 
Force (and a series of proceedings that followed) and the President’s 
Spectrum Policy Initiative—as well as the FCC National Broadband Plan 
that was released in March 2010.
FCC Spectrum Policy Task Force (2002)
Seeking to exploit the opportunity opened by new technological capa­
bilities, the Spectrum Policy Task Force (SPTF) approached not only the 
problem of the need for changes to spectrum management and allocation 
but also the long-term need to allow further change to happen readily 
in anticipation of such technological advance. The SPTF report of 2002 
introduced new models and ways of thinking about the rights of users 
and licensees, about the accommodation of market forces, and about the 
preparation for future radio technologies beyond the horizon.35 
The FCC chair formed the SPTF in 2002 to help the FCC improve spec­
trum policy management in recognition of the challenges it faces to “keep 
pace with the ever-increasing demand for spectrum and the continuing 
30  FCC, Order FCC 02-48, ET Docket No. 98-153, February 14, 2002.
31  An adaptive radio and radio technology are commonly referred to as a “cognitive radio” 
or a “smart radio,” defined in a 2005 FCC proceeding as a radio empowered to “alter its 
transmitter parameters based on interaction with the environment in which it operates.” 
See FCC, Report and Order FCC 05-57, ET Docket No. 03-108, March 10, 2005, available at 
http://hraunfoss.fcc.gov/edocs_public/attachmatch/FCC-05-57A1.pdf. 
32  FCC, ET Docket No. 04-186, May 13, 2004. 
33  FCC, ET Docket No. 06-89, June 8, 2006, available at http://hraunfoss.fcc.gov/­
edocs_public/attachmatch/FCC-06-77A1.pdf. 
34  FCC, Report and Order FCC 97-5, ET Docket No. 96-102, January 9, 1997, available at 
http://www.fcc.gov/Bureaus/Engineering_Technology/Orders/1997/fcc97005.pdf. 
35  FCC, “Spectrum Policy Task Force Report,” ET Docket No. 02-135, November 2002, 
available at http://hraunfoss.fcc.gov/edocs_public/attachmatch/DOC-228542A1.pdf. 

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Wireless Technology Prospects and Policy Options 
28 
WIRELESS TECHNOLOGY PROSPECTS AND POLICY OPTIONS
advances in wireless technology and applications.”36 The SPTF report 
of November 2002 sought to provide a comprehensive and systematic 
review of FCC spectrum policy and to catalyze reform of that policy. 
The report offers a number of findings and recommendations aimed at 
improving spectrum policy and ensuring that it is able to evolve with 
technology and applications. 
The 2002 SPTF report summarizes the regulatory history of spectrum 
policy in the United States from its beginnings more than 90 years ago, 
covering both statutory and administrative aspects. It also notes that 
public interest use, such as for public safety communications and national 
defense, is an ongoing consideration of the regulatory process and is 
factored into policy decisions along with economic considerations driven 
by private-sector demand for services and applications. The SPTF report 
makes the case for spectrum policy reform, stating that the dramatic 
increase in demand for spectrum-based services coupled with significant 
and continuing technological advances makes reform not only possible but 
also necessary. It argues that these new and evolving dynamics are strain­
ing long-standing, outmoded spectrum policies that, unchanged, will fail 
to maximize the potential public benefits of spectrum-based services and 
applications. Specifically, it notes the potential for “smart” or “opportu­
nistic” technology, such as software-defined radios, to allow more flexible 
use of spectrum. Additionally, the report notes that spectrum scarcity is of 
increasing concern. It refers to some evidence that allocated spectrum is 
being underutilized and calls for more comprehensive measurements of 
spectrum use to be undertaken. It sees better understanding of actual use 
as one means of identifying where scarcity might be mitigated through 
more efficient allocation and greater flexibility.
The SPTF report identifies seven key elements for a new approach to 
spectrum policy:
•	 Maximizing flexibility of spectrum use. A flexible-use approach to 
spectrum policy, in contrast to the traditional command-and-control 
approach, allows licensed and unlicensed users maximum autonomy to 
determine the highest-value use of their spectrum and allows them 
to make choices based on market factors.
•	 Clear and exhaustive definition of spectrum rights and responsibili-
ties. Clarity in the rules governing use would create an environment 
for spectrum users to confidently negotiate alternative arrangements 
for maximizing value. Rules should be written to identify uses that are 
excluded, prohibited, or limited, allowing users to explore any options 
not explicitly prohibited. 
36  Ibid., p. 1. 

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Wireless Technology Prospects and Policy Options 
INTRODUCTION: TRENDS AND FORCES RESHAPING THE WIRELESS WORLD 
29
•	 Accounting for all dimensions of spectrum use. Spectrum should be allo­
cated using time in addition to traditional dimensions of frequency, space, 
and power. Technology advances also make possible new approaches to 
allocation in these traditional dimensions. 
•	 Promoting efficiency. Three types of efficiency are identified: spectral, 
technical, and economic. There are situations where spectral and technical 
efficiency may take priority over economic efficiency in order to promote 
public interest goals. However, economic efficiency can be promoted by 
providing spectrum users with flexibility of use and ease of transferability. 
This could allow maximizing of the value of services provided.
•	 “Good neighbor” incentives. To the extent possible grouping like sys­
tems or devices (e.g., low-power systems with high sensitivity to interfer­
ence) together in spectrum “neighborhoods.”
•	 Periodic review of rules. Rules should be reviewed so that they can 
be adjusted in light of technological advances made since those rules were 
made. Such reviews should be scheduled at intervals that permit adjust­
ment of business plans and investments. 
•	 Enforcement. Enforcement increases in complexity with the com­
plexity of technology and applications. Proper enforcement requires suf­
ficient resources for monitoring use of the spectrum.
The remainder of the 2002 SPTF report focuses on approaches for 
avoidance of interference, alternative spectrum usage models, and promo­
tion of access to spectrum. 
First, the SPTF report addresses avoidance of interference, a prob­
lem that has been a major responsibility of the FCC from its beginning 
and has always been a challenge. The issues related to interference have 
increased in technical difficulty and prevalence due to changes created by 
new technology and new applications. The SPTF report argues that these 
changes will challenge the continued effectiveness of current approaches 
to managing interference avoidance. It states that a more quantitative 
approach to interference management should be pursued by the FCC. The 
SPTF report recommends that the FCC move toward assessing interfer­
ence based on real-time adaptation, actual spectrum use, and interactions 
between transmitters and receivers rather than on transmitter operations 
alone, as is currently done. Control of interference could be improved 
by several methods other than measurement, including approaches that 
account for and promote receiver robustness, increased use of automated 
transmitter power and frequency, advanced antenna technology, tighten­
ing of out-of-band emission limits, harmonizing references to interference, 
developing technical bulletins explaining FCC rules regarding interfer­
ence, and developing a best-practices handbook. 
Second, the SPTF report examines alternative spectrum usage ­models. 

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Wireless Technology Prospects and Policy Options 
30 
WIRELESS TECHNOLOGY PROSPECTS AND POLICY OPTIONS
Three models are described, including command-and-control, exclusive-
use, and a commons (or open-access) model. The SPTF report concludes 
that spectrum policy is not generally best served by the traditional 
command-and-control approach but mostly requires striking a balance 
between the exclusive rights and commons models. The report presents 
the alternatives as offering a continuum over which elements of the dif­
ferent models may be incorporated in particular instances as necessary to 
best serve the public good. It identifies factors that may favor the applica­
tion of one model over another depending on circumstances. Generally, 
the SPTF report argues that the exclusive-use model may best be applied 
where spectrum is relatively scarce and transaction costs associated with 
market mechanisms are relatively low. This contrasts with the commons 
model, which may best be applied where spectrum is relatively abundant 
and transaction costs associated with market mechanisms are relatively 
high. The SPTF report views the command-and-control model as best only 
for fulfilling compelling public-interest objectives such as conforming to 
treaty obligations (e.g., with respect to satellite transmissions), ensuring 
capacity for passive scientific observations, and supporting public safety 
communications. Even in these cases other models should, according to 
the SPTF report, be applied to the extent possible.37
Finally, the SPTF report recommends approaches for promoting 
access to spectrum, which it views as essential to continued innovation. 
It notes the significant market for unlicensed devices created in the rela­
tively limited spectrum available for unlicensed use. It argues that further 
innovation is likely with additional available spectrum for such use. It 
also discusses how secondary markets involving the leasing of licensed 
spectrum rights might further promote access. 
In each of the three areas discussed—avoidance of interference, alter­
native spectrum usage models, and promoting access to spectrum—the 
SPTF report addresses transition issues that might arise.
2008 President’s Spectrum Policy Initiative
The Commerce Department has been leading an effort initiated by a 
presidential order to take a similar fresh look at the use and management 
37  It is important to note that both the market and the commons approaches claim that 
they would reduce spectrum scarcity. The market approach would price spectrum to clear 
competing uses, and the commons approach would create the conditions for markets in 
more intelligent devices that can successfully communicate without displacing other com­
munications—that is, without “using” spectrum. The primary differences, then, are whether 
transactions costs associated with market mechanisms are higher than those associated with 
commons approaches (e.g., dispute resolution) and whether devices can develop the ability 
to clear competing uses through coordination. 

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Wireless Technology Prospects and Policy Options 
INTRODUCTION: TRENDS AND FORCES RESHAPING THE WIRELESS WORLD 
31
of spectrum allocated to the federal government in various agencies and 
departments.
The resulting Federal Strategic Spectrum Plan, released in March 
2008 by the NTIA, incorporates summaries of 15 agency-specific plans 
and integrates planning needs of the NTIA and other federal agencies.38 
The plan’s aim is to support a new and evolving spectrum management 
system that enables more effective use of spectrum and allows dynamic 
access to it where feasible. According to the plan, the current system can­
not readily accommodate innovations or new operational requirements. 
The plan states that a new model for spectrum management is required to 
meet the growing federal and private-sector need for spectrum. It recog­
nizes that much of the growth will be below 5 GHz, implying that addi­
tional use must be supported in already heavily utilized spectrum space. 
The plan emphasizes the need for agility and an evolutionary model for 
spectrum management that can rapidly take advantage of technology 
advances, including advances in use of the various degrees of freedom. It 
notes that meeting the needs identified in the plan will require coordina­
tion among all stakeholders, including federal agencies, state and local 
public safety entities, and private-sector users as well as vendors and 
researchers developing and commercializing technology advances.
The plan identifies several specific future federal requirements for 
spectrum likely to drive spectrum policy and the methods needed to 
meet those requirements. First, more data and higher data rates will be 
needed for public safety communications and military applications, such 
as increased use of sensors and unmanned systems. Increased application 
of wireless communications for law enforcement and other federal agency 
needs was a common theme in agency-specific plans. Second, the demand 
for satellite and space-based services, including space research, global 
positioning systems, and remote-sensing operations for meteorological 
services and climate research, is expected to increase, driving the need for 
spectrum to support them. Use of high-frequency bands (between 3 and 
30 GHz) and use of spectrum for radar and air traffic control were also 
identified by federal agencies as likely to grow over time. Finally, the plan 
noted emerging applications above 30 GHz that may drive spectrum use 
in this frequency range over the long term. 
The 2008 plan outlines near-term and mid-term strategies for address­
ing federal spectrum policy needs and briefly discusses challenges and 
plans for developing long-term strategies. It notes that projection of 
future spectrum use is largely qualitative (based on anticipated require­
38  U.S. Department of Commerce, Spectrum Management for the 21st Century: The President’s 
Spectrum Policy Initiative—Federal Strategic Spectrum Plan, March 2008, available at http://
www.ntia.doc.gov/opadhome/opad_wire.html.

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Wireless Technology Prospects and Policy Options 
32 
WIRELESS TECHNOLOGY PROSPECTS AND POLICY OPTIONS
ments) rather than quantitative. Recognizing that private-sector spectrum 
needs are also likely to grow, the plan identifies crucial improvements—
automation and analytical tools, standardized generation of spectrum 
requirements, and spectrum forecasting methods. The near-term strategy 
includes 10 elements for federal use of spectrum:
•	 Use of commercial services where feasible;
•	 Smart technologies such as software-defined (cognitive) radios;
•	 Flexible approaches to incentives for making underutilized spec­
trum available to other entities;
•	 A range of public safety issues, including interoperability, ­spectrum 
and infrastructure sharing, and expanded microwave backhaul;
•	 Considerations for continuity of government;
•	 Improving processing time for frequency assignment requests;
•	 Improving methods for spectrum valuation and incentivizing eco­
nomic efficiency;
•	 Improving technical efficiency by such methods as optimizing 
sharing and tradeoff analysis;
•	 Trend forecasting; and
•	 Better interagency and federal/private coordination.
The plan identifies two midterm strategies for improving spectrum 
management. First, it describes a unified approach to coordinating spec­
trum management at the federal level across the FCC, NTIA, and DOD. 
It also describes initial plans for creating a technology test bed to support 
exploration of new technologies and methods to share spectrum. 
The Department of Commerce Spectrum Management Advisory 
Committee, convened as part of the department’s spectrum policy initia­
tive, issued a series of reports in late 2008 that examine definitions of effi­
cient spectrum use, mechanisms for improving operational efficiency, the 
transition of federal services to more efficient technologies, a ­spectrum-
­sharing test bed, and federal-nonfederal spectrum sharing.39
39  See http://www.ntia.doc.gov/advisory/spectrum/csmac_reports.html.

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Wireless Technology Prospects and Policy Options 
33
2
Key Technology Considerations
Radio-frequency (RF) communication saw a progression of innova­
tion throughout the 20th century. In recent years, it has been transformed 
profoundly by technological advances, both in the capabilities of individ­
ual radios and in the design of networks and other systems of radios. This 
discussion presents some highlights of recent advances and their implica­
tions for the design of radios and radio systems and for regulation and 
policy. It does not aim to describe the full range of technical challenges 
associated with wireless communications; the interested reader is referred 
to the 1997 NRC report The Evolution of Untethered Communications, which 
describes many of the fundamental challenges associated with wireless 
communications or, for a more recent view of the technology and its appli­
cations, several recent textbooks on wireless communications. 
  National Research Council, The Evolution of Untethered Communications, National Acad­
emy Press, Washington, D.C., 1997.
  See, e.g., Andrea Goldsmith, Wireless Communications, Cambridge University Press, 
­Cambridge, England, 2005; David Tse and Pramod Viswanth, Fundamentals of Wireless 
Communication, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, England, 2005; and Theodore S. 
­Rappaport, Wireless Communications: Principles and Practice, 2nd Edition, Prentice-Hall, Up­
per Saddle River, N.J., 2001. 

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Wireless Technology Prospects and Policy Options 
34 
WIRELESS TECHNOLOGY PROSPECTS AND POLICY OPTIONS
Technological Advances in Radios 
and Systems of Radios
Digital Signal Processing and Radio Implementation in CMOS
Modern communications technologies and systems, including those 
that are wireless, are mostly digital. However, all RF communications 
ultimately involve transmitting and receiving analog signals; Box 2.1 
describes the relationship between digital and analog communication.
Digital signal processing (Box 2.2) is increasingly used to detect the 
desired signal and reject other “interfering” signals. This shift has been 
enabled by several trends:
•	 Increasing use of complementary metal oxide semiconductor 
(CMOS) integrated circuits (Box 2.3) in place of discrete components;
•	 The application of dense, low-cost digital logic (spawned primarily 
by the computer and data networking revolutions) for signal processing;
•	 New algorithms for signal processing;
•	 Advances in practical implementation of signal processing for antenna 
arrays; and 
•	 Novel RF filter methods. 
The shift relies on an important tradeoff: although the RF performance 
of analog components on a CMOS chip is worse than that of discrete ana­
log components, more sophisticated computation can compensate for 
these limitations. Moreover, the capabilities of radios built using CMOS 
can be expected to continue to improve. 
The use of digital logic implies greater programmability. It is likely 
that radios with a high degree of flexibility in frequency, bandwidth, 
and modulation will become available, based on highly parallel architec­
tures programmed with special languages and compilers. These ­software-
defined radios will use software and an underlying architecture that is 
quite different from conventional desktop and laptop computers, but 
they will nonetheless have the ability to be programmed to support new 
applications.
High degrees of flexibility do come at a cost—both financial and in 
terms of power consumption and heat dissipation. As a result, the wire­
less transceiver portion (as opposed to the application software that com­
municates using that transceiver) of low-cost consumer devices is unlikely 
to become highly programmable, at least in the near future. On the other 
  Programmability of radio functionality is distinct from the increasing degree of appli­
cation programmability being introduced into mobile phones and exemplified by smart 
phones for which a large number of user-selected applications are available.

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Wireless Technology Prospects and Policy Options 
KEY TECHNOLOGY CONSIDERATIONS 
35
BOX 2.1  
Analog Versus Digital Communications
In common usage, the term “analog” has come to mean simply “not digital,” 
as in “analog wristwatch” or “analog cable TV.” But for the purposes of this 
report it is useful to trace the meaning to its original technical usage, in early 
computing. From about 1945 to 1965, an era when digital computers were very 
slow and very costly, differential equations describing a hypothetical physical 
system were solved (one might say modeled) by an interconnected network 
of properly weighted passive components (resistors and capacitors) and small 
amplifiers, so that the smoothly time-varying voltages at various points in this 
network were precisely analogous to the time behavior of the corresponding 
variables (velocity, acceleration, flow, and so on) of the system being modeled. 
Today, we solve these same equations numerically on a digital computer, very 
quickly and at low cost.
In a similar way, for roughly 100 years, signals were transmitted in analog 
form (over wires or wirelessly) with a smoothly varying signal, representing 
the changing level and pitch of voice; the hue, saturation, and brightness of 
each point in a video image; and so forth. But just as high-speed and low-cost 
­numerical representations and digital computations replaced analog comput-
ing, it likewise became much more reliable and less expensive to transmit digital 
coded numerical samples of a signal to be reconstituted at the receiver rather 
than to faithfully transmit a continuously varying analog representation. In digi-
tal communications, information is encoded into groups of ones and zeroes 
that represent time-sampled numerical values of the original (voice, music, 
video, and so on) signal.
Ironically, in the wireless domain, once the analog signal has been encoded 
into a sequence of digital values, smoothly varying forms for the ones and the 
zeroes must be generated so that the transmitted signal will propagate. Fig-
ure 2.1.1 shows a digital sequence of ones and zeros. The sharp on-off pulses 
that work so well inside a computer do not work well at all when sent through 
space between antennas. And so groups of ones and zeroes are represented by 
smooth changes in frequency, phase, or amplitude in a sinusoidal carrier, the 
perfect waveform of propagation. Three schemes are illustrated in Figures 2.1.2 
through 2.1.4: amplitude shift keying of the carrier wave from 1 volt to 0 volts 
(Figure 2.1.2), frequency shift keying of the transmission frequency from f0 to f1 
(Figure 2.1.3), and phase shift keying of the phase by 180 degrees (Figure 2.1.4). 
These ones and zeroes are interpreted at the receiver in groups of eight or more 
bits, representing the numerical value or other symbol transmitted.
continued

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Wireless Technology Prospects and Policy Options 
36 
WIRELESS TECHNOLOGY PROSPECTS AND POLICY OPTIONS
FIGURE 2.1.2  Amplitude shift keying. SOURCE: Charan Langton, “Tutorial 8—All 
About Modulation—Part 1,” available at http://www.complextoreal.com. Used 
with permission.
FIGURE 2.1.1  Digital sequence of ones and zeroes—0010110010. SOURCE: 
Charan Langton, “Tutorial 8—All About Modulation—Part 1,” available at http://
www.complextoreal.com. Used with permission.
BOX 2.1  Continued

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Wireless Technology Prospects and Policy Options 
KEY TECHNOLOGY CONSIDERATIONS 
37
FIGURE 2.1.4  Phase shift keying. SOURCE: Charan Langton, “Tutorial 8—All 
About Modulation—Part 1,” available at http://www.complextoreal.com. Used 
with permission.
FIGURE 2.1.3  Frequency shift keying. SOURCE: Charan Langton, “Tutorial 8—All 
About Modulation—Part 1,” available at http://www.complextoreal.com. Used 
with permission.

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Wireless Technology Prospects and Policy Options 
38 
WIRELESS TECHNOLOGY PROSPECTS AND POLICY OPTIONS
BOX 2.2 
Digital Signal Processing
For the continuous sinusoidal signals that can be propagated from transmit-
ter to receiver to be encoded, modulated, demodulated, and decoded using 
digital technology, they must be put into a digital form by using an analog-to-
digital converter (ADC), and then a digital-to-analog converter (DAC) to return 
to analog form. For example, an ADC might take 500 million samples per second, 
with a resolution of 10 bits (1 part in 1024 accuracy). Then, the continuous sig-
nal being received would be represented by a series of samples each spaced 2 
nanoseconds apart. A series of dots approximately represents the continuous 
function shown in Figure 2.2.1.
To find the frequency domain representation of this function, we can calcu-
late its Fourier transform. But because it is now a sequence of discrete samples 
rather than a continuous mathematical function, we use an algorithm known 
as the discrete Fourier transform (DFT). It has the form
X
x e
m
k
j
mk
N
k
N
=
−
=
−
∑
2
0
1
π
.
And the inverse DFT has the form
x
N
X e
k
m
j
mk
N
m
N
=
=
−
∑
1
2
0
1
π
.
In these two expressions, we use N time domain samples to compute N 
frequency components, and vice versa. A huge improvement on the DFT is the 
fast Fourier transform (FFT) and the inverse FFT (IFFT). By always using N equal 
to a power of 2 (16, 32, 64, 128…), the calculation is greatly simplified. The FFT 
and IFFT are the foundation of modern digital signal processing, made possible 
by high-speed, low-cost digital CMOS (see Box 2.3).
FIGURE 2.2.1  Representation of continuous function as series of digital sam-
ples. SOURCE: Charan Langton, “Tutorial 6—Fourier Analysis Made Easy—Part 3,” 
available at http://www.complextoreal.com. Used with permission.

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Wireless Technology Prospects and Policy Options 
KEY TECHNOLOGY CONSIDERATIONS 
39
BOX 2.3  
Complementary Metal Oxide Semiconductor Technology
The transformation of communications from analog to digital and the ­related 
dramatic reduction in costs and increased performance are a consequence of 
the revolution in semiconductor design and manufacturing caused by the emer-
gence of the personal computer (PC) industry. In particular, the remarkable 
and steady increase in performance and reduction in feature size by a factor 
of two every 18 months, generally known as Moore’s law, has driven aggressive 
innovation far beyond the PC industry. By far, the majority investment to enable 
this progress has been in the design and process development of complemen-
tary metal oxide semiconductor (CMOS) technology. Introduced in the 1960s, 
CMOS is now used widely in microprocessors, microcontrollers, and other digi-
tal logic circuits as well as in a wide variety of analog circuits. This technology for 
constructing integrated circuits uses complementary and symmetrical pairs of 
p-type and n-type metal oxide semiconductor field-effect transistors.
Investments also spawned a new industry structure: “fabless” companies, 
which design, market, and sell innovative products, along with silicon foundries, 
which manufacture the chips for these companies, spreading the capital invest-
ment in exotic equipment over large volumes.
For example, today even a new, small company can design a complex part 
in CMOS and have a foundry charge $1,000 to process a silicon wafer yielding, 
say, 5,000 chips (20 cents each). Adding 10 cents for packaging and testing gives 
a cost of 30 cents for a part that is sold to a cell phone manufacturer for 40 to 
60 cents. Well over 1 billion cell phones are sold each year.
hand, there are other applications, such as cellular base stations, where 
concurrent support of multiple standards and upgradability to new stan­
dards make transceiver programmability highly desirable. 
Also, the decreasing cost of computation and memory opens up new 
possibilities for network and application design. The low cost of memory, 
for example, makes practical store-and-forward voice instead of always-
on voice. This capability creates new opportunities for modest-latency 
rather than real-time communication and may be of increasing impor­
tance to applications such as public safety communications. Digital signal 
processing of the audio can also, for example, be used to enhance under­
standability in (acoustically) noisy environments.
  Note that some forms of digital signal processing—compression and some algorithms 
used to encode and decode audio (vocoders)—can adversely affect audio quality in certain 
applications. For example, the vocoders in early digital mobile phones did not cope well 
with wind and road noise, and there have been reports that vocoders in digital public safety 
systems poorly transmit such important sounds as sirens and gunshots.

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Wireless Technology Prospects and Policy Options 
40 
WIRELESS TECHNOLOGY PROSPECTS AND POLICY OPTIONS
The pace of improvement in digital logic stands in contrast to the 
much slower pace of improvement in analog components. One conse­
quence of this trend is that it becomes potentially compelling to reduce 
the portion of a radio using discrete analog devices and instead use digital 
signal processing over very wide bandwidths. However, doing so pres­
ents significant technical challenges. As a result, at least for the present, 
the development of radios is tied to the pace of improvements in analog 
components as well as the rapid advances that can be expected for digi­
tal logic, although promising areas of research exist that may eventually 
overcome these challenges. 
Digital Modulation and Coding
Modulation is the process of encoding a digital information signal 
into the amplitude and/or phase of the transmitted signal. This encoding 
process defines the bandwidth of the transmitted signal and its robust­
ness to channel impairments. Box 2.4 describes how waveforms can be 
constructed as a superposition of sinusoidal waves, and Box 2.5 describes 
several modern modulation schemes in use today. 
The introduction of the more sophisticated digital modulation schemes 
in widespread use today—such as CDMA and OFDM, whereby different 
users using the same frequency band are differentiated using mathematical 
codes—have further transformed radio communications (see Box 2.6).
Many important advances have also been made in channel coding, 
which reduces the average probability of a bit error by introducing redun­
dancy in the transmitted bit stream, thus allowing the transmit power 
to be reduced or the data rate increased for a given signal bandwidth. 
Although some of the advances come from the ability to utilize ever-
improving digital processing capacity, others have come from innovative 
new coding schemes (Box 2.7).
Low Cost and Modularity
The low cost and modularity (e.g., WiFi transceivers on a chip) that 
have resulted from the shift to largely digital radios built using CMOS 
technology make it cheaper and easier to include wireless capabilities 
in consumer electronic devices. As a result, developing and deploying 
novel, low-cost, specialized radios have become much easier, and many 
more people are capable of doing so. A likely consequence is continued 
growth in the number of wireless devices and in demand for wireless 
communications. 

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Wireless Technology Prospects and Policy Options 
KEY TECHNOLOGY CONSIDERATIONS 
41
 BOX 2.4 
Power Spectra and the Frequency Domain
Late in the 1600s, Josef Baron Fourier first proved that any periodic waveform 
can be represented by a (possibly infinite) sum of pure sinusoidal functions of 
various amplitudes. This result is surprising but true, however little the original 
waveform may resemble a smooth sine or cosine function. For example, a per-
fect square wave x(t) can be represented by the infinite series
x(t) = sin ωt + (1/3) sin 3ωt + (1/5) sin 5ωt + (1/7) sin 7ωt + …
Figure 2.4.1 shows that adding the waveforms of just the first four terms of 
this equation already begins to approximate the square wave, an approximation 
that improves as more terms are added.
This square wave can be composed by adding an increasing number of sine 
waves that are odd harmonics of the basic frequency of the square wave—that 
is 3, 5, 7, and so forth times the frequency—and 1/3, 1/5, 1/7, and so forth times 
the amplitude.
Needless to say, it is impossible in practice to combine an infinite number 
of sine waves, but then it is also impossible to produce a perfect square wave, 
rising and falling in zero time. But we certainly can generate waves with very, 
very fast rise and fall times, and the faster they are the larger the number of 
harmonics they contain. Consider just the simple case of the 3rd, 5th, and 7th 
harmonics.
This collection of sine waves can be represented in another way, by showing 
the amplitude of each frequency component visually. This amplitude ­spectrum 
(Figure 2.4.2) represents the signal amplitude in the frequency domain. A signal 
FIGURE 2.4.1  Representation of square wave (solid line) by the sum of 1, 2, 3, 
and 4 sinusoidal waveforms (dashed lines). 
Amplitude
Time
continued

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Wireless Technology Prospects and Policy Options 
42 
WIRELESS TECHNOLOGY PROSPECTS AND POLICY OPTIONS
also has a frequency domain representation of the power in a signal, which 
is proportional to the square of the amplitude. Especially in the case of sig-
nals radiating from an antenna, we usually show the signal power spectrum as 
consisting of equal positive and negative frequencies or sidebands, with half 
of the power in each sideband. Thus, the power spectrum of the signal from 
Figure 2.4.1 would look like the spectrum shown in Figure 2.4.3.
These ideal-looking spectra result from combining perfectly stable, pure sine 
waves of precise frequencies, which are also impossible to achieve in practice. 
Nevertheless, the spectra do illustrate the relationship between the coefficients 
of the time-domain harmonics in the Fourier series, and the frequency-domain 
components in the amplitude and power spectra. These are more clearly related 
by the Fourier transform, which accepts a time domain representation of a 
­signal, such as x t( ) , and returns a frequency domain representation:
X
x t e
dt
j t
ϖ
ω
( ) =
( )
−∞
∞
−
∫
.
FIGURE 2.4.2  Signal amplitude represented in the frequency domain.
BOX 2.4  Continued

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Wireless Technology Prospects and Policy Options 
KEY TECHNOLOGY CONSIDERATIONS 
43
The inverse Fourier transform accepts a frequency domain representation 
X ϖ
( ) and returns the corresponding time domain representation:
x t
X
e
d
j t
( ) =
( )
−∞
∞
∫
1
2π
ϖ
ϖ
ω
.
These two transformations are extremely important in modern wireless, 
­because they allow information to be encoded by including or excluding differ-
ent frequencies from a transmitted signal and then detecting these at the receiver, 
in order to symbolize data in a way that is very resistant to interference and noise. 
These continuous integral equations form the basis for the discrete computations 
described in Box 2.2. This requires high-speed, specialized computations.
FIGURE 2.4.3  Power spectrum representation of the signal shown in Figure 2.2.1.
 
Frequency
Amplitude

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Wireless Technology Prospects and Policy Options 
44 
WIRELESS TECHNOLOGY PROSPECTS AND POLICY OPTIONS
 BOX 2.5  
Modern Modulation Techniques
Gaussian minimum shift keying (GMSK) is the most widely used form of 
frequency shift keying (see Box 2.1), as a result of its adoption in the Global 
System for Mobile Communications (GSM), the standard second-generation 
(2G) air interface used by 80 percent of cellular phones worldwide. The sharp 
digital pulse used to perform the frequency shift is first softened to a Gaussian 
shape, reducing unwanted harmonics. The dominant worldwide cellular phone 
system GSM uses a simple constant-amplitude sine wave, with all modulation 
done by GMSK.
Quadrature phase shift keying (QPSK) is a technique that allows two bits 
of information to be sent concurrently. Two identical carriers 90 degrees out 
Q
I
11
10
00
01
FIGURE 2.5.1  Possible pairs of bits transmitted using quadrature phase shift 
keying.

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Wireless Technology Prospects and Policy Options 
KEY TECHNOLOGY CONSIDERATIONS 
45
of phase (in-phase, I and quadrature, Q) are each modulated with a 0 degree 
or 180 degree phase shift to represent a one or a zero. These two modulated 
­carriers are then added and transmitted, giving four different values, or two bits 
of information, when received and decoded, as shown in Figure 2.5.1.
Quadrature amplitude modulation (QAM) is a technique that, like QPSK, 
uses two carriers 90 degrees apart (I, Q). But instead of phase modulation, QAM 
uses amplitude modulation. For example, 16-QAM has four amplitude values for 
I and four values for Q. When the two are combined and transmitted, there are 
16 possible combinations, corresponding to 4 bits, as shown in Figure 2.5.2.
Q
I
0000
0100
1100
1000
0001
0101
1101
1011
0011
0111
1111
1011
1110
1010
0010
0110
FIGURE 2.5.2  Possible groups of four bits transmitted using quadrature ampli-
tude modulation.

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Wireless Technology Prospects and Policy Options 
46 
WIRELESS TECHNOLOGY PROSPECTS AND POLICY OPTIONS
BOX 2.6  
Code Division Multiple Access and  
Orthogonal Frequency Division Multiple Access
Because the efficient use of spectrum is important, particularly the expen-
sively licensed cellular spectrum, it is important that as many users as possible be 
able to access a given frequency band without interfering with one ­another. Tradi­
tionally, this has been accomplished by assigning a narrowband sub­frequency 
“channel” to each user (frequency division multiple access; FDMA), or by pro-
viding brief, high-data-rate recurring time slices or slots to each user in turn 
(time division multiple access). As both the number of concurrent users and 
the demand for higher data rates have increased, new techniques have emerged 
that exploit digital processing to support these requirements without increasing 
interference. 
Code division multiple access (CDMA) has become increasingly important 
as the basis for higher-data-rate and more spectrally efficient third-generation 
(3G) mobile phone systems. CDMA is a spread spectrum multiple access tech-
nique. In CDMA a locally generated pulse train code runs at a much higher rate 
than the data to be transmitted. Data for transmission are added using an exclu-
sive or logical operation with the faster-pulse train code. Each user in a CDMA 
system uses a different code to modulate the signal. The signals are separated 
by digitally correlating the received signal with the locally generated code of the 
desired user. If the signal matches the desired user’s code, the correlation func-
tion will be high and the system can extract that signal. If the desired user’s code 
has nothing in common with the signal, the correlation will eliminate it, treating 
it as noise (although it is actually rejected interference, the low correlation value 
makes it appear to be noise). Thus a large number of users can occupy the same 
band of frequencies and still be able to uniquely separate their desired signals. 
These coded signals use various modulation techniques such as quadrature 
amplitude modulation (QAM), phase-shift keying (PSK), and the like. 
Orthogonal frequency division multiple access (OFDMA) uses a group of 
closely spaced, harmonically related subcarriers, each of which can be modu-
lated by PSK, QAM, or other methods. They are then added and transmitted. 
Because the subcarriers are harmonically related, they are said to be orthogo-
nal and can easily be separated using a fast Fourier transform and decoded. 
Systems often use as many as a few thousand subcarriers in a single frequency 
band. Rather than a particular subcarrier being assigned rigidly to each user, 
as in FDMA, these subcarriers can be dynamically allocated among users, pro-
viding more subcarriers to different classes of users to give higher data rates, 
lower error rates, or other quality-of-service choices. Also, transmitting a given 
payload in a given period of time over multiple channels at a lower data rate 
(e.g., 1 Mbps over 16 channels) is much more power efficient than transmitting 
over a single channel at a higher data rate (e.g., 16 Mbps over a single channel). 
OFDMA is the access method in the 3GPP Long Term Evolution and IEEE802.22 
(WiMax) standards. The basic OFDM technique is also used in WLAN IEEE 802.11 
(WiFi), Terrestrial Radio Digital Audio Broadcast, Terrestrial Digital Television 
(DVB-T and T-DMB standards), and Mobile Digital Television (DVB-H and ISDB-
T standards). 

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Wireless Technology Prospects and Policy Options 
KEY TECHNOLOGY CONSIDERATIONS 
47
New Radio System Architectures
New networking technologies are transforming the architectures of 
radio systems, as seen in the introduction of more distributed, often 
Internet-Protocol (IP)-based networks in addition to networks that rely 
on centralized switching. This shift is suggested by cell phones, in which 
every mobile phone is a transmitter as well as a receiver, but the shift goes 
further to architectures that do not have the centralized control of cellular 
systems. What was once a population of deployed radios consisting of a 
small number of transmitters and many receivers (which placed a pre­
mium on low-cost receivers and did not impose tight cost constraints on 
transmitters) is changing to a population that contains many more trans­
ceivers. Especially in more densely populated areas, services that have 
BOX 2.7  
Evolution of Coding Schemes
A major advantage of the increased use of digital CMOS technology is the 
ability to encode information before modulation and transmission so that ­errors 
introduced into the radio signal during transmission and reception by noise or 
interference can be detected and corrected during decoding at the receiver. Use 
of these techniques has made possible the accurate recovery of very tiny signals 
from heavy interference and noise. Although deep-space communication was 
the original source of these ideas, they have since been incorporated as a funda-
mental enabler of modern wireless communications ranging from wireless local 
area networking to mobile phones and to satellite radio and television.
For four decades, the workhorse combination making these advances pos-
sible has been the convolutional coder and the Viterbi decoder, which remain 
the mainstay of many systems. The convolutional coder is a simple linear state 
machine of shift registers and exclusive-or gates, which can be made longer and 
more elaborate as needed by the expected transmission environment. It expands 
the data prior to modulation to include additional bits that, when ­decoded, 
­permit error detection and correction. The Viterbi decoder is a state machine 
that calculates metrics based on the current and prior received signals and makes 
the most likely decoding choice among the possible transmitted ­symbols. This 
scheme is the basis for CDMA and Global System for Mobile Communciations 
(GSM) digital cellular coding, as well as WiFi and various ­modems.
For the extremes of deep-space missions and certain other applications 
where very long codes are required, the Viterbi algorithm becomes too com-
plex, and a more recent technique of turbo coding is combined with Reed-
Solomon error-correcting codes. It is likely that turbo coding will gradually 
assume a central role in broadband mobile applications. In applications that are 
tolerant of latency, closely related low-density-parity-check codes can provide 
even lower error rates.

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Wireless Technology Prospects and Policy Options 
48 
WIRELESS TECHNOLOGY PROSPECTS AND POLICY OPTIONS
relied on transmission from high-power central sites are giving way to 
more localized transmissions using ever-smaller cells and mesh networks 
(Box 2.8) that provide much greater capacity by enabling frequencies to 
be reused at a fine-grained level. 
Dynamic Exploitation of All Degrees of Freedom
Another important shift in radios has been the ability to use new 
techniques to permit greater dynamic exploitation of all available 
degrees of freedom. Theoretic communications capacity is the product 
of the number of independent channels multiplied by the Shannon 
  For example, cellular carriers have introduced ever-smaller cell sizes (e.g., micro, pico, 
femto) to optimize cost, capacity, and coverage, and broadcasters use local repeaters to 
extend coverage.
BOX 2.8  
Capacity Scaling of Mesh Networks
Much has been claimed about the scalability of mesh networks (wireless 
networks with no central control). Leaving aside issues of cost and latency, the 
possibility that they could scale linearly is enticing—that is, that adding more 
nodes would increase network throughput in proportion to the number of 
nodes added. If mesh networks were to scale linearly, they would offer infinite 
capacity, which would have profound consequences for spectrum management 
policy. However, considerable doubt has been raised about such claims by 
research showing limitations to their scalability.
Research by Kumar and Gupta (2000) examined the question of capacity in 
mesh networks.1 Their research showed that, making certain assumptions about 
how current technology operates, there was indeed a constraint on the ability 
of mesh networks to scale and that the “cause of the throughput constriction 
is not the formation of hot spots, but the pervasive need for all nodes to share 
the channel locally with other nodes.”2 It considered networks where nodes 
were arbitrarily located as well as networks where nodes are uniformly distrib-
uted. These results were obtained assuming perfect information about node 
location and traffic demand and with stationary (nonmobile) nodes. ­Capacity 
would decrease further should any of these assumptions not hold. The capac-
ity limitations did not change when the network nodes were located in a two-
­dimensional plane or on the surface of a sphere. The research further showed 
that splitting the communication channel into several subchannels did not 
change any of the results. Although scaling was not linear, the results did show 
that networks composed of nodes with mostly close-range transactions and 
sparse long-range demands, such as those envisaged for smart homes, are fea-
sible. That is, where nodes need to communicate only with nearby nodes, then 

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Wireless Technology Prospects and Policy Options 
KEY TECHNOLOGY CONSIDERATIONS 
49
all nodes can transmit data to nearby nodes at a bit rate that does not decrease 
with the number of nodes. 
Further research has explored theoretical limits of scaling wireless networks 
if current technological limitations could be eliminated and optimal operational 
strategies could be devised.3 For instance, no assumptions were made that 
inter­ference must be regarded as noise or that packet collision between nearby 
transmitters must necessarily be destructive. One result of this research was 
to show that better scaling can be achieved by different network architectures 
for information transport depending on attenuation. For relatively high attenu-
ation, a multihop transport mode where load can be balanced across nodes 
appears to have the best scaling characteristics. For relatively low attenuation, 
multistage relaying with interference subtracted from the signal at each stage 
could theoretically attain unbounded transport capacity. Yet achieving these 
theoretical limits would require not only overcoming existing technical limita-
tions but also achieving fundamental advances in information theory to under-
stand complex modes of cooperation between nodes in a network. 
1 Piyush Gupta and P.R. Kumar, “The Capacity of Wireless Networks,” IEEE Transactions on 
Information Theory 46(2; March):388-404, 2000.
2  Ibid. p. 391.
3  Liang-Liang Xie and P.R. Kumar. “A Network Information Theory for Wireless Communica-
tion: Scaling Laws and Optimal Operation,” IEEE Transactions on Information Theory 50(5):748-
767, 2004.
 
limit for a channel. In practice, the capacity (data rate) of an individual 
channel will be limited by the particular choice of modulation, coding 
scheme, and transmission power—for any particular profile of back­
ground channel noise. 
Four independent degrees of freedom can be used to establish inde­
pendent channels—frequency, time, space, and polarization. In the past, 
technology and the regulatory schemes that govern it have relied princi­
pally on a static separation by frequency and space. Advances in digital 
signal processing and control make it possible for radios to exploit the 
available degrees of freedom on a dynamic basis and to coordinate their 
own use of the various degrees of freedom available so as to coexist with 
  Polarization has seen practical application only for separating wireless signals for satel­
lite and point-to-point microwave services.

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Wireless Technology Prospects and Policy Options 
50 
WIRELESS TECHNOLOGY PROSPECTS AND POLICY OPTIONS
one another and with uncoordinated spectrum occupants. Antenna arrays 
enable more sophisticated spatial separation through beam forming in 
all three dimensions. Today’s radio technologies can thus, in principle, 
take greater advantage of all the degrees of freedom (frequency, time, 
space, and polarization) to distinguish signals and to do so in a dynamic, 
fine-grained fashion. An important consequence is that a wider set of 
­parameters (beyond the conventional separation in frequency and space) 
can be used to introduce new options for allocating usage rights (i.e., 
defining what a user can do and what the user must tolerate) based on 
all of these degrees of freedom.
Flexibility and Adaptability
The agility and the flexibility of radios are improving along with 
advances in the ability to more accurately measure communication chan­
nels (sensing), share channels (coordination), and adapt to the operational 
environment in real time (adaptation). More agile radios can change their 
operating frequency or modulation or coding scheme, can sense and 
respond to their environment, and can cooperate to make more dynamic, 
shared, and independently coordinated use of spectrum. Digital logic 
advances make it possible for radios to incorporate significant and grow­
ing computing power that enables them to coordinate their own use of the 
various degrees of freedom available so as to coexist with each other and 
with uncoordinated spectrum occupants. Since much of the processing is 
performed digitally, the performance improvements popularly associated 
with Moore’s law that characterize the computer industry are likely to 
apply to improvements in this type of processing. The result is that radios 
and systems of radios will be able to operate in an increasingly dynamic 
and autonomous manner. 
Finally, increased flexibility poses both opportunities and challenges 
for regulators. Although it is much more complex, costly, and power con­
suming, flexibility makes possible building radios that can better coexist 
with existing radio systems. Coexistence is sometimes divided into under­
lay (low-power use intended to have a minimal impact on the primary 
user) and overlay (agile utilization by a secondary user of “holes” in time 
and space of use by the primary user). Such overlays and underlays might 
be introduced by rules requiring such changes or by rules that enable 
­licensees to agree to such sharing in exchange for a market price. 
Moreover, flexibility allows building radios with operating param­
eters that can be modified to comply with future policy or rule changes 
or future service requirements. That is, devices are able to instantiate and 
operate on specified policies, and the policies (and the devices’ operation) 
can be modified. 

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Wireless Technology Prospects and Policy Options 
KEY TECHNOLOGY CONSIDERATIONS 
51
Besides providing regulators and system operators with a valuable 
new tool, this malleability poses new challenges, such as how to assure 
a radio’s security in the face of potential (possibly malicious) attempts to 
modify its software. Possible scenarios include rogue software silently 
placing calls constantly (thus congesting the control channel) or altering 
the parameters of a cell phone’s transmitter so as to jam transmissions of 
cellular or other services. Information system security experience from 
other applications suggests that it will be possible, with significant effort, 
to provide reasonable security (i.e., against casual efforts to break it) but 
that it would be quite difficult using today’s state of the art to provide 
highly robust security against a determined attacker.
Antennas
Work has been done for many years on antennas that can operate over 
very wide frequency ranges. Early theoretical work in this area on mode 
coupling of radiation into materials by such authors as Chu, Harrington, 
and Hansen10 still stands today, and advanced research continues on such 
topics as fractal and non-resonant antennas. Commercial products approxi­
mating wideband antenna technology include patch antennas, meander 
antennas for use at 2.4 and 5 GHz, and extreme spectrum antennas in the 
2 to 6 GHz bands. 
In the past decade, an interesting new approach to improved wireless 
communication began to develop, based on using multiple antennas at 
both transmitter and receiver. Advances in analog and digital processing 
have made it possible to individually adjust the amplitude and phase of 
the signal on each member of an array of antennas. When the approach 
is used to increase data rates, it is called multiple-input, multiple-output 
(MIMO), and when it is used to extend range, it is called beam forming. 
The most basic form of MIMO is spatial multiplexing, in which a high-
data-rate signal is split into lower-rate streams and each is broadcast 
concurrently from a different antenna. (More generally, multiple ­antennas 
can be used to obtain the desired degree of enhancement in both data rate 
and range.) These schemes require significant “baseband” (i.e., digital) 
  For a general discussion of cybersecurity challenges, see, for example, National Research 
Council, Toward a Safer and More Secure Cyberspace, The National Academies Press, Wash­
ington, D.C., 2007.
  L.J. Chu, “Physical Limitations of Omnidirectional Antennas,” Journal of Applied Physics 
19(December):1163-1175, 1948.
  R.F. Harrington, “Effects of Antenna Size on Gain, Bandwidth and Efficiency,” Journal of 
Research of the National Bureau of Standards 64:1-12, 1960.
10  R.C. Hansen, “Fundamental Limitations in Antennas,” Proceedings of the IEEE 69(2):170-
182, 1981.

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Wireless Technology Prospects and Policy Options 
52 
WIRELESS TECHNOLOGY PROSPECTS AND POLICY OPTIONS
processing before transmission and after reception, but are able to pro­
vide increased range or data rates without using additional bandwidth or 
power. They provide link diversity, which improves reliability, and they 
enable more efficient use of spectrum. This approach is used in a num­
ber of commercially deployed technologies including 802.11n (a wireless 
LAN standard), WiMax (a last-mile wireless local-access technology), 
and long-term-evolution (LTE; a technology for fourth-generation mobile 
telephony). 
Low-cost, Portable Radios at 
Frequencies of 60 GHz and Above
The use of CMOS and digital processing together with other advances 
in RF technology opens up opportunities in the form of low-cost, portable 
radios that are becoming increasingly practical at frequencies of 60 GHz 
and above. Technological progress may extend this up to 100 GHz and 
beyond. 
Radios operating in this domain confront a number of challenges. 
At these frequencies, propagation distances are very short in free space 
and even shorter where there is foliage. Penetration through and diffrac­
tion around building walls or other structures are also very limited. On 
the other hand, operation at these frequencies also has some attractive 
properties. Only at these frequencies are very large bandwidths available, 
making them the only practical option to support wireless applications 
that require extremely high data rates. For example, technology devel­
oped for in-room video transmission uses data rates of up to 4 gigabits 
per second (Gbps). 
Another attractive feature of operation at these frequencies is dimin­
ished potential for interference. Short propagation distances and limited 
penetration of buildings are one reason. The high path losses could have 
another advantage with respect to interference. A likely solution to the 
path-loss problem is to use adaptive beam forming to provide high antenna 
gain—that is, directing transmitted energy along a chosen path and pref­
erentially receiving a signal from a chosen path. If transmission sensitivity 
and receiver sensitivity are thus tightly focused, the potential for inter­
ference among different pairs of transmitters and receivers is markedly 
reduced.11 Using these frequencies for mobile devices therefore becomes 
technically challenging because very narrow beams must be dynamically 
11  Note, however, that this situation can also exacerbate the “hidden node” problem in 
which a transmitter using a “listen before talk” protocol before transmitting to a receiver 
cannot necessarily detect another transmitter that is already using the same channel to com­
municate with the receiver.

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Wireless Technology Prospects and Policy Options 
KEY TECHNOLOGY CONSIDERATIONS 
53
steered, a capability that is now being deployed in commercial products 
providing links up to 4 Gbps.12 Note that technological advances in these 
areas, which open up the bands between 20 and 100 GHz to practical use, 
will also open up other attractive options for using antenna arrays at lower 
frequencies, such as the use of MIMO, or the adaptation of 802.11n technol­
ogy to operate at higher-than-present frequencies. 
What applications might operation in these newly accessible frequen­
cies have? In the short term applications that require very large bandwidth 
over short range appear to be promising, such as devices that allow com­
puter devices to transfer data at high speed across a desktop or devices that 
can transmit high-definition video from one side of a room to another. 
Short propagation distances make these frequencies less viable for 
wide-area infrastructure or applications where in-building signal propa­
gation is important. Looking ahead, it is possible that new architectures, 
such as very small cells, could make it possible to use these frequencies 
to provide wider-coverage services. Realizing this vision would depend 
on several factors not yet present—devices that operate at 20 to 100 GHz 
becoming cheap enough to be ubiquitous, a sufficiently widespread and 
cheap wired network infrastructure that would connect these devices, 
and the development of new business models for such services. 
Interference as a Property of Radios  
and Radio Systems, not Radio Signals
It is commonplace to talk about radio signals interfering with one 
another, a usage that mirrors the common experience of broadcast radio 
signals on the same channel interfering with each another. Thus, the term 
“interference” might suggest that multiple radio signals cancel each other 
out, making their reception harder or impossible. However, this view is 
misleading because radio signals themselves do not, generally speak­
ing, interfere with each other in the sense that information is destroyed. 
In fact, interference is a property of a receiver, reflecting the receiver’s 
­inability to disambiguate the desired and undesired signals. 
Radio signals are electromagnetic waves whose behavior, as described 
by Maxwell’s equations, is linear. One consequence of this behavior is that 
radio signals do not, in general, cancel each other out. Each new com­
munication signal is superposed on the entire field.13 Actual destruction 
of information requires energy input at the point of destruction, and this 
12  For example, SiBEAM, which is currently offering chip sets for wireless high-definition 
television links.
13  In principle, a precisely applied signal could literally cancel out another field, but only 
at a single point in space.

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Wireless Technology Prospects and Policy Options 
54 
WIRELESS TECHNOLOGY PROSPECTS AND POLICY OPTIONS
energy must be applied very precisely to cancel out the signal’s vector 
field in all six dimensions, which is a low-probability event, and applies 
only at a single point in space.
As a result, the superposition of any number of radio signals should 
be thought of not in terms of destroying information but rather in terms 
of the ambiguity it creates for a radio trying to receive any one specific 
signal. The difficulty of resolving the ambiguity relates to the energy emit­
ted by other radios (with the implication that each radio sees multiple sig­
nals) and the unpredictability of the signals (which makes the individual 
signals harder to separate). 
Even though it is available, information is discarded in the receivers 
primarily for the following reasons:
•	 Dynamic range—large interfering signals inhibit a receiver’s ability 
to detect a small signal. A small signal cannot be amplified above certain 
noise levels without the larger signal saturating the receiver. Moreover, 
desensitization circuits will reduce gain in the presence of strong inter­
fering signals. Finally, the resolution of analog-to-digital converters is 
limited, which means that a weak signal cannot be digitally represented 
when a strong interfering signal is also present.
•	 Nonlinearity of receiver components—the desired and the interfering 
signals will interfere with each other inside the receiver. (See below.)
•	 Inadequate separation in signal space (within the various degrees of 
freedom and code).
Moreover, the extent to which signal processing can be used to sepa­
rate signals with the required sensitivity, accuracy, and latency is lim­
ited by the computational power available in a radio. Removing signal 
ambiguity thus entails investment in one or more of the following: better 
radio components, additional radio complexity, additional integrated cir­
cuit area, additional antennas, additional computation, and/or additional 
power consumption. 
Another area for potential improvement is in systems of radios. With 
more and more radios capable of transmitting and receiving, behavioral 
schemes can be used to mediate among radios. Also, because it is funda­
mentally easier to separate out known (and thus predictable) signals as 
opposed to random signals, mechanisms that allow waveform and modu­
lation information to be registered or otherwise shared may prove useful. 
However, there will always be practical limits to what can be shared or 
coordinated. 
The costs of disambiguating signals are, thus, ultimately reflected in 
a number of ways, including in the complexity of a radio’s (or system’s) 
design, the cost of its hardware, its size, the power it consumes, and (for 

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Wireless Technology Prospects and Policy Options 
KEY TECHNOLOGY CONSIDERATIONS 
55
mobile devices) the lifetime of the battery. Disambiguation thus involves 
tradeoffs, given that a radio is built to meet many requirements, only one 
of which is dealing with signal ambiguity.
Enduring Technical Challenges
Even as the capabilities and performance of radios continue to improve, 
a number of hard technical problems can be expected to persist. 
Power Consumption
The power required to operate increasingly complex and sophisti­
cated radios will continue to represent an important boundary condition, 
especially for mobile devices, where it dictates the cost, capacity, dimen­
sions, and weight of their batteries as well as the interval between charges. 
Even for nonmobile devices, excess power results in heat that requires 
space or costly cooling components to dissipate. The design of practical 
radios will continue to reflect difficult tradeoffs between power consump­
tion and other desired attributes and capabilities. 
Nonlinearity
Real-world radio elements are not perfectly linear—that is, the out­
put of an element is not exactly proportional to the input. Nonlinearity 
results in signal distortion and, when more than one signal is present in 
a nonlinear element, the creation of new, unwanted products of the origi­
nal signals—an effect known as intermodulation distortion. The result is 
a degraded ability to separate a desired signal from other signals, which 
constrains the extent to which a receiver can mitigate interference. 
Radio designers use several strategies to mitigate these effects. One is 
to use filters that separate out signals at other frequencies from the range 
of signals that are to be detected. In particular, filters allow relatively 
strong signals to be separated out so that a relatively weak signal can 
be detected. Another is to use components that are close to linear over a 
wider range of signal strengths. 
Nonlinearity has always been a significant challenge to radio ­designers. 
It is a particular challenge to realizing the vision of radios that dynamically 
adapt to the presence of other radios by changing their frequency and other 
operating parameters. One might imagine building a radio that uses digital 
signal processing over very wide frequency ranges to separate out desired 
signals from potentially interfering signals. Doing so would allow one to 
leverage improvements in digital logic and better digital signal process­
ing techniques to mitigate interference. However, the extent to which this 

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Wireless Technology Prospects and Policy Options 
56 
WIRELESS TECHNOLOGY PROSPECTS AND POLICY OPTIONS
approach can be used is constrained by the intermodulation distortion 
associated with real-world radio components, which limit the bandwidth 
that can be handled practically using digital signal processing alone.
A variety of avenues are being pursued by researchers to overcome 
these constraints. One of them has long been of interest but has not been 
realized in commercial products: the use of narrow filters that are tun­
able under digital control over a wide range, perhaps using microelectro­
mechanical systems (MEMS) technology. 
Nomadic Operation and Mobility
Supporting nomadic operation and mobility requires more dynamic 
adaptation of radio operating parameters than is needed for fixed radios, 
which only need to cope with changes in environmental conditions. More­
over, nomadic operation and mobility make it more difficult to neatly seg­
ment space or frequency, and they complicate dynamic market approaches 
because they make it more difficult to buy and sell rights at the rate at 
which radios can move between segments. 
Heterogeneity of Capabilities
As more sophisticated radios are deployed, the heterogeneity of 
­capabilities—especially the existence of radios with much poorer perfor­
mance than others—will present growing challenges. At any point in time, 
there will be a legacy in terms of deployed equipment, existing frequency 
allocations, and existing businesses and government operations that are 
being made obsolete, in some sense, by new capabilities. The problem is 
not new, but a rapid pace of technological advancement and concomitant 
explosion of applications, especially applications with different purposes 
and capabilities, magnifies the challenges.
Not all heterogeneity will arise from legacy systems. Some applica­
tions will have cost and/or power requirements that preclude the use of 
highly sophisticated radios that coordinate their behavior. For example, 
the constraints on cost and power consumption for embedded networked 
sensors preclude the use of highly sophisticated radios that are able to do 
very sophisticated signal processing or complex computation to coordi­
nate their behavior. Another manifestation of heterogeneity is the contrast 
between active use, which involves both transmitter(s) and receiver(s), 
and passive spectrum use (e.g., remote sensing and radio astronomy), 
which involves receivers only.14 Figuring out how to simultaneously 
14  For a detailed discussion of passive scientific uses, see National Research Council, Fre-
quency Allocations and Spectrum Protection for Scientific Uses, The National Academies Press, 
Washington, D.C., 2007. 

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Wireless Technology Prospects and Policy Options 
KEY TECHNOLOGY CONSIDERATIONS 
57
accommodate more sophisticated and adaptable radios with those that are 
necessarily less sophisticated will be an ongoing challenge. 
Timescales for Technology Deployment
A particular challenge in contemplating changes to policy or regula­
tory practice is determining just how quickly promising new technologies 
will actually be deployable as practical devices and systems and thus how 
quickly, and in what directions, policy should be adjusted.
Rate for Deployment of New Technologies 
as Practical Devices and Systems
As is natural with all rapidly advancing technology areas, concepts 
and prototypes are often well ahead of what has been proven feasible or 
commercially viable. The potential of adaptive radios, for example, has 
been explored (particularly for military use), but the technology has not 
yet been used in mainstream commercial devices or services. As described 
above, there is reason to expect the capabilities of radios to improve and 
their hardware costs to steadily decline, but many important details of 
operation and protocols must be worked out in parallel with technical 
development and regulatory change. Moreover, although great techni­
cal progress has been made in recent years, resulting in the deployment 
of new wireless services, wireless communications will remain a fertile 
environment for future basic research as well as product and service 
development.
Timescales for Technology Turnover
Different wireless services are characterized by the different timescales 
on which technology can be upgraded. The factors influencing the turn­
over time include the time to build out the infrastructure and the time to 
convince existing users (who may be entrenched and politically powerful) 
to make a shift. For instance, public safety users tend to have a long evolu­
tion cycle, as government procurement cycles are long and products are 
made to last a long time. Cellular turnover is rapid by comparison, and 
technology can be changed out relatively readily (a 2-year handset half-
life and a 5- to 7-year time frame for a shift to new technology are typical). 
The digital television transition that finally occurred in the United States in 
2009 is emblematic of the challenge of making a transition where technol­
ogy turnover is very slow, in part because of expectations raised by static 
technology and services that were developed over many decades. 
Importantly, the rate at which turnover is possible depends on the 
incentives for upgrading as well as the size of the installed base. For 

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Wireless Technology Prospects and Policy Options 
58 
WIRELESS TECHNOLOGY PROSPECTS AND POLICY OPTIONS
instance, firms operating cellular networks have demonstrated an ability 
to upgrade their technology fairly quickly despite having an enormous 
user base, whereas aviation has a relatively small set of users but a very 
long turnover rate, having yet to transition from essentially 1940s radio 
voice technology. The primary driver of successful upgrades is for users 
to see tangible benefits and for service providers to have an incentive 
to push for the switch. Cellular subscribers gain tangible benefits from 
newer capabilities commensurate with the added costs. (Also, U.S. mobile 
operators generally subsidize handset cost, because it makes it easier to 
upgrade their network technologies and increase system capacity, some­
what offsetting the visible costs to the end user),15 whereas private pilots 
would incur a large capital cost and have to learn a new system even 
though the existing technology already meets their requirements.
Talent and Technology Base for 
Developing Future Radio Technology 
The changing nature of radios is creating new demands for training and 
education. Research and development (R&D) for radios depend on skills 
that span both the analog and the digital realms and encompass multiple 
traditional disciplines in electrical and computer engineering. Similarly, 
making progress in wireless networks often requires expertise from both 
electrical engineering and computer science. It is thus not straightforward 
for a student to obtain the appropriate education and training through a 
traditional degree program. The nature of modern radios presents another 
barrier to advanced education and university-based research, because the 
CMOS chips that lie at their heart require very large-scale fabrication facili­
ties, presenting a significant logistical barrier to university-based groups 
that seek to test and evaluate new techniques. 
This report assumes a continued stream of innovation in radio tech­
nology. Such sustained innovation depends on the availability of scien­
tific and engineering talent and on sustained R&D efforts. Considerable 
attention has been focused in recent years on broad concerns about the 
declining base of scientific and engineering talent and levels of research 
support in the United States and its implications for competitiveness, 
including in the area of telecommunications. For a broad look at trends 
and their implications for science, engineering, and innovation, see Rising 
15  Incentives may differ across markets and regulatory regimes. For example, cellular 
upgrades have been market-driven in the United States and government-driven in the 
European Union (EU). The effect has been mixed. On the one hand, the EU push for third 
generation arguably got ahead of actual market demand, whereas the U.S. market moved 
slowly from analog to second-generation digital services, arguably giving the EU higher-
quality wireless voice services sooner.

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Wireless Technology Prospects and Policy Options 
KEY TECHNOLOGY CONSIDERATIONS 
59
Above the Gathering Storm: Energizing and Employing America for a Brighter 
Economic Future;16 for a study focused on telecommunications research, 
see Renewing U.S. Telecommunications Research.17
The issues and opportunities described in this report involve con­
siderations of many areas of science and engineering—including RF 
engineering, CMOS, networking, communications system theory, com­
puter architecture, applications, communications policy, and economics. 
Addressing the challenges and realizing the opportunities will require a 
cadre of broad systems-oriented thinkers. Building this talent will be 
a major national advantage. 
Radio engineering is an important area for consideration in this con­
text, given that wireless is a fast-moving, high-technology industry that is 
economically important in its own right and that has much broader eco­
nomic impacts. Moreover, wireless engineering encompasses an extensive 
skill set—including RF engineering, an ability to do RF work in CMOS 
technology, and an ability to work on designs that integrate RF and digi­
tal logic components—that is difficult to learn in a conventional degree 
program. Similarly, wireless networks involve expertise that spans both 
electrical engineering and computer science. 
Finally, for R&D to be effective, it is important to be able to implement 
and experiment with new ideas in actual radios and systems of radios. 
Work on new radio designs requires access to facilities for IC design and 
fabrication. Work on new radio system architectures also benefits from 
access to test beds that allow ideas to be tested at scale. Given the high 
cost of such facilities, university R&D can be enhanced by collaboration 
with industry.
Measurements of Spectrum Use
The standard reference in the United States for the use of spectrum 
is the U.S. Frequency Allocation Chart that is published by the NTIA. 
The chart separates the spectrum from 30 MHz to 300 GHz into federal 
or nonfederal use and indicates the current frequency allocations for a 
multitude of services (cellular, radiolocation, marine, land mobile radio, 
military systems, and so on). 
Although this chart is an invaluable reference in providing a com­
prehensive view of what frequencies are potentially in use for various 
16  National Academy of Sciences, National Academy of Engineering, and Institute of 
Medicine, Rising Above the Gathering Storm: Energizing and Employing America for a Brighter 
Economic Future, The National Academies Press, Washington, D.C., 2007.
17  National Research Council, Renewing U.S. Telecommunications Research, The National 
Academies Press, Washington, D.C., 2007.

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Wireless Technology Prospects and Policy Options 
60 
WIRELESS TECHNOLOGY PROSPECTS AND POLICY OPTIONS
services and in giving some indication of the complexity of frequency use, 
it does not shed light on a particularly critical issue—the actual density 
of use of the spectrum. That is, are there blank spaces in frequency, time, 
and space that could potentially be used for other purposes?
It is increasingly asserted that much spectrum goes unused or is used 
inefficiently. Yet relatively little is known about actual spectrum utiliza­
tion. Licensees and users are not required to track their use of spectrum. 
There are no data available from any sort of ongoing, comprehensive 
measurement program. And when spectrum measurements have been 
made, they were often aimed at addressing a specific problem. Proxy mea­
surements, such as the number of licenses issued in a frequency range, 
have been used to characterize trends and extrapolate likely use, but they 
do not measure actual use and do not, of course, yield any insight into 
unlicensed use.18
Why Spectrum Measurement Is Hard
Perhaps the greatest challenge is that any program of measurement 
will be limited in its comprehensiveness if all the degrees of freedom are 
actually to be measured. Measurements can be made only at specific loca­
tions and times; measurements at one place may not reveal much about 
even nearby points. Results obtained by one set of measurements are not 
easily applied to a different situation. The full scope of measurement is 
suggested by the electrospace model, in which one specifies the frequency, 
time, angle of arrival (azimuth, elevation angle), and spatial location 
(latitude, longitude, elevation) to be measured.19 Other measurement 
considerations include polarization, modulation scheme, location type 
(e.g., urban, suburban, or rural),20 and which signals are being measured 
(known signals, unknown signals, or noise).
Many radio systems are designed to operate with very low average 
power levels, and naive spectrum measurement techniques may miss 
use by such low-power devices.21 Moreover, a directional signal will be 
missed if the receiver is not pointing in the right direction. Often designed 
to operate with very low average power levels, point-to-point microwave 
18  Robert Matheson, Spectrum Usage for the Fixed Services, NTIA Report 00-378, March 
2000, p. xi. 
19  Robert Matheson, “The Electrospace Model as a Frequency Management Tool,” 
­Addendum to the Proceedings of the 2003 ISART Conference, 2003.
20  Allen Petrin, “Maximizing the Utility of Radio Spectrum: Broadband Spectrum Measure­
ments and Occupancy Model for Use by Cognitive Radio,” Ph.D. Thesis, Georgia Institute 
of Technology, August 2005, p. 6. 
21  Robert Matheson, letter to David Liddle in follow-up to presentation to the committee, 
August 27, 2004. 

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Wireless Technology Prospects and Policy Options 
KEY TECHNOLOGY CONSIDERATIONS 
61
links and radar systems are examples of use that may be missed by 
spectrum measurements efforts. Radar emits narrow high-power pulses 
infrequently, making them easy to miss. Some uses, such as public safety 
communications, are inherently sporadic and random in time and loca­
tion. Because they are normally confined to military installations, defense 
uses may take place in well-defined locations but will vary considerably 
over time. 
Also, measurements by definition measure only active use of the spec­
trum; passive use of the spectrum and remote sensing cannot be detected 
and, worse, could be interpreted as non-use of parts of the spectrum that 
would be seen as empty. Similarly, without careful interpretation, guard 
bands established to mitigate interference for existing services could be 
interpreted as unused portions of the spectrum even though these bands 
are in a real sense being used to enable those services. 
These considerations suggest that spectrum measurement is a chal­
lenging endeavor that requires measurements at many points in space 
and time and the collection of a very large amount of data. They also sug­
gest that spectrum measurement has an inherent element of subjectivity, 
because results may depend significantly on the particular assumptions 
made and methods employed. 
Looking forward, measurement might be improved over the long 
term by requiring systems to provide usage statistics, as might the devel­
opment and adoption of a formal framework for measuring, characteriz­
ing, and modeling spectrum utilization. Such a framework might provide 
­researchers a way to cogently discuss spectrum utilization and pro­
vide policy makers with evidence-based information about technical 
­factors affecting efficient utilization. 22 
Results from Some Measurement Activities
The NTIA has a long history of spectrum measurement work going 
back to at least 1973.23 Those early efforts included federal land mobile 
radio measuring use in the 162-174 and 406-420 MHz range, and Federal 
Aviation Administration radar bands in the 2.7-2.9 GHz range. These 
projects were generally considered successful because the measurements 
focused on a definite problem and were able to address specific ques­
tions, such as whether claimed interference was real and whether minor 
changes to receivers could mitigate the problem of overcrowded use. The 
22  F. Weidling, D. Datla, V. Petty, P. Krishnan, and G.J. Minden, “A Framework for R.F. 
Spectrum Measurements and Analysis,” Proceedings of IEEE Symposium on New Frontiers in 
Dynamic Spectrum Access Networks, 2005, pp. 573-576. 
23  Ibid.

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Wireless Technology Prospects and Policy Options 
62 
WIRELESS TECHNOLOGY PROSPECTS AND POLICY OPTIONS
NTIA conducted a number of broadband spectrum surveys in different 
cities in the 1990s.24
An NTIA report from 1993 (and updated in 2000) used proxy infor­
mation as a “measurement” of spectrum usage for fixed services (e.g., 
­common carriers).25 That report examined historical license data and 
observations about market and technology factors likely to affect spec­
trum use, in order to gain insight on the degree to which the existing 
fixed-service spectrum bands would continue to be needed for their allo­
cated services. One conclusion to be drawn from that report is that point-
to-point microwave bands are probably underused and that the growth 
expected when these bands were allocated decades ago did not occur.26 
Anticipated use of point-to-point microwave has moved largely to optical 
fiber instead, although it is still used in many rural areas where the traffic 
does not justify the cost of laying fiber. 
A number of research projects have attempted to directly mea­
sure spectrum utilization.27 Shared Spectrum Company, a developer of 
­spectrum-sensing cognitive radio technology, has made several measure­
ment studies since 2000, including occupancy measurements in urban 
settings such as New York City and Chicago, suburban settings such as 
northern Virginia, and rural environments in Maine and West Virginia.28 
Spectrum measurements for the New York City study were done during 
a period of expected high occupancy, the Republican National Conven­
tion.29 The studies aimed to determine how much spectrum might be allo­
cated for more sophisticated wireless applications and secondary users 
relative to primary (licensed) users. 
Some important conclusions can be drawn from these measurements. 
The measurements indicate that some frequency bands are very ­heavily 
24  Frank H. Sanders and Vince S. Lawrence, Broadband Spectrum Survey at Denver, Colorado, 
NTIA Report 95-321, September 1995; Frank H. Sanders, Bradley J. Ramsey, and Vincent 
S. Lawrence, Broadband Spectrum Survey at San Diego, California, NTIA Report TR-97-334, 
December 1996; Frank H. Sanders, Bradley J. Ramsey, and Vincent S. Lawrence, Broadband 
Spectrum Survey at San Francisco, California, May-June 1995, NTIA Report 99-367, July 1999.
25  Robert Matheson, Spectrum Usage for the Fixed Services, NTIA Report 00-378, March 
2000, p. 1. 
26  Robert Matheson, letter to David Liddle in follow-up to presentation to the committee, 
August 27, 2004.
27  P.G. Steffes and A.J. Petrin, “Study of Spectrum Usage and Potential Interference to 
Passive Remote Sensing Activities in the 4.5 cm and 21 cm Bands,” Proceedings of the IEEE 
Geoscience and Remote Sensing Symposium 3(20-24):1679-1682, 2004; S.W. Ellingson, “Spectral 
Occupancy at VHF: Implications for Frequency-Agile Cognitive Radios,” Proceedings of the 
IEEE Vehicular Technology Conference 2(25-28):1379-1382, 2005.
28  Mark McHenry, “NSF Spectrum Occupancy Measurements Project Summary,” Shared 
Spectrum Company, August 15, 2005. 
29  Mark McHenry and Dan McCloskey, “New York City Spectrum Occupancy Measure­
ments September 2004,” Shared Spectrum Company, December 15, 2004.

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Wireless Technology Prospects and Policy Options 
KEY TECHNOLOGY CONSIDERATIONS 
63
used and that some other currently assigned frequency bands are only 
lightly used, at least over some degrees of freedom. Above all, the pic­
ture that emerges clearly from the measurements made to date is that 
frequency allocation and assignment charts are misleading in their sug­
gestion that little spectrum is theoretically available for new applications 
and services—provided that the right sharing or interference mitigation 
measures could be put in place. One might legitimately quibble over the 
details or the precise level of use; the real point is that there is a good deal 
of empty space, provided that ways of safely detecting and using it can 
be found.
Another broad conclusion is that the density of use becomes lower 
at higher frequency. The advent of low-cost radios that can operate at 
frequencies in the tens of gigahertz points to a promising arena for intro­
ducing new services.
Finally, measurements of spectrum use do not capture the value of 
use. In addition, if a licensee internalizes the opportunity cost of under­
utilized spectrum and has a way to mitigate that cost, there is no need 
for centralized measurement and management; that empty space exists, 
but the best way to use it is not necessarily for the government to allow 
additional users.
Challenges facing Regulators
Technology advances bring new issues before regulators that require 
careful analysis. Some require a subtle understanding of the ways in 
which new technology may necessitate new regulatory approaches and a 
challenging of past assumptions about limitations and constraints. Several 
examples are discussed below.
Use of White Space to Increase Spectrum Utilization
The basic goal of “white space” utilization is to let operators with 
lower priority use the space when higher-priority users leave the spec­
trum unoccupied. From a technical perspective this approach requires 
adding sensing capability to devices to determine if a higher-priority user 
is using the spectral band (or bands). Such a dynamic use of spectrum has 
not been supported in past regulatory models.
In the dynamic situation envisaged in the white-space model, several 
new questions and considerations have to be addressed. For instance, 
“occupancy” must be defined thoughtfully. Higher-priority users opposed 
to the use of white space might say that any use of their spectrum could 
cause harm to their transmissions, so that only “no interference” is accept­
able. Yet achieving no interference has never been possible because all 

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Wireless Technology Prospects and Policy Options 
64 
WIRELESS TECHNOLOGY PROSPECTS AND POLICY OPTIONS
radios transmit energy outside their allowed bands and generate interfer­
ence with other adjacent users. Therefore, the only question, ultimately, 
is the degree to which interference is allowed. In the absence of a clear 
technical analysis of when a given level of interference is actually causing 
significant degradation of signal, it is difficult to determine an acceptable 
level. How best to do so is of importance in formulating rules to open up 
spectrum as well as for private parties to negotiate what level of interfer­
ence they would accept in return for a market price. 
A clear technical analysis requires that several factors be considered. 
Estimating the total interference load depends on a realistic statistical 
model for the number of likely secondary users, the transmitted power 
spectrum for each user, the susceptibility of the primary occupant’s 
­receivers to these secondary signals, and the ability of the primary user 
to adapt its transmissions to reduce the impacts of the secondary users. 
Given that the analysis is statistical in nature, it may be useful to 
approach the question in terms of a probability of degradation that should 
not be exceeded. If the likelihood of degradation by secondary users falls 
below this probability, then those secondary users would be considered 
as not occupying the band of the primary user. An analysis done from 
this perspective would help avoid situations in which highly improbable 
scenarios (as opposed to situations that can reasonably be expected to 
cause a problem) lead to the rejection of sharing arrangements. 
Second, considering frequency as the only degree of freedom available 
to separate users makes for simpler technical analysis but is highly limit­
ing. Radios built to perform dynamic beam forming, for instance, allow 
highly sophisticated spatial separation. Also, if sensing is fast enough, 
then it is possible to exploit white spaces in time. Thus frequency, time, 
and space could all be considered as tools to reduce the effects of interfer­
ence to below the level of degradation defined as noninterference.
Third, spectral emissions regulations have historically considered 
each transmitter working independently. Yet, considering sensing per­
formed by the network might mean much greater opportunity for more 
efficient spectrum use. Just how much might be gained from such an 
approach is not well understood, because it depends on an understanding 
of the statistical correlation between sensing at different locations. Consid­
ering such an approach requires the same mind-set change as described 
previously, which allows for statistically based improvements. 
Finally, there is the issue of sensitivity of detection. Greater sensitivity 
increases the probability of detection but also leads to a greatly increased 
probability of false alarms. In other words, at some point increasing sensi­
tivity causes any random noise to appear as occupancy. To make a proper 
analysis requires a level of understanding about sensing that goes beyond 
just sensing the energy in a spectral band. Most signals have distinctive 

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Wireless Technology Prospects and Policy Options 
KEY TECHNOLOGY CONSIDERATIONS 
65
signatures that can be used to differentiate them from noise or other 
­spurious emissions. 
One opportunity to make use of white space is in the broadcast televi­
sion bands. To that end, in late 2008, the FCC issued a set of rules30 under 
which devices use geolocation and access to an online database of televi­
sion broadcasters together with spectrum-sensing technology to avoid 
interfering with broadcasters and other users of the television bands. 
(Alternatively, the ruling provides for devices that rely solely on sensing, 
provided that more rigorous standards are met.) Debate and litigation 
ensued following the 2008 order on such issues as how to establish and 
operate a database of broadcaster locations. In a second order issued in 
2010 to finalize the rules, the requirement was dropped that devices incor­
porating geolocation and database access also must employ sensing.31 
Adaptive Antenna Arrays and Power Limits
Antenna arrays at transmitters and receivers are being used increas­
ingly to provide greater range, robustness, and capacity. Yet the basic 
regulatory strategy of defining an equivalent isotropically radiated power 
level for transmitters ignores many of the special characteristics of antenna 
arrays. As one example, this regulatory approach does not encourage the 
use of beam forming, which has considerable advantages in reducing 
interference over omnidirectional antennas.
Decreasing Cost of Microwave Radio Links
The present report describes above how standard CMOS technol­
ogy can now be used to transmit in the microwave bands (60-GHz links 
have been demonstrated). As desired data rates rise into the gigabit-
per-­second range, adaptive antenna arrays will be used to obtain the 
necessary received power for both mobile and fixed devices. As with 
the previous examples, this technology is very different from what has 
been in use until now. 
30  FCC, “Second Report and Order and Memorandum Opinion and Order in the Matter of 
Unlicensed Operation in the TV Broadcast Bands,” ET Docket No. 04-186, and “Additional 
Spectrum for Unlicensed Spectrum for Unlicensed Devices Below 900 MHz and in the 3 GHz 
Band,” ET Docket 02-380, FCC 08-260, Washington, D.C., November 14, 2008.
31  FCC, “Second Memorandum Opinion and Order in the Matter of Unlicensed Opera­
tion in the TV Broadcast Bands,” ET Docket No. 04-186, and “Additional Spectrum for 
Unlicensed Spectrum for Unlicensed Devices Below 900 MHz and in the 3 GHz Band,” ET 
Docket 02-380, FCC 10-174, Washington, D.C., September 23, 2010.

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Wireless Technology Prospects and Policy Options 
66 
WIRELESS TECHNOLOGY PROSPECTS AND POLICY OPTIONS
Engineering Alone is Often no Solution
The previous section describes several specific issues where engi­
neering insights would help to inform future policy and regulation. At 
the same time, it is important not to oversell the extent to which better 
engineering or understanding of the technology alone can yield solutions. 
In the end, an engineering analysis depends on a knowledge of possible 
scenarios and what the acceptable outcomes are. These inform a complex 
set of business, marketing, and political judgments about value and risk. 
For example,
•	 Engineering alone does not determine whether a service support­
ing aviation merits greater protection from interference than a service 
delivering entertainment. 
•	 The density and the distribution of a constellation of mobile devices 
(which affect their ability to interfere) cannot be determined fully a priori. 
They will reflect market and consumer behavior, and moreover they will 
change over time.

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Wireless Technology Prospects and Policy Options 
67
3
Policy Options
Pressures on today’s Wireless Policy Framework
The current wireless policy framework is based on the technology of 
more than 8 decades ago and on the desire, at that time, for governmental 
control over communications. It has evolved to encompass a patchwork of 
legacy rules and more modern approaches that have been added over time. 
Nonetheless, there is wide acceptance that the rules are ripe for change, to 
better reflect the technological options available today and in the future. 
The current framework is under pressure today on several fronts:
•	 The current framework continues to rely heavily (with a few exceptions) 
on service-specific allocations and assignments that are made primarily by fre-
quency band and geographic location and does not encompass all of the spectrum 
management approaches possible. Allocation and assignment of services by 
frequency band were historically seen as the only technologically feasible 
way of allowing multiple wireless systems and services to coexist. Today, 
technology advances make it possible to use additional degrees of free­
dom to separate transmissions, introducing new options for allocating 
usage rights. In addition, new frontiers are being opened by the emer­
gence of inexpensive, small devices that operate at 20 to 100 GHz. 
•	 Despite revisions aimed at ensuring greater flexibility, the current framework 
continues to rely significantly on centrally managed allocation and ­assignment, 
with government regulators deciding how and by whom wireless communications 
are to be used. Spectrum policy has become more flexible over the past sev­
eral decades in such areas as permitted modulation waveforms and types 

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Wireless Technology Prospects and Policy Options 
68 
WIRELESS TECHNOLOGY PROSPECTS AND POLICY OPTIONS
of use and the adoption of less centralized models such as unlicensed bands 
and white space. Nonetheless, the past decade has seen widespread agree­
ment that central management by regulators is inefficient and insufficiently 
flexible—an agreement that reflects the complexity of the problem and the 
dispersion in the economy of the information that is required to make deci­
sions. It also reflects concerns about whether government institutions are 
sufficiently nimble to make efficient and timely decisions.
•	 The current framework will not be able to satisfy the increasing and broad-
ening demand for wireless communications. One source of this demand is 
greater use of richer media (such as video) that requires higher data rates. 
Another is the continued growth in Internet applications and services and 
the growing demand for untethered and mobile access to them. Demand 
for mobile access to the public telephone network has ­ continued—the 
leading example of a more general shift toward mobile interpersonal com­
munication. Together, these have resulted in rapid growth in the number 
of users of wireless devices and services. Increasingly, communications 
are between devices as well as people, notably reflected in growing inter­
est in sensor networks, and together, these trends may overwhelm the 
ability of the existing framework to enable introduction of new commu­
nications services to meet demand. 
•	 The current framework does not fully reflect changes in how radios are 
built and deployed now or in how they could be built and deployed in the future 
in response to different regulations. Technological innovation has expanded 
the range of potential wireless applications and services and the technical 
means for providing them. At the same time, it has dramatically lowered 
the cost of including wireless capabilities in devices. The old regime and 
technology placed a premium on simple, low-cost receivers and did not 
impose tight cost constraints on transmitters. New technology enables 
the deployment of many more, and more capable yet inexpensive, trans­
ceivers. Today, the population of deployed radios has shifted from one 
dominated by a small number of transmitters and many receivers to a 
population that also contains many more transceivers (e.g., every cell 
phone is a transmitter as well as a receiver). 
Key Considerations for a Future Policy Framework
Enabling More Nimble Evolution of Spectrum Policy
The current spectrum plan reflects decades of historical practice and 
in its myriad allocations and assignments reflects many stages of tech­
  For example, this point arose repeatedly in the remarks of those who briefed this 
committee.

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Wireless Technology Prospects and Policy Options 
POLICY OPTIONS  
69
nology and policy development. It thus encompasses not only the fixed 
allocations made years ago for services that use now-outdated technology 
(e.g., AM radio) but also new regulatory and technology approaches (e.g., 
ultrawideband).
Generally speaking, allocations for services reflect the frequency 
range that was practical at the time a particular service was introduced, 
and many services introduced decades ago persist today. It was often 
possible to fulfill demand for new services by exploiting the higher fre­
quencies that would become available as advances were made in device 
and radio technology. Today, propagation and penetration considerations 
constrain, for many applications, the utility of the higher frequencies that 
are less crowded, and so it is no longer possible to free up spectrum for 
those applications by simply moving to higher frequencies. In addition, 
following many decades of fitting in new services wherever there was 
free space, there is little or no unclaimed spectrum at lower frequencies. 
Much of the current spectrum frame work also reflects a time when oper­
ating rights were fairly well defined and when there were relatively few 
systems, system operators, and transmitters. 
The complexity and density of existing allocations, assignments, and 
uses, coupled with competing demands for new uses, especially at lower 
frequencies, mean that any change will be difficult. It will involve careful 
consideration of the specifics of allocations, assignments, and uses in spe­
cific frequencies as well as the particular technical characteristics of par­
ticular frequencies and proposed applications. Regulators must approach 
this evaluation carefully lest they end up simply reinventing old command-
and-control approaches. Change may also involve addressing the costs 
and benefits of proposed changes that are (often unevenly) distributed 
over multiple parties, resolving conflicting claims about costs and benefits, 
and addressing coordination issues, which are especially challenging if 
achieving a particular change requires actions by a large number of parties. 
Moreover, some parties gain by changing while others gain by waiting. As 
a result, decision making ends up, broadly, being a political question.
Today, more flexible and adaptable radios and a world in which these 
systems are in the hands of millions of people suggest the need for cor­
respondingly nimble and flexible processes for developing and evolving 
future wireless communications policy. In essence, what will be needed is 
an approach that is not necessarily completely right the first time, but right 
over time. That is, the approach should allow for experimentation and feed­
back, and the regulatory system should be able to track and even anticipate 
advances in wireless technology and emerging ways of implementing and 
using wireless services. Developing such a system in detail is beyond the 
scope of this committee’s charge, but it is with such an objective in mind 
that the following items are offered as promising avenues for progress.

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Wireless Technology Prospects and Policy Options 
70 
WIRELESS TECHNOLOGY PROSPECTS AND POLICY OPTIONS
Avoiding the Extremes in the “Property Rights”  
Versus “Commons” Debate
The terms “property rights,” “commons,” “and greater public good” 
are used as shorthand for particular approaches to spectrum management. 
“Property rights” refers to an approach that relies on a well-­specified and 
possibly exclusive license to operate a service using a set frequency range, 
location, transmitted power, and so forth. These rights can be established 
or transferred through an administrative proceeding, auction, or market 
transaction. Ideally, any of the dimensions along which the rights are 
defined can then be redefined through market transactions. “Commons” 
refers to an approach that establishes a band in which those who operate 
devices do not need to obtain a license and instead must comply with 
rules that are applied to all devices operating in that channel, such as 
limits on transmitted power. This approach is intended to incentivize 
development of devices that perform better in a noisy, shared environ­
ment as an alternative to the use of market incentives for prioritizing 
potential sources of radiation in any given channel by the value of the 
communication carried in that channel. “Greater public good” refers 
to government-sponsored free use of the spectrum for such purposes as 
national security, public safety, and science.
Each approach has advantages and disadvantages, transaction 
costs, incentives for and loci for innovation, and so forth. No one of the 
approaches can at present be judged to be better than the other two. More­
over, there is a much larger space of alternatives that combine attributes 
of these approaches, and the dividing lines between the approaches will 
shift as technological capabilities, deployed services, and business ­models 
evolve. These observations suggest avoiding building an overly rigid 
regulatory structure or relying solely on a single approach. Instead, they 
suggest using each approach where practically and politically feasible, 
and measuring and monitoring their performance, and using those results 
  R.H. Coase, “The Federal Communications Commission,” Journal of Law and Economics 
2:1-40, 1959; Arthur S. De Vany, Ross D. Eckert, Charles J. Meyers, Donald J. O’Hara, and 
Richard C. Scott, “A Property System for Market Allocation of the Electromagnetic Spec­
trum: A Legal-Economic-Engineering Study,” Stanford Law Review 21:1499, 1969; Gregory 
L. Rosston and Jeffrey S. Steinberg, “Using Market-Based Spectrum Policy to Promote the 
Public Interest,” Office of Plans and Policy’s Working Paper, January 1997; Gerald Faulhaber 
and David Farber, “Spectrum Management: Property Rights, Markets, and Commons,” 
­Office of Plans and Policy’s Working Paper, 2002.
  Yochai Benkler, “Overcoming Agoraphobia: Building the Commons of the Digitally 
Networked Environment,” Harvard Journal of Law and Technology 11(Winter):287, 1997-1998; 
Y. Benkler, “Some Economics of Wireless Communications,” Harvard Journal of Law and Tech-
nology 16(1; Fall):25-83, 2002; Kevin Werbach, “Supercommons: Towards a Unified Theory 
of Wireless Communication,” Texas Law Review 82:863-870, 2004.

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Wireless Technology Prospects and Policy Options 
POLICY OPTIONS  
71
to inform future allocations. Regulators and policy makers will need to 
be able to track these developments and guide where the dividing lines 
should be in the future.
Leveraging the Role of Standards Setting 
in Regulatory Decision Making
Standards are stable and well-maintained specifications that are pro­
vided by vendors, service providers, nonprofit organizations, or ad hoc 
organizations. They specify attributes such as interoperability and com­
patibility, which are often important in regulatory proceedings. Regula­
tors often rely, at least implicitly, on technical standards that guide those 
building devices and services in how to comply with the regulations. This 
reliance on standards setting reflects two related ideas—first, that regula­
tors may be better positioned to review technical proposals already cap­
tured in standards than to recommend specific technical approaches, and 
second, that it may be best to leave some of the technical details needed 
to define a service to standards rather than rules. 
However, the process of forging consensus on standards is not easy. 
As in other domains, standards for wireless technologies have tended to 
be characterized less by engineers seeking consensus resolution of largely 
technical matters and more by contention among players with significant 
stakes in the outcome (e.g., incumbents seeking to protect their position, 
participants who have investments in intellectual property, or participants 
who have differing business interests with respect to proposed services or 
applications). As standards have taken on greater importance, the num­
ber of competing players and conflicting interests has grown, making the 
processes more cumbersome. 
One risk is that the large incumbent players can dominate by virtue 
of their greater resources and their greater participation in standards 
bodies, although this risk can be partly mitigated by moving to a one 
company, one vote formula, but with tradeoffs. Another risk is that stan­
dards efforts could degenerate into a battle between two camps with 
disparate proposals that can end in a deadlock if a standard accommo­
dates both camps—essentially a nondecision that can, at the extreme, 
prevent a ­product from coming to market or necessitate the establishment 
of another industry group that creates another standard that is narrow 
enough to be implementable.
  One recent example of such a deadlock was IEEE 802.153a, an effort to establish a stan­
dard for a high-data-rate ultrawideband-based wireless personal area network. The effort 
ended when the standards working group was unable to decide between two competing 
proposals that were backed by different industry groups.

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Wireless Technology Prospects and Policy Options 
72 
WIRELESS TECHNOLOGY PROSPECTS AND POLICY OPTIONS
Another challenge for standards setting is that standards are most 
useful once a new service has already seen at least some use. That is, 
standards processes are most useful in helping a set of actors forge a com­
mon approach for a service that has already been developed and, at least 
experimentally, deployed. They are much less effective where new solu­
tions are being sought. Related to this is the risk that some standards that 
are developed may never see significant adoption. Nor is the standards 
process always nimble or rapid; a recent example is the IEEE 802.11n 
standard for wireless local area networks that took many years to finally 
adopt, by which time interim solutions had already been widely deployed 
to meet the market demands for faster networking. 
Understanding the Sensitivity of Innovation to Policy Decisions 
The innovation process involves a number of actors, including aca­
demic researchers, small and large firms, and end users. Policy and stan­
dards setting play an important role in shaping decisions that ultimately 
affect innovation. Understanding the interplay between technology and 
policy is critical to creating effective policy. Considerations include the 
tension between efficiency and innovation and between the various 
stages of innovation. Another important consideration is that innovation 
depends on inputs from basic research (see below).
Ensuring Technology Expertise in the Regulatory Process
When matters requiring an evaluation of technical claims or options 
come before the Federal Communications Commission (FCC), the tech­
nical basis for its decisions rests on information provided in comments 
to the FCC and assessments made by its engineering staff (Box 3.1). The 
technical analyses in the submitted comments will of course tend to reflect 
the interests of the parties submitting those comments. The expertise of its 
engineering staff allows the FCC to address many specific technical issues 
it must grapple with regularly—for example determining the right noise 
figure for a particular system or the appropriate specification for adjacent 
channel interference. 
Spectrum policy has entered an era in which many critical and stra­
tegic technical issues are likely to arise as technologies, applications, 
and services evolve. The FCC confronted many novel technical issues 
in its early days. Over time its focus has broadened and now encom­
passes economic and legal issues as the industries it regulates mature and 
broaden, issues such as broadcast media ownership and common carrier 
regulation. Today, qualitative and quantitative technology shifts of the 
sort discussed in this report and their complexity and interactions mean 

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Wireless Technology Prospects and Policy Options 
POLICY OPTIONS  
73
BOX 3.1  
The Federal Communication Commission’s 
Office of Engineering and Technology
The Office of Engineering and Technology (OET), the technical advisory arm 
of the FCC,1 has three divisions: policy and rules, electromagnetic compatibility, 
and a laboratory. The policy and rules division has three branches. The spec-
trum policy branch covers regulations and procedures for spectrum allocation 
and utilization. The technical rules branch develops technical rules and stan-
dards for the operation of unlicensed RF devices. The spectrum coordination 
branch monitors the activities of other government agencies, particularly the 
National Telecommunications and Information Administration (NTIA), as well as 
activities of the communications industry. It is also the liaison between the FCC 
and the Interdepartment Radio Advisory Committee, which advises the NTIA. 
The electromagnetic compatibility division of OET studies radiowave propaga-
tion and communications systems characteristics; it also issues and manages 
experi­mental licenses. The laboratory division focuses mainly on testing, evalu-
ation, and compliance. It has a technical research branch, a measurements and 
calibration branch, an equipment authorization branch, and a customer service 
branch. In 1998, OET convened a Technology Advisory Council drawn from a 
range of technical experts, including manufacturing, academia, communica-
tions services providers, and researchers. The council, which met regularly until 
July 2006, was intended to provide a means for the FCC to stay abreast of rapid 
advances in telecommunications technology and help inform FCC regulations 
in light of those advances.2 In October 2010, a new council was appointed.
1 See the Office of Engineering and Technology Web site at http://www.fcc.gov/oet/.
2 Technology Advisory Council Charter, FCC, November 2002, available at http://www.fcc.
gov/oet/tac/TACCharter_112502.pdf.
that the FCC faces new challenges of a technological nature. Examples 
of these complex issues that were grappled with during the work of 
this committee included how best to use the white space of (unused) TV 
channels and how best to use the 700-MHz spectrum for public safety 
communications.
Because it believes that the FCC would greatly benefit from enhanc­
ing its technology assessment and engineering capabilities, the committee 
offers several options for obtaining access to such expertise.
One option is to recruit additional top-caliber engineers and scientists 
to work at the FCC, perhaps for limited terms. Programs could provide 
early- or mid-career professionals with an opportunity to gain experience 
in its policy and regulatory environment or could establish rotating posi­

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Wireless Technology Prospects and Policy Options 
74 
WIRELESS TECHNOLOGY PROSPECTS AND POLICY OPTIONS
tions to bring in senior academic and industry experts. There is, of course, 
a potential for conflicts of interests to arise when staff move between 
government and industry, and these conflicts of interest must be carefully 
avoided. On balance, however, the increased flow of expertise, ideas, 
and perspectives seems likely to bring net benefits. The FCC has used 
the position of chief technologist, which has been held by several senior 
experts from academia and industry, as one way to bring in such exper­
tise. The committee believes, however, that it will be necessary to create 
an environment that attracts more of the right talent. As things stand, for 
example, the committee’s impression is that many in the technical com­
munity do not appear to be convinced that working at the FCC can help 
advance an engineering career in industry or academia. 
Another option is to convene an external advisory committee that 
could give the FCC outside, high-level views on key technical issues. The 
FCC announced the appointment of a new Technology Advisory Council 
in October 2010, as this report was being prepared for publication.
Another option would be to add technical expertise to the staff of each 
commissioner. The staff members are regarded as highly competent, but 
most are legal professionals, not technologists. That is, although the staff 
members are generally knowledgeable—and often very much so—about 
technology, they typically do not have the advanced engineering back­
ground that may be necessary to understand and resolve complex, deeply 
technical issues. 
Also, the FCC could tap outside technical expertise, including exper­
tise available elsewhere in the federal government. Notably, the NTIA 
Institute for Telecommunication Sciences (ITS; Box 3.2) already pro­
vides considerable technical assistance to federal agencies on a cost-
­reimbursement basis and has done a limited amount of work for the FCC 
in the past. Over the years ITS has developed and maintained a strong 
competency in a number of technical areas related to RF communica­
tions. Strengthening the relationship between the FCC and ITS would 
give the FCC access to another source of independent scientific and 
engineering expertise on an as-needed basis. NIST, which has consider­
able expertise and resources for technology evaluation and is ­currently 
working in such areas as the performance of land mobile radios and 
their use for public safety, is another potential source of expertise. (One 
caveat is that the FCC’s status as an independent agency rather than an 
executive branch agency may limit work done by the NTIA or NIST to 
technical and not policy matters.)
Finally, another source of outside technical expertise might be a feder­
ally funded research and development center (FFRDC). These are orga­
nizations managed by universities, industrial firms, or nonprofits and 
chartered to provide federal agencies with technical expertise. FFRDCs 

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Wireless Technology Prospects and Policy Options 
POLICY OPTIONS  
75
BOX 3.2 
Institute for Telecommunications Sciences
The Institute for Telecommunication Sciences (ITS) is the research and engi­
neer­ing arm of the National Telecommunications and Information Administra-
tion (NTIA) in the Department of Commerce.1 Its stated mission is to be the 
federal government’s primary technical resource for telecommunications issues. 
A liaison office coordinates ITS technical research with other federal agencies. As 
part of its broader mission it has supported several other federal agencies, includ­
ing the Departments of Defense, Homeland Security, and Transportation as well 
as state and local government.2 It works through cooperative research and devel-
opment agreements with the private sector (e.g., American Automobile Associa-
tion, Intel, Lucent, and Motorola) and academic institutions (e.g., University of 
­Colorado, University of Pennsylvania). ITS has also provided technical support to 
the FCC for specific issues such as evaluation of propagation models necessary 
to implement the Satellite Home Viewer Act. 3
ITS performs fundamental research and engineering with technical pro-
grams several areas directly related to wireless technology: broadband wireless, 
digital land mobile radio, information technology, propagation measurement 
and models, and spectrum research. It provides the technical resources from 
the United States in developing international telecommunications standards. 
The staff of ITS is composed mostly of scientists and engineers across a number 
of disciplines, including electronics engineering, math, physics, and computer 
science. Its stated goals reflect its engineering focus. Those goals include opti-
mization of federal spectrum allocation methods, support for systems engineer-
ing and planning of interoperable public safety radio systems and standards 
(not frequency allocation, which is the purview of the FCC), improvement of 
network operation and management of national defense systems, and provid-
ing practical telecommunications performance measurement methods. ITS also 
hosts the International Symposium on Advanced Radio Technologies (ISART) 
conference, which annually brings together researchers, business leaders, 
­policy makers, and regulators to discuss the future development and applica-
tion of radio frequency technologies.
1 ITS, “FY 2007 Technical Progress Report,” December 2007, available at http://www.its.
bldrdoc.gov/pub/ntia-rpt/tpr/2007/07-tpr.pdf.
2 ITS overview brochure, available at http://www.its.bldrdoc.gov/ITS_brochure/ITS_brochure.
pdf.
3 ITS, “Propagation Model Development,” 1999, available at http://www.its.bldrdoc.gov/
tpr/1999/its_e/prop_model/prop_model.html.

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Wireless Technology Prospects and Policy Options 
76 
WIRELESS TECHNOLOGY PROSPECTS AND POLICY OPTIONS
are able to bring in expertise on a project-by-project basis and to engage 
expertise that may not be available within the constraints of civil service 
salaries. 
The committee’s view is that whatever mechanisms the FCC uses 
to tap outside technical expertise, the goal is to strengthen capabilities 
for establishing appropriate high-level guidance, and not to build up an 
infrastructure for more detailed command-and-control regulation. 
Technology-Enabled Policy Options
Considering “Open” Approaches in the Range of 20 to 100 GHz 
Use is relatively sparse at frequencies of 20 to 100 GHz; commercial 
services in that range represent a small fraction of the services that oper­
ate below 20 GHz. The relatively high attenuation in materials—and 
short free space propagation in the oxygen absorption band around 
60 GHz—means that propagation distances are relatively short. The ratio 
of antenna size to wavelength makes it practical to form very narrow 
beams. Together, these factors make interference inherently unlikely. 
These frequencies thus represent an opportunity that stands in marked 
contrast to the very difficult transition problems associated with introduc­
ing new services, allocations, and sharing arrangements at lower frequen­
cies. (Increased use of higher frequencies would, however, do little, at least 
in the short term, to alleviate pressures to also introduce new services at 
lower frequencies.) For these higher frequencies, the reduced legacy prob­
lem and lower chance for interference (in the classical sense) indicate that 
nontraditional (“open”) approaches can predominate. Although it is an 
oversimplification to say this, at lower frequency the problem is dealing 
with the legacy, while at the higher frequency it is difficult for radios 
to interfere. These factors suggest that the two domains be approached 
differently, but the distinction has so far not been clearly articulated or 
incorporated into the policy-making process. 
The lower bound of the range proposed for open use, 20 GHz, was 
selected on the basis of two factors—frequencies above 10 Ghz have only 
recently become practical in small devices at low cost and the region 
between 10 and 20 GHz is already heavily allocated, such as for Ku-band 
satellite transmissions between 12 and 18 GHz.
The upper bound of this range, 100 GHz, reflects what can reasonably 
be expected to be practical today or in the near future and the upper limit 
at which it is possible to have a reasonable sense of how the technology 
might be employed. It would thus be imprudent to recommend a particu­
lar regime for frequencies above 100 GHz, given the limited understand­
ing of how radios might be constructed or operated in that domain, and it 

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Wireless Technology Prospects and Policy Options 
POLICY OPTIONS  
77
would be prudent to review policy in this area every few years and make 
adjustments as appropriate.
FCC policy has already moved toward a more flexible and adaptive 
approach in this frequency domain, with an unlicensed regime estab­
lished at 57 to 64 GHz and licensed access to bands at 80 and 95 GHz on 
a first-come, first-protected basis. These measures may stimulate com­
mercial activity and speed the deployment of new services. 
At the outset, these frequencies most likely would be used for very 
short distances and very-high-bandwidth applications, such as in-room 
video distribution, because the bandwidth for gigabit and higher-rate 
applications is not available elsewhere. This is not to say that existing 
applications in those ranges would be quickly or easily replaced, but 
rather that over time it would be attractive to introduce new applications 
at 20 to 100 GHz rather than carving out the rights to introduce them at 
lower frequencies. 
Finally, although usage at 20 to 100 GHz is relatively low compared 
to usage at frequencies below 20 GHz, existing users at the higher fre­
quencies are likely to object, and some exceptions to the open rule would 
probably be needed to protect some existing services. For example, many 
satellite and military services operate in this range, mostly under NTIA 
jurisdiction. There are also non-communications uses in this frequency 
range, such as radar, navigation, and other industrial, scientific, and 
medical uses. Recent experience in working out a sharing arrangement 
between WLAN and military radar use at 5 GHz suggests, in the view of 
the committee, both the possibilities and the potential pitfalls; an accom­
modation was ultimately reached but not without considerable study and 
delay. Because many of the existing uses above 20 GHZ are for govern­
ment services, the participation of and cooperation between the NTIA and 
the FCC will be required to sort out the issues. 
Using a Wider Set of Approaches to Mitigate Interference 
and a Wider Set of Parameters in Making Assignments
Interference should not be viewed simply as an overlap in frequency 
and space between two radios but also in terms of the ability of par­
ticular radios and radio systems to separate desired from undesired sig­
nals. Harm from interference has both technical dimensions (how well a 
radio or radio system can separate desired from undesired signals) and 
economic dimensions (the costs and distribution of costs of building, 
  See, for example, Bennett Z. Kobb, Wireless Spectrum Finder: Telecommunications, Govern-
ment and Scientific Radio Frequency Allocations in the US 30 MHz-300 GHz, McGraw-Hill, New 
York, 2001.

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Wireless Technology Prospects and Policy Options 
78 
WIRELESS TECHNOLOGY PROSPECTS AND POLICY OPTIONS
deploying, and operating a radio/radio system with particular technical 
characteristics that make it easier to disambiguate the signals). 
Today, technology is enabling new ways of mitigating interference. 
The degrees of freedom available for managing interference go beyond 
the traditional parameters of frequency and geographical area and include 
amplitude, frequency, space, time, and polarization. Interference mitiga­
tion can also be thought of in terms of the behavior of radio systems rather 
than individual radios. In the future, coordination and cooperation are 
more likely to be win-win situations; a key question is how to motivate 
such cooperation.
Regulation is beginning to reflect these opportunities. Historically, 
interference between adjacent bands has been mitigated by inserting 
guard bands. Under recently adopted rules for the 700-MHz band, for 
example, there are no guard bands, leaving it up to users to figure out 
how to mitigate interference, whether by cooperation among users, invest­
ment in better receivers, or by other means. This is a good example of a 
more technology- and service-neutral approach to regulation. Rather than 
mandate a particular technical solution, the idea is to be flexible and allow 
users to find the best ways of increasing overall efficiency.
Introducing Technological Capabilities for  
More Sophisticated Spectrum Management 
Some current and emerging technologies could make it much easier 
to introduce new services into crowded frequency bands. Given sufficient 
motivation, ingenuity, and investment, it is not possible to obtain signifi­
cant improvements in communications capacity in a particular piece of 
spectrum, but migrating current nondigital services to digital transmis­
sion will be a major challenge, especially for specific applications like 
aviation radios, which have a large, politically powerful legacy base. 
Improvements are more feasible in bands where the disadvantages of 
migration are not so widely distributed across so many users, where the 
user base is a less potent political force, or where the market dynamics 
are such that end-user technology is regularly refreshed.
Smart antennas, for example, could mitigate interference problems 
in an overlay system. By focusing a beam from the transmitter to a 
receiver, devices with smart antennas can significantly reduce their over­
all ­transmission power. They could also scan their environment for other 
transmissions and transmit in directions that help avoid interference. 
These technologies are not very practical at lower frequencies but become 
more so at somewhat higher frequencies.
Moreover, it may be possible to incorporate more sophisticated 
approaches into receiver specifications established through either stan­

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Wireless Technology Prospects and Policy Options 
POLICY OPTIONS  
79
dards or regulations. Adaptive radios need to be able to sense their envi­
ronment, negotiate with other radios, and adjust their operation accord­
ingly. Doing so requires radios that can listen to a much wider range of 
signals and distinguish among various signals more accurately than is 
required for a conventional radio. A receiver’s ability to sense a small 
signal in the presence of a nearby larger signal is limited both by noise, 
which tends to corrupt measurement of the received signal, and by the 
receiver’s dynamic range. Thus, adaptive radios are viable only if radios 
meet demanding specifications for both dynamic range and noise. The 
problem remains of how to deal with legacy hardware, which does not 
have this capability built in because it was made before receiver perfor­
mance was improved to exploit these opportunities. 
Such higher-quality receivers also cost more, have a more complex 
design, and consume more power. Even small additional costs matter 
a great deal when service providers are fighting to save pennies. The 
additional investment can have a big payoff, however, if it enables new 
applications that are not otherwise possible.
Developing Complementary Policy to 
Allow Negotiation Among Users
A complement to the introduction of new technology is the creation 
of a policy environment in which neighbors (and others whose services 
experience interference) are free to negotiate a mutually acceptable out­
come. This notion, first proposed by Coase, provides for market negotia­
tions to complement or replace regulatory mandates. A new arrangement 
may not be optimal for a given set of parties and might run the risk of 
becoming obsolete as technologies emerge, but such negotiations allow 
for flexibility in situations such as the following:
•	 Operator A spills over into neighbor B’s spectrum in a manner that 
is acceptable under current regulation but is costly to neighbor B, who 
should be free to pay A to not spill over.
•	 Operator A seeks to implement a service that will interfere with 
operator B’s service unless operator B improves the interference-rejection 
capabilities of its receivers. Operator A should be free to pay B for these 
improvements.
It is important to recognize, however, that if the transaction costs such 
as for bargaining are high, the bargains are likely to be less efficient. For 
  R.H. Coase, “The Federal Communications Commission,” Journal of Law and Economics 
2(1):1, 1959.

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Wireless Technology Prospects and Policy Options 
80 
WIRELESS TECHNOLOGY PROSPECTS AND POLICY OPTIONS
example, the introduction of more sophisticated devices and network 
architectures could make it more difficult to know who is spilling over 
into a neighbor’s usage rights, and who is not. 
One can also envision scenarios in which such bargaining might not 
improve the overall efficiency of spectrum use. If license holders can 
negotiate with others to shut down interfering transmissions, the former 
will have less incentive to invest in innovative devices that can operate 
well in the presence of noise. Similarly, to the extent that device manu­
facturers know that their customers will not be able to protect themselves 
from interference, they will be motivated to invest in more robust, smarter 
devices that can give their purchasers better communications irrespective 
of whether or not there is an interference-reducing agreement. 
Trading Absolute Outcomes for Statistically Acceptable Outcomes 
Approaches that use a statistical probability of interference of less 
than 100 percent do not necessarily lead to ruinous outcomes that will 
destroy service. Rather, these approaches seek to relax constraints so as 
to normally (or almost always) provide good outcomes but accept poorer 
outcomes with acceptable probabilities and consequences. That is, the 
system attempts to offer optimal performance most of the time to most 
users and degrades softly under less optimal conditions. The difference 
between the approaches emphasizing absolute and acceptable outcomes 
regarding interference is somewhat analogous to the difference between 
personal auto safety (which “accepts” a certain number of accidents) and 
common carrier air safety (which has an explicit albeit unrealizable goal 
of zero accidents). 
The latter approach has already been embraced in some aspects of 
telecommunications. The Internet’s best-effort design, for example, does 
not guarantee quality of service yet generally provides an acceptable 
overall experience. Acceptance of a similar tradeoff was reflected in the 
market’s favoring Ethernet over Token Ring technology in the early days 
of local area networks. Already in the wireless space, such imperfections 
as holes in coverage area or lower-quality audio (compared to a landline) 
are accepted in exchange for the convenience of mobility.
Such a relaxation of requirements could significantly open up oppor­
tunities for nonexclusive use of frequency bands. Rather than have regula­
tors decide on acceptable quality, it might be desirable to allow licensees 
flexibility to negotiate mutually beneficial arrangements even though the 
result at times might be degraded quality.

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Wireless Technology Prospects and Policy Options 
POLICY OPTIONS  
81
Embracing “Design for Light” and “Design for Darkness”  
More Broadly in Design Concepts and Regulatory Frameworks
Many systems have been “designed for darkness”—that is, under 
the assumption that a particular band has been set aside for a particular 
service or operator and that there are no other emissions in that band. 
Cellular systems are a notable example of this approach. An alternative 
is to design for light, with an assumption of a noisy, cluttered environ­
ment. Both are reasonable design approaches for certain applications and 
services, but it is important to be clear about which mode is appropriate 
under what circumstances. The historical preference has been to design 
for darkness, whereas today, technological advances suggest opening up 
more bands in the design-for-light modality. These techniques include 
beam steering, enhanced signal processing, and network coordination. To 
design for light will require better information than is available today on 
sources of potential interference. 
Broadening the Scope of Inquiry to Encompass 
Receivers and Networks of Transceivers
Much regulation has focused on transmitters, with specifications for 
transmission frequency and bandwidth, geographical location, and trans­
mit power. Increasing use of new radio architectures (discussed above) 
suggests that the scope of inquiry be broadened to look at the properties 
and behaviors of receivers and networks of transceivers. 
Better receiver standards would create an environment in which 
receiver capabilities present less of a barrier than they do today for imple­
menting new spectrum sharing schemes. For example, it might be ­possible 
to overlay unlicensed use onto licensed use with receiver specifications 
written to these standards. 
Expanding the scope for policy or regulation to a system of radios 
rather than an individual radio also would open up new opportunities. 
For example, a network of radios can help avoid the hidden node prob­
lem because it can use multiple network elements to listen from multiple 
points for transmissions. Also, a network of radios would be able to relay 
a transmission through hops at lower power at each node rather than 
directly at higher power, thus decreasing the chance it would interfere 
with another system. Receivers could also report on their position—for 
example, via embedded GPS receivers—although this capability has cost 
and potential privacy implications.

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Wireless Technology Prospects and Policy Options 
82 
WIRELESS TECHNOLOGY PROSPECTS AND POLICY OPTIONS
Exploiting Programmability 
As discussed above, technology has enabled highly programmable 
radios. To be sure, such radios are not practical in many circumstances 
today because of their complexity, power use, and dollar costs, especially 
for mobile devices. Nonetheless, programmable radios are being used for 
some applications today (such as cellular base stations), and it is reason­
able to expect wider use in the future. One implication of this program­
mability is that the radio operating parameters can be made modifiable 
to comply with policy or rule changes. Deployment of devices with such 
capabilities opens up new opportunities for more flexible regulation and 
for policy makers to safely work more incrementally. Namely, (1) ­policies 
would not need to be homogeneous and could be adapted to local envi­
ronmental conditions such as signal density, (2) the operating rules of 
existing devices could be revised to accommodate new technology, and 
(3) devices could more easily be certified for international use because 
they can readily be switched to comply with local policy. 
Although revisability may sound attractive, the opportunity must be 
weighed against some significant drawbacks. Paradoxically, rules that 
require revisability could actually have the effect of discouraging deploy­
ment and investment if they are seen as weakening the commitments 
made by regulators. The most likely scenario, if such a policy were poorly 
drafted, would be that most industry participants would take a wait-and-
see position, which defeats the purpose of providing flexible and revisable 
rules for quick adoption. There are possible mechanisms to address this 
concern, such as offering investors compensation if the rules on which 
they relied are materially changed. Such mechanisms would need to be 
carefully considered as part of any rulemaking that sought to exploit 
revisability. 
Exploiting Adaptive and Environment-Sensing Capabilities 
That Can Help Reduce Centralized Management
As agility, sensing, and coordination improve, and as etiquettes and 
standards for these capabilities develop, opportunities will likely arise 
for reduction of centralized management. Potential advantages to this 
approach include a lower barrier to entry (because entry either will not 
require engagement with a regulator for spectrum assignment or will 
entail negotiation with an existing license holder, or it will be easier and 
less costly to find an existing license holder willing to share its spectrum 
assignments) and flexibility of use (because operation is defined primarily 
by the attributes of radio equipment rather than by regulation). Potential 
disadvantages to this approach include uncertainty about the techni­
cal feasibility and the added costs of building more capable and robust 

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Wireless Technology Prospects and Policy Options 
POLICY OPTIONS  
83
radios. Such a shift is also predicated on resolving the issues discussed 
above about more robust receiver design. Some current proposals would 
maintain a form of centralized control but would replace regulation with 
much more nimble and dynamic approaches, such as services that collect 
and distribute information about or grant access to open channels. 
Establishing Mechanisms for Dealing with Legacy Systems
In recent years, notable efforts to deal with legacy systems have 
included relocating microwave services to allow deployment of PCS 
­cellular telephony and the relocation of Nextel cell services out of public 
safety bands. More recently, relocation of government services as well as 
broadcast radio services and fixed services has been undertaken for new 
3G advanced wireless services bands. Having an easier process for mak­
ing such changes is a critical enabler of more dynamic policies to meet 
changing technologies and market needs. Although there are costs and 
difficulties associated with relocating infrastructure elements, an even 
bigger legacy challenge is the need to migrate potentially millions of 
user-owned or user-operated devices. Among the options for dealing with 
legacy systems are the following:
•	 Commissioning independent neutral analyses to support decision 
making about potential interference with legacy services based on actual 
harm rather than political claims.
•	 Establishing streamlined recovery procedures. Claims of interfer­
ence are inevitable where old and new systems coexist. A streamlined 
process would help identify, report, and resolve such claims.
•	 Establishing databases of legacy equipment. It is far easier to 
­coexist with legacy systems if details about their operation are known. 
A lightweight system for registering systems would help to facilitate the 
creation of a useful database. 
•	 Exploiting technological improvement. As radios become more 
capable, they will be increasingly able to coexist with existing users and 
services. Future policy should require or incentivize new users to coexist 
with existing users—for example, by making future devices more flexible 
(e.g., adaptable filters and oscillators and reprogrammability) so that their 
operation can be relocated more readily—and should avoid rules that 
inhibit this.

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Wireless Technology Prospects and Policy Options 

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Wireless Technology Prospects and Policy Options 
Appendixes

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Wireless Technology Prospects and Policy Options 

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Wireless Technology Prospects and Policy Options 
87
Appendix A
Biographies of Committee 
Members and Staff
David E. Liddle, Chair, is a general partner in the firm U.S. Venture Part­
ners (USVP), a leading Silicon Valley venture capital firm that specializes 
in building companies from an early stage in digital communications, net­
working, wireless communications, semiconductors, technical software, 
and e-health. He retired in December 1999 after 8 years as CEO of Interval 
Research Corporation. During and after his education (B.S., electrical 
engineering, University of Michigan; Ph.D., computer science, University 
of Toledo, Ohio), Liddle has spent his professional career developing tech­
nologies for interaction and communication in research, development, 
management, and entrepreneurship. First, he spent 10 years at the Xerox 
Palo Alto Research Center and the Xerox Information Products Group, 
where he was responsible for the first commercial implementation of 
the graphical user interface and local area networking. He then founded 
Metaphor Computer Systems, whose technology was adopted by IBM 
and the company ultimately acquired by IBM in 1991. In 1992, Liddle 
cofounded Interval Research Corporation with Paul Allen. During his 
tenure, the company formed six new companies and several joint ventures 
based on the research conducted at Interval. He is a consulting professor 
of computer science at Stanford University. He has served as a director at 
Sybase, Broderbund Software, Metricom, Starwave, and Ticketmaster; he 
is currently a director with the New York Times and numerous early-stage 
companies. He was honored as a distinguished alumnus from the Univer­
sity of Michigan and is a member of the national advisory committee at 
the College of Engineering of that university. He is also a member of the 

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Wireless Technology Prospects and Policy Options 
88 
WIRELESS TECHNOLOGY PROSPECTS AND POLICY OPTIONS
advisory committee of the School of Engineering at Stanford University, 
and of the College of Engineering at the University of California, Berkeley. 
He has been elected a senior fellow of the Royal College of Art for his con­
tributions to human–computer interaction. His current technology and 
investment interests are focused on signal processing, with an emphasis 
on wireless communications.
Yochai Benkler is the Jack N. and Lillian R. Berkman Professor of Entre­
preneurial Legal Studies at Harvard Law School and faculty codirector of 
the Berkman Center for Internet and Society at Harvard University. His 
research focuses on the effects of laws that regulate information produc­
tion and exchange on the distribution of control over information flows, 
knowledge, and culture in the digital environment. His particular focus 
has been on the neglected role of commons-based approaches toward the 
management of resources in the digitally networked environment. His 
books include The Wealth of Networks: How Social Production Transforms 
Markets and Freedom (2006), which received the Don K. Price Award from 
the American Political Science Association for best book on science, tech­
nology, and politics; the American Sociological Association’s CITASA 
Book Award for an outstanding book related to the sociology of communi­
cations or information technology; the Donald McGannon Award for best 
book on social and ethical relevance in communications policy research; 
and was named best business book about the future by the magazine 
strategy+business. In civil society, Benkler’s work was recognized by the 
Electronic Frontier Foundation’s Pioneer Award in 2007 and by the Public 
Knowledge IP3 Award in 2006. Previously, Benkler was a professor at Yale 
University and New York University School of Law. 
David Borth is an expert on wireless communications, with insight 
into both national security and commercial needs. He is corporate vice 
president and director of the Communications Research Laboratories 
of ­Motorola, Inc., a part of the company’s research arm, Motorola Labs. 
Borth joined Motorola in 1980 as a member of the Systems Research Labo­
ratory in corporate research and development in Schaumburg, Illinois. As 
a member of that organization, he has conducted research on digital mod­
ulation techniques, adaptive digital signal processing methods applied to 
communication systems, and personal communication systems including 
both cellular and PCS systems. He has contributed to Motorola’s imple­
mentations of the GSM, TDMA (IS-54/IS-136), and CDMA (IS-95) digital 
cellular systems. In his current role, he manages a multinational (United 
States, Australia, France, Japan, United Kingdom) organization focus­
ing on all aspects of communication systems ranging from theoretical 
systems studies to system and subsystem analysis and implementation 

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Wireless Technology Prospects and Policy Options 
APPENDIX A 
89
to integrated circuit designs. Borth received his B.S., M.S., and Ph.D. 
degrees in electrical engineering from the University of Illinois at Urbana-
­Champaign. Previously, he was a member of the technical staff of the 
systems division of Watkins-Johnson Company and an assistant professor 
in the School of Electrical Engineering, Georgia Institute of Technology. 
Borth is a member of Motorola’s Science Advisory Board Associates and 
has been elected a Dan Noble Fellow, Motorola’s highest honorary techni­
cal award. He has been issued 31 patents and has authored or coauthored 
chapters of five books in addition to 25 publications. He received the Dis­
tinguished Alumnus Award from the University of Illinois Electrical and 
Computer Engineering Alumni Association and was elected a fellow of 
the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers for his contributions 
to the design and development of wireless telecommunication systems. 
He is a registered professional engineer in the state of Illinois. Borth was 
a member of the Computer Science and Telecommunications Board from 
2000 to 2003. He also served on the CSTB committee that produced the 
report Information Technology for Counter-Terrorism: Immediate Action and 
Future Possibilities (2003).
Robert W. Brodersen is the John R. Whinnery Distinguished Professor 
in the Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science at 
the University of California, Berkeley. He is also the coscientific direc­
tor of the Berkeley Wireless Research Center, where he works on the 
application of integrated circuits as applied to personal communication 
systems, with an emphasis on wireless communications and low power 
design. ­Brodersen’s research is focused in the areas of low-power design 
and wireless communications and the CAD tools necessary to support 
these activities. He has won best paper awards for a number of journal 
and conference papers in the areas of integrated circuit design, CAD, 
and communications, including the W.G. Baker Award in 1979. In 1982 
he became a fellow of the IEEE. He was corecipient of the IEEE Morris 
K. Liebmann Award in 1983. He received technical achievement awards 
from the IEEE Circuits and Systems Society in 1986, from the Signal Pro­
cessing Society in 1991, and in 1999 from the ACM Special Interest Group 
in Mobile Computing. Brodersen was elected a member of the National 
Academy of Engineering in 1988. In 1996, he received the IEEE Solid 
State Circuits Award. Brodersen was awarded an honorary doctorate 
from the University of Lund, Sweden, in 1999, and in 2000 he received 
the ­ Millennium Award from the Circuits and Systems Society and the 
Golden Jubilee Award from the IEEE. In 2001 he was awarded the Lewis 
Winner Award for outstanding paper at the IEEE International Solid-State 
Circuits Conference. He has served on the editorial board or as a reviewer 
for numerous scholarly journals and publications including the IEEE Jour-

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Wireless Technology Prospects and Policy Options 
90 
WIRELESS TECHNOLOGY PROSPECTS AND POLICY OPTIONS
nal of Solid-State Circuits, IEEE Transactions on VLSI Systems, IEEE Personal 
Communications Magazine, and Wireless Personal Communications (Kluwer 
Press). He is the author or coauthor of more than 60 journal publications 
and 120 published conference papers and is the author, coauthor, editor, 
or contributor to 14 books, including An Anatomy of a Silicon Compiler 
(1992, Kluwer Academic Publishers) and Low Power Digital CMOS Design 
(1995, Kluwer Academic Publishers). He received a Ph.D. degree in engi­
neering from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) in 1972.
David D. Clark graduated from Swarthmore College in 1966 and received 
his Ph.D. from MIT in 1973. He has worked since then at the MIT Labo­
ratory for Computer Science, where he is currently a senior research 
scientist in charge of the Advanced Network Architecture Group. Clark’s 
research interests include networks, network protocols, operating sys­
tems, distributed systems, and computer and communications security. 
After receiving his Ph.D., he worked on the early stages of the ARPANET 
and on the development of token ring local area network technology. 
Since the mid-1970s, Clark has been involved in the development of 
the Internet. From 1981 to 1989, he acted as chief protocol architect in 
this development and chaired the Internet Activities Board. His current 
research area is protocols and architectures for very large, very high speed 
networks. Specific activities include extensions to the Internet to support 
real-time traffic, explicit allocation of service, pricing, and new network 
technologies. In the security area, Clark participated in the early devel­
opment of the multilevel secure multics operating system. He developed 
an information security model that stresses integrity of data rather than 
disclosure control. Clark is a fellow of the ACM and the IEEE and is a 
member of the National Academy of Engineering. He received the ACM 
SIGCOMM Award and the IEEE Award in International Communications, 
as well as the IEEE Hamming Award for his work on the Internet. He is a 
consultant to a number of companies and serves on a number of techni­
cal advisory boards. He chaired the committee that produced the CSTB 
report Computers at Risk: Safe Computing in the Information Age and served 
on several committees that produced several CSTB reports.
Thomas (Ted) Darcie received his Ph.D. degree in aerospace physics 
from the University of Toronto in 1982. Currently, he is a professor at 
the University of Victoria, British Columbia, holding a Tier 1 Canada 
Research Chair in Optical Systems for Communications, Imaging and 
Sensing. Previously he worked at AT&T Bell Laboratories at Crawford 
Hill, Holmdel, New Jersey, where he joined the technical staff to study a 
wide variety of topics related to lightwave telecommunications, including 
fiber fabrication processes, semiconductor lasers, optical amplifiers, and 

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Wireless Technology Prospects and Policy Options 
APPENDIX A 
91
numerous modulation and multiplexing techniques. He has been a lead 
figure in the development of lightwave systems for analog applications 
in cable television and wireless systems. As head of access communica­
tions research at AT&T Bell Laboratories (1989-1995), he was responsible 
for technology innovation in wireless, lightwave, and hybrid fiber-coax 
systems. He has authored more than a hundred technical publications and 
25 patents spanning this broad set of technologies. From 1995 to 2002, he 
was vice president at AT&T Laboratories, in charge of communications 
infrastructure research. His research laboratory provided technology sup­
port for AT&T’s diverse requirements in optical networking, broadband 
access, fixed wireless access, wireless LAN, and cellular systems. His team 
worked closely with AT&T businesses to provide technical expertise and 
vision and had numerous programs devoted to the evolution of mobile 
and broadband services, applications, and technologies. In 2002 and 
2003, he was vice president for AT&T Labs Research network architecture 
and strategic operations planning vice president, with responsibility for 
connecting innovative network technologies with opportunities within 
AT&T’s network. Darcie is an AT&T fellow and a fellow of the IEEE. 
Dale N. Hatfield is an independent consultant and adjunct professor in 
the Department of Interdisciplinary Telecommunications at the University 
of Colorado at Boulder. Between December 2000 and April 2002, ­Hatfield 
served as chair of the department. Prior to joining the University of 
­Colorado, he was the chief of the Office of Engineering and Technology at 
the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) and immediately before 
that was chief technologist at the agency. Before joining the Commis­
sion in December 1997, he was CEO of Hatfield Associates, Inc., a multi­
disciplinary telecommunications consulting firm in Boulder, Colorado, for 
15 years. Before that, he was deputy assistant secretary of commerce 
for communications and information and deputy administrator of the 
NTIA. Before moving to the NTIA, Hatfield was chief of the Office of 
Plans and Policy at the FCC. In 1973 he received a Department of Com­
merce ­Silver Medal for contributions to domestic communications satellite 
policy and in 1999 received the Attorney General’s Distinguished Service 
Award. In 2000, he received the Personal Communications Industry Asso­
ciation (PCIA) Foundation’s Eugene C. Bowler Award for exceptional pro­
fessionalism and dedication in government service and the FCC’s Gold 
Medal Award for distinguished service. More recently, he received the 
distinguished engineer award from the University of Colorado at Boulder. 
He is a fellow of the Radio Club of America. In February 2001, the Federal 
Trade Commission appointed Hatfield as a monitor trustee for the AOL/
Time Warner merger. He also serves on the board of directors of Crown 
Castle International and KBDI TV-12 Public Television in Denver. Hatfield 

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Wireless Technology Prospects and Policy Options 
92 
WIRELESS TECHNOLOGY PROSPECTS AND POLICY OPTIONS
holds a B.S. in electrical engineering from Case Institute of Technology 
and an M.S. in industrial management from Purdue University.
Michael L. Katz is the Edward J. and Mollie Arnold Professor of Busi­
ness Administration of the Haas Economic Analysis and Policy Group 
and director of the Center for Telecommunications and Digital Conver­
gence at the University of California, Berkeley. In 2001 and 2002, he was 
deputy assistant attorney general for economic analysis in the Antitrust 
Division of the Department of Justice. From 1994 to 1996, he was chief 
economist at the Federal Communications Commission. He is coeditor of 
the ­California Management Review and Journal of Economics and Management 
Strategy. He is a former member of the CSTB of the National Research 
Council. He received his Ph.D in economics from Oxford University. 
Paul J. Kolodzy is currently a technology consultant in advanced wireless 
and networking technology, drawing on 20 years of experience in technol­
ogy development for advanced communications, networking, electronic 
warfare, and spectrum policy for government, commercial, and academic 
clients. Before becoming a consultant, Kolodzy was the director of the 
Wireless Network Security Center (WiNSeC), a research facility at Stevens 
Institute of Technology that draws on wide-ranging expertise to design, 
develop, and evaluate technology for the secure transmission of voice, 
video, and data. Previously, Kolodzy had been appointed as the chair of 
the FCC’s Spectrum Policy Task Force, which was charged with examin­
ing spectrum allocation processes and other issues so that spectrum could 
be put to the best use in a timely manner. Before joining the FCC, Kolodzy 
served as a program manager within the Advanced Technology Office of 
the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA) at the Depart­
ment of Defense. At DARPA, he oversaw the initiation of next-generation 
communications technology, which included the neXt Generation (XG) 
Communications initiative. The XG project developed technology that has 
the potential to fundamentally change the manner in which spectrum is 
allocated and assigned. Kolodzy has also held positions at MIT’s Lincoln 
Laboratory and Lockheed Martin Corporation in the development and 
management of advanced signal processing, RF, and EO systems. Kolodzy 
received a B.S. in chemical engineering from Purdue University and an 
M.S. and a Ph.D. in chemical engineering from Case Western Reserve 
University.
Larry Larson is a professor of electrical and computer engineering and 
director of the Center for Wireless Communications at the University of 
California, San Diego (UCSD). His research ranges from electronic cir­
cuits and systems to electronic devices and materials. Larson develops 

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Wireless Technology Prospects and Policy Options 
APPENDIX A 
93
high-speed circuits based on InP (indium-phosphide) and GaAs (gallium 
arsenide) as well as silicon germanium and CMOS technology. He also 
explores applications for micromachining technology in the manufacture 
of high-speed integrated circuits and studies new packaging technology 
for them. Larson’s current research is specifically focused on low-power 
circuit design and RF design techniques for wireless communications. He 
recently completed CDMA Mobile Radio Design, a book on how to design 
the hardware and software for wireless handsets based on code-division 
multiple access technology. CDMA is the foundation of all 3G wireless 
technologies, including Europe’s W-CDMA standard and CDMA2000. As 
director of the industry-sponsored Center for Wireless Communications 
(CWC) at UCSD, he oversees a wide range of ongoing research projects, 
with funding from CWC’s 17 corporate members. He is the first holder 
of the communications-industry-endowed chair at the Jacobs School. He 
joined the UCSD faculty in 1996 after a 16-year career at Hughes Research 
Laboratories. There, he pioneered the development of analog integrated 
circuits and low-noise high-electron-mobility transistors in III-V technol­
ogy, as well as microwave integrated circuits in SiGe HBT technology 
and RF MEMS technology. Larson received a Ph.D. from the University 
of California, Los Angeles, in 1986. He is an IEEE fellow and co-winner 
of the 1996 Hughes Electronics Lawrence Hyland Patent Award and the 
1999 IBM Microelectronics Excellence Award. 
David P. Reed is a senior vice president in the chief scientist group at 
SAP Labs and an adjunct professor at the MIT Media Laboratory. He was 
previously a fellow at HP Labs. Reed’s work focuses on using digital 
technology to transform the design of technological, business, and social 
systems. His explorations center on exploiting new information technolo­
gies that enable people to be more effective, including mobile computing; 
highly scalable wireless networking; group information sharing; pervasive 
­networking; video media processing; and infrastructures for electronic 
commerce. Reed spent 4 years at Interval Research Corporation explor­
ing portable and consumer media technology. For 7 years before joining 
Interval, Reed was vice president and chief scientist for Lotus Develop­
ment Corporation, where he led the design and implementation of key 
products, including 1-2-3, and technical business strategy. Reed was also 
a professor in MIT’s Laboratory for Computer Science. He is coinventor 
of the end-to-end argument, often called the fundamental architectural 
principle of the Internet. He holds a B.S. in electrical engineering and M.S. 
and Ph.D. degrees in computer science and engineering from MIT.
Gregory Rosston is the deputy director of the Stanford Institute for Eco­
nomic Policy Research. His research focuses on industrial organization, 

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Wireless Technology Prospects and Policy Options 
94 
WIRELESS TECHNOLOGY PROSPECTS AND POLICY OPTIONS
antitrust, and regulation. He has written numerous articles on compe­
tition in local telecommunications, implementation of the Telecommu­
nications Act of 1996, and auctions and spectrum policy. He has also 
co-edited two books, including Interconnection and the Internet: Selected 
Papers from the 1996 Telecommunications Policy Research Conference. Before 
joining Stanford University, Rosston served as deputy chief economist of 
the FCC, where he helped to implement the Telecommunications Act. In 
this work, he helped to design and write the rules that the FCC adopted 
as a framework to encourage efficient competition in telecommunications 
markets. He also helped with the design and implementation of the FCC’s 
spectrum auctions. Rosston received his Ph.D. in economics from Stanford 
University and his A.B. in economics with honors from the University of 
California, Berkeley.
David Skellern is CEO of National ICT Austrialia (NICTA). Skellern 
began his career in 1974 at the University of Sydney, where he spent 
a decade designing, building, and commissioning instrumentation and 
extensions for the Fleurs Synthesis Radiotelescope, one of Australia’s 
pioneering giant radiotelescopes. From 1983 to 1989 he held various aca­
demic appointments as a staff member of Sydney University’s Electrical 
Engineering Department. In 1989, Skellern took up the chair of elec­tronics 
at Macquarie University. He also spent considerable time working in 
industry as a visiting researcher, including more than 2 years at Hewlett-
­Packard Laboratories. In 1997 he cofounded the Radiata group of com­
panies in Australia and the United States, established to commercialize 
the results of the WLAN research project that he led at Macquarie Uni­
versity in collaboration with the Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial 
Research Organization. Over the next 3 years he played an integral role 
in building a successful company with a team of 65. In September 2000 
Radiata demonstrated the world’s first chip-set implementation of the 54 
Mbps IEEE 802.11a, a high-speed WLAN standard. Radiata was acquired 
by Cisco Systems, Inc., in 2001 for 565 million Australian dollars, at which 
time Skellern joined Cisco and subsequently moved to the United States 
as technology director of the Wireless Networking Business Unit. Skellern 
was appointed to the NICTA board in 2003. He received a B.Sc. (computer 
science and mathematics) in 1972, a B.E. (electrical engineering) in 1974, 
and a Ph.D. in 1985 from the University of Sydney.
Staff
Jon Eisenberg is director of the Computer Science and Telecommunica­
tions Board of the National Academies. At CSTB, he has been the study 
director for a diverse body of work, including a series of studies explor­

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Wireless Technology Prospects and Policy Options 
APPENDIX A 
95
ing Internet and broadband policy and networking and communications 
technologies, and a study of how to use information technologies to 
enhance disaster management. From 1995 to 1997 he was a AAAS Science, 
Engineering, and Diplomacy Fellow for the U.S. Agency for International 
Development, where he worked on environmental management, technol­
ogy transfer, and information and telecommunications policy issues. He 
received his Ph.D. in physics from the University of Washington in 1996 
and a B.S. in physics with honors from the University of Massachusetts 
at Amherst in 1988.

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Wireless Technology Prospects and Policy Options 
96
Appendix B
Speakers at Meetings
Although the briefers and workshop speakers listed below provided 
much useful information of various kinds to the committee, they were not 
asked to endorse the report’s conclusions or recommendations, nor did 
they see the final draft of this report before its release.
October 23-24, 2003 
The National Academies 
Washington, D.C.
Joseph B. Evans, National Science Foundation
Michael D. Gallagher, National Telecommunication and Information 
Administration
Paul Kolodzy, Wireless Network Security Center, Stevens Institute of 
Technology
James A. Lewis, Center for Strategic and International Studies
James H. Snider, New America Foundation
Peter Tenhula, Federal Communications Commission
January 29-30, 2004 
Stanford Universitys 
Palo Alto, California
Bob Brodersen, University of California, Berkeley
Michael Howse, PacketHop
Devabhaktuni Srikrishna, Tropos Networks

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Wireless Technology Prospects and Policy Options 
APPENDIX B 
97
February 12-13, 2004 
Workshop 
The National Academies 
Washington, D.C.
Siavash Alamouti, Vivato
Richard Barth, Department of Commerce
Samuel W. Bodman, Department of Commerce
David G. Boyd, SAFECOM Program, Department of Homeland Security
Thera Bradshaw, City of Los Angeles Information Technology Agency
Charles N. Brownstein, Computer Science and Telecommunications 
Board
Duane Buddrius, Alvarion, Inc.
Jim Bugel, Cingular Wireless LLC
Leigh Chinitz, Proxim Corporation
Mark Cooper, Consumer Federation of America
Diane Cornell, Cellular Telecommunications & Internet Association
Thomas Cowper, Statewide Wireless Network, New York’s Office of 
Technology
David Donovan, Association for Maximum Service Television, Inc.
Tyler Duvall, Department of Transportation
Harold Feld, Media Access Project
Bruce Fette, General Dynamics Decision Systems
Michael Gallagher, National Telecommunications and Information 
Administration
Merri Jo Gamble, Department of Justice
Michael Green, Atheros Communications
Kalpak Gude, PanAmSat
Robert Gurss, Association of Public-Safety Communications Officials 
International
Dewayne Hendricks, Dandin Group, Inc.
Bradley Holmes, Arraycomm, Inc.
Nancy Jesuale, Net City Engineering, Inc.
Kevin Kahn, Intel
Julius Knapp, Federal Communications Commission
Robert LeGrande, Office of the Chief Technology Officer, District of 
Columbia
Pat Mahoney, Iridium Satellite LLC
Preston F. Marshall, Advanced Technology Office, Defense Advanced 
Research Projects Agency 
William Moroney, United Telecom Council and United Power Line 
Council
John Muleta, Wireless Telecommunications Bureau, Federal Communi­
cations Commission

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Wireless Technology Prospects and Policy Options 
98 
WIRELESS TECHNOLOGY PROSPECTS AND POLICY OPTIONS
Glen Nash, Department of General Services, State of California
Scott Pace, National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Carl Panasik, Texas Instruments
Andrea Petro, Office of Management and Budget
Marilyn Praisner, Montgomery County Council
Dipankar Raychaudhuri, Wireless Information Network Lab, Rutgers 
University
Paul Rinaldo, American Radio Relay League
George (Gee) Rittenhouse, Lucent Technologies
Kenneth Ryan, Comsearch
Greg Schmidt, LIN Television Corporation
David Siddall, Paul, Hastings, Janofsky, and Walker, LLP
Jim Smoak, Verizon Wireless
Carl Stevenson, Agere Systems
Karen St. Germain, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration
Thomas Walsh, Boeing Space and Communication Spectrum 
Management
Jennifer Warren, Lockheed Martin
Charles Wheatley, Qualcomm
Donald Willis, Federal Aviation Administration
Moe Z. Win, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Badri Younes, Department of Defense
July 22-23, 2004 
University of California, San Diego 
San Diego, California
Bob Brodersen, University of California, Berkeley
Michael Chartier, Intel
Robert Matheson, National Telecommunications and Information 
Administration
Allen Petrin, Georgia Institute of Technology
Chuck Wheatley, Qualcomm

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Wireless Technology Prospects and Policy Options 
99
Appendix C
Statement of Task
An expert committee will be convened to conduct a comprehensive 
assessment of wireless technology and application trends and their impli­
cations for spectrum management and policy. The study will be grounded 
in an assessment of how technology capabilities are evolving, including 
the implications of emerging technologies (such as software radios, smart 
antennas, and other intelligent signal processing), architectural alterna­
tives (such as base station-based and peer-to-peer), services (such as 3rd 
and 4th generation mobile, local area networking, and fixed broadband), 
and applications. Building on this technology assessment, the study 
will also examine the interplay between the technical, economic, and 
­policy issues. Key policy issues to be considered include spectrum ­supply 
and demand, alternative spectrum management approaches (including 
­unlicensed approaches), standards-setting processes and forums, and 
how the international environment is evolving and affecting U.S. policy 
options. The committee is seeking broad input on these issues from aca­
demic and industry experts and diverse stakeholders.
In addition, the committee will convene a workshop examining the 
present and prospective needs of public- and private-sector spectrum 
users and technology and policy options for more efficient and effective 
use of spectrum. The scope of topics to be considered in the workshop will 
be very similar to that of the broader study, but with additional emphasis 
on federal, state, and local government spectrum uses. 
The committee will issue a brief report of the workshop. The com­
mittee will also produce a final report with consensus findings and 
recommendations.

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Wireless Technology Prospects and Policy Options 

