Dushantha Nalin K. Jayakody · John Thompson
Symeon Chatzinotas · Salman Durrani    Editors 
Wireless Information 
and Power Transfer: 
A New Paradigm for 
Green Communications

Wireless Information and Power Transfer: A New
Paradigm for Green Communications

Dushantha Nalin K. Jayakody • John Thompson
Symeon Chatzinotas • Salman Durrani
Editors
Wireless Information
and Power Transfer:
A New Paradigm for Green
Communications
123

Editors
Dushantha Nalin K. Jayakody
Department of Software Engineering,
Institute of Cybernetics
National Research Tomsk
Polytechnic University
Tomsk, Russia
Symeon Chatzinotas
Interdisciplinary Centre for Security
University of Luxembourg
Esch-sur-Alzette, Luxembourg
John Thompson
School of Engineering
University of Edinburgh
Institute for Digital Communications
Edinburgh, UK
Salman Durrani
College of Engineering
and Computer Science
The Australian National University
Canberra, Aust Capital Terr, Australia
ISBN 978-3-319-56668-9
ISBN 978-3-319-56669-6
(eBook)
DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-56669-6
Library of Congress Control Number: 2017943674
© Springer International Publishing AG 2018
This work is subject to copyright. All rights are reserved by the Publisher, whether the whole or part of
the material is concerned, speciﬁcally the rights of translation, reprinting, reuse of illustrations, recitation,
broadcasting, reproduction on microﬁlms or in any other physical way, and transmission or information
storage and retrieval, electronic adaptation, computer software, or by similar or dissimilar methodology
now known or hereafter developed.
The use of general descriptive names, registered names, trademarks, service marks, etc. in this publication
does not imply, even in the absence of a speciﬁc statement, that such names are exempt from the relevant
protective laws and regulations and therefore free for general use.
The publisher, the authors and the editors are safe to assume that the advice and information in this book
are believed to be true and accurate at the date of publication. Neither the publisher nor the authors or
the editors give a warranty, express or implied, with respect to the material contained herein or for any
errors or omissions that may have been made. The publisher remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional
claims in published maps and institutional afﬁliations.
Printed on acid-free paper
This Springer imprint is published by Springer Nature
The registered company is Springer International Publishing AG
The registered company address is: Gewerbestrasse 11, 6330 Cham, Switzerland

To my parents Amara Dewndarage and
Linton Jayakody
Dushantha Nalin K. Jayakody

Preface
The concept of wireless information and power transfer provides researchers with a
unique set of challenges which is quite distinct from their traditional ﬁxed power
supply. New approaches in, wireless power transmission (or transfer) (WPT) is
paramount as it helps us to overcome the scarcity of electric power when electric
power is supplied wirelessly.
The necessities of communication systems are a burgeoning issue that is already
straining operating budgets and attracting the attention of policymakers around
the globe. Communication technologies continue to be a central element of the
transition to smart, energy-efﬁcient and sustainable lifestyles. Radio frequency (RF)
energy transfer and harvesting techniques have recently become alternative methods
to power next-generation wireless networks. This book features the latest research
ﬁndings in the area of wireless energy harvesting through RF wireless power transfer
and simultaneous information and power transfer in light of the emerging area of the
Internet of Things.
All living and machine entities rely on both information and power for their
existence. Although these two entities are work harmoniously, in traditional engi-
neering design; information and power are handled by separate systems with limited
interaction. Indeed, wireless energy harvesting (WEH) through radio waves has
already found various applications (such as the radiofrequency identiﬁcation (RFID)
technology, healthcare monitoring, etc.), but radio wave-based communication and
power transfer have largely been designed separately. The contributions in this book
aim at achieving a breakthrough in the design of WPT networks whilst delivering
simultaneously high quality to this rapidly evolving area. This book brings together
the latest ﬁndings in wireless information and power transfer in order to disseminate
state-of-the-art results and inspire future research in this ﬁeld. This introduces a new
paradigm of green communications.
The editors would like to express their gratitude to all the contributors
for their full cooperation during the entire authoring and production process
and their patience through the reviewing rounds and speciﬁcally to Himal A.
Suraweera, Salman Durrani, Nalin D. K. Jayakody, Shree Krishna Sharma, Symeon
vii

viii
Preface
Chatzinotas, Wanchun Liu, Xiangyun Zhou, Naﬁseh Janatian, Ivan Stupia, Luc
Vandendorpe, Christos Masouros, Yunfei Chen, Weisi Guo, Muhammad Ismail,
Mohamed Kashef, Khalid A. Qaraqe, Ioannis Katsidimas, Sotiris Nikoletseas,
Theofanis P. Raptis, Christoforos Raptopoulos, Fahira Sangare, Zhu Han,
Mohammadali Mohammadi, Batu K. Chalise and Sotiris Nikoletseas.
Furthermore, a special thanks goes out to the reviewing team for providing
constructive feedback and improving the quality of the content: Himal Suraweera,
Pan Cao, Nalin D. K. Jayakody, Cristian Rusu, Mohammad Ali Mohammadi, Bin
Chen, Batu Chalise, Sumit Gautam, Dang Khoa Nguyen, Christos Masouros, Yunfei
Chen and Muhammad Ismail.
The writing of this book would not have been possible without the support
of many friends and colleagues. This work was funded, in part, by the Ministry
of Education and Science of the Russian Federation Grant No. 02.G25.31.0190
dated 27.04.2016 and performed in accordance with Russian Government Reso-
lutions No. 218 of 09.04.2010; by various funding schemes of the Ministry of
Education and Science, Russia; by the FNR-FNRS bilateral project “InWIP-NETs:
Integrated Wireless Information and Power Networks”; by the Australian Research
Council’s Discovery Project funding scheme (project number DP140101133); by
the Norwegian-Estonian Research Cooperation Programme through grant EMP133;
and by the Estonian Research Council through research grant PUT405. Authors
also acknowledged the contribution of the COST Action on Inclusion Radio
Communications (IRACON) CA15104.
Finally, the editors would like to thank Mary E. James and Brinda Megasyamalan
from Springer for their support in bringing this book to completion.
Tomsk, Russia
Dushantha Nalin K. Jayakody
Edinburgh, UK
John Thompson
Esch-sur-Alzette, Luxembourg
Symeon Chatzinotas
Canberra, ACT, Australia
Salman Durrani

Contents
Part I
Emerging Topics of Wireless Information and Power
Transfer
1
Introduction, Recent Results, and Challenges in Wireless
Information and Power Transfer .........................................
3
Dushantha Nalin K. Jayakody, Shree K. Sharma,
and Symeon Chatzinotas
2
Full-Duplex Wireless-Powered Communications .......................
29
Mohammadali Mohammadi, Batu K. Chalise,
and Himal A. Suraweera
3
Multi-Objective Resource Allocation Optimization for SWIPT
in Small-Cell Networks ....................................................
65
Naﬁseh Janatian, Ivan Stupia, and Luc Vandendorpe
4
Harvesting Signal Power from Constructive Interference
in Multiuser Downlinks ....................................................
87
Christos Masouros
5
Energy Harvesting for Wireless Relaying Systems ..................... 123
Yunfei Chen
6
Multi-Scale Energy Harvesting ........................................... 157
Weisi Guo, Yansha Deng, Arumugam Nallanathan, Bin Li,
and Chenglin Zhao
Part II
Energy Harvesting Protocols For Wireless Sensor
and Related Areas
7
RF Energy Harvesting Networks: Existing Techniques
and Hardware Technology................................................. 189
Fahira Sangare and Zhu Han
ix

x
Contents
8
Wireless Powered Sensor Networks ...................................... 241
Wanchun Liu, Salman Durrani, and Xiangyun Zhou
9
Spectrum and Energy Harvesting Protocols for Wireless
Sensor Nodes ................................................................ 271
Mansi Peer and Vivek Ashok Bohara
10
Efﬁcient Wireless Power Transfer Maximization Algorithms
in the Vector Model......................................................... 297
Ioannis Katsidimas, Sotiris Nikoletseas, Theofanis P. Raptis,
and Christoforos Raptopoulos
11
Enabling Green Heterogeneous Cellular Networks via
Balanced Dynamic Planning .............................................. 323
Muhammad Ismail, Mohamed Kashef, Erchin Serpedin,
and Khalid A. Qaraqe
Index............................................................................... 359

Authors’ Biography
Symeon
Chatzinotas
(S’06–M’09–SM’13)
received his M.Eng. degree in telecommunications
from
Aristotle
University
of
Thessaloniki,
Thessaloniki, Greece, and M.Sc. and Ph.D. degrees
in electronic engineering from the University
of Surrey, Surrey, UK, in 2003, 2006 and 2009,
respectively. He is currently a research scientist with
the SIGCOM Research Group, Interdisciplinary
Centre for Security, Reliability and Trust, University
of Luxembourg, Luxembourg, managing H2020,
ESA and FNR projects. In the past, he has worked
on numerous R&D projects for the Institute of
Informatics
and
Telecommunications,
National
Centre for Scientiﬁc Research “Demokritos”; Informatics and Telematics Institute,
Centre for Research and Technology Hellas; and Mobile Communications Research
Group, Centre for Communication Systems Research, University of Surrey, Surrey,
UK. He has authored more than 120 technical papers in refereed international
journals, conferences and scientiﬁc books. His research interests include multiuser
information theory, cooperative/cognitive communications and wireless network
optimisation. He was the corecipient of the 2014 Distinguished Contributions
to Satellite Communications Award and Satellite and Space Communications
Technical Committee, IEEE Communications Society and CROWNCOM 2015
Best Paper Award. He is one of the editors of the book Cooperative and
Cognitive Satellite Systems (Elsevier, 2015) and was involved in co-organising
the ﬁrst international workshop on Cognitive Radios and Networks for Spectrum
Coexistence of Satellite and Terrestrial Systems (CogRaN-Sat) in conjunction with
the IEEE ICC 2015, London, UK, June 8–12, 2015.
xi

xii
Authors’ Biography
Salman Durrani received his B.Sc. (ﬁrst-class
honours) degree in electrical engineering from
the University of Engineering and Technology,
Lahore, Pakistan, in 2000. He received his Ph.D.
degree in electrical engineering from the University
of Queensland, Brisbane, Australia, in December
2004. He has been with the Australian National Uni-
versity, Canberra, Australia, since 2005, where he is
currently senior lecturer in the Research School of
Engineering, College of Engineering and Computer
Science.
His research interests are in wireless communi-
cations and signal processing, including machine-
to-machine and device-to-device communication,
wireless energy harvesting systems, stochastic geometry modelling of ﬁnite area
networks and synchronisation in communication systems. He has co-authored more
than 100 publications to date in refereed international journals and conferences.
He was a recipient of the 2016 IEEE ComSoc Asia-Paciﬁc Outstanding Paper
Award. He was the chair of the ACT Chapter of the IEEE Signal Processing and
Communications Societies from 2015 to 2016. He currently serves as an editor of
the IEEE Transactions on Communications. He is a member of Engineers Australia
and a senior fellow of the Higher Education Academy, UK.
Dushantha Nalin K. Jayakody (M’14) received
the B.Eng. degree (with ﬁrst-class honors) from
Pakistan and was ranked as the merit position
holder of the University (under SAARC Scholar-
ship). He received the M.Sc. degree in Electron-
ics and Communications Engineering from Eastern
Mediterranean University, Cyprus (under the Uni-
versity full graduate scholarship) and ranked as
the ﬁrst merit position holder of the department.
He received the Ph.D. degree in Electronics and
Communications Engineering from the University
College Dublin, Ireland. Currently, he is a Professor
at the Institute of Cybernetics, National Research
Tomsk Polytechnic University, Russia, where he
also serves as the Director of Tomsk Infocomm Lab. From 2014 to 2016, he has
held a Research Fellow positions at the University of Tartu, Estonia and University
of Bergen, Norway. Dr Jayakody has received the best paper award from the
IEEE International Conference on Communication, Management and Information
Technology (ICCMIT), Warsaw, Poland in April 2017. Dr. Jayakody is a Member of
IEEE and has served as session chair or technical program committee member for
various international conferences, such as IEEE PIMRC 2013/2014, IEEE WCNC

Authors’ Biography
xiii
2014/2016, and IEEE VTC 2015. He currently serves as a lead guest editor for the
Elsevier Physical Communications Journal and MDPI Information journal. Also, he
serves as a reviewer for various IEEE Transactions and other journals.
John Thompson (SM’13) received his B.Eng. and
Ph.D. degrees from the University of Edinburgh,
Edinburgh, UK, in 1992 and 1996, respectively.
He holds a personal chair in signal processing
and communications with the School of Engineer-
ing, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK. He
specialises in antenna array processing, coopera-
tive communication systems and energy-efﬁcient
wireless communications. His work in these areas
is highly cited, and his h-index is currently 21
according to Web of Science. Mr. Thompson is a
distinguished lecturer for the IEEE Communications
Society for 2014–2015. He was the lead editor of the IEEE Communications
Magazine special issue on “5G Wireless Communication Systems: Prospects and
Challenges”, published in February and May 2014. He was an elected member at
large for the Board of Governors of the IEEE Communications Society from 2012
to 2014. He is also serving as a tutorial co-chair for the 2015 IEEE International
Conference on Communications in London, UK.
Vivek Ashok Bohara received his Ph.D. degree
from the School of EEE, Nanyang Technological
University (NTU), Singapore, in 2011. From 2011
to 2013, he was a postdoctoral researcher (Marie
Curie fellowship) in ESIEE Paris, Université Paris-
Est. He joined IIIT-Delhi in 2013 where he is
currently working as an assistant professor. His
research interests are towards next-generation com-
munication technologies such as device-to-device
communication, carrier aggregation and digital pre-
distortion algorithms. He received ﬁrst prize in the
National Instruments ASEAN Virtual Instrumenta-
tion Applications Contest in 2007 and 2010. He was also the recipient of best poster
award at IEEE ANTS 2014 and IEEE COMSNETS 2015 and 2016 conferences.

xiv
Authors’ Biography
Batu K. Chalise received his M.Sc. and Ph.D.
degrees in electrical engineering from the Univer-
sity of Duisburg-Essen, Germany. He has been a
faculty member with the Department of Electrical
Engineering and Computer Science, Cleveland State
University, OH, since fall of 2015. From 2013 to
2015, he was a wireless systems research engineer
with ArrayComm, San Jose, CA, where he worked
on LTE and LTE-A communication systems. He was
a postdoctoral research fellow with the Center for
Advanced Communications, Villanova University,
Villanova, PA, from 2010 to 2013. He has held various research and teaching
positions at the University of Duisburg-Essen; Université Catholique de Louvain,
Belgium; and Villanova University.
His current research interests include signal processing for wireless and radar
communications and machine learning. In wireless communications, he is mainly
interested in full duplex, cooperative, cognitive, massive multi-antenna and energy
harvesting communications.
Dr. Chalise is an associate editor of the EURASIP Journal on Wireless Com-
munications and Networking. He serves as a Technical Program and Organizing
Committee member in various IEEE conferences. He received an exemplary
reviewer award from the IEEE Communications Society in 2013. He is a senior
member of the IEEE and the recipient of 2016 US Air Force Research Lab Summer
Faculty Fellowship.
Yunfei Chen (S’02–M’06–SM’10) received his
B.E. and M.E. degrees in electronic engineering
from Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai,
P.R. China, in 1998 and 2001, respectively. He
received his Ph.D. degree from the University of
Alberta in 2006. He is currently working as an asso-
ciate professor at the University of Warwick, UK.
His research interests include wireless communica-
tions, cognitive radios, wireless relaying and energy
harvesting.

Authors’ Biography
xv
Yansha Deng received her Ph.D. degree in electrical
engineering from Queen Mary University of Lon-
don, UK, in 2015. She is currently a postdoctoral
research fellow with the Department of Informatics,
King’s College London, UK. Her research interests
include massive MIMO, HetNets, molecular com-
munication, cognitive radio, cooperative networks
and physical layer security.
Weisi Guo received his M.Eng., M.A. and Ph.D.
degrees from the University of Cambridge. He is
currently an assistant professor at the University of
Warwick and a faculty fellow at the Alan Turing
Institute (ATI). He is an investigator in a number
of projects funded by the Royal Society, Lloyd’s
Register Foundation, British Council and US Air
Force. He is the recipient of the IET Innovation
Award 2015 and IEEE Best Paper Award 2014 and a
ﬁnalist in the Bell Labs Prize 2014 and semi-ﬁnalist
in the Bell Labs Prize 2016. He has published over
80 peer-reviewed papers, and his research interests are in the areas of networks,
molecular communications and urban science.
Zhu
Han
(S’01–M’04–SM’09–F’14)
received
his B.Sc. degree in electronic engineering from
Tsinghua University, in 1997, and M.Sc. and Ph.D.
degrees in electrical and computer engineering from
the University of Maryland, College Park, in 1999
and 2003, respectively.
From 2000 to 2002, he was an R&D engineer
of JDSU, Germantown, Maryland. From 2003 to
2006, he was a research associate at the University
of Maryland. From 2006 to 2008, he was an
assistant professor at Boise State University, Idaho.
Currently, he is a professor in the Department of
Electrical and Computer Engineering as well as
in the Department of Computer Science at the University of Houston, Texas. His
research interests include wireless resource allocation and management, wireless
communications and networking, game theory, big data analysis, security and smart
grid. Dr. Han received an NSF Career Award in 2010, the Fred W. Ellersick Prize
of the IEEE Communications Society in 2011, the EURASIP Best Paper Award for
the EURASIP Journal on Advances in Signal Processing in 2015, the IEEE Leonard

xvi
Authors’ Biography
G. Abraham Prize in the ﬁeld of communication systems (best paper award in IEEE
JSAC) in 2016 and several best paper awards in IEEE conferences. Currently, Dr.
Han is an IEEE Communications Society distinguished lecturer.
Muhammad Ismail received his B.Sc. and M.Sc.
degrees (Hons.) in electrical engineering (electronic
and communications) from Ain Shams University,
Cairo, Egypt, in 2007 and 2009, respectively, and
Ph.D. degree in electrical and computer engineer-
ing from the University of Waterloo, Waterloo,
ON, Canada, in 2013. He is currently an assistant
research scientist with the Electrical and Computer
Engineering Department, Texas A&M University at
Qatar, Doha, Qatar, and an IEEE senior member. Dr.
Ismail is a co-author of two research monographs
by Wiley-IEEE Press and Springer, and he has
presented two tutorials in the IEEE WCNC 2016 and the IEEE GLOBECOM
2015. He is a corecipient of best paper awards in the IEEE ICC 2014, the IEEE
GLOBECOM 2014, the SGRE 2015 and the Green 2016. Dr. Ismail was an editorial
assistant of the IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology from 2011 to 2013. He
has been an associate editor of the IEEE Transactions on Green Communications
and Networking since 2016 and the IET Communications since 2014. He is serving
as a TPC co-chair in the IEEE VTC Fall 2017 and has served as a TPC co-chair in
the IEEE VTC Fall 2016, the publication and publicity chair in the CROWNCOM
2015, the Web chair of the IEEE INFOCOM 2014 and a TPC member in several
IEEE conferences.
Naﬁseh Janatian received her B.Sc. degree in
electronic engineering from Sharif University of
Technology, Tehran, Iran, in 2006. She received her
M.Sc. and Ph.D. degrees in communication systems
from Isfahan University of Technology, Isfahan,
Iran, in 2009 and 2015, respectively. From February
to August 2013, she was a visiting research assis-
tant at the Institute for Infocomm Research (I2R),
Agency for Science, Technology and Research
(A*STAR), Singapore. Since September 2015, she
has been working as a postdoctoral fellow at
the Institute of Information and Communication
Technologies, Electronics and Applied Mathematics
(ICTEAM), Université Catholique de Louvain (UCL), Louvain-la-Neuve, Belgium.
Her main research interests include the application of statistical signal processing
and optimisation theory to wireless communications with the current focus on
beamforming and resource allocation design in simultaneous wireless information
and power transfer (SWIPT) networks.

Authors’ Biography
xvii
Mohamed Kashef received his B.Sc. and M.Sc.
degrees (Hons.) in electronic and electrical commu-
nications engineering from Cairo University, Cairo,
Egypt, in 2006 and 2009, respectively, and Ph.D.
degree in electrical engineering from the University
of Maryland, College Park, MD, USA, in 2013. He
is currently a postdoctoral research associate with
Texas A&M University at Qatar, Doha, Qatar, and
an IEEE member. His research interests generally
include wireless communication systems and net-
works, visible light communication networks and
optimisation of stochastic systems.
Ioannis Katsidimas is a Ph.D. student under the
supervision of Professor Sotiris Nikoletseas, at the
Computer Engineering and Informatics Department
of the University of Patras, Greece. Also, he is a
researcher at the Computer Technology Institute and
Press “Diophantus”, Greece.
His research interests include wireless power
transfer algorithms in ad hoc communication net-
works, wireless sensor networks and Internet of
Things. Currently, he participates in the Privacy Flag
EU project.
Bin Li received his bachelor’s degree in electrical
information engineering from Beijing University of
Chemical Technology (BUCT) in 2007 and Ph.D.
degree in communication and information engineer-
ing from Beijing University of Posts and Telecom-
munications (BUPT) in 2013. Then, he joined BUPT
at 2013, and now, he is an associate professor of the
School of Information and Communication Engi-
neering (SICE). His current research interests are
focused on statistical signal processing for wireless
communications, e.g. molecular communications,
millimetre-wave (mm-wave) communications and
cognitive radios (CRs). He has published more than
70 journal and conference papers. He received 2011 ChinaCom Best Paper Award,
2015 IEEE WCSP Best Paper Award and 2010 and 2011 BUPT Excellent Ph.D.
Student Award Foundation.

xviii
Authors’ Biography
Wanchun Liu received her B.Sc. and M.S.E.
degrees in electronic and information engineering
from Beihang University, Beijing, China. She is
currently pursuing her Ph.D. degree at the Research
School of Engineering, Australian National Uni-
versity, Canberra, Australia. Her research interest
lies in the ﬁeld of wireless communications and
includes wireless communication networks powered
by energy harvesting and backscatter communica-
tions.
She was a TPC member of VTC’17-Spring and
the GLOBECOM workshop on wireless energy
harvesting communication networks at GLOBE-
COM’16. She is also a TPC member of GLOBE-
COM’17.
Christos Masouros (SMIEEE, MIET) received his
diploma degree in electrical and computer engi-
neering from the University of Patras, Greece, in
2004 and M.Sc. by research and Ph.D. in electrical
and electronic engineering from the University of
Manchester, UK, in 2006 and 2009, respectively. In
2008, he was a research intern at Philips Research
Labs, UK. Between 2009 and 2010, he was a
research associate in the University of Manchester
and between 2010 and 2012 a research fellow in
Queen’s University Belfast. He has held a Royal
Academy of Engineering Research Fellowship between 2011 and 2016.
He is currently a senior lecturer in the Communications and Information Systems
Research Group, Department of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, University
College London. His research interests lie in the ﬁeld of wireless communications
and signal processing with particular focus on green communications, large-scale
antenna systems, cognitive radio, interference mitigation techniques for MIMO and
multicarrier communications. He was the recipient of the Best Paper Award in the
IEEE GLOBECOM conference 2015 and has been recognised as an exemplary
editor for IEEE Communications Letters and as an exemplary reviewer for IEEE
Transactions on Communications. He is an associate editor for IEEE Communica-
tions Letters and guest editor for the IEEE Journal of Selected Topics in Signal
Processing issue “Exploiting Interference Towards Energy Efﬁcient and Secure
Wireless Communications”.

Authors’ Biography
xix
Mohammadali Mohammadi received his B.S.
degree in electrical engineering from Isfahan Uni-
versity of Technology, Isfahan, Iran, and his M.S.
and Ph.D. degrees in electrical engineering from K.
N. Toosi University of Technology, Tehran, Iran, in
2005, 2007, and 2012, respectively. From Novem-
ber 2010 to November 2011, he was a Visiting
Researcher at the Research School of Engineering,
Australian National University, Canberra, A.C.T.,
Australia, working on cooperative networks. He is
currently an Assistant Professor with the Faculty
of Engineering, Shahrekord University, Shahrekord,
Iran. His research interests include cooperative com-
munications, energy harvesting and green communi-
cations, full-duplex communications, and stochastic
geometry.
Arumugam Nallanathan is professor of wireless
communications in the Department of Informatics
at King’s College London (University of London).
He served as the head of Graduate Studies in the
School of Natural and Mathematical Sciences at
King’s College London, 2011/2012. He was an
assistant professor in the Department of Electrical
and Computer Engineering, National University of
Singapore, from August 2000 to December 2007.
His research interests include 5G wireless networks,
Internet of Things (IoT) and molecular communica-
tions. He published more than 300 technical papers
in scientiﬁc journals and international conferences.
He is a corecipient of the Best Paper Award presented at the IEEE International
Conference on Communications 2016 (ICC2016) and IEEE International Confer-
ence on Ultra-Wideband 2007 (ICUWB 2007). He is an IEEE distinguished lecturer.
He has been selected as a Thomson Reuters Highly Cited Researcher in 2016. He
is an editor for IEEE Transactions on Communications and IEEE Transactions
on Vehicular Technology. He was an editor for IEEE Transactions on Wireless
Communications (2006–2011), IEEE Wireless Communications Letters and IEEE
Signal Processing Letters. He served as the chair for the Signal Processing and
Communication Electronics Technical Committee of the IEEE Communications
Society and Technical Program chair and member of Technical Program Commit-
tees in numerous IEEE conferences. He received the IEEE Communications Society
SPCE outstanding service award 2012 and IEEE Communications Society RCC
outstanding service award 2014.

xx
Authors’ Biography
Sotiris Nikoletseas is a professor at the Computer
Engineering and Informatics Department of the Uni-
versity of Patras, Greece. Also, he is the director
of the Sensors Lab and a scientiﬁc consultant of
the Algorithms Group at the Computer Technology
Institute and Press “Diophantus” (CTI), Greece. He
has been a visiting professor at the Universities of
Geneva, Ottawa and Southern California (USC).
His research interests include algorithmic aspects
of wireless sensor networks and the Internet of
Things (IoT), wireless energy transfer protocols,
probabilistic techniques and random graphs, prob-
abilistic algorithms and algorithmic engineering. He
has published 3 books and 200C research papers and has delivered several invited
talks and tutorials. He has coordinated several externally funded R&D projects.
Mansi
Peer
joined
as
a
Ph.D.
scholar
at
Indraprastha Institute of Information Technology
(IIIT)-Delhi, India, in 2016. She has received her
B.Tech. (2014) and M.Tech. (2016) degrees from the
National Institute of Technology (NIT), Srinagar,
and IIIT-Delhi, respectively. Her research areas
include cooperative relaying, cognitive networks
and RF energy harvesting, and currently, she is
working in the device-to-device communication
domain.
Khalid A. Qaraqe (S’00) was born in Bethlehem.
Dr. Qaraqe received a B.S. degree in EE from the
University of Technology, Bagdad, Iraq, in 1986,
with honors. He received an M.S. degree in EE from
the University of Jordan, Jordan, Amman, Jordan, in
1989, and he earned his Ph.D. degree in EE from
Texas A&M University, College Station, TX, in
1997. From 1989 to 2004 Dr. Qaraqe has held a vari-
ety of positions in many companies and he has over
12 years of experience in the telecommunication
industry. Dr. Qaraqe has worked on numerous GSM,
CDMA, and WCDMA projects and has experience
in product development, design, deployments, testing, and integration. He joined
the department of Electrical and Computer Engineering of Texas A&M University
at Qatar, in July 2004, where he is now a professor.
Dr. Qaraqe research interests include communication theory and its application
to design and performance, analysis of cellular systems, and indoor communication
systems. Particular interests are in mobile networks, broadband wireless access,
cooperative networks, cognitive radio, diversity techniques, and 5G systems.

Authors’ Biography
xxi
Dr. Theofanis P. Raptis is a postdoctoral research
fellow at the National Research Council (CNR),
Pisa, Italy. Previously, he was a researcher at the
Computer Technology Institute and Press “Dio-
phantus”, Greece. He received his Ph.D. from the
Computer Engineering and Informatics Department,
University of Patras, Greece.
His research interests include wireless power
transfer algorithms in ad hoc networks, as well
as future Internet platforms and test beds. He has co-authored more than 35
publications in acclaimed international refereed journals, conferences and books
and has participated in several European Union-and national-funded R&D projects
(AUTOWARE, IoT Lab, DISFER, SHARPEN, HOBNET).
Dr. Christoforos Raptopoulos got his Ph.D. enti-
tled “Design and Analysis of Algorithms for Ran-
dom and Evolutionary Networks” under the super-
vision of Professor Paul G. Spirakis, from the
Computer Engineering and Informatics Department
in the University of Patras, Greece, in 2008. He
worked as a postdoc at the University of Paderborn
and Heinz Nixdorf Institute (HNI) in Germany and
as a research fellow (“Bourse d’excellence”) at the
Computer Science Department of the University of
Geneva.
Hisresearchinterestsincludeevolutionarydynam-
ics, dynamic and evolutionary networks, average
case analysis of algorithms and random graphs. He
has been the principal investigator of the SHARPEN
project (Structural and Algorithmic Properties of Dynamic and Evolutionary Net-
works) and has participated in several EU projects on fundamental aspects of
networks (MULTIPLEX, IoT Lab, HOBNET, FRONTS, FLAGS, AEOLUS).
Fahira Sangare (M’10) received his B.E. degree
in electrical, electronic and information engineering
from Nagaoka University of Technology, Japan, in
2005 and M.E.E. in electrical engineering from the
University of Houston, Texas, in 2013. From 2005
to 2016, he was an electrical engineer for Schlum-
berger, the world’s largest oilﬁeld service company,
in various countries (Japan, the USA, Canada and
Mexico).
He is currently pursuing a Ph.D. in electri-
cal engineering at the University of Houston. His
research interests include mathematical optimisation, wireless sensor networks, RF
energy harvesting, embedded software and system design.

xxii
Authors’ Biography
Erchin Serpedin is a Professor in the Department of
Electrical and Computer Engineering, Texas A&M
University, College Station, TX, USA. He received
a specialization degree in signal processing and
transmission of information from Ecole Superieure
D’Electricite (SUPELEC), Paris, France, in 1992,
an M.Sc. degree from the Georgia Institute of Tech-
nology, Atlanta, USA, in 1992, and a Ph.D. degree
in electrical engineering from the University of
Virginia, Charlottesville, USA, in January 1999. Dr.
Serpedin is the author of 3 research monographs, 1
textbook, 15 book chapters, 140 journal papers, and
250 conference papers. His research interests include signal processing, biomedical
engineering, bioinformatics, and machine learning. Dr. Serpedin is currently serving
as an Associate Editor of the IEEE SIGNAL PROCESSING MAGAZINE. He served
as an Associate Editor of a dozen of journals, such as the IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON
INFORMATION THEORY, IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SIGNAL PROCESSING,
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, IEEE SIGNAL PROCESSING
L ETTERS, IEEE COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS, IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON
WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS, Signal Processing (Elsevier), Physical Commu-
nications (Elsevier), EURASIP Journal on Advances in Signal Processing, and as a
Shree Krishna Sharma received an M.Sc. degree in
information and communication engineering from
the Institute of Engineering, Pulchowk, Nepal; an
M.A. degree in economics from Tribhuvan Univer-
sity, Nepal; an M.Res. degree in computing science
from Staffordshire University, Staffordshire, UK;
and a Ph.D. degree in wireless communications
from the University of Luxembourg, Luxembourg,
in 2014. Dr. Sharma worked as a Research Associate
at Interdisciplinary Centre for Security, Reliability
and Trust (SnT), University of Luxembourg, for two
years, where he was involved in EU FP7 CoRaSat
project, EU H2020 SANSA, ESA project ASPIM,
as well as Luxembourgish national projects Co2Sat,
and SeMIGod. He is currently working as a Postdoctoral Fellow at Western
University, Canada. His research interests include 5G and beyond wireless systems,
Internet of Things (IoT), adaptive optimization of distributed communication,
computing and caching resources, cognitive and cooperative communications, and
interference mitigation and resource allocation in heterogeneous wireless networks.
In the past, Dr. Sharma was involved with Kathmandu University, Dhulikhel,
Nepal, as a Teaching Assistant, and he also worked as a Part-Time Lecturer for
eight engineering colleges in Nepal. He worked in Nepal Telecom for more than
Technical Chair for ﬁve major conferences. He is an IEEE Fellow.

Authors’ Biography
xxiii
four years as a Telecom Engineer in the ﬁeld of information technology and
telecommunication. He is the author of more than 75 technical papers in refereed
international journals, scientiﬁc books, and conferences. He received an Indian
Embassy Scholarship for his B.E. study, an Erasmus Mundus Scholarship for his
M.Res. study, and an AFR Ph.D. grant from the National Research Fund (FNR)
of Luxembourg. He received Best Paper Award in CROWNCOM 2015 conference,
and for his Ph.D. thesis, he received “FNR award for outstanding PhD Thesis 2015”
from FNR, Luxembourg. He is a member of IEEE and has been serving as a reviewer
for several international journals and conferences; and also as a TPC member for a
number of international conferences including IEEE ICC, IEEE Globecom, IEEE
PIMRC, and IEEE ISWCS.
Ivan Stupia received his M.Sc. degree in telecom-
munications engineering and Ph.D. degree in infor-
mation engineering from the University of Pisa,
Italy, in 2004 and 2009, respectively. In 2011, he
joined the Institute of Information and Communi-
cation Technologies, Electronics and Applied Math-
ematics (ICTEAM) of the Université Catholique de
Louvain.
His expertise and general interests span the areas
of wireless communications and signal processing
with special emphasis on radio resource allocation,
interference management techniques, cooperative
networking, wireless power transfer and green and
cost-effective design of cellular networks. His current research topics focus on the
application of game theory and multi-objective optimisation to the design of self-
adaptive and self-organising networks.
Himal
A.
Suraweera
received
his
B.Sc.
Engineering (First Class Honors) degree from
the University of Peradeniya, Sri Lanka, in 2001,
and his Ph.D. degree from Monash University,
Australia, in 2007.
He is a Senior Lecturer at the Department of
Electrical & Electronic Engineering, University
of Peradeniya. From January 2011 to May 2013,
he was a Post-Doctoral Research Associate at the
Singapore University of Technology and Design,
Singapore. From July 2009 to January 2011, he
was with the National University of Singapore,
Singapore, as a Research Fellow. From February 2007 to June 2009, he was a
Research Fellow at Victoria University, Australia. He was awarded the Mollie
Holman medal and the Kenneth Hunt medal upon graduating from Monash
University, IEEE ComSoc Asia-Paciﬁc Outstanding Young Researcher Award in
2011, and WCSP Best Paper Award in 2013.

xxiv
Authors’ Biography
Dr. Suraweera serves on the editorial boards of IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON
WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS, IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GREEN COMMU-
NICATIONS AND NETWORKING, and Series on Green Communications and Net-
working of the IEEE JOURNAL ON SELECTED AREAS IN COMMUNICATIONS.
He was an editor for IEEE COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS during 2010–2015.
He was a co-chair of the Signal Processing for Communications Symposium,
GLOBECOM ’15. His research interests include relay networks, energy harvesting
wireless communications, full duplex communications, physical layer security, and
MIMO systems.
Luc Vandendorpe (M’93, SM’99, F’06) was born
in Mouscron, Belgium, in 1962. He received his
degree (summa cum laude) in electrical engineering
and Ph.D. degree from the Université Catholique
de Louvain (UCL), Louvain-la-Neuve, Belgium, in
1985 and 1991, respectively. Since 1985, he has
been with the Communications and Remote Sensing
Laboratory, UCL, where he ﬁrst worked in the ﬁeld
of bit rate reduction techniques for video coding. In
1992, he was a visiting scientist and a research fel-
low at the Telecommunications and Trafﬁc Control
Systems Group, Delft University of Technology, the Netherlands, where he worked
on spread spectrum techniques for personal communication systems. From October
1992 to August 1997, he was a senior research associate of the Belgian NSF, UCL,
and an invited assistant professor. He is now a full professor with the Institute of
Information and Communication Technologies, Electronics and Applied Mathemat-
ics, UCL. His research interests include digital communication systems and more
precisely resource allocation for OFDM(A)-based multicell systems, MIMO and
distributed MIMO, sensor networks, UWB-based positioning and wireless power
transfer. He is a TPC member for numerous IEEE conferences (VTC, GLOBECOM,
SPAWC, ICC, PIMRC and WCNC). He was a co-technical chair for the IEEE
ICASSP 2006. He served as an editor for Synchronization and Equalization of the
IEEE Transactions on Communications between 2000 and 2002 and as an associate
editor of the IEEE Transactions on Wireless Communications between 2003 and
2005 and the IEEE Transactions on Signal Processing between 2004 and 2006. He
was the chair of the IEEE Benelux joint chapter on communications and vehicular
technology between 1999 and 2003. He was an elected member of the Signal
Processing for Communications Committee between 2000 and 2005 and an elected
member of the Sensor Array and Multichannel Signal Processing Committee of the
Signal Processing Society between 2006 and 2008 and between 2009 and 2011. Luc
Vandendorpe is a fellow of the IEEE.

Authors’ Biography
xxv
Chenglin Zhao received his bachelor’s degree in
radio technology from Tianjin University in 1986,
master’s degree in circuits and systems from Bei-
jing University of Posts and Telecommunications
(BUPT) in 1993 and Ph.D. degree in communication
and information system from Beijing University of
Posts and Telecommunications in 1997. At present,
he serves as a professor in Beijing University
of Posts and Telecommunications, Beijing, China.
His research is focused on emerging technologies
of short-range wireless communication, cognitive
radios and 60GHz millimetre-wave communica-
tions.
Xiangyun Zhou received his B.E. (Hons.) degree in
electronic and telecommunications engineering and
Ph.D. degree in telecommunications engineering
from the Australian National University in 2007 and
2010, respectively. From 2010 to 2011, he worked
as a postdoctoral fellow at the UNIK – University
Graduate Center, University of Oslo, Norway. He
joined the Australian National University in 2011
and currently works as a senior lecturer. His research
interests are in the ﬁelds of communication theory
and wireless networks.
Dr. Zhou currently serves on the editorial board
of IEEE Transactions on Wireless Communications
and IEEE Communications Letters. He also served as a guest editor for the IEEE
Communications Magazine’s feature topic on wireless physical layer security in
2015 and the EURASIP Journal on Wireless Communications and Networking’s
special issue on energy harvesting wireless communications in 2014. He was a co-
chair of the ICC workshop on wireless physical layer security at ICC’14, ICC’15
and ICC’16. He was also a co-chair of the GLOBECOM workshop on wireless
energy harvesting communication networks at GLOBECOM’16.
He was the chair of the ACT Chapter of the IEEE Communications Society and
Signal Processing Society from 2013 to 2014. He is a recipient of the Best Paper
Award at ICC’11 and IEEE ComSoc Asia-Paciﬁc Outstanding Paper Award in 2016.

Introduction
Wireless power transfer (WPT) through RF signals has a long and rich history.
Indeed, it has been more than 120 years since the ﬁrst pioneering experimental
work was accomplished by Nikola Tesla in 1899. Recently, wireless information
and power transfer has been acknowledged as a signiﬁcant means to prolonging
the lifetime of energy-constrained wireless devices and networks. The evolution
of this technology has been rapid, and it is now being considered for most of the
beyond 5G technologies, with new commercial products being showcased every
year in the Consumer Electronics Show. WPT is a technology whose time has
come. The reason is the proliferation of the number of Internet-connected devices,
which is set to explode even further with the coming of the Internet of Things
(IoT). For instance, industry forecasts predict that the number of IoT-connected
devices will exceed 25 billion by 2025, whilst the number of mobile subscribers
will exceed 7 billion by the same year. Typically, energy-limited wireless devices are
generally powered by batteries with a limited operating time. Whilst recharging the
batteries can extend the lifetime of the device/network to a certain extent, it usually
experiences high costs and may not be very convenient in certain cases like toxic
environments, building structures or inside human bodies, etc. Thus, RF energy
harvesting through ambient environment or other ways is an attractive solution to
power wireless devices in the future. In particular, RF signal-sourced wireless power
transfer methods are especially appealing to low-energy-consumption devices in
IoT.
Since RF signals can carry energy and information at the same time, simul-
taneous wireless information and power transfer (SWIPT) is an interesting new
area of research that has attracted increasing attention by academia and industry.
However, a uniﬁed research framework in this area of research is still in the
infancy stage, although notable results are reported in this book. Radio frequency
(RF) energy transfer and harvesting techniques have recently become alternative
methods to power next-generation wireless networks. As this emerging technology
enables proactive energy replenishment of wireless devices, it is advantageous in
supporting applications with quality of service (QoS) requirements. The level of
the ambient RF signals is unceasingly growing because of wireless systems such
xxvii

xxviii
Introduction
as mobile base stations, Wi-Fi applications, TV and radio base stations, wireless
routers and other systems that exploit wireless networks. Hence, wireless power
transfer and wireless energy harvesting systems are drawing more attention and
becoming more efﬁcient. Furthermore, these systems are much less affected by
weather circumstances as compared with other energy harvesting systems. However,
they have some challenges such as low power density and high sensitivity. In the
contemporary era, the available frequency resources are getting rarer as a result of
spectrum segmentation and increased number of connected devices. Furthermore,
the power consumed by our modern communication applications and networks is
becoming a warning factor in the dialogue of global warming, resulting in the
idea of green and sustainable radio. Consequently, it becomes vital to deﬁne and
explore new wireless network designs which have the ability to support higher
system throughput and energy efﬁciency whilst providing large-scale coverage and
availability.
In this direction, we present an overview of the WPT including system archi-
tecture, RF wireless power transfer techniques and existing applications. We
demonstrate the idea of WPT is exploited in emerging areas such as full duplex
communication, cooperative wireless communications, interference exploitation,
etc. WPT/SWIPT applications of WSNs are also of a particular interest in this book.
These systems absorb ambient RF signals in the environment. The book aims at
bringing and structuring the state-of-the-art research ﬁndings in WPT/SWIPT and
presenting these to postgraduate students, companies and researchers. The book will
also serve as a reference book in the area of RF wireless power transfer and RF
energy harvesting for researchers, engineers and postgraduate and doctoral students.
The book contains two parts, i.e. Part I deals with the emerging topics of wireless
information and power transfer and Part II contains interesting applications and
background of WPT in wireless sensor networks and related areas.
Part I: Emerging Topics of Wireless Information and Power
Transfer
In recent years, research on RF energy harvesting or WPT-assisted communication
has created innovative paradigms. In this context, we term WPT as energy scaveng-
ing through RF signals for far ﬁelds, with a signiﬁcant attention to the information
processing angle as it is central to wireless communications. In this section, we
discuss some emerging topics of wireless information and power transfer.
Chapter 1 focuses on surveying and presenting an introduction to the wireless
information and the power transfer area. This chapter provides an overview and
introduction to simultaneous wireless information and power transfer (SWIPT)
systems, with a particular focus on emerging techniques associated with SWIPT.
The chapter explores various key design issues in the development of SWIPT-
assisted emerging wireless communication technologies including those related

Introduction
xxix
to 5G communications. The chapter also provides interesting research ideas and
directions for future work.
Chapter 2 studies the full duplex communication together with the WPT. Full
duplex (FD) radios that can simultaneously transmit and receive on the same
frequency channel have emerged as a solution to potentially double the spectral
efﬁciency. In this chapter, the authors overview the state-of-the-art advances in FD
communications and WPT. Speciﬁcally, FD wireless-powered network design with
examples from (a) bidirectional topology, (b) relay topology and (c) hybrid access
point topology is presented. Then, the chapter presents FD to design energy and
spectrally efﬁcient future wireless communication network. In particular, in each
topology, the chapter analyses the system performance and considers beamforming
design to optimise the performance. In addition, the impact of beamforming strategy
and various system/energy harvesting parameters on the performance is discussed
in detail. Finally, future research directions and open problems associated with FD
and WPT are identiﬁed.
Chapter 3 investigates the concept of SWIPT for small-cell networks and inves-
tigates the resource allocation optimisation for SWIPT in small-cell networks. The
chapter considers a small-cell network with multiple-input single-output SWIPT
system model and addresses the problem of joint transmit beamforming and
receiver time switching design. The design problem is formulated as a non-convex
multi-objective optimisation problem with the goal of maximising the harvested
energy and information data rates for all users simultaneously. The proposed multi-
objective optimisation problem is introduced employing the weighted Chebyshev
method. In this scenario, the trade-off between the maximisation of the energy
efﬁciency of information transmission and the maximisation of the wireless power
transfer efﬁciency is studied by means of resource allocation using a multi-objective
optimisation framework.
Chapter 4 presents the latest developments in the area of interference exploitation
for harvesting useful signal power. This complements existing work on energy
harvesting and wireless power transfer, where wireless interference acts not only
as a source of RF energy for powering the transceiver hardware but also as a source
of useful signal energy for enhancing signal detection. This chapter complements
Chap. 1 by providing the state of the art in the area of RF energy harvesting with
interference exploitation, where constructive interference is harvested both as useful
signal power and as an RF energy source. This is more potentially an interesting
research direction. There is only a limited work done to date.
Chapter 5 presents different aspects of energy harvesting relaying systems. First,
the performance of energy harvesting relaying systems with or without interference
is analysed in terms of different performance measures. This analysis helps to
show the beneﬁt of energy harvesting relaying. Then, a new energy harvesting
relaying protocol that allows the source node to harvest energy from the relay node
during the relaying phase is examined. Finally, the channel estimation problem for
energy harvesting relaying is discussed, where pilots used in channel estimation are
transmitted using the harvested energy.

xxx
Introduction
Chapter 6 reviews the state-of-the-art technologies that allow multi-scale wireless
devices to simultaneous harvest energy and transmit data. The energy efﬁciency
of systems in general determines its operational sustainability. Harvesting energy
is a crucial technology for a variety of wireless systems that have limited access
to a reliable electricity supply or recharging sources. As such, these devices need
to harvest electricity from alternative sources such as the natural environment
or wireless signals. A variety of wireless systems and devices ﬁt this proﬁle,
from relatively power-hungry macro-base stations deployed in remote regions to
nanoscale sensors in in vivo environments.
Part II: RF Energy Harvesting Protocols for Wireless Sensors
and Related Areas
The future Internet of Things (IoT) will connect trillions of devices, where wireless
sensors will play an important part. Due to the large scale of such networks,
battery replacement is a crucial issue for the massive number of wireless sensors.
To efﬁciently address the ﬁnite sensor lifetime problem in IoT, techniques such
as energy harvesting-powered and wireless power transfer-powered WSNs are
promising solutions.
Chapter 7 presents an introduction to RF energy harvesting techniques, describ-
ing the underlying electronics hardware design, showing the current state-of-the-art
applications and commercially available products and ﬁnally expanding to future
applications and challenges ahead. This chapter surveys the general architecture
of a harvester from both anticipated and ambient RF origins, in order to meet
the future demand for self-powered devices. All the subsystems of the harvester
were discussed, including the antenna design, matching circuit, rectiﬁer, power
management and energy storage. In addition, potential RF signal scavenging
applications and techniques beyond wireless sensor node power were explored, such
as long-distance electrical power distribution, SWIPT, beamforming and cognitive
radio.
Chapter 8 summarises the state-of-the-art WSNs, EH-based WSNs and wireless
power transfer techniques and then motivates wireless power transfer-based WSNs.
Also, it presents the major design challenges for wireless power transfer-based status
monitoring WSNs, including accurate modelling of sensor energy costs and metrics
to take into account the age of the sensed information. Then, the chapter introduces
a novel solution to one of the challenges. Speciﬁcally, it introduces a harvest-then-
use protocol and considers two complementary performance metrics to measure
the timeliness of the status monitoring WSN, i.e. update cycle and update age.
Moreover, the chapter investigates a framework of analysis for both the update cycle
and the update age, which takes into account both the energy cost of sensing and
transmission.

Introduction
xxxi
Chapter 9 proposes a simultaneous approach of using cooperative spectrum
sharing and energy harvesting techniques for enhancing the quality of service (QoS)
of next-generation wireless networks. The vision of creating a sustainable and
smart planet has encouraged researchers to move towards more energy-efﬁcient and
user-friendly technologies giving rise to the notion of 5G standard. 5G standard
is envisioned to bring with itself the ability to alleviate the problems of spectrum
underutilisation and energy inefﬁciency. Earlier, these two issues were tackled
separately; however, this chapter addresses these issues jointly.
Chapter 10 introduces a model which arises naturally from fundamental proper-
ties of the superposition of energy ﬁelds. This model has been shown to be more
realistic than other one-dimensional models that have been used in the past and
can capture super-additive and cancellation effects. Under this model, the chapter
deﬁnes two new interesting problems for conﬁguring the wireless power transmitters
so as to maximise the total power in the system, and it proves that the ﬁrst problem
can be solved in polynomial time. The chapter presents a distributed solution that
runs in pseudo-polynomial time and uses various knowledge levels, and it provides
theoretical performance guarantees. Finally, the chapter designs three heuristics for
the second problem and evaluates them experimentally.
Chapter 11 relates to heterogeneous cellular networks via balanced dynamic
planning. Generally, network operators exploit temporal and spatial ﬂuctuations in
call trafﬁc load to save energy by switching off their lightly loaded base stations
(BSs), a technique that is referred to as dynamic planning. This chapter quantiﬁes
the impact of dynamic planning on mobile users’ service quality for data calls in
both uplink and downlink. It proposes dynamic planning frameworks with balanced
energy efﬁciency that account for the service quality of mobile users both at the
downlink and uplink based on a two-timescale decision problem. Simulation results
demonstrate that the balanced dynamic planning frameworks can save energy for
the network operators and provide service quality guarantee for mobile users in
the downlink and the uplink as compared with an unbalanced (traditional) dynamic
planning benchmark.

Part I
Emerging Topics of Wireless Information
and Power Transfer

Chapter 1
Introduction, Recent Results, and Challenges
in Wireless Information and Power Transfer
Dushantha Nalin K. Jayakody, Shree K. Sharma, and Symeon Chatzinotas
1.1
Introduction
Radio communications have become one of the pillars on which our Society relies
for carrying out many daily tasks. Today, the number of connected devices is
increasing exponentially, reﬂecting not only enthusiastic smartphone adoption but
also increasing connectivity of machines, etc. Some theoretical foundations have
to be revisited and groundbreaking technologies are to be discovered during the
coming decade. Today, wireless services are dominated by packet data transfer over
the cellular and Wi-Fi networks. The cellular networks account for the majority of
the world’s wireless ICT power consumption, with 6 million macro-cells worldwide
consuming a peak rate of 12 billion Watts. The rapid growth in the Internet-of-
Things (IoT) sector is set to increase the energy consumption of small devices
dramatically. While many such small devices are sensor motes with a power
consumption that is in the order of a Watt or less, the sheer number of such devices
(25 billion) is set to consume more power than the cellular networks worldwide.
Therefore, it is important to address the emerging challenge of energy efﬁciency for
connected small devices.
D.N.K. Jayakody ()
Department of Software Engineering, Institute of Cybernetics, National Research Tomsk
Polytechnic University, Tomsk, Tomskaya Oblast, Russia
e-mail: nalin.jayakody@ieee.org
S.K. Sharma
University of Western Ontario, London, ON, Canada N6A 3K7,
e-mail: sshar323@uwo.ca
S. Chatzinotas
Interdisciplinary Centre for Security, University of Luxembourg, Esch-sur-Alzette,
Luxembourg
e-mail: Symeon.Chatzinotas@uni.lu
© Springer International Publishing AG 2018
D.N.K. Jayakody et al. (eds.), Wireless Information and Power Transfer:
A New Paradigm for Green Communications, DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-56669-6_1
3

4
D.N.K. Jayakody et al.
Mobile communications system in the upcoming years will have to face
massively diverse tasks and expectations. Current 3G and 4G technologies such
as high-speed packet access (HSPA) and long-term evolution (LTE) will evolve in
that route, but there are also many advantages brought up by ﬁfth-generation (5G)
mobile communications technologies. Some interesting projects also feature this
new targeting technology era of 5G, for example, EU-funded FP7 project METIS
[1], an industry-wide consortium with the target to explore mobile and wireless
enablers for the 2020 information civilization.
As shown in [2], the projected expansion of the global carbon footprint from
2007 to 2020 is contributed by mobile devices, and network architecture devices
as a one of the main stakeholders. As per the prognosis, the overall carbon
footprint of mobile communications surges almost linearly until 2020 with an
annual increase of 11 Mto CO2, an increase equivalent to the annual emissions
of the whole of 2.5 million EU households. It is clear that one of the immense
challenges is to encounter the future necessities and potentials in a reason-
able and sustainable way. Low energy consumption is important to accomplish
in this dialogue. Currently, the mobile operator’s energy bill is a cumulative
part of their OPEX (operational expenditure), and with the future needs and
opportunities there is a clear danger that this may increase even more if noth-
ing is done. This is also vital in terms of sustainability; even though mobile
communications currently subsidize a segment of a percent to the global CO2
footprint [2], it is central to uphold or even lessen this in the future. Hence, low
energy consumption (WPT does not necessarily imply low energy consumption,
as the power transfer efﬁciencies are quite low) is a key design goal for future
mobile communication systems. RF energy harvesting (RFEH) through ambi-
ent energy can help to improve the amount of energy that a single node can
harvest.
Initial work on wireless power transfer (WPT) focused on long-distance and
high-power applications. However, both the low efﬁciency of the transmission
process and the health concerns for such high-power applications prevented their
further development. Therefore, on the one hand, most recent WPT research has
focused on short-distance power transmission through inductive coupling [3] (e.g.,
charging mobile phones, medical implants, and electrical vehicles). Conversely,
recent advances in silicon technology have signiﬁcantly reduced the energy demand
of many wireless devices. As wireless sensor nodes and transceivers become more
power efﬁcient, we envision that radio waves will not only become a major source
of power for operating these devices, but also their information and power trans-
mission aspects will be uniﬁed, e.g., power line communications. In this direction,
simultaneous wireless information and power transfer (SWIPT) technology can
offer signiﬁcant gain in lifetime, reducing charging cycles and improving energy
efﬁciency, transmission delay, power consumption, and interference management
by superposing information and power transfer. A new analytical approach that
takes into account both the information ﬂow and power transfer can contribute
towards a signiﬁcant engineering revolution and lead to potential new applications
and services for future 5G wireless networks.

1
Introduction, Recent Results, and Challenges in Wireless Information. . .
5
Wireless connected devices (smartphones, etc.) are increasing. Information
and power are two fundamental notions with critical impact on all aspects of
life. Rollout of IoT will lead to the massive deployment of sensor nodes and
information exchange, making it impractical to recharge/control these devices.
Therefore, recharging devices wirelessly presents a new opportunity. The funda-
mental objective of the project is to address the challenging problem of SWIPT
in future communication networks. As a sustainable solution to prolong the
lifetime of energy-constrained wireless networks, energy harvesting (EH) technique
has recently drawn signiﬁcant attention. Apart from the conventional renewable
energy sources, such as solar and wind, radio frequency (RF) signals radiated by
ambient transmitters can be treated as a viable new opportunity for EH. Many
future applications could beneﬁt from SWIPT; for example, wireless implants can
be charged and calibrated concurrently with the same signal. The research on
SWIPT/WPT will have an impact on different applications, e.g., SWIPT could be
the only option to deploy nodes at remote locations as well as in body-centric and
industrial applications.
The successful communication between two terminals solely powered by ambi-
ent radio signals, such as the existing cellular signals, has already been treated in
[3, 4]. Wirelessly powered communications networks (WPCNs) under different
setups have been studied in [5] to enable energy transfer in hybrid cellular networks.
In [6], a medium access control (MAC) protocol was proposed for wireless sensor
networks (WSNs) powered by WPCN. The nodes of WSN interfere with each other
and also contribute to the RF energy that can be harvested. WPCN was considered
for cognitive radio networks in [7], where secondary transmitters harvest ambient
RF energy from the signals sent by nearby active primary transmitters. SWIPT has
been employed in the cooperative scenario in the literature [2, 8–10], in which
relay transmissions can be powered by EH from the incoming signals. However, a
vast number of challenges remain open for research, e.g., multi-node scenario with
SWIPT, relay selection, physical layer network coding (PLNC), a tailored SWIPT
technique for novel channel coding schemes, multi-objective optimization (MOO)
in multiuser SWIPT, and enhanced receiver architectures for SWIPT.
The recent literature focuses on the development of circuits and communication
techniques for efﬁcient energy harvesting (EH) from the ambient electromagnetic
radiation (WPT technology); the recent cost action IC1301 on Wireless Power
Transmission for Sustainable Electronics focuses on the development of efﬁcient
wireless power transmission technologies and strategies. However, this area is
still in its infancy. Several current EU projects (e.g., Zero Power EU, SWAP,
E-CROPS, SCAVANGE, etc.) focus on utilizing conventional EH sources (e.g.,
solar, vibration, wind, etc.) to increase the operational autonomy of wireless
communication systems. In contrast to the state of the art, which predominantly
distinguishes information and power transfer, one main objective of this project is
to study the fundamental beneﬁts of SWIPT in future wireless networks.
The radio wave-based information and power transfer has largely been designed
separately, as shown in Fig. 1.1.

6
D.N.K. Jayakody et al.
Fig. 1.1 Wireless transmission of power and information to multiple connected devices
The chapter is organized as follows. In Sect. 1.2, we introduce main technologies
associated with RFEH. Then, in Sect. 1.3, we focus on emerging technologies like
mmWave assisted SWIPT, Massive MIMO enabled MIMO, etc. Subsequently, we
present recommendations and future directions of SWIPT in Sect. 1.4. Finally, we
provide the summary of this chapter in Sect. 1.5.
1.2
Main Schemes
1.2.1
RF Wireless Energy Harvesting
Energy harvesting or energy scavenging is the process of converting energy that
is obtained from external energy sources such as wind, thermal, kinetic, and solar
energy into electricity. The environment contains a good source of available energy
rather than the energy stored in batteries or super capacitors. There has been
considerable growth of interest relating to RFEH as the demand of WSNs, number
of radio transmitters, and mobile base stations continues to increase [11]. RFEH
becomes a propitious solution to wireless networks with limited lifetime. Power
supply of RF energy harvesting network (RF-EHN) has been maintained at a certain
rate from an RF environment built from billions of radio transmitters, mobile
phones, mobile base stations, and television broadcast systems around the world.

1
Introduction, Recent Results, and Challenges in Wireless Information. . .
7
Therefore, the wireless devices now can harvest energy from RF signals according
to the power requirement at the time. As a result of this technique, various forms of
practical applications such WSNs, wireless body networks, and wireless charging
systems for wireless devices have been found by RF-EHNs [12, 13]. In RFEH,
radio signals are used as a channel to transfer energy in the form of electromagnetic
radiation with a frequency range from 300 GHz to as low as 3 kHz. Ambient signals
arising from TV broadcasting, Wi-Fi, and GSM signals, etc. can be considered here
as sources.
1.2.2
Wireless Power Transfer
WPT is an innovative concept for use of electricity that was originally devised
by Nikola Tesla in the 1890s. WPT refers to the transmission of electrical energy
from a power source by means of electromagnetic ﬁelds, to an electrical component
or a portion of a circuit that consumes electrical power without the aid of wired
interconnections. The WPT system contains a transmitter connected to the main
power source, which transforms main power to a time variant electromagnetic
ﬁeld and one or more receiver devices to receive and harvest energy from the
electromagnetic ﬁeld. Two factors, long-distance transmission and high power, have
been more focused during early efforts on WPT. Nonetheless, further development
of these factors ended to due to low efﬁciency of the power transmission process and
health concerns related to high-power applications. Therefore, most WPT research
start to continue in two distinct regions, non-radiative (near ﬁeld) and radiative (far
ﬁeld). The ﬁelds in these regions have different characteristics and different WPT
techniques are used to transfer power. The amount of WPT depends on various
factors like placement of power beacon, antenna array scheme, transmitted power,
etc. However, high frequency signals with very high transmitted power may not be
feasible due to severe attenuation and blockage effects.
1.2.3
Simultaneous Wireless Information and Power Transfer
In SWIPT, both information and RF energy are conveyed from the source to the des-
tination and, therefore, SWIPT is suitable for low-power operation. Simultaneous
wireless information and power transfer (SWIPT) is a recently developed technique,
which allows signals that carry information to also be used to harvest energy.
Fundamental design changes are required in wireless communication networks to
have an efﬁcient SWIPT. Reception reliability and information transfer rates are
conventionally used to assess performance of the wireless network [14]. The trade-
off between energy harvested and information rates becomes an important factor
to access performance once users in the system perform energy harvesting using
RF signals [14]. In [14], an ideal receiver is used, which has the ability to perform

8
D.N.K. Jayakody et al.
Fig. 1.2 Various simultaneous wireless information and power transfer (SWIPT) antenna archi-
tectures. (a) Separate receiver architecture. (b) Time switching architecture. (c) Power splitting
architecture. (d) Antenna switching architecture
energy harvesting (EH) and information decoding (ID) simultaneously. Two circuit
receivers are used in the receiver architecture proposed in [15] to perform EH and
ID separately. Applications of smart antenna technologies in SWIPT MIMO and
relaying were considered in [16]. The possibility of further improvements in WPT
energy efﬁciency is opened up by the use of these smart antenna technologies.
Next we present some basic antenna architecture associated with SWIPT.
Conventional architectures may not be suitable for SWIPT [17, 18] due to various
power sensitivity. Antenna switching architecture is given in Fig. 1.2a. The antenna
array is separated into two sets: energy harvester and the information receiver. Then,
the architecture allows to perform energy harvesting and information decoding inde-
pendently and simultaneously. The antenna architecture based on time-switching
mode is shown in Fig. 1.2b, allows the network node to switch and use either the
information decoding antenna or the RFEH antenna for the received RF signal.
Based on the preset power level or power allocation optimization mechanism,
Fig. 1.2c, divide the incoming power stream into two sections; information decoding
and RFEH. Finally in Fig. 1.2d, a nantenna-switching equips an energy harvesting
antenna and information decoding antenna. They observe different channels and
take the advantage of spatial multiplexing. Compared to time-switching and power-
splitting protocols, the antenna switching protocol is comparatively easy and
appealing for practical SWIPT architecture design.
In the next section, as shown in Fig. 1.3, we provide SWIPT enabled emerging
technologies in different application areas. Figure 1.3 provides various enabling
SWIPT techniques for emerging wireless communication areas such as Massive
Multiple-Input Multiple-Output (MIMO), Bistatic Scatter Radio, Cooperative Non-
Orthogonal Multiple Access (NOMA), Multiuser MIMO, Broadband wireless
systems, etc. All these emerging technologies are included in the following para-
graphs in conjunction with the latest literature in the ﬁeld.

1
Introduction, Recent Results, and Challenges in Wireless Information. . .
9
Fig. 1.3 Various emerging areas of SWIPT associated technologies
1.3
Emerging Technologies Associated with Simultaneous
Wireless Information and Power Transfer/Wireless
Power Transfer
1.3.1
Wireless Power Transfer/Simultaneous Wireless
Information and Power Transfer Assisted Cooperative
Relaying
Over the past decade, cooperative wireless diversity techniques have rekindled
within the research community. Usage of WPT/SWIPT also becomes an interesting
avenue for self-powered relaying [19]. A generic example of cooperative relay
scheme is given in the following Fig. 1.4. In the ﬁrst timeslot, an access point
(or base station) transmits wireless RF energy and information simultaneously.
The relay nodes (Relay 1 and Relay 2) are equipped with two antennas, i.e., one
antenna for energy harvesting (EH) and other for information decoding (ID). In
the second time slot, the relay harvests energy from the access point and utilizes it
for information decoding as well as for retransmitting the signal to the destination
using PLNC. Figure 1.4 shows the downlink (DL) and in the uplink (UL), relays

10
D.N.K. Jayakody et al.
Fig. 1.4 Parallel relay scheme cooperative communications system with self-powered relay nodes
can also harvest energy from the RF signals of the UL transmission. This way, the
relay can be a self-powered device. Such a wireless system can be powered in the
presence of Wi-Fi or using ambient signals. Resource allocation cooperative relay
algorithm design for SWIPT systems includes the following aspects/system design
protocols:
1. Harvest-then-Cooperate Scheme: In this scheme, authors in [20, 21] propose a
protocol related to ﬁrst harvest RF energy in the relay node then use harvested
energy for cooperation, in which the source and relay harvest energy from the
an access point or power beacon in the downlink and work cooperatively in
the uplink. The resource allocation and performance measuring parameters like
throughput, amount of energy, etc. are analyzed for three-node scheme in [20]
and for multiple access relay scheme in [22] and [23], it extends for multi user
and multi antenna scenarios, respectively.
2. Harvest-use scheme: In this scheme, the harvested energy cannot be stored in
the battery, but should be utilized for the operational energy needs [24]. This
scheme offers a trade-off between the EH time and communication time from

1
Introduction, Recent Results, and Challenges in Wireless Information. . .
11
the relay node. It was found that the FD seems to be an attractive and promising
technology for HU-assisted cooperative relay communications.
3. Self-Energy Recycling: In this technique, a part of the energy (loop energy)
that is used for information transmission by the relay is used for harvested and
reused in addition to the dedicated energy sent by the source. In this scheme, the
relay can functions in full-duplex mode with simultaneous energy harvesting and
information transmission.
4. Interference Aided Harvesting: An interference aided RFEH operation is intro-
duced in [25] for cooperative wireless relaying systems. In particular, energy-
strained relays harvest energy from the received information bearing signal and
co-channel interference signals. Then it uses that harvested energy to cover the
energy expenses to transmit decoded signal to the destination.
Note that some of above approaches have some overlaps; however, the aforemen-
tioned sectorization is based on their more prominent features.
1.3.2
Bistatic Scatter Radio for Energy Harvesting
A scatter radio is deﬁned as a radio which works based on the principle of
communications by means of reﬂected power [26]. This communication principle
is commonly used in Radio Frequency IDentiﬁcation (RFID) systems, which are
extensively being used in object tracking and supply chain monitoring. In RFID
systems, an RFID tag communicates its identiﬁcation number to a reader and also
additional information stored in its memory in some cases [27]. For short distances
(less than 2–5 m), the tags (also called passive tags) can derive their received
power from the signal received from the reader and the communication distance
is determined by the ability of the tag to extract the energy level from the received
signal. However, for moderate/long-distance applications, the tag (also called semi-
passive tag) consists of a battery in order to operate the backscatter modulator and
tag state machine and use the same backscatter mechanism for the communication
purpose [27, 28].
In the commonly used RFID systems, a carrier emitter and a reader are placed
in a single reader box, which is called as a monostatic RFID architecture. In
other words, the transmit antenna, which generates the carrier signal, and the
receive antenna, which is used to demodulate the reﬂected signal coming from the
RFID tag, are components of the same equipment [29]. However, there are several
disadvantages of this monostatic architecture such as high round-trip path loss and
limited communication ranges with the passive tags.
In order to address the aforementioned disadvantages of monostatic RFID
structure, there is an emerging concept of bistatic architecture in which the carrier
signal emitter is dislocated from the reader where backscattered signals are received.
This architecture is characterized by easier setup with multiple carrier emitters and

12
D.N.K. Jayakody et al.
one centralized reader and also provides long-range scatter radio communication for
sensor networks [29].
Traditional wireless communication transmission is operated by costly battery
supported system. However, this pulls down the attention of biologic electric
potential (EP) signals (from one or multiple plants). In [30], low-cost, batteryless,
and wireless approach presented proof-of-concept for the “plant-as-sensor-and-
battery” idea. Here, a self-powered, EP wireless sensor is constructed that harvests
near-maximum energy from the plant itself and, then, forwards the EP signal. It can
travel approximately 10 m with a single switch. This technique uses the low-cost
and low-power bistatic scatter radio principles and contributes to the green energy.
One of the main challenges in realizing SWIPT systems is to ﬁnd a reliable
source for RFEH purpose. In this regard, the carrier emitters of bistatic radar
systems, which are essential parts of bistatic scatter ratio, can act as potential
sources for RFEH. By exploiting the scatter radio emitter’s transmissions, much
more ambient energy can be captured.
1.3.3
Simultaneous Wireless Information and Power Transfer
with Symbol Level Precoding
In contrast to the traditional concept that interference is always considered to be
harmful, there is an emerging concept of treating constructive interference among
the users as a source of useful signal energy [30–32]. With the knowledge of
both the instantaneous Channel State Information (CSI) and the data symbols
at the Base Station (BS), the received interference can be classiﬁed as either
constructive or destructive. The destructive interference deteriorates the detection
performance whereas constructive one moves the received symbols away from
the decision thresholds of the constellation, thus improving the signal detection
performance [30].
The available precoding for wireless downlink transmission can be broadly
grouped into: (1) user-level precoding, (2) group level precoding, and (3) symbol
level precoding [31]. The ﬁrst technique is dependent on the CSI of individual
users and the second technique is dependent on the CSI of each user group. On the
other hand, the symbol level precoding technique, also called data-aided precoding,
requires CSI knowledge as well as the symbols of the users. Besides the possibility
of using constructive interference as a source of useful information signal, this can
be used as a source of electrical wireless energy for energy harvesting purpose [30].
For this purpose, symbol level precoding can be employed in order to exploit the
constructive interference for information decoding and energy harvesting purposes.
In this context, authors in [30] have recently extended the conventional SWIP
beamforming techniques in the context of symbol level precoding by exploiting the
interference signal as:
1. A source of electrical signal for energy harvesting, and
2. A source of useful information signal [33].

1
Introduction, Recent Results, and Challenges in Wireless Information. . .
13
The existing literature in symbol level precoding has mostly focused on a single
cell scenario. The investigation of this approach in practical multicell scenarios is
challenging due to the need of high level of collaboration among base stations in
order to acquire the knowledge of symbols of the users. In this context, future works
should focus on the feasibility of SWIPT systems with symbol level precoding in
practical multicell systems, and also they should focus towards the reduction of
communication resource overhead.
1.3.4
Secure Wireless Power Transfer/Simultaneous Wireless
Information and Power Transfer Transmission
As already indicated, in SWIPT, RF signal is used to harvest the energy at the
receiver end. In order to expedite the EH process, the transmitter is able to emit
a highly boosted signal. This may likewise prompt to an expanded defenselessness
to eavesdropping because of a higher potential for data spillage when the receiver
is malevolent. In line with this, a new paradigm of quality of service (QoS) matter
raised in communications systems with SWIPT frameworks, which is imperative
to handle [34]. In particular, privacy and authentication have progressively become
major areas for wireless communications. Also, physical layer security has emerged
as a new layer of defense to acquire perfect secrecy communications besides to
the cryptography—more amount to upper layers and expensive technique [35,
36]. Cooperative relay secure transmission with PHY layer security improvements
received signiﬁcant attention [37–40]. In [37], maximize the secrecy rate with the
help of SWIPT enabled AF relays, limited by the EH power constraints of individual
relays by jointly optimizing the cooperative beam forming relays.
By employing separated receiver mode, i.e., particular receiver assigned for
conﬁdential information decoding and the rest of the receivers are assigned for EH,
some works focus on the SWIPT assisted PHY layer security. In [15, 41, 42], the
artiﬁcial noise will be used to interfere with the eavesdropper for secrecy informa-
tion nodes as well as operate as the primary source of EH for non-ID receivers—this
method does not suit for colocated antennas where the user simultaneously receives
secrecy ID and performs EH. In [41, 42], optimize the aggregate harvested power
of all users while satisfying secrecy rate requirements of individual users over an
orthogonal frequency division multiple access (OFDMA) [22]. In [15], the secrecy
performance analysis using secrecy outage and secrecy capacity metrics has been
studied for single-input multiple-output SWIPT systems and in [38–40, 43], SWIPT
assisted secrecy issues addressed in non-perfect CSI for the same system setup.

14
D.N.K. Jayakody et al.
Fig. 1.5 Millimeter Wave (MmWave) assisted SWIPT/wireless power transfer (WPT) scheme.
This shows how the mmWave assisted SWIPT enabling the universal access of 5G networks
1.3.5
Simultaneous Wireless Information and Power Transfer
Assisted Millimeter Wave Communications
In the presence of low frequency, bearing signal offers less power transfer efﬁciency
and ultimately affects the quality of experience of the user. As the availability of
large spectrum resources at higher frequencies (above 6 GHz) is vital, Millimeter
Wave (mmWave) communications present as a key candidate for future 5G com-
munications as shown in Fig. 1.5. In general, mmWave is identiﬁed as a promising
avenue for WPT due to the following reasons; very high frequencies, narrow beam,
large array gains, and dense network with mmWave base stations. As with the new
IoT wave, many low powered connected devices are expected to deploye, mmWave
RF signal can be used to harvest energy substantially.
A scheme demonstrating harvest and use strategy is applied in [36] where the
user harvests energy from the corresponding base station through mmWave signals,
then uses the harvested energy to transmit information messages. The overall
(energy-and-information) coverage probability is improved by use of optimizing
technique over the power-splitting ratio in order to receive signal (optimally

1
Introduction, Recent Results, and Challenges in Wireless Information. . .
15
portion) between the energy harvesting and the information decoding modules using
mmWave assisted SWIPT in [36, 44]. Here, authors maximize the network-wide
energy coverage for a given user population by optimizing the antenna geometry. In
[45], a prototype is developed for 24 GHz rectenna. This demonstrates the feasibility
of wireless energy harvesting and information transmission by use of millimeter
wave.
Unfortunately, as high frequency bands inherently suffer from poor penetra-
tion and diffraction, they present as research challenges to use mmWave for
SWIPT/WPCN assisted wireless networks. Also, limited amount of work consid-
ered mmWave for SWIPT/WPCN. There is a huge gap in the research on mmWave
assisted SWIPT in information processing and hardware development point of
view. Many of current setup cannot be used directly for higher frequencies like
above 6 GHz.
1.3.6
Simultaneous Wireless Information and Power
Transfer/Wireless Power Transfer Enabled Wireless
Sensor Network
The WSN has come to signiﬁcant attention with the new embarkation of IoT as
WSNs will play a crucial part there. These devices are small in nature but, generally,
place in hazardous or remote areas where human access is limited. Therefore,
replacing the batteries or supplying stable power source is an issue for WSNs.
In this section, we propose a hybrid time-switching and power-splitting spectrum
sharing protocol for energy harvesting wireless sensor nodes [46]. In WSNs, power
ingestion is usually divided into three parts as in [47]: sensing, data processing, and
communication. As compared to sensing and data processing, communication is a
costly functionality in a typical sensor node [48]. Hence, local data processing is
important in order to minimizing power utilization of WSNs. As the failure of any
node can signiﬁcantly cause the structure to be rerouting and inefﬁcient in terms of
reliability, improving the lifespan of WSNs is an important issue for future IoT. This
takes introduction to alternative energy sources like SWIPT for WSNs. Figure 1.6
depicts a WSN architecture energized by solar power and WPT techniques. Certain
types of sensors may only consider WPT and can discard information depending
on the application. The WSN may be distributed over a wide range of area (many
kilometers) especially for a WSN user. At the same time, sensor nodes can be
situated in the unreachable locations, or the real site of each sensor node can be
unidentiﬁed. Also, a WSN may consist of dozens, hundreds, or even thousands of
sensor nodes. Under these circumstances, it is also very useful to have WPT and
information processing capabilities embedded to the sensors.
In [49], authors focus on the development of network deployment and their
routing strategy. The idea is to minimize the total recharging cost to improve the
lifespan of WSNs. Using the assumption that the sensors can continuously be

16
D.N.K. Jayakody et al.
Fig. 1.6 This depicts a wireless sensor network (WSN) architecture supported by solar and WPT
recharged before their power is exhausted and have complete knowledge of CSI,
an optimization problem formulates using joint network deployment and routing. A
few prototype implementations of sensor nodes using RFEH is investigated in [50,
51]. By utilizing the beneﬁts offered by SWIPT, low-power wireless sensor nodes
deployed in healthcare sector can be energized during their operations, and this will
subsequently improve the QoE at the end-users [12].
Some work has suggested the use of wireless energy charger application for WSN
as it supports the mobility [52, 53]. A practical Real-Time Wireless Recharging
Protocol for dynamic wireless recharging in sensor networks is proposed in [54].
The real-time recharging framework supports single or multiple mobile vehicles
and similarly, a collaborative wireless charging scheme is presented in [55, 56].
Recharging selected nodes in remote area with Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAVs)
delivers a solution that presently can recharge a single node. The authors in [57]
simulated a limited recharging system and presented evidence of effectiveness of
recharging a single node. However, this does not describe a robust system model
and work is limited to simulations. Prototype based implementation for such energy
harvesting architecture is provided in [57, 58].
A substantial amount of work concentrating the aspect of wireless energy
harvesting and relatively less work concentrate on SWIPT enabled WSNs [59].
Exploitation of inference based energy harvesting techniques is not yet largely
investigated. Physical layer redesign of SWIPT enabled WSNs is a timely require-
ment to furthering research with solid theoretical framework.

1
Introduction, Recent Results, and Challenges in Wireless Information. . .
17
1.3.7
RF Energy Harvesting Enabled Internet of Things
Networks
Recently, the trend of introducing energy harvesting concepts in IoT networks
is increasing. In many IoT applications such as environmental monitoring, the
sensors may need to rely on the harvested energy due to the unavailability of a
ﬁxed and reliable power supply. By incorporating energy harvesting capabilities in
IoT devices, the self-sustainability of IoT networks can be signiﬁcantly enhanced.
However, the harvested RF energy may not be sufﬁcient to handle the continuous
operation of IoT sensors and it is important to reduce the energy consumption of
the sensors deployed over a wide area. In this regard, one promising solution is to
incorporate caching at the aggregator nodes/access points so that the sensing data
can be stored temporarily and can be forwarded to the requested users without the
need of activating the sensors. Following this approach, authors in [60] evaluated the
performance of a caching mechanism in an IoT-enabled sensing system assuming
that a sensor is capable of harvesting RF energy from the radio environment.
It has been shown that the incorporation of caching ability reduces the power
consumption of the energy-harvesting-based sensor and hence improves the overall
sensing performance.
In cooperative relay systems used for IoT applications, a relay’s battery quickly
drains out since it has to support other nodes for their communication. One way
to address this problem is to incorporate energy harvesting capability at the relay
nodes of IoT networks. With this energy harvesting capability and opportunistic
relaying, the inactive nodes can utilize their idle time in recharging their batteries.
In this context, authors in [61] studied an energy harvesting-based relay selection
scheme considering the residual batteries of the relays and the channel distribution
function of both large-scale and small-scale fading. Furthermore, the contribu-
tion in [62] analyzed the fundamental limitations of energy harvesting-based
Machine to Machine (M2M) communication systems and derived the corresponding
theoretical bounds by using the Shannon theorem and IEEE 802.1ah channel
models.
In addition, maintenance of batteries in IoT devices can be a signiﬁcant problem
for IoT networks since they are easily prone to wear and tear. The currently used
rechargeable batteries have a ﬁxed life-cycle and they need to be periodically
replaced. Moreover, power converters used in the sensor devices are usually heavy,
costly, and lossy [63]. In order to address these issues, authors in [63] proposed
a technique to perform converter-less and storage-less energy harvesting. The
proposed scheme uses a power management unit which can perform maximum
power point tracking of the solar energy while providing almost ﬁxed voltage to the
IoT devices and is recommended to be a promising solution for energy management
in IoT networks.

18
D.N.K. Jayakody et al.
1.3.8
Multicarrier Simultaneous Wireless Information
and Power Transfer Systems
In the context of multicarrier SWIPT systems, several existing literature have
studied the performance of SWIPT in Orthogonal Frequency Division Multiplexing
(OFDM)-based wireless systems [64–67]. The contribution in [64] investigated the
performance of SWIPT receivers considering a single user OFDM channel and has
provided an upper bound for the rate-energy trade-off for the considered system
setup. It has been shown that there exists a trade-off between the achievable rate
and the harvested energy, leading to the rate-energy trade-off in the considered
system setup. Furthermore, the authors in [65] studied SWIPT for broadband
wireless systems, which employ OFDM and transmit beamforming in order to
create a set of parallel sub-channels with the objective of simplifying the resource
allocation mechanism. Subsequently, authors proposed power control mechanisms
for SWIPT in the context of multiuser multiantenna OFDM setting taking circuit-
power constraints into account. However, in [68], only the carriers which have
been assigned to a speciﬁc user are utilized for energy harvesting purpose for that
particular user assuming a ﬁxed subcarrier allocation. Furthermore, the authors
in [66] studied the performance of SWIPT in an OFDM-based multiuser single-
antenna system by employing a Power-Splitting (PS) technique at the receiver.
Subsequently, the following two sets of receiver architectures were analyzed: (1)
the ﬁrst set considering arbitrary power-splitting ratios to split the received power
into continuous sets of power streams, and (2) the second set with the ﬁxed PS ratios
to divide the received power level into a discrete set of power streams. It has been
demonstrated that system energy efﬁciency can be enhanced by employing RFEH in
the interference limited regime and multiantenna receivers are beneﬁcial to enhance
the system capacity rather than enhancing the system energy efﬁciency [66].
Moreover, authors in [67] studied the performance of SWIPT systems in OFDM-
based multiuser wireless systems considering broadcast transmission from a ﬁxed
access point to a set of distributed user terminals. In their analysis, authors
considered two multiple access schemes, namely, Time Division Multiple Access
(TDMA) and OFDMA. In the ﬁrst scheme, Time Splitting (TS) approach was used
in such a way that information receiver of a particular user operates in the scheduled
time slot for that user whereas the energy receiver operates in all other time periods.
However, in the second approach, the PS approach is applied at each receiver
considering that all subcarriers share the same PS ratio at each receiver. In the
abovementioned two settings, authors in [14] subsequently addressed the problem of
weighted sum-rate maximization over all the users by adapting the time/frequency
power allocation and either PS or TS ratio considering the constraints of minimum
harvested energy constraint on each user and total and/or peak transmit power
constraint.
Most of the existing SWIPT literature have focused on narrowband receivers for
energy harvesting and information decoding purposes. In this regard, one of the
interesting future research directions is to investigate suitable RFEH techniques in

1
Introduction, Recent Results, and Challenges in Wireless Information. . .
19
order to harvest energy based on wideband transmitted signal and also to explore
wideband SWIPT receiver architectures. In this direction, one of the promising
research directions is to investigate suitable techniques to enable the utilization of
all the unused carriers for energy harvesting and the information bearing carrier
for information decoding. For this purpose, the SWIPT receiver should be able to
support multiple frequency bands. Moreover, another interesting research direction
is to explore RFEH from multiple sources, which are operating in different sets of
frequencies, simultaneously.
1.3.9
Massive Multiple-Input Multiple-Output Enabled
Simultaneous Wireless Information
and Power Transfer Systems
Another important application area of SWIPT is massive MIMO [23], which uses
a very large number of antennas and has been considered as one of the promising
technologies in order to meet the capacity demands of 5G wireless. The massive
MIMO setting facilitates the SWIPT operation in a way that the antennas can be
partitioned into two different sets for information decoding and energy harvesting.
Massive MIMO system not only enables the multiplexing of signals among spatially
distributed user terminals but also focuses its transmitted energy towards the
directions of interest. Besides, in a multicast setting, massive MIMO SWIPT has
been shown to achieve both high spectral efﬁciency and high energy efﬁciency.
Several recent works in the literature have applied SWIPT in massive MIMO
systems in various settings. Authors in [69] proposed an antenna partition strategy
in order to divide the antennas at the receiver for energy harvesting and infor-
mation decoding purpose and subsequently analyzed the rate-energy trade-off in
interference-aware massive MIMO systems. Furthermore, the contribution in [70]
studied wireless energy transfer enabled massive MIMO system consisting of one
hybrid energy and data access point having ﬁxed power supply and with a large-
scale antenna array. In the considered setup, a number of distributed single-antenna
users are based on the wireless energy transferred from the hybrid access point for
uplink transmission and use frame-based transmissions with each frame divided into
the following three phases: (1) uplink channel estimation, (2) downlink WPT, and
(3) uplink wireless information transfer [70]. Moreover, authors in [71] studied the
wireless energy transfer enabled massive MIMO considering superimposed pilot-
based channel estimation. It has been shown that even with simpler linear detection
method, this scheme provides better achievable rate than that of the conventional
pilot-based schemes.
In addition, the contribution in [72] employed energy beamforming for SWIPT
in large-scale MIMO systems with the objective of achieving long-distance wireless
energy transfer. Subsequently, a resource allocation scheme was proposed by jointly
optimizing the transmit power and the transfer time. Besides, the contribution in

20
D.N.K. Jayakody et al.
[73] investigated SWIPT in multi-way relay networks with massive MIMO by
considering power-splitting and time-switching receiver architectures. In this setup,
authors derived closed-form expressions for asymptotic symmetric sum rate and
subsequently studied the energy-rate trade-off.
Although a large number of degree of freedoms available in massive MIMO
systems provide performance beneﬁts for both information decoding and energy
harvesting, several issues such as balancing rate-energy trade-off in the presence of
interference, low-complexity antenna partition methods, joint transmit beamforming
and receive power-splitting design, pilot contamination, imperfect CSI acquisition,
and synchronization issues need to be addressed.
1.3.10
Low-Power Consumption Channel Codes for
Simultaneous Wireless Information and Power
Transfer/Wireless Power Transfer Enabled Systems
A proper channel coding technique is needed for SWIPT enabled communication
systems since the receiving signal can contain corrupted information such as noise,
interference, fading, etc. and the available energy budget is extremely limited for
self-powered nodes. Polar codes [74] and LDPC codes can be potential channel
coding techniques in SWIPT enabled 5G communications. A method for efﬁciently
constructing polar codes is presented and analyzed in [75], and it applies in coop-
erative communications in [75]. Polar codes can be decoded by using successive
cancellation (SC) or the belief propagation (BP) algorithms. However, unlike SC
decoders, performance optimizations for BP decoders are not yet much explored.
An early stopping criterion for polar BP decoding to reduce energy dissipation
and decoding latency is proposed in [76]. In [77], it is shown that polar codes
are suitable for DF and compress-and-forward relaying in relay channels with
orthogonal receivers.
A low-power decoder design approach for generic quasi-cyclic low-density
parity-check (QC-LDPC) codes based on the layered min-sum decoding algorithm
is given in [78] and a low-power high-throughput LDPC decoder using non-
refresh embedded DRAM is designed in [79]. Turbo codes have been used in 3G
cellular standard. These codes achieve lower bit error rates at the expense of high-
computational complexity as compared to LDPC and Polar codes. Therefore, for
mobile communication devices, designing energy efﬁcient Turbo decoders is of
great importance. In [80], present a MAP-based Turbo decoding algorithms with
energy-quality trade-offs for various channel models.
However, an energy efﬁcient Polar and LDPC coding scheme for SWIPT
enabled communication systems is needed. Interesting researcher’s motivation for
developing a low-power consuming and adapting coding techniques suitable for
SWIPT/WPT depended wireless communication system is an encouraging research
direction. As the turbo codes have the beneﬁts of low interconnect complexity and

1
Introduction, Recent Results, and Challenges in Wireless Information. . .
21
inherent ﬂexibility, in [81] it is demonstrated that they facilitate high-throughput
ﬂexible channel coding gain at lower implementation complexities as compared
to LDPC and polar codes. They further explained that the turbo codes offer an
additional beneﬁt of backwards compatibility to 3G and 4G standards, which is
favorable for cellular communications industry in terms of cost savings. This again
brings the research community works on channel coding to investigate the best suit
coding technique for energy efﬁcient deployment in 5G standards.
1.4
Research Challenges and Future Directions
1.4.1
Hardware Impairment
Many of the research work focused on SWIPT have not yet focused on hard-
ware impairments in the SWIPT enabled communication networks. Several hard-
ware impairments such as in-phase/quadrature-phase (I/Q) imbalances, high-power
ampliﬁer nonlinearity, and oscillator phase noise that can decrease the quality of
the transmitter. The effect of realistic relay transceiver structures on the outage
probability and throughput of WPT has been analyzed and conﬁrmed in [82]
based on two-way decode-and-forward (DF) cognitive network in the inﬂuence of
transceiver impairment [83]. Moreover, DF in EH systems with multiple antennas
are also studied in [84] under the existence of transmitted hardware impairment.
However, hardware impairment can have various effects on SWIPT enabled com-
munication systems. It is an interesting research direction to exploit the effects of
hardware impairment in different SWIPT enabled wireless communication systems.
In addition, we strongly recommend that future research on SWIPT and SWIPT
emerging technologies needs to pay extra attention to hardware impairment.
1.4.2
Internet of Things
Internet of things (IOT) is an evolving area that is based on connecting all types of
electronic devices to the Internet. IoT essentially connects people, processes, data,
and every possible things together in order to fulﬁll modern needs of society. One
of the main deployment challenges in IoT is to maintain reliable communication
with the low-cost and power limited IoT devices. In general, most of the IoT
devices are battery operated and sometimes can be located in remote areas such
as devices in a vessel in the middle of the deep ocean, military devices, etc. [85].
Therefore, charging those batteries sometimes can be economically impracticable;
hence, SWIPT integration to IoT devices can be a promising solution to overcome
this major issue in IoT.

22
D.N.K. Jayakody et al.
1.4.3
Information-Theoretic Framework
Information-theoretic framework examines fundamental limits of SWIPT/SPT from
an information-theoretic perspective. A proper theoretical framework has not yet
been developed for SWIPT technology. Since SWIPT recently has only been
introduced, a theoretical framework for trustworthiness evaluation could raise the
possibility of merging SWIPT with existing communication technologies. In this
regard, implementing rigorous theoretic frameworks for SWIPT systems can be an
interesting and valuable research area.
1.4.4
Full-Duplex Transceiver Design
Full-duplex (FD) communication is an enabled technology for 5G as it improves
the throughput. Inherently, it suffers from self-inference issues. In order to use FD
incorporation with SWIPT, a robust SI cancelling algorithm enabled low-power
transceiver design is needed. This forms a new direction for researchers interested
in this avenue. A test bed design by incineration of nonlinearity in the circuit
design and suitable mathematical modeling will optimize the EH capacity of the
rectiﬁer.
1.4.5
Satellite Communications
Satellite assisted SWIPT is an interesting application via radio frequency beam. As
many satellites are solar-powered, we could use solar energy harvesting to power up
the satellite and then to use it to initiate wireless power transmission to the ground
stations via microwave beams and also participate in the information transmission
[86]. This is designed in geostationary orbit, 36,000 km above the Earth’s surface.
In Fig. 1.7, we demonstrate a future idea of using solar-powered satellite for SWIPT.
This can use SWIPT application as the satellite can transmit information and power
for low-power consumed base stations and mobile base stations such as drones, etc.
This can also be used to energize UAVs while supporting the idea of ubiquitous
energy. Future researchers may pay attention to such satellite assisted SWIPT based
drones, base stations, or similar applications and support the idea of “ubiquitous
energy” becoming a reality.

1
Introduction, Recent Results, and Challenges in Wireless Information. . .
23
Fig. 1.7 Usage of a solar-powered satellite to develop SWIPT assisted scheme together with
mobile base stations and regular base stations
1.4.6
Simultaneous Wireless Information and Power Transfer
Assisted Vehicular Communications
M. Hutin and M. Le-Blanc proposed a device and technique for powering an
electrical vehicle (EV) inductively in 1894 using an approximately 3-kHz AC
generator [87]. However, even after a century ago this avenue of WPT using RF
signals has not picked up by researchers or R & D companies to a greater extent.
In the early twenty-ﬁrst century, the microwave power transmission to micro aerial
vehicle (MAV) [87] and Mars observation airplane projects were deployed. They
have used microwave power transmission systems directed towards small airplanes.
They were proposed and developed in Japan. SWIPT is an excellent possible
technology to reduce or even eliminate the fuel requirements of an airplane or drone.
Hence, further research on SWIPT assisted UAV, small aircrafts, and other vehicular
activities propose a promising research direction.

24
D.N.K. Jayakody et al.
1.5
Conclusions
This chapter presents an introduction, and recent results of simultaneous wireless
information and power transfer. We presented a comprehensive introduction on the
WPT and SWIPT with focus on architecture and enabling techniques. Then, we
present most emerging wireless 5G related technologies together with SWIPT/WPT.
Finally, we have discussed on the future directions and practical challenges in RFEH
techniques including SWIPT. The incorporation of RFEH technique with 5G key
areas brings about novel research issues and areas. This will form a motivation and
the basis for future research in this unique area.
Acknowledgements This work was partially funded by the Russian Federal budget funds for
research work (Fundamental research, applied research and experimental development) through the
grant No. 3942 and performed in accordance with Russian Government Resolutions No. 2014/226
of 2017, FNR-FNRS bilateral project “InWIP-NETs: Integrated Wireless Information and Power
Networks. Authors also acknowledged the contribution of the COST Action on Inclusion Radio
Communications (IRACON) CA15104.
References
1. EU funded research project FP7 METIS. (Mobile and wireless communications Enablers for
the Twenty-twenty Information Society, Nov 2012 to Apr 2015), https://www.metis2020.com.
2. A. Fehske, G. Fettweis, J. Malmodin, G. Biczók, The global footprint of mobile communica-
tions: The ecological and economic perspective. IEEE Commun. Mag. 49(8), 55–62 (2011)
3. N. Shinohara, Power without wires. IEEE Microw. Mag. 12(7), S64–S73 (2011)
4. X. Zhou, R. Zhang, C.K. Ho, Wireless information and power transfer: Architecture design
and rate-energy tradeoff, in IEEE Global Communications Conference, 2012, pp. 3982–3987
5. J.R. Smith, Wirelessly Powered Sensor Networks and Computational RFID (Springer, New
York, 2013)
6. K. Huang, V. Lau, Enabling wireless power transfer in cellular networks: Architecture,
modeling and deployment. IEEE Trans. Wirel. Commun. 13(2), 902–912 (2014)
7. P. Nintanavongsa, M. Naderi, K. Chowdhury, Medium access control protocol design for
sensors powered by wireless energy transfer, in Proceedings IEEE INFOCOM, 2013
8. D.W.K. Ng, E.S. Lo, R. Schober, Wireless information and power transfer: Energy efﬁciency
optimization in OFDMA systems. IEEE Trans. Wirel. Commun. 12(12), 6352–6370 (2013)
9. Z. Ding, S.M. Perlaza, I. Esnaola, H.V. Poor, Power allocation strategies in energy harvesting
wireless cooperative networks. IEEE Trans. Wirel. Commun. 13(2), 846–860 (2014)
10. I. Krikidis, Simultaneous information and energy transfer in large-scale networks with/without
relaying. IEEE Trans. Commun. 62(3), 900–912 (2014)
11. H. Nishimoto, Y. Kawahara, T. Asami, Prototype implementation of ambient RF energy
harvesting wireless sensor networks, in 2010 IEEE Sensors, Kona, HI, 2010, pp. 1282–1287
12. X. Zhang, H. Jiang, L. Zhang, C. Zhang, Z. Wang, X. Chen, An energy-efﬁcient ASIC for
wireless body sensor networks in medical applications. IEEE Trans. Biomed. Circ. Syst 4(1),
11–18 (2010)
13. R.C. Johnson, H.A. Ecker, J.S. Hollis, Determination of far-ﬁeld antenna patterns from near-
ﬁeld measurements. Proc. IEEE 61(12), 1668–1694 (1973)
14. R. Zhang, C.K. Ho, MIMO broadcasting for simultaneous wireless information and power
transfer. IEEE Trans. Wirel. Commun. 12(5), 1989–2001 (2013)

1
Introduction, Recent Results, and Challenges in Wireless Information. . .
25
15. D. Ng, E. Lo, R. Schober, Robust beamforming for secure communication in systems with
wireless information and power transfer. IEEE Trans. Wirel. Commun. 13(8), 4599–4615
(2014)
16. N.M.B. Medepally, Voluntary energy harvesting relays and selection in cooperative wireless
networks. IEEE Trans. Wirel. Commun. 9, 3543–3553 (2010)
17. X. Lu, P. Wang, D. Niyato, D.I. Kim, Z. Han, Wireless networks with RF energy harvesting: A
contemporary survey. IEEE Commun. Surv. Tutor. 17(2), 757–789 (2015)
18. X. Zhou, R. Zhang, C.K. Ho, Wireless information and power transfer: Architecture design
and rate-energy tradeoff, in IEEE Transaction on Communications, 2008, pp. 4754–4767
19. A.A. Nasir, X. Zhou, S. Durrani, R.A. Kennedy, Relaying protocols for wireless energy
harvesting and information processing. IEEE Trans. Wirel. Commun. 12(7), 3622–3636
(2013)
20. H. Chen, Y. Li, J.L. Rebelatto, B.F. Uchoa-Filho, B. Vucetic, Harvest-then-cooperate: Wireless-
powered cooperative communications. IEEE Trans. Signal Process. 63(7), 1700–1711 (2015)
21. Y. Liu, Wireless information and power transfer for multirelay-assisted cooperative communi-
cation. IEEE Commun. Lett. 20, 784–787 (2016)
22. M. Zhang, Y. Liu, R. Zhang, Artiﬁcial noise aided secrecy information and power transfer in
OFDMA systems. IEEE Trans. Wirel. Commun. 15, 3085–3096 (2016)
23. G. Yang, C.K. Ho, R. Zhang, Y.L. Guan, Throughput optimization for massive mimo systems
powered by wireless energy transfer. arXiv 1403, 3991 (2014)
24. I. Krikidis, G. Zhang, B. Ottersten, Harvest-use cooperative networks with half/full-duplex
relaying, in Proceedings of IEEE Wireless Communications and Networking Conference, 2013,
pp. 4256–4260
25. A.A. Nasir, X. Zhou, S. Durrani, R.A. Kennedy, Relaying protocols for wireless energy
harvesting and information processing, in IEEE Transaction on Wireless Communication,
2013, pp. 3622—3636
26. H. Stockman, Communication by means of reﬂected power. Proc. IRE 36(10), 1196–1204
(1948)
27. N. Fasarakis-Hilliard, P.N. Alevizos, A. Bletsas, “Coherent detection and channel coding
for bistatic scatter radio sensor networking, in 2015 IEEE International Conference on
Communications (ICC), London, 2015, pp. 4895–4900
28. V. Liu, A. Parks, V. Talla, S. Gollakota, D. Wetherall, J.R. Smith, Ambient backscatter:
Wireless communication out of thin air, in Proceedings ACM SIGCOMM, 2013
29. G. Vannucci, A. Bletsas, D. Leigh, A software-deﬁned radio system for backscatter sensor
networks. IEEE Trans. Wirel. Commun. 7(6), 2170–2179 (2008)
30. C. Konstantopoulos, E. Koutroulis, N. Mitianoudis, A. Bletsas, Converting a plant to a battery
and wireless sensor with scatter radio and ultra-low cost. IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas. 65(2),
388–398 (Feb. 2016)
31. M. Alodeh, S. Chatzinotas, B. Ottersten, in 2015 IEEE Global Communications Conference
(GLOBEM), Constructive Interference through Symbol Level Precoding for Multi-Level
Modulation, 2016, pp. 1–6
32. M. Alodeh, S. Chatzinotas, B. Ottersten, Constructive multiuser interference in symbol level
precoding for the MISO downlink channel. IEEE Trans. Signal Process. 63(9), 2239–2252
(2015)
33. D. Kwon, H.S. Kang, D.K. Kim, Robust interference exploitation-based precoding scheme
with quantized CSIT. IEEE Commun. Lett. 20(4), 780–783 (2016)
34. G. Pan, C. Tang, T. Li, Y. Chen, Secrecy performance analysis for SIMO simultaneous wireless
information and power transfer systems. IEEE Trans. Commun. 63(9), 3423–3433 (2015)
35. G. Pan, H. Lei, Y. Deng, L. Fan, J. Yang, Y. Chen, Z. Ding, On secrecy performance of MISO
SWIPT systems with TAS and imperfect CSI. IEEE Trans. Commun. 64, 3831–3843 (2016)
36. L. Wang, M. Elkashlan, R.W. Heath, M. Di Renzo, K.K. Wong, Millimeter wave power
transfer and information transmission, in 2015 IEEE Global Communications Conference
(GLOBECOM), San Diego, CA, 2015

26
D.N.K. Jayakody et al.
37. H. Xing, K. Wong, A. Nallanathan, R. Zhang, Wireless powered cooperative jamming for
secrecy multi-AF relaying networks. IEEE Trans on Wireless Commun 1(4), 372–375 (2012)
38. L. Dong, Z. Han, A. Petropulu, H. Poor, Improving wireless physical layer security via
cooperating relays. IEEE Trans. Signal Process. 58(3), 1875–1888 (2010)
39. Y. Yang, Q. Li, W.-K. Ma, J. Ge, P.C. Ching, Cooperative secure beamforming for AF relay
networks with multiple eavesdroppers. IEEE Signal. Process. Lett. 20(1), 35–38 (2013)
40. J. Li, A.P. Petropulu, S. Weber, On cooperative relaying schemes for wireless physical layer
security. IEEE Trans. Signal Process. 59(10), 4985–4997 (2011)
41. L. Liu, R. Zhang, K.C. Chua, Secrecy wireless information and power transfer with MISO
beamforming. IEEE Trans. Signal. Proc. 62(7), 1850–1863 (2014)
42. H. Xing, L. Liu, R. Zhang, Secrecy wireless information and power transfer in fading wiretap
channel, in Proceedings in IEEE International Conference on Communication (ICC), June
2014, pp. 5402–5407
43. M. Zhang, Y. Liu, Energy harvesting for physical-layer security in OFDMA networks. IEEE
Trans Info Forensics Sec 11(1), 154–162 (2015)
44. T.A. Khan, A. Alkhateeb, R.W. Heath, Millimeter wave energy harvesting. IEEE Trans. Wirel.
Commun. 15(9), 6048–6062 (2016)
45. S. Ladan, A.B. Guntupalli, K. Wu, A high-efﬁciency 24 GHz rectenna development towards
millimeter-wave energy harvesting and wireless power transmission. IEEE Trans. Circuits.
Syst. Regular Papers 61(12), 3358–3366 (2014)
46. M. Peer, N. Jain, V.A. Bohara, A hybrid spectrum sharing protocol for energy harvesting
wireless sensor nodes, in IEEE 17th international workshop on signal processing advances
in wireless communications (SPAWC), 2016, pp. 1–6
47. V. Gungor, G. Hancke, Industrial wireless sensor networks: Challenges, design principles, and
technical approaches. IEEE Trans. Ind. Electron. 56(10), 4258–4265 (2009)
48. I.F. Akyildiz, T. Melodia, K. Chowdhury, A survey on wireless multimedia sensor networks.
Comput. Netw. 51(4), 921–960 (2007)
49. B. Tong, Z. Li, G. Wang, W. Zhang, How wireless power charging technology affects
sensor network deployment and routing, in Proceedings of IEEE International Conference on
Distributed Computing Systems (ICDCS), Genoa, Italy, 2010, pp. 438–447
50. H. Nishimoto, Y. Kawahara, T. Asami, Prototype implementation of ambient RF energy
harvesting wireless sensor networks, in Proceedings of IEEE Sensors, Kona, HI, 2010
51. Z. Popovic, E.A. Falkenstein, D. Costinett, R. Zane, Low power far-ﬁeld wireless powering for
wireless sensors. Proc. IEEE 101(6), 1397–1409 (2013)
52. S. Gua, C. Wang, Y. Yang, Mobile data gathering with wireless energy replenishment in
rechargeable sensor networks, in International Conference on Computer Communications,
2013, pp. 1932–1940
53. S. Gua, C. Wang, Y. Yang, Joint mobile data gathering and energy provisioning in wireless
rechargeable sensor networks. IEEE Trans. Mob. Comput. 13(12), 2836–2852 (2014)
54. C. Wang, J. Li, F. Ye, Y. Yang, Netwrap: An ndn based real-time wireless recharging framework
for wireless sensor networks. IEEE Trans. Mob. Comput. 13(6), 1283–1297 (2014)
55. L. Xie, Y. Shi, Y.T. Hou, H.D. Sherali, Making sensor networks immortal: An energy renewal
approach with wireless power transfer. IEEE ACM Trans. Networking 20(6), 1748–1761
(2012)
56. S. Zhang, J. Wu, S. Lu, Collaborative mobile charging. IEEE Trans. Comput. 64(3), 654–667
(2015)
57. E.B. Johnson, C. Detweiler, Charge selection algorithms for maximizing sensor network life
with UAV-based limited wireless recharging, in 2013 IEEE Eighth International Conference
on Intelligent Sensors, Sensor Networks and Information Processing, Melbourne, VIC, 2013,
pp. 159–164
58. M.Y. Naderi, K.R. Chowdhury, S. Basagni, W. Heinzelman, S. De, S. Jana, Experimental study
of concurrent data and wireless energy transfer for sensor networks, in 2014 IEEE Global
Communications Conference, Austin, TX, 2014, pp. 2543–2549

1
Introduction, Recent Results, and Challenges in Wireless Information. . .
27
59. M.Y. Naderi, K.R. Chowdhury, S. Basagni, W. Heinzelman, S. De, S. Jana, Experimental study
of concurrent data and wireless energy transfer for sensor networks, in 2014 IEEE Global
Communications Conference, Austin, TX, 2014, pp. 2543–2549
60. D. Niyato, D.I. Kim, P. Wang, L. Song, A novel caching mechanism for Internet of Things
(IoT) sensing service with energy harvesting, in 2016 IEEE International Conference on
Communications (ICC), Kuala Lumpur, 2016, pp. 1–6
61. H. Kawabata, K. Ishibashi, S. Vuppala, G. Abreu, Robust relay selection for large-scale energy
harvesting IoT networks. IEEE Int. Things J. (99), 1
62. J. Rinne, J. Keskinen, P.R. Berger, D. Lupo, M. Valkama, Feasibility and fundamental limits
of energy-harvesting based M2M communications, in 2016 IEEE 27th Annual International
Symposium on Personal, Indoor, and Mobile Radio Communications (PIMRC), Valencia,
Spain, 2016, pp. 1–6
63. H.G. Lee, N. Chang, Powering the IoT: Storage-less and converter-less energy harvesting, in
20th Asia and South Paciﬁc Design Automation Conference, Chiba, 2015, pp. 124–129
64. P. Grover, A. Sahai, Shannon meets Tesla: Wireless information and power transfer, in 2010
IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory, 2010, pp. 2363–2367
65. K. Huang, E. Larsson, Simultaneous information and power transfer for broadband wireless
systems. IEEE Trans. Signal Process. 61(23), 5972–5986 (2013)
66. D.W.K. Ng, E.S. Lo, R. Schober, Wireless information and power transfer: Energy efﬁciency
optimization in OFDMA systems. IEEE Trans. Wirel. Commun. 12(12), 6352–6370 (Decem-
ber 2013)
67. X. Zhou, R. Zhang, C.K. Ho, Wireless information and power transfer in multiuser OFDM
systems. IEEE Trans. Wirel. Commun. 13(4), 2282–2294 (2014)
68. P. Grover, A. Sahai, Shannon meets Tesla: wireless information and power transfer, in
Proceedings IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory (ISIT), Austin, TX, 2010
69. H. Wang, W. Wang, X. Chen, Z. Zhang, Wireless information and energy transfer in inter-
ference aware massive MIMO systems, in 2014 IEEE Global Communications Conference,
Austin, TX, 2014, pp. 2556–2561
70. G. Yang et al., Throughput optimization for massive mimo systems powered by wireless energy
transfer. IEEE J. Select. Areas Commun. 33(8), 1640–1650 (2015)
71. J. Li, H. Zhang, D. Li, H. Chen, On the performance of wireless-energy-transfer-enabled
massive mimo systems with superimposed pilot-aided channel estimation. IEEE Access 3,
2014–2027 (2015)
72. X. Chen, X. Wang, X. Chen, Energy-efﬁcient optimization for wireless information and
power transfer in large-scale MIMO systems employing energy beamforming. IEEE Wireless
Commun. Lett. 2(6), 667–670 (2013)
73. G. Aruma Baduge, E. Larsson, V. Poor, Wireless information and power transfer in multi-way
massive MIMO relay networks. IEEE Trans. Wirel. Commun. 99, 1
74. R. Blasco-Serrano, R. Thobaben, M. Andersson, V. Rathi, M. Skoglund, Polar codes for
cooperative relaying. IEEE Trans. Commun. 60(11), 3263–3273 (2012)
75. I. Tal, A. Vardy, How to construct polar codes. IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory 59(10), 6562–6582
(2013)
76. H. Kong, C. Xing, S. Zhao, P. Shi, Cooperative coding scheme using polar codes, in Proceed-
ings of 2012 2nd International Conference on Computer Science and Network Technology,
Changchun, 2012, pp. 602–606
77. B. Yuan, K.K. Parhi, Early stopping criteria for energy-efﬁcient low-latency belief-propagation
polar code decoders. IEEE Trans. Signal Process. 62(24), 6496–6506 (2014)
78. K. He, J. Sha, L. Li, Z. Wang, Low power decoder design for QC-LDPC codes, in Proceedings
of 2010 IEEE International Symposium on Circuits and Systems, Paris, 2010, pp. 3937–3940
79. Y.S. Park, D. Blaauw, D. Sylvester, Z. Zhang, Low-power high-throughput LDPC decoder
using non-refresh embedded DRAM. IEEE J. Solid State Circuits 49(3), 783–794 (2014)
80. J. Kaza, C. Chakrabarti, Design and implementation of low-energy turbo decoders. IEEE Trans.
Very Large Scale Integr. (VLSI) Sys. 12(9), 968–977 (2004)
81. R.G. Maunder, The 5G channel code contenders, AccelerComm White Paper, Aug 2016, 1–13

28
D.N.K. Jayakody et al.
82. D.K. Nguyen, D.N.K. Jayakody, S. Chatzinotas, J. Thompson, J. Li, Wireless energy harvesting
assisted two-way cognitive realy networks: Protocol design and performance analysis, in IEEE
Access, 2016
83. S. Lee, R. Zhang, K. Huang, Opportunistic wireless energy harvesting in cognitive radio
networks. IEEE Trans. Wirel. Commun. 12(9), 4788–4799 (2013)
84. V.P. Tuan, S.Q. Nguyen, H.Y. Kong, Performance analysis of energy-harvesting relay selection
systems with multiple antennas in presence of transmit hardware impairments, in International
Conference SUBMITTED on Advanced Technologies for Communications (ATC), Hanoi,
Vietnam, 2016, pp. 126–130
85. S.K. Sharma, T.E. Bogale, S. Chatzinotas, X. Wang, L.B. Le, Physical layer aspects of wireless
IoT, in International Symposium on Wireless Communication Systems (ISWCS), Poznan, pp.
304–308, 2016
86. URSI, White paper on solar power satellite (SPS) systems and report of the ursi inter-
commission working group on SPS, in URSI Inter-commission Working Group on SPS, 2007
87. K. Miyashiro, F. Inoue, K. Maki, K. Tanaka, S. Sasaki, K. Komurasaki, Sequentially rotated
array antenna for wireless power transmission to an MAV (in Japanese), in IEICE Technical
Report, WPT2012–30, 2012, pp. 59–61

Chapter 2
Full-Duplex Wireless-Powered Communications
Mohammadali Mohammadi, Batu K. Chalise, and Himal A. Suraweera
2.1
Introduction
Wireless communications have seen a rapid progress since the invention of the
radio around the turn of the twentieth century by Guglielmo Marconi. Proliferation
of wireless applications, smart phones, and devices has profoundly impacted the
everyday lives of people. In most communication systems, radio terminals have a
dual role as transmitters and receivers. Such role has been traditionally carried out
by employing half-duplex (HD) operation, meaning that the radio terminals transmit
and receive in orthogonal time or frequency channels. However, this requires
additional spectrum which, in fact, is scarce. In their quest to ﬁnd a solution for
this spectrum scarcity problem, academic and industrial communities have focused
on full-duplex (FD) communications, where the terminals are allowed to transmit
and receive simultaneously over the same frequency band [1, 2].
The history of FD wireless dates back to around 1940s when the principle
was mainly used in radar systems [1]. However, until very recently, FD was not
considered to be feasible due to the effects of self-interference (SI). This view has
been radically changed since prototypes and efﬁcient SI cancellation algorithms
M. Mohammadi ()
Faculty of Engineering, Shahrekord University, Shahrekord 115, Iran
e-mail: m.a.mohammadi@eng.sku.ac.ir
B.K. Chalise
Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, Cleveland State University,
Cleveland, OH 44115-2214, USA
e-mail: batu.k.chalise@ieee.org
H.A. Suraweera
Department of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, University of Peradeniya,
Peradeniya 20400, Sri Lanka
e-mail: himal@ee.pdn.ac.lk
© Springer International Publishing AG 2018
D.N.K. Jayakody et al. (eds.), Wireless Information and Power Transfer:
A New Paradigm for Green Communications, DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-56669-6_2
29

30
M. Mohammadi et al.
have emerged through the development of electronics and antenna theory [3–5]. In
FD systems, the signiﬁcant power difference between the transmitted signal and the
received signal causes SI. Such strong SI can saturate the front end of the receiver
to cause severe performance degradation [6–8].
Present methods to mitigate SI in FD transceivers can be classiﬁed into two broad
categories as: analog and digital SI cancellation techniques [4]. Further, analog
domain SI cancellation techniques can be subdivided into passive suppression
techniques and active analog techniques. Examples of former include the placement
of a radio frequency (RF) absorber to block the path between the transmitter and
receiver, polarization and the deployment of directional antennas [9]. These methods
rely on propagation path loss for attenuation of the transmitted signal at the receiver.
On the other hand, active analog cancellation techniques rely on methods such
as speciﬁc antenna placement and the use of delay lines to cancel the RF analog
signal. Other options for SI cancellation exist in the digital domain, where with the
help of reference signals and adaptive ﬁltering, SI can be estimated and removed.
Often a combination of both analog and digital cancellation methods are required
to reduce the SI up to tolerable levels and to make FD operation practical [10].
Nevertheless, perfect SI cancellation is not possible due to nonlinear distortion
caused by transmitter and receiver imperfections [7].
The use of FD has already been advocated for small cells, wireless local area
networks (WLANs), and ﬁfth generation (5G) systems [1, 2, 8, 11]. In addition,
applications of FD technology in cognitive radio systems [12] and physical layer
security [13] have also been considered. For example, simultaneous sensing and data
transmission function allowed by FD radios can improve the sensing performance
and secondary throughput in cognitive radio systems. Transmission of artiﬁcial
noise to interfere the eavesdropper is an effective technique used for improving
the wireless security. To this end, FD radios allow simultaneous transmission of
jamming signals and reception of useful signals and hence become a natural solution
to improve the secrecy.
2.1.1
Wireless-Powered Communications
Emergence of multi-media rich wireless applications has created a high demand
for energy. Terminals in contemporary wireless networks are either connected to
the electrical grid or rely on batteries for operation. Therefore, limited operational
lifetime of such wireless terminals imposes strict constraints on the network
performance. In this context, energy harvesting communications have emerged as
a viable solution to supply power to wireless devices by letting them scavenge
energy from resources such as photovoltaic, wind, vibrational, thermoelectric, and
RF signals [14]. Already, tremendous research progress has been achieved to
bring energy harvesting from an interesting theoretical concept to a technological
maturity [15–17].

2
Full-Duplex Wireless-Powered Communications
31
Energy harvesting from solar, wind, etc. present signiﬁcant challenges due to the
intermittent nature of these sources [14]. An alternative reliable source of energy
that can overcome this issue is offered by ambient and directed RF signals. It is well
accepted that RF sources can provide a controllable energy ﬂow to replenish the
depleted energy supply of wireless nodes and sensors [18]. However, to realize such
wireless-powered communication systems, several key design aspects are yet to
be comprehensively investigated. These include efﬁcient beamforming design [19,
20], resource allocation [21], optimized power beacon (PB) placement [22], and
waveform design [23]. In addition, characteristics of the propagation environment
is an important factor for wireless power transmission and the received power
level depends on the range of frequencies used [24]. Accordingly, in the existing
literature, depending on the nature of both the source that is used to harvest RF
energy and the receiver architecture, three main approaches have been identiﬁed
as (1) wireless energy harvesting, (2) wireless power transfer (WPT), and (3)
simultaneous wireless information and power transfer (SWIPT).
•
Wireless energy harvesting: This approach refers to harvesting energy from
the ambient RF signals available in the environment. While solutions based on
TV broadcasting, WiFi, and GSM signals have been developed, an issue with
the approach is the variable nature of the ambient RF signal sources. Moreover,
the approach is also sensitive to several factors such as path loss and shadowing
effects as well as the choice of the rectiﬁer since often a range of frequencies
must be scanned in order to harvest sufﬁcient amounts of energy.
•
Wireless power transfer: WPT refers to harvesting energy using dedicated
external sources such as a transmitter or a PB [18]. Available solutions to
perform WPT can be divided into two categories: (1) near-ﬁeld and (2) far-ﬁeld.
Popular methods of near-ﬁeld WPT include inductive power transfer between
nearby coils or magnetic resonance coupling. Although such methods exhibit
high conversion efﬁciency, they are not suitable for mobile applications due to
very short distances. On the other hand, far-ﬁeld methods rely on the radiative
nature of wave propagation. The history of far-ﬁeld WPT can be traced back to
Nicola Tesla’s experiments in the last century. Although the experiments ended
up in failure, they opened the way for more recent developments in microwave
WPT [25].
The gains of WPT depend on several factors such as the placement of PBs and
the ability of the antenna array to focus the radiated power in the desired user
direction. Moreover, frequency of the signal used for WPT has an impact on the
performance and the sharpness of the beam increases with the signal frequency.
However, high frequency signals such as millimeter waves are subject to severe
attenuation and blockage effects. Hence, an optimum frequency must be selected
to achieve a high WPT efﬁciency.
•
Simultaneous wireless information and power transfer: Varshney in [26]
proposed a new form of WPT coined as SWIPT. In SWIPT, both information
and RF energy are conveyed from the source to the destination and, therefore,
SWIPT is suitable for low power operation. Also SWIPT saves spectrum by

32
M. Mohammadi et al.
simultaneously transmitting information and energy using the same waveform.
Several researchers have looked into practical ways of implementing SWIPT
receivers [19]. The two main architectures described in the literature include the
time-switching (TS) receiver and power-splitting (PS) receiver. A TS receiver
operates by allowing the terminal to adaptively switch between the information
and energy receiver over orthogonal time periods. A PS receiver, on the other
hand, splits the incoming RF signal into two streams with different power
levels, one for information reception and one for energy harvesting. If multiple
antennas are present, SWIPT architectures based on antenna switching can
be implemented where antennas are divided into two disjoint sets, one for
information reception and other for energy harvesting [27].
2.1.2
Full-Duplex Wireless-Powered Communications
FD and WPT can be combined to realize communications with improved per-
formance. Several attractive features of FD wireless-powered communications
include:
•
In many cases of interest, FD wireless-powered systems exhibit higher through-
put gains as compared to their HD counterparts.
•
As shown in [28, 29], undesirable SI component can be converted into an
extra source of energy harvesting in FD wireless-powered communications.
Hence, FD radios that can recycle the energy of the transmitted signal can be
designed. Also, it is beneﬁcial to use multiple antennas to harvest practical
amounts of energy [27]. This approach can be coupled with FD communications,
since spatial-domain SI cancellation can be implemented for improved perfor-
mance [7].
•
A FD base station (BS) can receive information and transfer energy to a set
of disjoint terminals at the same time. Such a possibility is helpful for rapidly
responding to the energy demands of the terminals and efﬁciently managing the
perpetual operation of the network [11, 30, 31].
•
FD nodes capable of WPT are ideal for 5G small cell implementation. In general,
FD radios are unable to transmit with very high power due to possible generation
of SI, while path loss signiﬁcantly limits the energy harvesting performance.
Hence, FD and WPT when combined together will offer beneﬁts in terms of
the increased spectral and energy efﬁciency.
2.1.3
Recent Results
This subsection presents a comprehensive survey of the state-of-the-art techniques
on FD wireless-powered communication systems. There are three main topologies
investigated in the literature. The ﬁrst topology refers to the case of FD bi-directional

2
Full-Duplex Wireless-Powered Communications
33
communications where one or both nodes of the point-to-point system apply TS
or PS architecture to perform energy harvesting and information decoding. In
particular, so far FD WPT [32] and FD SWIPT [33–35] bi-directional systems have
been studied. In [32], a multi-antenna bi-directional FD WPT system, in which a
device powered by WPT from an energy transmitter communicates with an infor-
mation receiver over the same frequency band, has been considered. Speciﬁcally, the
achievable rate associated with the link from the device to the information receiver
has been maximized by jointly optimizing the energy beamforming at the energy
transmitter and information beamforming at the device subject to transmit power
constraints. In [33], optimal transmit beamforming vector at a FD access point (AP),
PS ratio at the FD mobile station (MS), and transmit power of the FD MS have
been designed to minimize the system’s weighted sum transmit power. However,
authors in [33] have assumed perfect SI cancellation, and therefore, the effect of SI
is not included in the results. In [34], an antenna pair selection scheme has been
introduced to improve the performance of a FD wireless-powered bi-directional
system. Optimum design of the PS ratio and transmit power for SWIPT, in a FD bi-
directional communication system with dual-antenna nodes, was analyzed in [35].
The FD wireless-powered bi-directional system model has also been extended
to include the cases of physical layer security in [36] and machine-to-machine
communication for the internet-of-things (IoT) [37].
The second topology studied in the literature is the FD relay topology. To this
end, [28, 38–43] have investigated the three-node FD relay channel and WPT. In
[38], throughput of a single-antenna dual-hop FD relaying system, assuming a TS-
based receiver, has been studied with the aim of characterizing the fundamental
trade-off between the energy harvesting and communication periods. Note that most
contemporary wireless standards promote the use of multiple antenna terminals, and
hence there is a need to understand the performance under more general antenna
setups [44]. The concept of “self-energy recycling” in the context of WPT has been
proposed in [28, 29], where the FD node regains a portion of its own transmit energy
via the SI channel. The integration of SI for WPT and optimal beamforming design
at the relay have been studied in [39]. A FD multi-antenna relaying system with
SWIPT has been considered in [40], where the source and relay transceiver have
been designed based on the minimum mean-square-error criterion.
The incorporation of the harvest-use model and TS-based FD relaying have been
considered in [41]. The results in [41] demonstrate that the FD mode can outperform
the HD counterpart. PS-based FD relaying with the harvest-use and harvest-store-
use models have been studied in [42], where the relay periodically switches between
two rechargeable batteries for charging and discharging during two consecutive time
slots of each block. The optimal PS ratio that maximizes the end-to-end signal-to-
interference-plus-noise ratio (SINR) and the trade-off between the end-to-end SINR
and recycled self-power have also been characterized. In [43], assuming a dual-
hop FD relaying system, the PS parameter and energy consumption proportion in
the case of single-antenna transceivers have been jointly optimized. As concluded
in this study, self-energy recycling has a limited effect and relaying is useful only
when the direct source-to-destination link is very weak.

34
M. Mohammadi et al.
The third topology presented in the literature is the FD hybrid AP topology where
data from users in the uplink channel and energy to the users in the downlink
channel are transmitted and received simultaneously [45–48]. The work in [45]
considered a wireless-powered communication network, where a hybrid FD AP
broadcasts energy to a set of users and receives information from another set
of users via time-division multiple access at the same time. Under perfect and
imperfect SI cancellation at the AP, the time allocation for the downlink energy
transfer and the uplink information transfer and the transmit power allocation
have been jointly optimized. The same system setup has been considered in [46],
where a sum-throughput maximization problem and a total-time minimization
problem have been studied. In [47], considering a multi-user scenario, the case of
orthogonal frequency division multiplexing has been studied by jointly optimizing
the subcarrier scheduling and power allocation. In [48], a resource allocation
algorithm design for a SWIPT system consisting of a FD BS, multiple single-
antenna HD users, and multiple energy harvesters equipped with multiple antennas
has been presented. A FD multiuser multiple-input multiple-output (MIMO) system
has been studied in [49], where uplink users ﬁrst harvest energy via BS energy
beamforming before transmitting their information to the BS, while at the same
time the BS transmits information to the users in the downlink channel. The FD
hybrid BS topology has also been extended to physical layer security in [50],
where the transmitter covariance matrix and receive combining vector at the multi-
antenna hybrid BS have been jointly optimized to maximize the weighted uplink
and downlink secrecy sum rate. Hardware feasibility of FD and WPT has also been
demonstrated in [51], where an AP and a sensor node transmit data to each other
while the AP simultaneously delivers power to the sensor.
Table 2.1 shows the summary of recent results discussed above on FD wireless-
powered communication systems.
2.1.4
Chapter Organization
The aim of this chapter is to analyze and optimize the performance of FD
wireless-powered communications. The presented analysis considers general mul-
tiple antenna setups, while the effect of residual SI is modeled speciﬁcally to
show the corresponding performance insights of practical signiﬁcance. In particular,
we consider bi-directional, relay, and hybrid AP enabled FD wireless-powered
communications with precoder design and parameter optimization in Sects. 2.2–
2.4, respectively. In Sect. 2.5 we discuss future research challenges related to FD
wireless-powered communications and conclusions are drawn in Sect. 2.6.
Notation: We use bold upper case letters to denote matrices, bold lower case
letters to denote vectors. k  k, ./, ./1, and tr./ to denote the Euclidean norm,
conjugate transpose operator, matrix inverse, and the trace of a matrix, respectively;

2
Full-Duplex Wireless-Powered Communications
35
Table 2.1 Summary of recent results on FD wireless-powered communication systems
Wireless energy
transfer receiver
Literature
Topology
technique
Architecture
Design objective
[32]
Bi-directional
WPT
TS
Maximizing the achievable
rate
[33]
Bi-directional
SWIPT
PS
Minimizing the sum transmit
power
[34]
Bi-directional
SWIPT
–
Antenna pair selection
[35]
Bi-directional
SWIPT
PS
Maximizing the sum rate
[36]
Bi-directional
SWIPT
TS
Improving the physical layer
security
[28]
Relay (AF)
SWIPT
TS
Maximizing the throughput.
Self-energy recycling is
assumed
[38]
Relay (AF/DF)
SWIPT
TS
Optimizing the TS parameter
[39, 40]
Relay (AF)
SWIPT
TS-PS
Beamforming optimization
[41]
Relay (AF/DF)
SWIPT
TS
Maximizing the channel
capacity
[42]
Relay (DF)
SWIPT
PS
Maximizing the e2e SINR
[43, 44]
Relay (DF)
SWIPT
PS-TS
Maximizing the information
rate
[45–47]
AP
WPT
–
Maximizing the
sum-throughput of uplink
transmissions
[48]
AP
WPT
–
Minimizing the
uplink/downlink transmit
power
[49]
AP
WPT
TS
Maximizing the sum rate
[50]
AP
WPT
–
Maximizing the weighted
sum secrecy rate
Pr./ denotes the probability; fX./ and FX./ denote the probability density function
(pdf) and cumulative distribution function (cdf) of the random variable (RV) X,
respectively; C N .; 2/ denotes a circularly symmetric complex Gaussian RV
x with mean  and variance 2; W.x/ is the Lambert W-function, deﬁned as the
solution for W in W exp.W/ D x [52];  .a/ is the Gamma function;  .a; x/ is
upper incomplete Gamma function [53, Eq. (8.350)]; K./ is the th order modiﬁed
Bessel function of the second kind [53, Eq. (8.432)];  .x/ is the psi (digamma)
function [53, Eq. (8.360.1)]; En.x/ is the En-function [53], and Gmn
pq

z j a1ap
b1bq

denotes the Meijer G-function [53, Eq. (9.301)].

36
M. Mohammadi et al.
2.2
Full-Duplex Wireless-Powered Bi-directional
Communications
In this section, we propose optimum and suboptimum schemes to enlarge the
boundary of the BS-MS rate region for a FD wireless-powered bi-directional
communication system.
2.2.1
System Model
As shown in Fig. 2.1, we consider FD bi-directional communications between an
N-antenna BS and a MS with two antennas [54]. Speciﬁcally, the BS has MT
transmit antennas and .N  MT/ receive antennas. At the MS side, one antenna
is used for transmission and the other for reception. Since the MS is usually power
limited and the uplink rate is the bottleneck, we consider a case where the BS ﬁrst
transmits energy to the MS, which will be used by the MS for the subsequent uplink
transmission.
The communication takes place in two phases with duration ˛ and .1˛/, respec-
tively. In phase I, the BS transmits energy to the MS. Suppose the transmit power
of BS in this phase is PBS, then the received energy is E D ˛PBS

HBMH
BM

;
where the channel between the BS and the MS is denoted as HBM and ./ returns
the maximum eigenvalue of a matrix. In phase II, the BS and the MS communicate
to each other using FD operation. The MS’s transmit power can be written as pm D
PBS

HBMH
BM

with  ≜
˛	
1˛ where 	 is RF-to-DC energy conversion efﬁciency
coefﬁcient. The conversion efﬁciency, and thus the coefﬁcient value depends on
several factors, such as the efﬁciency of the rectenna and power efﬁciency of the
hardware circuit that converts the received RF signals to DC voltage [15]. The
SI
H
BS
hB
MT
MR
MS
1
Rx
1
hm
Tx
Rx
Tx
hM
Fig. 2.1 FD wireless-powered bi-directional communication system

2
Full-Duplex Wireless-Powered Communications
37
channels from the BS to MS and from the MS to BS are denoted by h
B 2 C1MT
and hM 2 C.NMT/1, respectively. FD operation causes SI at the BS and MS
receive antennas. The SI channels are HSI 2 C.NMT/MT and hM at the BS and
MS, respectively. The transmit beamformer at the BS is wt and the noise power at
the BS and MS is denoted by 2
b and 2
m, respectively.
By using the minimum mean-square-error receiver at the BS, the BS and MS
achievable rates are, respectively, calculated as [54]
rB D .1  ˛/ log2
0
@1 C pm
2
b
 
khMk2 
jh
MHSIwtj2
2
b C kHSIwtk2
!1
A ;
(2.1)
rM D .1  ˛/ log2
 
1 C
jh
Bwtj2
2m C pmjhmj2
!
:
(2.2)
The maximum achievable rate at the BS has been derived in [54] as
Rmax
B
D .1  ˛/ log2
 
1 C
˛
1  ˛
bkhMk2
2
b
!
;
(2.3)
where ˛ D

exp

W

Qb1
e

C 1

 1

=

Qb C exp

W

Qb1
e

C 1

 1

and Qb D
b khMk2
2
b
with b D 	PBS

HBMH
BM

. The MS-BS rate region can be obtained by
maximizing the MS rate while conﬁrming that the BS-rate is equal to a certain value
RB. By solving this optimization problem for all RB, where RB 2 Œ0; Rmax
B

 and Rmax
B
is the maximum value of BS rate, we obtain the MS-BS rate region. As such, the
optimization problem for a given RB is expressed as
max
kwtk2PBS; 0˛1; pm
.1  ˛/ log2
 
1 C
jh
Bwtj2
2m C pmjhmj2
!
s.t.
.1  ˛/ log2
0
@1 C pm
2
b
 
khMk2 
jh
MHSIwtj2
2
b C kHSIwtk2
!1
A D RB;
pm D
˛	PBS

HBMH
BM

.1  ˛/
:
(2.4)
The optimization problem (2.4) is a complicated non-convex optimization with
respect to (w.r.t.) wt and ˛. However, (2.4) can be solved efﬁciently by ﬁnding
optimum wt for a given ˛ and vice-versa. Since ˛ is scalar valued, the optimum
solution can be ascertained by using one-dimensional search w.r.t. ˛.

38
M. Mohammadi et al.
2.2.2
Joint Optimization of Beamformer and Time-Splitting
Parameter
In this subsection, optimum and suboptimum schemes for solving the joint opti-
mization of the beamformer, wt, and TS parameter, ˛, are presented.
2.2.2.1
Optimum Scheme
The optimum scheme corresponds to ﬁnding wt that maximizes the end to end
SINR for a given ˛. Since ˛ is scalar valued, the jointly optimal solution of wt
and ˛ can be obtained by using one-dimensional search w.r.t. ˛. The computational
complexity of line search is minimized by exploiting the nature of the optimization
problem (2.4).
1. Optimization of wt: First consider the problem of optimizing wt for a given ˛.
In this case, the optimization problem (2.4) is expressed as
max
kwtk2PBS
.1  ˛/ log
 
1 C
jh
Bwtj2
2m C pmjhmj2
!
(2.5)
s.t.
.1  ˛/ log2
0
@1 C pm
2
b
 
khMk2 
jh
MHSIwtj2
2
b C kHSIwtk2
!1
A D RB:
Since log.1 C x/ is a monotonically increasing function of x ≜
jh
Bwtj2
2mCpmjhmj2 and
the denominator, 2
m C pmjhmj2, of x is independent of wt, (2.5) can be solved
from
max
kwtk2PBS
jh
Bwtj2
s.t.
jh
MHSIwtj2
2
b C kHSIwtk2 D B;
(2.6)
where B ≜khMk2  2
b
pm
h
2
RB
1˛  1
i
. It is clear that the objective function
in (2.6) is maximized with kwtk2 D PBS. This optimization problem is non-
convex due to the fact that it is the maximization of a quadratic function with
a quadratic equality constraint. Moreover, (2.6) does not admit a closed-form
solution. However, it can be efﬁciently and optimally solved using semi-deﬁnite
programming. For this purpose, deﬁne VB ≜wtw
t and relax the rank-one
constraint, rank.VB/ D 1. The relaxed optimization is
max
VB
f.˛; pm/ D tr.VBhBh
B/
s.t. tr.VBH
SIhMh
MHSI/ D B

2
b C tr.VBH
SIHSI/

;

2
Full-Duplex Wireless-Powered Communications
39
tr.VB/ D PBS; VB  0:
(2.7)
The optimization problem (2.7) is a standard semi-deﬁnite relaxation (SDR)
problem with only two equality constraints. Therefore, according to Shapiro–
Barvinok–Pataki (SBP) rank reduction theorem [55], there exists a rank-one
optimum solution of VB. Let V
B be the optimum solution of (2.7). Since V
B is
rank-one matrix, the optimum solution w
t is obtained w
t D pPBS QuQu, where
Qu is the eigenvector corresponding to a non-zero eigenvalue of V
B .
2. Optimization of wt and ˛: In order to jointly optimize wt and ˛, the SDR
problem (2.7) can be solved using an one-dimensional (or line search) search
over ˛ where 0  ˛  1. However, this line search can be limited to a
small segment, and therefore the number of required SDR optimizations can
be signiﬁcantly minimized. To illustrate this, let the objective function in (2.5),
for a given w
t , be deﬁned as
f.˛/ D .1  ˛/ log2
 
1 C

c C
˛b
1˛
!
;
(2.8)
where  D jh
Bw
t j2
jhmj2
and c D
2
m
jhmj2 . The derivative of f.˛/ can be written as
df.˛/
d˛
D  log2.g.˛// 
bg.˛/1
.1  ˛/ log.2/

c C
˛b
1  ˛
2
;
(2.9)
where g.˛/ D 1 C

cC ˛b
1˛
 0; 8˛ 2 Œ0; 1
. It is clear from (2.9) that
df.˛/
d˛
< 0 for all ˛, i.e., f.˛/ is a monotonically decreasing function of ˛. This
means that the maximum value of the objective function is achieved when ˛ is
minimum, provided that the equality constraint is fulﬁlled. However, as ˛ ! 0,
B ! 1, i.e., the infeasibility of the SDR optimization problem (2.7) increases.
Consequently, the optimum ˛ is the minimum ˛ for which (2.7) is feasible. The
output VB of such feasible SDR provides the optimum wB. In a nutshell, the
proposed optimum solution can be summarized as follows:
1. Deﬁne a ﬁne grid of ˛ in steps of @˛. Start with ˛ D 0.
2. Solve (2.7) with the increment of @˛.
3. If feasible, stop and output ˛ and VB.
4. If not, go to step (2).
2.2.2.2
Suboptimal Scheme
The scheme presented in Sect. 2.2.2.1 requires an extensive optimization. Hence, in
order to ﬁnd a low-complexity closed-form solution, we can enforce a ZF constraint
so that the designed transmit beamformer wt ensures no SI for the FD operation at
the BS. To realize this, it is easy to check from (2.4) that the following condition is
sufﬁcient,

40
M. Mohammadi et al.
w
t H
SIhM D 0:
(2.10)
1. Optimization of wt: Substituting (2.10) into (2.4), the resulting optimization
problem for a given ˛ can be re-expressed as [54]
max
wt
jh
Bwtj2
s.t. kwtk2  PBS
(2.11)
w
t H
SIhM D 0:
Using a standard Lagrangian multiplier method and skipping the corresponding
details, the closed-form solution of wt is expressed as w
t D pPBS
BhB
kBhBk where
B D I 
H
SIhMh
MHSI
kH
SIhMk2 .
Accordingly, the corresponding objective function becomes jh
Bwtj2
D
PBSkBhBk2:
2. Optimization of ˛: Obviously, the transmit beamformer w
t is independent of ˛.
Therefore, the optimization problem (2.4) w.r.t. ˛ is equivalent to
max
0˛1 f.˛/ ≜.1  ˛/ log2
 
1 C

c C
˛b
1˛
!
s.t. .1  ˛/ log2

1 C
˛
1  ˛
Qb

D RB:
(2.12)
The optimum ˛ would be zero if there were no equality constraint (or the
constraint with RB D 0). In the presence of equality constraint with RB > 0, it is
clear that the optimum ˛ is the smallest ˛ that satisﬁes the equality constraint.
The following proposition presents ˛.
Proposition 1. When equality constraint is feasible (i.e., RB  Rmax
B
) , the optimum
˛ is given by
˛opt D

1
RB log.2/W

 RB log.2/
b
eRB log.2/

1 1
Qb

 1
Qb
1 
1
RB log.2/W

 RB log.2/
Qb
eRB log.2/

1 1
Qb

 1
Qb
:
(2.13)
Proof. The equality constraint for the BS rate is expressed as
log

1 C
˛
1  ˛
Qb

D RB log.2/

˛
1  ˛ C 1

:
(2.14)

2
Full-Duplex Wireless-Powered Communications
41
Deﬁne y ≜1 C
˛
1˛b. Then, after simple manipulations, (2.14) can be expressed as

RB log.2/
Qb
y

e RB log.2/
Qb
y D

RB log.2/
Qb

eRB log.2/

1 1
Qb

:
(2.15)
Using the Lambert-W function, y in (2.15) is expressed as
y D
Qb
RB log.2/W

RB log.2/
Qb
eRB log.2/

1 1
Qb

:
(2.16)
Note that RB log.2/
Qb
eRB log.2/

1 1
Qb

 1
e is required to have a real value of y. If not, the
equality constraint is not feasible for given Qb and RB where RB  Rmax
B
. Substituting
y in (2.16), we obtain
˛
1  ˛ D
1
RB log.2/W

RB log.2/
Qb
eRB log.2/

1 1
Qb

 1
Qb
which yields the optimum ˛Opt given in (2.13).
We now corroborate our analysis with the numerical examples to reveal the
behavior of the MS-BS rate region. The distance between the BS and MS is set
to 10 meters, whereas the path loss exponent is taken as 3. The noise powers,
2
b and 2
m, are ﬁxed to 70 dBm. Figure 2.2 shows the rate regions obtained
with the optimum and suboptimum methods for MT D 2 and 3, when N D
5, PBS D 30 dBm, whereas the corresponding regions for PBS D 0 dBm are
shown in Fig. 2.3. The channel coefﬁcients (excluding the path attenuation) for all
channels are taken as independent and identically distributed (i.i.d.) C N .0; 1/ RVs.
All results correspond to averaging of 100 independent channel realizations. The BS
rate is varied from 0 to Rmax
B
. The achieved BS-MS rate regions are also shown for
the HD mode. Note that, in the HD mode, the information transmission period of
.1˛/ is equally divided for the BS to MS and then the MS to BS communications.
Due to the HD protocol, the BS and MS can utilize all of their antennas for transmit
and receive beamforming as in standard MIMO communications. Thus, the BS and
MS information rates are, respectively, given by
rB;H D1  ˛
2
log2
 
1 C
˛
1  ˛
	PBS2.HBMH
BM/
2
b
!
;
rM;H D1  ˛
2
log2
 
1 C PBS.HBMH
BM/
2m
!
:
(2.17)
It can be observed from Figs. 2.2 and 2.3 that the maximum value of the MS rate
is obtained when RB is minimum, whereas the minimum value is obtained when
RB takes maximum value. Moreover, the BS-rate is much smaller than the MS-

42
M. Mohammadi et al.
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
0
5
10
15
20
25
BS−rate (bpcu)
MS−rate (bpcu)
Optimum, MT=2
Sub−optimum, MT=2
Optimum, MT=3
Sub−optimum, MT=3
HD
Fig. 2.2 MS-BS rate region with PBS D 30 dBm, and MT D 2; 3
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
BS−rate (bpcu)
MS−rate (bpcu)
Optimum, MT=2
Sub−optimum, MT=2
Optimum, MT=3
Sub−optimum, MT=3
HD
Fig. 2.3 MS-BS rate region with PBS D 0 dBm, MT D 2; 3, and N D 5

2
Full-Duplex Wireless-Powered Communications
43
rate. This is due to the fact that the former is limited by the transmit power of the
MS which depends on the harvested power. Both ﬁgures show that the optimum
method performs much better than the suboptimum approach. Moreover, when MT
increases, the obtained maximum BS rate decreases, whereas the maximum MS rate
remains almost unchanged in the optimum method and increases in the suboptimum
method. Figure 2.2 shows that the maximum BS and MS rates obtained with the
optimum method are almost double of the corresponding rates of the HD mode.
However, when the BS rate increases, the MS rate decreases rapidly in the FD
mode, whereas it only decreases gradually in the HD mode. The advantage of the
FD mode over the HD mode diminishes as PBS decreases, as seen from Fig. 2.3. As
a ﬁnal observation, the advantage of the optimum method is more pronounced for
smaller values of MT.
2.3
Full-Duplex Wireless-Powered Relay Communications
The source-relay-destination topology is another widely considered system model
in the current FD literature [1]. When FD relays are employed, information from
the source can be transferred to the destination in one time slot, and thus the
spectral efﬁciency bottleneck of using HD relays can be resolved. FD operation
of the relays offers clear beneﬁts for use in modern wireless networks [56]. As an
example, the self-backhauling capability of FD relays has been identiﬁed as a useful
feature for their use in dense 5G indoor networks [57]. Furthermore, FD relays
with limited transmit power can be carefully placed in order to cover coverage
gaps, although several relays would be required. While important results on FD
relays with ﬁxed and reliable power supplies have been reported in the literature, as
outlined in Sect. 2.1.3, FD wireless-powered relay communications is still in infancy
and deserves more investigation.
Consider a two-hop FD decode-and-forward relay system where the relay
is powered using WPT from the source signals. Speciﬁcally, below we design
optimum and suboptimum receive and transmit beamformers at the multiple antenna
relay and optimize the TS parameter to characterize the instantaneous throughput
and delay-constrained throughput.
2.3.1
System Model
Figure 2.4 shows a FD decode-and-forward relay system consisting of one source
S, one relay R, and one destination, D [44]. Both S and D are equipped with a
single antenna, while R is equipped with two sets of antennas, i.e., MR receiving
antennas and MT transmitting antennas. The relay has no external power supply and
employs the TS protocol to receive energy from S. Hence, the entire communication
process is divided into two phases, i.e., for a transmission block time T, ˛ fraction

44
M. Mohammadi et al.
SR
h
SI
H
R
S
D
RD
h
T
M
R
M
1
1
Rx
Tx
Fig. 2.4 FD wireless-powered relay system model
of the block time is devoted for energy harvesting and the remaining time, .1˛/T,
is used for information transmission. We assume that the channels in the two-hop
system remain constant over the block time T and vary independently from one
block to the other. Such a fading process is known as block fading in the literature.
We denote the channel coefﬁcient from S to R and from R to D by hSR 2 CMR1 and
hRD 2 C1MT, respectively.
The relay uses the harvested energy during ˛T period for subsequent transmis-
sion to D. Therefore, the transmit power of R is given by
Pr D PSˇ1khSRk2;
(2.18)
where PS is the source transmit power and ˇ1 models the path loss effect in S-R
channel.
At the information transmission phase, upon receiving source signal, R applies
a linear combining vector wr, then forwards the estimated signal to D using the
transmit beamforming vector wt. Hence, end to end SINR at D can be expressed
as [44]
FD D min
 
N1ˇ1jw
rhSRj2
 N1ˇ1khSRk2jw
rHSIwtj2 C 1
;  N2ˇ1ˇ2khSRk2jhRDwtj2
!
;
(2.19)
with N1 D
PS
2
R and N2 D
PS
2
D where 2
R and 2
D are the noise power at R and D,
respectively, ˇ2 models the path loss effect for the R-D link, and HSI 2 CMRMT
represents the residual SI channel whose elements are modeled as circularly
symmetric complex Gaussian C N .0; 2
SI/ RVs in line with the literature [3, 6]. Note
that the SINR in (2.19) has a much more complicated form than the corresponding
SINR in conventional relay networks having nodes with ﬁxed power supplies, since

2
Full-Duplex Wireless-Powered Communications
45
the signal received is subject to “double fading” due to channel fading during the
energy harvesting and information transmission phases.
We now present the following optimization problem to maximize the instanta-
neous rate w.r.t. ˛, wt, and wr:
max
kwrkDkwtkD1; ˛2Œ0;1/ R.˛; wt; wr/ D .1  ˛/ log2

1 C FD

:
(2.20)
2.3.2
Relay Beamforming Designs
The optimization problem (2.20) is non-convex and challenging to solve. To this
end, we consider the beamforming design problem for a given ˛. In this case, (2.20)
turns to a problem of maximizing the minimum of the ﬁrst hop SINR and second-
hop signal-to-noise ratio (SNR), which is expressed as
max
kwrkDkwtkD1 min
 
N1ˇ1jw
rhSRj2
 N1ˇ1khSRk2jw
rHSIwtj2 C 1
;  N2ˇ1ˇ2khSRk2jhRDwtj2
!
:
(2.21)
In the following subsections, we provide optimum as well as suboptimum schemes
for solving (2.21). In the optimum approach, the problem of joint transmit and
receive beamforming design is considered, whereas in the suboptimum schemes,
different linear receiver/transmitter techniques are employed at R.
2.3.2.1
Optimum Scheme
The optimum scheme corresponds to ﬁnding wr and wt such that the end to end
SINR is maximized. Since the second-hop SNR does not depend on wr, the ﬁrst-
hop SINR can be maximized w.r.t wr by ﬁxing wt . This optimization problem is
a generalized Rayleigh ratio problem which is globally maximized when wr D
A1hSR
kA1hSRk where A D

 N1ˇ1khSRk2HSIwtw
t H
SI C I

. Accordingly, by substituting
wr into (2.21), the corresponding problem can be solved and the wOPT
t
is given
in [44, Proposition 1].
2.3.2.2
TZF Scheme
We now present some suboptimum beamforming solutions. One such scheme takes
the advantage of the multiple transmit antennas to completely cancel the SI [58].
To ensure this is feasible, the number of the transmit antennas at relay should be
greater than one, i.e., MT > 1. In addition, maximal ratio combining (MRC) is

46
M. Mohammadi et al.
applied at the relay input, i.e., wMRC
r
D
hSR
khSRk. This solution is named as the transmit
zero-forcing (TZF) scheme in [44]. After substituting wMRC
r
into (2.21), the optimal
transmit beamforming vector wt is obtained by solving the following problem:
max
kwtkD1
jhRDwtj2;
s.t.
h
SRHSIwt D 0:
(2.22)
From the ZF constraint in (2.22), we know that wt lies in the null space of h
SRHSI.
Denoting B ≜I 
H
SIhSRh
SRHSI
kh
SRHSIk2 , we have wZF
t
D
Bh
RD
kBh
RDk. Now, substituting the wZF
t
and wMRC
r
into (2.19), the end-to-end SNR can be expressed as [44]
TZF D N1ˇ1khSRk2
.1  ˛/
min

1 ˛; N2
N1
	˛ˇ2kQhRDk2

;
(2.23)
where QhRD is an .MT  1/  1 vector and follows the chi-square distribution with
2.MT  1/ degrees-of-freedom.
2.3.2.3
RZF Scheme
As an alternative solution, the transmit beamforming vector can be set using the
maximal ratio transmit (MRT) principle, i.e., wMRT
t
D
h
RD
khRDk, and wr can be designed
with the ZF criterion w
rHSIwt D 0. This solution is named as the receive ZF (RZF)
scheme in [44]. To ensure feasibility of RZF, R should be equipped with MR > 1
receive antennas. Substituting the MRT solution for wt into (2.21), the optimal
receive beamforming vector wr is the solution to the following problem:
max
kwrkD1
jw
rhSRj2
s.t.
w
rHSIh
RD D 0:
(2.24)
Using similar steps as in the TZF scheme, the vector wr can be obtained as wZF
r
D
DhSR
kDhSRk, where D ≜I 
HSIh
RDhRDH
SI
kHSIhRDk2
is the projection idempotent matrix with rank
.MT  1/. Invoking (2.19), and using wZF
r
and wMRT
t
, the end-to-end SNR can be
expressed as [44]
RZF D min

N1ˇ1kQhSRk2;  N2ˇ1ˇ1khSRk2khRDk2
;
(2.25)
where QhSR is a .MR  1/  1 vector and follows the chi-square distribution with
2.MR  1/ degrees-of-freedom.

2
Full-Duplex Wireless-Powered Communications
47
2.3.2.4
MRC/MRT Scheme
As another suboptimal approach, principles of MRT and MRC can be employed
where wr and wt are set to match the ﬁrst hop and second hop channel, respectively.
Hence, wMRC
r
D hSR=khSRk and wMRT
t
D h
RD=khRDk. Accordingly, by substituting
wMRC
r
and wMRT
t
into (2.19), the end-to-end SINR can be expressed as
MRC Dmin
0
@c1khSRk2
 
 N1ˇ1
jh
SRHSIh
RDj2
khRDk2
C1
!1
; c2khSRk2khRDk2
1
A;
(2.26)
where c1 D N1ˇ1 and c2 D  N2ˇ1ˇ2. It is worthwhile to note that the optimum,
TZF, and RZF schemes reduce to the MRC/MRT scheme in the absence of SI.
Although the MRC/MRT scheme is not optimal in the presence of SI, it could be
favored in situations where compatibility with HD systems is a concern. Note that
the MRC/MRT scheme requires only the knowledge of hSR and hRD, whereas the
other three schemes require the knowledge of hSR, hRD, and HSI.
2.3.3
Performance Analysis
In this subsection, we evaluate the throughput of the instantaneous transmission and
delay-constrained transmission in the cases of optimum and suboptimum schemes.
2.3.3.1
Instantaneous Transmission
The instantaneous throughput of the considered FD wireless-powered relaying
system can be computed as [38]
RI.˛/ D .1  ˛/ log2.1 C FD/;
(2.27)
where FD (2.19) is a function of ˛. This expression reveals an interesting trade-
off between energy harvesting duration and the instantaneous throughput. A longer
energy harvesting time increases the harvested energy and consequently the second
hop SNR, however, decreases the available time for information transmission and
vice-versa. Therefore, an appropriate system design can optimize the instantaneous
throughput by adjusting ˛. The optimal ˛ is obtained by solving
˛ D arg max
0<˛<1
RI.˛/:
(2.28)
For a given end-to-end SINR or SNR of a particular scheme, RI.˛/ in (2.28)
is a concave function of ˛ and the optimized ˛ can be obtained by solving the

48
M. Mohammadi et al.
equation dRI.˛/
d˛
D 0. For example, in case of the optimum scheme, by substituting
the optimum wOPT
t
, the instantaneous throughput as a function of ˛ is
RI.˛/ D.1 ˛/log2
 
1 C N1ˇ1khSRk2 min

1 
˛b1
.1  ˛/ C ˛b2
; ˛b0
1  ˛
!
;
(2.29)
where b0 D N2
N1 	ˇ2jhRDwOPT
t
j2, b1 D 	 N1ˇ1jh
SRHSIwOPT
t
j2, and b2 D 	 N1ˇ1khSRk2
kHSIwOPT
t
k2. The optimization problem (2.28) can be solved by using the procedure
described in [44]. Let a0 D 	 N2ˇ1ˇ2khSRk2jhRDwOPT
t
j2. Then, the optimal value of
˛ can be obtained as
˛
Opt D
8
ˆˆ<
ˆˆ:
e
W

a01
e

C1
1
a01Ce
W

a01
e

C1 ; if
eW
 a01
e

C1 < a0
˛0 C 1I
1
1C˛0 ;
otherwise;
(2.30)
where ˛0 D
2b0b2
.b2b1b0/Cp
b2
0C.b2b1/2C2b0.b1Cb2/.
Furthermore, optimal ˛ for the proposed suboptimum beamforming schemes can
be obtained from (2.30) by replacing a0 and ˛0 from Table 2.2.
An important point to stress is that, in contrast to the suboptimum schemes, the
obtained solution of wt in the optimum scheme depends on ˛. As a consequence,
joint optimization w.r.t. ˛ and wt is required. There are two ways to solve this joint
optimization. The ﬁrst way is to ﬁnd wt by following Proposition 1 and next per-
forming a one-dimensional line search over 0 < ˛ < 1. This guarantees the global
optimum solutions for ˛ and wt. Another way is to employ an iterative approach
where each iteration step consists of a two-step optimization, i.e., optimizing wt for
a given ˛ and vice-versa.
Figure 2.5 shows the instantaneous throughput versus the time portion ˛ of the
beamforming schemes for an arbitrary frame of block time T. In the simulations,
we set the channel variances as ˇ1 D d
1
and ˇ2 D d
2 , where d1 and d2 denote
the distances between the S and R and between R and D, respectively and  is the
path loss exponent. As expected, the optimum scheme outperforms all suboptimum
schemes on all TS values. In addition, simulation results, not shown in the ﬁgure to
avoid clutter, reveal that the values of the optimal ˛ decrease as either the number of
Table 2.2 Suboptimum beamforming schemes’ parameters
Scheme
a0
˛0
TZF
	 N2ˇ1ˇ2khSRk2kBhRDk2
	 N1 N2ˇ2kBhRDk2
RZF
	 N2ˇ1ˇ2khSRk2khRDk2
N2
N1 	ˇ2
khSRk2khRDk2
kDhSRk2
MRC/MRT
	 N2ˇ1ˇ2khSRk2khRDk2
2	 N1ˇ1
jh
SRHSIh
RDj2
khRDk2
. r
1C
4ˇ1 N2
1
ˇ2 N2
jh
SRHSIh
RDj2
khRDk4
1
!

2
Full-Duplex Wireless-Powered Communications
49
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
1.6
α
Instantaneous Throughput
Simulation
Analytical
Optimal
RZF
MRC/MRT
TZF
Fig. 2.5 Instantaneous throughput versus ˛ (MT D MR D 3, PS D 20 dBm, d1 D 20, d2 D 10
and  D 3)
relays’ receive antennas or the sources’ transmit power is increased. This is because
in these cases the relay node can harvest the same amount of energy in a shorter
time. Therefore, more time must be allocated to the information transmission phase
in order to improve the throughput.
2.3.3.2
Delay-Constrained Transmission
Throughput of the delay-constrained transmission can be determined by evaluating
the outage probability, Pout, at a ﬁxed source transmission rate Rc bits/s/Hz where
Rc D log2.1 C th/ and th is the value of SNR for correct data detection at the
destination [59]. Due to the time variation of the fading channel, outage events
where the instantaneous channel capacity is below the source transmission rate may
occur. Therefore, Pout can be written as
Pout D Pr.FD < th/ D FFD.th/;
(2.31)
where th D 2Rc  1. Given that the source is communicating Rc bits/sec/Hz and
.1  ˛/T is the effective communication time from S to D in the block time T
seconds, the throughput, RD.˛/, in delay-constrained transmission mode is given
by [59]
RD.˛/ D .1  Pout/Rc.1  ˛/:
(2.32)

50
M. Mohammadi et al.
In order to determine the delay-constrained throughput, it is important to
characterize the outage probability of each scheme. In the following, both exact and
asymptotic expressions for the outage probability of the TZF, RZF, and MRC/MRT
schemes are presented. We notice that derivation of the outage probability of the
optimum scheme is difﬁcult. Hence we have resorted to simulations for evaluating
the delay-constrained throughput of the optimum scheme in Fig. 2.6.
According to (2.23), (2.25), and (2.31), the outage probability at D for TZF and
RZF schemes can be expressed as [44]
PTZF
out D 1 
1
 .MR/
Z 1
th
N1ˇ1
Q

MT  1;
1
 N2ˇ1ˇ2
th
x

xMR1exdx;
(2.33)
and
PRZF
out D 1  Q

MR; th
N1ˇ1

C
1
 .MR/
0
@
Z 1
th
N1ˇ1
P

MT;
1
 N2ˇ1ˇ2
th
x

xMR1exdx
C
 th
N1ˇ1
MR1 Z 1
th
N1ˇ1
Q

MT;
1
 N2ˇ1ˇ2
th
x

exdx
1
A ;
(2.34)
respectively, where Q.a; x/ D  .a; x/= .a/ and P.a; x/ D .a; x/= .a/.
The outage probability analysis of the MRC/MRT scheme for arbitrary MT and
MR appears to be cumbersome. Therefore, we only consider two special cases:
•
Case (1) MT D 1, MR  1
•
Case (2) MT  1, MR D 1
Statistics of the associated RVs in both of these special cases can be found.
Therefore, using (2.26) and (2.31), outage probability of Cases 1 and 2 can be
expressed as [44]
PMRC;1
out
D 1 
Z 1
th
N1ˇ1
G21
23
 
1
 N1ˇ12
SI
 c1
th
 1
x
 ˇˇˇ 1; MR
1; MR; 0
!
xMR1
 .MR/e

xC th
c2x

dx;
(2.35)
and
PMRC;2
out
D 1 
Z 1
th
N1ˇ1

1  e 1
c2x
 c1x
th 1

Q
 
MT;
th
 N1ˇ12
SIx
!
exdx;
(2.36)
respectively. The integrals in (2.33)–(2.36) do not admit a closed-form solution,
however, they can be evaluated numerically. To gain further insights, we now look
into the high SNR regime and present simple approximations from [44]. These

2
Full-Duplex Wireless-Powered Communications
51
expressions enable the characterization of the achievable diversity order of the TZF,
RZF, and MRT/MRC schemes.
Proposition 2. In the high SNR regime, i.e., N1; N2 ! 1, the outage probability of
the TZF scheme can be approximated as: PTZF
out 
8
ˆˆˆˆˆˆˆˆˆˆˆ<
ˆˆˆˆˆˆˆˆˆˆˆ:
 
1
 .MRC1/ C
1
 .MT1/ .MR/
1
P
kD0
.1/kC1
kŠ.kCMT/

2
D
2
R
1
ˇ2
MTCk1
1
MRMTkC1
! th
N1ˇ1
MR ;
MT > MR C 1;
1
 .MRC1/
 
1 C
1
 .MR/

ln
 N1ˇ1
th

C  .1/
 
2
D
2
R
1
ˇ2
MR! th
N1ˇ1
MR ;
MT D MR C 1;
 .MRMTC1/
 .MT/ .MR/

1
ˇ2
MT1  th
N2ˇ1
MT1
;
MT < MR C1:
(2.37)
By inspecting (2.37), we see that the TZF scheme achieves a diversity order
of min.MR; MT  1/. This is intuitive since one degree-of-freedom is used for
interference cancellation. Moreover, for the case MR C 1 D MT, PTZF
out decays as
NMR
1
ln. N1/ rather than NMR
1
as in the conventional case with ﬁxed power, which
implies that in the energy harvesting case the slope of PTZF
out converges much slowly.
Proposition 3. In the high SNR regime, i.e., N1; N2 ! 1, the outage probability of
the RZF scheme can be approximated as
PRZF
out 
8
ˆˆˆˆˆˆ<
ˆˆˆˆˆˆ:
1
 .MR/

th
N1ˇ1
MR1
;
MR < MT C 1;
1
 .MR/
 
1 C
1
 .MTC1/

2
D
2
R
1
ˇ2
MT! 
th
N1ˇ1
MT ;
MR D MT C 1;
 .MRMT/
 .MR/ .MTC1/

1
ˇ2
MT 
th
N2ˇ1
MT ;
MR > MT C 1:
(2.38)
Proposition 3 indicates that the RZF scheme achieves a diversity order of
min.MR  1; MT/. This result is also intuitively satisfying since one degree-of-
freedom should be allocated for SI cancellation at the receive side of R.
Proposition 4. In the high SNR regime, i.e., N1; N2 ! 1, with MT D 1 the outage
probability of the MRC/MRT scheme can be approximated as
PMRC;1
out
 1 
2
 .MR/G21
23
 
1
2
SIth
ˇˇˇ
1; MR
1; MR; 0
! 
th
 N2ˇ1ˇ2
 MR
2
KMR
 
2
r
th
N2ˇ1ˇ2
!
:
(2.39)
Moreover, by applying a Bessel function approximation for small arguments,
K.x/   ./
2

x
2

, in (2.39) we can write

52
M. Mohammadi et al.
PMRC;1
out
! 1  G21
23
 
1
2
SIth
ˇˇˇ
1; MR
1; MR; 0
!
:
(2.40)
Note that (2.40) presents the outage probability ﬂoor and indicates that the
MRC/MRT scheme with MT D 1 exhibits a zero-diversity order in presence of
residual SI.
Proposition 5. In the high SNR regime, i.e., N1; N2 ! 1, with MR D 1, the outage
probability of the MRC/MRT scheme can be approximated as
PMRC;2
out
 1 
 
1  e

1
2
SIth
! 0
@e th
N1ˇ1 
th
N1ˇ1 .MT/
1
X
kD0
.1/k
kŠ.MT C k/

 N1
N2
1
ˇ2
MTCk
EMTCk
 th
N1ˇ1
!
:
(2.41)
At this point, it is important to determine the value of ˛ that maximizes
the throughput. We note that delay-constrained throughput should converge to
the ceiling value of Rc.1  ˛/ when Pout ! 0. For each beamforming scheme
we observe that Pout is a complicated function of ˛ and it decreases as the value of
˛ is increased. However, this will lead to the decrease of the term .1  ˛/ at the
same time. Therefore, an optimal value of ˛ that maximizes the delay-constrained
throughput exists and it can be found by solving the following optimization
problem:
˛ D arg max
0<˛<1
RD.˛/:
(2.42)
Given (2.33)–(2.36), the optimization problem in (2.42) does not admit closed-
form solutions. However, the optimal ˛ can be solved numerically. Figure 2.6
demonstrates the impact of optimal ˛ on the delay-constrained throughput. The
superior performance of the optimum scheme compared to suboptimal schemes
is more pronounced especially between 0:4 and 0:8 values of ˛. The highest
throughput with optimized ˛ for the optimum, RZF, MRC/MRT, and TZF schemes
are given by 0:6517, 0:6396, 0:5672, and 0:4824, respectively. Moreover, we see
that each one of the TZF, RZF, and MRC/MRT schemes can surpass other schemes
depending on the value of ˛. This observation reveals the existence of various design
choices when performance-complexity trade-off becomes a design factor. It is also
observed that all schemes achieve signiﬁcant throughput gains as compared to the
HD mode.
Simulations also show that as long as a beamforming scheme is capable of
cancelling the SI, the delay-constrained throughput can be improved as either the
number of relays’ receive antennas or the sources’ transmit power is increased.
This is because, the amount of the harvested energy at the relay is increased and
consequently the outage probability is decreased, i.e., Pout ! 0. Therefore, the
delay-constrained throughput tends to RD.˛/ ! Rc.1  ˛/ which approximately

2
Full-Duplex Wireless-Powered Communications
53
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
α
Delay−constrained Throughput
RZF
MRC/MRT
TZF
HD
Fig. 2.6 Delay-constrained throughput of different schemes (MT D MR D 3, PS D 10 dBm,
d1 D 15, d2 D 10, 	 D 0:5, and Rc D 2)
deliver the highest throughput for some small values of the ˛. However, an excessive
amount of harvested energy at R is not always advantageous. For example, in case of
MRC/MRT scheme it is detrimental since it results in a strong irreducible SI effect
at R.
2.4
Full-Duplex Information and Power Transfer
with Hybrid AP
If a BS or an AP is empowered with FD operation, simultaneous uplink and
downlink transmission among a set of users can be implemented. Thus, in addition
to FD bi-directional and relay topologies, some papers have also considered the
above scenario [45, 46, 60]. The gains that can be achieved with the help of
the FD BS (or AP) topology are largely inﬂuenced by the residual SI at the BS
(or AP) as well as the inter-user interference at downlink users due to uplink user
transmissions. Moreover in multi-cell environments, compared to HD operation
that employs time-division duplexing (TDD) or frequency-division duplexing,
simultaneous uplink and downlink transmissions can cause different interference
patterns [61]. Hence, in order to reap the spectral efﬁciency gains promised by the
FD mode, systems based on the BS topology need to be carefully designed [62].

54
M. Mohammadi et al.
U
h
LI
H
D
U
R
M
U
U
D
h
D
g
Rx
Tx
T
M
1
1
Fig. 2.7 FD hybrid data-and-energy transfer system
In the sequel, a design to maximize the rate-energy region of a FD system with
one multi-antenna hybrid AP, one uplink user, and one energy harvester downlink
user is presented.
2.4.1
System Model
Consider a FD system, as shown in Fig. 2.7, consisting of a hybrid AP, one uplink
user (UU), and one downlink user (UD). Both UU and UD are equipped with a
single antenna, while the AP is equipped with MR receive antennas and MT transmit
antennas. The FD AP communicates with UU in the uplink and transmits energy to
UD in the downlink at the same time over the same frequency band [45, 46]. Denote
hU 2 CMR1 as the channel vector from the UU to AP, hD 2 CMT1 as the channel
vector from AP to the UD, HSI 2 CMRMT as the residual SI channel from transmit
antennas to the receive antennas at FD AP, and gD as the channel coefﬁcient from UU
to UD. The transmit and receive beamformers at the AP are wt and wr, respectively.
Given the total transmit power PAP at the AP, the harvested energy at the UD is
E D 	

PAPjh
Dwtj2 C PUjgDj2
where PU is the transmit power of UU. Moreover,
SINR at the FD AP can be expressed as
U D
PUjw
rhUj2
PAPjw
rHSIwtj2 C kwrk22n
;
(2.43)
where 2
n is the noise power at the AP.

2
Full-Duplex Wireless-Powered Communications
55
Our objective is to maximize the uplink rate of UU by jointly designing the
transmit and receive beamformers at the AP, subject to an EH constraints. Thus,
the following optimization problem is formulated as:
max
kwrkDkwtkD1
RU D log2
 
1 C
PUjw
rhUj2
PAPjw
rHSIwtj2 C 2n
!
;
s.t.
	

PAPjh
Dwtj2 C PUjgDj2
 NE;
(2.44)
where NE denotes the minimum requirement of the harvested energy at the UD.
2.4.2
Precoding Design for Rate-Energy Maximization
The joint optimization problem (2.44) can be solved by ﬁrst optimizing over wr
while ﬁxing wt. For a given wt that satisﬁes the constraint in (2.44), the optimization
problem w.r.t. wr reduces to
fre ≜max
kwrkD1
PUjw
rhUj2
PAPjw
rHSIwtj2 C 2n
:
(2.45)
Deﬁne NA ≜ŒPAPHSIwtw
t H
SI C 2
n I
. The optimum wr is given by
wr D
NA1hU
k NA1hUk:
(2.46)
Substitution of wr from (2.46) into (2.45) yields
fre D PUh
UŒPAPHSIwtw
t H
SI C 2
n I
1hU
D PU
2n
2
4khUk2  PAPh
UHSIwtw
t H
SIhU
2n C PAPwtH
SIHSIwt
3
5 ;
(2.47)
where the second expression is due to the application of Sherman–Morrison
formula [30]. Consequently, the joint optimization (2.44) reduces to an optimization
problem over wt, which is expressed as
max
kwtkD1 log2 .1 C fre/
s:t: 	

PAPjh
Dwtj2 C PUjgDj2
 NE;
(2.48)

56
M. Mohammadi et al.
which is equivalent to
min
kwtkD1
h
UHSIwtw
t H
SIhU
2n C PAPwtH
SIHSIwt
s:t: jh
Dwtj2 
1
PAP
" NE
	  PUjgDj2
#
:
(2.49)
The optimization problem (2.49) does not admit a closed-form solution for the
optimum wt. Its numerical solution is attainable, however, (2.49) is not a convex
problem. Introducing an auxiliary variable , a matrix variable Wt D wtw
t , and
relaxing the non-convex rank-one constraint on Wt, (2.49) can be expressed as an
SDR problem
min
Wt; 
s:t: tr
 
Wt



2
n I C HSIH
SI

 H
SIhUh
UHSI
!
 0;
(2.50)
tr

WthDh
D

 Nc;
tr .Wt/ D 1; Wt  0;
where Nc D
1
PAP
h
NE
	  PUjgDj2i
. Let W
t be an optimum solution in (2.49) for a given
. Using similar arguments as in the case of (2.7), it can be shown that W
t is rank-
one. The optimization (w.r.t. Wt) has to be solved for all possible values of , where
 2 Œ0; max
, i.e., a grid search over  is required.1 However, the computational cost
of solving (2.49) can be signiﬁcantly reduced by solving it as a feasibility problem.
In particular, it is clear that the minimum  is the one for which the optimization
problem (2.49) turns to be feasible. As such, the joint optimum solutions of  and
Wt can be determined using the following steps:
1. Deﬁne a ﬁne grid of  in steps of @,
2. Solve (2.49) with the smallest , i.e.,  D 0,
3. If feasible, stop and output  and Wt,
4. If not, repeat step (2) with the increment of @.
As soon as the problem is feasible, the above iterative approach can be stopped
and the optimum wt is recovered from the eigenvalue decomposition of Wt. In
particular, since the optimum happens to be Wt rank-one, wt is the eigenvector
corresponding to the largest eigenvalue (also the only one non-zero eigenvalue)
of Wt.
1Although max can be analytically calculated, it is not required for solving (2.49).

2
Full-Duplex Wireless-Powered Communications
57
In order to understand the gains of FD operation, a common practice adopted in
the literature is to compare with HD mode. We compare the performance of FD and
HD modes of operation at the hybrid AP under the so-called RF chain preserved
condition.2 In the HD mode of AP operation, hybrid AP employs orthogonal time
slots to serve the uplink and downlink users. At the uplink we use MRC to combine
the received signals and deploy MRT as the beamformer to transmit energy towards
the downlink user. Without loss of any generality, we normalize T to 1 and devote
0 < ˛HD  1 fraction of the block time for energy transfer and .1  ˛HD/ for
information transfer. For a fair comparison, the EH constraint of the downlink user
in the HD mode is set as the harvested energy in the FD mode. Therefore, ˛HD D
E
	PAPkhDk2 and RHD
U
D .1  ˛HD/ log2

1 C PUkhUk2=2
n

.
Figure 2.8 shows rate-energy region with MR D 2 and MT D 5, when PU D
10 dBm, PAP D 40 dBm, and 	 D 0:7. We consider a scenario where a line-of-
sight (LoS) link is present between the AP and the downlink user and for which the
complex channel gain vector from the AP to downlink user can be represented by
the Rician fading model as [63]
11.5
12
12.5
13
13.5
14
14.5
15
15.5
10.5
11
11.5
12
12.5
AP−rate (bpcu)
UD−energy (dBm)
FD
11.5
12
12.5
13
13.5
14
14.5
15
15.5
0
5
10
AP−rate (bpcu)
UD−energy (dBm)
HD
Fig. 2.8 Comparison of rate-energy regions with MR D 2 and MT D 5
2RF chains have a higher cost than antenna elements and therefore FD/HD studies based on RF
chain preserved condition as compared to “antenna-preserved” condition have been widely used in
the literature for fair comparison.

58
M. Mohammadi et al.
hD D
s
ˇK
K C 1hD;d C
s
ˇ
K C 1hD;s;
(2.51)
where hD;d represents the LoS component, ˇ denotes path loss effect, K is the Rician
K-factor, and hD;s denotes the scattered components of the channel. Furthermore, we
utilize the far-ﬁeld uniform linear antenna array model as in [63].
The EH constraint is varied from 0 dBm to NEmax which is obtained by applying
MRT beamformer at the AP. We also assume that the distance between the AP and
UD is 10 meters and K D 5 dB. The curves in Fig. 2.8 show that the FD mode
of operation can provide signiﬁcant performance gains. For example, FD AP can
provide a higher uplink rate as compared to the HD mode in all regions of the
harvested energy. Moreover, the decrease in the uplink rate when the harvested
energy varies from the minimum value to the maximum is more in HD. Under HD
operation, the downlink user does not exploit the inter-user interference for energy
harvesting, a high value of ˛HD causes the uplink rate to be reduced.
2.5
Future Directions
Research community faces a number of challenges ahead for the design and
deployment of FD wireless-powered systems. From a practical perspective these
challenges can be categorized into several key areas as outlined below:
•
Full-duplex transceiver design: Research on SI cancellation algorithm devel-
opment is required to guarantee practical FD transceiver implementation with
ﬂexible energy harvesting capability. Research on SI mitigation techniques with
low energy consumption is crucial since circuitry required in the cancellation
step could drain harvested energy signiﬁcantly. Further, nonlinear behavior of
the energy harvesting circuit components needs to be captured accurately via new
mathematical modeling. Such advances will offer new opportunities for system
optimization. In order to test transceiver solutions, test-bed development needs
to be undertaken as well.
•
Interference exploitation: Traditionally in wireless system design, interference
has been considered as a detrimental factor. However, in energy harvesting
communications, interference can be exploited as an extra source of energy.
A FD BS can simultaneously schedule the uplink and downlink transmission
on the same resource block, and hence as compared to traditional HD systems,
high interference conditions within the cell and from neighboring cells can be
expected [62]. As of now, how such interference can be best exploited to improve
the performance of FD wireless-powered systems is unknown. Therefore, it
is worthwhile to conduct research on transmission schemes, scheduling and
interference cancellation algorithms that can strike a good balance between
harvested energy and performance.

2
Full-Duplex Wireless-Powered Communications
59
•
MIMO implementation:
In the context of FD wireless-powered systems,
MIMO techniques can be used for spatial-domain SI cancellation and to harvest
more energy. However, often optimal solutions that maximize the rate-energy
trade-off in FD wireless-powered systems are complex and require signiﬁcant
energy consumption for computation purposes. Hence, it is worth looking at
low-complexity MIMO schemes suitable for efﬁcient FD MIMO design. As
an example, ﬂexible and low-complexity MIMO architectures that dynamically
adapt to the energy harvesting environment and assign different number of
antennas for energy harvesting/information transfer seem an interesting direction
to pursue.
•
MAC layer design: While majority of research on FD so far have considered
physical layer aspects, research work on MAC layer issues has been still on
infancy. In particular, MAC layer operations from an energy consumption point
are less understood. Signiﬁcant research efforts must be dedicated to model FD
MAC layer behavior and propose algorithms that can operate with minimum
energy. Moreover, whenever possible, the design of cross-layer algorithms that
can exploit information available at physical, MAC, and network layer should be
promoted [64].
•
Co-existence issues with HD systems:
FD mode is capable of providing
performance gains in terms of the throughput over HD mode in several cases.
However, in other cases, such as under asymmetric trafﬁc scenarios and high
SNR conditions, HD model outperforms the FD mode. Several works have
already proposed hybrid schemes, where the system could operate either in HD
mode or FD mode. Advantages of switching between HD/FD in the context
of wireless-powered communications are not well understood at present and
investigations must be carried out to ﬁnd whether such hybrid operation would
be beneﬁcial. In addition, future wireless networks will be mainly heterogeneous
and both HD and FD nodes would operate. From a network perspective, the
presence of HD nodes will create new opportunities for the efﬁcient design of
future FD wireless-powered systems.
2.6
Conclusions
In this chapter, we considered the application of FD in WPCNs under bi-directional,
relay, and hybrid AP topologies. We ﬁrst considered an N-antenna BS and a
wireless-powered MS and characterized optimum and suboptimum schemes for
optimizing bi-directional information rates between the BS and MS. The beam-
former at the BS and the TS parameter was jointly optimized for both optimum and
suboptimum schemes. Compared to the HD operation, a signiﬁcant improvement
in the BS-MS rate region can be observed. Then, we studied the instantaneous and
delay-constrained throughput of a FD wireless-powered MIMO relay system. We
considered optimum linear processing at the relay as well as several suboptimum
schemes. Next, optimum transceiver design for SWIPT in a FD system with one

60
M. Mohammadi et al.
hybrid AP, one downlink energy user, and one uplink user was investigated. We
jointly optimized the transmit and receiver beamformers at the AP to maximize
the uplink rate subject to EH constraint at the downlink user. We showed how
transmit and receiver beamformers at the AP, that maximize the uplink rate subject
to EH constraint at the downlink user, can be designed. In all cases, results that
are useful for evaluating the performance and extracting insights into the effects of
key parameters, such as the antenna conﬁguration, linear processing scheme, and
TS parameters, on the performance were presented. In certain regimes, FD mode
shows a better throughput as compared to the HD mode. Therefore, FD operation
is a promising approach to design energy and spectrally efﬁcient future wireless
communication networks.
References
1. A. Sabharwal, P. Schniter, D. Guo, D.W. Bliss, S. Rangarajan, R. Wichman, In-band full-duplex
wireless: challenges and opportunities. IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun. 32(9), 1637–1652 (2014)
2. Z. Zhang, K. Long, A.V. Vasilakos, L. Hanzo, Full-duplex wireless communications: chal-
lenges, solutions, and future research directions. Proc. IEEE 104(7), 1369–1409 (2016)
3. J.I. Choi, M. Jain, K. Srinivasan, P. Levis, S. Katti, Achieving single channel, full duplex wire-
less communication, in Proceedings of 16th International Conference on Mobile Computing
and Networking (MobiCom’10), Chicago, IL, September (2010), pp. 1–12
4. M. Duarte, C. Dick, A. Sabharwal, Experiment-driven characterization of full-duplex wireless
systems. IEEE Trans. Wirel. Commun. 11(12), 4296–4307 (2012)
5. E. Aryafar, M.A. Khojastepour, K. Sundaresan, S. Rangarajan, M. Chiang, MIDU: enabling
MIMO full duplex, in Proceedings of 18th International Conference on Mobile Computing
and Networking (MobiCom ’12), New York, August (2012), pp. 257–268
6. T. Riihonen, S. Werner, R. Wichman, Hybrid full-duplex/half-duplex relaying with transmit
power adaptation. IEEE Trans. Wirel. Commun. 10(9), 3074–3085 (2011)
7. T. Riihonen, S. Werner, R. Wichman, Mitigation of loopback self-interference in full-duplex
MIMO relays. IEEE Trans. Signal Process. 59(12), 5983–5993 (2011)
8. S.S. Hong, J. Brand, J.I. Choi, M. Jain, J. Mehlman, S. Katti, P. Levis, Applications of self-
interference cancellation in 5G and beyond. IEEE Commun. Mag. 52(2), 114–121 (2014)
9. E. Everett, A. Sahai, A. Sabharwal, Passive self-interference suppression for full-duplex
infrastructure nodes. IEEE Trans. Wirel. Commun. 13(2), 680–694 (2014)
10. M. Heino, D. Korpi, T. Huusari, E. Antonio-Rodriguez, S. Venkatasubramanian, T. Riihonen,
L. Anttila, C. Icheln, K. Haneda, R. Wichman, M. Valkama, Recent advances in antenna design
and interference cancellation algorithms for in-band full duplex relays. IEEE Commun. Mag.
53(5), 91–101 (2015)
11. European FP7 project DUPLO (full-duplex radios for local access) European commission -
research: the seventh framework programme [Online]. Technical Report (2012). Available:
http://www.fp7-duplo.eu/index.php/general-info
12. T. Riihonen, R. Wichman, Energy detection in full-duplex cognitive radios under residual self-
interference, in Proceedings of International Conference on Cognitive Radio Oriented Wireless
Networks and Communications (CrownCom’ 14), Oulu, June (2014), pp. 57–60
13. G. Zheng, I. Krikidis, J. Li, A.P. Petropulu, B.E. Ottersten, Improving physical layer secrecy
using full-duplex jamming receivers. IEEE Trans. Signal Process. 61(20), 4962–4974 (2013)
14. S. Priya, D.J. Inman, Energy Harvesting Technologies (Springer, Boston, MA, 2009)
15. X. Lu, P. Wang, D. Niyato, D.I. Kim, Z. Han, Wireless networks with RF energy harvesting: a
contemporary survey. IEEE Commun. Surv. Tut. 17(2), 757–789 (2015, Second quarter)

2
Full-Duplex Wireless-Powered Communications
61
16. S. Ulukus, A. Yener, E. Erkip, O. Simeone, M. Zorzi, P. Grover, K. Huang, Energy harvesting
wireless communications: a review of recent advances, IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun. 33(3),
360–381 (2015)
17. K. Huang, V.K.N. Lau, Enabling wireless power transfer in cellular networks: architecture,
modeling and deployment. IEEE Trans. Wirel. Commun. 13(2), 902–912 (2014)
18. S. Bi, C.K. Ho, R. Zhang, Wireless powered communication: opportunities and challenges.
IEEE Commun. Mag. 53(4), 117–125 (2015)
19. R. Zhang, C.K. Ho, MIMO broadcasting for simultaneous wireless information and power
transfer. IEEE Trans. Wirel. Commun. 12(5), 1989–2001 (2013)
20. K.J. Lee, H.B. Kong, H. Lee, S.R. Lee, I. Lee, Optimal beamforming designs for wireless
information and power transfer in MISO interference channels. IEEE Trans. Wirel. Commun.
14(9), 4810–4821 (2015)
21. E.S. Lo, D.W.K. Ng, R. Schober, Wireless information and power transfer: energy efﬁciency
optimization in OFDMA systems. IEEE Trans. Wirel. Commun. 12(12), 6352–6370 (2013)
22. H. Tabassum, E. Hossain, On the deployment of energy sources in wireless-powered cellular
networks. IEEE Trans. Commun. 63(9), 3391–3404 (2015)
23. B. Clerckx, E. Bayguzina, Waveform design for wireless power transfer. IEEE Trans. Signal
Process. 64(23), 6313–6328 (2016)
24. S. O’Driscoll, A.S.Y. Poon, T.H. Meng, Optimal frequency for wireless power transmission
into dispersive tissue. IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag. 58(5), 1739–1750 (2010)
25. W.C. Brown, The history of power transmission by radio waves. IEEE Trans. Microwave
Theory Tech. 32(9), 1230–1242 (1984)
26. L.R. Varshney, Transporting information and energy simultaneously, in Proceedings of IEEE
International Symposium on Information Theory (ISIT 2008), Toronto July (2008), pp.
1612–1616
27. Z. Ding, C. Zhong, D.W.K. Ng, M. Peng, H.A. Suraweera, R. Schober, H.V. Poor, Application
of smart antenna technologies in simultaneous wireless information and power transfer. IEEE
Commun. Mag. 53(4), 86–93 (2015)
28. Y. Zeng, R. Zhang, Full-duplex wireless-powered relay with self-energy recycling. IEEE Wirel.
Commun. Lett. 4(2), 201–204 (2015)
29. M. Maso, C. Liu, C. Lee, T.Q.S. Quek, L.S. Cardoso, Energy-recycling full-duplex radios for
next-generation networks. IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun. 33(12), 2948–2962 (2015)
30. M. Mohammadi, H.A. Suraweera, Y. Cao, I. Krikidis, C. Tellambura, Full-duplex radio for
uplink/downlink wireless access with spatially random nodes. IEEE Trans. Commun. 63(12),
5250–5266 (2015)
31. S. Goyal, C. Galiotto, N. Marchetti, S.S. Panwar, Throughput and coverage for a mixed full
and half duplex small cell network, in Proceedings of IEEE International Conference on
Communications (ICC’16), Kuala Lumpur, May (2016), pp. 1–7
32. Y.L. Che, J. Xu, L. Duan, R. Zhang, Multiantenna wireless powered communication with
cochannel energy and information transfer. IEEE Commun. Lett. 19(12), 2266–2269 (2015)
33. Z. Hu, C. Yuan, F. Zhu, F. Gao, Weighted sum transmit power minimization for full-duplex
system with SWIPT and self-energy recycling. IEEE Access. 4, 4874–4881 (2016)
34. M. Gao, H.H. Chen, Y. Li, M. Shirvanimoghaddam, J. Shi, Full-duplex wireless-powered
communication with antenna pair selection, in Proceedings of IEEE Wireless Communications
and Networking Conference (WCNC’15), New Orleans, LA, March (2015), pp. 693–698
35. A.A. Okandeji, M.R.A. Khandaker, K. Wong, Wireless information and power transfer in
full-duplex communication systems, in Proceedings of IEEE International Conference on
Communications (ICC’16), Kuala Lumpur, May (2016), pp. 1–6
36. W. Mou, Y. Cai, W. Yang, W. Yang, X. Xu, J. Hu, Exploiting full duplex techniques for secure
communication in SWIPT system, in Proceedings of International Conference on Wireless
Communications and Signal Processing (WCSP’15), Nanjing, October (2015), pp. 1–6
37. Y. Xiao, Z. Xiong, D. Niyato, Z. Han, L.A. DaSilva, Full-duplex machine-to-machine
communication for wireless-powered internet-of-things, in Proceedings of IEEE International
Conference on Communications (ICC’16), Kuala Lumpur, May (2016), pp. 1–6

62
M. Mohammadi et al.
38. C. Zhong, H.A. Suraweera, G. Zheng, I. Krikidis, Z. Zhang, Wireless information and power
transfer with full duplex relaying. IEEE Trans. Commun. 62(10), 3447–3461 (2014)
39. S. Hu, Z. Ding, Q. Ni, Beamforming optimisation in energy harvesting cooperative full-duplex
networks with self-energy recycling protocol. IET Commun. 10(7), 848–853 (2016)
40. Z. Wen, X. Liu, N.C. Beaulieu, R. Wang, S. Wang, Joint source and relay beamforming design
for full-duplex MIMO AF relay SWIPT systems. IEEE Commun. Lett. 20(2), 320–323 (2016)
41. I. Krikidis, G. Zheng, B.E. Ottersten, Harvest-use cooperative networks with half/full-duplex
relaying, in Proceedings of IEEE Wireless Communications and Networking Conference
(WCNC’13), Shanghai, April (2013), pp. 4256–4260
42. H. Liu, K.J. Kim, K.S. Kwak, H.V. Poor, Power splitting-based SWIPT with decode-and-
forward full-duplex relaying. IEEE Trans. Wirel. Commun. 15(11), 7561–7577 (2016)
43. T. Riihonen, L. Zhao, M. Vehkaperä, X. Wang, On the feasibility of full-duplex relaying
powered by wireless energy transfer, in Proceedings of IEEE Workshop on Signal Processing
Advances in Wireless Communications (SPAWC’16), Edinburgh, July (2016), pp. 1–5
44. M. Mohammadi, B.K. Chalise, H.A. Suraweera, C. Zhong, G. Zheng, I. Krikidis, Throughput
analysis and optimization of wireless-powered multiple antenna full-duplex relay systems.
IEEE Trans. Commun. 64(4), 1769–1785 (2016)
45. H. Ju, R. Zhang, Optimal resource allocation in full-duplex wireless-powered communication
network. IEEE Trans. Commun. 62(10), 3528–3540 (2014)
46. X. Kang, C.K. Ho, S. Sun, Full-duplex wireless-powered communication network with energy
causality. IEEE Trans. Wirel. Commun. 14(10), 5539–5551 (2015)
47. H. Kim, H. Lee, M. Ahn, H. Kong, I. Lee, Joint subcarrier and power allocation methods in
full duplex wireless powered communication networks for OFDM systems. IEEE Trans. Wirel.
Commun. 15(7), 4745–4753 (2016)
48. S. Leng, D.W.K. Ng, N. Zlatanov, R. Schober, Multi-objective resource allocation in full-
duplex SWIPT systems, in Proceedings of IEEE International Conference on Communications
(ICC’16), Kuala Lumpur, May (2016), pp. 1–7
49. V.-D. Nguyen, H.V. Nguyen, G.-M. Kang, H.M. Kim, O.-S. Shin, Sum rate maximization for
full duplex wireless-powered communication networks, in Proceedings of European Signal
Processing Conference (EUSIPCO’16), Budapest (2016), pp. 798–802
50. Y. Wang, R. Sun, X. Wang, Transceiver design to maximize the weighted sum secrecy rate in
full-duplex SWIPT systems. IEEE Signal Process. Lett. 23(6), 883–887 (2016)
51. K. Yamazaki, Y. Sugiyama, Y. Kawahara, S. Saruwatari, T. Watanabe, Preliminary evaluation
of simultaneous data and power transmission in the same frequency channel, in Proceedings of
IEEE Wireless Communications and Networking Conference (WCNC’15), New Orleans, LA,
March (2015), pp. 1237–1242
52. R.M. Corless, G.H. Gonnet, D.E.G. Hare, D.J. Jeffrey, D.E. Knuth, On the
Lambert W
function. Adv. Comput. Math. 5(4), 329–359 (1996)
53. I.S. Gradshteyn, I.M. Ryzhik, Table of Integrals, Series and Products, 7th edn. (Academic, San
Diego, CA, 2007)
54. B.K. Chalise, H.A. Suraweera, G. Zheng, Throughput maximization for full-duplex energy
harvesting MIMO communications, in Proceedings of IEEE Workshop on Signal Processing
Advances in Wireless Communications (SPAWC’16), Edinburgh, July (2016), pp. 1–5
55. B.K. Chalise, W. Ma, Y.D. Zhang, H.A. Suraweera, M.G. Amin, Optimum performance
boundaries of OSTBC based AF-MIMO relay system with energy harvesting receiver. IEEE
Trans. Signal Process. 61(17), 4199–4213 (2013)
56. K. Long, A.V. Vasilakos, Z. Zhang, X. Chai, L. Hanzo, Full duplex techniques for 5G networks:
self-interference cancellation, protocol design, and relay selection. IEEE Commun. Mag. 53(5),
128–137 (2015)
57. R. Wichman, K. Pajukoski, E. Lahetkangas, R. Pitaval, O. Tirkkonen, E. Tiirola, Full-duplex
self-backhauling for small-cell 5G networks. IEEE Wirel. Commun. 22(5), 83–89 (2015)
58. H.A. Suraweera, I. Krikidis, G. Zheng, C. Yuen, P.J. Smith, Low-complexity end-to-end
performance optimization in MIMO full-duplex relay systems. IEEE Trans. Wirel. Commun.
13(2), 913–927 (2014)

2
Full-Duplex Wireless-Powered Communications
63
59. A.A. Nasir, X. Zhou, S. Durrani, R.A. Kennedy, Relaying protocols for wireless energy
harvesting and information processing. IEEE Trans. Wirel. Commun. 12(7), 3622–3636 (2013)
60. H. Ahmadi, S. Narayanan, M.F. Flanagan, Simultaneous uplink/downlink transmission using
full-duplex single-RF MIMO. IEEE Wirel. Commun. Lett. 5(1), 88–91 (2016)
61. C. Psomas, M. Mohammadi, I. Krikidis, H.A. Suraweera, Impact of directionality on inter-
ference mitigation in full-duplex cellular networks. IEEE Trans. Wirel. Commun. 16(1),
1536–1276 (2017)
62. S. Goyal, P. Liu, S.S. Panwar, R.A. DiFazio, R. Yang, E. Bala, Full duplex cellular systems:
will doubling interference prevent doubling capacity? IEEE Commun. Mag. 53(5), 121–127
(2015)
63. S. Kashyap, E. Björnson, E.G. Larsson, On the feasibility of wireless energy transfer using
massive antenna arrays. IEEE Trans. Wirel. Commun. 15(5), 3466–3480 (2016)
64. K.M. Thilina, H. Tabassum, E. Hossain, D.I. Kim, Medium access control design for full
duplex wireless systems: challenges and approaches. IEEE Commun. Mag. 53(5), 112–120
(2015)

Chapter 3
Multi-Objective Resource Allocation
Optimization for SWIPT in Small-Cell Networks
Naﬁseh Janatian, Ivan Stupia, and Luc Vandendorpe
3.1
Introduction
The rapid development of mobile internet and internet of things (IoTs) has given
rise to a serious concern about the highly growing trafﬁc and the support of
a massive number of connected devices. Therefore, the energy storage, power
management and increase of the battery life of these devices are major issues to
be considered in realizing the upcoming networks successfully. While many energy
efﬁcient strategies aim at expanding the system’s battery life by reducing the energy
consumption, the others propose to recycle the ambient energy associated with
the energy harvesting (EH) sources such as vibration, heat and electromagnetic
waves. Among these different EH techniques, radiofrequency (RF) EH via RF
electromagnetic waves is one of the most appealing techniques. In this context,
the idea of using the same electromagnetic ﬁeld for transferring both information
and power to wireless devices, called simultaneous wireless information and power
transfer (SWIPT) has recently attracted signiﬁcant attention. It is predicted that
SWIPT will become an essential part for many commercial and industrial wireless
systems in the future, including the IoT, wireless sensor networks and small-cell
networks [1].
The ideal SWIPT receiver is the one which is able to extract energy from the
same signal as that used for information decoding (ID) [2]. However, this extraction
is not possible with the current circuit designs, since the energy carried by the RF
signal is lost during the ID process. Hence, a considerable effort has been devoted to
investigate different practical SWIPT receiver architectures. These architectures can
N. Janatian () • I. Stupia • L. Vandendorpe
Institute of Information and Communication Technologies, Electronics, and Applied
Mathematics, Université catholique de Louvain, Louvain-la-Neuve, Belgium
e-mail: naﬁseh.janatian@uclouvain.be; ivan.stupia@uclouvain.be;
luc.vandendorpe@uclouvain.be
© Springer International Publishing AG 2018
D.N.K. Jayakody et al. (eds.), Wireless Information and Power Transfer:
A New Paradigm for Green Communications, DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-56669-6_3
65

66
N. Janatian et al.
Fig. 3.1 Antenna switching SWIPT receiver
(a)
(b)
Fig. 3.2 Practical designs for the co-located SWIPT receiver. (a) Time switching (TS). (b) Power
splitting (PS)
be classiﬁed into two groups of: parallel and co-located receivers [3]. In a parallel
receiver architecture, also referred to as antenna switching, energy harvester and
information receiver are equipped with independent antennas for EH and ID. As
shown in Fig. 3.1, the antenna array is divided into two subsets, one for EH and
the other for ID. In a co-located receiver architecture, the energy harvester and
the information receiver share the same antennas. Two practical methods to design
the co-located receiver architecture for SWIPT are time switching (TS) and power
splitting (PS). As shown in Fig. 3.2a, in a TS design, each reception time frame is
divided into two orthogonal time slots, one for ID and the other for EH and the
receiver switches in time between EH and ID modes. However, in PS design the
receiver splits the received signal into two streams of different power levels for EH
and ID, as shown in Fig. 3.2b.
To realize SWIPT, the available resources such as transmit power, subcarriers
and beamforming vectors should be allocated properly among both information and
energy transfer functionalities. In [4–6], the authors address the problem of design-
ing TS/PS SWIPT receivers in a point-to-point wireless environment to achieve

3
Multi-Objective Resource Allocation Optimization for SWIPT...
67
various trade-offs between wireless information transfer and EH. In multi-user
environments, however, most of the researches focus on the power and subcarrier
allocation among different users such that some criteria (throughput, harvested
power, fairness, etc.) are met. Various policies have been proposed for single input-
single output (SISO) and multiple input-single output (MISO) conﬁgurations in a
multi-user downlink channel [7–12].
Resource allocation algorithm design aiming at maximization of the energy
efﬁciency of data transmission in a SISO PS SWIPT multi-user system is considered
in [7] with an orthogonal frequency division multiple access (OFDMA).
In MISO conﬁguration, there exists an additional degree of freedom of beam-
forming vector optimization at the transmitter. In [11], a joint beamforming and
PS ratio allocation scheme was designed to minimize the power cost under the
constraints of throughput and harvested energy. The problem of joint power control
and TS in MISO SWIPT systems by considering the long-term power consumption
and heterogeneous quality of service (QoS) requirements for different types of
trafﬁcs is also studied in [9]. In [10] resource allocation algorithm design for SWIPT
is addressed in a multi-user coordinated multipoint (CoMP) network which includes
multiple multi-antenna remote radio heads (RRHs) and separate single antenna
EH and ID receivers. A MISO femtocell co-channel overlaid with a macro-cell is
considered in [12] to exploit the advantages of SWIPT while promoting the energy
efﬁciency. The femto base station sends information to ID femto users (FUs) and
transfers energy to EH FUs simultaneously, and also suppresses its interference to
macro users. A novel EH balancing technique for robust beamformers design in
MISO SWIPT system is also proposed in [8] considering imperfect channel state
information (CSI) at the transmitter.
SWIPT in multi-user MIMO interference channel is studied in [13, 14]. In [13] a
MIMO interference channel with two transmitter–receiver pairs is considered. When
both receivers are set in ID mode or EH mode, the achievable rate obtained with
iterative water-ﬁlling and without CSI sharing is studied. Strategies are proposed
for the mixed case of one ID receiver and one EH receiver, in order to maximize the
energy transfer to the EH receiver and minimize the interference to the ID receiver.
PS SWIPT in a multi-user MIMO interference channel scenario is also studied
in [14]. The objective is to minimize the total transmit power of all transmitters
by jointly designing the transmit beamformers, power splitters and receiver ﬁlters,
subject to the signal-to-interference-plus-noise ratio (SINR) constraint for ID and
the harvested power constraint for EH at each receiver.
In this chapter, we address SWIPT from the following points of view:
•
First, based on the literature review conducted, most of the existing works in
SWIPT consider single cell cases with one base station (BS) and single or mul-
tiple mobile users. In a multi-cell case the system becomes interference limited,
since reuse of subcarriers from users in different cells produce interference that
degrades the system performance in terms of throughput and spectral efﬁciency,
particularly for cell edge users. In this perspective, important features such as
inter-cell interference coordination (ICIC) and CoMP communication have been
introduced for cellular communication networks. However, while interference

68
N. Janatian et al.
links are always harmful for information decoding, constructive interferences
are useful for energy harvesting. This already shows the dualistic nature of
interference in SWIPT networks. On the other hand, it is worth remarking that
the signal strength of far-ﬁeld RF transmission is greatly impaired by the path
loss when the separation between the transmitter and the RF energy harvester
increases. From an architectural point of view, a potential solution that could
ensure ubiquitous SWIPT is the avoidance of the high signal attenuation due
to path loss. This can be achieved, thanks to densiﬁcation of network nodes.
Therefore, the concept of ICIC relying on a cloud-based centralized digital
processing can be the basis to SWIPT technologies ensuring large energy transfer
efﬁciency and reduced costs. In this scenario, a large number of low-cost RRHs,
also referred to as access points (APs), are randomly deployed and connected
to the baseband unit (BBU) pool through the fronthaul links. This concept has
generally been applied to macro-cells, i.e. large outdoor tower-based systems.
However, it can also be applied to small-cells that provide distributed coverage
across a large space such as a stadium, airport or ofﬁce building. Such an
architecture would permit an integrated control of power and data transfer while
keeping the RF front ends relatively close to the associated devices.
•
Second, we consider TS SWIPT technique, which is practically feasible and
can be implemented using simple switches, while PS receivers require highly
complex hardware due to the different power sensitivity levels of ID and EH
parts in each receiver. In this perspective, it is worth mentioning that TS SWIPT
receivers can be considered as a special case of dynamic PS SWIPT receivers
with on–off power splitting factor. Hence, since realistic values of the ID and
EH receivers’ sensitivities may differ by more than 30dB, TS and dynamic PS
SWIPT will have similar performance in practical scenarios.
•
Third, existing SWIPT works have considered single objective optimization
(SOO) framework to formulate the problem of resource allocation or beamform-
ing optimization. Popular objectives are classical performance metrics such as
sum rate/ throughput (to be maximized), or transmit power (to be minimized),
or sum of energy harvested (to be maximized). However, SWIPT has a multi-
objective nature, i.e. both throughput and the amount of harvested energy are
desirable objectives in designing SWIPT systems. In SOO one of these objectives
is selected as the sole objective while the others are considered as constraints.
This approach assumes that one of the objectives is of dominating importance
and also it requires prior knowledge about the accepted values of the constraints
related to the other objectives. Therefore, the fundamental approach used in
our study is the multi-objective optimization (MOO) which investigates the
optimization of the vector of objectives, for nontrivial situations, where there is a
conﬂict between objectives. This approach has been proposed lately for wireless
information systems [15] and is only considered in [16, 17] very recently for a
parallel SWIPT system which consists of a multi-antenna transmitter, a single-
antenna information receiver and multiple EH receivers equipped with multiple
antennas. In this scenario, the trade-off between the maximization of the energy

3
Multi-Objective Resource Allocation Optimization for SWIPT...
69
efﬁciency of information transmission and the maximization of the wireless
power transfer efﬁciency is studied by means of resource allocation using an
MOO framework.
3.2
System Model
We consider a small-cell network consisting of several APs which may overlay the
existing macro-cell network as in Fig. 3.3. Small-cells are realized using multiple
RRHs which are connected to a central BBU through the fronthaul links [18]. Macro
BS and RRHs are equipped with multiple antennas and serve multiple single antenna
users. We assume that each cell in Fig. 3.3 consists of NAP APs which are equipped
with NAj; j D 1; : : : ; NAP antennas and serve NUE single antenna user equipments
(UEs). The term UE in this chapter refers to the broader range of devices from the
ones directly used by the end-users to the autonomous sensors. The sets of all UEs
and all APs are denoted by NUE and NAP, respectively. Each user is assumed to be
served by multiple transmitters but with different beamforming vectors. Therefore,
the received signal in the ith UE can be modelled as:
yi D
NAP
X
jD1
hH
ij
NUE
X
lD1
xljsl C ni;
(3.1)
BBU Pool
Fronthaul
Macro BS
RRH
SWIPT UEs
Backhaul
Fig. 3.3 Small-cell network with TS scheme in MISO SWIPT system

70
N. Janatian et al.
where i; l 2 NUE; j 2 NAP, sl is the information symbol from APs to the lth
UE which originates from independent Gaussian codebooks, sl 	 C N .0; 1/ and
xlj 2 CNAj1 is the beamforming vector from the jth AP to the lth UE. We assume
quasi-static ﬂat fading channel for all UEs and denote by hij 2 CNAj1 the complex
channel vector from the jth AP to the ith UE. Also ni 	 C N .0; 2
i / is the circularly
symmetric complex Gaussian receiver noise which includes the antenna noise and
the ID processing noise in the ith user. According to (3.1), the achievable data rate
Ri (bits/s/Hz) for the ith UE can be found from the following equation:
Ri D log2
0
@1 C
PNAP
jD1 trace.HijXij/
2
i C PNAP
jD1
PNUE
lD1;l¤i trace.HijXlj/
1
A ;
(3.2)
where Xij D xijxH
ij , Hij D hijhH
ij and therefore Xij; Hij 2 CNAjNAj are rank-one
matrices for i 2 NUE; j 2 NAP. This information data rate is achieved by treating
the interference as noise.
Besides, the received energy per channel use Ei (assuming normalized energy
unit of Joule/(channel use) or W) in the ith UE is given by:
Ei D
NAP
X
jD1
NUE
X
lD1
trace.HijXlj/;
(3.3)
in which the antenna noise power is neglected. However, this amount of energy
cannot be harvested in practice due to the technical issues of RF-to-DC energy
conversion. The efﬁciency of the RF energy harvester depends on the efﬁciency of
the antenna, the accuracy of the impedance matching between the antenna and the
voltage multiplier, and the power efﬁciency of the voltage multiplier that converts
the received RF signals to DC voltage [19].
In this scenario, the UEs are assumed to use TS design for implementing SWIPT.
As stated before, in a TS scheme each reception time frame is divided into two
orthogonal time slots, one for ID and the other for EH. Consequently, denoting by
˛i the fraction of time devoted to ID in the ith UE, the average data rate in this
scheme can be written as:
RTS
i .X; ˛i/ D ˛iRi.X/;
(3.4)
where Ri.X/ can be found from (3.2). Also we have the following equation for the
amount of harvested energy at the ith UE:
ETS
hi .X; ˛i/ D .1  ˛i/	iEi.X/;
(3.5)
in which Ei.X/ can be found from (3.3) and 	i denotes the energy harvesting
efﬁciency factor of the ith UE.

3
Multi-Objective Resource Allocation Optimization for SWIPT...
71
3.3
Resource Allocation Optimization for TS SWIPT
In this section, we study the resource allocation optimization problem for our TS
SWIPT system in a multi-objective manner. First we formulate the problem of
designing the optimal transmit strategies X D ŒXlj
l2NUE;j2NAP and time switching
ratios ˛ D Œ˛l
l2NUE jointly to maximize the performance of all users simultane-
ously and then we propose an algorithm based on the majorization–minimization
approach [20] to solve this problem.
3.3.1
Problem Formulation
As mentioned earlier, the data rate and harvested energy are both desirable for
each user in SWIPT scenarios. Therefore, in our problem formulation, we deﬁne
the utility vector of the ith UE by ui.X; ˛i/ D ŒRTS
i .X; ˛i/; ETS
hi .X; ˛i/
 which
includes both the data rate and the harvested energy values of the ith TS SWIPT
UE. Our optimization objective is then to maximize the utility vector of the whole
system deﬁned by u.X; ˛/ D Œu1.X; ˛1/; u2.X; ˛2/; : : : ; uNUE.X; ˛NUE/
 jointly via
the multi-objective problem formulation. This problem can be written as:
Maximize
X;˛
u.X; ˛/
subject to
(1)
NAP
X
jD1
NUE
X
lD1
trace.Xlj/  Pmax
(2) Xlj  0; Rank.Xlj/ D 1; 8l; j
(3) ˛l 2 Œ0; 1
; 8l;
(3.6)
where constraint (1) denotes the average power constraint for APs across all
transmitting antennas with upper limit of Pmax, constraint (2) considers the rank-
one property of Xljs and constraint (3) is due to deﬁnition of TS rates.
The design problem for the ideal SWIPT case in which energy is assumed to be
extracted simultaneously while information decoding is the same as problem (3.6)
but with utility vectors of ui.X/ D ŒRi.X/; 	iEi.X/
, where Ri.X/ and Ei.X/ can be
found from (3.2) and (3.3), respectively. As already stated, this ideal receiver is not
feasible in practice; however, for theoretical benchmarking, its performance can be
used as an upper bound for the performance of the TS SWIPT.

72
N. Janatian et al.
3.3.2
Resource Allocation Algorithm
Our approach to solve problem (3.6) is to relax the rank constraints on Xljs.
It is proved in [21] that the optimal solution of the relaxed problem satisﬁes
Rank.Xlj/ D 1; 8l 2 NUE; 8j 2 NAP. As the objectives in problem (3.6) are con-
ﬂicting, this problem cannot be solved in a globally optimal way and the Pareto
optimality of the resource allocation will be adopted as the optimality criterion.
Pareto optimality is a state of allocating the resources in which none of the objectives
can be improved without degrading the other objectives [22]. As there usually exists
multiple Pareto optimal solutions for MOO problems, it is generally converted into
a SOO problem involving possibly some parameters or additional constraints to
compute each Pareto optimal point. This conversion is called scalarization and
examples of it are the weighted sum, weighted product and the weighted Chebyshev
methods [15].
To solve the relaxed version of MOO problem (3.6), we use the weighted
Chebyshev method, which provides the complete Pareto optimal set by varying
predeﬁned preference parameters. The weighted Chebyshev goal function is
fch.:/ D Minimum
i2NUE;mD1;2
u.m/
i
v.m/
i
;
(3.7)
where u.m/
i
denotes the mth element of ui.X; ˛i/ and v.1/
i ; v.2/
i
8i 2 NUE are
the predeﬁned preference parameters that specify the priority of each objective.
Therefore, introducing the new parameter , weighted Chebyshev scalarization is
equivalent to the following problem:
Maximize
X;˛;

subject to
(1) ˛iRi.X/  v.1/
i ; 8i
(2) .1  ˛i/	iEi.X/  v.2/
i ; 8i
(3)
NAP
X
jD1
NUE
X
lD1
trace.Xlj/  Pmax
(4) Xlj  0; 8l; j
(5) ˛i 2 Œ0; 1
; 8i;
(3.8)
The above problem is a non-convex semideﬁnite program (SDP) due to not only
the coupled TS ratios and Ri, Ei in the ﬁrst and second constraints but also the
deﬁnition of Ri.X/ as presented in (3.2). Introducing the new variables Ri; Ei; Ii and
ˇi, problem (3.8) can be represented as:

3
Multi-Objective Resource Allocation Optimization for SWIPT...
73
Maximize
X;˛i;ˇi;Ri;Ei;Ii;; 8i

subject to
(C1) ˛iRi  v.1/
i ; 8i
(C2) ˇi	iEi  v.2/
i ; 8i
(C3) Ei D
NAP
X
jD1
NUE
X
lD1
trace.HijXlj/; 8i
(C4) Ii D
NAP
X
jD1
NUE
X
lD1;l¤i
trace.HijXlj/; 8i
(C5) Ri D log.Ei C 2
i /  log.Ii C 2
i /; 8i
(C6)
NAP
X
jD1
NUE
X
lD1
trace.Xlj/  Pmax
(C7) Xlj  0; 8l; j
(C8) ˛i C ˇi D 1; 8i
(C9) ˛i 2 Œ0; 1
;
(3.9)
where Ei and Ii deﬁned in (C3) and (C4) are the received energy and the interference
level in the ith UE, respectively. Also (C5) is directly obtained from substituting the
deﬁnition of Ei and Ii in the deﬁnition of Ri given by Eq. (3.2). It is shown in [21]
that the constraint (C5) in problem (3.9) can be relaxed to .C5/ deﬁned below:
.C5/ Ri  log.Ei C 2
i /  log.Ii C 2
i /:
(3.10)
We deﬁne O D log./, and use the monotonicity and concavity properties of the
logarithm function to reformulate the above problem as below:
Maximize
X;˛i;ˇi;Ri;Ei;Ii;O; 8i
O
subject to
.C1/ log.˛i/ C log.Ri/  O C log.v.1/
i /
.C2/ log.ˇi/ C log.	iEi/  O C log.v.2/
i /
(C3)–(C4)
.C5/ Ri  log.Ei C 2
i /  log.Ii C 2
i /
(C6)–(C9);
(P)
in which the nonconvexity of problem (3.9) is concentrated in inequality .C5/.
Now problem (P) can be considered as a DC (difference of convex) programming

74
N. Janatian et al.
[23] since .C5/ is the difference of two convex functions (Ri  log.Ei C 2
i ),
 log.Ii C 2
i /). Therefore, it can be solved using local optimization method
of convex–concave procedure (CCP) [24]. CCP is a majorization–minimization
algorithm [20] that solves DC programs as a sequence of convex programs by
linearizing the concave part, log.Ii C 2
i /, around the current iteration solution of Ii.
To this end, we use the ﬁrst order Taylor expansion and replace problem (P) in the
kth step by the following subproblem:
Maximize
X;˛i;ˇi;Ri;Ei;Ii;O; 8i
O
subject to
.C1/; .C2/; (C3)–(C4)
.C5/ Ri  log.Ei C 2
i / 
 
log.Ik
i C 2
i / C
1
Ik
i C 2
i
.Ii  Ik
i /
!
(C6)–(C9):
(Pk)
This problem is a convex SDP and it can be solved by standard optimization
techniques such as Interior-Point Method. In this paper, we have used the CVX
package to solve (Pk). The linearization point is updated with each iteration until
it satisﬁes the termination criterion as described in Algorithm 1. It can be easily
veriﬁed that if Ik
i is the stationary point of subproblem (Pk), i.e. fulﬁlling the
Algorithm 1: CCP Algorithm for TS SWIPT
1: Deﬁne a step size  2 R and a given tolerance " > 0.
2: Initialize: choose a value for I0
i inside the convex set deﬁned by (C1)-(C4),
(C6)-(C9).
3: Set k WD 0.
4: For the given Ik
i , solve the convex SDP of (Pk) to obtain the solution OIi.Ik
i /.
5: if kOIi.Ik
i /  Ik
i k ⩽" then
6:
stop.
7: else
8:
update Ik
i D Ik
i C .OIi.Ik
i /  Ik
i /.
9:
update iteration, k D k C 1.
10:
go back to line 4.
11: end if

3
Multi-Objective Resource Allocation Optimization for SWIPT...
75
KKT conditions of subproblem (Pk), it is also a stationary point of problem (P)
[25]. The conditions under which the constrained CCP algorithm converges to a
stationary point of the original problem are studied in [26] using Zangwill’s global
convergence theory [27] of iterative algorithms. These conditions are shown to be
satisﬁed for Algorithm 1 in [21].
3.4
Numerical Results
In this section, we provide numerical results to demonstrate the performance of the
proposed beamforming and TS algorithm in terms of harvested energy-data rate
trade-off. We investigate the effect of different parameters on this trade-off to get a
general overview for the practical design of the network.
3.4.1
Experimental Setup
We consider two small-cells as shown in Fig. 3.4, consisting of NAP D 2 APs
equipped with NA1, NA2 antennas and NUE TS SWIPT sensors. Sensors are dis-
tributed uniformly in a region bounded by two concentric circles with radius of dmin
and dmax. The distance of APs from each other is denoted by D as shown in Fig. 3.4.
Transmission channel gains, hij; 8i 2 NUE; j D 1; 2, depend on the location of
sensors with respect to APs and the channel fading model. At each sensor location,
channel gains are generated with Rayleigh fading and path loss exponent of 3. Noise
powers are assumed to be 2
i D 90 dBm, 8i 2 NUE and the maximum total power
budget is set to Pmax D 1 W. Parameter assumptions in this section (unless they are
clearly stated with different values) are summarized in Table 3.1.
3.4.2
Discussion
In this section, we illustrate the Pareto boundary of TS and ideal SWIPT systems
to investigate the trade-off between the harvested energy and the data rate. To plot
the Pareto boundaries, we solve the optimization problems (3.6) using Algorithm 1
in several directions by changing the preference weights of v.1/
i ; v.2/
i ; 8i. To have
a general view of the Pareto boundary, we ﬁrst consider a setup which includes
Fig. 3.4 Simulation scheme
dmin
D
dmax

76
N. Janatian et al.
Table 3.1 Parameter assumptions
Parameters
Speciﬁcation
Parameters
Speciﬁcation
NAP
2
Pmax
1 W
NA1 D NA2
2
dmin
2 m
N0
150 dBm/Hz
dmax
10 m
W
1 MHz
Multipath exponent
3
D
20 m
Fading
Rayleigh
	i
0.6
No. of channel realizations
100
two UEs served by two coordinated APs. The ﬁrst UE is assumed to be a SWIPT
sensor while the second UE is assumed to be an ID receiver such as smartphone.
Therefore, we set v.1/
1
D 21; v.2/
1
D 2; v.1/
2
D 1 and search for the optimal
solutions in different directions by changing the values of 1 and 2. In this setup,
1 changes the trade-off between the harvested energy and the data rate in the ﬁrst
UE and 2 changes the data rate preference between the ﬁrst and second UE.
Figure 3.5 depicts the 3D Pareto boundary and its three 2D projections for one
channel realization. As can be seen in Fig. 3.5a, the maximum harvested energy
occurs when both the data rate of the ﬁrst and second UEs are almost zero. By
decreasing the amount of desired harvested energy, we can achieve higher data rates.
In this scenario, the ﬁrst UE (SWIPT sensor) desires high amount of harvested
energy. Achieving high data rate is not required by this sensor while it is desired
for the second UE. The desired trade-off is therefore the boundary marked in pink
colour in Fig. 3.5d. The corresponding counterparts are also shown in Fig. 3.5b,c. To
explain the behaviour of the Pareto boundary in this area, we study the performance
in three different regions shown in Fig. 3.5d. At point A, we have the maximum
data rate for the second UE, i.e. RTS
2
D 33 bits/s/Hz, RTS
1
D 2 bits/s/Hz and ETS
1
D
0:08 mW. At this point, the whole power is assigned to the AP which is closest to the
second UE (it should be noted that we have assumed global power constraint for the
APs in our system model). A small part of this power is only devoted to the sensor
and therefore we will have such a low data rate and harvested energy in the ﬁrst UE.
By adapting the TS ratio of the sensor we can increase the harvested energy to a
certain point B in which we have ETS
1
D 0:5 mW with the data rate of RTS
1
D 1:8
bits/s/Hz in this case. As a result while we are increasing the harvested energy, data
rate of the second UE decreases only slightly to RTS
2
D 30 bits/s/Hz. However, to
further increase the harvested energy, the beamformers should be aligned toward the
ﬁrst UE and this yields to an interference which suddenly decreases the data rate of
the second UE to RTS
2
D 10 bits/s/Hz at point C. As a result, region 2 is the region
in which both APs are active. In region 3, we are willing to harvest more energy
and therefore the power will be assigned to the AP which is closer to the ﬁrst UE.
Therefore by transferring the power to the ﬁrst AP and adapting the TS ratio we
could harvest up to ETS
1
D 0:9 mW (point D).

3
Multi-Objective Resource Allocation Optimization for SWIPT...
77
40
30
R1
TS(bits/sec/Hz)
20
10
0
0
0.2
E1
TS(W)
0.4
0.6
0.8
×10-3
35
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
1
R2
TS(bits/sec/Hz)
(a)
R1
TS(bits/sec/Hz)
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
E1
TS(W)
×10-3
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
(b)
R2
TS(bits/sec/Hz)
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
R1
TS(bits/sec/Hz)
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
(c)
R2
TS(bits/sec/Hz)
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
E1
TS(W)
×10-3
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
Region 2
Region 3
Region 1
A
B
C
D
(d)
Fig. 3.5 3D Pareto boundary of TS SWIPT and its projections. (a) RTS
1 =ETS
1 =RTS
2 . (b) RTS
1 =ETS
1 .
(c) RTS
1 =RTS
2 . (d) ETS
1 =RTS
2
Now we consider a symmetric setup which includes N D NUE
2
D 1 UE with the
same priority in each small-cell. Therefore we set v.1/
i
D 1; v.2/
i
D 1 8i and search
for the optimal solutions by changing the value of 1 only. Figure 3.6 shows the
average Pareto boundary of the ﬁrst TS SWIPT UE. As it can be seen, the average
harvested energy is a monotonically decreasing function of the achievable data
rate. This result shows that these two objectives are generally conﬂicting and any
resource allocation algorithm that maximizes the harvested energy cannot maximize
the data rate. In this plot, as the amount of harvested energy increases from 0.45 W
to 1.8 mW, the average data rate reduces from 29.13 to 0.2657 bits/s/Hz.
Pareto boundary of the infeasible ideal SWIPT is also shown in this ﬁgure
as an upper bound. It can be observed that the maximum value of the harvested
energy Ehmax and the achievable data rates Rmax are the same for ideal and TS
SWIPT. However, as expected, the minimum value of the harvested energy and the

78
N. Janatian et al.
R1(bits/sec/Hz)
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Eh1(W)
×10-3
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
2
Ideal SWIPT
Rmax
TS SWIPT
(R*, E*
h)
Ehmax
Fig. 3.6 Pareto boundary of TS SWIPT and ideal SWIPT
achievable data rates are not zero in this case since the ideal SWIPT is assumed
to be able to harvest energy while decoding the information. It should be noticed
that if the AP is able to change its beamforming vector for EH and ID, the optimal
strategy would be to use the beamforming vectors related to the two extreme points
of the ideal SWIPT Pareto boundary in each time slot. In this case, the optimal TS
Pareto boundary would simply be the dashed linear line in Fig. 3.6. However, since
in our scenario the same beamforming vector is used for EH and ID, the optimal
TS Pareto boundary is the envelope of all linear lines connecting the projection of
ideal Pareto boundary points .R; E
h / on two axes, i.e. .0; E
h / and .R; 0/. Besides,
as it is evident from Fig. 3.6, the Pareto boundary of TS SWIPT generated from the
objectives in our problem formulation is non-convex. This is due to the multiple
AP schemes and joint optimization of TS ratios and the beamforming vectors
considered in this problem. In the following, we study the effect of the network
parameters such as the number of UEs, distance of the APs from each other and the
maximum possible distance of UEs from the APs on the Pareto boundary of the TS
SWIPT UE.

3
Multi-Objective Resource Allocation Optimization for SWIPT...
79
R1(bits/sec/Hz)
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Eh1(W)
× 10-3
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
2
TS SWIPT, N=1
Ideal SWIPT, N=1
TS SWIPT, N=2
Ideal SWIPT, N=2
TS SWIPT, N=3
Ideal SWIPT, N=3
Fig. 3.7 Pareto boundary of TS SWIPT and ideal SWIPT
3.4.2.1
Effect of the Number of UEs
To study the effect of the number of UEs, we consider a symmetric setup which
includes N D NUE
2
D 1; 2; 3 UEs in each small-cell with the same user preference
weights as in previous plot. Figure 3.7 shows the Pareto boundary of the ﬁrst TS
SWIPT UE in this setup.
As can be seen, increasing the number of UEs highly affects the possible amount
of harvestable energy at each UE, while the maximum data rate changes very
slightly by increasing the number of UEs. For example, the maximum harvested
energy in Fig. 3.7 reduces approximately from 1.8 mW to 0.5 mW and 0.3 mW by
increasing the number of UEs at each small-cell from N D 1 to N D 2 and N D 3,
respectively. This result is expectable, due to the ﬁxed total power consumption
assumption and the direct impact of transmit power on the received energy.
In Fig. 3.7 we have also plotted the Pareto boundaries of ideal SWIPT for
N D 1; 2; 3 UEs in each small-cell. Comparing the results of ideal and TS SWIPT
for different number of UEs shows that the harvested energy loss of TS SWIPT with
respect to the ideal SWIPT for a ﬁxed required data rate reduces with increasing the
number of UEs. As can be seen in Fig. 3.7, to achieve R1 D 5 bits/s/Hz in the ﬁrst
UE, we lose approximately 1 mW in TS SWIPT with respect to the ideal SWIPT
in N D 1 UE per small-cell. However, this amount reduces to nearly 0.3 mW and
0.2 mW in N D 2 and N D 3, respectively.

80
N. Janatian et al.
3.4.2.2
Effect of the Distance D Between APs
The effect of multi-user interference on the harvested energy-data rate trade-off is
shown in Fig. 3.8. In this ﬁgure, we have plotted the Pareto boundaries for the ﬁrst
UE for different AP distances of D D 10; 15; 20 m for two cases of dmax D 5; 10 m.
As can be seen in Fig. 3.8a, in dmax D 5 m, the Pareto boundaries are quite
close to each other for different values of D. The maximum harvested energy is
slightly higher in D D 10 m because of the higher level of interference in this
case. However, by increasing the demand for the data rate, this interference will
degrade the performance. In the case of dmax D 10 m, as plotted in Fig. 3.8b, Pareto
boundaries for D D 15; 20 m are very close to each other. However, by decreasing
the distance to D D 10 m the harvested energy increases in a ﬁxed desired data
rate. This is due to the fact that in higher dmaxs the probability of utilizing both APs
increases while in lower dmaxs the UEs are mostly fed with their nearest AP.
3.4.2.3
Effect of Maximum UE Distance dmax from the AP
The effect of small-cell size is investigated in this section by plotting the Pareto
boundaries for different maximum distance of UEs from the APs. Figure 3.9 shows
the harvested energy-data rate trade-off for N D 1, dmax D 5; 7:5; 10 m. As can be
seen, by decreasing the maximum distance of the UEs from the AP, in the same
number of UEs, the system can beneﬁt from less path loss and harvest more energy.
This superior performance is mostly seen in the region when harvested energy has a
higher preference weight. By decreasing the dmax further to 5 m, the system can also
beneﬁt from less interference due to the farther distance of UEs in each cell from
the AP of the other cell and therefore, this better performance can also be observed
in the data-rate preference region.
3.4.2.4
Effect of Inter-User Trade-Off
To study the trade-off between users in different small-cells, we choose different
preference weights for NUE D 2 UEs by setting v2
1 D 12; v2
1 D 2 and v1
2 D
1; v2
2 D 1. As a result, the trade-off between harvested energy and data rate is
changing with 1 for both UEs the same as previous plots, but the priority of the
ﬁrst UE is 2 times the second UE.
Figure 3.10a,b show the Pareto boundaries of these two UEs for 2 D 1; 5; 10; 15.
As can be seen, both UEs have the same Pareto boundaries for 2 D 1. To beneﬁt
from better performance in the ﬁrst UE, we increase the 2. It can be inferred from
Fig. 3.10 that this superior performance is not achievable by only adapting the TS
ratio. Consequently beamformers will be aligned toward the ﬁrst UE by allocating
more power to the ﬁrst AP which results in increasing the ETS
h1 without increasing
the interference on the ﬁrst UE. Hence the maximum data rate and harvested energy

3
Multi-Objective Resource Allocation Optimization for SWIPT...
81
R1
TS(bits/sec/Hz)
Eh1
TS(W)
×10-3
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
D=20 m
D=15 m
D=10 m
0
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.1
×10-3
6.4
6.6
6.8
7
7.2
7.4
(a)
R1
TS(bits/sec/Hz)
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Eh1
TS(W)
×10-3
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
D=10 m
D=15 m
D=20 m
(b)
Fig. 3.8 Pareto boundary of TS SWIPT for different D and dmax D 5; 10 m. (a) dmax D 5 m.
(b) dmax D 10 m

82
N. Janatian et al.
R1
TS(bits/sec/Hz)
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
Eh1
TS(W)
× 10-3
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
dmax=10 m
dmax=7,5 m
dmax=5 m
Fig. 3.9 Pareto boundary of TS SWIPT for different dmax
both decrease in the second UE. Therefore, improving the performance of one
user by increasing its preference weight will be at the expense of decreasing the
performance of the other user drastically.
3.4.2.5
Effect of the TS Ratios ’i
In this section, we study the effect of the TS ratios on harvested energy-data rate
trade-off. Speciﬁcally, we compare the Pareto boundaries of the optimal TS SWIPT
with the Pareto boundaries of the TS SWIPT which uses ﬁxed predeﬁned switching
rate. We consider a symmetric scenario with N D 1 and for the ﬁxed switching rate
case, we assume the same TS rate for both users. Figure 3.11 illustrates the Pareto
boundaries for ﬁxed switching rates of ˛1 D 0:1; : : : ; 0:9. As can be seen, for lower
switching rates, we have higher maximum harvested energy and lower maximum
achievable data rates. However, the optimal TS SWIPT leverages the best possible
harvested energy and data rate by optimizing ˛i; 8i jointly with the beamforming
strategy.

3
Multi-Objective Resource Allocation Optimization for SWIPT...
83
R1 (bits/sec/Hz)
E1(W)
×10-3
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
θ2=1
θ2=5
θ2=10
θ2=15
(a)
R2
TS (Bits/sec/Hz)
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Eh
2
TS (W)
×10-3
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
θ2=1
θ2=5
θ2=10
θ2=15
(b)
Fig. 3.10 Pareto boundary of (a) ﬁrst and (b) second TS SWIPT UEs with different priorities

84
N. Janatian et al.
R1
TS(bits/sec/Hz)
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
E1
TS(W)
×10-4
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
αi=0.1...0.9
Adaptive TS SWIPT
Fig. 3.11 Pareto boundary of TS SWIPT with ﬁxed and adaptive TS ratios
3.5
Conclusion
In this chapter, we studied the resource allocation optimization for SWIPT in small-
cell networks. We considered a small-cell network with MISO SWIPT system
model and we addressed the problem of joint transmit beamforming and receiver
time switching design in an MOO manner. The design problem was formulated as
a non-convex MOO problem with the goal of maximizing the harvested energy and
information data rates for all users simultaneously. The proposed MOO problem
was scalarized employing the weighted Chebyshev method. This problem is a non-
convex SDP which is relaxed and solved using convex–concave procedure based on
the majorization–minimization algorithm. The trade-off between energy harvested
and information data rate and the effect of network parameters on this trade-off was
investigated by means of numerical results. The numerical results showed that:
•
For TS SWIPT receiver, the energy performance loss with respect to ideal case
increases when the number of UEs decreases.
•
Interference is beneﬁcial in case of low-rate devices operating in a very dense
network.

3
Multi-Objective Resource Allocation Optimization for SWIPT...
85
•
Cooperation among multiple transmitters can be used to drastically increase the
achievable trade-off of one UE but the effect on the trade-off of other UEs could
be detrimental.
In this work, we have considered perfect CSI. However, channel estimation is
not possible during energy harvesting phase which may lead to out-dated CSI if
the harvesting phase is too long. Reliability of CSI estimation also depends on
TS ratio. Analysing this dependence and its associated trade-off which implies
robust beamforming and SWIPT strategy can be considered as an interesting future
work. Also generalization of this work can be applied in distributed massive MIMO
scenario which has the potential to increase the harvested energy.
Acknowledgements The authors would like to thank IAP BESTCOM project funded by BEL-
SPO, and the FNRS for the ﬁnancial support.
References
1. S. Bi, C. Ho, R. Zhang, Wireless powered communication: opportunities and challenges. IEEE
Commun. Mag. 53(4), 117–125 (2015)
2. L.R. Varshney, Transporting information and energy simultaneously, in IEEE International
Symposium on Information Theory, Auckland, December 2008
3. R. Zhang, C.K. Ho, MIMO broadcasting for simultaneous wireless information and power
transfer. IEEE Trans. Wirel. Commun. 12(5), 1989–2001 (2013)
4. L. Liu, R. Zhang, K.C. Chua, Wireless information transfer with opportunistic energy
harvesting. IEEE Trans. Wirel. Commun. 12(1), 288–300 (2013)
5. L. Liu, R. Zhang, K.C. Chua, Wireless information and power transfer: a dynamic power
splitting approach. IEEE Trans. Commun. 61(9), 3990–4001 (2013)
6. X. Zhou, Training-based SWIPT: optimal power splitting at the receiver. IEEE Trans. Veh.
Technol. 64(9), 4377–4382 (2015)
7. D.W.K. Ng, E.S. Lo, R. Schober, Wireless information and power transfer: energy efﬁciency
optimization in OFDMA systems. IEEE Trans. Wirel. Commun. 12(12), 6352–6370 (2013)
8. H. Zhang, K. Song, Y. Huang et al., Energy harvesting balancing technique for robust
beamforming in multiuser MISO SWIPT system, in Proceedings of IEEE International
Conference on Wireless Communication and Signal Processing (WCSP), Hangzhou, October
2013
9. Q. Shi, L. Liu, W. Xu et al., Joint transmit beamforming and receive power splitting for MISO
SWIPT systems. IEEE Trans. Wirel. Commun. 13(6), 3269–3280 (2014)
10. D. Wing, K. Ng, R. Schober, Resource allocation for coordinated multipoint networks with
wireless information and power transfer, in IEEE Global Communications Conference, Austin,
TX, December 2014
11. Y. Dong, M. Hossain, J. Cheng, Joint power control and time switching for SWIPT systems
with heterogeneous QoS requirements. IEEE Commun. Lett. 20(2), 328–331 (2015)
12. M. Sheng, L. Wang, X. Wang et al., Energy efﬁcient beamforming in MISO heterogeneous
cellular networks with wireless information and power transfer. IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun.
34(4), 954–968 (2016)
13. J. Park, B. Clerckx, Joint wireless information and energy transfer in a two-user MIMO
interference channel. IEEE Trans. Wirel. Commun. 12(8), 4210–4221 (2013)
14. Z. Zong, H. Feng, F.R. Yu et al., Optimal transceiver design for SWIPT in k-user MIMO
interference channels. IEEE Trans. Wirel. Commun. 15(1), 430–445 (2016)

86
N. Janatian et al.
15. E. Bjornson, E.A. Jorswieck, M. Debbah et al., Multiobjective signal processing optimization:
the way to balance conﬂicting metrics in 5G systems. IEEE Signal Process. Mag. 31(6), 14–23
(2014)
16. S. Leng, D.W.K. Ng, N. Zlatanov et al., Multi-objective beamforming for energy-efﬁcient
SWIPT systems, in IEEE International Conference on Communications (ICC), Kuala Lumpur,
22–27 May 2016
17. S. Leng, D.W.K. Ng, N. Zlatanov et al., Multi-objective resource allocation in full-duplex
SWIPT systems (2015). arXiv preprint arXiv:1509.05959
18. M. Peng, Y. Li, J. Jiang et al., Heterogeneous cloud radio access networks: a new perspective
for enhancing spectral and energy efﬁciencies. IEEE Trans. Wirel. Commun. 21(6), 126–135
(2014)
19. X. Lu, P. Wang, D. Niyato, Wireless networks with RF energy harvesting: a contemporary
survey. Commun. Surv. Tutorials 17(2), 757–789 (2015)
20. D.R. Hunter, K. Lange, A tutorial on MM algorithms. Am. Stat. 58(1), 30–37 (2004)
21. N. Janatian, I. Stupia, L. Vandendorpe, Joint MOO of transmit precoding and receiver design
in a downlink time switching MISO SWIPT system (2016). arXiv preprint arXiv:1610.08290
22. P.M. Pardalos, A. Migdalas, L. Pitsoulis, Pareto optimality, game theory and equilibria, in
Pareto Optimality, ed. by D.T. Luc (Springer Science & Business Media, New York, 2008),
pp. 481–515
23. R.H.N. Thoai, Dc programming: an overview. J. Optim. Theory Appl. 193(1), 1–43 (1999)
24. R.H. Tutuncu, K.C. Toh, M.J. Todd, Solving semideﬁnite-quadratic-linear programs using
SDPT3. Math. Program. 95(2), 189–217 (2003)
25. N. Janatian, I. Stupia, L. Vandendorpe, Joint multi-objective transmit precoding and receiver
time switching design for MISO SWIPT systems, in IEEE 17th International Workshop on
Signal Processing Advances in Wireless Communications, University of Edinburgh, July 2016
26. G.R. Lanckriet, B.K. Sriperumbudur, On the convergence of the concave-convex procedure.
Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst. 22, 1759–1767 (2009)
27. W.I. Zangwill, Nonlinear Programming (Prentice Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ, 1969)

Chapter 4
Harvesting Signal Power from Constructive
Interference in Multiuser Downlinks
Christos Masouros
4.1
Introduction to Constructive Interference: Deﬁnitions,
Examples, and Classiﬁcation
Interference is traditionally considered as the major limitation in meeting the
ever-increasing demands for transmission rates and quality of service (QoS) in
current and future wireless communication systems. In multi-user and multi-
access communications, interference is typically manifested in the communication
channel, where signals of different links are superimposed. Particular effort has
been placed on utilizing the channel’s state information (CSI) to counteract its
effects on transmission. It has been shown that in both time- and frequency-division
duplex modes the CSI can be made known to the transmitter (a situation termed
as CSIT). The a priori knowledge of interference is therefore not an uncommon
situation and it is in fact readily available at the cellular base stations during
downlink transmission, when CSIT combined with the knowledge of all data
symbols intended for transmission can be used to predict the resulting interference
between the symbols.
The seminal work of Costa in [1] has shown by information-theoretic analysis
that in the cases where CSIT is available, known interference does not affect the
capacity of the broadcast channel, which is therefore equivalent to the respective
noise-only channel. In [1] it is also stressed that the optimum strategy to achieve this
capacity would be to invest power not in cancelling interference, but rather in coding
along interference. Nevertheless, the majority of existing transmission strategies
attempt to eliminate, cancel, or pre-subtract interference. Indeed, a number of
important technologies exist that make use of the channel knowledge to mitigate
C. Masouros ()
University College London, Torrington Place, London, UK
e-mail: chris.masouros@ieee.org
© Springer International Publishing AG 2018
D.N.K. Jayakody et al. (eds.), Wireless Information and Power Transfer:
A New Paradigm for Green Communications, DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-56669-6_4
87

88
C. Masouros
or manage interference. Only recently, however, there has been a rising interest in
making use of the interference power to enhance the useful signal [2, 3].
What justiﬁes the traditional interference-cancellation approaches is that, from
a statistical perspective, interference imposes a “random,” noise-like perturbation
to the transmitted information and introduces a variance to the received signal
which on average hinders detection and deteriorates the resulting performance. By
employing an instantaneous, as opposed to statistical, view of interference one can
see that interference can contribute to the detection of the useful signal and in fact,
act as a source of useful signal power. This phenomenon can be utilized in the
CSIT-assisted downlink transmission and other known-interference scenarios where
interference can be predicted, and its power can be harvested to improve the wireless
link’s performance. In modern systems where transmitted power is becoming a
scarce resource and energy efﬁciency is becoming more and more central in the
overall network design, the harvesting and use of signal power from interference
which is inherent in the communication system provides an important source of
green useful power for reliable signal detection.
4.1.1
Is All Interference Harmful? Examples and Deﬁnitions
To motivate the concept of interference exploitation, this section presents a qualita-
tive analysis of instantaneous interference and explores the possibility of treating
part of interference as constructive, as a step towards the design of innovative
transmission schemes.
A trivial example of a two-user link is shown in Fig. 4.1a, where we deﬁne the
desired symbol of user 1 as u1 and the interfering symbol from user 2 as u2. For
simplicity, and without loss of generality, let us assume that these belong to a Binary
Phase Shift Keying (BPSK) constellation and that u1 D 1; u2 D 1. For illustration
purposes, ignore the noise at the receiver, and assume a lossless channel from the
1
u1
u2
y1=u1+u2· ρ
ρ
u1=1, u2=-1
y1
u1
y1
u1
i) ρ=0.5
ii) ρ=-0.5
1
-1
(a)
(b)
north
nconstr
Destructive
Constructive
Fig. 4.1 The concept of constructive interference—a two-user example: (a) transmission scenario,
(b) destructive (i) and constructive (ii) interference

4
Harvesting Signal Power from Constructive Interference in Multiuser Downlinks
89
intended transmitter to the receiver and an interfering channel represented by the
coefﬁcient . Accordingly, the received signal can be expressed as
y1 D u1 C u2  ;
(4.1)
where u2   is the interference. Note that this model also corresponds to a multiple-
input-single-output (MISO) transmission with a matched ﬁltering receiver tuned to
the channel of user 1, where the correlation between the two channels is  [4]. In
Fig. 4.1b two distinct cases are shown, depicting the transmitted () and received
(o) symbols for user 1 on the BPSK constellation. In case (i) with  D 0:5 it can
be seen from (4.1) that y1 D 0:5. In this case, the destructive interference from user
2 has caused the received symbol of user 1 to move towards the decision threshold
(denoted by the dashed line) in the BPSK constellation. The received power of user 1
has been reduced and its detection is prone to low-power noise. In case (ii), however,
for  D 0:5, the system equation (4.1) yields y1 D 1:5, and hence the interference
from user 2 is constructive. The power received by user 1 has been augmented due to
the interference from user 2 and now its detection is tolerant to noise nconstr of higher
power compared to north for the orthogonal transmission case without interference.
It should be stressed that in both cases the transmit power for each user in this
elementary example is equal to one. Note that, while the above example refers to
a two-user transmission scenario for illustration purposes, the fundamental concept
can be extended to more users, multipath transmission, inter-cell interference in a
multi-cell environment, and other generic interference-limited systems.
Let us make the above observation more explicit, by looking at the geometrical
representation in a two-user example with arbitrary channels. In Fig. 4.2 we show a
scenario of two users with channels h1 and h2. One could think of this as a multiple-
input-single-output (MISO) channel with two transmit antennas and one receive
antenna. To focus the study on the interference between the two transmissions,
in line with the above example, noise is also assumed to be zero here. In both
subﬁgures, the axes depict the directions of the complex-valued channels, and
u1 D 1; u2 D 1 like in the case above. The bold-lined arrow in each subﬁgure
represents the received signal y and the purple arrows denote its projection to each
1
1
-1
-1
1
1
-1
-1
(a)
(b)
y = u1·h1 + u2·h2
h2 axis
h2 axis
u1·h1
u1·h1
u2·h2
u2·h2
h1 axis
h1 axis
d1
d1
d2
d2
y = u1·h1 + u2·h2
Fig. 4.2 Geometrical representations of interference scenarios: (a) destructive, (b) constructive

90
C. Masouros
of the channel axes which represents the match-ﬁltered symbols d1; d2 at the receiver
before the decision stage. In the case of Fig. 4.2a, the two transmitted symbols add
up destructively in the received signal y. Consequently, the projections d1; d2 of
the received signal on the channel axes yield reduced symbol energy compared
to the transmitted symbols u1; u2 and the detection is destructively affected by
interference. In the case of Fig. 4.2b, however, the addition of the users’ transmitted
symbols yields a received signal which has higher amplitude compared to the
destructive case. As a result, the detected symbols d1; d2 have higher amplitudes
compared to the destructive case, and more importantly compared to the transmitted
symbols u1; u2 themselves, which in a practical scenario and in the presence of noise
translate to higher signal to noise ratios (SNRs).
Note that in both cases the amplitude of the transmitted symbols u1; u2 (and hence
the transmitted power) is the same, and it is the interfering power that increases the
received amplitude (hence the SNR) in the second case. Moreover, note that in the
case where different combinations of symbols u1; u2 are transmitted, the conﬁgura-
tions of Fig. 4.2a, b may result in constructive and destructive interference, respec-
tively. In other words, a channel conﬁguration that yields constructive interference
for a speciﬁc symbol combination may result in destructive interference for other
combinations and vice versa. It is clear from the above that the characterization of
interference and its separation into constructive–destructive depends not only on the
correlation of the transmission paths but also on the instantaneous symbol values.
4.1.2
Systematic Classiﬁcation of Interference for Generic
Constellations
To utilize the above observations and take advantage of constructive interference
in a systematic way in practical scenarios, it is important to be able to classify
interference into constructive and destructive systematically. Accordingly, here we
discuss the mathematical classiﬁcation of interference for a number of PSK and
QAM constellations.
Let us ﬁrst derive the mathematical classiﬁcation criteria for PSK modulation.
Figure 4.3a–c shows Monte Carlo generated received constellation points for differ-
ent PSK modulations. These are represented by randomly positioned dots in the PSK
constellations, centered around the nominal PSK constellation points. The red dots
denote received signals corrupted by destructive interference while the green dots
represent received symbols resulting from constructive interference. The generic
criterion for constructive/destructive interference classiﬁcation is as follows:
Constructive interference is that which yields received signals that have
increased distances from the decision boundaries of the modulated-symbol
constellation, with respect to the nominal constellation points.

4
Harvesting Signal Power from Constructive Interference in Multiuser Downlinks
91
Fig. 4.3 Basic PSK and
QAM constellations and
constructive
(green)–destructive (red)
interference sectors
1
-1
BPSK
QPSK
8PSK
Re
Im
Im
Re
(a)
(b)
(c)
1+i
1-i
-1+i
-1-i
Re
Im
16-QAM
(d)
Note that this is a simplistic deﬁnition of constructive interference, where the
comparison is made to the nominal constellation points. In the context of SNR
optimization, we will see in Sect. 4.2.2 that the deﬁnition can be extended to
arbitrary distances from the constellation’s decision boundaries to reﬂect varying
SNR and QoS requirements for the communication links. Based on the above
deﬁnition, below we derive the mathematical criteria for constructive interference
for BPSK, QPSK, and generic M-PSK modulation.
BPSK Let us take a closer look at Fig. 4.3a, and let us we deﬁne ui D eji as the
PSK symbol of interest and yi as the received signal without noise, for the ith user.
Accordingly, the interference to the ith user can be found as gi D yi  ui. For
the BPSK modulation of Fig. 4.3a the desired user’s signal ui 2 f1; C1g, and
therefore the decision boundary is the imaginary axis. Constructive interference
pushes the received symbol away from the decision boundary, and therefore for
ui D 1 interference is constructive when its real part is negative, and for ui D 1
interference is constructive when it’s positive. Accordingly, for BPSK, interference
is constructive when
Re.ui/Re.gi/  0
(4.2)
QPSK For quadrature-PSK (QPSK) modulation, since there are two decision
boundaries (the real and imaginary axes) in the signal constellation, the above

92
C. Masouros
Re
Im
Constructive
interference region
(a)
(b)
Re
Im
αR
αI
fi
yi
ui
fi
yi^
ω 
yi = yi e
-jfi
^
ui^
ω 
ui = ui e
= |ui|
^
-jfi
Fig. 4.4 Interference classiﬁcation for M-PSK constellations
criterion has to be applied separately to the real and imaginary part of the received
signal. Therefore, for QPSK, interference is constructive when
Re.ui/Re.gi/  0 & Im.ui/Im.gi/  0
(4.3)
Again, the received symbols that satisfy this requirement are shown in green
color in Fig. 4.3b.
Interference Classiﬁcation for M-PSK To obtain a more generic characterization
of interference for M-PSK, let us observe the constellation example shown in the
diagram of Fig. 4.4a, which focuses on one out of the M possible constellation points
in the modulated-symbol constellation, namely the point with symbol phase i. The
constructive interference region denoted by the green shaded area spans an angle on
each side of i that depends on the order M of the modulation, and is deﬁned by the
parameter ! for which
! D 
M
(4.4)
To obtain a generic characterization irrespective of the speciﬁc constellation
point studied, let us rotate our observation by i as shown in Fig. 4.4b, where
Oyi D yieji
(4.5)
Applying the same transformation to the symbol of interest results in
Oui D uieji D juij
(4.6)
i.e., we have now isolated the amplitude of the desired symbol. Let us also deﬁne
˛R D Re.Oyi/ and ˛I D Im.Oyi/, where clearly, ˛R represents the amplitude of

4
Harvesting Signal Power from Constructive Interference in Multiuser Downlinks
93
the received constellation point due to constructive interference and ˛I provides
a measure of the angle shift from the phase of the original constellation point.
For constructive interference conditions to hold, it can be seen that ˛R and
˛I are allowed to grow inﬁnitely, as long as their ratio is such that the received
symbol is contained within the constructive area of the constellation, i.e., the green
shaded area in Fig. 4.4b. Using basic geometry in the right triangle denoted by the
diagonal stripes in the ﬁgure we have that, for the received symbol to fall inside the
constructive interference region, ˛I; ˛R have to obey
j˛Ij  .˛R  juij/ tan !
(4.7)
In other words, for an M-PSK modulation for which the constellation points
are normalized to unit power, the resulting interference is constructive when the
received symbol (excluding noise) follows
ˇˇˇRe.yieji/
ˇˇˇ  .Im.yieji/  1/ tan !
(4.8)
where i is the desired information and ! is the modulation-dependent parameter
as deﬁned above.
Analytical characterization criteria of the interference for B-, Q-, and higher
order PSK modulation are further detailed in [5, 6]. We shall generalize the above
to accommodate arbitrary SNR requirements in the beamforming optimization
discussion of Sect. 4.2.2.
Constructive Interference in QAM Constellations It was shown in the previous
section that there are beneﬁts to be gained from utilizing interference in PSK-based
communication systems. Notably, low order PSK appears in numerous scenarios
in many communication standards [7]. Indeed BPSK and QPSK are favored in
high interference scenarios where the achievable rates are limited due to the ill-
conditioned nature of the channel or the density of the communication access points.
Evidently, the more the interference, the more the gain from utilizing it as opposed
to eliminating it. In a highly correlated or a densely populated multi-access channel
conventional schemes would employ low order PSK modulation and invest most of
their power in canceling the existing interference, so it is in these scenarios where it
is expected to gain the most from exploiting interference.
For the completeness of the discussion, however, we must not omit situations
where higher transmission rates are achievable, in which case higher order QAM
would be used according to the communication standards. It is therefore reasonable
to raise the following questions: “Can the above concept be applied to QAM
constellations?,” “How much beneﬁt can be extracted from interference energy in
these cases?”. A ﬁrst attempt to address these issues is presented in [8, 9] and more
recently in [10–12]. To examine this, let us observe the 16-QAM constellation,
shown in Fig. 4.3d. It can be seen that for the inner constellation points, since
they are bounded by decision thresholds in all directions around them, the concept
of constructive interference does not hold. Interference that shifts the received

94
C. Masouros
inner constellation point away from one decision boundary pushes it closer to
another decision boundary. However, for the outer constellation points there is still
some space for constructive interference. Indeed for the points at the corners of
the 16-QAM constellation the conditions are identical to the ones for the QPSK
constellation points. Therefore, as shown in Fig. 4.3d the interference classiﬁcation
criteria for these points are similar to the ones discussed above. Moreover, for the
outer constellation points in-between the corner points again there exists a margin
of constructive interference as shown in Fig. 4.3d, strictly towards the directions
away from the inner decision boundaries, as shown by the green shaded areas.
Combining the above observations, we can design the constructive interference
criteria for the example of 16-QAM deﬁned by the alphabet A D f	r C i	ij	r; 	i 2
f˙1; ˙3gg as [10]
Re.ui/Re.gi/  0 & Im.ui/Im.gi/  0;
for ui 2 f˙3 ˙ i3g
Re.ui/Re.gi/  0 & Im.gi/ D 0;
for ui 2 f˙3 ˙ ig
Re.gi/ D 0 & Im.ui/Im.gi/  0;
for ui 2 f˙1 ˙ i3g
;;
for ui 2 f˙1 ˙ ig
(4.9)
4.1.2.1
Decision-Boundary Adaptation
Notably, from the above discussion it follows that constructive interference does not
apply for the inner constellation points of QAM constellations, which increase in
population as the order of QAM modulation increases. However, further scope for
accommodating constructive interference in QAM constellations can be provided
by employing adaptive, channel-dependent, decision boundaries in the receive con-
stellation. This concept is illustrated in Fig. 4.5. Based on a stochastic study of the
Re
Im
16-QAM
(a)
Re
Im
New decision
boundaries
(b)
Q
ε
ε
Fig. 4.5 Decision-boundary expansion for 16-QAM: (a) 16-QAM with ﬁxed decision boundaries,
(b) boundary expansion to accommodate constructive interference

4
Harvesting Signal Power from Constructive Interference in Multiuser Downlinks
95
power of constructive interference for a given communication scenario, one could
envisage an expansion of the decision boundaries of the QAM constellation such
that the whole constellation spreads to accommodate an expansion of the Euclidean
distances between all constellation points. This would allow for additional con-
structive interference for all constellation points, including the inner points. The
resulting effect is shown in Fig. 4.5b where the focus is on the top right quadrant
of the 16-QAM constellation, and the black dots represent the original constellation
points, while the circles represent the expanded constellation points. The distances
from the constellation points to the decision boundaries in the original constellation
are denoted as ". It can be seen that the new constellation points can move within
the green shaded areas, while maintaining an equal or greater minimum Euclidean
distance " from the new decision thresholds compared to the distance in the
original constellation. Importantly, this allows for constructive interference power
to be accommodated for the inner constellation points, that had no provision for
constructive interference when employing ﬁxed decision boundaries as in Fig. 4.5a.
These remarks indicate that, while the advantages of interference exploitation
are more pronounced in systems using PSK modulation, there are still beneﬁts to
be gained in QAM-based systems. While initial efforts have been made towards
this direction in [11], it is yet to be explored how to optimally expand the decision
boundaries of QAM to accommodate interference, and how the above qualitative
observations quantify in performance gain for the QAM constellations.
Early work carried out on simple precoding techniques that will be discussed
in the following indicates that there are signiﬁcant beneﬁts to be derived by the
above observations. The important feature is that these beneﬁts are drawn not by
increasing the transmitted power of the useful signals ui, but rather by the reuse of
interference energy that already exists in the communication system; a source of
green signal energy that with conventional interference-cancellation techniques is
left unexploited.
4.2
Constructive Interference in Multiuser Downlinks:
Harvesting Useful Signal Power
To illustrate the usefulness of the above observations, we shall overview a number
of techniques that exploit constructive interference superposition, focusing on the
baseline scenario of single-cell multiuser downlink transmission. We note, however,
that interference-exploitation approaches have also been developed for multi-cell
scenarios in cognitive radio applications [13–16].
Accordingly, consider a multiuser MISO (MU-MISO) downlink that consists of
a base station transmitter equipped with Nt antennas and K single-antenna receivers.
For the case of the closed-form precoders of [5, 6, 8–11, 17–20], it is required that
Nt  K. The above channel is modelled by
y D Hx C n;
(4.10)

96
C. Masouros
where y 2 CK1 is the vector that models the received symbols in all receive
antennas and H D Œh1I h2I : : : hK; 
 2 CNtK is the channel matrix with hk 2 C1Nt
denoting the channel vector to the kth user, with elements hm;n representing the
complex-valued channel coefﬁcient between the nth transmit antenna and the mth
receive antenna. Furthermore, x 2 CNt1 is the vector of precoded transmit symbols
that will be discussed in the following and n 2 CK1 	 C N .0; 2I/ is the
additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) at the receiver, with C N .; 2/ denoting
the circularly symmetric complex Gaussian distribution associated with a mean of
 and a variance of 2.
4.2.1
Closed-Form Precoders, Linear and Non-linear
To accommodate constructive interference the precoding can be designed such
that the signal received at the MUs allows for the existence of interference
when this is constructive. The ﬁrst applications of this concept were developed
for code division multiple access (CDMA) communications [5, 17–19]. Since
then, a number of closed-form precoders have been developed to accommo-
date constructive interference [6, 12, 20–26] in MU-MISO systems. A generic
block diagram of the low-complexity precoding adaptations for a MU-MISO
downlink is shown in Fig. 4.6. The essential additional components involve the
symbol-by-symbol characterization of interference and the judicious precoding
block.
nk
MU Receiver
01001
Demodulation
01001
Modulation
Judicious
Precdoing
Detection
u
uk
Interference
Characterization
Interference
Estimation
BS Transmitter
Im
Re
Information
source
Fig. 4.6 A generic precoding block diagram for the exploitation of interference. Three distinct
operations can be observed: interference estimation, interference characterization, and judicious
precoding [3]

4
Harvesting Signal Power from Constructive Interference in Multiuser Downlinks
97
4.2.1.1
Closed-Form Linear Precoders
Early work such as the one in [6] has looked at adapting simple precoding
techniques such as zero forcing (channel inversion) [27] to accommodate for
constructive interference in MU-MISO downlinks. Here the main idea is to retain
the correlation between the transmitted symbols when it yields constructive inter-
ference and eliminate the correlation when it results in destructive interference by
means of zero-forcing (ZF) precoding. A further step towards transmitting along
interference is shown in [20, 21] for the MU-MISO downlink. Instead of observing
and characterizing the interference and zero forcing it accordingly, the precoder
actively inﬂuences the interference by means of rotational precoding to yield
constructive interference. In this case the useful signal beneﬁts from all interfering
signals’ energy at every symbol period.
To exploit constructive interference the correlation rotation precoder of [20]
carefully aligns interference so that it contributes constructively to the desired signal
power. In brief, the transmit vectors of [20] follow the typical linear precoding
form of
x D
s
P
ˇ Wu;
(4.11)
where u 2 CK1 is the modulated data vector, P is the transmit power budget. The
precoding matrix W D Œw1; w2; : : : ; wk
 2 CNtK, with wk 2 CNt1 denoting the
beamforming vector for the kth user, is formed as
W D HR;
(4.12)
where H D HH.HHH/1 is the Moore–Penrose generalized inverse of the channel
matrix, and R D R ˇ Q, with ˇ denoting element-wise matrix multiplication,
R representing the correlation rotation (CR) matrix. The CR matrix contains the
elements of the channel correlation matrix R D HHH rotated by the phase-only
matrix Q with elements in the form qk;l D ejk;l with
k;l D ∠uk  ∠ulk;l;
(4.13)
such that the resulting interference aligns constructively to the received signal.
In (4.13) above, k;l is the k; lth element of the channel correlation matrix R, ∠x
denotes the phase of the complex number x. Finally, in (4.11) ˇ is the scaling factor
that constraints the average transmit power, and is given as
ˇ D jjWjj2 D trace.WHW/:
(4.14)
Notably, by letting R D IK the CR precoder reduces to the conventional zero-
forcing (channel inversion) precoder. It can also be observed that the precoder

98
C. Masouros
in (4.12) combines the channel-only dependent zero-forcing component H with
the symbol-by-symbol adaptive part in R. By combining (4.10)–(4.12) it can be
seen that this results in the following received symbol vector:
y D
s
P
ˇ Ru C n;
(4.15)
where by the deﬁnition of matrix R above, the signal contained in the component
Ru beneﬁts from constructive interference, and falls inside the constructive
interference regions in the received constellations, as in Fig. 4.3.
4.2.1.2
Dirty Paper Non-linear Approaches
The capacity achieving alternative to low-complexity linear precoding is dirty paper
coding (DPC). While optimal DPC has prohibitive complexity, low-complexity
suboptimal approaches have been explored in the form of Tomlinson–Harashima
Precoding (THP) [28] and Vector Perturbation (VP) [29]. Both the THP and VP
families of techniques have been shown to beneﬁt from harvesting useful signal
power from interference.
Interference Optimized Tomlinson–Harashima Precoding THP transmission
involves the pre-subtraction of interference at the transmitter in an iterative manner,
by which the transmit symbol of the kth user is given as
xk D
2
4uk 
k1
X
lD1
bk;lxl
3
5 modL , k 2 Œ1; K
(4.16)
where bk;l is the k; lth element of matrix B, which is the equivalent channel matrix
obtained after lower-triangularization, such that each user only sees interference
from previously encoded users. uk is the kth user’s information data symbol, selected
from an integer constellation A D f	r C i	ij	r; 	i 2 f˙1; ˙3; : : : ˙ .
p
M  1/gg
where M is the constellation order. Accordingly, THP in (4.16) pre-subtracts from
the desired symbol all interference from the previously encoded users. Œ:
modL
denotes the modulo operation with base L, and is used to constrain the transmitted
power [28]. Still, this modulo operation results in a transmit power for THP that is
higher compared to uncoded transmission, a situation referred to as Power Loss.
A number of adaptations of THP have been developed such that interference is
exploited to improve the interference pre-subtraction function of the THP encoder.
Interference-optimized THP (IO-THP) in [30, 31] exploits the power of interference
to reduce the abovementioned power loss. It uses an encoding strategy where
the amplitude and phase of the useful signal for a number of users is optimized,
within the constructive constellation sectors as shown in Fig. 4.3 and under an SNR

4
Harvesting Signal Power from Constructive Interference in Multiuser Downlinks
99
threshold, such that the resulting interference is better aligned to the symbols of
interest. In this way the power required by THP encoding to subtract the interference
(and therefore the transmitted power) is minimized, leading to a more power-
efﬁcient transmission. Accordingly, for IO-THP the data symbols for a subset
Ks  K users are scaled by the real-valued factors vr
k; vi
k as
Quk D vr
kur
k C ivr
kui
k; k 2 Œ1; Ks
(4.17)
where ur
k D Re.uk/; ui
k D Im.uk/, and vr
k; vi
k are carefully optimized such that Quk
falls in the constructive area of the modulation constellation as discussed in the
previous section and shown in Fig. 4.3. Thereafter, the typical THP pre-subtraction
is applied to the modiﬁed data symbols as
Qxk D
2
4Quk 
k1
X
lD1
bk;lQxl.v/
3
5 modL, k 2 Œ1; K
(4.18)
where now the transmitted symbols Qxk are a function of the optimal scaling factors
v. For the details of the optimization of the factors vr
k; vi
k the reader is referred to
[30, 31]. By means of the above constructive symbol optimization, power is saved
from the interference-cancellation operation and invested in the useful signal as a
source of additional signal power.
An illustrative result of this effect is shown in Fig. 4.7 where the performance
in terms of bit error rate (BER) is shown for a system with Nt D 4; K D 4 as
a function of the transmit power in vector x expressed as the percentage of the
power of the uncoded symbols in vector u, for conventional THP and IO-THP with
increasing numbers of prescaled users Ks. A trade-off between transmit power and
performance can be obtained for IO-THP by varying the SNR threshold involved in
the optimization of the pre-scaling factors [30, 31]. While in this chapter we skip
the details of this trade-off, the main message in this result is that, by harvesting the
interference energy in this scenario, IO-THP achieves a transmit power reduction
down to 1=6 of that for conventional THP, for the same BER performance.
Constructive Vector Perturbation Precoding Vector perturbation designates
another family of non-linear precoders that employ a channel inversion precoding
matrix and apply a perturbation on the transmitted symbols such that the signal
content at the receiver is maximized. The transmitted signal is given by [29]
x D
s
P
ˇ H.u C l?/
(4.19)
where
ˇ D jjH.u C l?/jj2
(4.20)

100
C. Masouros
0
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
120%
140%
10
−3
10
−2
10
−1
Transmit Power w.r.t. non−Precoded Signals
Bit Error Rate (BER)
Conventional THP
IO−THP. Ks=1
IO−THP. Ks=2
IO−THP. Ks=4
Power Saving
Fig. 4.7 BER versus transmit power for THP, and IO-THP. Nt
D K
D 4, QPSK, SNR
D 29 dB [31]
is the transmit power scaling factor so that jjxjj2 D P and l? 2 CM1 is the selected
perturbation vector with integer entries. Also  D 2jcjmax C  where jcjmax is
the absolute value of the constellation symbol with the maximum magnitude and
 denotes the minimum Euclidean distance between constellation symbols. The
idea here is that the perturbation vectors l? are introduced to increase the degrees
of freedom in optimizing the resulting performance, and are later removed at the
receiver by applying a modulo operation with base .
Accordingly, the perturbation vectors l? are chosen from an integer constellation
ZMCjZM to maximize the signal component in the received symbols or equivalently
minimize ˇ and the resulting the noise ampliﬁcation at the receiver, as
l? D arg
min
l2ZMCjZM jjH.u C l/jj2
(4.21)
This is typically an NP hard problem solved with sphere search techniques [32]
that have complexity which grows exponentially with the number of users K.
To apply the concept of interference exploitation, the above optimization can
be constrained to ensure that the perturbation vectors add up strictly constructively
to the information symbols, so that the removal of perturbation is not necessary at
the receiver and the receiver complexity can be drastically reduced. In particular,
in the constructive vector perturbation approach of [33] the search space for the

4
Harvesting Signal Power from Constructive Interference in Multiuser Downlinks
101
Fig. 4.8 Constructive
perturbation lattice, QPSK
example [30]
Re
Im
1+i
1-i
-1+i
-1-i
perturbation vectors is limited to the constructive areas in the symbol constellation.
In other words the above optimization is modiﬁed (4.21) to
l? D arg min
l2AM jjH.u C l/jj2
(4.22)
where AM is a lattice that only involves the constructive areas of the constellation as
shown in Fig. 4.3. For the example of QPSK this constellation can be described as
AM D
n
0; "

m  sgnfRe.u/g C n  sgnfIm.u/g
o
where m; n 2 f1; 2; 3 : : :g, sgnfxg
denotes the sign of x and " is an arbitrary constant, which results in the lattice shown
in Fig. 4.8. The effect of this optimization is that, as the perturbed signals lie in the
constructive areas of the constellation, there is no need to remove the perturbation at
the receiver, which therefore alleviates the need to apply the Œ:
mod operation at the
receiver and the need to feed-forward the scaling factor ˇ for receiver equalization.
This further implies that there is no need for the perturbation quantities to take
integer values, and in fact, it is shown in [33] that the perturbation operation can be
transformed into a linear scaling operation in the form
x D
s
P
ˇ HSu
(4.23)
where S is a diagonal scaling matrix with elements si and ˇ
D jjHSujj2.
Accordingly, the perturbation search need not apply on an integer lattice AM like
the one in (4.21), (4.22), and can be extended to all points in the constructive
regions of the symbols’ constellation. By applying a lower-threshold st on the
scaling factors so that a minimum QoS level is guaranteed, the perturbation search
can be transformed into

102
C. Masouros
S? D arg min
S jjHSujj2
s.t.
si  st; 8i
(4.24)
that can be solved with quadratic programming. As a result, it has been shown that
this can offer up to an order of magnitude complexity reduction at the transmitter
for a moderate MU-MISO downlink with Nt D 10; K D 10 [33].
4.2.2
Beamforming Optimization for Constructive Interference
The above early work on closed-form precoders has been the baseline for designing
a number of optimum beamforming designs, speciﬁcally tailored for accommo-
dating and maximizing constructive interference. These have built upon traditional
optimization techniques that directly minimize the transmit power subject to quality
of service (QoS) constraints—most commonly the signal-to-interference-plus-noise
ratio (SINR)—for the MU-MISO downlink [34], where convex optimization strate-
gies are typically pursued. Moreover, SINR balancing optimizations [35] are of
interest, where the minimum achievable SINR is maximized, subject to a total
transmit power constraint. In all these strategies, from a stochastic point of view
and treating interference as harmful, the average SINR for the ith user is typically
expressed as
i D
jhiwij2
P
kD1;k¤i jhiwkj2 C N0
(4.25)
where hi and wi are the channel vector and the beamforming vector for the ith user,
and N0 is the noise spectral density.
Power Minimization The conventional power minimization precoder, treating all
interference as harmful, aims to minimize the average transmit power subject to an
SINR threshold i by formulating the optimization problem shown below [34]
min
fwig
K
X
iD1
kwik2
(4.26)
s.t.
jhiwij2
P
kD1;k¤i jhiwkj2 C N0
 i; 8i:
The above optimization is most commonly solved as a second-order cone
programming (SOCP) problem or exploiting uplink/downlink duality [34].
SINR Balancing SINR balancing maximizes the minimum achievable SINR
subject to a transmit power budget, in the form

4
Harvesting Signal Power from Constructive Interference in Multiuser Downlinks
103
max
ww
t
s.t.
khiwik2
P
kD1;k¤i khiwkk2 C N0
 t; 8i:
K
X
iD1
kwik2  P
(4.27)
where P denotes the total transmit power budget. We note that the above
optimization is non-convex and the solution involves more complex iterative
approaches [35].
4.2.2.1
Beamforming for Interference Exploitation
By harvesting useful signal power from constructive interference, recent works in
the area of beamforming optimization [8, 36–39] have shown signiﬁcant gains with
respect to the above optimization. Speciﬁcally, it has been demonstrated that the
transmit power required for a given QoS threshold can be drastically reduced in
the power minimization problem, or equivalently the QoS obtained for a given
transmit power can be drastically improved in the SINR balancing formulation.
More recently, these beamforming strategies have been extended to the realm of
hybrid analog-digital precoding, to exploit mutual coupling between the transmit
antennas by means of tunable antenna loads [40].
Let us place our attention on how the beamforming optimization can be adapted
to exploit constructive interference. As per the interference classiﬁcation and
discussion in Sect. 4.1.2, the optimizations in (4.26), (4.27) can be modiﬁed to
take the constructive interference into account. This can be done by imposing
interference constraints, not in terms of suppressing the stochastic interference,
but rather optimizing instantaneous interference to contribute to the received signal
power, thus providing a source for harvesting useful signal power. Indeed, for the
case when interference has been aligned, by means of precoding vectors wk, to
overlap constructively with the signal of interest, all interference in the received
signal contributes constructively to the useful signal. Accordingly, it has been shown
in [20] that in this case the instantaneous received SNR is given as
i D
ˇˇˇhi
PK
kD1 wkuk
ˇˇˇ
2
N0
(4.28)
where all interference contributes in the useful received signal power.
Strict Phase Alignment Accordingly, and based on the classiﬁcation criteria
detailed in [5] and Fig. 4.3 for constructive interference, the ﬁrst approach in this
area in [36], focusing on PSK modulation in the form ui D eji, introduced

104
C. Masouros
a modiﬁed interference constraint in (4.26) where interference is constrained to
strictly align to the phase of the useful signal. The power minimization problem
was reformulated in [36] as
min
fwig

K
X
kD1
wkej.ki/

2
s.t. ∠
0
@hi
K
X
kD1
wkuk
1
A D ∠.ui/; 8i
Re
0
@hi
K
X
kD1
wkej.ki/
1
A 
p
iN0; 8i:
(4.29)
Here clearly the transmit power is minimized on an instantaneous basis in the
objective function, and the ﬁrst set of constraints imposes that, for each user, the
phase of interference is strictly constrained to equal the phase of the symbol of
interest. The second set of constraints poses QoS constraints for each user, in the
form of the SNR thresholds i which relate to the instantaneous SNR expression
in (4.28).
We note the use of the sum of phase shifted (by the phase of the symbol of interest
i) interfering symbols plus the symbol of interest in the above expressions. This
is in line with our analysis above in Sect. 4.1.2, and serves to isolate the received
amplitude and phase shift in the symbol of interest due to interference. Note that
the above two conditions contain K equations and K inequalities, while there are
2Nt  2K real variables, so there are sufﬁcient degrees of freedom to satisfy these
two sets of constraints.
Phase Relaxation Still, it can be seen that due to the strict angle constraint, the
formulation (4.29) is more constrained than the constructive interference regions
in Fig. 4.3 where the strict phase constraints do not exist. To obtain a more
relaxed optimization for M-PSK, we resort to the previous classiﬁcation criteria
in Sect. 4.1.2 which we extend to incorporate an arbitrary SNR constraint . With
reference to Fig. 4.4, and using the beamforming vectors wk the above-deﬁned
components of the phase rotated received symbols excluding interference can be
rewritten as
˛R D Re
0
@hi
K
X
kD1
wkej.ki/
1
A , and ˛I D Im
0
@hi
K
X
kD1
wkej.ki/
1
A
(4.30)
To extend the above discussion to the case where constructive interference is
deﬁned with respect to an SNR threshold—as opposed to the nominal constellation
points—let us look at Fig. 4.9 where we have revisited the geometry of Fig. 4.4 by

4
Harvesting Signal Power from Constructive Interference in Multiuser Downlinks
105
Fig. 4.9 Optimization region
for beamforming for
interference exploitation
based on SNR threshold 
Re
Im
αR
αI
yi^
|ui|
γ
ω
introducing an SNR parameter  D piN0, following the SNR expression (4.28).
This gives rise to the constructive interference sector denoted by the green shaded
sector in Fig. 4.9. By a similar process to that in Fig. 4.4 it can be seen that ˛R and ˛I
are allowed to grow inﬁnitely, as long as their ratio is such that the received symbol
is contained within the constructive area of the constellation, i.e., the distances
from the decision boundaries, as set by the SNR constraints i, are not violated.
Accordingly, ˛R; ˛I have to follow
j˛Ij 

˛R  

tan !
(4.31)
As regards the constructive area in the constellation, with respect to (4.29),
it can be seen that the angle of the received signal need not strictly align with
the angle of the useful signal, as long as it falls within the constructive area of
the constellation with a maximum phase shift of  D ˙=M, for an M-PSK
modulation. Accordingly, to relax the optimization, ˛I is allowed to be non-zero as
long as the resulting symbol lies within the constructive area of the constellation.
Power Minimization with Interference Exploitation Using (4.30), (4.31) we
arrive at the power minimization problem presented in [37] as
min
fwig

K
X
kD1
wkej.ki/

2
s.t.
ˇˇˇˇˇˇ
Im
0
@hi
K
X
kD1
wkej.ki/
1
A
ˇˇˇˇˇˇ

0
B@Re
0
@hi
K
X
kD1
wkej.ki/
1
A 
p
iN0
1
CA tan !; 8i
(4.32)
It can be seen that the above optimization in (4.32) is more relaxed than the
zero-angle-shift optimization (4.29), which results in a smaller minimum in the
transmit power. Moreover, it contains a number of K inequalities which result in an
increased feasibility region compared to the conventional optimization, as detailed

106
C. Masouros
in [37]. Problem (4.32) is a standard second-order cone program (SOCP), thus can
be optimally solved using numerical software.
SNR Balancing with Interference Exploitation The respective SNR balancing
problem that allows interference exploitation can be designed in a similar fashion as
max
fwig t
s.t.
ˇˇˇˇˇˇ
Im
0
@hi
K
X
kD1
wkej.ki/
1
A
ˇˇˇˇˇˇ

0
B@Re
0
@hi
K
X
kD1
wkej.ki/
1
A 
p
tN0
1
CA tan !; 8i

K
X
kD1
wkej.ki/

2
 P
(4.33)
Remarkably, the relaxed nature of the interference-exploitation beamforming
problems leads to larger feasibility regions. To illustrate the extended feasibility
region for the optimization problems (4.32), (4.33), Fig. 4.10 shows the feasibility
probability of a K D 4 user system with respect to the number of transmit
1
2
3
4
5
6
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Feasibility probability
Nt
Γt=10dB
Conventional BF
CI−BF − QPSK
CI−BF − 8PSK
Fig. 4.10 Feasibility probability vs. Nt for conventional and interference-exploitation beamform-
ing, K D 4, t D 10 dB [37]

4
Harvesting Signal Power from Constructive Interference in Multiuser Downlinks
107
antennas Nt. The comparison is between the conventional beamforming of (4.26)
(“Conventional BF” in the legend) and the constructive interference beamforming
of (4.32) (“CI-BF”) for the cases of QPSK and 8PSK modulation. It can be seen that,
while the conventional optimization is only feasible for Nt  K, the proposed can
be feasible with non-zero probability for lower values of Nt. This observation could
have a signiﬁcant impact in the communication system design, where, by applying
interference-exploitation principles, more users can be scheduled simultaneously in
a given cell. Furthermore, it is important to note that the cell-edge users are more
prone to interference. In a single cell scenario this would be naturally captured
and exploited with the above interference-exploitation optimizations, given the
channel characteristics. More importantly, regarding other-cell interference, this is
the topic of multi-cell interference exploitation, which while captured to-date in CR
applications [13–16], is a widely open research area in the context of interference
exploitation.
Beamforming
Optimizations
for
QAM
Constellations While
the
above
approaches are shown for PSK constellations, the works in [8, 9] and more recently
in [10–12] have applied the interference-exploitation beamforming approaches
to QAM and star-QAM modulations. This has been pursued by adapting the
interference constraints in the beamforming optimizations according to the
interference classiﬁcation for QAM constellations outlined in Sect. 4.1.2 and
in (4.9). The keen reader is referred to [10, 11] for detailed formulations of the
corresponding optimizations.
Notably, all the above interference-exploitation optimizations allow for equiva-
lent multicast formulations to be employed, which result in more efﬁcient solvers
with much reduced complexity, as detailed in [36, 37]. Still, it is clear that the
interference-exploitation beamformers are data dependent and therefore require the
optimization problem to be solved on a symbol-by-symbol basis. This therefore
necessitates a closer look at the resulting complexity.
4.2.2.2
Notes on the Complexity of Interference-Exploitation
Beamforming
To facilitate the complexity comparison, the main signal-processing operations
for the conventional and the interference-exploitation beamforming approaches are
illustrated in the block diagrams of Fig. 4.11a, b, respectively.
Transmit (Base Station) Complexity With the low-complexity multicasting sim-
pliﬁcations derived in [36, 37] it has been shown that the complexity of solving the
equivalent multicasting optimization problems of (4.32), (4.33) is greatly reduced.
In fact, the complexity study found in [37] has shown that, due to the relaxed nature
of the problem, computationally efﬁcient gradient projection approaches can be
developed that achieve a complexity of down to 15% w.r.t. conventional power
minimization precoding, for each precoding optimization. More recent work in
[39] relying on barrier-method solvers has further reduced the complexity down

108
C. Masouros
wk
u
Channel-adaptive
BF optimization
01001
Modulation
Information Source
H
yk
(hkwk)-1
Q(dk)
uk^
dk
Feed-forward hkwk
H
wk
H
Q(yk)
(a)
(b)
Symbol-by-symbol
BF optimization
H
01001
Modulation
Information Source
uk^
u
yk
Fig. 4.11 Block diagram showing transmit and receive processing, (a) conventional beamforming
optimization, (b) beamforming for interference exploitation
to 2% w.r.t. conventional beamforming. However, as the interference-exploitation
beamforming optimizations need to be performed on a symbol-by-symbol basis
(denoted in the red box in Fig. 4.11b), a frame-based complexity analysis is
pertinent. For the example of an LTE Type 2 TDD frame with up to 112 downlink

4
Harvesting Signal Power from Constructive Interference in Multiuser Downlinks
109
symbol time slots [7], this translates to a doubling of complexity per frame of
112  2% D 224% for the interference-exploitation schemes w.r.t. conventional
precoding optimization. It is important to note that this complexity involves the
base station (BS) transmitter, where computational resources are more accessible.
At the same time, the complexity of the mobile units is drastically reduced as
explained below. In addition, this complexity increase comes with signiﬁcant power
savings of, for example, up to 3 dB for a small scale MU-MISO downlink of
Nt D 4; K D 4 [37].
Power Efﬁciency In fact, in terms of the ultimate metric of power efﬁciency at the
transmitter, for an LTE base station the transmit power is typically measured on
the order of 20 W, while the power consumption of the DSP processing is typically
orders of magnitude lower. Since with the interference-exploitation beamformers
show a halving of the transmit power at roughly double the DSP power w.r.t. to their
conventional counterparts, the gains in the power efﬁciency by harvesting useful
signal power form interference are therefore undeniable.
Receiver (Mobile Unit) Complexity Regarding the receive complexity, the pro-
posed approaches provide signiﬁcant beneﬁts compared to conventional beamform-
ing. Indeed, for conventional beamforming the MU receiver is required to equalize
the composite channel hiwi from (4.26), (4.27) as shown in the red box in Fig. 4.11a,
in order to recover the data. This necessitates that the BS feed-forward the composite
channel to each MU receiver for correct detection, denoted by the dashed red arrows
in Fig. 4.11a. Clearly, this is subject to CSI quantization and detection errors, and
introduces additional computational overheads at the MU receivers.
By contrast, as for the interference-exploitation approaches the received symbols
lie at the constructive area of the constellation (see Fig. 4.3), there is no need
for equalizing the composite channel hiwi to recover the data symbols at the ith
MU, and a simple decision stage sufﬁces. Accordingly, the beneﬁt of interference-
exploitation approaches is that CSI is not required for detection at the MU, which
allows for signiﬁcant savings in the training time and computational overheads
for signalling the beamformers to the MUs. It also makes these schemes immune
to the quantization errors involved in the feed-forward of hiwi for conventional
beamforming. The resulting beneﬁts are quantiﬁed in [15].
4.2.3
Resource Allocation for Interference Exploitation
The gains obtained by the above adaptations can be augmented by employing
speciﬁcally tailored resource allocation techniques. To enhance the performance
of the interference-exploitation schemes the goal of resource allocation would be,
instead of allocating resources that inherently experience minimum interference, to
optimize the interference between the resources according to QoS criteria.
This of course covers a vast area where resources can pertain to antenna selection,
power allocation, sub-carrier allocation in OFDM, user association and scheduling,

110
C. Masouros
and so on. In this subsection, we overview recent antenna selection [41–43] and
power allocation [25] strategies developed to optimize and exploit constructive
interference, while the same concept can be extended to alternative resources such
as user scheduling [44], adaptive modulation [11], or speciﬁc power allocation
for non-orthogonal multiple access (NOMA) [45] combined with interference
exploitation. Building upon the power allocation work, we further look at constant
envelope precoding (CEP) [46] where the CEP is optimized to exploit constructive
interference under given per-antenna power budgets.
4.2.3.1
Antenna Selection
The antenna-selection techniques developed for interference exploitation build upon
existing antenna-selection benchmark schemes, namely capacity maximization [47]
and path gain selection [48].
Capacity Maximization Recent work in the area of large scale antenna sys-
tems [49] showed channel-capacity-based antenna selection can be performed by
means of convex optimization, drastically reducing the complexity of previous
techniques from the literature, such as the capacity maximization technique in
[50]. Accordingly, the selection of Ns antennas out of the available Nt antennas
at the transmitter is performed over the system sum-capacity, and the optimization
problem is formulated as
max

log2
h
det

IK C HHH
i
s:t:
n;n 2 Œ0; 1
 ;
PN
nD1 n;n D Ns:
(4.34)
where  is an SNR parameter and  is an Nt  Nt selection matrix. In particular,
 is a real diagonal matrix, whose entries should be either null, i.e., n;n D 0 if
n is a non-selected antenna, or unitary, i.e., n;n D 1 if n is an antenna selected
for transmission. Since constraining the diagonal values of  to be binary results in
a non-convex formulation, a relaxation such that the elements of  take values in
between 0 and 1, i.e., n;n 2 f0; 1g in the optimization (4.34) above is commonly
adopted. With the above relaxation, the optimization problem becomes convex, and
the ﬁnal selection can be done by rounding the elements such that n;n 2 Œ0; 1
.
This approach has been shown to achieve near-optimal performance in the large
scale MIMO regime when compared to exhaustive search approaches [47].
Path Gain Selection A similar approach selects the subset of antennas whose path
gains are higher, according to the following optimization:

4
Harvesting Signal Power from Constructive Interference in Multiuser Downlinks
111
max

HHH
s:t:
n;n 2 f0; 1g ;
PN
nD1 n;n D Ns:
(4.35)
This form of selection has received a lot of attention due to its simplicity.
4.2.3.2
Antenna Selection for Interference Exploitation
Given the conditions for constructive interference reviewed in the previous sections,
it is possible to identify new antenna-selection metrics that maximize constructive
interference, thus optimally exploiting this important source of useful signal power.
Antenna Selection for Closed-Form Precoding Initial approaches were intro-
duced in [41, 42] where the selection takes place for given closed-form precoding
vectors wk such as selective precoding (SP) [41], matched ﬁltering (MF), or
correlation rotation (CR) [42]. In the more recent work of [42], the problem was
formulated as
max
 min
i

Re

hi PK
kD1 wkej.ki/
tan ! 
ˇˇˇˇIm

hi PK
kD1 wkej.ki/ˇˇˇˇ
s:t:
n;n 2 f0; 1g ;
PN
nD1 n;n D Ns:
(4.36)
The above optimization selects the antenna subset that maximizes the minimum
constructive interference amongst the users for a given set of wk in the MU-MISO
downlink. The above approach is most suitable for large scale antenna systems with
a low-complexity MF precoder and with a sufﬁcient number of transmit antennas
that guarantee constructive interference for all users. A clear connection to the
interference-exploitation beamforming optimizations in the previous section can be
seen, with the addition of the selection matrix , along with the antenna-selection
constraints.
Joint Antenna Selection and Precoding Optimization Going one step further,
the approach in [43] pursues a joint optimization of both the antenna subset and the
precoding vectors, by formulating the problem as
max
;fwigmin
i

Re

hi PK
kD1 wkej.ki/
tan ! 
ˇˇˇˇIm

hi PK
kD1 wkej.ki/ˇˇˇˇ
s:t:
n;n 2 f0; 1g ;
PN
nD1 n;n D Ns;

PK
kD1 wkej.ki/
2
 P:
(4.37)

112
C. Masouros
As we can see, the above formulation is designed to jointly optimize the
antenna selection by means of , together with the precoding vectors wi. The joint
optimization allows us to fully exploit the resulting constructive interference, and
can be solved using mixed integer programming techniques [51].
Successive Optimization To reduce the optimization complexity, the above prob-
lem can be decomposed into two sub-problems and solved with a successive
optimization approach. In [43] ﬁrst a subset selection is performed by solving the
following optimization problem based on the antenna cross-correlations hihH
k :
max
 min
i

Re

HHHeji
tan ! 
ˇˇˇIm

HHHejiˇˇˇ
s:t:
n;n 2 f0; 1g ;
PN
nD1 n;n D Ns:
(4.38)
where  D Œ1; 2; : : : ; i
T. It can be observed that the above bears resemblance to
the path gain selection of (4.35), but with a modiﬁed objective function, speciﬁcally
tailored for constructive interference. Then, for the selected subset of antennas
corresponding to the channel matrix QH D ŒQh1I Qh2I : : : I QhK
, the optimal precoding
vectors wk are computed by solving the following problem:
max
fwig min
i

Re

Qhi
PK
kD1 wkej.ki/
tan ! 
ˇˇˇˇIm

Qhi
PK
kD1 wkej.ki/ˇˇˇˇ
s:t:

PK
kD1 wkej.ki/
2
 P:
(4.39)
which is now a function of wi only. Both max–min optimizations in (4.38), (4.39)
are convex and can be solved using an auxiliary threshold variable as, for example,
in (4.27). It has been shown in [43] that the successive optimization approach
in (4.38), (4.39) performs within 0:5 dB of the joint optimization approach of (4.37),
at a signiﬁcantly reduced complexity, down to 1=6 of the joint optimization
complexity for a large scale system with Nt D 128; K D 5. It can be observed
in the relevant works that both beamforming and antenna selection for interference
exploitation provide signiﬁcant performance beneﬁts. Whether the former or the
latter are dominant in a practical scenario is subject to the size of the system and the
number of auxiliary antennas.
4.2.3.3
Power Allocation for Constructive Interference
Maximization
Power allocation approaches in the area of interference exploitation have mainly
focused on the closed-form precoders of Sect. 4.2.1. Firstly, it is important to note
that, contrary to conventional zero-forcing precoding, the precoders in [12, 20–25]
do not obtain uniform performance across all users. This is because the power of

4
Harvesting Signal Power from Constructive Interference in Multiuser Downlinks
113
constructive interference received may vary from user to user. Building on this
observation, an interesting power allocation approach in [25], designed for CR
precoding, optimizes the power allocation amongst the users such that the worst
user’s SNR is maximized. First it is shown that the user with the worst SNR is
the one that experiences the minimum constructive interference, which for CR is
measured by the parameter
ci D
K
X
kD1
ji;kj
(4.40)
where i;k is the i; kth element of the channel correlation matrix as deﬁned
in Sect. 4.2.1. Accordingly, the per-user power pi is determined by solving the
following optimization:
max
fpig mini c2
i pi
s.t.
X
i
pi D PT; 0  pi
(4.41)
where PT is the total transmit power budget. It can be seen that the above power
allocation ensures the same SINR to all users, which constitutes an SINR balancing
approach.
4.2.3.4
Constructive Constant Envelope Precoding
Constant envelope precoding (CEP), where the amplitude of the transmitted sym-
bols remains unchanged, has received particular attention recently due to its
suitability for large scale antenna systems envisaged for 5G implementations.
Building on the above power allocation discussion, and given a per-antenna
transmit power budget Pn for the nth transmit antenna, CEP forms the transmitted
symbol from the nth antenna of the BS as [52]
xn D
p
Pnejn;
(4.42)
where n represents the precoding phase of the CEP signal. It is clear that the
transmitted symbols have a constant envelope of pPn with phase-only variation. For
notational simplicity, let us assume that all transmit antennas obey Pn D
1
Nt ; 8n 2
f1; : : : ; Ntg, in which case we can write
x D
1
pNt
ej;
(4.43)

114
C. Masouros
where  D Œ1; 2; : : : ; Nt
T. Accordingly CEP aims at minimizing the interference
as [52]
min

M
P
mD1
ˇˇˇ
1
pNt hmej  um
ˇˇˇ
2
s:t: jnj  ; 8n 2 f1; : : : ; Ntg ;
(4.44)
where, unlike the transmit symbols xn, the information symbols un can be taken
from a constellation with either constant or non-constant envelope. The above
optimization represents a non-convex non-linear least squares (NLS) problem,
subject to local minima. The optimization problem (4.44) was ﬁrst solved in [52]
with a gradient descent (GD) based approach, and further improved in [53] with a
direct application of the cross-entropy method [54].
Constructive CEP Exploiting the concept of constructive interference in
Sect. 4.1.2, it is possible to deﬁne a new optimization problem that maximizes
the constructive interference, while employing phase-only transmit symbols.
Accordingly, in [46] the CEP optimization problem was deﬁned for PSK symbols
ui D eji as
max

min
i
(
Re

1
pNt hiej.i/
tan ! 
ˇˇˇˇIm

1
pNt hiej.i/ˇˇˇˇ
)
subjectto jnj  ; 8n 2 f1; : : : ; Ng :
(4.45)
In line with its conventional counterpart in [52], the formulation in (4.45) is
clearly non-convex, but can be efﬁciently solved via the cross-entropy method. It is
demonstrated in [46] that the constructive CEP approach, by harvesting useful signal
power from constructive interference, provides signiﬁcant performance beneﬁts
compared to conventional CEP approaches. For the example of a large scale system
with Nt D 64; K D 12, power gains of more than 5 dB were demonstrated
in [46].
4.3
Constructive Interference for Harvesting Both Radiated
Power and Useful Signal Power
The recent research attention on energy harvesting from RF signals, the motivator
behind this Book, has been stimulated from the fact that radiated energy can provide
a useful source of wireless power. Complimentary to the discussion above where
interfering energy is harvested as a source of useful signal power, recent works focus
on the beamforming optimization where part of the signal is used for decoding and

4
Harvesting Signal Power from Constructive Interference in Multiuser Downlinks
115
part of it is harvested as wireless power, giving rise to the concept of simultaneous
wireless information and power transfer (SWIPT) [55–57].
4.3.1
Constructive Interference in SWIPT
In the majority of SWIPT approaches, while interference is harvested as useful
energy for powering the receiver’s electronic components, in terms of signal detec-
tion interference is still treated as a harmful effect. In this section, we show that, by
means of the constructive interference concept, interference can be harvested both
as a source of wireless power and a source of useful signal power.
4.3.1.1
Conventional Beamforming for SWIPT
Beamforming approaches for SWIPT are based on the premise that part of the
received signal is used for information decoding, while the rest of the signal power
is used for energy harvesting at the receiver. When the receiver has only one antenna
from which to both harvest energy and decode information, two practical receiver
structures for SWIPT termed as “time switching” (TS) and “power splitting” (PS),
are typically employed to separate the received signal for decoding information
and harvesting energy [55]. For illustration reasons, at this point we focus on the
PS approach, while the discussion in this section is trivially applicable to the TS
approach.
A block diagram of the PS approach is shown in Fig. 4.12a, where it can be seen
that a portion Pi of the received signal is used for decoding the signal, while the rest
.PH D 1  Pi/ is used for energy harvesting. In the ﬁgure, zi models the noise from
the signal conversion from RF to baseband.
Treating interference as harmful, the received SINR for user i is given by
 con
i
D
jhiwij2
KP
kD1;k¤i
jhiwkj2 C N0 C NC
Pi
;
(4.46)
where NC is the spectral density of the conversion noise zi.
Similarly the harvested energy is typically expressed following the model in
Fig. 4.12a as:
Pcon
i
D .1  Pi/
0
@
K
X
kD1
jhiwkj2 C N0
1
A :
(4.47)

116
C. Masouros
ni
Decoding
Power
Splitter
ui
1-Pi
Pi
zi
RF-EH
Decoding
RF-EH
ni
Decoding
Power
Splitter
ui
1-Pi
Pi
zi
RF-EH
Decoding
RF-EH
Constructive
SWIPT
Beamforming
SWIPT
Beamforming
(a)
(b)
Fig. 4.12 Block diagram showing the power splitting SWIPT approach at the receiver with (a)
SWIPT beamforming, (b) constructive SWIPT beamforming
Consequently, the power minimization problem with both QoS and EH constraints
is formulated as
min
fwi;Pig
K
X
iD1
kwik2
s.t.
jhiwij2
KP
kD1;k¤i
jhiwkj2 C N0 C NC
Pi
 i;
.1  Pi/
0
@
K
X
kD1
jhiwkj2 C N0
1
A  Ei; 0 < Pi < 1; 8i:
(4.48)
It is easy to see that formulation (4.48) is non-convex and hence challenging
to solve. Semideﬁnite programming relaxation is usually employed to solve the
optimization [58]. It is evident in the above optimization that, while interference
is treated as useful for energy harvesting, is still treated as harmful for information

4
Harvesting Signal Power from Constructive Interference in Multiuser Downlinks
117
decoding, as it reduces the SINR at the receiver. This is demonstrated in Fig. 4.12a
by the red shaded decoding part. Accordingly, the beamformer tries to constrain the
interference in the decoding part of the received power, to secure a QoS level.
4.3.2
Interference-Exploitation Beamforming for SWIPT
Clearly, like in the beamforming optimizations of Sect. 4.2.2, there is scope to
modify the optimization constraints such that constructive interference is harvested
both as a source of RF energy and a source of useful signal energy. By adapting
the beamforming optimizations in (4.32), (4.33) to the new transmission model as
per Fig. 4.12 and including the EH constraint, it is straightforward to see that the
interference-exploitation SWIPT beamforming optimization can be written as
min
fwig

K
X
kD1
wkej.ki/

2
s.t.
ˇˇˇˇˇˇ
Im
0
@hi
K
X
kD1
wkej.ki/
1
A
ˇˇˇˇˇˇ

0
B@Re
0
@hi
K
X
kD1
wkej.ki/
1
A 
s
i

N0 C NC
Pi

1
CA tan !;
ˇˇˇˇˇˇ
hi
K
X
kD1
wkej.ki/
ˇˇˇˇˇˇ

s
Ei
1  Pi
; 0 < Pi < 1; 8i
(4.49)
The problem (4.49) is nontrivial to solve because of the non-convex constraint
ˇˇˇhi
PK
kD1 wkej.ki/ˇˇˇ 
q
Ei
1Pi . A number of SOCP bounds have been derived in
[59] to obtain the beamforming vectors wk.
It is clear here that interference now provides a source of both RF power for
harvesting and useful signal power for decoding, as demonstrated in Fig. 4.12b. The
above approach has been shown to offer power gains of more than 15 dB compared
to conventional SWIPT beamforming in an Nt D 4; K D 4 MU-MISO system.
4.3.3
Open Problems and Research Directions
The above sections have overviewed work carried out in the area of interference
exploitation, that has received recent attention in the context of harvesting inter-
fering power for energy efﬁcient wireless transmission. While a body of work has
already focused on exploiting wireless interference in a number of scenarios and
under various approaches, the topic is quite broad, with wide potential in revisiting

118
C. Masouros
existing interference-cancellation approaches in interference-limited transmission
scenarios. Accordingly, there are numerous open problems in the area.
Information Theory An important pillar of research that is widely open in the
interference-exploitation research to date is that of communication-theoretic analy-
sis and optimization. To this date, the fundamental extent of the potential beneﬁts
from constructive interference is unknown, as there is a lack of information-theoretic
studies to provide performance benchmarks for the scenarios of interest. The main
limitation here is the fact that, as interference exploitation is modulation dependent,
Shannonian analysis and capacity calculations that assume Gaussian signals cannot
be applied. Instead modulation-dependent analysis is required, building on the more
complex ﬁnite-constellation approaches [60]. The development of such an analysis
would, however, provide a benchmark against which to measure the performance
of existing approaches, and more importantly, pave the way for optimizing practical
approaches for interference exploitation towards achieving the theoretically optimal.
CSI Robustness and Asynchronous Interference It could be suggested that
interference-exploitation approaches may be more sensitive to CSI errors and
asynchronicity, since they heavily depend on the careful superposition of the
interfering signals. While initial studies on CSI-robust techniques have disproved
this [26, 37], the analytical study of the effects of CSI errors and asynchronicity, and
the design of robust techniques speciﬁcally tailored for interference exploitation is
still an open topic in the literature. Given that practical systems operate with various
forms of CSI quantization and errors, and are subject to asynchronicity this provides
a very pragmatic research direction.
Multi-Level Modulation Initial work on the application of the concept of construc-
tive interference for multi-level modulation such as QAM and star-QAM has been
ongoing [8–11], primarily designing the optimization constraints for beamforming
to accommodate constructive interference. It is yet to be explored, however, how to
adaptively adjust the decision boundaries in the multi-level constellations to further
beneﬁt from constructive interference, as discussed in Sect. 4.1.2. This entails both
signal-processing algorithms and analytical work to study the extent of the required
constellation expansion, and how to optimally beneﬁt for such an approach.
Advanced Scenarios and Applications Finally, the application of the concept of this
chapter to more advanced scenarios is still widely open. While initial work has been
ongoing related to multi-cell transmission [13–16] and to energy harvesting commu-
nications [59] as detailed above, both these areas are open to contributions in their
various scenarios and existing solutions. Other exciting applications as, for example,
the exploitation of self-interference in full-duplex communications, the application
of this concept to emerging wireless paradigms such as distributed antenna systems,
Cloud–RAN transmissions, amongst many others, are still untouched territory that
provide grounds for future research directions.

4
Harvesting Signal Power from Constructive Interference in Multiuser Downlinks
119
In the coming generations of wireless networks where power efﬁciency will play
a dominant role, harvesting energy from interference, both as RF power and as
useful signal power, is a critical enabling solution. The abovementioned concept of
constructive interference and the identiﬁed open problems provide scope for fruitful
research for the years to come.
Acknowledgements The author would like to thank the researchers in the Department of
Electrical and Electronic Engineering in University College London, Pierluigi Amadori, Adrian
Garcia Rodriguez, and Ka Lung Law for the helpful discussions and assistance in developing the
content of this chapter.
The ﬁnancial support from the Royal Academy of Engineering, UK is gratefully acknowledged.
References
1. M. Costa, Writing on dirty paper. IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory IT-29, 439–441 (1983)
2. G. Zheng, I. Krikidis, C. Masouros, S. Timotheou, D.A. Toumpakaris, Z. Ding, Rethinking the
role of interference in wireless networks. IEEE Commun. Mag. 52(11), 152–158 (2014)
3. C. Masouros, T. Ratnarajah, M. Sellathurai, C. Papadias, A. Shukla, Known interference in
the cellular downlink: a performance limiting factor or a source of green signal power? IEEE
Commun. Mag. 51(10), 162–171 (2013)
4. D.N.C. Tse, P. Viswanath, Fundamentals of Wireless Communications (Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge, 2005)
5. C. Masouros, E. Alsusa, Soft linear precoding for the downlink of DS/CDMA communication
systems. IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol. 59(1), 203–215 (2010)
6. C. Masouros, E. Alsusa, Dynamic linear precoding for the exploitation of known interference
in mimo broadcast systems. IEEE Trans. Wirel. Commun. 8(3), 1396–1404 (2009)
7. 3GPP TS 36.211, V8.2.0 (2008-03), Release 8 Evolved Universal Terrestrial Radio Access
(E-UTRA); Physical Channels and Modulation
8. F. Keskin, J. Hahn, P.W. Baier, Minimum energy soft precoding. Electron. Lett. 43(6), 55–56
(2007)
9. M. Li, C. Liu, S.V. Hanly, Transmitter optimization for the network mimo downlink with ﬁnite-
alphabet and QoS constraints, in AusCTW Adelaide, 2013
10. M. Alodeh, S. Chatzinotas, B. Ottersten, Constructive interference through symbol level
precoding for multi-level modulation, in 2015 IEEE Global Communications Conference
(GLOBECOM), San Diego, CA, 2015
11. M. Alodeh, S. Chatzinotas, B. Ottersten, Symbol-level multiuser MISO precoding for multi-
level adaptive modulation: a multicast view (2016). arXiv preprint arXiv:1601.02788
12. D. Kwon, W. Yeo, D.K. Kim, A new precoding scheme for constructive superposition of
interfering signals in multiuser MIMO systems. IEEE Commun. Lett. 18(11), 2047–2050
(2014)
13. F. Khan, C. Masouros, T. Ratnarajah, Interference driven linear precoding in multiuser MISO
downlink cognitive radio network. IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol. 61(6), 2531–2543 (2012).
14. C. Masouros, T. Ratnarajah, Interference as a source of green signal power in cognitive relay
assisted co-existing MIMO wireless transmissions. IEEE Trans. Commun. 60(2), 525–536
(2012)
15. K.L. Law, C. Masouros, M. Pesavento, Transmit beamforming for interference exploitation in
the underlay cognitive radio Z-channel. IEEE Trans. Signal Process. (submitted). Available on
https://arxiv.org/abs/1606.06504

120
C. Masouros
16. M. Alodeh, S. Chatzinotas, B. Ottersten, Symbol based precoding in the downlink of cognitive
MISO channel, in Proceedings of CROWNCOM (2015)
17. C. Masouros, E. Alsusa, Two-stage transmitter precoding based on data-driven code hopping
and partial zero forcing beamforming for MC-CDMA communications. IEEE Trans. Wirel.
Commun. 8(7), 3634–3645 (2009)
18. C. Masouros, E. Alsusa, Interference exploitation using adaptive code allocation for the
downlink of precoded MC-CDMA systems. IET J. Commun. 2(9), 1118–1130 (2008).
doi:10.1049/iet-com:20070628
19. E. Alsusa, C. Masouros, Adaptive code allocation for interference management on the
downlink of DS-CDMA systems. IEEE Trans. Wirel. Commun. 7(7), 2420–2424 (2008).
doi:10.1109/TWC.2008.061043
20. C. Masouros, Correlation rotation linear precoding for MIMO broadcast communications.
IEEE Trans. Signal. Process. 59(1), 252–262 (2011)
21. S.M. Razavi, T. Ratnarajah, C. Masouros, Transmit-power efﬁcient linear precoding utilizing
known interference for the multiantenna downlink. IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol. 63(9), 4383–
4394 (2014)
22. S.M. Razavi, T. Ratnarajah, Adaptively regularized phase alignment precoding for multiuser
multiantenna downlink. IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol. 64(10), 4863–4869 (2015)
23. M.-J. Qi, Y.-C. Wu, Correlation rotation precoding algorithm based on criterion of minimum
mean square error. J. Comput. Appl. 1, 037 (2012)
24. X.M. Yang, Y. Xiong, Linear precoding with known interference for MIMO broadcast
channels. Electron. Lett. 47(13), 778–780 (2011)
25. Z.J. Liu, J.L. Wang, D.C. Sun K.C. Yi, Uniﬁed SER performance analysis and improvement
for multiuser MIMO downlink with correlation rotation linear precoding. IEEE Trans. Wirel.
Commun 12(4), 1678–1685 (2013)
26. D. Kwon, H.S. Kang, D.K. Kim, Robust interference exploitation-based precoding scheme
with quantized CSIT. IEEE Commun. Lett. 20(4), 780–783 (2016)
27. C.B. Peel, B.M. Hochwald, A.L. Swindlehurst, A vector-perturbation technique for near-
capacity multiantenna multiuser communication-part I: channel inversion and regularization.
IEEE Trans. Commun. 53(1), 195–202 (2005)
28. C. Windpassinger, R. Fischer, T. Vencel, J. Huber, Precoding in multiantenna and multiuser
communications, IEEE Trans. on Wireless Comms. 3(4), 1305–1316 (2004)
29. C.B. Peel, B.M. Hochwald, A.L. Swindlehurst, A vector-perturbation technique for near-
capacity multiantenna multiuser communication-part II: perturbation. IEEE Trans. Commun.
53(3), 537–544 (2005)
30. C. Masouros, M. Sellathurai, T. Ratnarajah, Interference optimization for transmit power
reduction in Tomlinson-Harashima precoded MIMO downlinks. IEEE Trans. Signal Process.
60(5), 2470–2481 (2012)
31. A. Garcia, C. Masouros, Power-efﬁcient Tomlinson-Harashima precoding for the downlink of
multi-user MISO systems. IEEE Trans. Commun. 62(6), 1884–1896 (2014)
32. E. Agrell, T. Eriksson, A. Vardy, K. Zeger, Closest point search in lattices. IEEE Trans. Inf.
Theory 48(8), 2201–2214 (2002)
33. C. Masouros, M. Sellathurai, T. Ratnarajah, Vector perturbation based on symbol scaling for
limited feedback MISO downlinks. IEEE Trans. Signal Process. 62(3), 562–571 (2014)
34. M. Bengtsson, B. Ottersten, Optimal and suboptimal transmit beamforming, in Handbook of
Antennas in Wireless Communications, ed. by L. Godara, ch. 18 (CRC, Boca Raton, FL, 2001)
35. M. Schubert, H. Boche, Solution of the multi-user downlink beamforming problem with
individual SINR constraints. IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol. 53(1), 18–28 (2004)
36. M. Alodeh, S. Chatzinotas, B. Ottersten, Constructive multiuser interference in symbol level
precoding for the MISO downlink channel. IEEE Trans. Signal Process. 63(9), 2239–2252
(2015)

4
Harvesting Signal Power from Constructive Interference in Multiuser Downlinks
121
37. C. Masouros, G. Zheng, Exploiting known interference as green signal power for downlink
beamforming optimization. IEEE Trans. Signal Process. 63(14), 3668–3680 (2015)
38. M. Alodeh, S. Chatzinotas, B. Ottersten, Energy-efﬁcient symbol-level precoding in multiuser
MISO based on relaxed detection region. IEEE Trans. Wirel. Commun. 15(5), 3755–3767
(2016)
39. K.L. Law, C. Masouros, K.K. Wong, G. Zheng, Constructive interference exploitation for QoS-
based downlink beamforming optimization. IEEE Trans. Signal Process. (in press)
40. A. Li, C. Masouros, Exploiting constructive mutual coupling in P2P MIMO by analog-digital
phase alignment. IEEE Trans. Wirel. Commun. 16(3), 1948–1962 (2017)
41. C. Masouros, E. Alsusa, Transmit antenna selection for partial linear precoding MIMO
schemes. IET Electron. Lett. 45(14), 736–737 (2009)
42. P.V. Amadori and C. Masouros, interference driven antenna selection for massive multi-user
MIMO. IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol. 65(8), 5944–5958 (2016)
43. P.V. Amadori, C. Masouros, Large scale antenna selection for interference exploitation. IEEE
Trans. Commun. (in press)
44. M. Alodeh, S. Chatzinotas, B. Ottersten, Data aware user selection in the cognitive downlink
MISO precoding systems, in IEEE International Symposium on Signal Processing and
Information Technology (ISSPIT), December 2013. Invited paper
45. Z. Ding, Z. Yang, P. Fan, H.V. Poor, On the performance of non-orthogonal multiple access
in 5G systems with randomly deployed users. IEEE Signal Process. Lett. 21(12), 1501–1505
(2014)
46. P.V. Amadori, C. Masouros, Constant envelope precoding by interference exploitation in phase
shift keying-modulated multiuser transmission. IEEE Trans Wirel. Commun. 16(1), 538–550
(2017)
47. X. Gao, O. Edfors, F. Tufvesson, E.G. Larsson, Massive MIMO in real propagation environ-
ments: do all antennas contribute equally? IEEE Trans. Commun. 63(11), 3917–3928 (2015)
48. Z. Chen, J. Yuan, B. Vucetic, Z. Zhou, Performance of Alamouti scheme with transmit
antenna selection, in IEEE International Symposium on Personal, Indoor and Mobile Radio
Communications, vol. 2 (2004), pp. 1135–1141
49. F. Rusek, D. Persson, B.K. Lau, E. Larsson, T. Marzetta, O. Edfors, F. Tufvesson, Scaling up
MIMO: opportunities and challenges with very large arrays. IEEE Signal Process. Mag. 30(1),
40–60 (2013)
50. A. Gorokhov, D. Gore, A. Paulraj, Receive antenna selection for MIMO spatial multiplexing:
theory and algorithms. IEEE Trans. Signal Process. 51(11), 2796–2807 (2003)
51. Y. Cheng, M. Pesavento, Joint discrete rate adaptation and downlink beamforming using mixed
integer conic programming. IEEE Trans. Signal Process. 63(7), 1750–1764 (2015)
52. S.K. Mohammed, E.G. Larsson, Per-antenna constant envelope precoding for large multi-user
MIMO systems. IEEE Trans. Commun. 61(3), 1059–1071 (2013)
53. J.C. Chen, C.K. Wen, K.K. Wong, Improved constant envelope multiuser precoding for massive
MIMO systems. IEEE Commun. Lett. 18(8), 1311–1314 (2014)
54. P.T. De Boer, D.P. Kroese, S. Mannor, R.Y. Rubinstein, A tutorial on the cross-entropy method.
Ann. Oper. Res. 134(1), 19–67 (2005)
55. R. Zhang, C.K. Ho, MIMO broadcasting for simultaneous wireless information and power
transfer. IEEE Trans. Wirel. Commun. 12(5), 1989–2001 (2013)
56. G. Zhu, C. Zhong, H.A. Suraweera, G.K. Karagiannidis, Z. Zhang, T.A. Tsiftsis, Wireless
information and power transfer in relay systems with multiple antennas and interference. IEEE
Trans. Commun. 63, 1400–1418 (2015)
57. Y. Zeng, R. Zhang, Full-duplex wireless-powered relay with self-energy recycling. IEEE Wirel.
Commun. Lett. 4(2), 201–204 (2015)

122
C. Masouros
58. S. Timotheou, I. Krikidis, G. Zheng, B. Ottersten, Beamforming for MISO interference
channels with QoS and RF energy transfer. IEEE Trans. Wirel. Commun. 13(5), 2646–2658
(2014)
59. S. Timotheou, G. Zheng, C. Masouros, I. Krikidis, Exploiting constructive interference for
simultaneous wireless information and power transfer in multiuser downlink systems. IEEE
JSAC Spec. Issue Green Commun. Netw. Second Issue 34(5), 1772–1784 (2016)
60. W. He, C.N. Georghiades, Computing the capacity of a MIMO fading channel under PSK
signaling. IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory 51(5), 1794–1803 (2005)

Chapter 5
Energy Harvesting for Wireless Relaying
Systems
Yunfei Chen
5.1
Introduction
In wireless communications, the destination node may be too far away from the
source node, or it may be obstructed from the source node, such that direct
communications between them are not possible. In this case, idle nodes between
them can be used to form a relaying link [1, 2]. Even when direct communications
between source and destination are available, idle nodes can still be used to provide
extra links. Thus, in wireless relaying, the relaying nodes forward signals from the
source to the destination to extend network coverage or to achieve diversity gain.
However, one of the main problems of existing wireless relaying systems is that
the relaying node has to consume its own energy to perform the relaying operation.
This discourages idle nodes from taking part in relaying, especially when they
operate on batteries and hence have a limited lifetime. Energy harvesting can solve
this problem by allowing the relaying node to harvest wireless energy from the
source and to use the harvested energy for relaying. Thus, this chapter investigates
energy harvesting wireless relaying. Figure 5.1 compares the conventional wireless
relaying with energy harvesting relaying. One sees that their main difference is that
energy harvesting relaying has an extra energy link between source and relay so that
the source can transfer energy to the relay wirelessly.
There are two main relaying protocols: amplify-and-forward (AF) and decode-
and-forward (DF) [3, 4]. In AF, the signal from the source is ampliﬁed and then
forwarded to the destination without any further processing. The ampliﬁcation and
forwarding operations will consume energy. In DF, the signal from the source
Y. Chen ()
University of Warwick, Coventry CV4 7AL, UK
e-mail: yunfei.chen@warwick.ac.uk
© Springer International Publishing AG 2018
D.N.K. Jayakody et al. (eds.), Wireless Information and Power Transfer:
A New Paradigm for Green Communications, DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-56669-6_5
123

124
Y. Chen
Fig. 5.1 Comparison of
conventional and energy
harvesting relaying
Information
Energy
Source Node
Source Node
a
a
Relay Node
Relay Node
b
b
Destination
Node
Destination
Node
Energy harvesting relaying
Conventional relaying
Fig. 5.2 TS and PS strategies
for wireless relaying
Power Splitting
Time-Switching
S-R Information
Transmission
R-D Information
Transmission
R-D Information Transmission
S-R Energy
Transfer
S-R Energy Transfer r
S-R Information Transmission 1–r
T/2
T/2
aT
(1–a)T/2
(1–a)T/2
is ﬁrst decoded and then re-encoded before being forwarded to the destination.
The decoding, encoding and forwarding operations will also consume energy. The
AF protocol is simpler than the DF protocol by performing a straightforward
ampliﬁcation without any decoding but its performance is usually poorer than the
DF protocol due to the ampliﬁed noise.
On the other hand, there are two main energy harvesting strategies: time-
switching (TS) and power-splitting (PS) [5]. In TS, a dedicated harvesting time is
allocated for energy harvesting. This simpliﬁes the hardware requirement but the
dedicated harvesting time reduces the throughput or achievable rate of the system.
In PS, no dedicated harvesting time is allocated but a portion of the received power
is split for energy harvesting. This strategy keeps the throughput of the system
but increases the hardware requirement, as a power splitter is not trivial in the
implementation. Figure 5.2 compares the TS and PS strategies. In this ﬁgure, T
is the total transmission time in wireless relaying, ˛ is the so-called TS coefﬁcient
that determines how much time will be dedicated for harvesting, and  is the so-
called PS factor that determines how much of the received power should be split for
harvesting.
In this chapter, we consider both TS and PS for AF and DF protocols. For
simplicity, we only consider a three-node relaying system, where the signal is

5
Energy Harvesting for Wireless Relaying Systems
125
transmitted from the source to the relay and then forwarded to the destination,
without a direct link between source and destination. Each node is also half-duplex
and has a single antenna.
5.2
Energy Harvesting DF Relaying Without Interference
5.2.1
Introduction
In this section, we show the performance of energy harvesting DF relaying without
interference. As mentioned before, DF normally offers better performance than AF
and thus, it is preferred in applications that emphasize performances. On the other
hand, compared with TS, the PS scheme does not require any dedicated harvesting
time. Thus, PS normally has higher throughput. Considering these, in this section,
the performance of DF using PS will be studied.
Several previous works on DF relaying using energy harvesting exist. For
example, reference [6] used stochastic geometry theories to study the effect of
random location on the outage probability of DF using PS. Reference [7] studied the
approximate ergodic capacity of DF using both TS and PS. Reference [8] considered
interference for DF relaying using TS. Reference [9] compared full-duplex and half-
duplex DF relaying systems using TS. This was extended to the multiple antenna
case in [10]. All of them assumed Rayleigh fading channels. There were no results
on bit error rate (BER) either.
In this section, the exact BER and throughput performances of DF using
PS will be studied for Nakagami-m fading channels. Two different transmission
scenarios will be considered: instantaneous transmission with known channel state
information and delay- or error-tolerant transmission with averaged error rate or
throughput. For each scenario, exact analytical expressions for the end-to-end BER
and throughput will be derived. These expressions will then be used to study the
optimum PS factor, a key parameter for energy harvesting relaying. Design guidance
on energy harvesting relaying will be provided based on the study.
As mentioned before, we consider a three-node DF relaying system using PS but
without a direct link. From Fig. 5.2, the source transmits a signal to the relay in the
ﬁrst phase. The relay splits this signal into two parts: one part for energy harvesting
and one part for information decoding. The decoded information is then encoded
again and forwarded to the destination using the harvested energy. Thus, the part of
the received signal at the relay for information decoding is
yr
k D
p
.1  /PShs C
p
1  nra
k C nrc
k :
(5.1)
In the above equation, PS is the transmitted power of the source,  is the PS factor
to be optimized, h is the Nakagami-m fading gain of the source-to-relay link, s is
the transmitted binary phase shift keying (BPSK) bit such that s D C1 and s D 1

126
Y. Chen
with equal probabilities, nra
k is the k-th sample of the noise from the antenna and
nrc
k is the k-th sample of the noise from the RF-to-baseband conversion, assumed
to be additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) with mean zero and variance 2
ra and
2
rc, respectively, and the fading power jhj2 is Gamma distributed with fjhj2.x/ D

m1
1
m1 xm11
 .m1/e m1
1 x; x > 0, m1 is the Nakagami m parameter, 1 is the average
fading power of the source-to-relay link and  ./ is the complete Gamma function
[11, Eq. (8.310.1)].
The other part of the received signal for energy harvesting can give the harvested
energy Eh D 	PSjhj2 T
2 so that the transmission power of the relay is Pr D
Eh
T=2 D
	PSjhj2, where 	 is the conversion efﬁciency of the energy harvester used. Using
the harvested energy calculated, one has the received signal at the destination as
yd
k D
p
PrgOs C nda
k C ndc
k
(5.2)
where Pr is the transmission power of the relay given before, g is the Nakagami-
m fading gain of the relay-to-destination link, Os is the data decision of the BPSK
bit made and transmitted by the relay, and nda
k and ndc
k are the antenna noise and
the conversion noise, respectively. In this case, jgj2 is Gamma distributed fjgj2.x/ D

m2
2
m2 xm21
 .m2/e m2
2 x; x > 0, where m2 is the Nakagami m parameter and 2 is the
average fading power of the relay-to-destination link. Also, nda
k and ndc
k are AWGN
with mean zero and variance 2
da and 2
dc, respectively.
5.2.2
BER
Using (5.1) and (5.2), the BERs of the S-R and R-D links are derived as BERr D
1
2erfc.p1/ and BERd D
1
2erfc.p2/, respectively, where 1 D
.1/PSjhj2
.1/2raC2rc is
deﬁned as the instantaneous signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) of the S-R link, 2 D
	PSjhj2jgj2
2
daC2
dc
is deﬁned as the instantaneous SNR of the R-D link, and erfc./ is the
complementary error function [11, Eq. (8.250.4)].
For instantaneous transmission, h and g are known through channel estimation.
Thus, the end-to-end BER of the whole relaying link can be derived as BER D
BERr.1  BERd/ C BERd.1  BERr/ or
BER D 1
2erfc
0
@
s
.1  /PSjhj2
.1  /2ra C 2rc
1
A C 1
2erfc
0
@
s
	PSjhj2jgj2
2
da C 2
dc
1
A
1
2erfc
0
@
s
.1  /PSjhj2
.1  /2ra C 2rc
1
A erfc
0
@
s
	PSjhj2jgj2
2
da C 2
dc
1
A :
(5.3)

5
Energy Harvesting for Wireless Relaying Systems
127
One sees that, when the hop SNRs are large, the third term in (5.3) is much
smaller than the ﬁrst two terms and may be ignored. In this case, when the value
of  increases, the ﬁrst term in (5.3) increases while the second term in (5.3)
decreases. Thus, there exists an optimum value of  that minimizes the BER. This
optimum value can be derived using standard mathematical manipulations of ﬁrst-
order differentiation but there is no closed-form expression for the optimum value
of .
For error-tolerant transmission, the average end-to-end BER can be calculated as
N
BER D
Z 1
0
Z 1
0
2
641
2erfc
0
@
s
.1  /PSx
.1  /2ra C 2rc
1
A C 1
2erfc
0
@
s
	PSxy
2
da C 2
dc
1
A
 1
2erfc
0
@
s
.1  /PSx
.1  /2ra C 2rc
1
A erfc
0
@
s
	PSxy
2
da C 2
dc
1
A
3
75 fjhj2.x/fjgj2.y/dxdy:
(5.4)
5.2.3
Throughput
Similarly, the throughput of the S-R and R-D can be derived from the received
signals as Cr D ln.1 C 1/ and Cd D ln.1 C 2/, respectively.
For instantaneous transmission, the fading channel gains are known. Using them,
the end-to-end throughput of the DF relaying system can be derived as
C D minfCr; Cdg D ln
0
@1 C min
(
.1  /PSjhj2
.1  /2ra C 2rc
; 	PSjhj2jgj2
2
da C 2
dc
) 1
A :
(5.5)
This throughput also has an optimum value of . The optimum value of  can be
derived as C
opt D .2
daC2
dcC	jgj22
rcC	jgj22
ra/
p

2	jgj22ra
, where  D Œ	jgj22
rc
2 C 2.	jgj22
rc/
.2
daC2
dcC	jgj22
ra/C.2
daC2
dc	jgj22
ra/2. One sees that this optimum  does not
depend on jhj2. As well, when
jgj2
2
daC2
dc is large and goes to inﬁnity, C
opt approaches
zero.
For delay-tolerant transmission, the ergodic throughput is obtained by averaging
it over the channel gains such that only the channel statistics are needed. Using this,
the ergodic capacity can be calculated as
NC D
Z 1
0
Z 1
0
ln
0
@1 C min
(
.1  /PSx
.1  /2ra C 2rc
; 	PSxy
2
da C 2
dc
) 1
A fjhj2.x/fjgj2.y/dxdy:
(5.6)

128
Y. Chen
The ergodic throughput in [7] and [8] are approximate expressions, since [8] and [7]
interchanged the order of integration and logarithm or the order of logarithm and the
minimum function, while mathematically they are not interchangeable due to the
non-linearity of the logarithm operation. The integration in (5.6) may be simpliﬁed
by using special functions but no closed-form expressions can be derived due to its
complexity.
5.2.4
Numerical Results
In this case, numerical examples of the BER and throughput in different scenarios
will be presented. Without loss of generality, in the examples, we set PS D 1, 2
ra D
2
rc D 2
da D 2
dc D 1, while jhj2 and jgj2 in the instantaneous transmission change
with ˇ1 D
jhj2
2raC2rc and ˇ2 D
jgj2
2
daC2
dc and 1 and 2 in the delay- and error-tolerant
transmissions change with ˇ1 D
1
2raC2rc and ˇ2 D
2
2
daC2
dc . The values of ˇ1 and ˇ2
indicate how good the source-to-relay and relay-to-destination links are.
Figure 5.3 shows the maximum throughput using the optimized  for different
values of ˇ1 and ˇ2. When ˇ1 is ﬁxed in the legend, the X-axis corresponds to ˇ2,
and when ˇ2 is ﬁxed in the legend, the X-axis corresponds to ˇ1. In this case, one
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
β1 or β2 (dB) 
Maximum throughput (bits/s/Hz)
β2 = 0 dB
β2 = 10 dB
β1 = 0 dB
β1 = 10 dB
Fig. 5.3 Maximum throughput using optimum  vs. ˇ1 or ˇ2 when 	 D 0:3 in instantaneous
transmission

5
Energy Harvesting for Wireless Relaying Systems
129
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
10−6
10
-12
10
-14
10
-16
10
-18
10-20
10
-10
10-8
10−4
10−2
100
β1 or β2 (dB)
Minimum BER
β2 = 0 dB
β2 = 10 dB
β1 = 0 dB
β1 = 10 dB
Fig. 5.4 Minimum BER using optimum  vs. ˇ1 or ˇ2 when 	 D 0:3 in instantaneous
transmission
sees that the optimized throughput increases signiﬁcantly with ˇ1, when ˇ2 is ﬁxed
to 0 and 10 dB, while the optimized throughput remains almost the same when ˇ2
increases and ˇ1 is ﬁxed to 0 and 10 dB. Thus, the throughput is more sensitive to
ˇ1. Figure 5.4 shows the minimum BER using the optimized  for different values
of ˇ1 and ˇ2. Similarly, the BER is more sensitive to ˇ1 than to ˇ2. This indicates
that the S-R link is more important than the R-D link in this case, as expected, as the
S-R link not only determines the throughput or BER at the relay, but also determines
the throughput or BER at the destination, via the harvested power.
Figure 5.5 shows the optimized value of  used to calculate the maximum
throughput in Fig. 5.3. When ˇ2 is ﬁxed to 0 dB or 10 dB, the optimum  does not
change when ˇ1 increases. This agrees with the discussion before that the optimum
 does not depend on jhj2. When ˇ1 is ﬁxed to 0 dB or 10 dB, the optimum 
decreases with an increasing ˇ2, as less power needs to be harvested when the
channel condition of the relay-to-destination link improves, under the same other
conditions. Figure 5.6 gives the optimum  used to calculate the minimum BER in
Fig. 5.4. Again, in general, the optimum  is more sensitive to ˇ2 than to ˇ1.
Figure 5.7 gives the optimized  for the maximum throughput for different ˇ1
and ˇ2 in delay- or error-tolerant transmission. It is interesting to note that in this
case, when ˇ2 is ﬁxed to 0 dB or 10 dB, the optimum  increases very slowly
with ˇ1, very close to a constant as in the instantaneous transmission. However,
the optimum  does decrease when ˇ2 increases, for ﬁxed ˇ1. This implies to us

130
Y. Chen
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
β
1 or β
2 (dB) 
Optimum ρ
β2 = 0 dB
β2 = 10 dB
β1 = 0 dB
β1 = 10 dB
Fig. 5.5 The optimum  vs. ˇ1 or ˇ2 when 	 D 0:3 to achieve the maximum throughput in
instantaneous transmission
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
β1 or β2 (dB)
Optimum ρ
β2 = 0 dB
β2 = 10 dB
β1 = 0 dB
β1 = 10 dB
Fig. 5.6 The optimum  vs. ˇ1 or ˇ2 when 	 D 0:3 to achieve the minimum BER in instantaneous
transmission

5
Energy Harvesting for Wireless Relaying Systems
131
β1 or β2 (dB)
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
Optimum ρ
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
β2 = 0 dB
β2 = 10 dB
β1 = 0 dB
β1 = 10 dB
Fig. 5.7 The optimum  vs. ˇ1 or ˇ2 when m1 D m2 D 2 and 	 D 0:3 for the maximum
throughput in delay-tolerant transmission
that in delay-tolerant transmission, the R-D link is more important than the S-R
link. Figure 5.8 gives the optimum  for the minimum BER for different ˇ1 and
ˇ2 in delay- or error-tolerant transmission. In this case, this optimum value changes
signiﬁcantly in most curves when ˇ1 or ˇ2 increase or decrease.
5.2.5
Conclusion
In this section, the throughput and BER expressions for DF relaying using PS
have been analysed for Nakagami-m fading channels in two different transmission
scenarios. Numerical results have shown that there does exist an optimum value
of the PS factor in all the cases considered. For instantaneous transmission, the
optimum value of  for maximum throughput does not depend on ˇ1 in this case.
For delay- or error-tolerant transmissions, the relaying performance is less sensitive
to 	 too. In addition, the optimum  that achieves maximum throughput is insensitive
to ˇ1, while the optimum  for minimum BER is sensitive to both ˇ1 and ˇ2.

132
Y. Chen
β1 or β2 (dB) 
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
Optimum ρ
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
β2 = 0 dB
β2 = 10 dB
β1 = 0 dB
β1 = 10 dB
Fig. 5.8 The optimum  vs. ˇ1 or ˇ2 when m1 D m2 D 2 and 	 D 0:3 for the minimum BER in
error-tolerant transmission
5.3
Energy Harvesting AF Relaying with Interference
5.3.1
Introduction
The AF protocol does not perform as well as the DF protocol but is simpler than the
DF protocol. So it will be useful for applications where complexity is limited. Also,
in a practical network, the relaying process may be subject to interference caused by
other transmitters in the network. In this section, we will study the performance of
energy harvesting AF relaying with interference. Again, we consider the PS scheme.
Some previous works on energy harvesting AF relaying exist. For example,
reference [12] studied two energy harvesting AF schemes using PS and TS.
Reference [13] studied a harvest-use structure, where the relay does not have
energy storage capability and has to use the harvested energy immediately after it
is harvested, for the optimal trade-off between harvesting time and relaying time.
Reference [14] studied the optimal power allocation for energy harvesting AF,
where relays can harvest energies from multiple source nodes and the total harvested
energy was then allocated for transmissions of signals to different destinations.
All these works consider Rayleigh fading. They did not consider the effect of
interference either.

5
Energy Harvesting for Wireless Relaying Systems
133
To provide more insights on various aspects of AF relaying using PS, in this
section, the performance of AF relaying using PS is analysed by deriving the outage
probability and the throughput in Nakagami-m fading channels, when both the relay
and the destination suffer from interference. Both ﬁxed-gain relaying and variable-
gain AF relaying are studied. Using the derived expressions, the effects of different
system parameters on the system performance are examined.
Again, consider a three-node system without a direct link between source and
destination. For PS, a fraction of the received signal is harvested without any
dedicated harvesting time. Thus, the transmission from the source to the relay takes
T
2 seconds and the received information signal at the relay is given by
yr
k D
p
.1  /Psha C
p
1  
N
X
iD1
p
Pihiai C
p
1  nra
k C nrc
k
(5.7)
where N is the number of interfering sources at the relay, Pi is the transmission
power of the i-th interferer, hi is the fading gain from the i-th interferer to the
considered relay, ai is the transmitted BPSK bit of the i-th interferer and all the
other symbols are deﬁned as before. We assume Nakagami-m fading such that jhij2,
i D 1; 2; : : : ; N, are Gamma distributed with fjhij2.x/ D

mI1
I1
mI1 xmI11
 .mI1/e mI1
I1 x; x >
0, where mI1 and I1 are the m parameter and the average fading power from
the interferer to the relay, respectively. They are assumed to be independent and
identically distributed. Then, the harvested energy is given by Eh D 	.Psjhj2 C
PN
iD1 Pijhij2/ T
2 .
Using the harvested energy, the received information is ampliﬁed and forwarded.
The received signal at the destination is given by
yd
k D
p
Pragyr
k C
N
X
jD1
p
Qjgjbj C nda
k C ndc
k
(5.8)
where Pr D
Eh
T=2 D 	.Psjhj2 C PN
iD1 Pijhij2/, Qj is the transmission power of
the j-th interferer to the destination, gj is the fading gain from the j-th interferer to
the destination, bj is the transmitted BPSK bit of the j-th interferer and all other
symbols are deﬁned as before. The ampliﬁcation factor depends on the method of
AF relaying [15–17]. In ﬁxed-gain relaying, a is a constant and without loss of
generality, a D 1. In variable-gain relaying, one has a D
1
p
.1/PSjhj2C.1/2raC2rc .
We again assume Nakagami-m fading such that jgjj2, j D 1; 2; : : : ; N, are Gamma
distributed with fjgjj2.x/ D

mI2
I2
mI2 xmI21
 .mI2/e mI2
I2 x; x > 0, where mI2 and I2 are the
m parameter and the average fading power in the link from the j-th interferer to the
destination, respectively.

134
Y. Chen
5.3.2
Outage
The outage probability is deﬁned as the probability that the SINR is below a
certain threshold 0 as Pout D Prf < 0g. Denote 2 D
jgj2
PN
jD1 Qjjgjj2C2
daC2
dc and
3 D
jhj2
PN
iD1 Pijhij2C2raC2rc=.1/. Using (5.8), the end-to-end signal-to-interference-
plus-noise ratio (SINR) can be derived as
 D
PSa223
a22 C
1
	Œ.1/ PN
iD1 Pijhij2C.1/2raC2rc
.PSjhj2CPN
iD1 Pijhij2/
:
(5.9)
Compared with the end-to-end SINR for the conventional relaying, the end-to-
end SINR for energy harvesting relaying has an additional term of .PSjhj2 C
PN
iD1 Pijhij2/ multiplied with the second term in the denominator, which has caused
complexity.
The outage probability for ﬁxed-gain relaying using PS can be derived as
PPSFG
out
D 1 

mI1
PI1I1
NmI1  m1
PS1
m1 
mI2
QI2I2
NmI2
1
 .NmI1/ .m1/ .NmI2/
m21
X
lD0
l
X
l0D0
.m2=2/l 
l0
l

.2
da C 2
dc/ll0.NmI2 C l0  1/Š
lŠ

Z 1
0
Z 1
0zC02raC02rc=.1/
e
m2.2
daC2
dc/
2
XPSFG.y;z/
m1
Ps1 y
mI1
PI1I1 z
 .XPSFG.y; z//lym11zNmI11

mI2
QI2I2 C m2XPSFG.y;z/
2
NmI2Cl0 dydz:
(5.10)
where XPSFG.y; z/ D
0
	.1/
1
.yCz/
1
.y0z02ra02rc=.1//.
Similarly, if variable-gain relaying is used, the outage probability is derived as
PPSVG
out
D 1 

mI1
PI1I1
NmI1  m1
PS1
m1 
mI2
QI2I2
NmI2
1
 .NmI1/ .m1/ .NmI2/
m21
X
lD0
l
X
l0D0
.m2=2/l 
l0
l

.2
da C 2
dc/ll0.NmI2 C l0  1/Š
lŠ

Z 1
0
Z 1
0zC02raC02rc=.1/
e
m2.2
daC2
dc/
2
XPSVG.y;z/
m1
Ps1 y
mI1
PI1I1 z
 .XPSVG.y; z//lym11zNmI11

mI2
QI2I2 C m2XPSVG.y;z/
2
NmI2Cl0 dydz
(5.11)

5
Energy Harvesting for Wireless Relaying Systems
135
where XPSVG.y; z/ D
0
	.1/
.1/yC.1/2
raC2
rc
.yCz/.y0Z102ra02rc=.1//. The detailed derivation
can be found in [18].
5.3.3
Throughput
Let R be a ﬁxed transmission rate that the source needs to satisfy such that R D
log2.1 C 0/. Then, one has 0 D 2R  1. For PS, the throughput can be derived as
 D .1  Pout/RT=2
T
D R
2 .1  Pout/
(5.12)
Using PPSFG
out
in (5.10) and PPSVG
out
in (5.11) to replace Pout in (5.12), the throughput
for energy harvesting relaying using PS can be derived.
5.3.4
Numerical Results
In this subsection, the effects of some important system parameters are examined
by showing relevant numerical examples. In these examples, we set 2
ra D 2
rc D
2
da D 2
dc D 1, PS D PI1 D QI2 D I1 D I2 D 1, while 1 and 2 vary
with the average SINR of the source-to-relay link and the average SINR of the
relay-to-destination link deﬁned as 1 D
1
NPI1I1C2raC2rc and 2 D
2
NQI2I2C2raC2rc ,
respectively.
Figures 5.9, 5.10, 5.11, 5.12, 5.13 show the throughput of energy harvesting
relaying using PS versus  under different conditions. In these cases considered, the
throughput always increases and the rate of increase becomes small, when the value
of  increases. When  D 0:8, the throughput is very close to the maximum it can
be, indicating that there is greater ﬂexibility in the choice of . Also, the sensitivity
of the throughput to  is small, as the value of throughput ranges between 0.9 and 1
in most cases in Figs. 5.9, 5.10, 5.11, 5.12, 5.13. One also sees from these ﬁgures that
ﬁxed-gain relaying has larger throughput than variable-gain relaying, the throughput
increases when 	 increases, N decreases, R increases, the SINR increases or the m
parameter increases. The throughput is more sensitive to N, R, 1 and m1 than to 	,
2 and the relaying method.
5.3.5
Conclusion
The performance of energy harvesting AF relaying has been evaluated in terms of
the outage and the throughput for Nakagami-m fading with interference. Using these
results, the effects of the PS factor , the conversion efﬁciency of harvester 	, the
number of interferers N, the required ﬁxed transmission rate R, the SINR of different
hops and the m parameter on the throughput performance have been examined.

136
Y. Chen
ρ
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
τ
0.86
0.88
0.9
0.92
0.94
0.96
0.98
1
Rayleigh, N=8, Δ1=Δ2= 0 dB,R=2
Fixed gain, η=0.5
Fixed gain, η=0.3
Variable gain, η=0.5
Variable gain, η=0.3
Fig. 5.9 Throughput vs.  for different values of 	 using PS energy harvesting when N D 8,
1 D 2 D 0 dB, R D 2 bits/s/Hz in Rayleigh fading channels
ρ
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
τ
0.9
0.91
0.92
0.93
0.94
0.95
0.96
0.97
0.98
0.99
1
Rayleigh, Δ1=Δ2= 0 dB, η = 0.5, R=2
Fixed gain, N=8
Fixed gain, N=4
Variable gain, N=8
Variable gain, N=4
Fig. 5.10 Throughput vs.  for different values of N using PS energy harvesting when 	 D 0:5,
1 D 2 D 0 dB, R D 2 bits/s/Hz in Rayleigh fading channels

5
Energy Harvesting for Wireless Relaying Systems
137
ρ
τ
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
2
Rayleigh, N=8, Δ1=Δ2= 0 dB, η=0.5
Fixed gain, R=2
Fixed gain, R=4
Variable gain, R=2
Variable gain, R=4
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
Fig. 5.11 Throughput vs.  for different values of R using PS energy harvesting when N D 8,
1 D 2 D 0 dB, 	 D 0:5 in Rayleigh fading channels
ρ
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
τ
0.9
0.91
0.92
0.93
0.94
0.95
0.96
0.97
0.98
0.99
1
Rayleigh, N=8, η = 0.5, R=2
Fixed gain, Δ1=Δ2=0 dB
Fixed gain, Δ1 = 10 dB, Δ2 = 0 dB
Fixed gain, Δ1= 0 dB, Δ2= 10 dB
Variable gain, Δ1=Δ2=0 dB
Variable gain, Δ1 = 10 dB, Δ2 = 0 dB
Variable gain, Δ1= 0 dB, Δ2= 10 dB
Fig. 5.12 Throughput vs.  for different values of 1 and 2 using PS energy harvesting when
N D 8, 	 D 0:5, R D 2 bits/s/Hz in Rayleigh fading channels

138
Y. Chen
ρ
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
τ
0.9
0.91
0.92
0.93
0.94
0.95
0.96
0.97
0.98
0.99
1
Rayleigh inteference, N=8, Δ1=Δ2= 0 dB, η=0.5, R=2
Fixed gain, m1=m2=1
Fixed gain, m1=3, m2=1
Variable gain, m1=m2=1
Variable gain, m1=3, m2=1
Fig. 5.13 Throughput vs.  for different values of m1 using PS energy harvesting when N D 8,
1 D 2 D 0 dB, R D 2 bits/s/Hz, 	 D 0:5 and other channels suffer from Rayleigh fading
Numerical results show that PS is not sensitive to energy harvesting and that the
throughput is more sensitive to N, R, 1 and m1 than to 	, 2 and the relaying
method. Using these results, one can choose appropriate parameters for different
application environments.
5.4
Design of New Energy Harvesting Relaying Protocol
5.4.1
Introduction
The above two sections and most previous works on energy harvesting relaying
in the literature [6–14] have assumed energy harvesting relaying where the source
transfers wireless energy to the relay in the ﬁrst phase of broadcasting. More
speciﬁcally, the conventional energy harvesting relaying protocol has two phases.
In the ﬁrst broadcasting phase, the source transmits signal to the relay for energy
harvesting as well as information delivery. In the second relaying phase, the relay
uses the harvested energy to forward the signal to the destination. This protocol
provides an effective solution to energy harvesting relaying. However, note that
in the second relaying phase when the relay uses the harvested energy to forward
the signal, the signal is still broadcast by the relay to the destination. Thus, the
conventional energy harvesting protocol can be further improved by allowing the

5
Energy Harvesting for Wireless Relaying Systems
139
Fig. 5.14 Comparison of
conventional energy
harvesting relaying and new
energy harvesting relaying
Information
Energy
Source Node
Source Node
a
a
Relay Node
Relay Node
b
b
Destination
Node
Destination
Node
Conventional energy harvesting relaying
New energy harvesting relaying
source to harvest energy from the relay transmitting in the second relaying phase to
maximize the energy use. Figure 5.14 compares the conventional energy harvesting
relaying with the new energy harvesting relaying schemes. One sees that in the new
schemes the relay harvests energy from the source in the broadcasting phase and
the source harvests energy from the relay in the relaying phase. In the conventional
scheme, only the relay harvests energy from the source in the broadcasting phase.
In this work, we will study the performance of the new energy harvesting
relaying protocol using AF as an example, where in the relaying phase, the relay
transmits information to the destination while the source harvests energy from this
transmission. In this case, we consider both TS and PS energy harvesting schemes.
Before we move on to the analysis, a few assumptions need to be laid out. Again,
consider a three-node relaying system without direct link between the source and
the destination. Assume that both the source and the relay are equipped with energy
harvesters. To illustrate the performance gain of the new protocol, we consider
static AWGN channels without fading but with large-scale path loss. Also, assume
that there are Et joules of total energy initially available at the source and that the
whole relaying transmission takes T seconds that includes broadcasting, relaying
and energy harvesting. The system works as follows.
For TS, the relay receives energy from the source for ˛T seconds followed by
information reception from the source for 1˛
2 T seconds, in the ﬁrst broadcasting
phase. The received signal at the relay can be given by
yr
k D
p
Ps
h
p
dmsr
a C nra
k C nrc
k
(5.13)
where dsr is the distance between source and relay, m is the path loss exponent and
all the other symbols are deﬁned as before. Thus, compared with the signals we used
before, we have stated the large-scale path loss explicitly as dm
sr. Using this received
signal, the ﬁrst period of time is used for energy harvesting to give the harvested
energy at the relay as Ehr D 	Ps h2
dmsr ˛T.
In the second relaying phase, the relay node will forward the signal from the
source to the destination for 1˛
2 T seconds and the received signal at the destination
can be given by

140
Y. Chen
yd
k D
g
pdm
rd
p
Prdyr
k C nda
k C ndc
k
(5.14)
where drd is the distance between relay and destination, Pr D
Ehr
1˛
2 T D
2˛	
1˛Ps h2
dmsr
is the transmission power of the relay, dyr
k is the normalized transmitted signal,
normalized with respect to the average power of yr
k as d D
1
r
Ps h2
dmsr C2raC2rc
.
Unlike the conventional energy harvesting relaying protocol, in the new protocol,
the source also harvests energy from the signal transmitted by the relay. Thus, during
the second relaying phase, the received signal at the source is given by
ys
k D
h
p
dmsr
p
Prdyr
k C nsa
k
(5.15)
where we have used the channel reciprocity such that the channel gain h and the
distance dsr do not change for the S-R or R-S links and nsa
k is the AWGN at the
source. In this case, the harvested energy at the source is Ehs D 	 PrPsd2h4
d2m
sr
 .1˛/T
2
.
This equals to Ehs D 	2˛
P2
s .h2=dm
sr/3T
Psh2=dmsrC2raC2rc .
For PS, since there is no dedicated harvesting time, in this case, the source ﬁrst
transmits the signal to the relay for T
2 seconds, part of which is received at the relay
for information decoding as
yr
k D
p
.1  /Ps
h
p
dmsr
a C
p
1  nra
k C nrc
k
(5.16)
and part of which is harvested by the relay as Ehr D 	Ps h2
dmsr
T
2 . All the symbols are
deﬁned as before.
In the second relaying phase, the relay will use its harvested energy to forward
the received signal. Then, the received signal at the destination becomes
yd
k D
g
pdm
rd
p
Prdyr
k C nda
k C ndc
k
(5.17)
where in this case Pr D Ehr
T=2 D 	Ps h2
dmsr .
Also, unlike the conventional relaying protocol, in the second relaying phase of
the new protocol, the source needs to harvest energy from the signal transmitted by
the relay so its received signal is
ys
k D
h
p
dmsr
p
Prdyr
k C nsa
k
(5.18)

5
Energy Harvesting for Wireless Relaying Systems
141
and the harvested energy from this received signal is derived as Ehs D 	2.1 
/
P2
s .h2=dm
sr/3T=2
Psh2=dmsrC2raC2rc . Next, we consider two strategies of using this newly harvested
energy. In the ﬁrst strategy, all the harvested energies at the source node during dif-
ferent relaying transmissions will be stored until all the transmissions are ﬁnished.
The stored energy is then used to conduct more relaying transmissions. In the second
strategy, instead of storing all harvested energy until all the relaying transmissions
are ﬁnished, the harvested energy will be used immediately in the next relaying
transmission to increase its transmission power and therefore its transmission rate.
This strategy has the advantages of requiring smaller energy storage at the source
node as well as improving the quality of each relay transmission.
5.4.2
Conventional Protocol
For the conventional TS relaying protocol, the source transmits the signal for a
duration of ˛T C 1˛
2 T with a transmission power of Ps, where the ﬁrst part is
the dedicated energy transfer time and the second part is the extra information
transmission time. Thus, each relaying transmission will assume an energy of
Ei D
h
˛T C 1˛
2 T
i
Ps. Thus, given a total energy of Et at the beginning, the total
number of relaying transmissions the source can perform using the conventional TS
relaying protocol can be calculated as KCon
TS D Et
Ei D
Et
PsT
2
1C˛.
For TS, the end-to-end signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) can be derived using the
received signal expression as TS D
Psdra2
dd2C
.1˛/dmsr
2˛	Psh2.2rcC2ra/
, where d D
g2
dm
rd.2
daC2
dc/ and
r D
h2
dmsr.2raC2rc/ are the hop SNRs similar to before but with large-scale path loss
now. Thus, the total transmission rate or throughput in all relaying transmissions
can be shown as
CCon
TS D KCov
TS  log2.1 C TS/1  ˛
2
:
(5.19)
The calculation for PS is very similar. In the conventional PS relaying protocol,
each relay transmission consumes an energy of Ei D T
2 Ps and thus, given the initial
energy of Et, the total number of relaying transmissions is then KCon
PS D 2Et
PsT .
Also, for PS, the end-to-end SNR can be derived as PSD
Psdpa2
dd2C
dmsr
.1/Œ2raC2rc=.1/
	Psh2
,
where p D
h2
dmsrŒ2raC2rc=.1/
 and other symbols are deﬁned as before. Finally,
the total transmission rate or throughput of all relaying transmissions using the
conventional PS relaying protocol is
CCon
PS D KCon
PS
2
log2.1 C PS/:
(5.20)

142
Y. Chen
5.4.3
First Strategy of Using New Energy
Consider the ﬁrst strategy where the harvested energies at the source will be stored
until all relaying transmissions are ﬁnished. Then, they will be used to transmit more
data. In this case, the new total number of relaying transmissions can be derived
as KNew
TS
D
2
4
Et=.PsT/
1C˛
2
	2˛
P2s .h2=dmsr/3T
Psh2=dmsrC2raC2rc
3
5, where Œ
 is the rounding function to get an
integer and 1C˛
2
> 	2˛
P2
s .h2=dm
sr/3T
Psh2=dmsrC2raC2rc which is always the case as the harvested
energy is positive. Thus, since the number of relaying transmissions is increased
while the throughput for each transmission is the same as conventional scheme, one
has the total throughput in the ﬁrst strategy as
CNew1
TS
D KNew
TS
 log2.1 C TS/1  ˛
2
:
(5.21)
For PS, the derivation is similar. The new number of total relaying transmissions
using PS is calculated as KNew
PS
D
2
4
2Et=.PsT/
1	2.1/
P2s .h2=dmsr/3T=2
Psh2=dmsrC2raC2rc
3
5, where 1 > 	2.1/
P2
s .h2=dm
sr/3T=2
Psh2=dmsrC2raC2rc and thus one has the new total throughput as
CNew1
PS
D KNew
PS
2
log2.1 C PS/:
(5.22)
5.4.4
Second Strategy of Using New Energy
Consider the second strategy. In this case, the extra energy harvested by the source
will be used in the next relaying transmission to save battery capacity. Because of
this, an iterative process is used as
P.iC1/
s
D Et=KCon
TS C E.i/
hs
T
2
1 C ˛
iC1
TS
D
P.iC1/
s
dr
d C
.1˛/dmsr.P.iC1/
s
h2
dmsr C2raC2rc/
2˛	P.iC1/
s
h2.2raC2rc/
E.iC1/
hs
D 	2˛
.P.i/
s /2.h2=dm
sr/3T
P.i/
s h2=dmsr C 2ra C 2rc
:
(5.23)

5
Energy Harvesting for Wireless Relaying Systems
143
where i D 1; 2; : : : ; KCon
TS denote the i-th transmission, E1
hs D 0 and P1
s D Ps as the
initial conditions. Thus, the new total throughput is derived as
CNew2
TS
D
KCon
TS
X
iD1
log2.1 C .i/
TS/1  ˛
2
:
(5.24)
For PS, one has
P.iC1/
s
D 2.Et=KCon
PS C E.i/
hs /
T
iC1
PS
D
P.iC1/
s
dp
d C
dmsr.P.iC1/
s
h2
dmsr C2raC2rc/
Œ.1/2raC2rc
	P.iC1/
s
h2
E.iC1/
hs
D 	2.1  / .P.i/
s /2.h2=dm
sr/3T=2
P.i/
s h2=dmsr C 2ra C 2rc
:
(5.25)
and the new total throughput is therefore
CNew2
PS
D
KCon
PS
X
iD1
log2.1 C .i/
PS/1
2:
(5.26)
5.4.5
Numerical Results
In this subsection, numerical examples are given to show the performance of the new
protocol, where the values of ˛ and  are calculated by maximizing the throughput
of a single transmission log2.1CTS/ 1˛
2
or log2.1CPS/ 1
2, respectively. For ﬁxed h,
the value of h2
dmsr is determined by dsr. Thus, in the following, we examine the effects
of Ps, 	, dsr and 2
ra C 2
rc on the performance gain. Other parameters are set as
Et D 100 J, T D 1 s, 2
ra D 2
rc D 2
da D 2
dc D 2, m D 2:7 and h D g D 1. These
parameters can be changed to evaluate more conditions. The path loss exponent
m D 2:7 corresponds to an urban cellular environment [19]. The channel gains
h D g D 1 is chosen such that the operating SNR will be from 10 to 20 dB without
path loss, when 2 is from 0.01 to 0.1 as examined in this work. The choices of
distances are for illustration purpose only. The performance gain examined in the
following ﬁgures is calculated as the difference between the total throughput of new
and conventional protocols normalized by that of the conventional protocol.
Figure 5.15 shows the performance gain vs. Ps. Several observations can be
made. First, since the gain is always positive, the new protocol outperforms the

144
Y. Chen
Ps (Watt)
Gain (%)
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
First strategy using time-swtiching
First strategy using power-splitting
Second strategy using time-swtiching
Second strategy using power-splitting
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
Fig. 5.15 Performance gain vs. Ps when dsr D 1:2 m, drd D 1:2 m, 	 D 0:5 and 2 D 0:01
conventional protocol, as expected, as the source node harvests extra energy in
the relaying phase. Second, the new protocol using the ﬁrst strategy has a larger
performance gain than that using the second strategy at the cost of requiring a larger
capacity for energy storage. Third, the TS energy harvesting has a larger gain than
the PS energy harvesting, as PS normally harvests less energy than TS.
Figure 5.16 shows the gain vs. 	. One sees that the performance gain increases
when 	 increases. Figure 5.17 shows the gain vs. dsr. In this case, the performance
gain decreases when dsr increases. Also, compared with Fig. 5.16, the rate of change
in Fig. 5.17 is much higher than that in Fig. 5.16. Again, the ﬁrst strategy using TS
has the largest gain. Figure 5.18 shows the gain vs. 2. In this case, the gain increases
when 2 increases, except when the ﬁrst strategy is used with PS.
5.4.6
Conclusion
From this section, one concludes that the distance dsr has the largest effect on
the performance gain, followed by the conversion efﬁciency 	. To increase the
performance gain of the new protocol, one needs to choose a large 	 or a small
dsr. Also, TS is preferred to PS, as it produces larger gains. Note that the above

5
Energy Harvesting for Wireless Relaying Systems
145
η
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
Gain (%)
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
First strategy using time-swtiching
First strategy using power-splitting
Second strategy using time-swtiching
Second strategy using power-splitting
Fig. 5.16 Performance gain vs. 	 when Ps D 1 W, dsr D 1:2 m, drd D 1:2 m and 2 D 0:01
dsr (m)
Gain (%)
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
First strategy using time-swtiching
First strategy using power-splitting
Second strategy using time-swtiching
Second strategy using power-splitting
1
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
2
2.2
2.4
2.6
2.8
Fig. 5.17 Performance gain vs. dsr when Ps D 1 W, drd D 3  dsr, 	 D 0:5 and 2 D 0:01

146
Y. Chen
σ2
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
0.05
0.06
0.07
0.08
0.09
0.1
Gain (%)
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
5
5.5
First strategy using time-swtiching
First strategy using power-splitting
Second strategy using time-swtiching
Second strategy using power-splitting
Fig. 5.18 Performance gain vs. 2 when Ps D 1 W, dsr D 1:2 m, drd D 1:2 m and 	 D 0:5
result considers a static AWGN channel for simplicity. For fading channels, channel
estimation can be performed for each transmission [20] and the estimated channel
information can then be used at the source node for rate adaptation.
5.5
Channel Estimation in Energy Harvesting Relaying
5.5.1
Introduction
Channel estimation is an important part of wireless relaying, as the destination
needs the channel gains for signal demodulation and the relay may also need
the channel gains for variable-gain ampliﬁcation. There are a few existing works
on channel estimation for relaying. For example, reference [21] discussed several
linear minimum mean squared error (LMMSE) estimators for the cascaded channel
coefﬁcient as the product of the channel coefﬁcient in the source-to-relay link and
that in the relay-to-destination. Reference [22] proposed a new least squares (LS)
estimator and reference [23] proposed a minimum mean squared error (MMSE)
estimator, for the cascaded channel coefﬁcient. References [24] and [25] proposed
pilot-based moment-based (MB) estimators and maximum likelihood (ML) methods
for the individual channel powers.

5
Energy Harvesting for Wireless Relaying Systems
147
The previous sections analysed and proposed energy harvesting relaying
schemes. In these schemes, the energy is mainly harvested for data transmission
or data symbol forwarding in the relaying phase. Similar to data transmission, in
pilot-based channel estimation, pilot symbols need to be transmitted or forwarded
by the relay. Without energy harvesting, this transmission will bring a huge burden
to the relay in terms of energy consumption and thus, will also discourage idle nodes
from participating in relaying. Thus, it is important to adopt energy harvesting in
the channel estimation of wireless relaying.
In this section, new pilot-based channel estimators for AF relaying are proposed.
The pilots are sent using energy harvested from the source. Channel estimation is
performed only using these pilots multiplexed in the time domain with the data
symbols for single-carrier systems. Both TS and PS are considered. We propose
several new estimation schemes using the approximate ML method. In Schemes
1 and 2, the relay harvests energy from pilots sent by the source and then uses
this energy to forward pilots from the source as well as transmit its own pilots to
the destination. In Schemes 3 and 4, the relay harvests energy from pilots sent by
the source and also uses these pilots to estimate the source-to-relay link. Then, the
harvested energy is used to transmit its own pilot to the destination to estimate the
relay-to-destination link. Again, consider a three-node system without direct link.
Assume that a total of K pilots are used in all schemes for energy harvesting and
channel estimation. Each pilot occupies a time duration of Tp.
5.5.2
Scheme One
In Scheme 1, the relay harvests energy from the source using TS and then uses the
harvested energy to forward pilots from the source as well as transmit its own pilots
to the destination.
First, the source sends I pilots to the relay for energy harvesting. The received
signal at the relay is given by
y.reh/
i
D
p
Psh C n.reh/
i
(5.27)
where i D 1; 2; : : : ; I, n.reh/
i
is the AWGN with mean zero and variance 22
r , and
other symbols are deﬁned as before. All the noise in this paper is assumed circularly
symmetric. Using (5.27), the harvested energy is Eh D 	Psjhj2ITp.
Second, the source sends another J1 pilots to the relay, which will be forwarded
to the destination for channel estimation. The received signal at the destination is
y.ds/
j1
D
p
Prgay.rce/
j1
C n.ds/
j1
;
(5.28)
where y.rce/
j1
D pPsh C n.rce/
j1
is the forwarded pilot symbol, j1 D 1; 2; : : : ; J1,
n.rce/
j1
is the AWGN at the relay with mean zero and variance 22
r , and n.ds/
j1
is the

148
Y. Chen
AWGN at the destination with mean zero and variance 22
d . In Scheme 1, since the
relay does not perform channel estimation, ﬁxed-gain relaying can be used such that
one can set a as a constant for simplicity [15, 17].
Finally, in addition to forwarding J1 pilots from the source, the relay also uses
the harvested energy to transmit J2 pilots of its own to the destination, giving
y.dr/
j2
D
p
Prg C n.dr/
j2
(5.29)
where j2
D
1; 2; : : : ; J2, n.dr/
j2
is the AWGN at the destination during this
transmission and is again complex Gaussian with mean zero and variance 22
d .
Using the harvested energy, since the relay has to forward J1 pilots from the source
and transmit J2 pilots of its own, the transmission power of the relay can be written
as Pr D Eh
JTp D 	Psjhj2 I
J , where J D J1 C J2.
The ML estimators can be derived as follows. Denote Gy D
q
	 I
J Psjhjg. Using
the ML method, one log-likelihood function can be derived as llf1 D J2 ln.22
d /
1
22
d
PJ2
j2D1 jy.j2/
dr  Gyj2. Thus, by differentiating llf1 with respect to Gy, setting the
derivative to zero and solving the equation for Gy, the ML estimate of Gy can be
derived as
OGy D 1
J2
J2
X
j2D1
y.j2/
dr D
r
	 I
J PsjOhjOg:
(5.30)
Also, denote Hy D pPsh. Using the ML method, another log-likelihood function
can be derived as llf2 D J1 ln.2.1 C jGyj2a2/2
d / 
1
2.1CjGyj2a2/2
d
PJ1
j1D1 jy.j1/
ds 
GyHyaj2. By differentiating llf2 with respect to Hy, setting the derivative to zero and
solving the equation for Hy, the ML estimate of Hy can be derived as
OHy D
1
J1 OGya
J1
X
j1D1
y.j1/
ds D
p
PsOh:
(5.31)
The invariance principle of ML estimation states that a function of ML estimate
is the ML estimate of that function [26]. Using this principle, the ML estimates of g
and h can be derived by solving (5.30) and (5.31) for Og and Oh, which gives
Og1 D
1
J2
PJ2
j2D1 y.j2/
drj 1
J2
PJ2
j2D1 y.j2/
drj
1
a
q
	 I
J j 1
J1
PJ1
j1D1 y.j1/
dsj
(5.32)
Oh1 D
1
pPsa
1
J1
PJ1
j1D1 y.j1/
ds
1
J2
PJ2
j2D1 y.j2/
dr
(5.33)

5
Energy Harvesting for Wireless Relaying Systems
149
These ML estimators are approximate estimators because the exact ML estimators
should be obtained by multiplying llf1 with llf2 and using the joint function for
estimation. However, this renders complicated nonlinear functions of g and h
and hence, it is not used here. Since both y.j1/
ds and y.j2/
dr are samples received at
the destination, the relay does not perform channel estimation. This reduces the
complexity at the relay.
5.5.3
Scheme 2
Scheme 2 is similar to Scheme 1, except that the energy is harvested using PS. First,
the source sends K1 pilots to the relay. Part of the received signal at the relay is used
for channel estimation as z.rce/
k1
D
p
.1  /Psh C n.rce/
k1
, which is forwarded to
the destination to give
z.ds/
k1
D
p
Prgaz.rce/
k1
C n.ds/
k1
(5.34)
where k1 D 1; 2; : : : ; K1 index the pilots from the source,  is the PS factor, n.rce/
k1
and n.ds/
k1
are the AWGN with means zero and variances 22
r and 22
d , respectively.
The other part of the received power at the relay is harvested as Eh D 	Psjhj2K1Tp.
Second, the relay also transmits K2 its own pilots to the destination such that the
received signal at the destination is
z.dr/
k2
D
p
Prg C n.dr/
k2
(5.35)
where k2 D 1; 2; : : : ; K2 and n.dr/
k2
is the AWGN with mean zero and variance
22
d . Since the relay forwards K1 pilots from the source and transmits K2 pilots of
its own, a total of K D K1 C K2 pilots will be sent to the destination such that
Pr D
Eh
KTp D 	Psjhj2 K1
K .
The ML estimators are derived as follows. Denote Gz D
q
	Ps
K1
K jhjg and
Hz D
p
.1  /Psh. Similar to before, using the samples and the ML method, the
ML estimate of Gz can be derived as OGz D
1
K2
PK2
k2D1 z.k2/
dr D
q
	Ps
K1
K jOhjOg and
using the samples and the ML method, the ML estimate of Hz can be derived as
OHz D
1
K1 OGza
PK1
k1D1 z.k1/
ds D
p
.1  /PsOh. Using the invariance principle, the ML
estimators for g and h can be obtained as
Og2 D ap1  
q
	 K1
K
1
K2
PK2
k2D1 z.k2/
drj 1
K2
PK2
k2D1 z.k2/
drj
j 1
K1
PK1
k1D1 z.k1/
dsj
(5.36)

150
Y. Chen
and
Oh2 D
1
p
.1  /Psa
1
K1
PK1
k1D1 z.k1/
ds
1
K2
PK2
k2D1 z.k2/
dr
(5.37)
respectively. Again, only the destination needs to perform channel estimation to
reduce complexity at the relay.
5.5.4
Scheme 3
In Scheme 3, ﬁrst, the source sends J1 pilots to the relay such that the received signal
at the relay is
u.rce/
j1
D
p
Psh C n.rce/
j1
(5.38)
where j1 D 1; 2; : : : ; J1 and n.rce/
j1
is the AWGN with mean zero and variance 22
r .
Second, the source sends I pilots to the relay for energy harvesting. The harvested
energy is Eh D 	Psjhj2ITp. Finally, the relay uses the harvested energy to transmit
J2 pilots of its own to the destination. The transmission power of the relay is Pr D
Eh
J2Tp D 	Psjhj2 I
J2 and the received signal at the destination is
u.dr/
j2
D
s
	Ps
I
J2
jhjg C n.dr/
j2
(5.39)
where j2 D 1; 2; : : : ; J2. In the above, n.rce/
j1
and n.dr/
j2
are again circularly
symmetric AWGN with means zero and variances 22
r and 22
d , respectively.
The ML estimators can also be derived. Using (5.38), since there is only one
unknown parameter in the log-likelihood function, the ML estimator for h can be
easily derived. Also, denote Gu D
q
	Ps I
J2 jhjg. Using (5.39), the ML estimate of Gu
can be derived as OGu D
1
J2
PJ2
j2D1 u.j2/
dr D
q
	Ps I
J2 jOhjOg. Then, using the invariance
principle, the ML estimators are
Og3 D
1
J2
PJ2
j2D1 u.j2/
dr
q
	 I
J2 j 1
J1
PJ1
j1D1 u.j1/
rcej
(5.40)
and
Oh3 D
1
pPs
1
J1
J1
X
j1D1
u.j1/
rce:
(5.41)

5
Energy Harvesting for Wireless Relaying Systems
151
Note that, in this scheme, the relay estimates h and its estimate has to be sent to the
destination via control channels for the estimation of g at the destination. Thus, this
scheme is more complicated than Schemes 1 and 2.
5.5.5
Scheme 4
Scheme 4 is similar to Scheme 3, except that the relay uses PS to harvest energy.
First, the source sends K1 pilots to the relay, part of which is received for channel
estimation as
v.rce/
k1
D
p
.1  /Psh C n.rce/
k1
(5.42)
for k1 D 1; 2; : : : ; K1 and part of which is harvested with Eh D 	Psjhj2K1Tp.
Second, the relay uses the harvested energy to transmit K2 pilots of its own such
that the received signal at the destination is
v.dr/
k2
D
s
	Ps
K1
K2
jhjg C n.dr/
k2
(5.43)
for k2 D 1; 2; : : : ; K2. Note that n.rce/
k1
and n.dr/
k2
are also circularly symmetric
AWGN with means zero and variances 22
r and 22
d , respectively.
Using (5.42) and (5.43), the ML estimators for g and h can be derived in a similar
way as
Og4 D
1
K2
PK2
k2D1 v.k2/
dr
q
	 K1
K2

1j 1
K1
PK1
k1D1 v.k1/
rcej
(5.44)
and
Oh4 D
1
p
.1  /Ps
1
K1
K1
X
k1D1
v.k1/
rce:
(5.45)
5.5.6
Numerical Results
In this section, the new estimators will be examined. We set 	 D 0:5, Ps D 1,
K D 100 and 22
r D 22
d D 2. Deﬁne g D
jgj2
22
d , h D
jhj2
22r . The values of g
and h will change with g and h and their real and imaginary parts equal to each
other. The normalized mean squared error (MSE) is deﬁned as
1
Rjgj2
PR
rD1 jOgr  gj2,

152
Y. Chen
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
2
x 10−4
γh = 20 dB
γg (dB)
Normalized MSE
ˆg1ˆh1
ˆg2ˆh2
ˆg3ˆh3
ˆg4ˆh4
Fig. 5.19 Minimum normalized MSE of OgOh vs. g for different schemes
1
Rjhj2
PR
rD1 jOhr  hj2,
1
Rjghj2
PR
rD1 jOgr Ohr  ghj2 for Og, Oh and OgOh, respectively, where R
is the total number of simulation runs and Ogr and Ohr are the channel estimates in the
r-th run.
Figures 5.19 and 5.20 compare the estimators in terms of their minimum
normalized MSEs of OgOh achieved by performing exhaustive searches over the
relevant parameters. One sees that Schemes 3 and 4 have the best performances,
and Schemes 1 and 2 have the worst performance. Also, TS is better than PS in
most cases.
5.5.7
Conclusion
New pilot-based ML estimators for AF relaying have been proposed by using
harvested energy to transmit or forward pilots. Numerical results have been
presented to show their performances. It is concluded that the two schemes that
perform channel estimation only at the destination are the simplest but have the
worst performances in terms of MSE. Note that the proposed estimators use pilots
only, similar to some previous works. No data symbols are available for energy
harvesting in the estimation. One could extend this scheme to blind or semi-blind
estimation, where energy can also be harvested from data symbols.

5
Energy Harvesting for Wireless Relaying Systems
153
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
x 10
−3
γg = 20 dB
γh (dB)
Normalized MSE
ˆg1ˆh1
ˆg2ˆh2
ˆg3ˆh3
ˆg4ˆh4
Fig. 5.20 Minimum normalized MSE of OgOh vs. h for different schemes
5.6
Summary
In this chapter, the performance of wireless powered relaying has been analysed
in the absence or presence of co-channel interference. The analysis has shown
the beneﬁt of using energy harvesting or wireless power to reduce the energy
consumption at the relay. Moreover, new energy harvesting relaying protocols have
been designed to improve the system energy efﬁciency further. As an important part
of wireless relaying, channel estimation in the context of energy harvesting has also
been studied and several new channel estimators have been proposed. Owing to the
many beneﬁts offered by wireless power, energy harvesting relaying has seen wider
use in emerging applications, such as massive multiple-input-multiple-output [27].
Also, in addition to the schemes discussed in this chapter, there are quite a few works
focusing on the optimal use of the harvested energy in the relaying process [28, 29].
Finally, the above results only consider the case when the direct link between source
and destination does not exist. It may be possible to extend these results to the case
when the direct link exists. For example, in Sect. 5.2.2, assuming that the direct link
is independent of the relaying link, the overall BER may be modiﬁed by combining
(3) with the BER of the direct link, depending on the decision fusion rules. Also, in
Sect. 5.2.3, assuming selection combining, the throughput of the relaying link in (5)
can be combined with the throughput of the direct link. However, for Sect. 5.3, this
extension may be difﬁcult.

154
Y. Chen
References
1. M. Peng, Y. Liu, D. Wei, W. Wang, H.-H. Chen, Hierarchical cooperative relay based
heterogeneous networks. IEEE Wirel. Commun. 18, 48–56 (2011)
2. B. Zhou, H. Hu, S.-Q. Huang, H.-H. Chen, Intracluster device-to-device relay algorithm with
optimal resource allocation. IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol. 62, 2315–2326 (2013)
3. J.N. Laneman, G.W. Wornell, Energy-efﬁcient antenna sharing and relaying for wireless
networks, in Proceedings of 2000 IEEE Wireless Communication Networking Conference
(WCNC), Chicago, vol. 1, March (2000), pp. 7–12
4. J.N. Laneman, D.N.C. Tse, G.W. Wornell, Cooperative diversity in wireless networks: efﬁcient
protocols and outage behaviors. IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory 50, 3062–3080 (2004)
5. R. Zhang, C.K. Ho, MIMO broadcasting for simultaneous wireless information and power
transfer. IEEE Trans. Wirel. Commun. 12(5), 1989–2001 (2013)
6. Z. Ding, I. Krikidis, B. Sharif, H.V. Poor, Wireless information and power transfer in coop-
erative networks with spatially random relays. IEEE Trans. Wirel. Commun. 13, 4440–4453
(2014)
7. A.A. Nasir, X. Zhou, S. Durrani, R.A. Kennedy, Throughput and ergodic capacity of
wireless energy harvesting based DF relaying network, in Proceedings of IEEE ICC 2014,
pp. 4066–4071, Sydney, June (2014)
8. Y. Gu, S. Aissa, Interference aided energy harvesting in decode-and-forward relaying systems,
in Proceedings of IEEE ICC 2014, pp. 5378–5382, Sydney, June (2014)
9. H.A. Suraweera, G. Zheng, I. Krikidis, Z. Zhang, Wireless information and power transfer with
full duplex relaying. IEEE Trans. Commun. 62, 3447–3461 (2014)
10. M. Mohammadi, B.K. Chalise, H.A. Suraweera, C. Zhong, G. Zheng, I. Krikidis, Throughput
analysis and optimization of wireless-powered multiple antenna full-duplex relay systems.
IEEE Trans. Commun. 64, 1769–1785 (2016)
11. I.S. Gradshteyn, I.M Ryzhik, Table of Integrals, Series and Products, 7th edn. (Academic,
London, 2007)
12. A.A. Nasir, X. Zhou, S. Durrani, R.A. Kennedy, Relaying protocols for wireless energy
harvesting and information processing. IEEE Trans. Wirel. Commun. 12, 3622–3636 (2013)
13. I. Krikidis, G. Zhang, B. Ottersten, Harvest-use cooperative networks with half/full-duplex
relaying, in Proceedings of WCNC’13, pp. 4256–4260 (2013)
14. Z. Ding, S.M. Perlaza, I. Esnaola, H.V. Poor, Power allocation strategies in energy harvesting
wireless cooperative networks. IEEE Trans. Wirel. Commun. 13, 846–860 (2014)
15. M.O. Hasna, M.-S. Alouini, A performance study of dual-hop transmissions with ﬁxed gain
relays. IEEE Trans. Wirel. Commun. 3, 1963–1968 (2004)
16. G.K. Karagiannidis, Performance bounds of multihop wireless communications with blind
relays over generalized fading channels. IEEE Trans. Wirel. Commun. 5, 498–503 (2006)
17. M. Di Renzo, F. Graziosi, F. Santucci, A comprehensive framework for performance analysis of
dual-hop cooperative wireless systems with ﬁxed-gain relays over generalized fading channels.
IEEE Trans. Wirel. Commun. 8, 5060–5074 (2009)
18. Y. Chen, Energy-harvesting AF relaying in the presence of interference and Nakagami-m
fading. IEEE Trans. Wirel. Commun. 15, 1008–1017 (2016)
19. H. Meyr, M. Mseneclaey, S.A. Fechtel, Digital Communication Receivers, Synchronization,
Channel Estimation, and Signal Processing (Wiley, New York, 1998)
20. F.H. Khan, Y. Chen, M.-S. Alouini, Novel receivers for AF relaying with distributed STBC
using cascaded and disintegrated channel estimation. IEEE Trans. Wirel. Commun. 11,
1370–1379 (2012)
21. C.S. Patel, G.L. Stuber, Channel estimation for amplify and forward relay based cooperation
diversity systems. IEEE Trans. Wirel. Commun. 6, 2348–2356 (2007)
22. P. Lioliou, M. Viberg, M. Coldrey, Efﬁcient channel estimation techniques for amplify and
forward relaying systems. IEEE Trans. Commun. 60, 3150–3155 (2012)

5
Energy Harvesting for Wireless Relaying Systems
155
23. F. Gao, T. Cui, A. Nallanathan, On channel estimation and optimal training design for amplify
and forward relay networks. IEEE Trans. Wirel. Commun. 7, 1907–1916 (2008)
24. H. Yomo, E. de Carvalho, A CSI estimation method for wireless relay networks. IEEE
Commun. Lett. 11, 480–482 (2007)
25. N. Aerts, M. Moeneclaey, Pilot-based ML estimation in amplify-and-forward cooperative
networks, in Proceedings of IEEE WCNC 2012, Shanghai (2012), pp. 1044–1048
26. S. Kay, Fundamentals of Statistical Signal Processing: Estimation Theory (Prentice Hall,
London, 1993)
27. G. Amarasuriya, E.G. Larsson, H.V. Poor, Wireless information and power transfer in multiway
massive MIMO relay networks. IEEE Trans. Wirel. Commun. 15, 3837–3855 (2016)
28. A. Rajaram, D.N.K. Jayakody, V. Skachek, Store-then-cooperate: energy harvesting scheme
in cooperative relay networks, in Proceedings of 13th International Symposium on Wireless
Communication Systems (ISWCS’16), Poznan, Sept 2016
29. H. Chen, Y. Li, J.L. Rebelatto, B.F. Uchoa-Filho, B. Vucetic, Harvest-then-cooperate: wireless-
powered cooperative communications. IEEE Trans. Signal Process. 63(7), 1700–1711 (2015)

Chapter 6
Multi-Scale Energy Harvesting
Weisi Guo, Yansha Deng, Arumugam Nallanathan, Bin Li,
and Chenglin Zhao
6.1
Introduction
One of the key trends over the past half a century has been that technology is
getting smaller, faster, cheaper, and more powerful every day. In terms of computing
technology, the key components have become 100-times smaller each decade. For
example, the ENIAC computer (1956) used to ﬁll a warehouse, and its equivalent
compute power now sits inside a musical greeting card at the price of $4. Standard
smartphones today have more computing power than the personal computers (PCs)
of a decade ago. Today, this miniaturization trend continues in the form of personal
wearables that can perform many of the functions of smartphones and pads of
yesteryear. Smaller devices not only enable a greater number of them in any given
space, but also enable mobility and personalization. It is envisaged that device
miniaturization will lead to over 50 billion devices connected to the Internet,
forming a large part of the Internet-of-Things (IoT) paradigm. The consequence
is that devices are getting closer to the human body and integrating and interacting
with our lifestyles. Inevitably, as device dimensions reduce to microns, they are able
to be inserted inside our body to achieve precision sensing, communications, and
actuation; potentially transforming health-care. In fact, the Internet of Nano Things
(IoNTs) has been named as one of the top ten emerging technologies by the World
Economic Forum in 2016.
W. Guo ()
University of Warwick, Coventry, UK
e-mail: weisi.guo@warwick.ac.uk
Y. Deng • A. Nallanathan
Kings College London, London, UK
B. Li • C. Zhao
Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications (BUPT), Beijing Shi, China
© Springer International Publishing AG 2018
D.N.K. Jayakody et al. (eds.), Wireless Information and Power Transfer:
A New Paradigm for Green Communications, DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-56669-6_6
157

158
W. Guo et al.
The energy efﬁciency of systems in general determines its operational sustain-
ability. For small devices, removing the power-tether is an important mobility
enabler. Such devices today include sensor motes, radio frequency (RF) tags, and
wearable computers. When there is limited recharging or energy storage capability,
ad-hoc harvesting of energy is a crucial technology for a variety of systems. These
devices need to harvest energy from alternative sources such as natural environment
or even intercepting ambient wireless signals. Energy harvesting techniques not
only prolong operational life-time of such devices and reduce their infrastructure
dependency, but also allow devices to be deployed in any location deemed desirable
and be mobile. Harvesting energy from high frequency electromagnetic radiation
(i.e., visible band) has been most widely used in photovoltaic cells, but requires
direct sunlight which may not always be readily available when devices are
embedded inside or in the shadow of objects. Consequently, energy harvesting from
low frequency information transmissions (i.e., radio band) have been proposed as
an alternative.
A variety of wireless systems and devices that transmit across multiple distance
scales ﬁt this proﬁle, from relatively power-hungry macro-base stations (BSs)
deployed in remote regions, to nano-scale sensors in vivo environments (i.e.,
embedded sensors that monitor wound healing status). The wide range of devices
transverse multiple device length scales and communicate across distance scales that
vary by up to 9 orders of magnitude (from km to microns). Yet, it remains unclear
what set of energy harvesting technologies are suitable for the different dimension
and distance scales, as well as diverse operating environments. RF energy harvesting
solutions have recently been proposed as an alternative [1], especially for low-
power devices such as sensor motes in urban and semi-urban environments [2, 3].
The concept has been around since the 1970s [4]. For example, it has been shown
experimentally that the power delivered at a location that is 20 km away from a
150 kW TV transmitter or within 30 m from a cellular BS [5] is typically in the
order of 0.1 mW [6, 7]. Recent advances in this area have shown that energy -
efﬁcient transmitters can be entirely powered by RF energy harvesting devices,
which use cognitive methods to sense fruitful primary-network spectrum bands for
targeted energy harvesting [8] or sensing trafﬁc patterns for targeted deployment
of nodes [9], and simultaneous wireless information and power transfer is possible
(SWIPT) [10, 11]. Given knowledge of the location of a RF energy source, a receive
antenna array can be appropriately conﬁgured to further improve energy harvesting
efﬁciency. However, little is known about the peak power or reliable energy level
that can be harvested from multiple transmitters of different radio networks (e.g.,
cellular base stations, Wi-Fi access points, and mobile handsets).
This chapter will review state-of-the-art technologies that allow multi-scale
wireless devices to simultaneous harvest energy and transmit data, especially from
a number of different wireless signal sources. The chapter will be organized into
different technology dimension scales, and focus on both the fundamental scientiﬁc
principles and opportunities and the engineering challenges. The key sections are
listed as follows:

6
Multi-Scale Energy Harvesting
159
1. Macro-/Meso-scale energy harvesting for small devices such as RFID tags.
The focus will be on the potential of crowd harvesting from multiple radio
transmissions in complex urban environments.
2. Micro-/Nano-scale energy harvesting for nano devices such as drug delivery
robots and embedded health monitoring devices. The focus will be on informa-
tion and energy bearing bio-molecules and drawing inspiration from equivalent
biological processes.
We now present the detailed outline of each of the aforementioned sections.
6.2
Macro-/Meso-Scale Energy Harvesting
Current cellular and long-distance wireless systems are relatively large in dimension
and consume signiﬁcant power (i.e., each antenna element can consume up to
600 W [12]). There are already efforts to reduce the power consumption of wireless
infrastructures such as macro-/metro-BSs. In certain rural areas that lack reliable
and sufﬁcient electricity coverage, energy harvesting from solar radiation is possible
[13]. Certainly this is an active area of research for cellular network vendors such
as Alcatel-Lucent. The challenge lies in optimizing data transmission and sleep
mode in the face of an unreliable energy source with the aid of energy storage
[14]. On a smaller scale, femto-BSs and other small-cell technologies (i.e., wireless
relays), which are often deployed in areas that require coverage compensation and
may not have access to electricity in the immediate vicinity, are likely to demand
10–100 W of power. As such, indoor optical wireless systems have been proposed to
transfer power to small cells at night time [15]. Nonetheless, it remains challenging
to power a large wireless system using entirely energy harvesting. Several realistic
problems related to obstacles that obstruct the energy beams and unexpected high
trafﬁc demand can lead to unacceptable levels of service outage.
Smaller meso-scale systems are likely to demand a signiﬁcantly lower level
of power, varying from 1 mW to 1 W. As such, harvesting energy from wireless
transmissions becomes possible. This section will examine the potential of crowd
harvesting energy from all neighbouring transmissions with particular emphasis on
large-scale network modeling and theoretical bounds under full and variable trafﬁc
patterns.
6.2.1
Crowd Energy Harvesting
6.2.1.1
Background
Over the past decade, increased urbanization and growing demands for wireless data
have led to a dramatic increase in the number and density of wireless transmitters in

160
W. Guo et al.
cities. The global cellular infrastructures constituted more than four million macro-
BSs and served more than seven billion active user equipments (UEs) in 2013.
Moreover, public and privately owned Wi-Fi access points (APs) in developed cities
have reached the density of over 350/km2, with top metropolitan cities reaching
over 700/km2. With IoT devices equipped with wireless capabilities, it is expected
the number of wireless devices will exceed 50 billion by 2020.
Despite the growing density of RF transmitters in urban areas, doubts remain
with regard to the amount of RF energy that they can provide over a period of time.
Whilst the increase in transmitter density will undoubtedly increase the amount of
RF energy available in urban environments, a few challenges in large-scale reliable
RF energy harvesting are undeniable. As shown in Fig. 6.1, some of these challenges
are: (1) the random nature of RF transmitter locations, (2) stochastic elements
in the RF propagation channel, and (3) variations in spectrum utilization due to
varying data trafﬁc patterns (i.e., sensors may only transmit data occasionally), all
of which need to be carefully considered in the design of an efﬁcient RF energy
harvesting system. For example, the ﬂuctuating harvested energy due to channel
Base Station (BS)
Energy Harvesting 
Device
High Spectrum 
Utilization Zone
Low Spectrum 
Utilization Zone
Macro-BS
(Silent)
Macro-BS
(Active)
Energy Harvest 
Device
Fig. 6.1 Illustration of large-scale RF energy harvesting by multiple RF transmitters. On any
particular spectrum band, the transmitter may or may not be transmitting, depending on the local
trafﬁc load

6
Multi-Scale Energy Harvesting
161
fading and node movements needs to be converted into constant DC voltage using
a capacitor. However, longer-term stable energy harvesting is harder to predict and
more difﬁcult to compensate for. Understanding the long-term energy harvesting
reliability is important for energy aware transmission protocols and for devices that
have a limited battery capacity [16].
6.2.1.2
Hardware
Energy harvesting of electromagnetic radiation is most widely used by photovoltaic
cells. However, direct sunlight is not always readily available. RF harvesting
solutions have been proposed as an alternative [6, 17, 18]. By amalgamating multiple
radio signals, RF energy harvesting has the greatest potential in urban areas,
where there is an abundance of wireless communication devices from multiple
Radio-Access-Technologies (RATs). Due to stochastic signal strength variations,
the ﬂuctuating harvested power can be converted into constant DC voltage using a
capacitor. Recently, it has been shown that the power delivered is typically in the
order of 0.1 mW at a location that is 20 km away from a 150 kW TV transmitter [7],
or within a short range of 30 m from a cellular BS [5]. Several commercial devices
exist with reasonably low sensitivity (i.e., 11 dBm of the P2110 Powerharvester)
and signiﬁcantly higher sensitivities are needed to harvest from a wider variety of
RF signals. Even with improved energy harvesting circuits, little is known about
the power lever that can be delivered in RF bands other than the TV channels
and when devices attempt to harvest from the increasingly densely deployed BSs,
Wi-Fi hotspots, and even mobile handsets. Due to stochastic variations in RF
signal strength and trafﬁc load (for example, BS trafﬁc is notoriously stochastic
[19]), the harvested power level ﬂuctuates over time and needs to be converted
into constant DC voltage using a capacitor. However, long-term stability is harder
to predict and more difﬁcult to compensate for. Existing performance tests have
focused on speciﬁc scenarios: single dominant link (e.g., transmission from a
nearby TV-station) [6], or ﬁeld tests in a small experimental area, typically without
considering the effects of: multi-path, shadowing, trafﬁc load, and mobility [20].
6.2.1.3
Modeling Crowd Energy Harvesting Potential
Considering energy harvesting from a large number of ﬁxed RF transmitters, it is
possible to calculate the speciﬁc pathloss for each channel and predict the energy
harvesting performance. The computational complexity grows linearly with the
number of energy harvesting devices. If there is a lack of perfect knowledge of
transmitters’ locations, e.g., private Wi-Fi APs and mobile phones, predicting the
energy harvesting performance becomes impractical if not impossible. Therefore,
an accurate statistical notion of the available ambient RF energy as a function
of the wireless networks interested and the associated propagation environment is
needed. Stochastic geometry studies random spatial patterns, formed by spatial point

162
W. Guo et al.
processes. The underlying principle is that the locations of network transmitters are
random in nature, but their density and mutual distances follow certain statistical
distributions. This knowledge can be used to create tractable statistical frameworks
for analysing the performance of wireless networks [21]. In order for the results
to be accurate, the spatial distribution of the network nodes must be derived
from empirical cell location data. In this section, we offer a review of the spatial
distributions of cellular macro-BSs and present new data and spatial distributions
for femto-BSs and Wi-Fi APs.
In order to estimate the energy received from a large number of RF transmitters,
one needs to know the probability distribution of the distance between the kth
nearest RF transmitter and the energy harvesting device. In the literature, two
independent sets of macro-BS data and mathematical proofs have produced the same
spatial distribution of macro-BSs [22, 23]. The probability density function (pdf) of
the distance r between the energy harvesting device at an arbitrary location and the
kth nearest macro-BS is given by
fBS;Rk.rI k/ D 2.ƒ/k
.k  1/Šr2k1eƒr2;
k ⩾1;
(6.1)
where ƒ is the average spatial density of macro-BSs in an area where the signal
power is high enough to be considered. Such an area is approximately 4 km2 for
urban environments concerning macro-BSs. The k D 1 case (i.e., the nearest
macro-BS), which follows a Rayleigh distribution, is most commonly considered
in wireless communications.
In recent years, femto-BSs are being deployed with increasing densities in urban
areas. Empirical data obtained has shown that the spatial distribution of the kth
nearest femto-BS is identical to that of macro-BSs. That is to say, despite the tedious
multi-variable optimization for cellular network planning, macro- and femto-BSs
are in fact randomly deployed with the spatial distribution of the kth nearest BS
given by (6.1). In the literature, Poisson cluster processes (PCPs) such as the Matern
and Thomas cluster processes have been utilized for modeling ad-hoc and small-cell
networks [24], but there is a lack of evidence base for such PCP-based modeling.
Wi-Fi APs are deployed in a fundamentally different way to cellular BSs.
Their higher density,1 possibly different spatial distribution, and higher trafﬁc load
may yield a different prospect in terms of energy harvesting. Note that the vast
majority of Wi-Fi APs are owned by private residential or individual business
entities, as opposed to network operators, and both the density and number of
Wi-Fi APs change over time. Therefore, the locations of Wi-Fi APs are not
exactly known. Whilst certain efforts have been made to locate Wi-Fi APs using
directional spectrum sensing approaches [25], a more systematic approach is to
infer Wi-Fi APs’ locations and density through residential and business census data.
1In urban areas, the deployment density of Wi-Fi APs has grown over the past decade to 400–1000
APs per square km.

6
Multi-Scale Energy Harvesting
163
By assigning a Wi-Fi AP to each residential or business registration address, one can
infer the approximate locations of Wi-Fi APs. Based on this data, two discoveries
were made [11]: (1) the density distribution of Wi-Fi APs is a log-normal distributed
cluster process, commonly found in the ions of materials [26], and that (2) the pdf
of the distance between a random point in space and the kth nearest Wi-Fi AP
follows the Gamma distribution, i.e., fWi  Fi;Rk.rI k/ 	 .k; /, where  is the scale
parameter. What remains undiscovered is the precise distribution of Wi-Fi APs in
terms of the scale parameter , and the precise spatial distribution of mobile UEs.
6.2.1.4
Full Spectrum Utilization Upper-Bound Analysis
In this section, we consider the aggregated RF power density (Watts per Hz) over a
bandwidth of B and from an area with an average transmitter density of ƒ. We ﬁrst
assume that all transmitters are transmitting across the whole spectrum available and
emit with the maximum allowable power spectrum density on all frequency bands,
and hence this is an upper-bound analysis. Leveraging the spatial distributions of
RF transmitters found in the previous section, the total average received RF power
from K RF transmitters is given by
P
rx.˛; / D B
K
X
kD1
Z C1
0
Ptxr˛
k fRk.rkI k/ drk;
(6.2)
where Ptx is the transmit power,  is the frequency dependent pathloss constant, ˛
is the pathloss distance exponent, and fRk.rkI k/ is given in (6.1).
As an example, let us consider the aggregate harvested power Prx for a deploy-
ment of macro-BSs that follow the spatial distribution given by (6.1). By inte-
grating (6.2), the total power harvested is found to have the following scaling
relationships:
•
Linearly proportional to the transmit power: P
rx / Ptx;
•
Exponentially proportional to the cell density: P
rx / .ƒ/1C ˛
2 .
Alternative spatial distributions of RF transmitters are likely to yield different
solutions.
A key question at this stage of the analysis is: given that transmitters further
away are unlikely to contribute much more power, what is the power difference
between harvesting from only the closest transmitter and crowd harvesting? Based
on both simulation and the analytical expression in (6.2), the latter can harvest
approximately 5–10% more power than the former. Note that this considers only
power. When energy is considered, one also needs to take into account spectrum
utilization over time. The reliability of crowd harvesting energy over time will
improve dramatically over targeting just a single transmitter.

164
W. Guo et al.
6.2.1.5
Variable Spectrum Utilization Analysis
In the previous section we have studied the upper-bound to the amount of power
that can be harvested from a number of RF transmitters. In order to estimate the
harvestable RF energy, it is important to consider the spectrum utilization over time
for each RF transmitter. Spectrum utilization depends on the trafﬁc load of each
transmitter. Unlike TV channels, which are fewer in number and broadcast over long
periods, cellular and Wi-Fi network nodes transmit on demand and the demands can
ﬂuctuate in unpredictable temporal and spatial patterns.
Over the past decade, wireless network trafﬁc has shifted from mainly circuit-
switched call trafﬁc to packet-switched data trafﬁc dominated. Whilst voice call
trafﬁc is well understood, data trafﬁc arrival and departure patterns are much
more diversiﬁed and unpredictable over time and geographical locations. In this
subsection, we leverage the statistical attributes of real 3G HSPA data from a
European city’s 3G network [27]. Two key observations have been made in all
cellular network areas used for trafﬁc data collection:
1. The mean trafﬁc Rk at the kth BS is related to the mean capacity of the BS. In
other words, given that each BS has the same bandwidth, cells having superior
propagation conditions emit greater energy. The relationship between the trafﬁc
and the BS capacity Ck is approximately logarithmic, i.e., Rk 	 log10 Ck [27].
2. The pdf of the trafﬁc load Lk at the kth BS is exponentially distributed, i.e.,
fLk 	 exp./, whereby the rate of decay  is the same for each cell and varies
slowly with time (e.g., hours in a day, and days in a week) [19].
Given knowledge of the statistical properties of data trafﬁc, one can infer the
spectrum utilization pattern at each BS as a ratio of the trafﬁc and the peak capacity
of the BS, i.e., Lk D Rk
Ck . Given that each of the K BSs is independent and identically
distributed in space and in spectrum utilization, the pdf of the power density (Watts
per Hz) harvested from the sum of all K RF transmitters is the K-fold continuous
convolution of the trafﬁc load pdf and the inverse of the received power upper-bound
from (6.2):
fPrx D
K
O
kD1
fLk=P
rx:
(6.3)
The cumulative distribution function (CDF) of harvested power density (Watts
per Hz) shows the reliability of harvestable power density at any given instance in
time, where the main variation is derived from the spectrum utilization pattern. By
aggregating the CDF over both the frequency bands and time, we can obtain the
total expected RF energy that is harvestable.

6
Multi-Scale Energy Harvesting
165
6.2.2
Case Study: Central London
6.2.2.1
Above Ground
In this section, we consider a central London case study area detailed in [28] that is
of 9 km wide and 5 km long. It covers Hyde Park, parts of the Thames River, and
major tourism hotspots such as Trafalgar Square, Piccadilly Circus, the Parliament,
China Town, London Eye, and Oxford Street. Multiple RATs are included: (1) 4G
Cellular Macro-BS Downlink (50 MHz); (2) 4G Cellular UE Uplink (20 MHz);
(3) Wi-Fi AP Downlink (20 MHz); and (4) TV Broadcast (100 MHz). The main
parameters of the case study are given in Table 6.1.
Table 6.2 shows the mean peak power for different RATs on the per 20 MHz band
level, with the whole spectrum available to each RAT. This was a study conducted
in [28]. It can be seen that the greatest opportunity for power harvesting lies in the
Wi-Fi and TV broadcast RATs. In fact, given that the network trafﬁc on Wi-Fi and
TV is typically higher than that of the cellular RAT, it is advisable to focus energy
harvesting in these bands, at least before femto-BSs are more widely deployed. By
comparing with existing test observations that 100 W can be achieved at a 20 km
distance from a 150 kW TV station [7] or within 30 m from a cellular BS [5], we
can see that in general the mean energy harvestable is approximately 5–10 times
lower than the special cases tested in [5, 7]. This is primarily due to the log-normal
shadow fading considered in our model, as well as the non-line-of-sight (NLOS)
positioning of the energy harvesting devices with respect to the RF transmitters.
Due to the small number and ﬁxed locations of TV masts, their energy harvesting
potential has been well analysed. We now focus on the effect of Wi-Fi APs’ density,
number of spectrum bands, and the shadow fading variance on the power harvesting
effectiveness. Figure 6.2 shows the simulated aggregate power available to harvest
for various Wi-Fi hotspot densities and number of bands available (each band having
a bandwidth of 20 MHz). In the simulations, a number of cellular and TV bands
are also in operation, with static parameter values set to the peak values shown in
Table 6.1. The simulation results show that for a high Wi-Fi density (1000/km2),
the ambient RF power available is in the order of W, depending on the number of
spectrum bands.
Figure 6.3 shows the simulated aggregate power available to harvest versus
various Wi-Fi hotspot densities and log-normal shadow fading variance. We can
see that when log-normal shadow fading is considered, the average RF power
available for harvesting degrades log-linearly with the shadowing variance. In
realistic channel conditions, the shadow fading variance can be up to 2
D
9 dB [29]. Compared to the case with no shadow fading, the RF power available
for harvesting is lowered by 9 dB for the 3 dB shadow fading variance, and 35 dB
for the 6 dB shadow fading variance. Accordingly, in order to achieve a good RF
energy harvesting performance, the devices need to be deployed at locations that
experience a shadow fading variance of no greater than 3 dB.

166
W. Guo et al.
Table 6.1 London simulation case study parameters
Parameters
Symbol and value
Case study environment
Geographic area
Central London, 45 km2
Energy harvester location
Uniform random
No. of energy harvesters
500
Duration of study
2 week period
Propagation model
3GPP urban micro [29]
Pathloss constant
, 104
Pathloss distance exponent
˛, 2–4
Channel fading
Rayleigh
Shadow fading
Log-normal (3 dB variance)
Trafﬁc and spectrum
Spectrum utilization pdf
fLk
User arrival pdf
Poisson
Data trafﬁc pdf
Log-normal
Trafﬁc time sample
15 min
4G cellular RAT
Total no. of macro-BSs
96
Macro-BS density
ƒmacro  BS, 2/km2
Macro-BS distribution
Uniform random [22]
Macro-BS transmit power
Ptx; macro  BS, 40 W
Total no. of UE
700,000
UE density
ƒUE, 15,500/km2
UE distribution
Uniform random (assumed)
UE transmit power
Ptx; UE, 0.1 W
Total no. of Wi-Fi APs
45,000
Wi-Fi AP density
ƒWi  Fi, 1000/km2
Wi-Fi AP distribution
Log-normal cluster based
Wi-Fi AP transmit power
Ptx; Wi  Fi, 1 W
Total no. of TV masts
4–5
TV mast density
ƒTV, 0.1/km2
TV mast distribution
Fixed
TV mast transmit power
Ptx; TV, 1000 kW
As shown previously in (6.3), the energy harvested depends on the convolution
between the peak power available for harvesting and the pdf of the spectrum
utilization level. The peak power value given by (6.2) is largely determined by
the spatial distribution and density of RF transmitters, as well as the propagation
environment itself. We have shown that the harvested power value can be improved
by 5–10% through crowd harvesting as compared to harvesting from the closest
transmitter only. Moreover, the spectrum usage can be dynamic and in the event that
the closest transmitter is not transmitting, crowd energy harvesting shines. When

6
Multi-Scale Energy Harvesting
167
Table 6.2 London case study results with different RATs [28]
RAT
Peak power per band (W/sqm)
Cellular downlink
0.3
UE uplink
1
Wi-Fi downlink
5
TV broadcast
1.2
RAT
Peak power (W/sqm)
Cellular downlink (50 MHz)
0.6
UE uplink (20 MHz)
1
Wi-Fi downlink (20 MHz)
5
TV broadcast (100 MHz)
6
RAT
Aggregate daily energy
Cellular downlink (50 MHz)
5 mJ/sqm
UE uplink (20 MHz)
4.2 mJ/sqm
Wi-Fi downlink (20 MHz) 8
0.13 J/sqm
TV broadcast (100 MHz)
0.5 J/sqm
Peak power and aggregate daily energy harvested averaged across all devices over a 2 week period
0
200
400
600
800
1000
0
5
10
15
20
−60
−59
−58
−57
−56
−55
−54
Number of bands, B
Hotspot Density, per km2
Power Harvested, dBm
Fig. 6.2 Simulated aggregate power available to harvest for various Wi-Fi hotspot densities and
number of bands available

168
W. Guo et al.
0
200
400
600
800
1000
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
−300
−250
−200
−150
−100
−50
0
Shadow Fading Var. σ2
Hotspot Density, per km2
Power Harvested, dBm
Fig. 6.3 Simulated aggregate power available to harvest for various Wi-Fi hotspot densities and
shadow fading variances (dB)
the investigation factors in the variational spectrum utilization, it is apparent that
the total energy harvested from all ambient RF transmitters will produce a ﬁxed 5%
of improved reliability in energy delivery per second over that from the strongest
transmitter. For a ﬁxed reliability demand (i.e., deliver at least a certain power
level for at least 30% of the time), the power harvested has improved from 4 W
(harvesting from the closest transmitter only) to 8.5 W (crowd harvesting), an
improvement of over 100%. This is primarily down to exploiting diverse variations
in spectrum utilization at different transmitters by harvesting energy from a diverse
range of radio sources. The aggregate daily energy harvested (averaged across all
devices) is given in Table 6.2. It shows that Wi-Fi and TV broadcast remain the most
promising bands to harvest because of their wider bandwidth and greater spectrum
utilization due to higher trafﬁc.
6.2.2.2
Below Ground
Table 6.3 shows a different study conducted for central London detailed in [2] for
underground stations. The study uses real measurement data across from 400 MHz
to 2.5 GHz to test the average and peak received power density. The results show
that GSM900 and GSM1800 and 3G all have similar high energy harvesting
potential, whilst Wi-Fi and DTV remain signiﬁcantly weaker (by approximately

6
Multi-Scale Energy Harvesting
169
Table 6.3 London underground case study results with different RATs [2]
RAT
Average power (W/sqm)
Peak power
Cellular downlink (75 MHz)
840
64 mW/sqm
UE uplink (75 MHz)
5
200 W/sqm
Wi-Fi downlink (100 MHz)
1.8
60 W/sqm
TV broadcast (140 MHz)
8.9
4.6 mW/sqm
Average power density and maximum power density
20 dBm/sqcm). These results seem to indicate that in reality BSs are a far better
source of energy harvesting than DTV and Wi-Fi, possibly because of the nature of
the embedded underground environment.
6.2.3
Optimization for Crowd Harvesting
We have so far reviewed the potential of crowd harvesting across different RATs,
which is attractive, especially in the TV bands (LoS) and Wi-Fi bands (NLoS).
However, what remains unclear is how a relay system, where the nodes are
sufﬁciently apart (and hence have different energy harvesting potentials), can
collaborate to achieve optimal relaying performance. In this section we discuss
node collaboration and transmission scheduling for crowd harvesting [11]. It has
been revealed that the correlation distance of the trafﬁc density is less than 80 m
in urban areas [30], indicating that the RF energy harvesting process may follow
similar spatial correlation. Two nodes that are more than 100 m apart tend to have
almost independent energy harvesting processes, and thus node collaboration can be
performed to exploit the independent relationship between energy proﬁles, e.g., to
achieve energy harvesting diversity gains.
First we illustrate the beneﬁt of node collaboration via combining the SWIPT and
ambient energy harvesting, in order to compensate for the possible energy shortage.
Assuming that the source can harvest more ambient RF energy than the relay node,
the energy harvesting phase can be split further into two parts: (1) source-to-relay
energy delivery, and (2) ambient RF energy harvesting at relay. Note that the source
can make use of the time when the relay forwards the message, to harvest additional
ambient RF energy. Furthermore, for the scenario where the nodes have no SWIPT
structure or have some common information to the same destination, for example,
the multiple relays in the second hop of a relaying transmission, or multiple sensors
that sense the same target and need to deliver the sensing results to the sink. In this
case, collaborative transmission can be used to address the uneven energy arrival
rates. As a simple example, a transmission frame can be divided into two subframes.
In the ﬁrst subframe, only one of the nodes can be scheduled to transmit in the
conventional way. In the second subframe, multiple nodes can perform simultaneous
joint transmission (JT) to the destination with distributed beamforming. To this end,

170
W. Guo et al.
the frame division portion and the node scheduling should be jointly optimized,
taking into account the ESI of all nodes. For both cases, to get the optimal system
parameters, practical online algorithms should be designed based on the prediction
of the mobile trafﬁc that generates the crowd EH source. One can model the mobile
trafﬁc variation with Markovian model, of which the transition probabilities can
be trained based on real data [11], and then MDP policy iteration will provide the
optimal transmission scheduling and system parameters. To reduce the complexity
of MDP, one can do conventional optimization on a per-frame basis, with the energy
arrivals and channel conditions of several future frames as known, given the trafﬁc
prediction precision is high.
6.2.4
Summary and Discussion
Most existing work on energy harvesting has focused on the hardware design of
energy harvesting devices. Field tests of those devices are typically in LoS with
a nearby BS or TV mast. Whilst the results are beneﬁcial, they reveal very little
about how such devices will perform when mass deployed in an urban environment.
In an urban mass deployment, the energy harvesting devices may need to be at
locations to serve a purpose (e.g., to sense the pollution level at a speciﬁc location)
and there is very little ﬂexibility in alternative locations. Such locations are likely to
be in NLoS from RF transmitters, and far away from powerful TV mast transmitters.
Crowd energy harvesting can leverage the growing density of BSs, Wi-Fi APs, and
mobile UEs. However, an analytical framework backed up by empirical data has
been absent thus far. This review paper has shown that stochastic geometry has the
potential to provide a upper-bound to the power available to harvest (6.2), provided
that we know the spatial distribution of the transmitters. Further understanding of
the trafﬁc patterns can yield insight into the spectrum usage level. By convolving the
upper-bound of the power from multiple transmissions with the spectrum utilization
probability function, the reliability distribution of energy harvesting from multiple
sources can be found (6.3).
What the preliminary study has shown can be summarized as:
•
The upper-bound power available for harvesting scales linearly with transmit
power, and exponentially with the transmitter density. This is sensitive to both
the pathloss distance exponent and the spatial distribution of the transmitters.
Harvesting power from multiple sources offers a 5–10% improvement over
harvesting from only the closest source.
•
The reliability of the energy available for harvesting depends on the upper-bound
power, as well as the trafﬁc pattern. The pdf of the spectrum utilization typically
follows a log-normal distribution. Harvesting energy from multiple sources offers
greater diversity, which translates into a 5% improvement in reliability and 100%
improvement of energy level as compared to harvesting from the closest source.

6
Multi-Scale Energy Harvesting
171
There remains plenty of further work to be carried out, including large-scale ﬁeld
trials, ﬁnding accurate spatial distributions for transmitters of different RATs, as
well as their trafﬁc load distributions. Whilst TV and cellular networks are relatively
well understood, Wi-Fi and mobile UEs are not. Yet, it is the Wi-Fi APs and mobile
UEs that could potentially grow the fastest in terms of transmitter density, and their
cluster-like spatial distributions offer the greatest prospect of improving crowd RF
energy harvesting.
6.3
Micro-/Nano-Scale Energy Harvesting
6.3.1
Introduction
Today, micro-electronic devices can perform comparable operations to analog
electronic machines that used to occupy a factory ﬂoor. One consequence of increas-
ing device miniaturization is that we can now carry, wear, and embed advanced
machinery on or inside ourselves. As the technology for mobile and wearable
devices matures, research focus has now shifted towards embedded devices for
health monitoring. Whilst macro-scale implantable devices (i.e., pacemakers) can
trace its origin back to late 1950s, a new generation of micro-scale sensors can
monitor a variety of physical and biochemical states (i.e., wound recovery, hormone
levels) in the human body are being developed.
Nano-machines or nano-robotics deﬁne a broad number of devices comprised
of components that are close to the scale of a nanometre. Nano-machines have a
variety of applications that range from precision drug delivery, real-time sensing,
and controlling cell dynamics. Nanotechnology in this context has emerged greatly
in the early state (theoretical designs and simulated performance testing, with
a few in vitro and in vivo tests), although there are still some limitations for
further development. Currently, nano-machines lack the ability to communicate
with each other, limiting their potential to perform coordinated tasks. For example,
coordinated and controlled (via light, pH, swelling/shrinkage, etc.) drug delivery can
maximize the therapeutic range and minimize toxicity and ineffectiveness. Being
able to achieve nano-scale communications will herald a new era of nano-medicine:
connecting a plethora of nano-sensors and realizing a key component in the Internet
of Bio-Nano things (IoBNT) paradigm [31].
IoBNT systems are an essential component of nano-medicine, which promises
to revolutionize health-care. The demand for precision medicine such as nano-
machines operating in vivo environments is immense (current market valued at
$100 billion with a 14% CAGR). One example application area is coordinated
drug delivery. Today, poor drug delivery effectiveness costs the world $ billions
and exposes patients to the risk of high toxicity. Normal delivery of drugs through
the digestion and blood stream causes a long exposure to toxicity across a
wide range of cells. In effect, the therapeutic range is small and waste is high.

172
W. Guo et al.
Coordinated drug deliveries by mechanical and chemically triggered processes are
sensitive to the unpredictable in vivo environment, and do not achieve coordination
between devices. Coordinated drug delivery by a swarm of nano-machines that
can coordinate a simultaneous payload release can improve the therapeutic range
and decrease toxicity risk and waste. Wireless communication between such robots
and the outside world is necessary for the purposes of command and control,
and monitoring. Yet, wireless communication is extraordinarily challenging at the
nano-scale in ﬂuidic in vivo environments, i.e., small device dimension limits
electromagnetic waves to be at the lossy THz band. On the other hand, cells use
molecular signaling. Drawing an inspiration from these processes, researchers have
set out to design functional bioengineering sub-systems (i.e., remote controlled
DNA-circuits and bacteria systems [32]), as well as molecular communication sub-
systems [33]. In converting theoretical designs into practice, recent progress in
building macro-scale prototypes [34, 35] has allowed researchers to test various
signal detection and diversity schemes. Despite this progress at the macro-scale,
there remains no viable pathway to downscale the testbeds to the nano-scale
(Fig. 6.4).
6.3.1.1
Challenges with Wireless Energy Efﬁciency
In the previous section, we reviewed the growing focus on increasing the energy
efﬁciency of both mobile and ﬁxed wireless systems. Whilst we have built up a good
understanding of power consumption mechanisms in terrestrial mobile networks,
we still lack understanding in how nano-machines can communicate in an energy
efﬁcient manner. As communications and energy is vital for coordination and
control of any system, so too will they be for nano-machines. It is envisaged that
nano-scale communications will be critical to nano-machines that seek to coordinate
tasks such as in vivo drug delivery and surgery [31]. Whilst many meso- and
macro-scale in vivo medical devices (i.e., pacemaker) are battery powered, nano-
batteries (50 m [36]) are still signiﬁcantly larger or of the same dimension as
Transmitter
Messenger Molecules
undergoing Diffusion
Receiver 1
Receiver 2
Molecule
Absorbed
Molecule
Absorbed
Fig. 6.4 Illustration of molecular communications via diffusion (MCvD) with a single emitter and
multiple absorbing receivers

6
Multi-Scale Energy Harvesting
173
their nano-machine counter-parts. Therefore, charging batteries using externally
generated acoustic [37] and electromagnetic radiation is not always viable and
furthermore, nano-machines can be embedded in vivo areas that are either sensitive
to radiation or difﬁcult for radiation to penetrate. As such, energy harvesting
from the nano-machines’ locality is needed, i.e., the energy source should be near
the nano-machine. Over the past decade, there is increasing interest to harvest
energy from communication signals and achieve simultaneous wireless information
and power transfer (SWIPT). In this chapter, we draw on our understanding of
energy consumption and harvesting knowledge in current wireless systems to better
understand nano-scale communications and exploit opportunities.
6.3.1.2
Challenges with Wave-Based Systems
The traditional practices of wireless planning with known coverage areas and
propagation environments start to breakdown at the micro- and nano-scales. Com-
munication systems in complex biological environments must be: bio-compatible,
low-power consumption, low complexity, small dimension, and achieve reliable
signaling in a ﬂuid environment with complex cell/tissue obstacles. Such constraints
are challenging for both EM-based THz systems and nano-acoustic systems. Current
electricity and wave-based information delivery cannot downscale to the nano-scale
whilst retaining the required level of propagation robustness and energy efﬁciency
in vivo ﬂuidic environments.
6.3.2
Molecular Communication via Diffusion
For centuries, scientists have known that molecular signaling underpins biological
processes across multiple distance scales: from microscopic cell regulation to long
range insect signaling. Inspired by the abundant use of molecules in biological
signaling, Molecular communication via diffusion (MCvD) utilizes molecular
signal (i.e., a chemical pulse) as an alternative carrier for information [33]. MCvD
avoids the limitations of wave generation and propagation, and allows the signal
to both persist and propagate to areas that are difﬁcult to reach [38, 39]. The
information in MCvD can be repetitive signaling from a limited alphabet, which is
common in biological systems; or generic information from a rich alphabet, which
is more common in human interaction. Historically, molecular-based signaling
between animals has been observed since the ancient times, and more explicit
arguments relating signaling success and natural selection were articulated by
Darwin in 1871 [40]. It is only in the last decade or so that molecular communication
from a telecommunications and information theory perspective has been explored
[41]. Primarily, this has been due to the rise in demand from nano-scale engineering

174
W. Guo et al.
(e.g., communication between swarms of nano-robots for targeted drug delivery
[42]) and also the demand for industrial sensing in adverse environments. In both
of these cases, the local environment can be adverse to the efﬁcient propagation of
electromagnetic (EM) wave signals.
Intense interest in molecular signaling between external bodies began over
two decades ago, the scientiﬁc community paid particular interest to the pulse
modulation techniques used by moths to attract mating partners [43]. Over the
last decade, observations showed that chemical signals were encoded and decoded
both in the time- and spatial-domains to assist homing and message delivery [44],
and the moth’s antenna system has been successfully reverse-engineered using
biochemical sensors [45]. A more generalized communication system capable of
transmitting any alpha-numeric message was later devised and built [34], linking
the aforementioned bioengineering research with the ﬁeld of telecommunication. In
recent years, a growing body of signiﬁcant molecular communication research has
been devoted to a wide range of channel modeling [46] and telecommunication
system design [47–49], information theory [50, 51], sensor and circuit design
[45, 52], as well as biological system modeling [53, 54]. Furthermore, information
theorists have become interested in the achievable reliable information rate of the
random walk channel [50]. This led to various channel models been constructed,
including and not limited to the capacity of a delay-time modulated channel [51].
With the advent of IoBNT systems in nano-medicine, there is an urgent need to
connect various elements and sub-systems together to perform coordinated action.
Yet, engineers simply do not know how to design and build nano-scale commu-
nication systems that can operate reliably and efﬁciently in vivo environments
over long durations. Existing work in molecular communications has extended
earlier understanding of chemical signals to transmit continuous information (i.e.,
a sequence of distinctive data packets, as opposed to repetitive data). As such,
challenges in encoding and transmission strategies that relate to inter-packet chem-
ical interference arise, which are exasperated by the stochastic nature of molecular
diffusion channels.
6.3.3
Biological Communication and Energy Harvesting
Systems
In biology, chemical signaling using molecules exchanges information and energy.
In this subsection, we review some of the chemical signaling mechanisms in
the communications context. In particular, we focus on biological cell signaling,
which is essential to organized behaviour in multi-cellular organisms. A human
body contains 100 trillion cells that coordinate actions through chemical signaling.
Whilst the distances in cell signaling are typically small, hormone signals can
transverse over long distances (i.e., several metres in the blood stream). A mixture
of reception models exist. For example, signal receptors exist both within the cell

6
Multi-Scale Energy Harvesting
175
cytoplasm and on the surface of the cell membrane. Cell surface receptors often use
secondary messengers to transmit an ampliﬁed signal to the cytoplasm. Adjacent
cells often form direct passages that link their cytoplasms, permitting the passage of
messengers.
6.3.3.1
Intra- and Inter-Cell Signaling
A variety of chemical macromolecules are used for signaling, including but not
limited to peptides, proteins, dissolved gases, amino acids, nucleotides, steroids, and
other lipids. Cell receptors are designed only to react to certain chemical signals,
whilst ignoring the large volume and diversity of other signals. Receptor proteins
have unique shapes that ﬁt the shape of a speciﬁc signal molecule. Binding with the
right signal will produce a response within the cell. Intra-cell signaling only affects
a single cell and is divided into two categories. Intracrine occurs within the cell,
binding to receptors inside the cell’s cytoplasm and is used to regulate intracellular
events. Autocrine signaling also affects the host cell, but the chemical messenger
is ejected out of the cell and binds to the surface receptors of the cell. Inter-
cell signaling affects a secondary cell or cells. Inter-cell signaling occurs across
multiple distance scales, from a few microns (adjacent cells), to a metre (across
the human body). Juxtacrine signaling is a contact dependent signaling process
that allows chemical messengers to transverse via a ligand, junction, or matrix to
another attached cell (see Fig. 6.5a). Longer distance cell-to-cell communications is
called paracrine signaling. Here, cells eject molecular messengers that diffuse to a
local cell, a few hundred microns away (see Fig. 6.5b). Longer distance diffusion
communications occurs across the body between gland cells. This is known as
endocrine signaling. The gland cells excrete hormones that use the circulatory
system to be carried to target organ cells (see Fig. 6.5c).
The diffusive nature of endocrine signaling means that distant communications
is slow. The nervous system provides rapid communication between distant cells
and this is called synaptic signaling. Fiber extensions of nerve cells release
neurotransmitters (chemical messengers) from their tips close to the target cells via
the synaptic gap (see Fig. 6.5d). In addition to the aforementioned four techniques,
some signals perform autocrine signaling, where it secrets signals for the sole
purpose of binding to its own receptors, reinforcing developmental changes.
6.3.3.2
GABA Re-Uptake Mechanism
Energy harvesting using signaling molecules is common in biology at the cellular
level. One such biological example that utilizes two types of molecules is the
GABA re-uptake mechanism at the synaptic cleft. Glial cell absorbs/harvests GABA
molecules and converts them to glutamine for utilizing at the signaling mechanisms

176
W. Guo et al.
(a) Direct Contact
(b) Paracrine Signalling
(c) Endocrine Signalling
(d) Synaptic Signalling
Secretory 
Cell
Messenger 
Molecules
Adjacent 
Target Cells
Messenger 
Molecules
Messenger 
Molecules
Blood Vessel
Distant Target 
Cell
Hormone Secretion 
into Blood
Nerve Cell
Neuro-
transmitters
Target Cell
Synaptic 
Gap
Fig. 6.5 Four kinds of cell signaling: (a) Juxtacrine signaling—cells in direct contact with each
other send signals across junctions. (b) Paracrine signaling—secretions from one cell have an
effect only on cells in the immediate area. (c) Endocrine signaling—hormones are released into
the circulatory system, which carries them to the target cells. (d) Synaptic signaling—transmission
of signal molecules (neurotransmitters) from a neuron over a small synaptic gap to the target cell
of presynaptic region. Type A molecule generated by the source is absorbed and
converted to type B molecule inside the receiving node to be utilized in another
subsequent signaling mechanism. The -Aminobutyric acid (GABA) metabolism
and uptake is widely distributed across almost all regions of mammalian brain.
GABA is constructed by glutamate via enzymatic reaction with glutamic acid
decarboxylase (GAD) in the presynaptic neuron cell, which is then released as a
neurotransmitter for sending signal to both neighbour Glia cells and postsynaptic
neuron cells via GABA transporters (GATs). In this example, the presynaptic neuron
cell acts as the source to emit the GABA as type A molecule, and Glia cell acts as
the molecule harvesting node, and emit glutamine as type B molecule in response
to the electrical charge polarization caused by GABA. This example of molecular
signaling and simultaneous molecule harvesting demonstrates the dual usage of
signaling molecules in biology.

6
Multi-Scale Energy Harvesting
177
6.3.4
Nano-Scale Energy Models
Almost all nano-scale systems have biological equivalents, which lends us an
opportunity to better understand the energy levels involved. Biochemical processes
in a cell are performed by molecular machines (mostly protein based). Molecular
machine building blocks are constructed from single to multiple molecules. These
building blocks are generally divided between passive mechanisms (i.e., switches
react to a chemical stimulant) and active mechanisms (i.e., actuators consume
energy to perform an action) [55]. Unlike macroscopic machines, molecular
machines operate at energy scales close to the thermal energy, i.e., kT, where
k is Boltzmann’s constant and T is the temperature. Many of the motor actions
are driven by non-equilibrium thermodynamics, converting force (i.e., chemical
potential) into ﬂux (motor movement, chemical ﬂow). This process is known as
free energy transduction. There are many examples of molecular motors in action,
such as the muscle myosin, which is a motor that causes muscle contraction by
converting ATP (chemical fuel) into mechanical work (i.e., for ATP hydrolysis the
energy is 20kT  4 zJ).
6.3.5
Nano-Scale Propagation Models
The power expenditure model of a generic wireless system can be approximately
modularized into a number of contributing components. In this paper, the authors
focus on the propagation layer of consumption (including the data modulation,
ampliﬁcation, antenna loss, and propagation effects). The overhead consumption
due to signal processing and cooling elements are left for future discussions. The
main factors are: (1) the receiver antenna gain with radius R, (2) the free-space
propagation loss , (3) the transmitter efﬁciency (i.e., power ampliﬁer efﬁciency 
or chemical synthesis cost ), (4) absorption loss  (also known as transmittance),
and the (5) the circuit power consumption. In general, the received electromagnetic
(EM) power (PRx) or molecular number (NRx) is a small fraction of the total power
extracted by the transmitter PTotal:
PRx
PTotal
/   
R2
d˛

for EM
NRx
PTotal
/
1
.nTx  1/ 

R
d C R

for MCvD: t ! 1;
(6.4)
assuming that the communication circuit power is relatively small in a nano-
machine. Like RF communications, there is an energy efﬁciency factor for generat-
ing NTx molecules for transmission. This is related to the number of basic chemical

178
W. Guo et al.
components per molecule nTx and the energy cost to bind or synthesize them 
[56, 57]. We now explain the reasoning and details of the efﬁciency equations given
in Eq. (6.4) in the rest of the section.
6.3.5.1
THz Electromagnetic (EM) Communications
We ﬁrst examine the EM communications case. One can see that the best achievable
efﬁciency in Eq. (6.4) is limited by d˛ for EM and limited by d˛ for THz nano-
scale communications (where  / exp.kfd/). The absorption loss  is log-linear
proportional to absorption coefﬁcient k, which depends on the chemical composition
of the medium and is typically 1105 for air and 13 for water at f D 010 THz
[58]. To illustrate the aforementioned reasoning, we show an illustration of radio
wave versus molecular propagation in Fig. 6.6. In the (a) subplot, an isotropic EM
d
R
Point Source
Receiver Gain A, with
Effective Area Aeff
d
R
Point Source
Receiver Gain A, 
with Radius R
(a) Radio Frequency (RF) Channel
(b) Molecular Communication via Diffusion (MCvD) Channel
PTotal
PTx
PRx
NTx
NRx
Power Amplifier 
Efficiency μRF
PTotal
Synthesizing 
Cost j
Distance Dependent 
Propagation Loss, λ(f,d)
Time and Distance 
Dependent Propagation Loss, 
λ(D,d,t)
f
D
Macro-molecule 
synthesized from 
basic components
Fig. 6.6 Illustration of power loss in transmitting signals in (a) electromagnetic (EM) wave
communications, and (b) Molecular communications via diffusion (MCvD)

6
Multi-Scale Energy Harvesting
179
antenna transmits to a receiver antenna with an effective area Aeff / .fR/2, and the
resulting received power after propagating a distance of d is EM R2
d˛ , where the
value of EM is typically 10–30% for EM systems [59].
6.3.5.2
Molecular Communication via Diffusion
MCvD, on the other hand, relies on message bearing molecules to freely diffuse
from the transmitter to the receiver. We do not consider the base energy cost of
physical matter (i.e., the molecules) as matter is not lost in the communication
process. We do consider the energy cost of creating speciﬁc chemical compounds,
as well as the energy beneﬁts of restructuring the compound. In general, MCvD
involves messenger molecules performing a random walk motion across the com-
munication channel through collision interaction and a diffusion gradient. For each
emitted molecule, there is a ﬁnite probability that it will reach the intended receiver.
The power in the system at any given time instance is proportional to the number
of molecules. Whilst the stochastic process is intuitively unreliable and requires a
transmission time that is orders of magnitude longer than wave propagation, these
deﬁciencies can be mitigated by communicating at very small distances (microns)
or with the aid of strong ambient ﬂow. For a basic random walk process, consider
(as in Fig. 6.6b) a point emitter that transmits NTx molecules. The full absorption
receiver, will capture NRx molecules given by Yilmaz [46]:
NRx D NTxhc;
hc D

R
d C R

d
p
4Dt3 e
d2
4Dt ;
(6.5)
where hc is known as the ﬁrst passage time density distribution.
The resulting expected number of received molecules up to time t D T is
NTxFc, where Fc D
R
dCRerfc.
d
p
4DT /. This converges to NTx for 1-dimensional (1-D)
space and NTx
R
dCR for 3-D space as t ! 1 [60]. This means the full harvest
of all transmitted molecules is possible in certain conditions, independent of the
transmission distance. Naturally, the reality is that molecules will have a half life
and not all data bearing molecules can be harvested. Reactions with other chemicals
(i.e., enzymes) in the environment can reduce the effectiveness of energy harvesting
in MCvD over time [61]. Yet, the potential to capture the vast majority of the
transmitted molecules due to the random walk nature of propagation demonstrates
the potential of MCvD over wave-based transmission. As with EM communications,
there is a cost to produce the NTx molecules at the source in the ﬁrst place. This can
be shown to be [57]: PTotal D .nTx  1/NTx, where  is the synthesizing cost of
bonding nTx amino acids per transmitted molecule.
Comparing MCvD with EM propagation at the macro-scale to draw similar levels
of performance (see Fig. 6.7), the received EM power is / d˛, where ˛ typically
varies between 2 and 4. On the other hand, the received molecules from MCvD
can asymptotically be / d1, and at best independent of d in 1-D space, provided

180
W. Guo et al.
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Distance (d)
10-6
10-5
10-4
10-3
10-2
10-1
Received Power P RX or Molecules NRX
PRX for α=2
PRX for α=4
NRX for T=12hours
NRX for T=1week
RF Received Power with varying 
pathloss exponents, α
MCvD Received Molecules 
with varying absorption periods, T
RF Free-Space 
Decay (d-2)
RF Aggressive 
Decay (d-4)
MCvD Asymptotic 
Decay (d-1)
MCvD Aggressive
Decay (d-1erfc(d))
Fig. 6.7 Plot of received EM power (PRx) or MCvD molecules (NRx) for different transmission
distances (d). The results show that MCvD can achieve asymptotic distance-dependent power
decay at the rate of / d1, which is superior to all EM scenarios. Modeling parameters: mass
diffusivity (water molecules in air) D D 0:28 cm2=s, EM frequency 5 GHz with parabolic receiver
antenna Aeff D 0:56  R2, and receiver radius of R D 10 cm
the receiver is willing to wait for a long time t ! 1. Yet, the long waiting time is
not as ridiculous as it may appear for the following two reasons. Firstly, the rate of
diffusion is in reality accelerated by ambient air ﬂow (i.e., convection currents) or
shortened to a few milliseconds at the nano-scale. Secondly, when one transmits
a continuous stream of symbols, the power emitted for the ﬁrst symbol will be
recovered by the N-th symbol’s time (when N is large). Hence, there are no incurred
delays to power or energy recovery in MCvD, provided a long stream of information
symbols are transmitted (Fig. 6.8).
Several aspects of the previously reviewed biological processes can inspire
engineers to design energy efﬁcient communication systems at the nano-scale.
As mentioned previously, the GABA is constructed by glutamate via enzymatic
reaction with glutamic acid decarboxylase (GAD) in the presynaptic neuron cell,
which is then released as a neurotransmitter for sending signal to both neighbour
Glia cells and postsynaptic neuron cells via GABA transporters (GATs). In this
example, the presynaptic neuron cell acts as the source to emit the GABA as type A
molecule, and Glia cell acts as the relay, and emit glutamine as type B molecule
in response to the electrical charge polarization caused by GABA. Note that the
energy harvesting relay can also be engineered in cell by using genetic circuits with
chemical reaction promoted by certain catalyst. The idea of using biological circuits
for engineering transmitter and receiver in molecular communication system has
already been studied.

6
Multi-Scale Energy Harvesting
181
rR
dR
Destination Receiver
(Presynaptic Neuron)
Source Transmitter
(Presynaptic Neuron)
Energy Harvesting 
Molecular Relay with Converter
rD
dD
Relay Transceiver 
Link (Lossless)
DA
Relay 
Transmitter
Chemical Bank of 
basic components
(i.e., Amino Acids)
Molecule Type B 
(Glutamine)
Molecule Type A 
(GABA Neurotransmitter)
nB basic 
components
DB
Relay Receiver
(Glial Cell)
nA basic 
components
Fig. 6.8 Illustration of molecular relay communications with simultaneous energy harvesting. The
mechanism is similar to the GABA biological mechanism in recycling molecules and converting
molecular types through fragmentation and synthesis
6.3.6
Molecular Crowd Harvesting
As shown previously, despite the growing density of RF transmissions across
multiple spectrum bands, the amount of energy available to harvest is dominated
by the closest high power link. The rapid loss in RF energy due to transmission
distance limits the potential for crowd harvesting, and unless all the transmitters are
spaced equal distant to the receiver, crowd harvesting energy from N transmitters
is not signiﬁcantly superior to receiving energy from the nearest transmitter. For
MCvD systems, as mentioned in Sect. 6.2, the energy of molecules does not obey
the propagation laws of waves. Instead of experiencing a hostile / d˛ rate of
energy decay, molecular numbers (or energy) decay / d1. Therefore, the potential
to harvest energy from a ﬁeld of transmitters is far greater for MCvD than for RF
communications. If one assumes that the molecular transmitters are randomly and
uniformly distributed according to a Poisson Point Process (PPP) or Poisson Cluster
Process (PCP), one can leverage on existing stochastic geometry techniques [62]
to ﬁnd the expected molecular energy. This typically involves understanding the
general distance distribution fD.d; n/ from the energy harvesting node to the n-th
nearest transmitter node [63].
Figure 6.9 shows a simulation of crowd harvesting energy from a formation
of nodes distributed according to a modiﬁed Thomas PCP. Subplot (a) shows
an instant snap-shot of the PCP formation of nodes with an energy harvesting
receiver at the centre. Subplot (b) shows a scatter and box plot of the percentage of
energy harvested for MCvD and RF transmissions. The results show that RF energy
harvesting is far more sensitive to the density of transmitter nodes than MCvD
energy harvesting. The random walk nature of molecular propagation means that the
distance distribution (i.e., fD.d; n/) is not a key consideration in crowd harvesting,
whereas it is for RF systems. This demonstrates the potential for crowd harvesting in

182
W. Guo et al.
(b) Scatter and Box Plot of Energy Harvested for Node Densities
MCvD
RF
Centre of Cluster (PPP)
Energy Harvesting
Node
Transmitter
(Gaussian)
(a) Transmitters Distributed in a Modified Thomas PCP  
Fig. 6.9 Crowd harvesting energy from a formation of nodes distributed according to a Thomas
PCP. Subplot (a) shows an instant snap-shot of the PCP formation of nodes with an energy
harvesting receiver at the centre. Subplot (b) shows a scatter and box plot of the percentage of
energy harvested for MCvD and RF transmissions as a function of node density (per m2). Modeling
parameters: a variable modeling area radius 0.1–1 km, 20 clusters each with 10 nodes 2D Gaussian
distributed with s.d. 30 m, mass diffusivity D D 79:5¸tm2=s, pathloss exponent ˛ D 2, transmit
power PTx D 1 W, transmit molecule NTx D 1, and receiver radius of R D 1 m
molecular systems, which can achieve 2–5 dB improvement in harvesting efﬁciency
compared to RF systems in a similar setting, with the highest relative gain at low
node densities.
6.4
Conclusions and Future Work
The performance of communication systems is fundamentally limited by the loss of
energy through propagation and circuit inefﬁciencies. In this chapter, we have shown
that it is possible to achieve ultra-low energy communications across different
device size and transmission distance scales.
At the macro-scale, we have reviewed recent progress in simultaneous energy
and information transfer for large-scale networks. It can greatly reduce the use of
battery power and increase the availability and reliability for relaying. Through a
case study, we show that it is better to harvest energy from TV bands in LoS channels
and ambient Wi-Fi signals in NLoS conditions. Furthermore, we have discussed the
optimization of transmissions in crowd harvesting, especially with the use of node
collaboration.
At the nano-scale, we show that while the energy of waves will inevitably decay
as a function of transmission distance and time, the energy in molecules does not.
In fact, over time, the molecular receiver has an opportunity to recover some, if
not all of the molecular energy transmitted. Inspired by the GABA metabolism
system in nature, which fragments and reassembles molecules, we discuss a number
of communication systems. For point-to-point links, we found that given sufﬁcient
time, the energy harvested can be fully recovered in 1-D channels and scales with

6
Multi-Scale Energy Harvesting
183
d1 in 3-D channels. This fundamentally improves over wave-systems that have a
free-space upper-bound of d2. For more complex systems, we designed two relay
systems that can achieve high energy harvesting efﬁciency (12–25% at the relay).
For parallel channels, we found that molecular communications offer superior
energy harvesting scaling with node density (2–5 dB gain) and are signiﬁcantly less
sensitive to the spatial distribution of nodes. Regarding the information capacity,
the generalized capacity remains to be discovered, but capacity limits for speciﬁc
modulation schemes exist and are beyond the scope of this paper. In summary,
chemically manipulation to improve energy efﬁciency of information transmission
is something that has no parallel in radio frequency communications. What currently
remains beyond engineering capabilities is the ability to build such biological
functionalists into realistic systems. Nonetheless, the preliminary results in this
article indicate that the potential for simultaneous molecular information and energy
transfer (SMIET) is immense and further cross-discipline research is needed to
transform theory to reality.
References
1. S. Bi, C. Ho, R. Zhang, Wireless powered communication: opportunities and challenges. IEEE
Commun. Mag. 53(4), 117–125 (2015)
2. M. Pinuela, P. Mitcheson, S. Lucyszyn, Ambient RF energy harvesting in urban and semi urban
environments. IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory Tech. 61(7), 2715–2726 (2013)
3. F. Iannello, O. Simeone, U. Spagnolini, Medium access control protocols for wireless sensor
networks with energy harvesting. IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun. 60(5), 1381–1389 (2012)
4. W. Brown, The history of power transmission by radio waves. IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory
Tech. 32, 1230–1242 (1984)
5. B. Han, R. Nielsen, C. Papadias, R. Prasad, Radio frequency energy harvesting for long lifetime
wireless sensor networks, in International Symposium on Wireless Personal Multimedia
Communications (2013), pp. 1–5
6. T. Ajmal, D. Jazani, B. Allen, Design of a compact RF energy harvester for wireless sensor
networks, in IEEE Conference on Wireless Sensor Systems, June (2012), pp. 1–5
7. T. Ajmal, V. Dyo, B. Allen, D. Jazani, I. Ivanov, Design and optimisation of compact RF energy
harvesting device for smart applications. Electron. Lett. 50(2), 111–113 (2014)
8. S. Lee, R. Zhang, K. Huang, Opportunistic wireless energy harvesting in cognitive radio
networks. IEEE Trans. Wirel. Commun. 12, 4788–4799, (2013)
9. W. Guo, S. Wang, Mobile crowd-sensing wireless activity with measured interference power.
IEEE Wirel. Commun. Lett. 2, 539–542 (2013)
10. I. Krikidis, Simultaneous information and energy transfer in large-scale networks with/without
relaying. IEEE Trans. Commun. 62, 900–912 (2014)
11. W. Guo, S. Zhou, Y. Chen, S. Wang, X. Chu, Z. Niu, Simultaneous information and energy ﬂow
for IoT relay systems with crowd harvesting. IEEE Commun. Mag. 54(11), 143–149 (2016)
12. EARTH, WP2.D2.3: energy efﬁciency analysis of the reference systems. Energy Aware Radio
and Network Technologies (EARTH), Technical Report, December (2010)
13. S. Zaidi, A. Afzal, M. Hafeez, D. McLernon, M. Ghogho, Solar energy empowered cognitive
metro cellular networks. IEEE Commun. Mag. 53(7), 70–77 (2015)
14. O. Ozel, K. Shahzad, S. Ulukus, Optimal energy allocation for energy harvesting transmit-
ters with hybrid energy storage and processing cost. IEEE Trans. Signal Process. 62(12),
3232–3245 (2014)

184
W. Guo et al.
15. J. Fakidis, S. Videv, S. Kucera, H. Claussen, H. Haas, Indoor optical wireless power transfer to
small cells at nighttime. IEEE J. Lightwave Technol. 34(13), 3236–3258 (2016)
16. O. Ozel, K. Tutuncuoglu, J. Yang, S. Ulukus, A. Yenner, Transmission with energy harvesting
nodes in fading wireless channels: optimal policies. IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun. 29(8),
1732–1743 (2011)
17. T. Le, K. Mayaram, T. Fiez, Efﬁcient far-ﬁeld radio frequency energy harvesting for passively
powered sensor networks. IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits 43(5), 1287–1302 (2008)
18. D. Pavone, A. Buonanno, M. D’Urso, F.G.D. Corte, Design considerations for radio frequency
energy harvesting devices. Prog. Electromagn. Res. B 45, 19–35 (2012)
19. E. Nan, X. Chu, W. Guo, J. Zhang, User data trafﬁc analysis for 3G cellular networks, in IEEE
International ICST Conference on Communications and Networking in China, August (2013),
pp. 468–472
20. U. Olgun, C. Chen, J.L. Volakis, Investigation of rectenna array conﬁgurations for enhanced
RF power harvesting. IEEE Antennas Wirel. Propag. Lett. 10, 262–265 (2011)
21. M. Haenggi, Stochastic Geometry for Wireless Networks (Cambridge University Press, Cam-
bridge, 2012)
22. S. Wang, W. Guo, M. McDonnell, Distance distributions for real cellular networks, in IEEE
Conference on Computer Communications (INFOCOM) (2014), pp. 181–182
23. M. Haenggi, On distances in uniformly random networks. IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory 51,
3584–3586 (2005)
24. R. Ganti, M. Haenggi, Interference and outage in clustered wireless ad hoc networks. IEEE
Trans. Inf. Theory 55(9), 4067–4086 (2009)
25. S. Kumar, E. Hamed, D. Katabi, L.E. Li, LTE radio analytics made easy and accessible, in
ACM Special Interest Group on Data Communication (SIGCOMM), August (2014), pp. 1–12
26. I. Pocsik, Lognormal distribution as the natural statistics of cluster systems. Eur. Phys. J. D At.
Mol. Opt. Plasma Phys. 20(1), 395–397 (1991)
27. M. Laner, P. Svoboda, S. Schwarz, M. Rupp, Users in cells: a data trafﬁc analysis, in IEEE
Wireless Communications and Networking Conference (WCNC), April (2012), pp. 3063–3068
28. W. Guo, S. Wang, Radio-frequency energy harvesting potential: a stochastic analysis. Trans.
Emerg. Telecommun. Technol. 24, 453–457 (2013)
29. 3GPP, TR36.814 V9.0.0: further advancements for E-UTRA physical layer aspects (Release
9), 3GPP. Technical Report, March (2010)
30. D. Lee, S. Zhou, X. Zhong, Z. Niu, X. Zhou, H. Zhang, Spatial modeling of the trafﬁc density
in cellular networks. IEEE Wirel. Commun. 21(1), 80–88 (2014)
31. I.F. Akyildiz, M. Pierobon, S. Balasubramaniam, Y. Koucheryavy, The internet of bio-nano
things. IEEE Commun. Mag. 53(3), 32–40 (2015)
32. D. Piraner, M. Abedi, B. Moser, A. Lee-Gosselin, M. Shapiro, Tunable thermal bioswitches
for in vivo control of microbial therapeutics. Nat. Chem. Biol. 13(1), 75–80 (2016)
33. N. Farsad, H. B. Yilmaz, A. Eckford, C.-B. Chae, W. Guo, A comprehensive survey of recent
advancements in molecular communication. IEEE Commun. Surv. Tutorials 18(3), 1887–1919
(2016)
34. N. Farsad, W. Guo, A. Eckford, Tabletop molecular communication: text messages through
chemical signals. PLoS ONE 8, e82935 (2013)
35. B. Koo, C. Lee, H. Yilmaz, N. Farsad, A. Eckford, C. Chae, Molecular MIMO: from theory to
prototype. IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun. 34(3), 600–614 (2016)
36. S. Gowda, A. Reddy, X. Zhan, P. Ajayan, Building energy storage device on a single nanowire.
ACS Nano Lett. 11(8), 3329–3333 (2011)
37. M. Donohoe, S. Balasubramaniam, B. Jennings, J.M. Jornet, Powering in-body nanosensors
with ultrasounds. IEEE Trans. Nanotechnol. 15(2), 151–154 (2016)
38. S. Qiu, W. Guo, S. Wang, N. Farsad, A. Eckford, A molecular communication link for
monitoring in conﬁned environments, in IEEE International Conference on Communications
(ICC) - Workshops, June (2014), pp. 718–723
39. W. Guo, C. Mias, N. Farsad, J.L. Wu, Molecular versus electromagnetic wave propagation loss
in macro-scale environments. IEEE Trans. Mol. Biol. Multiscale Commun. (T-MBMC) 1(1),
18–25 (2015)

6
Multi-Scale Energy Harvesting
185
40. T.D. Wyatt, Fifty years of pheromones. Nature 457, 262–263 (2009)
41. T. Nakano, A. Eckford, T. Haraguchi, Molecular Communication (Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, 2013)
42. S. Chandrasekaran, D. Hougen, Swarm intelligence for cooperation of bio-nano robots using
quorum sensing, in IEEE Bio Micro and Nanosystems Conference, January (2006), p. 141
43. A. Mafra-Neto R.T. Carde, Fine-scale structure of pheromone plumes modulates upwind
orientation of ﬂying moths. Nature 369, 142–144 (1994)
44. P. Knusel, M. Carlsson, B. Hansson, T. Pearce, P. Verschure, Time and space are complemen-
tary encoding dimensions in the moth antennal lobe. Comput. Neural Syst. 18, 35–62 (2007)
45. M. Cole, Z. Racz, J. Gardner, T. Pearce, A novel biomimetic infochemical communication
technology: from insects to robots, in IEEE Sensors (2012), pp. 1–4
46. H.B. Yilmaz, A.C. Heren, T. Tugcu, C.-B. Chae, Three-dimensional channel characteristics for
molecular communications with an absorbing receiver. IEEE Commun. Lett. 18(6),929–930
(2014)
47. I.F. Akyildiz, F. Brunetti, C. Blazquez, Nanonetworks: a new communication paradigm.
Elsevier Comput. Netw. 52, 2260–2279 (2008)
48. I. Llatser, A. Cabellos-Aparicio, M. Pierobon, Detection techniques for diffusion-based
molecular communication. IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun. 31(12), 726–734 (2013)
49. L. Felicetti, M. Femminella, G. Reali, T. Nakano, A.V. Vasilakos, TCP-like molecular
communications. IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun. 32(12), 2354–2367 (2014)
50. B. Atakan, O. Akan, An information theoretical approach for molecular communication, in
IEEE Bionetics Conference, December (2007), pp. 33–40
51. K. Srinivas, A. Eckford, R. Adve, Molecular communication in ﬂuid media: the additive inverse
Gaussian noise channel. IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory 8, 4678–4692 (2012)
52. M. Pierobon, I.F. Akyildiz, A physical end-to-end model for molecular communication in
nanonetworks. IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun. 28(4), 602–611 (2010)
53. S. Hiyama, Y. Moritani, T. Suda, R. Egashira, A. Enomoto, M. Moore, T. Nakano, Molecular
communication, in Technical Proceedings of the 2005 NSTI Nanotechnology Conference and
Trade Show, vol. 3 (2005), pp. 391–394
54. P. Lio, S. Balasubramaniam, Opportunistic routing through conjugation in bacteria communi-
cation nanonetwork. Elsevier Nano Commun. Netw. 3, 36–45 (2012)
55. A. Coskun, M. Banaszak, R. Astumian, J. Stoddart, B. Grybowski, Great expectations: can
artiﬁcial molecular machines deliver on their promise. Chem. Soc. Rev. 41(1), 19–30 (2012)
56. T. Furubayashi, T. Nakano, A. Eckford, Y. Okaie, T. Yomo, Packet fragmentation and
reassembly in molecular communication. IEEE Trans. Nanobiosci. 15, 284–288 (2016)
57. M.S. Kuran, H.B. Yilmaz, T. Tugcu, B.O. Edis, Energy model for communication via diffusion
in nanonetworks. Nano Commun. Netw. 1(2), 86–95 (2010)
58. J. Jornet, I. Akyildiz, Channel modeling and capacity analysis for electromagnetic wireless
nanonetworks in the terahertz band. IEEE Trans. Wirel. Commun. 10(10), 3211–3221 (2011)
59. G. Auer, V. Giannini, C. Desset, I. Godor, P. Skillermark, M. Olsson, M. Imran, D. Sabella,
M. Gonzalez, O. Blume, A. Fehske, How much energy is needed to run a wireless network?
IEEE Commun. Mag. 18(5), 40–49 (2011)
60. Y. Deng, W. Guo, A. Noel, M. Elkashlan, A. Nallanathan, Enabling energy efﬁcient molecular
communication via molecule energy transfer. IEEE Commun. Lett. 21(2), 254–257 (2016)
61. A. Noel, K.C. Cheung, R. Schober, Improving receiver performance of diffusive molecular
communication with enzymes. IEEE Trans. NanoBiosci. 13(1), 31–43 (2014)
62. S. Akbar, Y. Deng, A. Nallanathan, M. Elkashlan, Downlink and uplink transmission in K-tier
heterogeneous cellular network with simultaneous wireless information and power transfer, in
IEEE Global Communications Conference (GLOBECOM), 2015
63. W. Guo, Y. Deng, H.B. Yilmaz, N. Farsad, M. Elkashlan, C.-B. Chae, A. Eckford, A. Nal-
lanathan, SMIET: simultaneous molecular information and energy transfer. IEEE Wirel.
Commun. (2017, to appear)

Part II
Energy Harvesting Protocols For Wireless
Sensor and Related Areas

Chapter 7
RF Energy Harvesting Networks: Existing
Techniques and Hardware Technology
Fahira Sangare and Zhu Han
7.1
Introduction
Radio frequency (RF) is any of the electromagnetic wave frequencies that lie in
the range extending from below 3 kHz to about 300 GHz, and that include the
frequencies used for communications or radar signals [115]. The radio spectrum
is bounded on the lower limit by low frequency signals like sound and on the higher
limit by signals such as visible light, as shown in Fig. 7.1.
RF signals can be primarily generated from two sources: dedicated and ambient.
The former can be deployed to provide energy when predictable supply is expected,
usually from license-free frequency bands of radio spectrum. The latter refer to RF
transmitters originally not intended for energy transfer, such as TV towers, radio
towers, and Wi-Fi routers. The continuous miniaturization of electronics has led to
an increasing interest in ever more tiny wireless autonomous sensor systems. This,
in turn, has led to the need for low-power electronics and alternatives to battery
power. Of the different methods that exist for scavenging energy (e.g., solar, wind,
vibration, and thermal), RF energy is seen as an attractive possibility.
This introductory chapter provides a basic understanding of RF energy harvesting
(RFEH) techniques. Starting with a brief explanation of existing wireless power
transfer techniques in Sect. 7.2, we explain the advantages of RFEH over other
techniques, then describe the underlying electronics hardware design of an RFEH
system from the power source (e.g., dedicated and ambient) to the energy scav-
enger components. Sections 7.3 and 7.4 present the design considerations, current
This work is partially supported by US NSF CPS-1646607, ECCS-1547201, CCF-1456921,
CNS-1443917, and ECCS-1405121.
F. Sangare () • Z. Han
University of Houston, Houston, TX 77004, USA
e-mail: fsangare@uh.edu; fahira@gmail.com; zhan2@central.uh.edu
© Springer International Publishing AG 2018
D.N.K. Jayakody et al. (eds.), Wireless Information and Power Transfer:
A New Paradigm for Green Communications, DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-56669-6_7
189

190
F. Sangare and Z. Han
Radio waves
Wavelength
X-rays,
Gamma 
rays, 
cosmic 
rays, etc.
ELF
VF
VLF
LF
MF
HF
VHF
SHF
EHF
UHF
Visible
light
Infrared
Ultraviolet
Frequency
The optical
spectrum
DC 
30 Hz
300 Hz
3 kHz 
30 kHz 
300 kHz 
3 KHz
30 MHz
300 MHz
3 GHz
30 GHz
300 GHz
3 THz
30 THz
1 m
0.4 x10-6 m
0.7 x10-6 m
10-6 m
10-5 m
10-4 m
10-3 m
10-2 m
10-1 m
102 m
103 m
104 m
105 m
106 m
107 m
10 m
Fig. 7.1 Electromagnetic spectrum

7
RF Energy Harvesting Networks: Existing Techniques and Hardware Technology
191
state-of-the-art applications and commercially available products for dedicated
and ambient sources, respectively, and ﬁnally expand to future applications and
challenges ahead. We ﬁnally provide a brief summary in Sect. 7.5.
7.2
RF Energy Harvesting Techniques
RFEH, also referred to as RF energy scavenging, is one of the main wireless
energy transfer (WET) techniques. The other methods are inductive coupling,
magnetic resonance coupling, and capacitive coupling. In the following originally
subsections, we survey and compare these three transfer methods, then focus on
RFEH systems.
7.2.1
Overview of RF Energy Harvesting
7.2.1.1
Wireless Power Transfer Techniques
The development of wireless charging technologies is advancing toward two major
directions: radiative wireless charging (or RF-based) and non-radiative wireless
charging (or coupling-based) such as inductive, magnetic resonance, and capacitive.
Inductive coupling [60] is based on magnetic coupling that delivers electrical
energy between two coils tuned to resonate at the same frequency. The electric
power is carried through the magnetic ﬁeld between the coils. Magnetic resonance
coupling [92] utilizes evanescent-wave coupling to generate and transfer electrical
energy between two resonators. The resonator is formed by adding a capacitance
on an induction coil. Both these techniques are near-ﬁeld wireless transmissions
featured with high power density and conversion efﬁciency. The power transmission
efﬁciency depends on the coupling coefﬁcient, which further relies on the distance
between two coils/resonators. The power strength is attenuated according to the
cube of the reciprocal of the distance (60 dB per decade of the distance) [122, 197],
which results in limited transfer. Besides, both inductive and resonance couplings
require calibration and alignment of coils/resonators at transmitters and receivers
sides. Therefore, they are not suitable for mobile and remote replenishment or
charging.
On the other hand, in capacitive power transfer (CPT), the electric ﬁeld is
conﬁned between conductive plates, alleviating the need for magnetic ﬂux guiding
and shielding components that add bulk and cost to inductive solutions [85].
Although CPT is developing quickly, it is perceived as only suitable for low-power
levels over short transfer distances, and it is limited in range to short gap distances
(i.e., <1 mm) [25]. Furthermore, the realizable amount of coupling capacitance
is restrained by the available area of the device, imposing a challenging design
constraint.

192
F. Sangare and Z. Han
In contrast, RF energy transfer has no such limitation. As the radiative elec-
tromagnetic wave cannot retroact upon the antenna that generated it at a distance
of above =2 [71], RF energy transfer can be regarded as a far-ﬁeld energy
transfer technique. The idea to use electromagnetic radiation for power transfer
was pioneered by Nicolas Tesla in the end of the nineteenth century by con-
ducting experiments on microwave technology. In 1931, he demonstrated the
principle by wirelessly powering a light bulb located 5 m away from a power
source of 15 kW in New York. It was until 1964, when W.C. Brown, who
is regarded as the principal engineer of practical wireless charging, realized
the conversion of microwaves to electricity through a rectenna [15]. In pow-
ering a model helicopter, Brown demonstrated the practicality of microwave
power transfer. During the past decade, with the advancement in complementary
metal-oxide-semiconductor (CMOS) circuit design, higher circuit density, and
efﬁcient energy storage, low-power transfer for powering wireless sensors began
to attract increasing attention. Table 7.1 shows a comparison of the four main WET
techniques.
Table 7.1 Contents of the wireless energy transfer (WET) techniques
WET
technique
Field
region
Propagation
Effective distance Efﬁciency
Applications
RF energy
transfer
Far
ﬁeld
Radiative
Typically from
several meters to
several kilometers
(depends on
distance,
frequency, and
sensitivity of the
harvester)
0:4% at 40 dBm,
>18:2% at
20 dBm, and
>50% at 5 dBm
input power,
respectively [116]
Wireless sensor
networks [132],
wireless body
networks [226]
Resonant
inductive
coupling
Near
ﬁeld
Non-radiative
From a few
millimeters to a
few centimeters
From 5:81 to
57:2% when
frequency varies
from 16.2 to
508 kHz
RFID tags, smart
cards, electric
vehicle [64, 129],
cell phone
charging [153],
and inductive
toothbrush [181]
Magnetic
resonance
coupling
Near
ﬁeld
Non-radiative
From a few
centimeters to a
few meters
From >90 to
>30% with
distance from 0.75
to 2.25 m [209].
PHEV charging
[82], cellular
phone [211]
Capacitive
coupling
Near
ﬁeld
Non-radiative
Less than a
millimeter
From 90 to 40%
for air gaps
varying from 0.1
to 1 mm [25].
Electric vehicle
[26], contactless
USB [205],
rotating
machinery [109]

7
RF Energy Harvesting Networks: Existing Techniques and Hardware Technology
193
7.2.1.2
Radiative RF Power Transfer
Radiative far-ﬁeld wireless power transfer utilizes diffused RF/microwave as a
medium to carry energy. Under idealized conditions, the received energy is governed
by the Friis’ free space equation:
pr D GtGr
 
4d
2
pt;
(7.1)
where pr is the received RF power, d the distance between the receiver and the
source power pt, Gt the source antenna gain, Gr the receiver antenna gain, and  the
wavelength of the carrier frequency.
Friis’ equation is accurate for long-distance transmission such as satellite com-
munications when there is negligible atmospheric absorption. However, these ideal
conditions are almost never achieved in ordinary terrestrial communications due to
obstructions, absorption, reﬂection, and more particularly in the case of wireless
rechargeable sensor networks, to polarization loss and effects of power rectiﬁcation
and conversion. Therefore, empirical adjustments are sometimes necessary [159]. A
more general form of average received power can be estimated as follows:
pr / GtGr

d
n
pt:
(7.2)
However, to get useful results, further adjustments are usually necessary resulting
in much more complex relations, such the Hata Model for Urban Areas [52].
Radiative RF power transfer can be further sorted into directive RF power
beamforming (radiated toward a direction) and nondirective RF power trans-
fer (radiated isotropically) [147]. For point-to-point transmission, beamforming
transmits electromagnetic waves [225] and can improve the power transmission
efﬁciency. However, the limitation of beamforming lies in the fact that the charger
needs to know the exact location of the energy receiver. Due to the obvious
limitation of this technique, RF wireless charging is usually realized through
nondirective radiation.
7.2.1.3
RF Energy Harvesting System
An RFEH system consists of the following three elements:
•
An RF energy source,
•
An RF energy harvester, and
•
A load used for the application.

194
F. Sangare and Z. Han
Transmit
Antenna
Receive
antenna
Impendence
matching
Voltage
Multiplier
Capacitor
DC output
RF input
Wireless Energy Harvester
Fig. 7.2 RF energy harvesting (RFEH) system [108]
Figure 7.2 illustrates the block diagram of a typical RF energy harvester made
of an antenna, an impedance matching circuit, a rectiﬁer/ﬁltering circuit, a voltage
multiplier or boost converter, and a power management module that may include an
energy storage unit. Each element of the system is described in the next sections.
7.2.2
RF Energy Sources: Dedicated Vs. Ambient
Unlike energy scavenging from environmental sources such as solar, wind, thermal,
or kinetic energy, radiative radio-frequency must provide controllable, steady, and
stable power over distance for the energy harvesters. For example, in a ﬁxed RFEH
Network, the harvested energy is predictable and relatively stable over time due to
ﬁxed distance [208].
RF energy can be generated and captured from two origins: intentional or
dedicated RF sources, and unintentional or ambient RF sources. The former
can be deployed to provide energy when predictable supply is expected, usually
from license-free frequency bands of the radio spectrum. The latter refer to RF
transmitters originally not intended for energy transfer, such as TV or radio towers,
and Wi-Fi routers.
7.2.2.1
Dedicated RF Sources
Dedicated RF sources can be deployed to transmit in the license-free ISM frequency
bands. However, these sources may incur high costs. Moreover, ISM-bands output
power is limited by regulations, such as the FCC and the general ISM regulations,
out of safety and health concerns related to radiations [66]. For example, in the
915 MHz ISM band, the maximum allowed power is 4 W [46]. Even at this highest
setting, the received power at a moderate distance of 20 m is attenuated down to
only 10 W. Due to these restrictions, several dedicated RF sources may need to be
set up in order to meet user’s demand. Power beacons (PB) [63], which are stations
deployed in an existing cellular network for recharging sensors and mobile devices,

7
RF Energy Harvesting Networks: Existing Techniques and Hardware Technology
195
illustrate such scenario by creating direct line-of-sight (LOS) links to mobiles. Sharp
energy beams formed at PBs aim to counteract propagation loss and reduce power
consumption of mobile devices, enabling close-to-free-space power transfer [56].
As the RFEH process with dedicated origin is fully controllable, it is suitable
to support applications with QoS constraints. These sources can also be mobile, to
travel and transfer power to rechargeable wireless network nodes. In [40–42, 103],
different transmission schemes for mobile RF power transmitters are investigated
for replenishing wireless sensor networks (WSNs).
7.2.2.2
Ambient RF Sources
Ambient RF sources refer to transmitters not intended for energy transfer. This
energy is essentially free. Their transmission powers vary signiﬁcantly, from around
106 W for TV tower, 10 W for cellular systems, to about 0.1 W for mobile devices
and Wi-Fi systems. These sources can further be split into static and dynamic
sources.
•
Static ambient RF sources: provide relatively stable and foreseeable power over
time, such as TV and radio towers. However, there could be long-term and
short-term ﬂuctuations due to service schedule (e.g., TV and radio) and fading,
respectively. Their power density is usually very small. As a result, a high-
gain antenna for many frequency bands and a rectiﬁer designed for wideband
spectrum should be considered. In [48], the performance analysis of a sensor
powered by static ambient RF sources is performed using a stochastic geometry
approach. An interesting ﬁnding is that when the distribution of RF sources
exhibits stronger repulsion, larger RFEH rate can be achieved at the sensor.
•
Dynamic ambient RF sources: work periodically or use time-varying transmit
power (e.g., a Wi-Fi access point and licensed users in a cognitive radio network
(CRN)). The energy collected from these sources has to be adaptive and possibly
intelligent to search for harvesting opportunities in a certain frequency range.
The study in [97] is an example of energy harvesting from dynamic ambient
RF sources in a CRN. A secondary user can harvest RF energy from nearby
transmitting primary users and transmit data when it is sufﬁciently far from
primary users, or when the nearby primary users are idle.
7.2.3
General Architecture of an RF Energy Harvester
Most of the RF energy harvester circuit implementations use semiconductor-based
rectifying elements to convert RF to DC power thanks to their low cost and small
form factor. The semiconductors are either bridges of discrete components such as
Schottky diodes or integrated circuits (ICs) based on CMOS technology with diode-
connected transistors. Schottky diodes are regularly chosen when large amounts of

196
F. Sangare and Z. Han
power are required, such as in space Solar Power Station (SPS) systems. Examples
of Schottky diodes implementation of RF rectiﬁers are shown in Table 7.2, which
include Avago Technologies’ HSMS [10] and Skyworks’ SMS [176] families of
surface mount microwave detector diodes. On the other hand, CMOS technology is
employed at low power because of lower parasitic values and customizable rectiﬁers
that signiﬁcantly increase the harvester efﬁciency. Furthermore, digital logic can be
incorporated onto the same die [198]. Table 7.2 shows the circuit performance of
some up-to-date designs.
Literature characterizes energy harvesting circuits from two different metrics:
efﬁciency and sensitivity. Efﬁciency can be expressed as a total energy harvesting
circuit efﬁciency or a power-conversion efﬁciency, while sensitivity is deﬁned
as the minimum power necessary to power an IC [198]. The efﬁciency of the
energy scavenger depends on the performance and type of antenna, the accuracy
of the impedance matching between antenna and load, and the power efﬁciency
of the rectiﬁer and voltage multiplier. On the other hand, sensitivity depends on
the semiconductor technology used and the application, as different sensors and
protocols may cause an increase in sensitivity value.
Table 7.2 RFEH circuits performance comparison [208]
Literature
Minimum RF
input power
Peak conversion
efﬁciency
Frequency
Rectiﬁer
element
Kocer and Flynn [86]
19.58 dBm @ 1 V
10.90% @
12 dBm
450 MHz
0.25 m
CMOS
Yi et al. [215]
N/A
26.50% @
11 dBm
900 MHz
0.18 m
CMOS
Mandal and Sarpeshkar
[110]
17.70 dBm @
0.8 V
37% @
18.7 dBm
970 MHz
0.18 m
CMOS
Shameli et al. [166]
14.10 dBm @ 1 V
N/A
920 MHz
0.18 m
CMOS
Le et al. [94]
22.60 dBm @ 1 V
30% @ 8 dBm
906 MHz
0.25 m
CMOS
Yao et al. [213]
14.70 dBm @
1.5 V
15.76% @
12.7 dBm
900 MHz
0.35 m
CMOS
Salter et al. [156]
25.50 dBm @ 1 V
N/A
2.2 GHz
130 nm
CMOS
Vera et al. [199]
N/A
42.1% @
10 dBm
2.45 GHz
SMS 7630
Papotto et al. [138]
24 dBm (4 W) @
1 V
11% @ 15 dBm
915 MHz
90 nm
CMOS
Seunghyun and Wentzloff
[160]
32 dBm @ 1 V
N/A
915 MHz
130 nm
CMOS
(continued)

7
RF Energy Harvesting Networks: Existing Techniques and Hardware Technology
197
Table 7.2 RFEH circuits performance comparison [208]
Literature
Minimum RF
input power
Peak conversion
efﬁciency
Frequency
Rectiﬁer
element
Masuch et al. [112]
N/A
22.70% @
3 dBm
2.4 GHz
130 nm
CMOS
Scorcioni et al. [161]
17 dBm @ 2 V
60% @ 3 dBm
868 MHz
0.13 m
CMOS
Taris et al. [188]
22.50 dBm @
0.2 V
N/A
900 MHz
HSMS-2852
11 dBm @ 1.08 V
Sun et al. [184]
3.20 dBm @ 1 V
83% @ 1 dBm
2.45 GHz
HSMS-2852
Karolak et al. [75]
21 dBm @ 1.45 V
65.20% @
21 dBm
900 MHz
13 nm CMOS
21 dBm @ 1.43 V
64% @ 21 dBm
2.4 GHz
Roberg et al. [155]
40 dBm @ 30 V
85% @ 40 dBm
2.45 GHz
SMS-7630
Nintanavongsa et al. [130] 10 dBm @ 1 V
10% @ 10 dBm
915 MHz
HSMS-2852
Franciscatto et al. [49]
0 dBm @ 1.2 V
10.9% 70.40% @
0 dBm
2.45 GHz
HSMS-2852
Scorcioni et al. [163]
16 dBm @ 2 V
58% @ 3 dBm
868 MHz
130 nm
CMOS
Stoopman et al. [178]
26.30 dBm @ 1 V
31.50% @
15 dBm
868 MHz
90 nm
CMOS
Wang and Mortazawi
[204]
39 dBm @ 2.5 V
N/A
AM freq
N/A
Thierry et al. [194]
10 dBm @ 2.2 V
N/A
900 MHz
HSHS-2852
20 dBm @ 0.4 V
2.4 GHz
Nimo et al. [128]
30 dBm @ 1.9 V
55% @ 30 dBm
13.56 MHz HSMS-286B
Alam et al. [3]
15 dBm @ 0.55 V
N/A
2.45 GHz
HSMS-2850
S. Agrawal et al. (2014)
10 dBm @ 1.3 V
75% @ 10 dBm
900 MHz
HSMS-2852
Stoopman et al. [179]
27 dBm @ 1 V
40% @ 17 dBm
868 MHz
90 nm
CMOS
7.2.3.1
Antenna Module
The antenna is the ﬁrst stage of an RFEH and is responsible for capturing sufﬁcient
signals that would further be converted into voltage. The main parameters to
consider in designing such an antenna are the size, gain, and the frequency it is
tuned to. The average received input RF power PRF depends on the input power
density S and the antenna’s aperture Areal (equivalent area which intercepted the
incident power density), expressed as follows:
PRF D S  Areal:
(7.3)
When a receiving antenna intercepts incident electromagnetic waves, a voltage
Voc is induced across its terminals. To a generator feeding a transmitting antenna, the

198
F. Sangare and Z. Han
Xa
Re
Rr
Voc
ZLoad
Receiving Antenna
Receiver
Incident wave
Fig. 7.3 Antenna equivalent circuit
antenna appears as a load. In the same manner, the receiver circuitry connected to a
receiving antenna’s output terminal will appear as a load impedance. The electrical
model of an antenna can be represented by an equivalent circuit as in Fig. 7.3, where
Xa is the antenna reactance, Rl the loss resistance (related to the material used), Rr
the wave radiation resistance, and Zload the input impedance of the receiver.
The antenna impedance Za is given by:
Za D .Rl C Rr/ C jXa D Ra C jXa:
(7.4)
Common values of Za are 300  (closed dipole antenna), 75  (open dipole
antenna), and 50  (wireless systems). The antenna reactance Xa depends on the
antenna structure; it is usually inductive for a loop antenna and capacitive for a
patch antenna [140]. Various antenna types for electromagnetic energy harvesting
have recently been proposed: dipole [2], Yagi-Uda [78, 185], microstrip [7, 172],
monopole [51, 221], loop [95, 133], patch (coplanar, L-shape, U-shape, E-shape,
start shape, circular, or square) [154], bow tie [23, 121], and spiral antenna [28]. For
a detailed comparison of existing antenna structures, readers can refer to [222].
A trade-off exists between antenna size and performance, hence the main design
challenge is to obtain high conversion efﬁciency. For example, in order to increase
the conversion efﬁciency, several broadband antennas, large antenna arrays, and
circularly polarized antennas are encountered in the existing literature:
1. Broadband antennas receive relatively high power of high frequency (on order of
1 GHz) from various sources [126, 200, 214, 216, 220].
2. Antenna arrays increase incident power delivered to the diode for rectiﬁcation.
It is an effective mean of increasing the receiving power but a trade-off arises
between the antenna size and the radiation gain [11].
3. Circularly polarized antennas offer power reception with less polarization mis-
match.
The antenna module can be designed to work on either single frequency or
multiple frequency bands, in which the application can harvest from a single or
multiple sources simultaneously. Research efforts have been made for narrow-band

7
RF Energy Harvesting Networks: Existing Techniques and Hardware Technology
199
Antenna
Low-Pass
Filter
Rectifier
DC-Pass
Filter
Resistive
Load
Fig. 7.4 Block diagram of a rectenna
antenna (typically from several to tens of MHz) designs in a single band [3, 8, 9], in
dual bands [6, 99, 223] as well as in triple bands [30, 79, 111]. The antenna module
can also include a rectifying circuit, as detailed in the next subsection (Fig. 7.4).
Rectenna
A rectenna is a particular type of antenna that rectiﬁes incoming electromagnetic
waves into DC current [170]. Over the last century, the development of rectennas
for wireless power transmission and SPS transmission [169] has achieved great
success in implementing speciﬁc functions and applications as diverse as Radio
Identiﬁcation (RFID) tagging systems, WLANs, WiMax, cognitive radio systems,
and wireless body area networks (WBAN).
There are two approaches to achieve high conversion efﬁciency with rectennas.
The ﬁrst option is to collect the maximum power and deliver it to the rectifying
diode, and the second one is to suppress the harmonics generated by the diode
that reradiate from the antenna as the power lost. Among various types of antenna
used in rectennas, microstrip antennas, and especially patch, are gaining popularity
in wireless applications owing to their low proﬁle, light weight, simple, and
inexpensive to manufacture using modern printed-circuit technology. The other
reason for the wide use of patch antenna is their versatility in terms of resonant
frequency, polarization, pattern, and impedance when particular patch shape and
mode are chosen [170].
7.2.3.2
Impedance Matching
Following the antenna in an RF energy harvester, the impedance matching network
performs impedance transformation to assure maximum power delivery by reducing
the transmission loss from antenna to rectiﬁer, and increasing the voltage gain at the
rectiﬁer input [1].

200
F. Sangare and Z. Han
Zant
Rin
Cin
T
Zant_High
Cin
Rin
Lshunt
Vant
Vant
Zant_Low
Cin
Rin
Lm
Vant
Cm
A)
B)
C)
Fig. 7.5 Matching circuits: (a) transformer, (b) shunt inductor, and (c) LC network [143]
A matching network is a resonator circuit operating at the designed frequency
and is usually made with reactive components such as coils and capacitors that are
not dissipative. Several topologies of matching circuits exist; three main ones widely
used are shown in Fig. 7.5.
Maximum power transfer can also be realized when the impedance at the antenna
output and the impedance of the load are conjugates of each other, thus eliminating
the need of an impedance matching network. However, many energy harvesting
circuits are made up with nonlinear devices such as diodes, thus exhibiting a
nonlinearity. This implies that the impedance of the energy harvesting circuit varies
with the amount of power received by the antenna [130]. For example in [47],
a method to dynamically maximize the delivered power from an RF source to a
receiving antenna is proposed using a ﬁnite number of discrete capacitors. The
control of the dynamic impedance matching is assigned to a Control Unit that runs
an algorithm to estimate the input power of the circuit and then set the capacitance
with the best value in the impedance matching network.
7.2.3.3
Rectiﬁcation and Filtering
The function of a rectiﬁer is to convert the AC current induced in the antenna
by received RF signals into a DC voltage. Two topologies for signal rectiﬁcation
exist:
1. Half-wave rectiﬁcation: either the positive or negative half of the AC wave is
passed, while the other half is blocked. Rectiﬁers yield a unidirectional but
pulsating direct current; and
2. Full-wave rectiﬁcation: converts the whole of the input waveform to one of
constant polarity (positive or negative) at its output. Full-wave rectiﬁcation
converts both polarities of the input waveform to pulsating DC (direct current)
and yields a higher average output voltage.

7
RF Energy Harvesting Networks: Existing Techniques and Hardware Technology
201
Fig. 7.6 Half-wave and
full-wave rectiﬁcation
Voltage
Input Voltage
Half-Wave Rectified
Full-Wave Rectified
Time [ms]
50
40
30
20
10
Fig. 7.7 Types of rectiﬁers circuits: (a) Basic rectiﬁer, (b) voltage double, and (c) voltage
multiplier
Harvesting System
Harvesting System
DIRECT FROM SOURCE
SINGLE/DOUBLE STAGE STORAGE
Sensor Node
Sensor Node
Primary Storage
Secondary Storage
a
b
Fig. 7.8 Energy harvesting architectures with and without storage capability [183]. (a) Harvest–
use, (b) Harvest–store–use
Half-wave rectiﬁers produce far more ripple than full-wave rectiﬁers, and much
more ﬁltering is needed to eliminate harmonics of the AC frequency from the output
(Figs. 7.6, 7.7, and 7.8).
As mentioned in Sect. 7.2.3.1, a single diode in a serial conﬁguration that also
acts as a half-wave rectiﬁer is the most common rectifying circuit. Generally, higher

202
F. Sangare and Z. Han
Table 7.3 Comparison of rectiﬁer circuits
Rectiﬁer type
Structure
Topology
Basic
(single-stage)
rectiﬁer
Single diode connected in series
with a load. A capacitor may be
added as a ﬁlter to smoothen the
ripple in the output
Half-wave or full-wave
Voltage doubler
Rectiﬁes the full-wave
peak-to-peak voltage of the
incoming AC signal using two
stages to approximately double
up the DC voltage
Full-wave. Villard circuit (single
shunt), Greinacher circuit (dual diode),
bridge (Delon) circuit [29, 88], and
Dickson charge pump
Voltage
multiplier
Multistage rectiﬁer to further
increase the voltage using a
network of capacitors and diodes
Full-wave. Cockcorft–Walton circuit
[83, 86], multiplier resonant [68, 145],
Villance multiplier [127], and boost
converter [87]
conversion efﬁciency can be achieved by diodes with lower built-in voltage such as
Schottky diodes. CMOS technology can be deployed as an alternative to diodes. In
[93, 175, 217], ﬂoating-gate devices were designed to passively reduce the threshold
voltage of the rectiﬁer circuit. Furthermore, the ﬂoating-gate rectiﬁer technique
allows the threshold of the rectiﬁer circuits to be programmed and optimized to
operate over a wide range of output current.
When the received power is not high enough, the rectiﬁer input needs to be
ampliﬁed in order to power the circuit. In these cases, a rectiﬁer circuit that
includes a multiplier may be used. There exist three main options of rectiﬁer circuit
designs: basic rectiﬁer using a single diode and capacitor, voltage doubler with two
diodes and capacitors, and voltage multiplier. Table 7.3 shows a comparison of the
rectiﬁers.
The RF signal source and received power dictate the type of rectiﬁcation circuit to
implement. Different values of DC voltage could be obtained with the same circuit
but different RF sources. The multiplier is usually formed by different stages, each
with diodes and capacitors. The higher the number of stages, the higher the voltage
output. However, because diode loss increases with the stage number, the system
efﬁciency is affected [140]. The measure to quantify the effect of the multiplier is
its efﬁciency 	rect, which depends on input power Pinrect and output power Poutrect.
	rect D Poutrect
Pinrect
:
(7.5)
7.2.3.4
Power Management Module
The power management module decides whether to store the electricity obtained
from the scavenger or to use it for the application immediately. It can adopt two
methods to control the incoming energy ﬂow: harvest–store–use and harvest–use.

7
RF Energy Harvesting Networks: Existing Techniques and Hardware Technology
203
The harvest–store–use method is the conventional architecture in most energy
harvesting systems. Here, the network node is equipped with an energy storage
device (battery or supercapacitor) that stores the converted electricity. Whenever the
collected energy is greater than the node’s consumption, it is stored for future use
[219]. The storage component itself may be single-stage (primary) or double-stage
(primary and secondary). Secondary storage is a backup storage for situations when
the primary storage is exhausted [69]. However, harvest–store–use method suffers
from several issues that will be described in Sect. 7.2.3.5.
In the harvest–use method, the harvested energy is directly used to power the
application or network node with no need of storage and voltage converter [96].
Therefore, for a network node to operate normally, the converted electricity has
to constantly exceed its minimum energy demand. Otherwise, the node will be
disabled. Some energy management techniques for harvest–use such as energy
neutral operation that adjusts the duty cycle of operation to the predicted rate
of harvest, time-switching approach where a sensor node harvests energy for
a percentage of time frame and transmits data for the rest of the time, and
converter-less operation to provide almost constant voltage directly to the target
device without using a voltage converter were proposed in [74, 171], and in [96],
respectively.
In both schemes, the aim is to create a balanced energy management between
the RF source and the load in order to avoid energy deﬁciency in a network. Most
of the power management efforts in the literature mainly focus toward efﬁcient
node’s energy consumption. The aim is to use algorithms, which take into account
the limited RF energy supply constraints as well as to develop applications with
minimum energy consumption. Some strategies include duty cycling [168], energy
driven [22], adaptive sensing rate [120], event driven [158], data compression [119],
data prediction [12], mobility based [210], and fuzzy control [5].
7.2.3.5
Energy Storage
Energy storage is of paramount importance in energy harvesting. Depending on
the level and duration of storage, proper technique has to be selected. There
are several technologies that vary in properties such as capacity, energy density,
power density, number of charge cycles, leakage, equivalent series resistance (ESR),
lifetime, temperature effects, etc. Because of these wide variations, it is important
to understand the differences between technologies and choose a storage device that
is well-suited for a given application [150].
For example, in traditional RFEH networks, it is common practice to use
rechargeable batteries for repositing energy owing to their high-energy density,
which is the energy extracted per unit volume (volumetric: Wh/l) or mass (gravimet-
ric: Wh/kg). In contrast, power density is extracted from a battery per unit volume
(W/l) or mass (W/kg) and mainly depends on the internal impedance of the battery.
Some batteries are specially designed to promote power density through reduced
internal impedance. Batteries designed to improve power density have less energy

204
F. Sangare and Z. Han
FUEL CELLS
Specific Energy [Wh/kg]
Specific Power [W/kg]
1000
500
100
50
10
5
1
0.5
0.05
0.01
1
10
100
103
104
105
106
107
ELECTROCHEMICAL
CAPACITORS
BATTERIES
CAPACITORS
0.1
Fig. 7.9 Power density vs energy density (Ragone plot) of energy storage units [39]
density for the same battery size (and vice versa). Figure 7.9 shows a generic graph
of the power density versus the energy density of storage units. As noticed in the
ﬁgure, power density decreases with increasing energy density.
There are essentially two devices known for storing harvested RF energy:
supercapacitors and batteries. In this section, we discuss their general properties
(Fig. 7.10).
Batteries
Batteries extract electrical power from a chemical reaction. They comprise of one
or more basic electrochemical units known as cells, which are connected in series
or in parallel to obtain the desired voltage and capacity. Each cell contains a
negative electrode (anode), a positive electrode (cathode), and an ionic conductor
(electrolyte). The anode and cathode are physically isolated by the electrolyte which
provides the medium for charge transfer (via ions) inside the cell.
The most common rechargeable batteries for autonomous low-cost, low-power
wireless sensors are Nickel Cadmium (NiCd), Nickel metal hydride (NiMH), and
Lithium based (Li-ion or Li polymer). The performance of these batteries systems
is compared in Fig. 7.11.

7
RF Energy Harvesting Networks: Existing Techniques and Hardware Technology
205
Fig. 7.10 Electrochemical
cell at discharge [101]
Cathode
Anode
DC power supply
Flow of anions
Flow of cations
Electrolyte
Electrons flow
Fig. 7.11 Comparison of
rechargeable 14500 Li-ion,
AA-size NiMH, and NiCd
batteries at 20 ıC [101]
450
400
350
300
250
200
150
100
50
50
1
10
100
1000
Li Ion
NiMH
NiCd
Energy density [Wh/L]
Power density [W/L]
0.1

206
F. Sangare and Z. Han
1. NiCd batteries use nickel hydroxide Ni.OH/2 for the cathode, Cd as the anode,
and an alkaline Potassium hydroxide (KOH) electrolyte. Their small size and
high discharge capacity made them suitable for portable tools and other consumer
applications. In addition, their cells, with nominal potential of 1.2 V, are sealed
and utilize a recombinant system [37] to prevent electrolyte loss and extend the
useful life. Once the battery of choice for low-power products, they have lost
market share to NiMH and Li-ion batteries which have superior energy density
and performance characteristics.
2. The components of NiMH batteries include a cathode of nickel hydroxide,
an anode of Hydrogen absorbing alloys, and a KOH electrolyte, which are
collectively more benign than the active chemicals used in rival Lithium batteries.
Their cell voltage is 1.2 V. The cells operating temperature range has been
extended to over 100 ıC, far exceeding the range currently achievable by Lithium
cells. However, they suffer from high discharge rate and much lower energy
density.
3. Typical Lithium-ion cells use Carbon for their anode and Lithium Cobalt dioxide
or a Lithium Manganese compound as the cathode. The electrolyte is usually
based on a Lithium salt in an organic solvent. Cell voltage is typically 4.2 V.
They have many attractive performance advantages which make them ideal for
low-power applications such as mobile phones, laptops, cameras, sensors, and
other consumer electronic products; and as well as higher power applications
such as automotive and standby power.
Internal impedance in batteries depends on factors such as cell size and con-
struction, number of connected cells, chemistry, wiring, and contact type [17].
Manufacturers datasheet often provide discharge proﬁle graphs as well as AC
impedance plots at a speciﬁc frequency. However, the data found in these plots
are not sufﬁcient to predict a battery’s voltage behavior under pulsed loads, such
as that of WSNs. Thus, the prediction of the transient response of the supply voltage
of low-power sensors requires a suitable electrical model like the Min and Rincon-
Mora model [20]. Such representation can be useful for predicting the runtime of
autonomous sensors and estimating the useful lifetime of the battery.
Many of today’s WSNs rely on batteries as the primary power source. Batteries
are frequently cited as the primary limiting factor in the lifetime of WSNs. Due
to the limited number of recharge cycles and their inability to hold full charge for
long duration, batteries often require replacement after 1–2 years. Such recurring
maintenance cost is very expensive or prohibitive for thousands of deeply embedded
nodes, which may also be spread out in remote locations. In both cases, the battery
is the primary limiting factor to operating maintenance-free for several years at
nontrivial data rates [173]. In addition to their low-power density and tendency to
leak, explode, or fail abruptly, batteries are losing favor among researchers [150].
Removing the battery altogether and storing energy solely in a supercapacitor is now
an alternative option for achieving longer life operation.

7
RF Energy Harvesting Networks: Existing Techniques and Hardware Technology
207
Supercapacitors
Supercapacitors are not only an excellent compromise between “electronic” or
“dielectric” capacitors (such as ceramic and tantalum) and rechargeable batteries but
are also a valuable technology for providing a unique combination of characteristics,
particularly very high-energy, power, and capacitance densities. They have been
found to be a good choice of energy storage for several reasons. As shown in
the Ragone plot of Fig. 7.9, supercapacitors are placed between capacitors and
batteries, indicating that they have the advantage of power density higher than
batteries as well as energy density higher than ordinary capacitors [89]. They
do not undergo irreversible chemical reactions, thus tolerate many more charge
and discharge cycles [123]. They exhibit much longer lifetime than batteries with
minimal environmental impact, accept and deliver charge much faster, with less
complex charging circuitry [206].
Supercapacitors are governed by the same basic principles as conventional
capacitors. However, they incorporate electrodes with larger surface areas and much
thinner dielectrics between the electrodes [57], which lead to increase in both
capacitance C and energy E as seen in the following equations:
C D Q
V ;
(7.6)
where Q is the stored positive charge and V the applied voltage;
E D 0  r  A  D;
(7.7)
where 0 is the dielectric constant (or permittivity) of free space, r the dielectric
constant of the insulating material between the electrodes, A the surface area of
each electrode, and D the distance between the electrodes.
A block diagram of supercapacitors is given in Fig. 7.12. Various schematics of
supercapacitors have been proposed through equivalent circuit models such as the
RC model, the parallel-branch model, the transmission-line model, the multibranch
model, and the multistage ladder model [118, 167].
Based upon current R&D trends, supercapacitors can be divided into three
general classes: electrochemical double-layer capacitors, pseudocapacitors, and
hybrid capacitors. A graphical taxonomy of the different classes and subclasses of
supercapacitors is presented in Fig. 7.13.
The main criteria for selecting a supercapacitor are the values of capacitance,
leakage current, and ESR. Since the amount of energy to be accumulated depends on
the capacitance value, the larger it is, the higher the amount of energy to be gained.
However, it has been found that supercapacitors with larger capacitance undergo
larger losses in stored energy due to leakage [212], which is the current required to
keep a capacitor charged at the rated voltage [124] for 72 h. Thus a supercapacitor
with large capacitance will not only take longer to charge but also discharge faster.
This implies that the number of operations that could be performed at a particular

208
F. Sangare and Z. Han
Current collector
Electrolyte Separator
Electrolyte, Active Layer
Current collector
Electrode
Electrode
Fig. 7.12 Schematic of an electrochemical double-layer capacitor
Supercapacitors
Electric Double-Layer
Capacitors
Pseudocapacitors
Activated 
Carbons
Metal Oxides
Carbon Aerogels
Carbon Nanotubes
Hybrid Capacitors
Conducting 
Polymers
Asymmetric 
Hybrids
Composite Hybrids
Battery-Type 
Hybrids
Fig. 7.13 Taxonomy of supercapacitors [57]
rate would be less than the number of operations that could be performed by a lower
capacitance value, at the same rate. This could lead to scenarios where the rate at
which a node performs operations has to be increased in order to be comparable to
a low capacitance storage device. On the other hand, a small capacitance would not
be adequate to store enough energy. Hence, it is wise to choose an appropriate value
based on the application’s requirements or on the rate of collected energy [18].
The major drawback of supercapacitors is their reported high leakage (also
referred to as self-discharge), which has been shown to increase exponentially
with terminal voltage (energy stored) [114], or to internal charge redistribution
[113]. Some researchers suggest that loss of charging efﬁciency due to internal
charge distribution can be partially offset if the supercapacitor undergoes more

7
RF Energy Harvesting Networks: Existing Techniques and Hardware Technology
209
than three cycles of a ﬁxed pattern of charging [16]. However, others suggest
that leakage is higher in supercapacitors that go through frequent charge cycles
[113]. Another disadvantage is their ESR that prevents from achieving power
densities closer to theoretical limits. Thus, determining how to lower the ESR of
supercapacitors is becoming an important area of research. Several methods for
reducing the ESR have already been developed, including polishing the surface
of the current collector, chemically bonding the electrode to the current collector,
and using colloidal thin-ﬁlm suspensions [57]. Finally, elevated temperatures have
a direct effect on supercapacitors ESR and consequently on their lifetime. While
measurements indicate that supercapacitor lifetime degrades by a factor of 2 with
a 10 ıC rise in temperature [90], it has also been shown that the temperature
of supercapacitor banks increases exponentially after being charged for a given
duration of time at constant current [24].
Hybrid Storage
In certain scenarios, it is not advisable to use batteries in energy harvesting applica-
tions because of their internal impedance. Similarly, drawbacks in supercapacitors
such as high leakage are not found in batteries. Thus, when an application requires
high power density as well as high-energy density, it is possible to employ a mixture
of both devices. Storage units comprising of a battery and a supercapacitor operating
in tandem are known as hybrid systems.
There are extensive works done with hybrid-storage units to prolong the runtime
and life extension of storage units under pulsed load [34, 61, 69, 177]. However, their
advantages have not been thoroughly assessed and tested in low-power WSNs which
operate with pulsed load currents in the order of tens of milliamperes. In [142],
a comprehensive theoretical analysis provides design guidelines for choosing a
supercapacitor in parallel with a battery. The analysis was supported by experiments
comparing the performance between two low-capacity batteries and their hybrid-
storage unit counterparts when using an electronic load as a pulsed current sink. It
was proven that the hybrid-storage units always achieved a higher runtime and the
sensor node runtime was extended by 16%.
Likewise, in [187], a hybrid system was further optimized by adding a DC–DC
converter coupled with a supercapacitor to extend the battery autonomy of ultralow
power WSNs with minimal operating voltage of 2.1 V or less. The basic idea was to
supply power to the sensor node from the supercapacitor with the DC–DC converter
disabled, and enabling it on demand for efﬁciently recharging the supercapacitor.
Several tests were conducted with two low ESR supercapacitors, yielding a battery
autonomy extension of at least 19%.

210
F. Sangare and Z. Han
7.3
Dedicated RF Energy Harvesting Applications
and Products
Dedicated RFEH systems, also referred to as “RF power-on-demand” or “antic-
ipated” power sources, consist of a power source or charger that intentionally
utilizes license-free ISM bands to transmit power, and a receiver that captures the
transmitted signals to convert to a DC voltage in order to operate. This can be
achieved either via directive RF power beamforming or via nondirective RF power
transmission. Therefore, the transmitter can consist of either a ﬁxed device or a
mobile device that periodically moves and transfers RF energy to network nodes
[210]. The transmitter also may or may not be oriented toward a receiver, i.e., with
LOS or not. Similarly, the receiving device may or may not be mobile. Applications
of RF power-on-demand systems include WSNs, WBANs in the healthcare industry,
and RFID tags. Additionally, RFEH can be used to provide charging capability
for a wide variety of low-power mobile devices such as electronic watches, MP3
players, wireless keyboard, and mouse, as most of them consume only microwatts
to milliwatts range of power.
WSNs are by far the most widely used applications of RF-powered energy
scavenging. A variety of wirelessly powered sensors have been reported or pro-
posed in the past decade for monitoring data such as temperature, conductivity,
vibration, humidity, luminosity, etc. Sensing in adverse conditions, such as in
toxic manufacturing, would beneﬁt from maintenance-free wireless sensors that
gather typically low-duty cycle data. Furthermore, there are a lot of practical
opportunities for low-cost residential and commercial building sensors with no need
of battery replacements for knowing environmental parameters such as occupancy,
humidity, temperature, light level, water level, air ﬂow in pipes, air quality, appliance
activity, etc. Examples of WSNs powered with anticipated RF sources can be
found in [4, 33, 44, 139, 141]. In [77, 134, 164], multi-hop RF-powered WSNs are
demonstrated through experiments.
In the healthcare industry, many existing implanted devices are powered induc-
tively, which requires proximity of the powering device to the patient and is often
uncomfortable. Recently, it has been shown that loosely coupled coils at farther
range can be effective for powering cardiac implants [152]. Some implanted devices
could beneﬁt from far-ﬁeld powering, e.g., during the night when the person is
conﬁned to the bedroom, which can increase the battery life and time between
surgical battery replacements. Thus, low-power medical devices can achieve real-
time work-on-demand power from anticipated RF sources, which further enables
a battery-free circuit with reduced size. Examples of body device implementations
can be found in [148, 174, 207].
Finally, another application that has caught intensive research investigation is
RFID, widely used for identiﬁcation, tracking, and inventory management [230].
As depicted in Fig. 7.14, these devices can be classiﬁed based upon the presence or
absence of radio transmitter or battery [32]:

7
RF Energy Harvesting Networks: Existing Techniques and Hardware Technology
211
Fig. 7.14 Classiﬁcation of
Radio Identiﬁcation (RFID)
systems [32]
Backscattered signal
Power for tag
Reader
Tag
PASSIVE
Power for tag and radio
Reader
Tag
SEMIPASSIVE
Power for radio
Backscattered signal
Reader
Tag + Radio
ACTIVE
Battery
Power for tag and radio
Power for tag
Battery
Transmitted signal
from tag
1. Passive tags: with no independent source of electrical power to drive the circuitry,
they have no radio transmitter of their own and rely instead on the received power
from a reader to be turned on as well as sending information through amplitude
modulation (AM). In exchange to their simplicity, small size, and low cost, their
read range is very short and limited, and their computational power is minimal.
2. Semi-passive tags: also known as battery-assisted passive tags, they incorporate
a battery to power their circuitry but still use backscattered communications [58]
for uplink communications, also via AM modulation. They are typically used in
automobile tolling applications. The trade-off is their increase in size, cost, and
maintenance requirements.
3. Active tags: conﬁgured as conventional bidirectional communication devices,
they include both an internal power source and a conventional transmitter tuned
to speciﬁc frequency channels via frequency-division multiplexing (FDM) in the
presence of other tags. They naturally suffer from the same trade-offs as their
semi-passive counterparts.
Recent developments in low-power circuit and energy harvesting technology
can extend the lifetime and operation range of conventional RFID tags. Instead of
relying on the readers to activate their circuits passively, RFID tags can harvest RF

212
F. Sangare and Z. Han
energy and perform communication actively [104]. Consequently, RFID technology
is evolving from simple passive tags to smart tags with newly introduced features
such as sensing, on-tag data processing, and intelligent power management [135].
Research progress has covered the designs of RFID tags with energy harvesting
in rectenna [62], rectiﬁer [73], RF-to-DC converter [161], charge pump [27], and
power harvester [19]. Despite the stellar advancement made in the RFID technology,
several issues such as reliability, security, speed of communications, and evolution
to a global standard still need to be addressed appropriately.
In the rest of the section, we present the major considerations to take when
designing a dedicated RFEH system, describe some prototype implementations as
well as commercial products, and ﬁnally expand with potential future applications.
7.3.1
Design Considerations
Depending on the electromagnetic transmission model, the energy source and
receivers must be designed and possibly adapted for maximum efﬁciency. This
includes selecting and assessing the frequency range to transmit, the adequate
antenna type, the power limitations and management, and the storage technologies.
7.3.1.1
RF Energy Source Design Constraints
Most anticipated RF power sources transmit in one of the common ISM bands
(center frequencies of 433 MHz, 915 MHz, 2.4 GHz, or 5.8 GHz). These bands
however do not allow for high power transmissions as they are limited by gov-
ernment regulatory bodies such as the FCC [46] in the USA due to concerns over
interference, safety, and health. For example, in the 915 MHz band, the maximum
threshold is 4 W. Even at the highest setting, the received power at a moderate
distance of 20 m is attenuated down to only 10 W [208]. Due to this limitation,
several dedicated RF sources may need to be deployed to meet the user demand.
Proper selection of the antenna is crucial. Several parameters must be taken
into account such as radiation pattern, gain, power rating, size, distance between
transmitting antenna and receiving antenna, etc. Radiation pattern depends on the
type of antenna selected. Most antennas show a pattern of “lobes” or maxima of
radiation. In a directive antenna, shown in Fig. 7.15, the largest lobe in the desired
direction of propagation is called main lobe. The other lobes are called side lobes
and usually represent radiation in unwanted directions. On the other hand, in the
radiation pattern of a simple omnidirectional antenna, the antenna is at the center of
the “donut” or torus. Radial distance from the center represents the power radiated
in that direction. Common types of low-gain omnidirectional antennas are the whip
antenna, vertically oriented dipole antenna, horizontal loop antenna, and the halo
antenna.

7
RF Energy Harvesting Networks: Existing Techniques and Hardware Technology
213
Fig. 7.15 Antenna radiation
patterns [196]
The antenna gain is not a mere ampliﬁcation of the RF signal, but rather a
measure of the focus of the signal (degree of directivity of the antenna’s radiation
pattern). Hence, a high-gain antenna will radiate most of its power in a particular
direction, while a low-gain antenna will radiate over a wider angle.
7.3.1.2
RF Energy Harvester Design
The antenna selection of the energy harvester should be identical to the one used
by the RF source. Because antenna efﬁciency is related to the frequency, dedicated
RF energy harvester usually has an antenna with small bandwidth, in contrast with
ambient RFEH where a wideband receiver antenna can be used to capture signals
from multiple sources or multiple frequency bands.
Good matching circuits are essential to achieve maximum power and improve
efﬁciency. For ﬁnancial reasons, RFID tags and WSNs use shunt inductors and
LC networks as matching networks instead of transformers [140]. Moreover, it is
recommended for high impedance antennas like dipole antennas to use parallel coils
[143], whereas small impedance antennas may employ LC networks for ambient
RFEH (e.g., Wi-Fi antenna), or when the available power is low [93].
Choice of rectiﬁcation circuits depends on the strength of the RF signal and
power received, since different values of DC voltage could be obtained with the
same circuit and different RF sources. When the distance from the RF source is far
and the received power is not high enough, the rectiﬁer input needs to be ampliﬁed
in order to power the circuit (most WSNs and RFID tags require at least 3.3 V).

214
F. Sangare and Z. Han
The power management design is rendered easier to accomplish for a dedicated
energy transmitter, thanks to a predictable and stable power transmission. Similarly,
more energy is expected to be stored within a shorter period of time than in ambient
RFEH, thus requiring sufﬁcient storage capability.
7.3.2
Commercial Products
Besides the well-known RFID systems, there exist few commercial products for
RF wireless power transfer aimed for WSNs and WBANs. In this subsection, we
introduce some manufacturers and their products.
7.3.2.1
Powercast Corp.
Built in 2003, Powercast Corp. [149] brings remote, wireless power capability to
micro-power devices such as wireless sensors, data loggers, and active RFID tags.
The company’s energy scavenging technology provides wireless power by convert-
ing electromagnetic signals into a DC power, thus reducing or eliminating battery
replacement by trickle charging rechargeable batteries, or using supercapacitors
and thin-ﬁlm energy cells. Their products address existing and future markets by
providing a full suite of FCC approved products:
•
Powerharvesters receivers: chips that harvest directive or ambient RF energy and
convert to DC power. These chips include the P1110 Powerharvester Receiver
(short-range, higher power), the P2110B Powerharvester Receiver (long range),
and the PCC110 or PCC210 chipsets (for OEM volume applications).
•
Powercaster transmitter TX91501: provides a reliable source of 915 MHz wire-
less energy to power, over a distance, devices equipped with Powerharvester
receivers. It comes in two versions that output either 1 or 3 W equivalent
isotropically radiated power (EIRP) with a transmitter ID broadcast.
In addition, the company supplies development kits and evaluation boards to
enable simple and fast testing and prototyping with RF-based wireless power tech-
nology. Figure 7.16 shows the P2110-EVAL-01 lifetime power energy harvesting
development kit for wireless sensors.
7.3.2.2
Texas Instruments
A more renowned company, Texas Instruments [189], introduced in December 2014
its new family of sensor transducers designated RF430FRL15XH. The devices are
the ﬁrst sensor transducers designed to operate over the traditional 13.56 MHz radio
spectrum and powered by scavenging energy from a nearby NFC-enabled reader
or smartphone. It is advertised to be implemented in applications ranging from

7
RF Energy Harvesting Networks: Existing Techniques and Hardware Technology
215
TX91501-3W-ID
P2110-EVB
Receiving Antennas
WSN-EVAL-01
915MHz PowercasterTM Transmitter
PICkitTM 3
Programmer
Dipole and Patch
Wireless Sensor Board
P2110 Evaluation Board
PICtailTM Daughter Card
(2.4GHz / 802.15.4)
XLP 16-bit
Development Board
Fig. 7.16 Lifetime power energy harvesting development kit for wireless sensors [149]
Fig. 7.17 Battery-less
NFC/RFID temperature
sensing patch
medical, health and ﬁtness, and industrial where instantaneous measurements are
required and a battery is not feasible or desired. Connections to power via other
options such as battery or USB are also offered as an alternative. An evaluation
board, RF430FRL152HEVM, is available for purchase to evaluate the key features
of the device and some sensor measurements. Application report SLOA212A demon-
strates the implementation of a single chip NFC/RFID ﬁeld powered temperature
sensor system with the RF430FRL152H, illustrated in Fig. 7.17.

216
F. Sangare and Z. Han
7.3.2.3
Energous Corp.
Silicon Valley startup Energous Corp. [38] is developing a new technology called
WattUp. Its transmitters deliver energy to devices via microwave beams: small
antennas embedded in speakers, televisions, and dedicated router-size boxes that
can direct wireless power to toys, lights, and mobile phones over several meters
distance. WattUp’s sophisticated localization and beamforming technology allows
multiple RF antennas to emit low-power, 5.8 GHz beams along different paths that
converge in a “pocket” around the targeted device to reach the receiving antenna,
even not in direct LOS. Energous claims that a WattUp transmitter is capable of
delivering microwaves up to four devices simultaneously. The amount of power the
beams deliver is dependent on distance: 4 W within 1.5 m, 2 W within 3 m, and 1 W
within 4.6 m. The company says that its eventual goal is 25% end-to-end efﬁciency
of the system for integration into near-market consumer devices.
7.3.2.4
Ossia Inc.
Energous has a competitor in Ossia Inc., based in Washington, which is also
developing an RF power delivery system named Cota. The Cota system uses a
Wi-Fi-like signal designed to charge many devices simultaneously, stationary or
moving, using their patented smart antenna technique. The company asserts that at
an effective radius of 10 m, a single Cota charging station can feed rechargeable
battery-operated devices in every room of an average home or ofﬁce suite. Under
license from Ossia, consumer electronics manufacturers will be able to include Cota
receivers in new products and have the opportunity to build their own branded
transmitters.
7.3.2.5
Farsens S.L.
Farsens S.L. [45] is a Spanish company based in San Sebastian that has developed a
wide range of wireless and battery-free RFID sensor tags. Its UHF RFID ICs harvest
energy from the RF ﬁeld created by commercial RFID readers and use that power to
drive sensors, actuators, or other electronics effectively creating battery-free devices
from a distance as far as 1.5 m. It also offers development platforms to create one’s
own wireless and battery-free sensors.
7.3.2.6
Texzon Technologies, LLC.
On a much larger scale, Texzon Technologies LLC. [191] in Texas introduced a
novel wireless power transmission system concept at the 2016 IEEE symposium
for Wireless and Microwave circuits, which is capable of transferring megawatts of
power. They intend to revolutionize the current electrical power distribution systems

7
RF Energy Harvesting Networks: Existing Techniques and Hardware Technology
217
by switching to a global wireless scheme utilizing a Zenneck surface wave [144]
between optimally sited power generation facilities and local distribution grids and
microgrids. This wireless power system will employ a “transmitter probe” located
near a power generation plant, to launch a Zenneck carrier wave. Receiver antennas
will be positioned appropriately around the world to receive the signal and download
the power into a local microgrid or conventional grid architecture. The company
claims that the consequential RF exposure levels are more than ten times lower than
the FCC, OSHA [193] and ANSI [192] recommended limits.
7.3.3
Future Directions
7.3.3.1
RF Energy Harvesting and Aerial Vehicles
Since the demonstration by W.C. Brown and Raytheon company of a model
helicopter powered via microwaves in the early 1960s [15], various similar research
in microwave-powered airplanes took off. Strassner and Chang summarize in [180]
the historical milestones achieved in the USA as well as internationally. The present
day desire to remotely power unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) or drones [36]
continues to serve as the main driving force behind current advancements being
made in RFEH, particularly in rectenna array components [43]. The use of UAVs
for communication and surveillance is seen as a huge potential, especially in the
military. Future uses for RFEH include powering probes from space stations into
deep space, and robots to enter perilous environments like nuclear contaminated
areas.
7.3.3.2
Simultaneous Wireless Information and Power Transfer
This book chapter focuses on energy transmission via electromagnetic waves. Even
so, the prime application of RF signals is for wireless communications. Hence, since
RF signals carry energy as well as information, theoretically energy harvesting and
information transfer can also be performed from the same signal input. This is
referred to as the simultaneous wireless information and power transfer (SWIPT)
[228] concept. It allows the information receiver and energy harvester to share the
same antenna or antenna array. Figure 7.18 displays the corresponding receiver
architecture for SWIPT. Wireless information is modulated on the amplitude and
phase of RF waves, while WET is carried out through far-ﬁeld radiation.
The traditional information receiver architecture designed for information recep-
tion may not be optimal for SWIPT because information reception and RFEH work
on very different power sensitivities (e.g., 10 dBm for energy harvesters versus
50 dBm for information receivers) [224]. This inspired the research efforts in
devising receivers for RF power/information receivers. Currently, there are four
typical types of receiver architectures [208]:

218
F. Sangare and Z. Han
Energy Harvester
a
b
c
d
Antennas
Antenna
Antenna
Antenna
Time Switcher
Power Splitter
Diode
Low-pass
filter
Battery
RF Flow
Controller
Decoder
Analog-to-digital
Converter
Information Receiver
Integrated Receiver Architecture
Information Receiver
Information Receiver
Information Receiver
Energy Harvester
Energy Harvester
Energy Harvester
Fig. 7.18 Receiver architecture designs for RF-powered information receiver [208]: (a) Separated
receiver architecture; (b) time-switching architecture; (c) power-splitting architecture; and (d)
integrated receiver architecture
•
Separated receiver architecture, also known as antenna-switching: equips an
energy harvester and information receiver with independent antenna(s) so that
they observe different channels.

7
RF Energy Harvesting Networks: Existing Techniques and Hardware Technology
219
•
co-located receiver architecture: categorized into time-switching and power-
splitting models, it allows a power harvester and an information receiver to share
the same antenna(s) so that they observe the same channel(s).
•
Integrated receiver architecture: implementation of RF-to-baseband conversion
for information decoding is integrated with the RFEH via the rectiﬁer circuit.
•
Ideal receiver architecture: assumes that the receiver is able to extract the RF
energy from the same signals used for information decoding.
The studies in [228] show that when the circuit power consumption is relatively
small compared to the received signal power, the integrated receiver architecture
outperforms the co-located receiver architecture at high harvested energy region,
whereas the co-located receiver architecture is superior at low harvested energy
region. However, when the circuit power consumption is high, the integrated
receiver architecture performs better. They also mentioned that for a system without
minimum harvested energy requirement, the integrated receiver achieves higher
information rate than that of the separated receiver at short transmission distances.
The above study and other related publications [21, 125] assume a linear energy
harvesting model where the RF to DC conversion efﬁciency does not depend
on the input power level. In practice however, there is a nonlinear relationship
between input and output as described in [54, 94, 198]. In [14], a practical nonlinear
model and corresponding resource allocation algorithm was proposed for SWIPT
networks, unveiling a greater performance gain over traditional linear models.
A key concern for both wireless information and energy transfer is the decay in
efﬁciency with the increase of transmission distance due to propagation path loss.
Such problem is especially severe in a single-antenna transmitter that generates
omnidirectional radiations. This low energy transfer efﬁciency calls for advanced
multi-antenna and signal processing techniques such as beamforming [31, 91, 107].
7.3.3.3
Beamforming
Point-to-point transmission of RF waves is referred to as power beamforming [224];
its sharpness improves with the number of transmit antennas. In RFEH networks,
beamforming designs have been explored to steer the RF signals toward the
target receivers with different information and/or energy harvesting requirements.
Figure 7.19 shows the SWIPT beamforming general model.
The knowledge of channel state information (CSI) plays an important role in
beamforming performance optimization. To accurately estimate a channel state, a
signiﬁcant overhead (e.g., time) can be incurred at a receiver. Normally, the longer
the time for channel state estimation, the more accurate CSI becomes. However,
it may result in reduced time for transmission, and also less amount of collected
energy. As a result, an optimization of RF energy transfer or SWIPT entails a trade-
off between data transmission and channel state estimation duration [208].
Distributed Energy Beamforming enables a cluster of distributed energy sources
to cooperatively emulate an antenna array by transmitting RF energy simultaneously
in the same direction to an intended harvester for better diversity gains. The potential

220
F. Sangare and Z. Han
Fig. 7.19 A general model
for simultaneous wireless
information and power
transfer (SWIPT)
beamforming system [208]
energy gains are expected to be the same as from information beamforming.
However, challenges arise in the implementation, e.g., time synchronization among
energy sources and coordination of distributed carriers in phase and frequency so
that signals can be combined constructively at the receiver side [208].
7.4
Ambient RF Energy Harvesting Applications
and Products
The obvious appeal of harvesting ambient RF energy over dedicated power trans-
mission is the utilization of “free” energy generated by radio transmitters such as
radio (AM and FM) towers, TV towers, cellular phone towers, and Wi-Fi routers.
Similar to dedicated RFEH applications, in ambient RFEH, the most popular
research attention is found on WSNs [100, 147] and WBAN [13, 70]. Other than the
above popular applications, devices powered by ambient RF energy is also attracting
increasing research attention. For example, in [68], the authors present a design of
an RF circuit that enables continuous charging of mobile devices especially in urban
areas where the density of ambient RF sources is high. Liu et al. [102] demonstrate
that an information rate of 1 kbps can be achieved between two prototype devices
powered by ambient RF signals, at the distance of up to 75 and 45 cm for outdoors
and indoors, respectively.
Additionally, RFEH can be used to provide charging capability for a wide
variety of low-power mobile electronic devices as most of them consume only
microwatts to milliwatts range of power. Existing literature has also presented many
implementations of battery-free devices powered by ambient energy such as mobile
electronic devices, electronic watches, MP3 players, wireless keyboard, and mouse
from Wi-Fi [136, 186], GSM [53, 146] and Digital Television (DTV) bands [79, 81].
Furthermore, in [105], a novel approach to embed systems in clothes is presented.

7
RF Energy Harvesting Networks: Existing Techniques and Hardware Technology
221
In the following subsections, we explore the constraints and requirements for
the development of an ambient RFEH system, the current research orientations and
ﬁnally conclude with some novel applications.
7.4.1
Design Considerations
As ambient RF levels are lower than those provided by an anticipated source,
the availability of the RF power, the efﬁciency of the harvesting system, and its
minimum startup power are of critical importance. In order to assess the feasibility
of deploying ambient harvesters, the available RF power needs to be evaluated in
different locations. Such measurements, in conjunction with knowledge on harvester
performance, can then be used to determine the locations at which RF harvester
powered devices can be successfully deployed.
7.4.1.1
Power Density Measurements
The surface power density (or speciﬁc power) is the amount of power per unit
area, usually expressed in W=m2. The input RF power density measured by a
spectrum analyzer is calculated summing all the spectral peaks across the band.
These levels provide a snapshot of source availability at the time and location of
the measurement [146]. Several RF spectral surveys, which measure ambient RF
power levels from sources such as television and mobile phone base stations, were
undertaken with spectrum analyzers in unknown measurement locations and with
no regard of the conditions that might affect the evaluation (e.g., outdoor, indoor,
street, bus, etc.) [59, 201]. In order to demonstrate the feasibility for implementing
ambient RFEH, a rigorous spectral survey must be taken ﬁrst, indicating the exact
time/location, and the associated RF bands with sufﬁcient input power density levels
for harvesting. Also, appropriate equipment to measure the electric ﬁeld strength
should be selected, such as an RF analyzer and a calibrated antenna.
The Effective Radiated Power (ERP) is the transmitter power delivered to the
antenna multiplied by the directivity or gain of the antenna [46]. Since high-
gain antennas direct most of the energy toward the horizon and not toward the
ground, high ERP transmission systems such as used for UHF-TV broadcast tend
to have less ground level ﬁeld intensity near the station than FM radio broadcast
systems with lower ERP and gain values. In urban areas, available RF energy in
areas close to transmission towers provides an opportunity to harvest that energy.
Some of the most prominent sources are AM radio transmission (540–1700 kHz,
maximum ERP of 50 KW), FM radio transmission (88–108 MHz, maximum ERP
of 100 KW), TV transmission (180–220 MHz, ERP from 3 KW for low-power VHF
to 1000 KW for full-power UHF), cellular and Personal Communications Services
(PCS) transmission (824–896 and 1850–1990 MHz, up to 500 W per channel), Wi-
Fi (2.45 or 5.8 GHz, transmit power around 100 mW), and mobile phones (transmit

222
F. Sangare and Z. Han
Table 7.4 RF power density
Band name
Frequency
Distance to base station Power density
Applications
AM station
540 MHz
from 5 to 10 km
from 0:159 to
0:04 mW=m2
Radio [229]
GSM-900
950 MHz
from 25 to 100 m
from 1:0 to
0:1 mW=m2
Phone [201]
GSM-1800
1747.5 MHz from 25 to 100 m
from 1:0 to
0:1 mW=m2
Phone [201]
UMTS-2100 2110 MHz
from 11.8 to 150 m
from 2 to
0:2 mW=m2
Phone (3G) [185]
WLAN
2.4 GHz
7 and 12 m
1 and 0:1 W=m2,
respectively
WLAN [201]
power of 1–2 W). Cellular towers can be used as a continuous source of renewable
energy as they transmit 24 h. Table 7.4 summarizes some examples of power density
measurements in an urban environment.
7.4.1.2
Antenna and Circuit Design
Once the RF power density levels for harvesting are known, antennas can now be
fabricated. As discussed in Sect. 7.2.3, rectennas are the most common designs
mentioned in the existing literature. A well-designed rectenna should ideally be
capable of harvesting energy across an entire band, and thus it is important to
calculate the total band power. Furthermore, the antenna needs to match the
impedance of the rectifying device over a range of input power levels to optimize
efﬁciency. Other requirements for the antenna include the fact that they must be
omnidirectional and dual-linear polarized since the exact location of the transmitter
is assumed to be unknown and the propagation environment includes scattering.
In addition, proper power management technique must be selected (e.g., harvest–
store–use or harvest–use). In the case of harvest–store–use, the DC output of
the converted signals should not be directly connected to the storage device to
avoid discharging under some conditions [147]. Monitoring of the available stored
energy, the received DC power, the power management circuit control, the sensor
data collection, and duty cycle, etc., are necessary functions that need to be
accomplished at the lowest possible potency. There are a number of very low-power
microcontrollers on the market, and some of their parameters like clock speeds can
be adjusted to reduce the power in different modes of operation.
Finally, energy storage could use supercapacitors or various types of rechargeable
batteries. If there is not enough energy captured, sensor data cannot be transmitted
and there is a danger of damaging the storage device. Therefore, the available
rectiﬁed RF power and the available energy stored should be monitored in a closed-
loop system allowing for adaptive adjustment of the data transmission duty cycle.

7
RF Energy Harvesting Networks: Existing Techniques and Hardware Technology
223
7.4.1.3
Multiband RF Energy Harvesting and Hybrid Systems
Most early research on RF energy scavenger designs focus on a single frequency
band [8, 50]. Lately, there have been design implementations of dual-band [131],
triple-band [72], and multiband antenna designs [146]. Due to relatively low-power
density and availability of ambient RF sources, it is highly advisable for a harvester
to capture signals over a large number of frequency bands to ensure continuous and
steady voltage for sensors operation.
A multiband harvester may have one antenna and circuit to harvest each
frequency band separately, then store the overall DC power in a single device.
However, this conﬁguration needs many antennas, thus increasing the overall costs,
weight, and size of the harvesting system. To overcome this problem, a possible
solution is to use only one ultrawide band or multiband antenna. In this case,
adequate matching networks must be constructed to overcome the nonlinearity of
the diodes with respect to both frequency and RF power input. An alternative
was presented in [141], where rectifying circuits tuned at different frequencies
were connected in series, allowing better rectiﬁcation and DC-combining efﬁciency.
Unfortunately, this architecture would not identify the optimum load in terms of
harvested DC power since the input of each rectiﬁer circuit changed with the
frequency of the signal.
One of the ﬁrst commercial applications of multiband ambient RFEH was
pioneered with Freevolt, a trademark of Drayson Technologies Ltd [35]. It is
branded as a new innovative technology that provides power for low energy Internet
of Things (IoT) devices by scavenging power from wireless and broadcast networks
such as 2G, 3G, 4G, Wi-Fi, and DTV. The approach was implemented in the
CleanSpace Tag, a personal air quality pollution sensor. It claims no interference
with the data connectivity and does not require any increase in transmission power.
The use of ambient RFEH for WSNs depends on the application, the distance
to the base station, the frequency, the distance between nodes, etc. Table 7.5
depicts the commercial requirements of existing sensor network nodes. The results
deduced from Tables 7.2 and 7.5 indicate that energy solely harvested from the
ambiance is typically insufﬁcient as a primary power source of WSNs. Hence, it
may be combined with other energy harvesting sources. As an example, for outdoor
applications, when the base station is far from the nodes, RFEH can be combined
with photovoltaic [98], or even piezoelectric [76] sources. In a similar way, for
human body sensors, it can be associated with other sources such as thermal or
vibration [140]. These types of dual harvesting systems are called “hybrid energy
harvesting systems.”
7.4.2
Hardware Implementation and Future Directions
Harvesting energy from the ambient environment is a promising ﬁeld that opens
the door to many different applications, the bulk of which relates to sensing nodes.

224
F. Sangare and Z. Han
Table 7.5 Comparison of power consumption of some selected sensor network nodes [229]
Operating
conditions
Crossbow MICAz
Waspmote
Intel IMote2
Jennic JN5139
Radio standard
IEEE 802.15.4 Zig-
Bee
IEEE
802.15.4/ZigBee
IEEE
802.15.4
IEEE
802.15.4/ZigBee
Typical range
100 m outdoor, 30 m
indoor
500 m
30 m
1000 m
Data rate
250 kbps
250 kpps
250 kbps
250 kbps
Sleep mode
15 A
62 A
390 A
2.8 A
Processor
consumption
8 mA active mode
9 mA
31–53 mA
2.7
C
0.325 mA/MHz
Transmission
17.4 mA (C0 dBm)
50.26 mA
44 mA
34 mA (+3 dBm)
Reception
19.7 mA
49.56 mA
44 mA
34 mA
Supply
voltage
(min)
2.7 V
3.3 V
3.2 V
2.7 V
Average power
2.8 mW
1 mW
12 mW
3 mW
While several concepts of energy harvesting through RF signals have been proposed
mainly in the academia, a commercial product that works solely on energy harvested
from thin air has yet to be offered. In the following paragraphs, we survey the latest
achievements in ambient RFEH and future directions.
7.4.2.1
Harvesting from Cell Towers
There are 4 GSM frequency bands operating in the world, with 850 and 1900 MHz
in America, and 900 and 1800 MHz in the rest of the world [65]. The aggregated
power density over some GSM frequency bands is shown in Table 7.4. Most
publications focus on the proof of concept rather than on a viable option for
energy replenishment. Some examples of DC power scavenged from cellular towers
radiations are in [8, 53, 76]. However, it remains that energy scavenging from
cellular towers still suffers from very low efﬁciency and long duty cycle.
7.4.2.2
Digital Television Band Energy Harvesting
Cellular base transceiver stations and TV broadcast represent the most promising
ambient RF sources due to their high transmit power (e.g., TV) and ubiquity in
urban environments. Collecting energy from DTV signals was ﬁrst investigated by
Intel [157] in 2009, where 60 W of power was harvested at a distance of 4 km from
a broadcasting TV station. Other practical examples of DTV band energy harvesting
can be found in [78, 84, 132, 168, 202].

7
RF Energy Harvesting Networks: Existing Techniques and Hardware Technology
225
7.4.2.3
Wi-Fi Energy Harvesting
With the ubiquity of Wi-Fi signals in urban environments and the fact that it
operates mainly in the crowded 2.45 GHz band (same with RFID, cordless phones,
Bluetooth, ZigBee, etc.), harvesting energy from Wi-Fi has become a hot topic.
Wi-Fi transmission operates in “bursts,” i.e., a router emits power only when it is
sending data packets to a host, with a typical power of 100 mW at short range.
Thus, while a harvester can capture power during transmission, the power leaks
during silent periods, limiting the minimum voltage requirement needed to turn on a
sensor. Many prototype implementation of devices operating on Wi-Fi energy were
demonstrated in the academia [72, 136, 186] but are yet to match the efﬁciency
and effectiveness of a dedicated source. Nevertheless, the research and development
divisions of companies like Samsung, Intel, Qualcomm, and Texas Instruments are
currently hard at work trying to make harvesting from ambient Wi-Fi signals a
reality.
7.4.2.4
Cognitive Radio
A CRN powered with RF energy can provide a spectrum and energy-efﬁcient
solution for wireless networking [106]. The idea of utilizing electromagnetic signals
from primary transmitters to power secondary devices was initially proposed in
[97]. In an RF-powered CRN, the scavenging capability allows secondary users
to gain and store energy from nearby transmissions (of primary users). Then, the
secondary users can transmit data when far away from primary users or when nearby
primary users are idle. Thus, they must not only identify spectrum availabilities for
opportunistic data transmission but also explore for occupied spectrum channels to
harvest energy [208].
Figure 7.20 shows a general network architecture for RF-powered CRNs. There
are three zones associated with the primary user: energy harvesting, transmission,
and inference zones. In the harvesting zone, a secondary user can receive RF
energy from a primary user on transmission. The transmission zone refers to the
communication coverage of the primary user; if the secondary user is still in the
harvesting zone, he can scavenge power from the primary user. If the latter occupies
the channels, then the secondary user cannot transmit data if he is in the interference
zone.
Cognitive radio consists of four main functions to support intelligent and efﬁcient
dynamic spectrum access:
1. Spectrum sensing: to detect the activities of primary users accurately
2. Spectrum access: to access spectrum while protecting primary users from
collision and to provide fair and efﬁcient sharing of available spectrum
3. Spectrum management: to achieve high spectrum utilization for both communi-
cation and RFEH by performing channel selection
4. Spectrum handoff: to switch a secondary user from one channel to another

226
F. Sangare and Z. Han
Fig. 7.20 A general network architecture of RF-powered cognitive radio networks (CRNs)[208]
Detailed research issues in the RF-powered CRN related to these four functions
can be found in survey paper [208].
7.5
Summary
Energy harvesting from radiative wireless charging is a promising ﬁeld that opens
the door to many different applications, the bulk of which relates to sensing
nodes. It enables wire-free operation, simple scalability, low-cost setup and main-
tenance, reliable, controllable, and environmentally friendly solution for networks
placement. The energy can be scavenged either from dedicated or from ambient
transmitters. Dedicated sources can be deployed where a stable and predictable
amount of power to meet user’s demand is expected, while ambient sources are
transmitters not primarily intended for this purpose, thus granting freely available
signals in the environment. Harvesting energy from the latter is very challenging,
given the amount of energy density available (0.04–2 mW=m2), whatever the
transmitter type may be.
This chapter surveyed the general architecture of a harvester from both antici-
pated and ambient RF origins, in order to meet the future demand for self-powered
devices. All the subsystems of the harvester were discussed: antenna design, match-
ing circuit, rectiﬁer, power management, and energy storage. In addition, potential
RF signals scavenging applications and techniques beyond wireless sensor nodes
power were explored, such as long-distance electrical power distribution, SWIPT,
beamforming, and cognitive radio. While several concepts of energy harvesting
through RF signals have been proposed mainly in the academia, it remains that very

7
RF Energy Harvesting Networks: Existing Techniques and Hardware Technology
227
few products are commercially available in the market. With the ubiquitousness of
the IoT, Wi-Fi signals, which work in the 2.4 GHz/5 GHz band, are gaining lots of
research interests. Currently, the research and development divisions of companies
like Samsung, Intel, Qualcomm, and Texas Instruments are hard at work trying to
make harvesting from Wi-Fi signal and other ambient sources a reality. The ﬁrst to
market with a viable solution will create huge amounts of goodwill.
References
1. S. Agrawal, S. Pandey, J. Singh, P.N. Kondekar, An efﬁcient RF energy harvester with tuned
matching circuit, in VLSI Design and Test (Springer, Berlin, 2013), pp. 138–145
2. A. Alaeldine, M. Latrach, H. Raggad, Z. Sayegh, Design and optimization of a
GSM printed dipole antenna for energy harvesting applications, in 2011 IEEE Inter-
national Symposium on Antennas and Propagation (APSURSI) (2011), pp. 1780–1783.
doi:10.1109/APS.2011.5996840
3. S.B. Alam, M.S. Ullah, S. Moury, Design of a low power 2.45 GHz RF energy harvesting
circuit for rectenna, in Proceedings of the IEEE ICIEV, Dhaka, Bangladesh (2013), pp. 1-4
4. A. Al-Khayari, H. Al-Khayari, S. Al-Nabhani, M.M. Bait-Suwailam, Z. Nadir, Design of an
enhanced RF energy harvesting system for wireless sensors, in 2013 7th IEEE GCC Confer-
ence and Exhibition (GCC) (2013), pp. 479–482. doi:10.1109/IEEEGCC.2013.6705826
5. F.A. Aoudia, M. Gautier, O. Berder, Fuzzy power management for energy harvesting wireless
sensor nodes, in IEEE International Conference on Communications (ICC16) (2016), pp. 1–6.
doi:10.1109/ICC.2016.7510767
6. H. Arai, M. Chomora, M. Yoshida, A voltage-boosting antenna for RF energy harvesting, in
IEEE Antenna Technology (iWAT), 2012 IEEE International Workshop (2012), pp. 169–172.
doi:10.1109/IWAT.2012.6178638
7. M. Arrawatia, M.S. Baghini, G. Kumar, RF energy harvesting system at 2.67 and 5.8 GHz, in
2010 Asia-Paciﬁc Microwave Conference (2010), pp. 900–903
8. M. Arrawatia, M.S. Baghini, G. Kumar, RF energy harvesting system from cell towers in
900MHz band, in 2011 IEEE National Conference in Communications (NCC) (2011), pp. 1–
5. doi:10.1109/NCC.2011.5734733
9. M. Arsalan, M.H. Ouda, L. Marnat, T.J. Ahmad, A. Shamim, K.N. Salama, A 5.2 GHz,
0.5 mW RF powered wireless sensor with dual on-chip antennas for implantable intraocular
pressure monitoring, in 2013 IEEE Microwave MTT-S International Microwave Symposium
Digest (IMS) (2013), pp. 1–4. doi:10.1109/MWSYM.2013.6697639
10. Avago Technologies, http://www.avagotech.com/. Cited 30 Dec 2016
11. N.P. Basta, E.A. Falkenstein, Z. Popovic, Bow-tie rectenna arrays, in 2015 IEEE Wireless
Power Transfer Conference (WPTC) (2015), pp. 1–4. doi:10.1109/WPT.2015.7140158
12. A. Bogliolo, V. Freschi, E. Lattanzi, A.L. Murphy, U. Raza, Towards a true energetically
sustainable WSN: a case study with prediction-based data collection and a wake-up receiver,
in Proceedings of the 9th IEEE International Symposium on Industrial Embedded Systems
(SIES) (2014), pp. 21–28. doi:10.1109/SIES.2014.6871181
13. L.M. Borges, N. Barroca, H.M. Saraiva, J. Tavares, P.T. Gouveia, F.J. Velez, C. Loss, R.
Salvado, P. Pinho, R. Gonçalves, N.B. Carvalho, Design and evaluation of multi-band RF
energy harvesting circuits and antennas for WSNs, in 2014 21st International Conference on
Telecommunications (ICT) (2014), pp. 308–312. doi:10.1109/ICT.2014.6845129
14. E. Boshkovska, D.W. Ng, N. Zlatanov, R. Schober, Practical non-linear energy harvesting
model and resource allocation for SWIPT systems. IEEE Commun. Lett. 19(12), 2082–2085
(2015). doi:10.1109/LCOMM.2015.2478460

228
F. Sangare and Z. Han
15. W.C. Brown, R.H. George, N.I. Heenan, R.C. Wonson, Microwave to dc converter. US Patent
3,434,678, https://www.google.com/patents/US3434678.GooglePatents (1969). Cited 30 Dec
2016
16. D. Brunelli, C. Moser, L. Thiele, L. Benini, Design of a solar-harvesting circuit for batteryless
embedded systems. IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. Regul. Pap. 56(11), 2519–2528 (2009).
doi:10.1109/TCSI.2009.2015690
17. I. Buchman, Batteries in a Portable World: A Handbook on Rechargeable Batteries for Non-
engineers, 3rd edn. (Cadex Electronics Inc., Richmond, 2011)
18. R. Chai, Y. Zhang, A practical supercapacitor model for power management in
wireless
sensor
nodes.
IEEE
Trans.
Power
Electron.
30(12),
6720–6730
(2015).
doi:10.1109/TPEL.2014.2387113
19. A. Chasin, V. Volskiy, M. Libois, M. Ameys, M. Nag, M. Rockele, K. Myny, S. Steudel,
S. Schols, G.A. Vandenbosch, W. de Raedt, Integrated UHF a-IGZO energy harvester for
passive RFID tags, in 2013 IEEE International Electron Devices Meeting (2013), pp. 11–3.
doi:10.1109/IEDM.2013.6724608
20. M. Chen, G.A. Rincon-Mora, Accurate electrical battery model capable of predicting
runtime and IV performance. IEEE Trans. Energy Convers. 21(2), 504–511 (2006).
doi:10.1109/TEC.2006.874229
21. X. Chen, X. Wang, X. Chen, Energy-efﬁcient optimization for wireless information and
power transfer in large-scale MIMO systems employing energy beamforming, IEEE Wireless
Commun. Lett. 2(6), 667–670 (2013). doi:10.1109/WCL.2013.092813.130514
22. J.F. Christmann, E. Beigné, C. Condemine, J. Willemin, C. Piguet, Energy harvesting and
power management for autonomous sensor nodes, in Design Automation Conference (DAC)
(2012), pp. 1049–1054. doi:10.1145/2228360.2228550
23. F. Congedo, G. Monti, L. Tarricone, M. Cannarile, Broadband bowtie antenna for RF energy
scavenging applications, in Proceedings of the 5th European Conference on Antennas and
Propagation (EUCAP) (2011), pp. 335–337
24. A.B. Cultura, Z.M. Salameh, Performance evaluation of a supercapacitor module for energy
storage applications, in Power and Energy Society General Meeting-Conversion and Delivery
of Electrical Energy in the 21st Century (2008), pp. 1–7. doi:10.1109/PES.2008.4596322
25. J. Dai, D.C. Ludois, A survey of wireless power transfer and a critical comparison of inductive
and capacitive coupling for small gap applications. IEEE Trans. Power Electron. 30(11),
6017–6029 (2015). doi:10.1109/TPEL.2015.2415253
26. J. Dai, D.C. Ludois, Capacitive power transfer through a conformal bumper for electric
vehicle charging. IEEE J. Emerging Sel. Top. Power Electron. 4(3), 1015–1025 (2015).
doi:10.1109/JESTPE.2015.2505622
27. D. De Donno, L. Catarinucci, L. Tarricone, An UHF RFID energy-harvesting system
enhanced by a DC-DC charge pump in silicon-on-insulator technology. IEEE Microwave
Wireless Compon. Lett. 23(6), 315–317 (2013). doi:10.1109/LMWC.2013.2258002
28. K.K.A. Devi, S. Sadasivam, Design of a 377 ohms patch antenna for ambient RF energy
harvesting at downlink frequency of GSM 900, in The 17th Asia Paciﬁc Conference on
Communications (APCC) (2011), pp. 492–495. doi:10.1109/APCC.2011.6152859
29. K.K. Devi, S. Sadasivam, N.M. Din, C.K. Chakrabarthy, Design of a 377 patch antenna for
ambient RF energy harvesting at downlink frequency of GSM 900, in The 17th Asia Paciﬁc
Conference on Communications (2011), pp. 492–495. doi:10.1109/APCC.2011.6152859
30. Y. Ding, T. Arslan, A triple bands printed inverted-F antenna for mobile RF energy
scavenging, in 2014 Loughborough Antennas and Propagation Conference (LAPC) (2014),
pp. 218–221. doi:10.1109/LAPC.2014.6996362
31. Z. Ding, C. Zhong, D.W. Ng, M. Peng, H.A. Suraweera, R. Schober, H.V. Poor, Application
of smart antenna technologies in simultaneous wireless information and power transfer. IEEE
Commun. Mag. 53(4), 86–93 (2015). doi:10.1109/MCOM.2015.7081080
32. D.M. Dobkin, The RF in RFID: Passive UHF RFID in Practice (Newnes, Boston, 2008)

7
RF Energy Harvesting Networks: Existing Techniques and Hardware Technology
229
33. D. Dondi, S. Scorcioni, A. Bertacchini, L. Larcher, P. Pavan, An autonomous wireless
sensor network device powered by a RF energy harvesting system, in 38th Annual
Conference on IEEE Industrial Electronics Society (IECON) (2012), pp. 2557–2562.
doi:10.1109/IECON.2012.6388696
34. R.A. Dougal, S. Liu, R.E. White, Power and life extension of battery-ultracapacitor hybrids.
IEEE Trans. Compon. Packag. Technol. 25(1), 120–131 (2002). doi:10.1109/6144.991184
35. Drayson Technologies Ltd., http://draysontechnologies.com/. Cited 30 Dec 2016
36. S. Dunbar, F. Wenzl, C. Hack, R. Hafeza, H. Esfeer, F. Defay, S. Prothin, D. Bajon, Z.
Popovic, Wireless far-ﬁeld charging of a micro-UAV, in 2015 IEEE Wireless Power Transfer
Conference (WPTC) (2015), pp. 1–4. doi:10.1109/WPT.2015.7140154
37. Electropaedia, http://www.mpoweruk.com/. Cited 30 Dec 2016
38. Energous Corp., http://www.energous.com/. Cited 30 Dec 2016
39. Energy
Storage
Technologies,
http://www.cap-xx.com/resource/energy-storage-
technologies/. Cited 30 Dec 2016
40. M. Erol-Kantarci, H.T. Mouftah, DRIFT: differentiated RF power transmission for wireless
sensor network deployment in the smart grid, in 2012 IEEE Globecom Workshops (2012),
pp. 1491–1495. doi:10.1109/GLOCOMW.2012.6477806
41. M. Erol-Kantarci, H.T. Mouftah, Mission-aware placement of RF-based power transmitters
in wireless sensor networks, in 2012 IEEE Symposium on Computers and Communications
(ISCC) (2012), pp. 12–17. doi:10.1109/ISCC.2012.6249261
42. M. Erol-Kantarci, H.T. Mouftah, Suresense: sustainable wireless rechargeable sen-
sor
networks
for
the
smart
grid.
IEEE
Wirel.
Commun.
19(3),
30–36
(2012).
doi:10.1109/MWC.2012.6231157
43. J. Estrada, I. Ramos, A. Narayan, A. Keith, Z. Popovic, RF energy harvester in the proximity
of an aircraft radar altimeter, in 2016 IEEE Wireless Power Transfer Conference (WPTC)
(2016), pp. 1–4. doi:10.1109/WPT.2016.7498824
44. K.M.
Farinholt,
G.
Park,
C.R.
Farrar,
RF
energy
transmission
for
a
low-
power
wireless
impedance
sensor
node.
IEEE
Sensors
J.
9(7),
793–800
(2009).
doi:10.1109/JSEN.2009.2022536
45. S.L. Farsens, http://www.farsens.com/. Cited 30 Dec 2016
46. Federal Communications Commission, FCC Rules and Regulations Part 15 Section 247
(15.247). Operation within the bands 902–928 MHz, 2400–2483.5 MHz, and 5725–5850
MHz, Technical Report (2014)
47. C. Felini, M. Merenda, F.G. Della Corte, Dynamic impedance matching network for RF
energy harvesting systems, in 2014 IEEE RFID Technology and Applications Conference
(RFID-TA) (2014), pp. 86–90. doi:10.1109/RFID-TA.2014.6934206
48. I. Flint, X. Lu, N. Privault, D. Niyato, P. Wang, Performance analysis of ambient RF
energy harvesting: a stochastic geometry approach, in 2014 IEEE Global Communications
Conference (2014), pp. 1448–1453. doi:10.1109/GLOCOM.2014.7037012
49. B.R. Franciscatto, V. Freitas, J.M. Duchamp, C. Defay, T.P. Vuong, High-efﬁciency rectiﬁer
circuit at 2.45 GHz for low-input-power RF energy harvesting, in Proceedings of the IEEE
EuMC, Nuremberg, Germany (2013), pp. 507–510
50. A. Georgiadis, G.V. Andia, A. Collado, Rectenna design and optimization using reciprocity
theory and harmonic balance analysis for electromagnetic (EM) energy harvesting. IEEE
Antennas Wirel. Propag. Lett. 9, 444–446 (2010). doi:10.1109/LAWP.2010.2050131
51. S. Ghosh, S.K. Ghosh, A. Chakrabarty, Design of RF energy harvesting system for wireless
sensor node using circularly polarized monopole antenna: RF energy harvesting system for
WSN node using circularly polarized antenna, in 9th International Conference on Industrial
and Information Systems (ICIIS) (2014), pp. 1–6. doi:10.1109/ICIINFS.2014.7036513
52. A. Goldsmith, Wireless Communications, 1st edn. (Cambridge University Press, New York,
2005)
53. W.M. Gunathilaka, H.G. Dinesh, G.G. Gunasekara, K.M. Narampanawe, J.V. Wijayaku-
lasooriya, Ambient radio frequency energy harvesting, in 2012 IEEE 7th Interna-
tional Conference on Industrial and Information Systems (ICIIS) (2012), pp. 1–5.
doi:10.1109/ICIInfS.2012.6304789

230
F. Sangare and Z. Han
54. J. Guo, X Zhu, An improved analytical model for RF-DC conversion efﬁciency in microwave
rectiﬁers, in 2012 IEEE/MTT-S International Microwave Symposium Digest (2012), pp. 1–3.
doi:10.1109/MWSYM.2012.6259492
55. S. Guo, C. Wang, Y. Yang, Joint mobile data gathering and energy provisioning in wireless
rechargeable sensor networks. IEEE Trans. Mob. Comput. 13(12), 2836–2852 (2014).
doi:10.1109/TMC.2014.2307332
56. J. Guo, S. Durrani, X. Zhou, H. Yanikomeroglu, Outage probability of ad hoc networks with
wireless information and power transfer. IEEE Wirel. Commun. Lett. 4(4), 409–412 (2015).
doi:10.1109/LWC.2015.2427163
57. M.S. Halper, M.S. Ellenbogen, Supercapacitors: A Brief Overview (The MITRE Corporation,
McLean, 2006)
58. K. Han, K. Huang, Wirelessly powered backscatter communication networks: modeling,
coverage and capacity (2016). arXiv preprint arXiv:1605.05875
59. T.H. Haumann, U. Munzenberg, W.O. Maes, P.E. Sierck, P. Kostarakis, HF-Radiation levels of
GSM cellular phone towers in residential areas, in 2nd International Workshop on Biological
Effects of EMFS, vol.1 (2002), pp. 327–333
60. S.L. Ho, J. Wang, W.N. Fu, M. Sun, A comparative study between novel witricity and
traditional inductive magnetic coupling in wireless charging. IEEE Trans. 47(5), 1522–1525
(2011). doi:10.1109/TMAG.2010.2091495
61. C.E. Holland, J.W. Weidner, R.A. Dougal, R.E. White, Experimental characterization of
hybrid power systems under pulse current loads. J. Power Sources 109(1), 32–37 (2002).
doi:10.1016/S0378-7753(02)00044-7
62. S.S. Hong, R. Ibrahim, M.M. Khir, H. Daud, M.A. Zakariya, Rectenna architecture
based energy harvester for low power RFID application, in 2012 4th International
Conference on Intelligent and Advanced Systems (ICIAS), vol. 1 (2012), pp. 382–387.
doi:10.1109/ICIAS.2012.6306223
63. K. Huang, V.K. Lau, Enabling wireless power transfer in cellular networks: architec-
ture, modeling and deployment. IEEE Trans. Wirel. Commun. 13(2), 902–912 (2014).
doi:10.1109/TWC.2013.122313.130727
64. J. Huh, S.W. Lee, W.Y. Lee, G.H. Cho, C.T. Rim, Narrow-width inductive power transfer
system for online electrical vehicles. IEEE IEEE Trans. Power Electron. 26(12), 3666–3679
(2011). doi:10.1109/TPEL.2011.2160972
65. A. Huurdeman, The Worldwide History of Telecommunications (Wiley, New York, 2003)
66. Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE), IEEE standard for safety levels with
respect to human exposure to radio frequency electromagnetic ﬁelds, 3 kHz to 300 GHz. IEEE
C95.1-2005 (2005)
67. International Telecommunication Union, http://www.itu.int. Cited 30 Dec 2016
68. H. Jabbar, Y.S. Song, T.T. Jeong, RF energy harvesting system and circuits for
charging of mobile devices. IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron. 56(1), 247–253 (2010).
doi:10.1109/TCE.2010.5439152
69. X. Jiang, J. Polastre, D. Culler, Perpetual environmentally powered sensor networks, in IPSN
2005 Fourth International Symposium on Information Processing in Sensor Networks (2005),
pp. 463–468. doi:10.1109/IPSN.2005.1440974
70. L. Jianying, D. Fang, Z. Yichen, Y. Xin, C. Lulu, Z. Panpan, W. Mengjun, Bending effects on a
ﬂexible Yagi-Uda antenna for wireless body area network, in 2016 Asia-Paciﬁc International
Symposium on Electromagnetic Compatibility (APEMC), vol. 1 (2016), pp. 1001–1003.
doi:10.1109/APEMC.2016.7522928
71. R.C. Johnson, H.A. Ecker, J.S. Hollis, Determination of far-ﬁeld antenna patterns from near-
ﬁeld measurements. Proc IEEE 61(12), 1668–1694 (1973). doi:10.1109/PROC.1973.9358
72. E.A. Kadir, A.P. Hu, M. Biglari-Abhari, K.C. Aw, Indoor WiFi energy harvester with multiple
antenna for low-power wireless applications, in 2014 IEEE 23rd International Symposium on
Industrial Electronics (ISIE) (2014), pp. 526–530. doi:10.1109/ISIE.2014.6864668

7
RF Energy Harvesting Networks: Existing Techniques and Hardware Technology
231
73. P. Kamalinejad, K. Keikhosravy, S. Mirabbasi, V.C. Leung, An efﬁciency enhancement tech-
nique for CMOS rectiﬁers with low start-up voltage for UHF RFID tags, in 2013 International
Green Computing Conference (IGCC) (2013), pp. 1–6. doi:10.1109/IGCC.2013.6604483
74. A. Kansal, J. Hsu, S. Zahedi, M.B. Srivastava, Power management in energy har-
vesting sensor networks. ACM Trans. Embed. Comput. Syst. (TECS) 6(4) (2007).
doi:10.1145/1274858.1274870
75. D. Karolak, T. Taris, Y. Deval, J.B. Begueret, A. Mariano, Design comparison of low-power
rectiﬁers dedicated to RF energy harvesting, in Proceedings of the IEEE ICECS, Seville, Spain
(2012), pp. 524–527
76. B.G. Karthik, S. Shivaraman, V. Aditya, Wi-Pie: energy harvesting in mobile electronic
devices, in 2011 IEEE Global Humanitarian Technology Conference (GHTC) (2011),
pp. 398–401. doi:10.1109/GHTC.2011.43
77. K. Kaushik, D. Mishra, S. De, S. Basagni, W. Heinzelman, K. Chowdhury, S. Jana,
Experimental demonstration of multi-hop RF energy transfer, in 2013 IEEE 24th Annual
International Symposium on Personal, Indoor, and Mobile Radio Communications (PIMRC)
(2013), pp. 538–542. doi:10.1109/PIMRC.2013.6666195
78. S. Keyrouz, H.J. Visser, A.G. Tijhuis, Ambient RF energy harvesting from DTV stations,
in 2012 Loughborough Antennas and Propagation Conference (LAPC) (2012), pp. 1–4.
doi:10.1109/LAPC.2012.6403012
79. S. Keyrouz, H.J. Visser, A.G. Tijhuis, Multi-band simultaneous radio frequency energy
harvesting, in 2013 7th European Conference on Antennas and Propagation (EuCAP) (2013),
pp. 3058–3061
80. J.A. Khan, H.K. Qureshi, A. Iqbal, Energy management in wireless sensor networks: a survey.
Comput. Electr. Eng. 41, 159–176 (2015). doi:10.1016/j.compeleceng.2014.06.009
81. S. Kim, R. Vyas, J. Bito, K. Niotaki, A. Collado, A. Georgiadis, M.M. Tentzeris, Ambient
RF energy-harvesting technologies for self-sustainable standalone wireless sensor platforms.
Proc. IEEE 102(11), 1649–66 (2014). doi:10.1109/JPROC.2014.2357031
82. H. Kim, C. Song, J. Kim, D.H. Jung, E. Song, S. Kim, J. Kim, Design of magnetic shielding
for reduction of magnetic near ﬁeld from wireless power transfer system for electric vehicle,
in 2014 International Symposium on Electromagnetic Compatibility (2014), pp. 53–58.
doi:10.1109/EMCEurope.2014.6930876
83. H. Kitayoshi, K. Sawaya, Long range passive RFID-tag for sensor networks, in 2005
IEEE 62nd Vehicular Technology Conference (VTC), vol. 4 (2005), pp. 2696–2700.
doi:10.1109/VETECF.2005.1559038
84. S. Kitazawa, H. Ban, K. Kobayashi, Energy harvesting from ambient RF sources, in
IEEE MTT-S International Microwave Workshop Series on Innovative Wireless Power
Transmission: Technologies, Systems, and Applications (IMWS) (2012), pp. 39–42.
doi:10.1109/IMWS.2012.6215815
85. M. Kline, I. Izyumin, B. Boser, S. Sanders, Capacitive power transfer for contactless charging,
in 2011 Twenty-Sixth Annual IEEE Applied Power Electronics Conference and Exposition
(APEC) (2011), pp. 1398–1404. doi:10.1109/APEC.2011.5744775
86. F. Kocer, M.P. Flynn, A new transponder architecture with on chip ADC for long-range
telemetry applications. IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits 41(5), 1142–1148 (2006)
87. F. Kocer, M.P. Flynn, An RF-powered, wireless CMOS temperature sensor. IEEE Sensor J.
6(3), 557–564 (2006). doi:10.1109/JSEN.2006.874457
88. A. Kordzadeh, F. Hojjat-Kashani, A new reduced size microstrip patch antenna with
fractal shaped defects. Prog. Electromagn. Res. B (PIER B) 11, 29–37 (2009).
doi:10.2528/PIERB08100501
89. R. Kotz, M. Carlen, Principles and applications of electrochemical capacitors. Electrochim.
Acta 45(15), 2483–2498 (2000). doi:10.1016/S0013-4686(00)00354-6
90. R. Kötz, M. Hahn, R. Gallay, Temperature behavior and impedance fundamentals of superca-
pacitors. J. Power Sources 154(2), 550–555 (2006). doi:10.1016/J.JPOWSOUR.2005.10.048

232
F. Sangare and Z. Han
91. I. Krikidis, S. Timotheou, S. Nikolaou, G. Zheng, D.W. Ng, R. Schober, Simultaneous
wireless information and power transfer in modern communication systems. IEEE Commun.
Mag. 52(11), 104–110 (2014). doi:10.1109/MCOM.2014.6957150
92. A. Kurs, A. Karalis, R. Moffatt, J.D. Joannopoulos, P. Fisher, M. Soljacic, Wireless
power transfer via strongly coupled magnetic resonances. Science 317(5834), 83–86 (2007).
doi:10.1126/science.1143254
93. T.T. Le, Efﬁcient power conversion interface circuits for energy harvesting applications,
Doctorate Thesis, Oregon State University, USA (2008)
94. T. Le, K. Mayaram, T. Fiez, Efﬁcient far-ﬁeld radio frequency energy harvesting for passively
powered sensor networks. IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits 43(5), 1287–1302 (2008)
95. H. Le, N. Fong, H.C. Luong, RF energy harvesting circuit with on-chip antenna for
biomedical applications, in 2010 Third International Conference on Communications and
Electronics (ICCE) (2010), pp. 115–117. doi:10.1109/ICCE.2010.5670693
96. H.G. Lee, N. Chang, Powering the IoT: storage-less and converter-less energy harvesting,
in The 20th Asia and South Paciﬁc Design Automation Conference (2015), pp. 124–129.
doi:10.1109/ASPDAC.2015.7058992
97. S. Lee, R. Zhang, K. Huang, Opportunistic wireless energy harvesting in cog-
nitive
radio
networks.
IEEE
Trans.
Wirel.
Commun.
12(9),
4788–4799
(2013).
doi:10.1109/TWC.2013.072613.130323
98. S. Lemey, F. Declercq, H. Rogier, Textile antennas as hybrid energy-harvesting platforms.
Proc. IEEE 102(11), 1833–1857 (2014). doi:10.1109/JPROC.2014.2355872
99. B. Li, X. Shao, N. Shahshahan, N. Goldsman, T. Salter, G.M. Metze, An antenna co-design
dual band RF energy harvester. IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. Regul. Pap. 60(12), 3256–66
(2013). doi:10.1109/TCSI.2013.2264712
100. T.B. Lim, N.M. Lee, B.K. Poh, Feasibility study on ambient RF energy harvesting for wireless
sensor network, in 2013 IEEE MTT-S International Microwave Workshop Series on RF
and Wireless Technologies for Biomedical and Healthcare Applications (IMWS-BIO) (2013),
pp. 1–3. doi:10.1109/IMWS-BIO.2013.6756226
101. D. Linden, T.B. Reddy, Handbook of Batteries, 3rd edn. (McGraw-Hill, New York, 2001)
USA
102. V. Liu, A. Parks, V. Talla, S. Gollakota, D. Wetherall, J.R. Smith, Ambient backscatter:
wireless communication out of thin air. ACM SIGCOMM Comput. Commun. Rev. 43(4),
39–50 (2013). doi:10.1145/2486001.2486015
103. W. Liu, X. Zhou, S. Durrani, H. Mehrpouyan, S.D. Blostein, Energy harvesting wireless
sensor networks: delay analysis considering energy costs of sensing and transmission. IEEE
Trans. Wirel. Commun. 15(7), 4635–4650 (2016). doi:10.1109/TWC.2016.2543216
104. W. Liu, K. Huang, X. Zhou, S. Durrani, Full-duplex backscatter interference networks based
on time-hopping spreading spectrum (2016). arXiv preprint arXiv:1609.00062
105. C. Loss, R. Gon, C. Lopes, R. Salvado, P. Pinho, Textile antenna for RF energy harvesting
fully embedded in clothing, in 2016 10th European Conference on Antennas and Propagation
(EuCAP) (2016), pp. 1–4. doi:10.1109/EuCAP.2016.7481721
106. X. Lu, P. Wang, D. Niyato, E. Hossain, Dynamic spectrum access in cognitive radio
networks with RF energy harvesting. IEEE Wirel. Commun. 21(3), 102–110 (2014).
doi:10.1109/MWC.2014.6845054
107. X. Lu, P. Wang, D. Niyato, Z. Han, Resource allocation in wireless networks
with
RF
energy
harvesting
and
transfer.
IEEE
Network
29(6),
68–75
(2015).
doi:10.1109/MNET.2015.7340427
108. X. Lu, P. Wang, D. Niyato, D.I. Kim, Z. Han, Wireless charging technologies: Fundamentals,
standards, and network applications. IEEE Commun. Surv. Tutorials 18(2), 1413–1452
(2015). doi:10.1109/COMST.2015.2499783
109. D.C. Ludois, J. Reed, M. Erickson, Aerodynamic ﬂuid bearings for capacitive power transfer
and rotating machinery, in IEEE Energy Conversion Congress and Exposition (ECCE) (2012),
pp. 1932–1937. doi:10.1109/ECCE.2012.6342576

7
RF Energy Harvesting Networks: Existing Techniques and Hardware Technology
233
110. S. Mandal, R. Sarpeshkar, Low-power CMOS rectiﬁer design for RFID applications. IEEE
Trans. Circuits Syst. I 54(6), 1177–1188 (2007)
111. D. Masotti, A. Costanzo, S. Adami, Design and realization of a wearable multi-frequency RF
energy harvesting system, in Proceedings of the 5th European Conference on Antennas and
Propagation (EuCAP) (2011), pp. 517–520
112. J. Masuch, M. Delgado-Restituto, D. Milosevic, P. Baltus, An RF-to-DC energy harvester
for co-integration in a low-power 2.4 GHz transceiver frontend, in Proceedings of the IEEE
ISCAS, Seoul, Korea (2012), pp. 680–683
113. G.V.
Merrett,
A.S.
Weddell,
Supercapacitor
leakage
in
energy-harvesting
sensor
nodes:
fact
or
ﬁction?
in
Networked
Sensing
Systems
(INSS)
(2012),
pp.
1–5.
doi:10.1109/INSS.2012.6240581
114. G.V. Merrett, A.S. Weddell, A.P. Lewis, N.R. Harris, B.M. Al-Hashimi, N.M. White,
An empirical energy model for supercapacitor powered wireless sensor nodes, in 2008
Proceedings of 17th International Conference on Computer Communications and Networks
(2008), pp. 1–6. doi:10.1109/ICCCN.2008.ECP.34
115. Merriam-Webster, Deﬁnition of radio frequency, in Encyclopedia Britannica, http://www.
merriam-webster.com/dictionary/radiofrequency (2016). Cited 30 Dec 2016
116. C. Mikeka, H. Arai, Design issues in radio frequency energy harvesting system, in Sustainable
Energy Harvesting Technologies - Past, Present and Future, ed. by K.T. Yen (INTECH Open
Access Publisher, Rijeka, 2011). doi:10.5772/945
117. C. Mikeka, H. Arai, A. Georgiadis, A. Collado, DTV band micropower RF energy-
harvesting circuit architecture and performance analysis, in IEEE International Conference
on RFID-Technologies and Applications (RFID-TA) (2011), pp. 561–567. doi:10.1109/RFID-
TA.2011.6068601
118. S. Moayedi, F. Cingoz, A. Davoudi, Accelerated simulation of high-ﬁdelity models of
supercapacitors using waveform relaxation techniques. IEEE Trans. Power Electron. 28(11),
4903–4909 (2013). doi:10.1109/TPEL.2013.2250522
119. M.I. Mohamed, W.Y. Wu, M. Moniri, Adaptive data compression for energy harvesting
wireless sensor nodes, in 10th IEEE International Conference on Networking, Sensing and
Control (ICNSC) (2013), pp. 633–638. doi:10.1109/ICNSC.2013.6548812
120. C. Moser, L. Thiele, D. Brunelli, L. Benini, Adaptive power management for environmentally
powered systems. IEEE Trans. Comput. 59(4), 478–491 (2010). doi:10.1109/TC.2009.158
121. M. Mrnka, Z. Raida, J. Grosinger, Wide-band dielectric resonator antennas for RF energy
harvesting, in 2015 Conference on Microwave Techniques (COMITE) (2015), pp. 1–4.
doi:10.1109/COMITE.2015.7120313
122. J.O. Mur-Miranda, G. Fanti, Y. Feng, K. Omanakuttan, R. Ongie, A. Setjoadi, N. Sharpe,
Wireless power transfer using weakly coupled magnetostatic resonators, in Proc. IEEE ECCE,
Atlanta, GA, USA (2010), pp. 4179–4186. doi:10.1109/ECCE.2010.5617728
123. D.B. Murray, J.G. Hayes, Cycle testing of supercapacitors for long-life robust applications.
IEEE Trans. Power Electron. 30(5), 2505–2516 (2015). doi:10.1109/TPEL.2014.2373368
124. Nesscap Co., http://www.nesscap.com/. Cited 30 Dec 2016
125. D.W. Ng, E.S. Lo, R. Schober, Wireless information and power transfer: Energy efﬁciency
optimization in OFDMA systems. IEEE Trans. Wirel. Commun. 12(12), 6352–6370 (2013).
doi:10.1109/TWC.2013.103113.130470
126. A. Nimo, D. Grgic, L.M. Reindl, Ambient electromagnetic wireless energy harvesting using
multiband planar antenna, in 9th International Multi-Conference on Systems, Signals and
Devices (SSD) (2012), pp. 1–6. doi:10.1109/SSD.2012.6198036
127. A. Nimo, D. Grgic, L.M. Reindl, Impedance optimization of wireless electromagnetic energy
harvester for maximum output efﬁciency at W input power, in International Society for
Optics and Photonics (SPIE) Smart Structures and Materials Nondestructive Evaluation and
Health Monitoring (2012), vol. 8341. doi:10.1117/12.914778
128. A. Nimo, D. Grgic, T. Ungan, L.M. Reindl, A new family of passive wireless RF harvesters
based on R-C-Quartz oscillators, in Proceedings of the IEEE EuMC, Nuremberg, German
(2013), pp. 511–514

234
F. Sangare and Z. Han
129. P. Ning, J.M. Miller, O.C. Onar, C.P. White, A compact wireless charging system for electric
vehicles, in 2013 IEEE Energy Conversion Congress and Exposition (2013), pp. 3629–3634.
doi:10.1109/ECCE.2013.6647179
130. P. Nintanavongsa, U. Muncuk, D.R. Lewis, K.R. Chowdhury, Design optimization and
implementation for RF energy harvesting circuits. IEEE J. Emerging Sel. Topics Circuits
Syst. 2(1), 24–33 (2012)
131. P. Nintanavongsa, M.Y. Naderi, K.R. Chowdhury, A dual-band wireless energy transfer
protocol for heterogeneous sensor networks powered by RF energy harvesting, in 2013
International Conference on Computer Science and Engineering Conference (ICSEC) (2013),
pp. 387–392. doi:10.1109/ICSEC.2013.6694814
132. H. Nishimoto, Y. Kawahara, T. Asami, Prototype implementation of ambient RF energy
harvesting wireless sensor networks, in 2010 IEEE Sensors (2010), pp. 1282–1287.
doi:10.1109/ICSENS.2010.5690588
133. A.
Noguchi,
H.
Arai,
Small
loop
rectenna
for
RF
energy
harvesting,
in
2013
Asia-Paciﬁc
Microwave
Conference
Proceedings
(APMC)
(2013),
pp.
86–88.
doi:10.1109/APMC.2013.6695199
134. J.P. Olds, W.K. Seah, Design of an active radio frequency powered multi-hop wireless sensor
network, in 2012 7th IEEE Conference on Industrial Electronics and Applications (ICIEA)
(2012), pp. 1721–1726. doi:10.1109/ICIEA.2012.6361003
135. U. Olgun, C.C. Chen, J.L. Volakis, Low-proﬁle planar rectenna for batteryless RFID sensors,
in 2010 IEEE Antennas and Propagation Society International Symposium (2010), pp. 1–4.
doi:10.1109/APS.2010.5562220
136. U. Olgun, C.C. Chen, J.L. Volakis, Efﬁcient ambient WiFi energy harvesting technology and
its applications, in 2012 IEEE International Symposium on Antennas and Propagation (2012),
pp. 1–2. doi:10.1109/APS.2012.6349384
137. Ossia Inc., http://www.ossia.com/. Cited 30 Dec 2016
138. G. Papotto, F. Carrara, G. Palmisano, A 90-nm CMOS threshold compensated RF energy
harvester. IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits 46(9), 1985–1997 (2011)
139. G. Papotto, F. Carrara, A. Finocchiaro, G. Palmisano, A 90-nm CMOS 5-Mbps crystal-less
RF-powered transceiver for wireless sensor network nodes. IEEE J. Solid State Circuits 49(2),
335–346 (2014). doi:10.1109/JSSC.2013.2285371
140. A.M. Pareja, A. Bakkali, J. Pelegri-Sebastia, T. Sogorb, V. Llario, A Bou, Radio fre-
quency energy harvesting - sources and techniques, in Renewable Energy - Utilisation and
System Integration, ed. by C. Wenping (INTECH Open Access Publisher, Rijeka, 2016).
doi:10.5772/61722
141. D. Pavone, A. Buonanno, M. D’Urso, F. Della Corte, Design considerations for radio
frequency energy harvesting devices. Prog. Electromagn. Res. B 45, 19–35 (2012).
doi:10.2528/PIERB12062901
142. M. Penella, F.M. Gasulla, Runtime extension of low-power wireless sensor nodes
using
hybrid-storage
units.
IEEE
Trans.
Instrum.
Meas.
59(4),
857–865
(2010).
doi:10.1109/TIM.2009.2026603
143. M.T. Penella-Lopez, M. Gasulla-Forner, Powering Autonomous Sensors: An Integral
Approach with Focus on Solar and RF Energy Harvesting (Springer, Dordrecht, 2011).
doi:10.1007/978-94-007-1573-8
144. G. Peterson, The application of electromagnetic surface waves to wireless energy trans-
fer, in 2015 IEEE Wireless Power Transfer Conference (WPTC) (2015), pp. 1–4.
doi:10.1109/WPT.2015.7139133
145. M. Pinuela, P.D. Mitchenson, S. Lucyszyn, Analysis of scalable rectenna conﬁgurations for
harvesting high frequency electromagnetic ambient radiation, in International Conference
on Micro and Nanotechnology for Power Generation and Energy Conversion Applications
(2010), pp. 41–44
146. M. Pinuela, P.D. Mitcheson, S. Lucyszyn, Ambient RF energy harvesting in urban and
semi-urban environments. IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory Tech. 61(7), 2715–2726 (2013).
doi:10.1109/TMTT.2013.2262687

7
RF Energy Harvesting Networks: Existing Techniques and Hardware Technology
235
147. Z. Popovic, Cut the cord: low-power far-ﬁeld wireless powering. IEEE Microw. Mag. 14(2),
55–62 (2013). doi:10.1109/MMM.2012.2234638
148. Z. Popovic, P. Momenroodaki, R. Scheeler, Toward wearable wireless thermometers for
internal body temperature measurements. IEEE Commun. Mag. 52(10), 118–25 (2014).
doi:10.1109/MCOM.2014.6917412
149. Powercast Corp., http://www.powercastco.com/. Cited 30 Dec 2016
150. R.V. Prasad, S. Devasenapathy, V.S. Rao, J. Vazifehdan, Reincarnation in the ambiance:
Devices and networks with energy harvesting. IEEE Commun. Surv. Tutorials 16(1), 195–
213 (2013). doi:10.1109/SURV.2013.062613.00235
151. D.V. Ragone, Review of battery systems for electrically powered vehicles. SAE Technical
Paper (1968). doi:10.4271/680453
152. S. Rao, J.C. Chiao, Body electric: wireless power transfer for implant applications. IEEE
Microw. Mag. 16(2), 54–64 (2015). doi:10.1109/MMM.2014.2377586
153. RAV Power, Datasheet for Qi-enabled charger, http://www.ravpower.com/qi-wireless-
charger-black.html. Cited 30 Dec 2016
154. V. Rizzoli, G. Bichicchi, A. Costanzo, F. Donzelli, D. Masotti, CAD of multi-resonator
rectenna for micro-power generation, in 2009 European microwave conference (EuMC)
(2009), pp. 1684–1687
155. M. Roberg, T. Reveyrand, I. Ramos, E.A. Falkenstein, Z. Popovic, High-efﬁciency harmon-
ically terminated diode and transistor rectiﬁers. IEEE Trans. Microw. Theory Tech. 60(12),
4043–4052 (2012)
156. T. Salter, K. Choi, M. Peckerar, G. Metze, RF energy scavenging system utilizing switched
capacitor DC-DC converter. Electron. Lett. 45(7), 374–376 (2009)
157. A.
Sample,
J.R.
Smith,
Experimental
results
with
two
wireless
power
transfer
systems,
in
2009
IEEE
Radio
and
Wireless
Symposium
(2009),
pp.
16–18.
doi:10.1109/RWS.2009.4957273
158. F. Sangare, A. Arab, M. Pan, L. Qian, S.K. Khator, Z. Han, RF energy harvesting for WSNs
via dynamic control of unmanned vehicle charging, in IEEE Wireless Communications and
Networking Conference (WCNC) (2015), pp. 1291–1296. doi:10.1109/WCNC.2015.7127655
159. F. Sangare, Y. Xiao, D. Niyato, Z. Han, Mobile charging in wireless-powered sensor networks:
optimal scheduling and experimental implementation. IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol. (TVT)
(2016, to appear)
160. O.H. Seunghyun, D.D. Wentzloff, A -32 dBm sensitivity RF power harvester in 130 nm
CMOS, in Proceedings of the IEEE RFIC, Montreal, QC, USA (2012), pp. 483–486
161. S. Scorcioni, L. Larcher, A. Bertacchini, Optimized CMOS RF-DC converters for remote
wireless powering of RFID applications, in 2012 IEEE International Conference on RFID
(2012), pp. 47–53. doi:10.1109/RFID.2012.6193055
162. S. Scorcioni, A. Bertacchini, L. Larcher, A 868 MHz CMOS RFDC power converter with -17
dBm input power sensitivity and efﬁciency higher than 40% over 14 dB input power range,
in Proceedings of the IEEE ESSCIRC, Bordeaux, France (2012), pp. 109–112
163. S. Scorcioni, L. Larcher, A. Bertacchini, L. Vincetti, M. Maini, An integrated RF energy
harvester for UHF wireless powering applications, in Proceedings of the IEEE WPT, Perugia,
Italy (2013), pp. 92–95
164. W.K. Seah, J.P. Olds, Data delivery scheme for wireless sensor network powered by RF
energy harvesting, in 2013 IEEE Wireless Communications and Networking Conference
(WCNC) (2013), pp. 1498–1503. doi:10.1109/WCNC.2013.6554785
165. W.K.
Seah,
Z.A.
Eu,
H.P.
Tan,
Wireless
sensor
networks
powered
by
ambient
energy harvesting (WSN-HEAP)- survey and challenges, in 1st International Con-
ference on Wireless Communication, Vehicular Technology, Information Theory and
Aerospace and Electronic Systems Technology (Wireless VITAE) (2009), pp. 1–5.
doi:10.1109/WIRELESSVITAE.2009.5172411
166. A. Shameli, A. Safarian, A. Rofougaran, M. Rofougaran, F.D. Flaviis, Power harvester design
for passive UHF RFID tag using a voltage boosting technique. IEEE Trans. Microwave
Theory Tech. 55(6), 1089–1097 (2007)

236
F. Sangare and Z. Han
167. L. Shi, M.L. Crow, Comparison of ultracapacitor electric circuit models, in Power and Energy
Society General Meeting - Conversion and Delivery of Electrical Energy in the 21st Century
(2008), pp. 1–6. doi:10.1109/PES.2008.4596576
168. R. Shigeta, T. Sasaki, D.M. Quan, Y. Kawahara, R.J. Vyas, M.M. Tentzeris, T. Asami,
Ambient RF energy harvesting sensor device with capacitor-leakage-aware duty cycle control.
IEEE Sensors J. 13(8), 2973–2983 (2013). doi:10.1109/JSEN.2013.2264931
169. N. Shinohara, S. Kawasaki, Recent wireless power transmission technologies in Japan for
space solar power station/satellite, in 2009 IEEE Radio and Wireless Symposium (2009),
pp. 13–15. doi:10.1109/RWS.2009.4957272
170. S. Shrestha, S.K. Noh, D.Y. Choi, Comparative study of antenna designs for RF energy har-
vesting. Int. J. Antennas Propag. 2013, 1–10 (2013). http://dx.doi.org/10.1155/2013/385260
171. A.M. Siddiqui, L. Musavian, Q. Ni, Energy efﬁciency optimization with energy harvesting
using harvest-use approach, in IEEE International Conference on Communication Workshop
(ICCW) (2015), pp. 1982–1987. doi:10.1109/ICCW.2015.7247471
172. Z.W. Sim, R. Shuttleworth, B. Grieve, Investigation of PCB microstrip patch receiv-
ing antenna for outdoor RF energy harvesting in wireless sensor networks, in 2009
Loughborough Antennas and Propagation Conference (LAPC) (2009), pp. 129–132.
doi:10.1109/LAPC.2009.5352525
173. F.I. Simjee, P.H. Chou, Efﬁcient charging of supercapacitors for extended lifetime
of wireless sensor nodes. IEEE Trans. Power Electron. 23(3), 1526–1536 (2014).
doi:10.1109/TPEL.2008.921078
174. V. Sivaji, D.K. Bhatia, S. Prasad, Novel technique for sleep apnea monitoring, in 2015 IEEE
12th International Conference on Wearable and Implantable Body Sensor Networks (BSN)
(2015), pp. 1–5. doi:10.1109/BSN.2015.7299418
175. A. Sivaramakrishnan, K.J. Jegadishkumar, A highly efﬁcient power management system
for charging mobile phones using RF energy harvesting. Int. J. Inf. Technol. Convergence
Services (IJITCS) 1(5), 21–30 (2011). doi:10.5121/ijitcs.2011.1503
176. Skyworks Inc., http://www.skyworksinc.com/. Cited 30 Dec 2016
177. T.A.
Smith,
J.P.
Mars,
G.A.
Turner,
Using
supercapacitors
to
improve
battery
performance,
in
Power
Electronics
Specialists
Conference
(2002),
pp.
124–128.
doi:10.1109/PSEC.2002.1023857
178. M. Stoopman, S. Keyrouz, H.J. Visser, K. Philips, W.A. Serdijn, A self-calibrating RF energy
harvester generating 1 V at -26.3 dBm, in Proceedings of the IEEE Symposium VLSIC, Kyoto,
Japan (2013), pp. 226–227
179. M. Stoopman, S. Keyrouz, H.J. Visser, K. Philips, W.A. Serdijn, Co-design of a CMOS
rectiﬁer and small loop antenna for highly sensitive RF energy harvesters. IEEE J. Solid-State
Circuits 49(3), 622–634 (2014)
180. B. Strassner, K. Chang, Microwave power transmission: Historical milestones and system
components. Proc. IEEE 101(6), 1379–1396 (2013). doi:10.1109/JPROC.2013.2246132
181. M. Stratmann, P. Trawinski, Rechargeable toothbrushes with charging stations. Braun GmbH,
US Patent 6,798,169, https://www.google.com/patents/US6798169.GooglePatents (2004).
Cited 30 Dec 2016
182. W.L. Stutzman, G.A. Thiele, Antenna Theory and Design, 3rd edn. (Wiley, New York, 2012)
183. S. Sudevalayam, P. Kulkarni, Energy harvesting sensor nodes: Survey and implications. IEEE
Commun. Surv. Tutorials 13(3), 443–461 (2011). doi:10.1109/SURV.2011.060710.00094
184. H. Sun, Y. Guo, M. He, Z. Zhong, Design of a high-efﬁciency 2.45-GHz rectenna for low-
input-power energy harvesting. IEEE Antennas Wirel. Propag. Lett. 11, 929–932 (2012)
185. H. Sun, Y.X. Guo, M. He, Z. Zhong, A dual-band rectenna using broadband Yagi antenna
array for ambient RF power harvesting. IEEE Antennas Wirel. Propag. Lett. 12, 918–921
(2013). doi:10.1109/LAWP.2013.2272873
186. V. Talla, B. Kellogg, B. Ransford, S. Naderiparizi, S. Gollakota, J.R. Smith, Powering the
next billion devices with Wi-Fi (2015). arXiv: 1505.06815

7
RF Energy Harvesting Networks: Existing Techniques and Hardware Technology
237
187. M. Tanevski, A. Boegli, P.A. Farine, Power supply energy optimization for ultra low-power
wireless sensor nodes, in Sensors Applications Symposium (SAS) (2013), pp. 176–181.
doi:10.1109/SAS.2013.6493581
188. T. Taris, V. Vigneras, L. Fadel, A 900 MHz RF energy harvesting module, in Proceedings of
the IEEE 10th International NEWCAS, Montreal, QC, USA (2012), pp. 445–448
189. Texas Instruments Corp., http://www.ti.com/. Cited 30 Dec 2016
190. Texas Instruments Inc., ISM-band and short range device regulatory compliance overview,
http://www.ti.com/lit/an/swra048/swra048.pdf. Cited 30 Dec 2016
191. Texzon Technologies, LLC., http://www.texzontechnologies.com/. Cited 30 Dec 2016
192. The American National Standard Institute, https://www.ansi.org/. Cited 30 Dec 2016
193. The Occupational Safety and Health Administration, https://www.osha.gov/. Cited 30 Dec
2016
194. T. Thierry, F. Ludivine, O. Laurent, V. Valerie, COTS-based modules for far-ﬁeld radio
frequency energy harvesting at 900 MHz and 2.4 GHz, in Proceedings of the IEEE
International NEWCAS, Paris, France (2013), pp. 1–4
195. J.P. Thomas, M.A. Qidwai, J.C. Kellogg, Energy scavenging for small-unmanned systems. J.
Power Sources 159(2), 1494–1509 (2006)
196. Timothy Truckle (Own work), https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Sidelobes_en.svg.
Cited 30 Dec 2016
197. UPM Rafsec, Tutorial overview of inductively coupled RFID systems, Tampere, Finland,
http://www.rafsec.com/rﬁdsystems.pdf (2003). Cited 30 Dec 2016
198. C.R. Valenta, G.D. Durgin, Harvesting wireless power: Survey of energy-harvester conversion
efﬁciency in far-ﬁeld, wireless power transfer systems. IEEE Microw. Mag. 15(4), 108–120
(2014). doi:10.1109/MMM.2014.2309499
199. G.A. Vera, A. Georgiadis, A. Collado, S. Via, Design of a 2.45 GHz rectenna for electromag-
netic (EM) energy scavenging, in Proceedings of the IEEE Radio Wireless Symposium, New
Orleans, LA, USA (2010), pp. 61–64
200. L. Vincetti, M. Maini, E. Pinotti, L. Larcher, S. Scorcioni, A. Bertacchini, D. Grossi,
A. Tacchini, Broadband printed antenna for radiofrequency energy harvesting, in 2012
International Conference on Electromagnetics in Advanced Applications (ICEAA) (2012),
pp. 814–816. doi:10.1109/ICEAA.2012.6328744
201. H.J. Visser, A.C. Reniers, J.A. Theeuwes, Ambient RF energy scavenging: GSM and WLAN
power density measurements, in 38th European Microwave Conference (EuMC) (2008),
pp. 721–724. doi:10.1109/EUMC.2008.4751554
202. R.J. Vyas, H. Nishimoto, M.M. Tentzeris, Y. Kawahara, T. Asami, A battery-less, energy
harvesting device for long range scavenging of wireless power from terrestrial TV broad-
casts, in IEEE MTT-S International Microwave Symposium Digest (MTT) (2012), pp. 1–3.
doi:10.1109/MWSYM.2012.6259708
203. R.J. Vyas, B.S. Cook, Y. Kawahara, M.M. Tentzeris, E-WEHP: a batteryless embedded
sensor-platform wirelessly powered from ambient digital-TV signals. IEEE Trans. Microwave
Theory Tech. 61(6), 2491–2505 (2013). doi:10.1109/TMTT.2013.2258168
204. X. Wang, A. Mortazawi, High sensitivity RF energy harvesting from AM broadcasting
stations for civilian infrastructure degradation monitoring, in Proceedings of the IEEE IWS,
Beijing, China (2013), pp. 1–3
205. K. Wang, S. Sanders, Contactless USB – a capacitive power and bidirectional data transfer
system, in 2014 IEEE Applied Power Electronics Conference and Exposition (APEC) (2014),
pp. 1342–1347. doi:10.1109/APEC.2014.6803481
206. N. Williard, D. Baek, J.W. Park, B.O. Choi, M. Osterman, M. Pecht, A life model
for supercapacitors. IEEE Trans. Device Mater. Reliability 15(4), 519–528 (2015).
doi:10.1109/TDMR.2015.2479466
207. L. Xia, J. Cheng, N.E. Glover, P. Chiang, 0.56 V, 20 dBm RF-powered, multi-node wireless
body area network system-on-a-chip with harvesting-efﬁciency tracking loop. IEEE J. Solid
State Circuits 49(6), 1345–1355 (2014). doi:10.1109/JSSC.2014.2305074

238
F. Sangare and Z. Han
208. L. Xiao, P. Wang, D. Niyato, D. Kim, Z. Han, Wireless networks with RF energy har-
vesting: a contemporary survey. IEEE Commun. Surv. Tutorials 17(2), 757–789 (2015).
doi:10.1109/COMST.2014.2368999
209. L. Xie, Y. Shi, Y.T. Hou, A. Lou, Wireless power transfer and applications to sensor networks.
IEEE Wirel. Commun. 20(4), 140–145 (2013). doi:10.1109/MWC.2013.6590061
210. L. Xie, Y. Shi, Y.T. Hou, W. Lou, H.D. Sherali, H. Zhou, S.F. Midkiff, A mobile platform for
wireless charging and data collection in sensor networks. IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun. 33(8),
1521–1533 (2015). doi:10.1109/JSAC.2015.2391631
211. L. Xie, Y. Shi, Y.T. Hou, W. Lou, H.D. Sherali, S.F. Midkiff, Multi-node wireless energy
charging in sensor networks. IEEE/ACM Trans. Networking (TON) 23(2), 437–450 (2015).
doi:10.1109/TNET.2014.2303979
212. H. Yang, Y. Zhang, Analysis of supercapacitor energy loss for power management in
environmentally powered wireless sensor nodes. IEEE Trans. Power Electron. 28(11), 5391–
5403 (2013). doi:10.1109/TPEL.2013.2238683
213. Y. Yao, W. Jie, S. Yin, F.F. Dai, A fully integrated 900-MHz passive RFID transponder front
end with novel zero-threshold RF-DC rectiﬁer. IEEE Trans. Ind. Electron. 56(7), 2317–2325
(2009)
214. D. Yi, T. Arslan, Broadband differential antenna for full-wave RF energy scavenging system,
in 2013 Loughborough Antennas and Propagation Conference (LAPC) (2013), pp. 325–328.
doi:10.1109/LAPC.2013.6711912
215. J. Yi, W.H. Ki, C.Y. Tsui, Analysis and design strategy of UHF micro-Power CMOS rectiﬁers
for micro-sensor and RFID applications. IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I 54(1), 153–166 (2007)
216. D. Yi, T. Arslan, A. Hamilton, Broadband antenna for RF energy scavenging system,
in 2012 Loughborough Antennas and Propagation Conference (LAPC) (2012), pp. 1–4.
doi:10.1109/LAPC.2012.6403034
217. F. Yuan, CMOS Circuits for Passive Wireless Microsystems (Springer, New York, 2011).
doi:10.1007/978-1-4419-7680-2
218. F. Yuan, K.Q. Zhang, S. Jin, H. Zhu, A harvest-use-store mode for energy harvesting
communication systems with optimal power policy, in 2014 IEEE International Conference
on Communications (ICC) (2014), pp. 5366–5371. doi:10.1109/ICC.2014.6884174
219. F. Yuan, Q.T. Zhang, S. Jin, H. Zhu, Optimal harvest-use-store strategy for energy
harvesting wireless systems. IEEE Trans. Wirel. Commun. 14(2), 698–710 (2015).
doi:10.1109/TWC.2014.2358215
220. N.A. Zainuddin, Z. Zakaria, M.N. Husain, B.M. Derus, M.A. Aziz, M.A. Mutalib, M.A. Oth-
man, Design of wideband antenna for RF energy harvesting system, in 2013 3rd International
Conference on Instrumentation, Communications, Information Technology, and Biomedical
Engineering (ICICI-BME) (2013), pp. 162–166. doi:10.1109/ICICI-BME.2013.6698485
221. Z. Zakaria, N.A. Zainuddin, M.A. Aziz, M.N. Husain, M.A. Mutalib, A parametric study
on dual-band meander line monopole antenna for RF energy harvesting, in 2013 IEEE
International Conference on RFID-Technologies and Applications (RFID-TA) (2013), pp. 1–
5. doi:10.1109/RFID-TA.2013.6694523
222. Z. Zakaria, N.A. Zainuddin, M.N. Husain, M.Z. Aziz, M.A. Mutalib, A.R. Othman, Current
developments of RF energy harvesting system for wireless sensor networks. Adv. Inf. Sci.
Serv. Sci. 5(11), 328–338 (2013). doi:10.4156/AISS.vol5.issue11.39
223. Z. Zakaria, N.A. Zainuddin, M.A. Aziz, M.N. Husain, M.A. Mutalib, Dual-band monopole
antenna for energy harvesting system, in 2013 IEEE Symposium on Wireless Technology and
Applications (ISWTA) (2013), pp. 225–229. doi:10.1109/ISWTA.2013.6688775
224. R.
Zhang,
C.K.
Ho,
MIMO
broadcasting
for
simultaneous
wireless
information
and
power
transfer.
IEEE
Trans.
Wirel.
Commun.
12(5),
1989–2001
(2013).
doi:10.1109/TWC.2013.031813.120224
225. R.
Zhang,
C.K.
Ho,
MIMO
broadcasting
for
simultaneous
wireless
information
and
power
transfer.
IEEE
Trans.
Wirel.
Commun.
12(5),
1989–2001
(2013).
doi:10.1109/GLOCOMW.2014.7063588

7
RF Energy Harvesting Networks: Existing Techniques and Hardware Technology
239
226. X. Zhang, H. Jiang, L. Zhang, C. Zhang, Z. Wang, X. Chen An energy-efﬁcient ASIC for
wireless body sensor networks in medical applications. IEEE Trans. Biomed. Circuits Syst.
4(1), 11–8 (2010). doi:10.1109/TBCAS.2009.2031627
227. J. Zhang, Y. Huang, P. Cao, A wideband cross dipole rectenna for RF wireless harvesting,
in 2013 7th European Conference on Antennas and Propagation (EuCAP) (2013), pp. 3063–
3067
228. X. Zhou, R. Zhang, C.K. Ho, Wireless information and power transfer: Architec-
ture design and rate-energy tradeoff. IEEE Trans. Commun. 61(11), 4754–4767 (2012).
doi:10.1109/TCOMM.2013.13.120855
229. A.M. Zungeru, L.M. Ang, S. Prabaharan, K.P. Seng, Radio frequency energy harvesting and
management for wireless sensor networks, in Green Mobile Devices and Networks: Energy
Optimization and Scavenging Techniques, ed. by G.-M. Muntean, M. Venkataraman (CRC
Press, Boca Raton, 2012), pp. 341–368. doi:10.1201/b10081-16
230. Y. Zuo, Survivable RFID systems: Issues, challenges, and techniques. IEEE Trans. Syst. Man
Cybern. Part C Appl. Rev. 40(4), 406–418 (2010). doi:10.1109/TSMCC.2010.2043949

Chapter 8
Wireless Powered Sensor Networks
Wanchun Liu, Salman Durrani, and Xiangyun Zhou
8.1
Wireless Sensor Networks
The ﬁrst wireless sensor network (WSN) was originally invented by the United
States Military in the 1950s to detect and track Soviet submarines [1]. The network,
which consisted of acoustic sensors, was distributed in the Atlantic and Paciﬁc
oceans. In the 1980s, the United States Defense Advanced Research Projects
Agency (DARPA) started the distributed sensor network program which boosted the
civilian and scientiﬁc research on WSNs. Thanks to the advances in semiconductor,
networking and material science technologies in the past a few decades, the
ubiquitous deployment of large-scale WSNs has ﬁnally come true. The state-of-the-
art WSNs have many applications such as micro-climates measurement on farms,
habitat monitoring, volcano monitoring, structural monitoring, vehicle tracking,
human presence detection in homes and ofﬁces, electrical/gas/water metering.
For instance, consider the applications of WSNs in Australia as an example [2].
In South Australia, WSNs have been widely used to monitor the growing of grapes.
Sensors measure the temperature, light, wind speed, humidity, and soil moisture
and provide information for analysis, in order to optimize plant growth and prevent
crop loss. In Victoria, a wireless sensor network of 100 nodes was deployed over
This work was supported by the Australian Research Council’s Discovery Project Funding Scheme
(Project number DP140101133).
W. Liu () • X. Zhou
Research School of Engineering, The Australian National University,
Canberra 2601, ACT, Australia
e-mail: wanchun.liu@anu.edu.au; xiangyun.zhou@anu.edu.au
S. Durrani
College of Engineering and Computer Science, The Australian National University,
Canberra, Aust Capital Terr, Australia
e-mail: salman.durrani@anu.edu.au
© Springer International Publishing AG 2018
D.N.K. Jayakody et al. (eds.), Wireless Information and Power Transfer:
A New Paradigm for Green Communications, DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-56669-6_8
241

242
W. Liu et al.
a 1 km square region of forest in the Dandenong Ranges. The network monitors in
real-time, a range of environmental parameters to improve situational awareness,
such as the event of bush ﬁres. In Melbourne, in order to solve the noise pollution
problem, a WSN has been deployed across the central business district to measure
sound level. A noise map of the city is generated by the data collected from the
sensors, which is then used to manage noisy areas. In Sydney, WSNs are deployed
to detect and indicate where open parking is located in the city streets to reduce
trafﬁc congestion.
The future Internet-of-Things (IoT), which is going to connect tens of billions
of low-complexity wireless devices such as sensors and wearable computing
devices, can be treated as a advanced evolution of WSN. The IoT will enable
new applications such as smart cities, home automation, and e-healthcare. One of
the most important implementation challenge of the IoT is that the ﬁnite battery
capacity sensor nodes have a limited lifetime and thus require regular battery
replacements [3]. This kind of battery replacement for massive number of IoT
nodes is difﬁcult or even infeasible as many sensors are deployed in hazardous
environments or hidden in walls, furniture, and even in human bodies.
One immediate solution is to use large batteries for longer lifetimes, however,
the increased size, weight, and cost may not be affordable for the massive number
of sensors. Another solution is to adopt low power hardware, but at the cost of
lesser computation ability and lower transmission ranges. To effectively address
the ﬁnite node lifetime problem, an alternative technique, i.e., energy harvesting
powered WSN is the most promising solution.
8.2
Energy Harvesting Wireless Sensor Networks
Generally speaking, energy harvesting (EH) means harvesting energy from the
ambient environment such as solar, wind and thermal energy, or other energy
sources such as foot strike, ﬁnger strokes, and body heat, and converting it to
electrical power/energy. In theory, a sensor node can be powered perpetually as long
as the harvested energy source is continuously available. Figure 8.1 illustrates the
basic architecture of an EH WSN, which consists of multiple sensors and one sink.
The sensors are able to harvests energy from a solar panel and may also harvests
energy from other energy sources such as RF signals emitted by power beacons or
base stations (which will be discussed in the next subsection).
More precisely, an EH sensor consists of six modules which are illustrated in
Fig. 8.2: a micro-controller (not included in the ﬁgure for brevity), EH module,
battery, sensing modulo, transmitter(and receiver), and data buffer. The sensor ﬁrst
needs to convert the ambient energy arrival into a direct current (DC) signal by
the EH module, which is then used to charge the battery of the sensor. Powered by
the harvested energy, the sensing module senses its relevant parameters and saves
the sensed data into the data buffer, and the transmitter transmits the sensed data to
the sink.

8
Wireless Powered Sensor Networks
243
Sensor
Sensor
Sensor
Sensor
Transmission link
Sink
Power beacon or
base station
WPT link
EH link
Energy source
Fig. 8.1 Illustration of EH WSN
Energy ﬂow
Data ﬂow
Sensor
Battery
Sensing module
Transmitter
Data buﬀer
Energy
arrival
Information
transmission
EH module
Fig. 8.2 Illustration of the components of a wireless sensor node
Table 8.1 Environmental
energy harvesting power
(reproduced from [5])
Source
Average harvested energy
Solar panel
15 mW/cm2
Light (indoor)
10–100 W/cm2
Airﬂow
0.4–1 mW/cm3
Vibrations
200–380 W/cm3
Thermoelectric
40–60 W/cm2
Piezoelectric
100–330 W/cm3
The EH rate of different energy sources are listed in Table 8.1. It is straight-
forward to see that EH from a solar panel can provide the highest EH rate. In
addition, solar energy is the most easily accessible energy source and there are lots
of existing WSN applications based on it. For example, the outdoor multi-target
tracking networks [4], such as the zebra tracking and the turtle habitat monitoring
networks in the USA.

244
W. Liu et al.
8.2.1
WSN Power Consumptions
There are three main energy costs in wireless sensors, which are summarized
in [5] as
1. Energy cost of RF transmission and reception. This is the energy consumption of
the RF components of the transmitter (and also the receiver), such as the mixer
and the analog to digital converter (ADC).
2. Energy cost of information sensing and processing. This is the energy consump-
tion of the sensor chip and the ADC of the sensing module.
3. Energy cost of other basic processing while being active. This is the energy
consumption of the micro-controller of the wireless sensor node. The processing
unit, which is generally associated with a small storage unit, performs tasks,
processes data, and controls the functionality of other components in the sensor
node.
The power consumptions for processing, sensing, and transmission/reception for
most commonly used WSN nodes are summarized in Tables 8.2, 8.3, and 8.4,
respectively. In Table 8.2, we list two micro-controllers PXA271 and ATmega
128/L, which are used in WSN nodes Inote2 and MicaZ, respectively. We also
include three micro-controllers of TI’s low voltage low power series. Comparing
TI’s MSP430F2132 with ATmel’s ATmega 128/L, we see that the active power
consumption is signiﬁcantly reduced. In Table 8.3, we list six sensor chips with
the functions of dual-axis accelerometer, three-axis accelerometer, pressure sensing,
light sensing, temperature sensing, and thermopile sensing. We see that the power
consumption of different types of sensors varies greatly. In Table 8.4, we list six
commonly used 2.4 GHz Low Power Transceiver for the IEEE 802.15.4 standard.
Comparing TI’s CC2502 with Freescale’s MC1321, it is easy to see that MC1321’s
power consumption is almost doubled compared to CC2502 in the receive mode,
while the transmit power consumption is almost the same.
We see that the energy cost of processing and sensing is much smaller compared
to the energy cost of transmission, and this is the reason why majority of the current
work on EH WSNs has considered only the energy cost of transmission, while
ignoring the energy cost of processing and sensing [6, 7].
However, the IoT will require various more complicated sensing functions, such
as charge coupled device (CCD) or complementary metal oxide semiconductor
(CMOS) image sensors that adopt array sensing, and high-rate and high-resolution
acoustic and seismic sensors [8] (and the references therein). The energy cost of
sensing in this scenario can actually be higher than the energy cost of transmis-
sion. Moreover, as an emerging low power communication technique, backscatter
communication [9], which does not have any active RF components and relies on
passive RF signal reﬂection, has an ultra low power consumption roughly within
a W level when active for transmissions [10, 11]. Therefore, in these application
scenarios, power consumptions for sensing are comparable to or even much higher

8
Wireless Powered Sensor Networks
245
Table 8.2 Processor consumption
Features
PXA271
ATmega 128/L
TMS320c5535
MSP430BT5190
MSP430F2132
Manufacturer
CPU
MCU
DSP
MCU
MCU
Company
Intel
Atmel
TI
TI
TI
Voltage supply
3 V
5 V
1.05 V
3 V
2.2 V
CPU frequency
13 MHz
12 MHz
50 MHz
20 MHz
1 M
Active mode
power
44.2 mW
125 mW
7.5 mW
9 mW (RAM
program execution)
0.55 mW
Standby mode
power
1.72 mW (idle 8.5 mW)
8.5 mW
0.26 mW
3.6 W
1.54 W
Wake up time
<0.6 ms
<1.5 ms
> 30.5 s
<5 s
<1 s
Start time
(from power
down)
<136.65 ms
>4.12 ms
>8 ms
<0.15 ms
<2 ms
Notions
Used by Imote2
(High-performance wireless
sensor network node)
Used by commercial
off-the-shelf sensor plat form
such as, MicaZ, Mica2
TI low voltage low
power series
TI low voltage low
power series
TI low voltage low
power series

246
W. Liu et al.
Table 8.3 Sensor consumption
Features
ADXL202JE
ADXL345
MS5534AM
TSL2550D
PGA309-ht
LMP91051
Manufacturer
Analog devices
Analog devices
Intersema
TAOS
TI
TI
Function
Dual-axis
accelerometer
Three-axis
accelerometer
Barometric pressure
sensor
Ambient light
sensor
Temperature and
pressure sense
Thermopile
sensor
Voltage supply
3.5 V
2.5 V
3 V
3.3 V
3 V
3.3 V
Active mode
power
1.75 mW
58 W
3 mW
1 mW
3.6 mW
11.88 mW
Standby mode
power
< 0.084 mW
0.25 W
0.01 mW
< 0.03 mW
0
0.247 mW
Data conversion
time
2 ms
> 0.3 ms
< 35 ms
400 ms
< 0.2 ms
<10 s
Begin to sleep
–
1.4 ms
–
–
0
2 s
Wake up time
–
1.4 ms
–
1 s
0
1 ms

8
Wireless Powered Sensor Networks
247
Table 8.4 Transceiver consumption (reproduced from [5])
Features
CC2520
CC2430
CC2590
JN5139
MC1321
EM1250
Manufacturer
TI
TI
TI
Jennic
Freescale
Ember
Radio frequency (GHz)
2.4
2.4
2.4
2.4
2.4
2.4
Bit rate (kbps)
250
250
250
250
250
250
Supply voltage (V)
1.8–3.8
2.0–3.6
2.2–3.6
2.2–3.7
2.0–3.4
2.1–3.6
Sleep current (A)
1
0.5
0.1
0.2
1
1
Rx current (mA)
18.5
27
3.4
34
37
29
Tx current min (mA)
16.2(18 dBm)
–
–
–
20.9(28 dBm)
19(32 dBm)
Tx current max (mA)
33.6 (5 dBm)
27 (0 dBm)
22.1 (12 dBm)
35 (3 dBm)
30 (0 dBm)
33 (5 dBm)

248
W. Liu et al.
than that of transmission/reception. The ﬁrst study is [12] that considers a WSN
energy allocation problem taken into account both the sensing and transmission
power consumptions.
8.2.2
EH Models
In order to evaluate the performance of EH-based communications, we need to
model the EH process ﬁrst. Most of the studies have modeled EH processes as
a time-discrete process or a block-by-block process, due to the fact that sensors,
in practice, operate in a time-block-based manner, i.e., transmission and sensing
tasks are processed in one or several time blocks. In other words, we care about
how much energy is harvested in different EH time blocks, rather than the entire
time-continuous energy harvesting process within each of the block. In general,
the harvested energy in each EH block could either remain constant or change
from block to block. These EH ﬂuctuations in time-domain are characterized by
the coherent time. The coherence time is the time interval (i.e., the number of EH
time blocks) within which the harvested energy does not change much.
There are three EH models listed below, as illustrated in Fig. 8.3.
1. Deterministic EH Model. Deterministic energy arrival is the most simple EH
model. It is a proper model when the coherence time of the EH process is
much larger than the duration of the entire communication session, such as
EH by solar panel on clear days. Since the deterministic EH model is very
simple, it is commonly adopted to evaluate the performance of EH-based WSN
communications [13–15].
2. Non-Causal EH Model. Non-causal EH model is an ideal EH model that the
future EH process is entirely known at the beginning of transmission. If the
non-causal EH information is known at a node, it can adopt the optimal energy
scheduling strategy and achieves the maximum communication performance.
Therefore, non-causal EH model is useful to provide a performance upper bound.
3. Random EH Models. The most popular EH model in the recent years is the
random EH model in which the EH process is regarded as random processes.
In general, random EH process can be treated as a casual EH model. They are
divided into two categories:
Fig. 8.3 Classiﬁcation of EH
models
EH Models
Deterministic
Non-Causal
Random
Correlated
Independent

8
Wireless Powered Sensor Networks
249
a. Correlated EH process is an EH process that the harvested energy in the
current time block, which is a random variable, is related to the harvested
energy in the previous time blocks, i.e., a Markov EH model [6, 7, 16]. For
example, in [17, 18], the EH process is modeled as an ON–OFF two-state a
ﬁrst-order discrete-time Markov process, where the harvested energy during
an ON block is constant while there is no energy harvested in OFF blocks.
b. Independent EH process is an EH process that the harvested energy in the
current time block is independent to the harvested energy in the previous
time blocks, i.e., an i.i.d. EH model. For the i.i.d. energy arrival model,
the available harvested energy in each time block follows i.i.d. continuous
distribution [19–21]. In [21, 22], Bernoulli i.i.d. discrete EH process is
considered.
8.2.3
Design and Performance Analysis
Most of the EH WSN design problems can be treated as energy/power schedul-
ing/management problems under dynamic EH processes. If the allocated power
usage in one time block is very high, an energy outage may happen in the next
few time blocks in which the EH rate is very low and cannot support the relevant
power consumptions, and thus causes performance losses. While if the allocated
power usage is very low in one time block, an energy overﬂow may happen in the
next a few time blocks in which the EH rate is very high and a ﬁnite battery cannot
store all the available energy, and thus causes a waste of energy. Therefore, it is very
important to carefully design the power scheduling protocols.
The power scheduling problem has basically two scenarios: ofﬂine and online,
corresponding to non-causal and causal EH processes, respectively. The design
targets of the power scheduling problems are mostly focused on average trans-
mission throughput maximization during a certain time duration and transmission
completion time minimization, and average delay minimization, such as [23–25],
respectively. The required constraints of the optimization problems include the
energy causality, i.e., not using energy in the future, and the battery capacity.
For the ofﬂine optimization problems, where the full knowledge of both the
energy state information and the transmission channel state information are known
before the beginning of transmission, when both the object function is a concave
and the constraints are convex, the optimal power scheduling strategy can be
found by solving Karush–Kuhn–Tucker conditions [23]. However, most of the EH
power scheduling problems are not convex, and in this case, optimal (deterministic)
dynamic programming policy and greedy policy are helpful [26]. The approach in
the optimal dynamic programming policy is to break an optimization problem into
sub-problems and then recursively ﬁnd the optimal solutions to the sub-problems.
The greedy policy also ﬁrst breaks down the problem into sub-problems, but then it
simply picks optimal choices for each sub-problem as the solution. However, such
locally optimal (i.e., greedy) choices may result in a bad global solution. On the

250
W. Liu et al.
other hand, the greedy policy has a much lower computation and space complexity
compared to the optimal dynamic programming policy and usually provides an
acceptable sub-optimal solution in some scenarios.
For the online optimization problems, the optimization only accounts for partial
or full statistical knowledge of the EH and transmission channel fading dynamic
processes, and the problem is usually solved as an online optimal power control
problem. The most commonly used method is the stochastic dynamic program-
ming [26, 27]. Formally, the stochastic dynamic policy has the same components
as the deterministic one. The only difference is that for the stochastic dynamic
programming, when evaluating each sub-problem, the long-term effect caused by
the adopted strategy should be taken into account.
8.3
Wireless Power Transfer and Wireless Sensor Networks
Leveraging the far-ﬁeld radiative properties of electromagnetic waves, wireless
receivers are able to harvest energy remotely from RF signals radiated by RF signal
emitters. This simple invention has been known long (a century ago) before the
recent excitement about WPT. WPT techniques are considered popular because of
the following two properties:
1. Wireless, which enables conveniently powering large-scale ubiquitous nodes
without battery replacements or speciﬁc conventional EH sources, particularly
for implanted in-body sensors. In other words, WPT technologies have the
potential to make people’s life truly wire free.
2. RF signals carry both energy and information at the same time, which enables
wireless power and information transfer at the same time.
Compared to conventional EH techniques, WPT has another two advantages:
1. WPT is more controllable and does not rely on environmental EH sources.
2. RF EH devices, i.e., rectiﬁer-based simple passive components, are suitable for
large-scale WSNs and IoT nodes. This is in contrast to: solar-energy-based node
is equipped with heavy solar panel, vibration-energy-based node is equipped
with relatively complex mechanical construction, thermal-energy-based node is
equipped with relatively large area thermoelectric generators, wind-energy-based
node is equipped with big size wind turbine.
A summary of some of the industry studies about the available harvested
RF power is listed in Table 8.5. Compared with the EH rate provided by the
conventional ambient EH methods shown in Table 8.1, we see that the EH rate of the
WPT techniques in general is much lower and decays rapidly with the distance with
the RF signal emitter. This is the main problem of WPT. However, for low power
WSNs, WPT is viable and an attractive solution.

8
Wireless Powered Sensor Networks
251
Table 8.5 Wireless power transfer experimental data [28]
Amount of energy
Source
Source power
Distance
harvested (W)
Isotropic RF transmitter
4 W
15 m
5.5
Isotropic RF transmitter
1.78 W
25 m
2.3
Isotropic RF transmitter
1.78 W
27 m
2
TX91501 powercaster transmitter
3 W
5 m
189
TX91501 powercaster transmitter
3 W
11 m
1
Tokyo TV tower
48 kW
6.3 km
0.1–0.25
KING-TV tower (Seattle)
960 kW
4.1 km
60
KING-TV tower (Seattle)
960 kW
10.4 km
15.8
Diode
LPF
Battery
Rectiﬁer
RF signal
DC signal
Fig. 8.4 Illustration of an RF-EH device
The architecture of a WPT-based wireless sensor is almost the same with an EH
wireless sensor, as illustrated in Fig. 8.2. The only difference is that the EH module
is replaced with an RF-DC converter, which is further discussed below.
8.3.1
RF-DC Converter
As mentioned above, an RF-EH device converting an RF signal to DC signal via a
rectiﬁer architecture is quite simple. It consists of a Schottky diode and a low pass
ﬁlter (LPF), as illustrated in Fig. 8.4. To accurately measure how much available RF
power captured by the antenna can be harvested, a proper model is required for the
non-linear power conversion property introduced by the Schottky diode.
The I-V curve of a Schottky diode is illustrated in Fig. 8.5a, and it shows that
only the positive part of the receive signal that is beyond a certain threshold can
be harvested. The harvested power increases monotonically from zero when the
receive signal power increases and is larger than the threshold. More precisely, the
non-truncated part of the non-linear model can be written as
I D Is

eV  1

;
(8.1)
where Is is the saturation current, V is the voltage drop across the diode, and  is the
reciprocal of the thermal voltage.
Although the model (8.1) is precise, it is not tractable for general analysis.
In [29], the authors take a Taylor expansion of the exponential function in (8.1), and

252
W. Liu et al.
Fig. 8.5 Illustration of the
models for RF-DC converter.
(a) Accurate non-linear
behavior of the Schottky
diode. (b) Near-practical
approximation. (c) Ideal
approximation
I
V
I = Is eγV −1

Is: saturation current
γ: reciprocal of the
thermal voltage
PRF
PDC
Pth
0
PRF
PDC
Pth
0
(a)
(b)
(c)
the optimal waveform design is considered based on the simpliﬁed model. In [30],
in order to better capture the truncated property of the Schottky diode, a non-linear
model is considered as
PDC D
M
1 C exp

a .PRF  b/
;
(8.2)
where M, a, b are the constant diode parameters, and PRF and PDC are the input RF
power and the output DC power, respectively. Then an optimal resource allocation
problem is considered for a multi-user simultaneous wireless information and power
transfer system based on the non-linear model.
There are another two commonly considered simpliﬁed models for RF-DC power
conversion, as illustrated in Fig. 8.5a,b.
1. For the near-practical model (Fig. 8.5b), the converted DC power is assumed to
increase linearly with the received RF power only if it passes a threshold [31, 32].
2. For the ideal model (Fig. 8.5c), the converted DC power is assumed to be
proportional to the RF power only if it is beyond the threshold [33, 34].

8
Wireless Powered Sensor Networks
253
8.3.2
Network Model for WPT
There are three network models for WPT.
1. WPT only network, where energy transfer is in the downlink. In [35], the authors
proposed a power beacon-based hybrid cellular network. In the network, mobile
users are wirelessly powered by randomly deployed power beacons, which
enables mobile users to have a much longer lifetime without battery replacement.
Different scenarios such as single-/multi-user, relays, multi-carrier have been
considered with WPT [29, 33, 36–41].
In [33], wirelessly power transfer from a multi-antenna PB to single/multiple
energy receivers is studied, where the optimal WPT strategy are obtained. In [36],
a system consisting of a single power beacon and multiple energy receivers
was considered, where the energy receiver can only do one-bit feedback. The
optimal channel learning algorithm was also proposed for such a WPT system.
In [37], the distributed WPT system with limited-feedback was studied, where a
distributed channel learning method was proposed. In [38], WPT-based sensor
networks were considered, where a large-scale sensor network is powered
by randomly deployed power beacons. The sensor-active probability was also
studied.
In [39], the multiple power beacon placement problem was considered.
The location of the power beacons was optimized which maximized the WPT
powered communication network. In [40] and [41], WPT-based single- and
bi-directional relay networks were considered, respectively, where the relay
is wirelessly powered by the transmitter for relaying the information to the
destination. The maximal throughput of such a relay networks was derived.
In [29], WPT with multi-carrier waveform was considered, where waveform
optimization method was proposed.
2. Simultaneous wireless information and power transfer (SWIPT) network, where
energy and information are transferred simultaneously in the downlink by
leveraging the property that RF signal carries both information and energy.
In [33], the authors ﬁrst proposed a practical SWIPT system, where the receiver
can obtain information and energy simultaneously from the received signal by
using a time-switching or power-splitting method, as illustrated in Fig. 8.6.
For the time-switching-based SWIPT receiver, the RF antenna periodically
switches between an information receiver and an energy receiver for information
detection and energy harvesting, respectively. In this way, the SWIPT receiver is
able to detect information for a certain percentage of time, and harvest energy in
the rest of the time. For the power-splitting-based SWIPT receiver, the received
RF signal is ﬁrst split into two streams by a passive power splitter, and then one
signal is sent to the information receiver and the other signal is sent to the energy
receiver.
SWIPT for a multi(MISO) broadcast channel was investigated in [42]. SWIPT
in OFDM-based systems were further investigated in [43, 44]. Such systems
are important, since 4G systems are based on OFDM. In [43], downlink

254
W. Liu et al.
Fig. 8.6 SWIPT receivers.
(a) Time-switching receiver.
(b) Power-splitting receiver
Energy
Receiver
Information
Receiver
Energy
Receiver
Information
Receiver
Power Splitter
(a)
(b)
OFDM-SWIPT in a multi-user system was studied, where the optimal resource
allocation problem was solved. In [44], the resource allocation problem of an
OFDM cellular system, which performs downlink SWIPT and uplink informa-
tion transmission, was comprehensively studied.
3. Wireless powered communication network (WPCN), where energy is transferred
in the downlink and information is transferred in the uplink. In [45], the authors
ﬁrst proposed the WPCN network model. In this network, mobile users harvest
RF energy emitted by a base station, and transmit information to the base
station when it has harvested enough energy. The WPCN is particularly useful in
wireless sensor networks, since wireless sensors usually have very low downlink
data rate but high uplink data rate, e.g., updating the sensed information to
the sink.
8.3.3
WPT-Based WSN Transmission Protocols
Unlike traditional battery-operated communications, the available harvested RF
power to the wirelessly powered nodes is time-variant due to the WPT channel
fading. To smooth out the WPT channel randomness effect, the harvested RF energy
is stored in an energy buffer, i.e., a battery or a super-capacitor, and there are two
kinds of WSN transmission protocols that rely on the stored battery energy:
1. Harvest-use protocol, where the harvested energy in one time block is assumed to
be used entirely within the same block. The harvest-use protocol can be adopted
by WSNs with small battery storage [19, 33, 34, 45, 46], where the harvested
energy should be used immediately, otherwise, the battery energy overﬂow
occurs and leads to communication performance losses. On the other hand, the

8
Wireless Powered Sensor Networks
255
performance analysis of harvest-use protocol-based WSNs is often tractable,
which is hence adopted by many research studies. Therefore, the performance
of a harvest-use protocol-based WSN can be treated as a lower bound of that
obtained by an optimal transmission protocol.
2. Harvest-store-use protocol, where the harvested energy in one time block can
be stored for future use. Since the harvested energy does not need to be
consumed entirely, the harvest-store-use protocol provides a better transmission
performance compared with the harvest-use protocol. The harvest-store-use
protocol is adopted by WSNs with large battery storage [47–49]. In this case, the
sensors do not need to use all the available energy at each time block, and thus can
better utilize the available harvested energy and schedule its power consumption
to improve the communication performance. In theory, in order to achieve a
globally optimal performance of transmission, a sensor can adaptively change
the transmit power in each time block depending on the current energy storage
and the length of data queue. However, most of the WPT-based WSNs are simple
devices, which require low-complexity protocols that do not allow adaptively
changing the transmit power. Therefore, the widely adopted harvest-store-use
protocol is a threshold-based protocol, which transmits with a constant power
within a time block as long as there is sufﬁcient energy for the transmission [47–
49].
8.3.4
Performance Analysis
There is one important metric for each of the WPT network, SWIPT network, and
WPCN, as shown below.
WPT efﬁciency is considered in WPT only networks, which is deﬁned as
	WPT D Ptx
Prx
;
(8.3)
where Ptx and Prx are the transmit signal power and the harvested signal power at
the transmitter and the receiver, respectively. WPT efﬁciently indicates the quality
of a WPT protocol design, such as channel training-based energy transfer [50, 51],
and multi-antenna energy beamforming [36, 37, 52].
Rate-energy region is considered in SWIPT networks, which is the boundary
of all the achievable tradeoff for maximal information rate versus energy transfer
[33, 34]. A large rate-energy region means the SWIPT network is more capable for
simultaneously harvesting RF energy and detecting information, or the performance
losses on information detection due to the RF energy harvesting is smaller.
Uplink throughput is the key metric for a WPCN. WPCNs encounter a doubly
near-far problem due to the fact that a far sensor from the sink, which receives
less wireless energy than a nearer sensor in the downlink, has to transmit with
more power in the uplink to achieve the same reliable information transmission

256
W. Liu et al.
rate [45]. Therefore, in order to achieve a better uplink throughput of a WSN, we
need to properly design the downlink WPT and the uplink information transmission
protocols. A time-division-multiple-access-based uplink–downlink user scheduling
is proposed in [45].
8.4
Design Challenges
8.4.1
Sensor Power Consumption
Besides modeling the EH process, to accurately analyze the EH powered sensor
behavior, we need an accurate model for sensor’s energy costs. As discussed in
the previous section, there are three main energy costs for a wireless sensors, and
particularly, the energy costs of sensing and transmission/reception dominate the
overall energy consumption.
Therefore, for a status monitoring WSN, we need to taken into account both the
energy costs of sensing and transmission when analyze the performance of status
monitoring.
8.4.2
The Age of Information
The recent internet-of-things brings ubiquitous wireless sensors together, which
monitor environmental data and update them to the users. In this status monitoring
application, we need the sensors to update their monitored status as timely as
possible. The conventional metric to measure the timeliness of a WSN is update
cycle, which measures the time elapsed from one status update at the sink to the
next [48]. Update cycle captures how frequently the status information is updated
at the user. For example, if the average update cycle of a WSN is 10 s, then we can
expect that the status updates successfully at the user every 10 s. However, from
the 10 s update cycle, we cannot see when the status was originally generated. For
example, when a successful status is received/updated at the user, the status could
be collected 9 s ago, which is not a fresh status, or 1 s ago, which is a fresh status.
Measuring the freshness of the updated status has long been desirable, but it is only
recently that it have been seriously considered and modeled in [53–55], and named
as update age.
Since both the update frequency and freshness are related to determine how
timely a status monitoring WSN is, we need both the update cycle and update age
to accurately measure the timeliness of the status monitoring WSN. It was ﬁrst
proposed in a recent study [48] that using update cycle together with update age
brings a comprehensive measure of the timeliness of a status monitoring WSN. The
idea is simple that since update age and update cycle are complementary to each

8
Wireless Powered Sensor Networks
257
other, i.e., update cycle does not reﬂect the update freshness at the sink whereas
update age does not reﬂect the update frequency, the best way to evaluate the
performance of a status monitoring WSN is to jointly utilize both of them.
8.5
WPT-WSN: Delay Analysis Considering Energy Costs
of Sensing and Transmission
8.5.1
System Model
We consider a status monitoring scenario where a wirelessly powered sensor
periodically transmits its sensed status information to a sink, as illustrated in
Fig. 8.1. The sensor is able to harvest RF energy from a nearby power beacon.
To complete the status monitoring task, the sensor has two main functions, i.e.,
sensing and transmission, each having individual energy cost. Before performing
either sensing or transmission, the sensor ﬁrst needs to spend a certain amount of
time on EH. The harvested energy is stored in a half-duplex battery, which cannot
charge and discharge at the same time [19]. Because the commercial battery capacity
typically ranges from joules to thousands of joules [4], and the available harvested
energy per second is only a few millijoules, as shown in Table 8.5, we assume that
the battery has a sufﬁcient capacity such that the amount of energy stored in the
battery never reaches its maximum capacity.
We adopt a block-wise operation following the state-of-the-art EH sensor design
practice [56]. Speciﬁcally, we assume that one sensing operation or one transmission
is performed in one time block of duration T seconds, and sensing and transmission
cannot occur within a same time block. In general, a sensor may spend different
amounts of time on one sensing operation and one packet transmission [8]. Thus,
in future study, the assumed protocol and analysis can be generalized to different
sensing and transmission time durations. At the beginning of each block, the sensor
makes a decision to perform either energy harvesting, sensing, or transmission
depending on the current battery energy storage. Before the discussion of such
sensing and transmission protocol, ﬁrstly, we need the following deﬁnitions of three
types of time blocks:
1. Energy harvesting block (EHB): The sensor harvests RF energy and stores
the energy in its battery. We consider that the wireless channel between the
power beacon and the sensor suffers from independent and identically distributed
(i.i.d.) block Rayleigh fading. In general, Rayleigh fading channel is commonly
considered in the scenario where there is no line-of-sight, and there are sufﬁcient
scatters between the transmitter and the receiver. Note that if there is line-of-sight
between the power beacon and the sensor, Rician or Nakagami fading channel
model should be adopted, which is further studied in [48].

258
W. Liu et al.
With the i.i.d. Rayleigh fading channel assumption for the WPT link, the
harvested energy in each EHB follows the same exponential distribution and
changes independently from block to block. Thus, we refer to the energy arrival
process as exponential energy arrival process. The average EH rate is  Joules
per block.
2. Sensing Block (SB): The sensor samples the environmental status information,
and then processes and packs the sensed information into a data packet. The
energy cost in a SB is denoted by ESB Joules.
3. Transmission Block (TB): The sensor transmits the data packet, which was
generated from the last sensing operation, to the sink with energy cost ETB Joules,
i.e., the transmit power is PTB
D ETB=T. To indicate successful packet
reception, the sink sends a one-bit feedback signal to the sensor after each
TB. Note that the time and energy consumed for receiving the feedback signal
at the sensor is negligible as compared to its packet transmission time. If the
transmission is successful, we have a successful transmission block (STB);
otherwise, we have a failed transmission block (FTB).
The transmission outage, i.e., the probability of a TB being a FTB, is denoted
by Pout. We assume that a transmission outage from the sensor to the sink occurs
when the SNR at the sink  is lower than SNR threshold 0 D 40 dB [57]. The
outage probability is
Pout D Pr f < 0g :
(8.4)
The SNR at the sink is deﬁned as [58]
 D jhj2Ptx
 d2 ;
(8.5)
where h is the sensor-sink transmission channel fading gain,  is a path loss
factor which is assumed to be one [31] for simplicity, 2 is the noise power at
the sink, d is the distance between the sensor and the sink, and  is the path loss
exponent.
Also we assume that h is block-wise Rayleigh fading. Using (8.5), the
transmission outage probability can be written as
Pout D 1  exp
 
d20
Ptx
!
:
(8.6)
8.5.2
Sensing and Transmission Protocol
The time-varying EH process results in randomness in the delay for performing
sensing and transmission. To properly design a sensing and transmission protocol
for a status monitoring WSN, two issues need to be considered.

8
Wireless Powered Sensor Networks
259
The ﬁrst issue is about when to perform sensing. Considering the energy cost of
sensing, it is necessary to harvest sufﬁcient energy, ESB, before a sensing operation.
However, it is not a good choice to perform sensing as soon as the harvested energy
reaches ESB. Because there may not be sufﬁcient energy left for transmission after
the sensing operation, a certain amount of time for EH is required to prepare for
transmission which results in unnecessary delay and makes the sensed status less
timely. Therefore, to avoid such delays and make the update timely, we deﬁne the
condition for the sensing operation to be when the harvested energy in the battery
exceeds ESB C ETB. In this way, a transmission of sensed status information occurs
immediately after the sensing operation (i.e., a SB is always followed by a TB).
The second issue is about whether we need a retransmission when a failed
transmission (i.e., a FTB) occurs. Considering the energy cost of sensing, it is
necessary to perform retransmission(s) if the ﬁrst TB after a SB is failed, rather
than drop the packet and perform the next sensing operation. However, an arbitrary
number of retransmissions that make a status-information-containing packet to be
eventually received by the sink should be prevented. This is because a very long
retransmission process would make the updated status very untimely at the sink.
Therefore, we impose a time window for retransmissions to control the delay caused
by retransmissions. We denote W as the maximum number of time blocks after a SB,
within which transmission and retransmission(s) of the currently sensed information
can take place. Speciﬁcally, the time window for retransmissions is W  1 time
blocks, due to the fact that the ﬁrst transmission always happens immediately after
the SB.
We present the sensing and transmission protocol as follows, and the ﬂowchart
of the protocol is illustrated in Fig. 8.7.
(a) First, several EHBs are required to harvest enough energy, ESB C ETB, and then
a SB and a TB occur immediately.
(b) If the TB is a STB, i.e., the transmission in the TB is successful, in order to
prepare for the next sensing period, the sensor attempts to harvest energy, which
may take several EHBs, until the battery energy exceeds ESB C ETB again.
(c) If the TB is a FTB, i.e., the transmission in the TB fails, in order to prepare for a
retransmission, the sensor has to go back to harvesting energy, which may take
several EHBs, until the battery energy exceeds ETB.
(d) Retransmission may occur several times until either one of the two conditions
is met: (1) The sensed information is successfully transmitted to the sink, i.e., a
STB ﬁnally occurs, or (2) the time window for retransmissions W 1 is reached
but no STB occurs. Then, the data packet at the sensor is dropped, no matter
successful retransmission or not, and the sensor goes back to harvesting energy
for a new sensing operation.
An illustration of the sensing and transmission protocol with W D 6 is shown in
Fig. 8.8. From the example, we see that two EHB occur ﬁrst, after which the battery
energy exceeds ESB C ETB, and then a SB together with a TB occurs. Although
the TB is a FTB, after two retransmissions, a STB occurs. Then, after three EH

260
W. Liu et al.
EHB
Suﬃcient energy for
SB+TB?
SB
TB, counter=1
Successful transmission?
counter=W?
Suﬃcient energy for
TB?
TB, counter++
EHB, counter++
No
Yes
No
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
No
Fig. 8.7 Flowchart of the protocol
EHB
SB
STB
FTB
tSB,j
tSTB,j
tSB,j+1 tSTB,j+1 tSB,j+2
tSTB,j+2
t
...
...
...
...
Update cycles
Update ages
Fig. 8.8 Illustration of the sensing and transmission protocol, and the update cycle and update age

8
Wireless Powered Sensor Networks
261
blocks, a new SB occurs, after which, however, a STB never occurs within 6 time
blocks. Therefore, the sensed packet has to be dropped. In other words, the sensed
information in the second SB is not able to be received by the sink.
The time indices shown in Fig. 8.8 will be deﬁned in the following section.
8.5.3
Delay Related Metrics
As discussed in Sect. 8.4.2, to completely capture the timeliness of the status
monitoring WSN, we need both the update cycle and the update age metrics.
Recall that update age measures the time taken from when information is obtained
by the sensor to when the sensed information is successfully transmitted to the
sink, i.e., how timely the updated information at the sink is, and update cycle
measures the time duration between two consecutive successful transmissions, i.e.,
how frequently the information at the sink is updated. Thus, both the metrics are
important for measuring the timeliness of the status monitoring WSN.
As shown in Fig. 8.8, for the ease of describing the two metrics, tSTB;j is used to
denote the block index for the jth STB during the entire sensing and transmission
operation. Since each STB corresponds to a SB that generates the status information
contained in the STB, tSB;j is used to denote the block index for the SB in which the
sensed information is transmitted in the jth STB.
The two delay related metrics, expressed in terms of the number of time blocks,
are formally deﬁned in the following.
Deﬁnition 1 (Update Age). For the jth STB, the update age is given by the number
of time blocks from tSB;j to tSTB;j (shown in Fig. 8.8). The jth update age is
TUA;j D tSTB;j  tSB;j; j D 1; 2; 3; : : : :
(8.7)
Remark 1. Conditioned on a successful status-information-containing packet
reception at the sink, the update age measures the time elapsed from the generation
of the packet at the sensor to the successful reception of the packet at the sink.
A larger update age implies that a more outdated status is received by the sink.
However, the update age does not capture the delay that caused by dropped data
packets, and hence is not able to reﬂect the update frequency at the sink.
Deﬁnition 2 (Update Cycle). For the jth STB, the update cycle is given by the
number of time blocks from tSTB;j1 to tSTB;j (shown in Fig. 8.8). The jth update
cycle is
TUC;j D tSTB;jC1  tSTB;j; j D 1; 2; 3; : : : :
(8.8)
Remark 2. The update cycle measures the time elapsed from one successful status
update at the sink to the next, which takes into account the delay due to dropped
data packets. However, the update cycle is not able to measure the update freshness
at the sink, i.e., the time duration from the generation of a packet to its successful
reception at the sink.

262
W. Liu et al.
Therefore, update age and update cycle complement each other, and they jointly
capture the update freshness and frequency. Using both the metrics provides
comprehensive measure of the performance of a status monitoring WSN.
8.5.3.1
Modeling Update Age and Update Cycle as i.i.d. Random
Variables
To study the steady-state behavior of the update age and the update cycle during the
sensing and transmission process, we need the following lemma ﬁrst.
Lemma 1.
For an exponential energy arrival process, the steady-state distribution
of the energy level after each TB has pdf
g ."/ D 1
e "
 ;
(8.9)
where  is the average harvested energy.
Proof. This proof is identical to [59, Lemma 1]. We repeat some of the details here
for sake of completeness.
Because the harvested energy in each EHB is an exponentially distributed
random variable with parameter , as we have mentioned in Sect. 8.5.1, the energy
accumulation process by consecutive EHBs can be treated as a Poisson process [60].
Using the memorylessness property of the Poisson process [60, p. 134], conditioned
on that the available energy is higher than any given threshold value, the amount of
energy exceeding that threshold has the same distribution with the harvested energy
in each time block, i.e., Eq. (8.9). This completes the proof of Lemma 1.
From the deﬁnitions of the update age and the update cycle, TUA;j and TUC;j
only depend on (1) the available energy after the ﬁrst TB following a SB, and
(2) the random EH process after the TB. Since the steady-state distribution after
each TB is the same (i.e., Lemma 1) and the EH process is a steady-state process
(i.e., the i.i.d. exponential energy arrival process), both TUA;j and TUC;j have steady-
state distributions. For convenience, we remove subscript j for TUA and TUC in (8.7)
and (8.8), respectively.
8.5.4
Delay Analysis
We present the analytical results of the update age and the update cycle in this
section.

8
Wireless Powered Sensor Networks
263
8.5.4.1
Update Age and Update Cycle
Theorem 1. For an exponential energy arrival process, average update age is
given by
NTUA D .1  Pout/
Psuc
0
@1 C
W
X
lD2
l
l
X
nD2
.Pout/n1 Pois

l  n; .n  1/ETB=

1
A
(8.10)
where
Psuc D 1  Pout C .1  Pout/
W
X
lD2
l
X
nD2
.Pout/n1 Pois

l  n; .n  1/ETB=

: (8.11)
From Theorem 1, the average update age is independent with the energy cost of
sensing.
Theorem 2. For an exponential energy arrival process, average update cycle is
given by
NTUC D 1  Psuc
Psuc
ESB

C NV C W C 1

C ESB C ETB

C NTUA C 1;
(8.12)
where NTUA and Psuc are given in (8.10) and (8.11), and
NV D
Pout
1  Psuc
0
B@ETB


W2
X
iD0
iPois

i; ETB


 .W  1/
0
@1 
W2
X
iD0
Pois

i; ETB

1
A
1
CA
C
1
1Psuc

W
X
lD2
l
X
nD2
.Pout/n Pois

ln; .n1/ETB


˚l;
(8.13)
where
˚l ≜
0
B@ETB
 
Wl1
X
iD0
iPois

i; ETB


.Wl/
0
@1
Wl1
X
iD0
Pois

i; ETB

1
A
1
CA :
(8.14)
Proof. See Appendix F of [48].
From Theorem 2, the average update cycle depends on both the energy cost of
sensing and transmission.

264
W. Liu et al.
8.5.4.2
Asymptotic Update Age and Update Cycle
We also present the asymptotic update age and update cycle when the retransmission
window W  1 is sufﬁciently large.
Corollary 1. For an exponential energy arrival process, NTUA increases with W, and
as W gets large, the asymptotic NTUA is given by
lim
W!1
NTUA D 1 C
Pout
1  Pout
ETB

C 1

:
(8.15)
Proof. See Appendix G of [48].
Corollary 2. For an exponential energy arrival process, NTUC decreases with W,
and as W grows large, the asymptotic NTUC is given by
lim
W!1
NTUC D 2 C ESB C ETB

C
Pout
1  Pout
ETB

C 1

:
(8.16)
Proof. See Appendix G of [48].
8.5.4.3
Numerical Results
In this section, we present numerical results for the update age and update cycle.
We set the distance between the sensor and the sink as d D 90 m. This is because
the typical outdoor range for a wireless sensor is from 75 to 100 m [61]. Also we
set the path loss exponent for the sensor-sink transmission link as  D 3 [31]. The
noise power at the sink is 2 D 100 dBm [40]. The duration of a time block is
T D 5 ms[14]. The average harvested power is 10 mW [62], i.e., average harvested
energy per time block,  D 50 J. The RF-DC sensitivity level is 20 dBm [28].
Unless otherwise stated, (1) we set the power consumption in each TB, PTB D
40 mW, i.e., ETB D 200 J. Note that this includes RF circuit consumption (main
consumption) and the actual RF transmit power Ptx D 5 dBm1 and (2) we set the
power consumption in each SB as PSB D 45 mW[8], i.e., ESB D 225 J. In the
following calculations, power and SNR related quantities use a linear scale.
Assuming the SNR threshold  D 40 dB [57], we apply (8.6) to Theorems 1–2
and Corollaries 1–2, we compute the expressions of average and the asymptotic
values of TUA and TUC.
Pmfs of Update Age and Update Cycle Figure 8.9 plots the pmfs of update cycle,
TUC, and update age, TUA, for the exponential energy arrival process, respectively.
The results are plotted using Monte Carlo simulation method with 109 points. We
1The values we chose for PTB and Ptx are typical for commercial sensor platforms, such as
MICAz [61].

8
Wireless Powered Sensor Networks
265
0
20
40
60
80
100
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
Time blocks
pmf of TUA
0
50
100
150
200
0
0.005
0.01
0.015
pmf of TUC
Fig. 8.9 Pmfs for TUC and TUA
set W D 40, i.e., the time window for retransmissions is W  1 D 39 time blocks.
We see that the pmfs in general cannot be modeled by commonly used pmfs, such
as Poison distribution.
In the following ﬁgures, i.e., Figs. 8.7 and 8.8, we only present the numerical
results for the average update age and the average update cycle, which have been
presented in Corollaries 1–2.
Average Update Age and Average Update Cycle Figure 8.10 shows the average
update age, NTUA, and the average update cycle, NTUC, for different W, i.e., different
retransmission window, W  1. The results are generated using Theorems 1 and 2
and Corollaries 1 and 2, respectively. We can see that as the time window for
retransmissions increases, the average update age increases monotonically and
approaches its asymptotic value given by Corollary 1, while the average update
cycle decreases monotonically and approaches its analytical lower bound given by
Corollary 2. Also we see that with a larger retransmission window W1, the updated
status is in general less fresh, but the update frequency is higher.
Effect of Energy Cost of Sensing on Average Update Cycle We illustrate the
effect of energy cost of sensing on average update cycle. Figure 8.11 shows the
average update age, NTUA, and the average update cycle, NTUC, versus W, with different
energy cost of sensing, PSBT. The results are generated using Theorems 1 and 2.
The ﬁgure shows that the average update age increases with W, which is consistent
with Fig. 8.10, but it does not change with the energy cost of sensing, i.e., the update

266
W. Liu et al.
0
50
100
150
200
250
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
W
Time blocks
Analytical update cycle
Asymptotic update cycle
Asymptotic update age
Analytical update age
Fig. 8.10
NTUA and NTUC, versus W
0
50
100
150
200
250
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
W
¯TUC or ¯TUA, time blocks
¯TUC, PSB = 45 mW
¯TUC, PSB = 0 mW
¯TUA, independent of PSB
Fig. 8.11
NTUC and NTUA versus W for different sensing power, PSB

8
Wireless Powered Sensor Networks
267
age does not rely on the energy cost of sensing. This is because the update age is
the delay after a SB, and is independent with the energy cost of sensing. We can
see that for a ﬁxed value of W, e.g., W D 50, the average update cycle increases
as the sensing power consumption increases from 0 to 45 mW, i.e., the higher the
energy cost of sensing the larger update cycle. This is because during an update
cycle several SB occurs, and the higher energy cost of sensing the more EHBs within
the update cycle. We can see that NTUC is almost constant around the value of 52 and
does not vary much with W, i.e., the effect retransmission window on the average
update cycle is limited when the energy cost of sensing is ignored.
Summary
In this chapter, we have discussed the basic architecture of EH-based WSNs and
wireless power transfer-based WSNs. We have highlighted the advantage and
suitability of wireless power transfer-based WSNs, and discussed the associated
design challenges. We have presented a novel solution to one of the challenges,
related to the timeliness of the status monitoring WSNs, i.e., update cycle and update
age. Moreover, we have presented a framework of analysis for both the update cycle
and the update age, which takes into account both the energy cost of sensing and
transmission.
References
1. K. Sohraby, D. Minoli, T. Znati, Wireless Sensor Networks: Technology, Protocols, and
Applications (Wiley, New York, 2007)
2. M. Connectivity, The monitored World - a local perspective (2015). [Online]. Available: https://
blog.m2mconnectivity.com.au/2015/09/07/the-monitored-world-a-local-perspective/
3. H. Yetgin, K.T.K. Cheung, M. El-Hajjar, L. Hanzo, A survey of network lifetime maximization
techniques. IEEE Commun. Surv. Tutorials. (2017). Accepted
4. S. Sudevalayam, P. Kulkarni, Energy harvesting sensor nodes: survey and implications. IEEE
Commun. Surv. Tutorials 13(3), 443–461, Third Quarter (2011)
5. V. Gungor, G. Hancke, Industrial wireless sensor networks: challenges, design principles, and
technical approaches. IEEE Trans. Ind. Electron. 56(10), 4258–4265 (2009)
6. D. Niyato, E. Hossain, A. Fallahi, Sleep and wakeup strategies in solar-powered wireless
sensor/mesh networks: performance analysis and optimization. IEEE Trans. Mob. Comput.
6(2), 221–236 (2007)
7. J. Lei, R. Yates, L. Greenstein, A generic model for optimizing single-hop transmission policy
of replenishable sensors. IEEE Trans. Wirel. Commun. 8(2), 547–551 (2009)
8. V. Raghunathan, S. Ganeriwal, M. Srivastava, Emerging techniques for long lived wireless
sensor networks. IEEE Commun. Mag. 44(4), 108–114 (2006)
9. W. Liu, K. Huang, X. Zhou, S. Durrani, Backscatter communications for internet-of-things:
theory and applications. ArXiv e-prints (2017). [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/1701.
07588

268
W. Liu et al.
10. C. Boyer, S. Roy, Backscatter communication and RFID: coding, energy, and MIMO analysis.
IEEE Trans. Commun. 62(3), 770–785 (2014)
11. W. Liu, K. Huang, X. Zhou, S. Durrani, Full-duplex backscatter interference networks based
on time-hopping spreading spectrum. IEEE Trans. Wirel. Commun. (2017, to appear)
12. S. Mao, M.H. Cheung, V. Wong, Joint energy allocation for sensing and transmission in
rechargeable wireless sensor networks. IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol. 63(6), 2862–2875 (2014)
13. H. Mahdavi-Doost, R. Yates, Energy harvesting receivers: ﬁnite battery capacity, in Proceed-
ings of IEEE ISIT, July (2013), pp. 1799–1803
14. Z.A. Eu, H.-P. Tan, W.K. Seah, Design and performance analysis of MAC schemes for wireless
sensor networks powered by ambient energy harvesting. Ad Hoc Netw. 9(3), 300–323 (2011)
15. C. Huang, R. Zhang, S. Cui, Throughput maximization for the Gaussian relay channel with
energy harvesting constraints. IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun. 31(8), 1469–1479 (2013)
16. C.K. Ho, R. Zhang, Optimal energy allocation for wireless communications with energy
harvesting constraints. IEEE Trans. Signal Process. 60(9), 4808–4818 (2012)
17. A. Seyedi, B. Sikdar, Energy efﬁcient transmission strategies for body sensor networks with
energy harvesting. IEEE Trans. Commun. 58(7), 2116–2126 (2010)
18. S. Zhang, A. Seyedi, B. Sikdar, An analytical approach to the design of energy harvesting
wireless sensor nodes. IEEE Trans. Wirel. Commun. 12(8), 4010–4024 (2013)
19. S. Luo, R. Zhang, T.J. Lim, Optimal save-then-transmit protocol for energy harvesting wireless
transmitters. IEEE Trans. Wirel. Commun. 12(3), 1196–1207 (2013)
20. R. Morsi, D. Michalopoulos, R. Schober, On-off transmission policy for wireless powered com-
munication with energy storage, in Proceedings of Asilomar, November (2014), pp. 1676–1682
21. Y. Dong, F. Farnia, A. Ozgur, Near optimal energy control and approximate capacity of energy
harvesting communication. IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun. 33(3), 540–557 (2015)
22. N. Michelusi, L. Badia, M. Zorzi, Optimal transmission policies for energy harvesting devices
with limited state-of-charge knowledge. IEEE Trans. Commun. 62(11), 3969–3982 (2014)
23. O. Ozel, K. Tutuncuoglu, J. Yang, S. Ulukus, A. Yener, Transmission with energy harvesting
nodes in fading wireless channels: optimal policies. IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun. 29(8),
1732–1743 (2011)
24. J. Yang, S. Ulukus, Transmission completion time minimization in an energy harvesting
system, in Proceedings of CISS, March (2010), pp. 1–6
25. J. Yang, S. Ulukus, Delay-minimal transmission for energy constrained wireless communica-
tions, in Proceedings of IEEE ICC, May (2008), pp. 3531–3535
26. Y. Mao, G. Yu, Z. Zhang, On the optimal transmission policy in hybrid energy supply wireless
communication systems. IEEE Trans. Wirel. Commun. 13(11), 6422–6430 (2014)
27. N. Michelusi, M. Zorzi, Optimal random multiaccess in energy harvesting wireless sensor
networks, in Proceedings of IEEE ICC, June (2013), pp. 463–468
28. X. Lu, P. Wang, D. Niyato, D.I. Kim, Z. Han, Wireless networks with RF energy harvesting: a
contemporary survey. IEEE Commun. Surv. Tutorials 17(2), 757–789, Second Quarter (2015)
29. B. Clerckx, E. Bayguzina, Waveform design for wireless power transfer. IEEE Trans. Signal
Process. 64(23), 6313–6328 (2016)
30. E. Boshkovska, D.W.K. Ng, N. Zlatanov, R. Schober, Practical non-linear energy harvesting
model and resource allocation for SWIPT systems. IEEE Commun. Lett. 19(12), 2082–2085
(2015)
31. T. Wu, H.-C. Yang, On the performance of overlaid wireless sensor transmission with RF
energy harvesting. IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun. 33(8), 1693–1705 (2015)
32. W. Liu, X. Zhou, S. Durrani, P. Popovski, SWIPT with practical modulation and RF energy
harvesting sensitivity, in Proceedings of ICC, May (2016), pp. 1–7
33. R. Zhang, C.K. Ho, MIMO broadcasting for simultaneous wireless information and power
transfer. IEEE Trans. Wirel. Commun. 12(5), 1989–2001 (2013)
34. X. Zhou, R. Zhang, C.K. Ho, Wireless information and power transfer: architecture design and
rate-energy tradeoff. IEEE Trans. Commun. 61(11), 4754–4767 (2013)
35. K. Huang, V.K.N. Lau, Enabling wireless power transfer in cellular networks: architecture,
modeling and deployment. IEEE Trans. Wirel. Commun. 13(2), 902–912 (2014)

8
Wireless Powered Sensor Networks
269
36. J. Xu, R. Zhang, Energy beamforming with one-bit feedback. IEEE Trans. Signal Process.
62(20), 5370–5381 (2014)
37. S. Lee, R. Zhang, Distributed energy beamforming with one-bit feedback, in Proceedings of
IEEE WCNC, April (2016), pp. 1–6
38. Z. Wang, L. Duan, R. Zhang, Adaptively directional wireless power transfer for large-scale
sensor networks. IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun. 34(5), 1785–1800 (2016)
39. S. Bi, R. Zhang, Placement optimization of energy and information access points in wireless
powered communication networks. IEEE Trans. Wirel. Commun. 15(3), 2351–2364 (2016)
40. A.A. Nasir, X. Zhou, S. Durrani, R.A. Kennedy, Wireless-powered relays in cooperative
communications: time-switching relaying protocols and throughput analysis. IEEE Trans.
Commun. 63(5), 1607–1622 (2015)
41. Y. Zeng, H. Chen, R. Zhang, Bidirectional wireless information and power transfer with a
helping relay. IEEE Commun. Lett. 20(5), 862–865 (2016)
42. S. Luo, J. Xu, T.J. Lim, R. Zhang, Capacity region of MISO broadcast channel for simultaneous
wireless information and power transfer. IEEE Trans. Commun. 63(10), 3856–3868 (2015)
43. X. Zhou, C.K. Ho, R. Zhang, Wireless information and power transfer in multiuser OFDM
systems. IEEE Trans. Wirel. Commun. 13(4), 2282–2294 (2014)
44. K. Huang, E. Larsson, Simultaneous information and power transfer for broadband wireless
systems. IEEE Trans. Signal Process. 61(23), 5972–5986 (2013)
45. H. Ju, R. Zhang, Throughput maximization in wireless powered communication networks.
IEEE Trans. Wirel. Commun. 13(1), 418–428 (2014)
46. I. Krikidis, Simultaneous information and energy transfer in large-scale networks with/without
relaying. IEEE Trans. Commun. 62(3), 900–912 (2014)
47. W. Liu, X. Zhou, S. Durrani, P. Popovski, Secure communication with a wireless-powered
friendly jammer. IEEE Trans. Wirel. Commun. 15(1), 401–415 (2016)
48. W. Liu, X. Zhou, S. Durrani, H. Mehrpouyan, S.D. Blostein, Energy harvesting wireless sensor
networks: delay analysis considering energy costs of sensing and transmission. IEEE Trans.
Wirel. Commun. 15(7), 4635–4650 (2016)
49. A. Nasir, X. Zhou, S. Durrani, R. Kennedy, Wireless-powered relays in cooperative commu-
nications: time-switching relaying protocols and throughput analysis. IEEE Trans. Commun.
63(5), 1607–1622 (2015)
50. Y. Zeng, R. Zhang, Optimized training design for wireless energy transfer. IEEE Trans.
Commun. 63(2), 536–550 (2015)
51. Y. Zeng, R. Zhang, Optimized training for net energy maximization in multi-antenna wireless
energy transfer over frequency-selective channel. IEEE Trans. Commun. 63(6), 2360–2373
(2015)
52. J. Xu, R. Zhang, A general design framework for MIMO wireless energy transfer with limited
feedback. IEEE Trans. Signal Process. 64(10), 2475–2488 (2016)
53. M. Costa, M. Codreanu, A. Ephremides, Age of information with packet management, in
Proceedings of ISIT, June (2014), pp. 1583–1587
54. S. Kaul, R. Yates, M. Gruteser, Real-time status: How often should one update? in Proceedings
of IEEE INFOCOM, March (2012), pp. 2731–2735
55. Y. Sun, E. Uysal-Biyikoglu, R. Yates, C.E. Koksal, N.B. Shroff, Update or wait: how to keep
your data fresh, in Proceedings of IEEE INFOCOM, April (2016), pp. 1–9
56. P. Lee, Z.A. Eu, M. Han, H. Tan, Empirical modeling of a solar-powered energy harvesting
wireless sensor node for time-slotted operation, in Proceedings of IEEE WCNC, March (2011),
pp. 179–184
57. Z. Ding, S. Perlaza, I. Esnaola, H.V. Poor, Power allocation strategies in energy harvesting
wireless cooperative networks. IEEE Trans. Wirel. Commun. 13(2), 846–860 (2014)
58. A.J. Goldsmith, Wireless Communications (Cambridge University Press, New York, 2005)

270
W. Liu et al.
59. W. Liu, X. Zhou, S. Durrani, H. Mehrpouyan, S.D. Blostein, Performance of wireless-powered
sensor transmission considering energy cost of sensing, in Proceedings of IEEE GLOBECOM,
December (2015), pp. 1–7
60. R. Durrett, Probability: Theory and Examples (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 2010)
61. MICAz, Crossbow Technology (2006). [Online]. Available: http://www.openautomation.net/
uploadsproductos/micaz-datasheet.pdf
62. F. Zhang, V. Lau, Closed-form delay-optimal power control for energy harvesting wireless
system with ﬁnite energy storage. IEEE Trans. Signal Process. 62(21), 5706–5715 (2014)

Chapter 9
Spectrum and Energy Harvesting Protocols
for Wireless Sensor Nodes
Mansi Peer and Vivek Ashok Bohara
9.1
Introduction
Recently industry analysts predicted that by the year 2020, 50 billion devices will be
connected to mobile network worldwide. The large scale integration of devices to a
network is the result of the move towards a smarter planet. The goal is to generate
and process data with minimal human intervention and create an Internet of Things
(IoT). With emerging 5G wireless networks researchers are anticipating to unlock
the potential of IoT. 5G networks are envisioned to bring together different wireless
technologies paving a way for heterogeneous networks that can accommodate
diverse devices. These devices may have varied applications, for instance, they
may be wireless sensors used for monitoring temperature, pressure or stress, or
actuators which can be used to remotely control devices or make adjustments in real
time. These sensor nodes may be a part of body area network used for monitoring
body vitals. In particular, these devices with sensing abilities form a wireless sensor
network (WSN). There are two major concerns in the deployment of large scale
WSN given as follows:
•
Energy inefﬁciency: Energy consumption by the sensor nodes has been iden-
tiﬁed as one of the primary concerns. Further, most of the sensor nodes are
deployed in hostile or inaccessible environment where replacing the batteries or
providing stable energy source may not be feasible. The battery disposal also has
a serious impact on the global carbon emission levels. It contributes signiﬁcantly
to global warming and causes concern for the environment.
M. Peer () • V.A. Bohara
Wirocomm Research Group, Indraprastha Institute of Information Technology (IIIT), Delhi, India
e-mail: mansip@iiitd.ac.in; vivek.b@iiitd.ac.in
© Springer International Publishing AG 2018
D.N.K. Jayakody et al. (eds.), Wireless Information and Power Transfer:
A New Paradigm for Green Communications, DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-56669-6_9
271

272
M. Peer and V.A. Bohara
•
Spectrum Under-Utilization: Apart from above, recent frequency spectrum
measurements have shown that although most of the spectrum band is allocated
under license, the spectrum usage is very low. The unprecedented increase in the
number of nodes has prompted researchers to come out with ways to better utilize
this limited resource.
Recently, signiﬁcant amount of interest has been shown by the scientiﬁc research
community into the domain of radio frequency (RF) energy harvesting as a means
of “green and nonpolluting source of energy.” The ubiquitous presence of ambient
RF sources like cellular towers, mobile phones, WiFi routers, television, and radio
transmitters in a humanized environment make the option of charging low-power
sensors by means of RF energy harvesting more feasible. RF energy unlike solar
or wind is more predictable as it is less dependent of the time of the day, weather/
geographical location, etc. and can be effectively provided on demand. Inductive
coupling and magnetic resonance coupling are also other methods of wireless energy
transfer (WET) which involve resonating of coils tuned at a particular frequency,
however, there are two major limitations with this approach. First, the power is
attenuated according to the cube of distance which restricts the power transfer
distance. Second, it requires the calibration and alignment of resonators/coils which
makes it difﬁcult for mobile and remote charging [1]. Further, not only does a RF
signal carry information but energy too, so information transmission and power
transfer can occur simultaneously.
The spectral inefﬁciency problem in WSN can be alleviated by techniques such
as cooperative spectrum sharing (CSS) which facilitate spectrum sharing between
users, thus eliminating the need for dedicated spectrum band for sensor nodes. CSS
can work well for sensor networks as the wireless sensor nodes do not need to send
the data all the time, therefore providing a dedicated spectrum to sensor networks is
not an economically viable approach.
9.1.1
Related Work
Most of the recent work in the ﬁeld of RF energy harvesting has involved
cooperative relaying [2–4]. In [2], authors have proposed two energy harvesting
relaying protocols, namely the time switching-based relaying (TSR) protocol, where
the energy constrained amplify and forward (AF) relay node switches between
the energy harvesting and information decoding modes, and power splitting-based
relaying (PSR) protocol, where a fraction of power received at relay is devoted
to energy harvesting and rest of the power is utilized for information decoding.
In both the protocols, the relays were assumed to be half-duplex. In [3] energy
harvesting protocol was extended to full-duplex relays so that energy harvesting and
information transmission from relay to primary destination occurs simultaneously
that ensures uninterrupted information transmission. The energy stored in the
battery can be used for further transmissions at relay.

9
Spectrum and Energy Harvesting Protocols for Wireless Sensor Nodes
273
Energy harvesting techniques have also been employed to complement cognitive
radio networks. In a cognitive radio framework, two set of users, namely primary
and secondary users are allowed to co-exist in the same frequency band. Primary
user, also termed as licensed user, has a license to operate on a particular fre-
quency band. Secondary user, also termed as cognitive user or unlicensed user,
accesses the licensed band of primary user without degrading the performance
of primary user. Furthermore, by incorporating RF energy harvesting techniques,
secondary/cognitive user can be made self-sustaining. For instance, in [5], a model
has been proposed where low-power mobile nodes in the secondary networks called
the secondary transmitters (STs) harvest energy from the RF transmissions of
the primary transmitters (PTs). In this framework, STs can operate in any of the
following three modes: harvesting mode, transmitting mode, or idle mode. In the
harvesting mode a ST lying in the harvesting zone of an active PT harvests energy
from PT’s transmissions, and in transmission mode a ST lying outside the guard
zones of all the active PTs is able to transmit its information. When in idle mode
neither harvesting nor transmission takes place.
Most of the above works on energy harvesting were based on underlay protocol
wherein the performance of ST is limited by amount of interference acceptable at
PR. Furthermore they did not consider cooperative spectrum sharing protocols. We
believe that the cooperative and cognitive techniques are complementary to each
other and thus by modeling ST as an energy constrained cooperative relay, perfor-
mances of both primary and secondary systems can be enhanced simultaneously.
In our previous work [6], we had proposed a two phase cognitive relaying protocol
wherein secondary user, characterized as a self-sustaining energy constrained sensor
node, harvests energy from the primary signal transmission based on PSR protocol.
Further, it utilizes the harvested energy to assist the primary user to achieve the target
rate of communication in exchange for access to primary’s spectrum. Similarly [7]
focus on the information and energy cooperation in cooperative cognitive radio
networks.
9.1.2
Chapter Outline
This chapter tackles the problem of energy consumption by incorporating the tech-
nique of radio frequency (RF) energy harvesting in the sensor nodes. Speciﬁcally,
in this chapter we use the approach of simultaneous energy harvesting and spectrum
access to alleviate the major concerns of wireless sensor nodes such as limited power
and spectrum. In the course of this chapter we come up with a hybrid time switching
and power splitting spectrum sharing protocol to improve primary user’s outage
performance and provide spectrum access to secondary user. Later, we add the
concept of optimal sensor node selection for forwarding primary user’s information
using the already proposed hybrid protocol. It is to be noted that in this chapter the
wireless sensor nodes are considered to be in a cognitive cooperative relaying setup.

274
M. Peer and V.A. Bohara
9.2
A Hybrid Spectrum Sharing Protocol for Energy
Harvesting Sensor Nodes
In this section we have proposed a hybrid time switching and power splitting
spectrum sharing protocol [15] that not only improves the energy efﬁciency but also
leads to better spectrum utilization. Unlike [6], in the proposed work we incorporate
unequal division of time between the two phases. Our results show that for each
value of fraction of total harvested power used for transmission of primary signal
there exists an optimal value of fraction of block time over which if energy is
harvested results in minimum primary outage. Further, harvesting energy for the
optimal amount of time maximizes the overall throughput. In [6], it is assumed
that if ST fails in decoding the primary signal in phase 1, it will keep silent and
there will be no secondary spectrum access. However, in the proposed work if ST
fails in decoding primary signal in phase 1, it will transmit the secondary signal in
phase 2. This will improve the performance of secondary system. In comparison to
[5] where the performance of secondary node is limited by amount of interference
acceptable at PR, in our proposed scheme we have allocated a dedicated fraction of
block duration for secondary spectrum access. This will help the secondary node to
maintain its own QoS.
9.2.1
Proposed System Model and System Performance
Analysis
9.2.1.1
System Model
We have considered a cooperative spectrum sharing system [8] which consists of
two source–destination pairs. One is primary transmitter–primary receiver (PT–PR)
and other is secondary transmitter–secondary receiver (ST–SR) corresponding to
the primary and secondary systems, respectively, as shown in Fig. 9.1. We assume
that direct communication between PT and PR is not possible due to limitation
of transmission range, fading, obstacles, etc. [2]. In this scenario PT needs the
cooperation of a secondary node ST, which will act as a decode and forward (DF)
relay,1 to transmit from PT to PR. Moreover, ST, which is a sensor node, has no
power of its own and will be powered wirelessly by harvesting energy from the
PT–ST transmission. The block transmission time T is divided into two phases of
duration ˛T and .1˛/T. In phase 1, during ˛T time, PT broadcasts its information
signal xp which will be received at ST and SR. The total power, P, received at ST
during phase 1 will be divided between energy harvesting and information decoding
using PSR protocol.
1Interested readers may refer to [9] for details on control signaling involved between the primary
and secondary system.

9
Spectrum and Energy Harvesting Protocols for Wireless Sensor Nodes
275
Fig. 9.1 System model
The channel between each pair of transmitter and receiver is assumed to be
frequency non-selective Rayleigh slow fading channel. The channel coefﬁcients
corresponding to PT–ST, ST–SR, ST–PR, and PT–SR links are h1; h2; h3, and h4,
respectively. We have hi 	 C N .0; dv
i
/; i D 1; 2; 3; 4, where v is the path loss
exponent and di is the distance between the respective transmitter and receiver. The
channel gain ˇi D jhij2 is exponentially distributed and is denoted as ˇi 	 E .dv
i /,
where dv
i
is the mean of the distribution. The transmit power at PT is denoted as
Pp. The signal received at jth node in kth phase is denoted as yjk, where j D 1; 2; 3
for ST, SR, PR, respectively and k D 1; 2 for phase 1 and phase 2, respectively. In
phase 1, signal received at ST from PT is given by
y11 D
p
Pph1xp C na;
(9.1)
where na 	 C N .0; 2
a / is the AWGN noise received at ST. As power splitting
protocol is used at ST, P and .1  /P power is made available to the energy
harvesting and information receiver branches of the ST node, respectively, where
0    1. We have assumed that the power required for processing is negligible
compared to transmission power at ST [2]. So, the signal received at energy
harvester is given by
py11 D
p
Pph1xp C pna:
(9.2)
Energy harvested in time ˛T is given by
Eh D 	Ppjh1j2˛T;
(9.3)

276
M. Peer and V.A. Bohara
where 	 (0,1] is the conversion efﬁciency of the RF to DC conversion circuitry
used. Power extracted from the harvested energy is the transmit power available at
ST node and will be given by
Ph D
Eh
.1  ˛/T D 	Ppjh1j2˛
.1  ˛/
:
(9.4)
The signal received at information receiver of ST is given by
p
.1  /y11 D
q
.1  /Pph1xp C
p
.1  /na C nc;
(9.5)
where nc 	 C N .0; 2
c / is the sampled AWGN due to RF to baseband signal
conversion. From (9.5), the total AWGN variance at ST is given by 2 D .1  /
2
a C 2
c .
Rate achievable at ST will be
R1 D ˛ log2.1 C SNR1/;
(9.6)
where SNR1 D .1/Ppjh1j2
2
.
Signal received at SR is given by
y21 D
p
Pph4xp C nSR;
(9.7)
where nSR 	 C N .0; 2/ is the AWGN noise added at SR.
Rate achievable at SR in phase 1 is given by
R4 D ˛ log2
 
1 C Ppjh4j2
2
!
:
(9.8)
In transmission phase 2, three scenarios are possible depending on whether ST
and/or SR are able to successfully decode PT’s information in phase 1. The three
cases are as follows:
•
Case 1 In this case both ST and SR decode PT’s information. ST transmits signals
xp and xs with Ph and .1  /Ph power, respectively, where  (0,1). Signal
received at PR is given by
y32 D
p
Phh3xp C
p
.1  /Phh3xs C nPR;
(9.9)
where nPR 	 C N .0; 2/ is the AWGN noise added at PR. Signal received at SR
is given by
y22 D
p
.1  /Phh2xs C
p
Phh2xp C nSR:
(9.10)

9
Spectrum and Energy Harvesting Protocols for Wireless Sensor Nodes
277
Rate achievable at PR is given by
R3 D .1  ˛/ log2
 
1 C
Phjh3j2
.1  /Phjh3j2 C 2
!
:
(9.11)
Rate achievable at SR, conditioned on successful decoding of xp at ST and SR is
given by
R2 D .1  ˛/ log2
 
1 C .1  /Phjh2j2
2
!
:
(9.12)
•
Case 2 In case 2, ST is unable to decode xp with target rate in phase 1. So,
complete harvested power at secondary node is used for secondary transmission
and the signal received at SR in phase 2 is given by
y22 D
p
Phh2xs C nSR:
(9.13)
Hence, rate achievable at SR is given by
R5 D .1  ˛/ log2
 
1 C Phjh2j2
2
!
:
(9.14)
•
Case 3 In case 3, ST successfully decodes xp, however, SR fails to decode it.
Hence, the primary signal present in the combined signal transmitted by ST will
create interference at SR. So, the rate achievable at SR in phase 2 will be given by:
R6 D .1  ˛/ log2
 
1 C .1  /Phjh2j2
Phjh2j2 C 2
!
:
(9.15)
9.2.1.2
Outage Probability Analysis of Primary System
The outage at primary system will occur if any of the PT–ST and ST–PR links fail
in achieving the target rate of communication, i.e., Rpt. Therefore, outage at PR is
given by
PoP D PŒmin.R1; R3/ < Rpt
 D 1  PŒR1 > Rpt
PŒR3 > Rpt
:
(9.16)
If any of the two links fail (this explains the use of minimum operator) then the
overall primary transmission will be in outage. Using (9.6),
PŒR1 > Rpt
 D 1  P
	
jh1j2 <
t
m.1  /

D e
dv
1 t
m.1/ ;
(9.17)

278
M. Peer and V.A. Bohara
where t D 2Rpt=˛  1 and m D Pp
2 . Similarly,
PŒR3 > Rpt
 D P
"
 Phjh3j2
.1  /Phjh3j2 C 2 > .2
Rpt
1˛  1/
#
:
(9.18)
Using (9.4)
PŒR3 > Rpt
 D PŒbjh3j2jh1j2 > a
;
(9.19)
where a D 2.1˛/.2Rpt=.1˛/1/
	Pp˛
, b D   .2Rpt=.1˛/  1/.1  /. This b can be either
positive or negative. Hence,
PŒR3 > Rpt
 D
8
<
:
PŒjh3j2jh1j2 > a
b
;
˛ < 1  ı
PŒjh3j2jh1j2 < a
b
 D 0;
otherwise;
(9.20)
where ı D
Rpt
log2.1C

1 /.
The second equality in (9.20) can be explained by the fact that the probability of
jh3j2jh1j2 being less than a negative number is 0. The ﬁrst term in (9.20) involves
product of two independent exponentially distributed random variables. This can be
determined as
PŒR3 > Rpt
 D
8
<
:
R 1
0
fjh1j2.x/PŒjh3j2 > a
bx
dx;
˛ < 1  ı
0;
otherwise:
(9.21)
Further for ˛ < 1  ı, using the form
R 1
0
e ˇ
4x xdx D
q
ˇ
 K1.
p
ˇ/ [10], where
K1.:/ is the modiﬁed ﬁrst order Bessel function of second kind, we obtain
PŒR3 > Rpt
 D 1
dv
1
Z 1
0
e

x
dv
1 :e

a
bxdv
3 dx
(9.22)
D
s
4a
bdv
1 dv
3
K1
0
@
s
4a
bdv
1 dv
3
1
A :
The closed form expression for the outage probability of the primary system is
given by
PoP D
8
<
:
1  uK1.u/;
˛ < 1  ı
1;
otherwise
(9.23)
where  D e
dv
1 t
m.1/ , u D
q
4a
bdv
1
dv
3 .

9
Spectrum and Energy Harvesting Protocols for Wireless Sensor Nodes
279
9.2.1.3
Outage Probability Analysis of Secondary System
The secondary system will be able to achieve the target rate, i.e., Rst for the three
cases considered earlier with certain probability associated with each one of them
as determined below:
1. PT–ST, PT–SR, and ST–SR links successfully achieve the target rates Rpt, Rpt,
and Rst, respectively.
Ps1 D PŒR1 > Rpt
PŒR4 > Rpt
PŒR2 > Rst
:
(9.24)
2. PT–ST link fails to achieve the target rate but ST–SR link achieves the rate Rst.
Ps2 D PŒR1 < Rpt
PŒR5 > Rst
:
(9.25)
3. PT–SR link fails to obtain the target rate. However, PT–ST and ST–SR links
achieve the rate Rpt and Rst, respectively.
Ps3 D PŒR1 > Rpt
PŒR4 < Rpt
PŒR6 > Rst
:
(9.26)
Hence by combining all the above cases, the secondary system outage probability
can be given as
PoS D 1.PŒR1 > Rpt
PŒR4 > Rpt
PŒR2 > Rst
CPŒR1 < Rpt
PŒR5 > Rst
(9.27)
C PŒR1 > Rpt
PŒR4 < Rpt
PŒR6 > Rst
/;
where
PŒR4 > Rpt
 D P
2
66664
jh4j2 >
0
BBB@

2
Rpt
˛  1

2
Pp
1
CCCA
3
77775
D e
dv
4 t
m ;
(9.28)
PŒR2 > Rst
 D P
"
.1  / Phjh2j2
2
>

2
Rst
1˛  1
#
:
(9.29)
Using (9.4)
PŒR2 > Rst
 D PŒjh2j2jh1j2 > c
;
(9.30)
PrŒR5 > Rst
 D P
h
jh2j2jh1j2 > d
i
;
(9.31)

280
M. Peer and V.A. Bohara
where c D 2.1˛/.2Rst=.1˛/1/
	Pp˛.1/
and d D 2.1˛/.2Rst=.1˛/1/
	Pp˛
.
PŒR6 > Rst
 D P
	
jh2j2jh1j2 > d
e

;
(9.32)
where e D .1  /  .2
Rst
1˛  1/.
The terms in (9.30)–(9.32) can be found similar to (9.21). So,
PŒR2 > Rst
 D
s
4c
dv
1 dv
2
K1
0
@
s
4c
dv
1 dv
2
1
A ;
(9.33)
PŒR5 > Rst
 D
s
4d
dv
1 dv
2
K1
0
@
s
4d
dv
1 dv
2
1
A ;
(9.34)
PŒR6 > Rst
 D
8
ˆ<
ˆ:
q
4d
edv
1
dv
2 K1
q
4d
edv
1
dv
2

;
˛ < 1  
0;
otherwise;
(9.35)
where  D
Rst
log2. 1
 /.
The closed form expression for the outage probability of the secondary system
obtained by substituting (9.17), (9.28), (9.33), (9.34), and (9.35) in (9.27) is given by
PoSD
8
ˆˆˆˆ<
ˆˆˆˆ:
1
 
e
dv
4 t
m wK1.w/C.1/yK1.y/C

1e
dv
4 t
m

zK1.z/
!
;
˛ < 1  
1

e
dv
4 t
m wK1.w/C.1  /yK1.y/

;
otherwise;
(9.36)
where w D
q
4c
dv
1
dv
2 , y D
q
4d
dv
1
dv
2
and z D
q
4d
edv
1
dv
2 .
9.2.2
Simulation and Results
In this section, we present the plots of primary and secondary system outages.
The distances between PT–ST, ST–PR, PT–SR, and ST–SR are  m, (50-)m, 10 m,
(-10) m, respectively, where 50 m is the distance between the PT–PR link and ST
is assumed to be placed between PT and PR. The remaining parameters are given in
Table 9.1.

9
Spectrum and Energy Harvesting Protocols for Wireless Sensor Nodes
281
Table 9.1 Simulation parameters
Parameter
2
	

Pp
v
Target rate
Value
90 dBm
0.8
0.75
30 dBm
3
Rpt = Rst D 1
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
10
−2
10
−1
10
0
α (Fraction of block time )
Outage Proability
 Theoretical, ρ = 0.6
 Theoretical, ρ = 0.75
 Theoretical, ρ = 0.9
Simulated, ρ = 0.6
Simulated, ρ = 0.75
Simulated, ρ = 0.9
Fig. 9.2 Plot of primary outage probability against ˛ for  D 0:6, 0.75, 0.9,  D 30 m, 	 D 0:8,
and  D 0:75
Figures 9.2 and 9.3 show the plots of primary and secondary system outages
with respect to ˛ for  D 0:6; 0:75; 0:9. From the ﬁgures it is quite apparent that the
primary outage decreases with increase in ˛. This can be explained as follows. As
˛ increases, more energy is harvested at ST which results in better performance of
ST–PR link. However, after a certain value of ˛, corresponding to each , there is an
abrupt increase in primary outage. Since there is no direct link between PT and PR
so when the ST–PR link becomes a failure, primary outage increases to 1. This can
also be veriﬁed from (9.23). Further, secondary system outage at ﬁrst decreases and
later on increases with increase in ˛. The initial drop is due to the reason as stated
for the primary case that is the increased amount of harvested energy at ST. The
increase in the secondary outage occurs at higher values of ˛ because as ˛ increases
further, the fraction of time available for transmission in phase 2 reduces.
Now, consider Fig. 9.4 which plots the primary and secondary outages with
respect to PT–ST distance, i.e., . As can be seen from Fig. 9.4, primary outage
at ﬁrst increases and later on decreases with respect to PT–ST distance. As 
increases ST moves away from PT and that leads to the PT–ST link outage. Hence,
the overall primary outage sees an increase. However, as ST moves away further
from PT, it gets closer to PR. So, ST–PR link outage decreases and overall primary
outage becomes low. In the secondary system case the amount of energy harvested

282
M. Peer and V.A. Bohara
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
10
−3
10
−2
10
−1
10
0
α (Fraction of block time )
Outage Proability
 Theoretical, ρ = 0.6
 Theoretical, ρ = 0.75
 Theoretical, ρ = 0.9
 Simulated, ρ = 0.6 
Simulated, ρ = 0.75
Simulated, ρ = 0.9
Fig. 9.3 Plot of secondary outage probability against ˛ for  D 0:6, 0.75, 0.9,  D 30 m, 	 D 0:8,
and  D 0:75
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
10−4
10−3
10−2
10−1
PT−ST Separation (in meters)
Outage Proability
 Simulated, α = 0.2
Simulated, α = 0.4
Theoretical, α = 0.2
Theoretical, α = 0.4
Primary
Outage
Secondary
Outage
Fig. 9.4 Plot of primary and secondary outage probabilities against the PT–ST separation for
˛ D 0:2; 0:4 and  D 0:75; 0:9, 	 D 0:8, and  D 0:75
becomes a predominant factor for determining the outage because as  increases ST
is anyway moving away from SR. As the ST moves away from PT less amount
of energy is harvested and hence outage performance of the secondary system
degrades. Figure 9.5 shows the dependence of primary and secondary outages on

9
Spectrum and Energy Harvesting Protocols for Wireless Sensor Nodes
283
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
10
−2
10
−1
Conversion Efficiency, η 
Outage Proability
 Primary Theoretical, α = 0.2
 Primary Simulated, α = 0.2
 Primary Theoretical, α = 0.4
 Primary Simulated, α = 0.4
 Secondary Theoretical, α = 0.2
 Secondary Simulated, α = 0.2
  Secondary Theoretical, α = 0.4
Secondary Simulated, α = 0.4
Fig. 9.5 Plot of primary and secondary outage probabilities against conversion efﬁciency for
 D 0:9, ˛ D 0:2; 0:4,  D 30 m, and  D 0:75
the conversion efﬁciency, 	, of the RF circuitry at ST. As 	 increases the primary
and secondary outage decreases because greater amount of energy is harvested at
ST which will improve the link performance.
9.3
Multiple Energy Harvesting Sensor Nodes Using Hybrid
Spectrum Sharing Protocol
This section deals with a cooperative cognitive radio network wherein multiple
energy harvesting sensor nodes in the secondary system are considered. In recent
years work is being done in bringing together the complementary techniques of CSS
and energy harvesting (EH) as it is beneﬁcial for creating a standalone secondary
system which is capable of meeting its energy and spectrum requirements using
primary’s resources [6, 11]. In the previous section we combined both CSS and EH
to enhance the performance of primary and secondary systems. The performance of
the system can be further enhanced by integrating the concept of optimal selection.
The limitation of the framework in [6, 8] is that SU remains silent if it is not
decoding PU’s information and in [12] the use of two different SU puts a constraint
on the level of transmission power to avoid interference. In the proposed scheme
we alleviate the above drawbacks by utilizing a hybrid energy harvesting and
spectrum sharing protocol wherein the best node among multiple sensor nodes is
selected to forward the information of primary system. As a consequence, since the

284
M. Peer and V.A. Bohara
orthogonal channel (channel corresponding to the best node)2 is required for PU’s
information transmission same diversity order as the cooperative diversity using
multiple orthogonal channels [13]. In addition to the above we have employed a
hybrid power splitting and time switching protocol where an optimal time duration
is obtained during which if energy is harvested we will achieve the best QoS for the
primary system.
The main contributions are summarized as follows:
•
The selection process is robust in the sense that it makes joint use of both the
channel conditions and the amount of energy harvested in a CSS scenario thus
giving a better performance compared to [14].
•
The node selection procedure is such that the node with maximum achievable
rate is selected that is also capable of supporting secondary’s transmission.
•
The results obtained show that the value of fraction of power allocated for
energy harvesting and information decoding at the nodes play a signiﬁcant role
in primary and secondary outage performance.
•
Unlike [11] we have used optimal sensor node selection and have shown that the
outage performance of the primary system is improved by increasing the number
of sensor nodes in the secondary network. Further, the outage performance is also
limited by the value of fraction of power allocated for primary and secondary
transmissions.
We have also extended this work further. The Sect. 9.3.3 aims at giving an insight
into the fact that how there is a trade-off between the power consumption at the BS
and the number of sensor nodes present in the WSN to achieve a desired primary
system performance.
9.3.1
Proposed System Model and Performance Analysis
9.3.1.1
System Model
The proposed system model consists of base station BS, a primary cellular user
CU, N number of sensor nodes (secondary transmitters or STs), and one central
monitoring station or SR as shown in Fig. 9.6. The channel between each pair of
transmitter and receiver is assumed to be Rayleigh ﬂat fading and is denoted by hi1
for BS–STi link, hi2 for STi–CU link, hi3 for STi–SR link, h4 for BS–SR link, where
i D 1; 2; 3 : : : :N. Here, hij 	 C N .0; dv
ij / and h4 	 C N .0; dv
4 / where v is the
path loss exponent, dij and d4 is the distance between the respective transmitter and
receiver and j D 1; 2; 3 for BS, CU, and SR, respectively. The channel gains ˇij D
jhijj2 and ˇ4 D jh4j2 are exponentially distributed and are denoted as ˇij 	 E .dv
ij/
and ˇ4 	 E .dv
4/, respectively , where dv
ij , dv
4
are the mean of the distribution.
2We have considered that direct link fails.

9
Spectrum and Energy Harvesting Protocols for Wireless Sensor Nodes
285
Fig. 9.6 System model
where STi is the best relay
Further it is assumed that hij are independent and identically distributed (i.i.d.) 8i; j.
Hence, d1 D di1, d2 D di2, and d3 D di38i. The AWGN at each receiver is denoted
as n 	 C N .0; 2/. The signal received at STi, CU, SR in kth phase is denoted as
yk
STi, yk
2, and yk
3, respectively.
We assume that there is no direct link between BS and CU [2], hence BS requires
the assistance of the secondary user for transmission of the primary information
xp to CU. It is worth noting that BS constantly monitors the channel conditions
and gathers all the necessary CSI for selecting the best sensor node. After this BS
broadcasts the message which includes the information of selected node and also
the mode in which the selected node has to operate. The node selection process is
carried out as given in Algorithm 1. The cases mentioned in the algorithm have been
discussed later in the paper.
On the selected sensor node energy harvesting follows a hybrid power splitting
and time switching protocol. The total transmission time T is divided into ˛T and
.1  ˛/T, respectively, where ˛ is the time switching factor. The power allocated
for energy harvesting and information decoding is Pi and (1  )Pi, respectively,
where Pi is the power received at STi and 0    1 is the power splitting factor.
In phase 1, BS broadcasts its signal xp with a transmit power Pp. The signal
received at STi from BS is given by
y1
STi D
p
Pphi1xp C n:
(9.37)
The signal received at the energy harvester branch of STi will be
py1
STi D
p
Pphi1xp C pn:
(9.38)
Hence the energy harvested at each STi in time ˛T can be given by
Ehi D 	Ppjhi1j2˛T;
(9.39)

286
M. Peer and V.A. Bohara
Algorithm 1: Selection procedure
Let Ri be the rate achievable at STi in phase 1, Rpt is the primary target rate
and R
0
i be the rate achievable at CU when STi is transmitting xp and xs with
Ph and (1-)Ph power respectively, where Ph is the harvested power. Also,
RSR is the rate achievable at SR in phase 1.
for i D 1 W 1 W N do
if Ri > Rpt then
Select STi.
end if
i  i C 1
end for
Create a decoding set D of the selected nodes.
if D = ; then
case 1
else
if maxi [R
0
i
 > Rpt then
Select the node from D for transmission of combination of xp and xs in phase 2.
if RSR > Rpt then
case 2
else
case 3
end if
else
case 4
end if
end if
where 	 (0,1] is the conversion efﬁciency of the RF to DC conversion circuitry
used. The transmission power available at the energy harvesting sensor node is
given by
Phi D
Ehi
.1  ˛/T D 	Ppjhi1j2˛
.1  ˛/
:
(9.40)
The signal received at information receiver of each STi is given by
p
.1  /y1
sti D
q
.1  /Pphi1xp C n:
(9.41)
Hence the rate achievable at STi will be
Ri D ˛ log2.1 C SNRi/;
(9.42)
where SNRi = .1/Ppjhi1j2
2
.

9
Spectrum and Energy Harvesting Protocols for Wireless Sensor Nodes
287
Similarly, signal received at SR in phase 1 will be
y31 D
p
Pph4xp C n:
(9.43)
Hence the rate achievable at SR in phase 1 will be
RSR D ˛ log2
 
1 C Ppjh4j2
2
!
:
(9.44)
For phase 2 transmission, four cases are possible and they are illustrated in
Table 9.2. The four cases signify the possible achievable rates for STb–SR link
depending on the channel conditions and amount of energy harvested.
9.3.1.2
Outage Analysis of Primary System
The probability that no STi is able to decode xp in phase 1 is given by
P1 D PŒR1 < Rpt
PŒR2 < Rpt
 : : : : : : PŒRN < Rpt
;
(9.45)
It is assumed that each STi is equidistant from BS and CU. Hence,
P1 D

PŒR1 < Rpt
N D
 
1  e
dv
1 t
m.1/
!N
;
(9.46)
where t D .2
Rpt
˛  1/ and m D Pp
2 .
The probability that at least one of the sensor nodes decode xp will be
P0
1 D 1  P1:
(9.47)
Thus the outage for the primary system can be given as (assuming k nodes have
successfully decoded xp)
PoP D P1 C P0
1P2;
(9.48)
where
P2 D
2
4
N
X
kD1
 
N
k
!
pNk.1  p/kPŒmax.R0
1 : : : R0
k/ < Rpt
3
5 ;
(9.49)
R0
i D .1  ˛/ log2
 
1 C
Phjhi2j2
.1  /Phjhi2j2 C 2
!
:
(9.50)
PŒmax.R0
1 : : : R0
k/ < Rpt
 D
8
<
:

1  uK1.u/
k ;
˛ < 1  ı
1;
otherwise;
(9.51)

288
M. Peer and V.A. Bohara
Table 9.2 Table containing the details of the four possible cases in phase 2
Rate achievable corresponding
Case
Condition
Signal received at SR
to STb–SR link
Case 1 (a) Decoding set D
is empty
y2
3 D pPhhb3xs C n
Rb3 D .1  ˛/ log2

1 C Phjhb3j2
2

(b) Sensor node
achieving
maximum rate at
SR corresponding
to xs transmission
is selected
Case 2 (a) Decoding set D
is nonempty
y20
3 D p.1  /Phhb3xs C
pPhhb3xp C n
R0
b3 D .1˛/ log2

1 C .1/Phjhb3j2
2

(b) A sensor node
in D meets the
criterion maxiŒR0
i
>Rpt
(c) SR decodes xp
successfully in
phase 1
Case 3 (a) Decoding set D
is nonempty
y200
3 D p.1  /Phhb3xs C
pPhhb3xp C n
R00
b3 D .1˛/ log2

1 C .1/Phjhb3j2
Phjhb3j2C2

(b) A sensor node
in D meets the
criterion maxiŒR0
i
>Rpt
(c) SR
unsuccessful in
decoding xp in
phase 1
Case 4 (a) Decoding set D
is nonempty
y2000
3
D pPhhb3xs C n
R000
b3 D .1  ˛/ log2

1 C Phjhb3j2
2

(b) No node in D
meets the criterion
maxiŒR0
i
 >Rpt
(c) A sensor node
in D achieving
maximum rate at
SR corresponding
to xs transmission
is selected
Note: STb denotes the selected sensor node. hb3 denotes the channel coefﬁcient of the link between
selected node and SR. Ph is the power harvested at the selected node

9
Spectrum and Energy Harvesting Protocols for Wireless Sensor Nodes
289
where u D
q
4a
bdv
1
dv
2 , a D 2.1˛/.2Rpt=.1˛/1/
	Pp˛
, b D   .2Rpt=.1˛/  1/.1  /,
ı D
Rpt
log2.1C

1 / and K1.:/ is the modiﬁed ﬁrst order Bessel function of second kind.
The closed form expression for primary outage obtained on substituting (9.49)–
(9.51) in (9.47) will be given by
PoP D
8
ˆˆ<
ˆˆ:
P1 C P0
1
hPN
kD1
N
k

pNk.1  p/kwki
;
˛ < 1  ı
P1 C P0
1
hPN
kD1
N
k

pNk.1  p/ki
D 1;
otherwise;
(9.52)
where w D

1  uK1.u/

and p D
 
1  e
dv
1 t
m.1/
!
.
9.3.1.3
Secondary System
The outage of the secondary system can be obtained by combining the four cases
mentioned in Table 9.1,
PoS D P1PŒmax.R13 : : : :RN3/ < Rst
 C P0
1Œ1  P2
PŒR0
b3 < Rst
PŒRSR > Rpt
C P0
1Œ1  P2
PŒR00
b3 < Rst
PŒRSR < Rpt
(9.53)
C P0
1P2
2
4
N
X
kD1
 
N
k
!
pNk.1  p/kPŒmax.R13 : : : Rk3/ < Rst
3
5 ;
where Rst is the secondary target rate and Ri3 is the rate corresponding to STi-SR
link when only secondary signal is transmitted by STi. Further,
PŒR0
b3 < Rst
 D

1  vK1.v/

;
(9.54)
where v D
q
4c
dv
1
dv
3
and c D 2.1˛/.2Rst=.1˛/1/
	Pp˛.1/
.
P

max.R13R23 : : : :Ri3/ < Rst

D

1  yK1.y/
i:
(9.55)
PŒR00
b3 < Rst
 D
8
<
:
1  zK1.z/;
˛ < 1  
1;
otherwise;
(9.56)

290
M. Peer and V.A. Bohara
where  D
Rst
log2

1

, y D
q
4d
dv
1
dv
3
z D
q
4d
edv
1
dv
3 , d D
2.1˛/.2Rst=.1˛/1/
	Pp˛
and
e D .1  /  

2
Rst
1˛  1

.
PŒRSR > Rpt
 D e
dv
4 t
m :
(9.57)
By substituting (9.46), (9.51), (9.54), (9.55), (9.56), and (9.57) in (9.53) we
get (9.58)
PoSD
8
ˆˆˆˆˆˆˆˆˆˆˆˆˆˆˆˆˆ<
ˆˆˆˆˆˆˆˆˆˆˆˆˆˆˆˆˆ:
P1QNCP0
1.1  P21/RCP0
1.1  P21/T.1  /C
P0
1P21
hPN
kD1
N
k

pNk.1  p/kQki
;
˛ < 1  ı and ˛ < 1  
P1QNCP0
1/.1  P21/RCP0
1.1  P21/.1  /C
P0
1P21
hPN
kD1
N
k

pNk.1  p/kQki
;
˛ < 1  ı and ˛  1  
P1QNCP0
1.1  P22/R C P0
1.1  P22/T.1  /C
P0
1P22
hPN
kD1
N
k

pNk.1  p/kQki
;
˛  1  ı and ˛ < 1  
P1QNCP0
1.1  P22/RCP0
1.1  P22/.1  /C
P0
1P22
hPN
kD1
N
k

pNk.1  p/kQki
;
˛  1  ı and ˛  1  ;
(9.58)
where Q D

1  yK1.y/

, R D

1  vK1.v/

, T D
hPN
kD1
N
k

pNk.1  p/kwki
,
P21DP1CP0
1
hPN
kD1
N
k

pNk.1p/kwki
, P22DP1CP0
1
hPN
kD1
N
k

pNk.1  p/ki
and  D e
dv
4 t
m .
9.3.2
Simulation and Results
This section presents the study of the effect of various system parameters such as
˛, , and N on the outage performance of the primary and secondary system. Each
STi is assumed to be equidistant from BS and CU. BS, CU, and SR are assumed
to be collinear. The distances between BS–STi, STi–SR, BS–SR, and STi–CU are
30, 20, 10, 20 m, respectively, where distance between the BS–CU link is 50 m. The
remaining simulation parameters are given in Table 9.3.
Table 9.3 Simulation
parameters
Parameter
2
	

Pp
v
Value
90 dBm
0.8
0.75
10 dBm
3

9
Spectrum and Energy Harvesting Protocols for Wireless Sensor Nodes
291
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
10
−2
10
−1
10
0
α (Fraction of block time)
Outage Proability
Theoretical, N = 1
Theoretical, N = 3
Theoretical, N = 5
Theoretical, N = 7
Simulated, N = 1
Simulated, N = 3
Simulated, N = 5
Simulated, N = 7
Fig. 9.7 Plot showing the outage probability of primary system with respect to ˛ for N D 1; 3; 5; 7
Figure 9.7 shows the variation in the outage probability for a primary system
with respect to ˛ for  D 0:75. It is quite obvious that with the increase in the
number of sensor nodes there is a performance improvement because the decoding
probability of xp in phase 1 increases (9.45). Further, corresponding to each value of
 there is a value of ˛ beyond which the increase in N has no impact on the outage
performance of primary system. This can be explained as follows. Since there is no
direct link between BS and CU so when STi-CU link becomes a failure 8STiD,
primary outage increases to 1. This can also be veriﬁed from (9.52).
Figure 9.8 depicts the variation in the outage probability for a secondary system
with respect to ˛ for  D 0:75. Similar to primary system, with the increase in
the number of sensor nodes the outage probability for secondary system decreases.
This is due to the fact the proposed scheme selects the node which has the
maximum harvested energy. Hence with an increase in number of nodes there is
more probability that the selected node will have sufﬁcient harvested energy to relay
the information of secondary system, xs, with less outage.
9.3.3
Power Reduction Using Multiple Sensor Nodes
In this subsection we have done an extended study on the multiple sensor node
system model considered previously in Sect. 9.3.1. The prime difference is the
inclusion of the direct link between BS and CU, unlike Sect. 9.3.1. In a network
setup where the direct link is in operational mode the number of the sensor nodes

292
M. Peer and V.A. Bohara
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
10
−10
10
−8
10
−6
10
−4
10
−2
10
0
α (Fraction of block time )
Outage Proability
Simulated, N = 1
Simulated, N = 3
Simulated, N = 5
Simulated, N = 7
Theoretical, N = 1
Theoretical, N = 3
Theoretical, N = 5
Theoretical, N = 7
Fig. 9.8 Plot showing the outage probability of secondary system with respect to ˛ for
N D 1; 3; 5; 7
assisting the forwarding of BS’s data and power level at the BS will be the deciding
factors for selection of the direct link or the WSN for the primary information
transmission, which is the focus of this section. We observed that given the provision
to expand the WSN by incorporating more number of sensor nodes the WSN
assisted primary transmission will outperform the direct link system conﬁguration
at much lower power levels, hence saving big on energy. There can be a case where
the WSN expansion is not feasible then the direct link conﬁguration will do a better
job.
9.3.3.1
Performance Analysis
The system model is the same as shown in Fig. 9.6. An additional link between BS
and CU is considered and the channel is denoted by hd. We have hd 	 C N .0; dv
d /
and ˇd D jhdj2 where dd is the distance between BS and CU. For making an
unbiased comparison between the direct and relayed transmission we have taken
the time of direct transmission equal to the time ˛T meant for EH and information
decoding at the best sensor node. So the rate achievable corresponding to the direct
link is given by
Rd D ˛ log2
 
1 C Ppjhdj2
2
!
(9.59)

9
Spectrum and Energy Harvesting Protocols for Wireless Sensor Nodes
293
Hence, the outage probability of the BS–CU link can be calculated as
PŒRd > Rpt
 D e
dv
d t
m
(9.60)
The rest of the outage analysis for the primary and secondary systems will remain
the same as determined in Sect. 9.3.1.
9.3.3.2
Simulation and Results
This section highlights how the power at the BS and the values of , N affects
the outage probability of the primary and secondary system. All the simulation
parameters have been kept same as before and we have kept ˛ D 0:5.
Figure 9.9 demonstrates that by varying the power level at BS different QoS can
be obtained for primary system which is also impacted by the number of the sensor
nodes in WSN. The plot also compares the performance with the direct transmission
and the various crossover points corresponding to each value of senor nodes can be
seen. The crossover points are reached earlier, i.e., at a lower power value for higher
number of sensor nodes. The increase in the number of sensor nodes renders to
greater probability of selection of a more energy efﬁcient node for data forwarding
that results in power reduction.
In Fig. 9.10 we have plotted the outage probability against the number of sensor
nodes at Pp D 5, 10, and 15 dBm. As expected with the increase in number of
−10
−5
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
10
−8
10
−7
10
−6
10
−5
10
−4
10
−3
10
−2
10
−1
10
0
Power at Base Station (in dBm)
Outage Proability
 Theoretical, No. of nodes = 1
Theoretical, No. of nodes = 3
Theoretical, No. of nodes = 5
Theoretical, No. of nodes = 7
Theoretical, No. of nodes = 9
Theoretical, No. of nodes = 11
Theoretical, Direct Link
Simulated, No. of nodes = 1
Simulated, No. of nodes = 3
Simulated, No. of nodes = 5
Simulated, No. of nodes = 7
Simulated, No. of nodes = 9
Simulated, No. of nodes = 11
Simulated, Direct Link
Fig. 9.9 Plot showing the primary outage probability against the power at base station (BS) for
N D 1; 3; 5; 7; 9, and 11

294
M. Peer and V.A. Bohara
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
10
−6
10
−5
10
−4
10
−3
10
−2
10
−1
10
0
No. of Nodes
Outage Probability
Theoretical, Power at BS = 5 dBm
Theoretical, Power at BS = 10 dBm
Theoretical, Power at BS = 15 dBm
Simulated, Power at BS = 5 dBm
Simulated, Power at BS = 10 dBm
Simulated, Power at BS = 15 dBm
Fig. 9.10 Plot showing the primary outage probability against the number of sensor nodes in WSN
−10
−5
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
10
−4
10
−3
10
−2
10
−1
10
0
Power at Base Station (in dBm)
Outage Probability
Theoretical, No. of nodes = 1
Theoretical, No. of nodes = 3
Theoretical, No. of nodes = 5
Theoretical, No. of nodes = 7
Theoretical, No. of nodes = 9
Theoretical, No. of nodes = 11
Simulated, No. of nodes = 1
Simulated, No. of nodes = 3
Simulated, No. of nodes = 5
Simulated, No. of nodes = 7
Simulated, No. of nodes = 9
Simulated, No. of nodes = 11
Fig. 9.11 Plot showing the secondary outage probability against the power at base station (BS)
for N D 1; 3; 5; 7; 9, and 11
sensor nodes the outage performance is enhanced. In Fig. 9.11 we observe that
the secondary system outage probability decreases, then transits to a higher outage
value as power level at BS goes up and then again decreases. This is because of
the fact that at lower power the sensor nodes will not harvest enough energy so the

9
Spectrum and Energy Harvesting Protocols for Wireless Sensor Nodes
295
probability of only secondary signal transmission increases. Hence, the secondary
outage probability shows an improvement. But as the power level reaches a certain
level the probability of composite signal transmission sees a rise which results in
relatively higher secondary outage. Finally, as explained in the case of primary plot
with further increase in power the secondary performance gets better. Further, it is
to be noted as the power level gets higher the increase in sensor nodes has no impact
on secondary outage. The explanation being that the increase will further improve
primary performance hence providing no signiﬁcant improvement for secondary
transmission.
9.4
Summary and Future Direction
Energy harvesting and cooperative spectrum sharing techniques when employed
together can solve the energy and spectrum requirement problems of wireless
sensor nodes. In this chapter we proposed hybrid energy harvesting and cooperative
spectrum sharing protocols which not only alleviates the energy and spectrum
requirements of wireless sensor nodes but also results in signiﬁcant performance
improvement. We showed that for each value of ˛ there exists an optimal value of
fraction of block time over which if energy is harvested it will result in minimum
primary outage.
The optimal selection of the sensor node is imperative. This has been the focus of
the Sect. 9.3 of the chapter. We studied in detail the algorithm behind the selection
procedure and the different factors that impact the node selection. The results
showed the enhancement in primary and secondary system performance obtained.
This work can be extended to a scheme wherein the block duration of T is divided
into ˛T for information decoding and energy harvesting at ST. ˇ.1  ˛/T duration
is used for primary transmission. The factor ˇ is decided upon the EH capability of
ST. If transmission power available at ST is high, less time will be taken to achieve
preset value of primary’s rate (or to meet the preset requirement of QoS). Hence,
remaining time can be allocated for secondary transmission.
References
1. X. Lu, P. Wang, D. Niyato, D.I. Kim, Z. Han, Wireless networks with RF energy harvesting: a
contemporary survey. IEEE Commun. Surv. Tutorials 17(2), 757–789 (2015, Second quarter)
2. A. Nasir, X. Zhou, S. Durrani, R. Kennedy, Relaying protocols for wireless energy harvesting
and information processing. IEEE Trans. Wirel. Commun. 12(7), 3622–3636 (2013)
3. Y. Zeng, R. Zhang, Full-duplex wireless-powered relay with self-energy recycling. IEEE Wirel.
Commun. Lett. 4(2), 201–204 (2015)
4. A. Nasir, X. Zhou, S. Durrani, R. Kennedy, Wireless-powered relays in cooperative commu-
nications: time-switching relaying protocols and throughput analysis. IEEE Trans. Commun.
63(5), 1607–1622 (2015)

296
M. Peer and V.A. Bohara
5. S. Lee, R. Zhang, K. Huang, Opportunistic wireless energy harvesting in cognitive radio
networks. IEEE Trans. Wirel. Commun. 12(9), 4788–4799 (2013)
6. N. Jain, V. Bohara, Energy harvesting and spectrum sharing protocol for wireless sensor
networks. IEEE Wirel. Commun. Lett. 4(6), 697–700 (2015)
7. G. Zheng, Z. Ho, E.A. Jorswieck, B. Ottersten, Information and energy cooperation in cognitive
radio networks. IEEE Trans. Signal Process. 62(9), 2290–2303 (2014)
8. Y. Han, A. Pandharipande, S.H. Ting, Cooperative decode-and-forward relaying for secondary
spectrum access. IEEE Trans. Wirel. Commun. 8(10), 4945–4950 (2009)
9. V. Bohara, S.H. Ting, Y. Han, A. Pandharipande, Interference-free overlay cognitive radio
network based on cooperative space time coding. in Proceedings of the Fifth International
Conference on Cognitive Radio Oriented Wireless Networks Communications (CROWNCOM),
June 2010
10. I.S. Gradshteyn I.M. Ryzhik, Table of Integrals, Series, and Products, 7th edn. (Academic
Press, Amsterdam, 2007)
11. C. Zhai, J. Liu, L. Zheng, Relay based spectrum sharing with secondary users powered by
wireless energy harvesting. IEEE Trans. Commun. 64, 1875–1887 (2016)
12. Y. Han, S.H. Ting, A. Pandharipande, Cooperative spectrum sharing protocol with secondary
user selection. IEEE Trans. Wirel. Commun. 9(9), 2914–2923 (2010)
13. S. Ikki, M. Ahmed, Performance analysis of adaptive decode-and-forward cooperative diversity
networks with best-relay selection. IEEE Trans. Commun. 58(1), 68–72 (2010)
14. Y.-H. Lee, K.-H. Liu, Battery-aware relay selection for energy-harvesting relays with energy
storage, in 2015 IEEE 26th Annual International Symposium on Personal, Indoor, and Mobile
Radio Communications (PIMRC), Aug (2015), pp. 1786–1791
15. M. Peer, N. Jain, V.A. Bohara, A hybrid spectrum sharing protocol for energy harvesting
wireless sensor nodes, in IEEE 17th International Workshop on Signal Processing Advances
in Wireless Communications (SPAWC), July (2016), pp. 1–6

Chapter 10
Efﬁcient Wireless Power Transfer Maximization
Algorithms in the Vector Model
Ioannis Katsidimas, Sotiris Nikoletseas, Theofanis P. Raptis,
and Christoforos Raptopoulos
10.1
Introduction
Wireless Power Transfer (WPT) has recently become a commercially viable option
in various wireless systems due to the reliability of continuous power supply and
the convenience provided by the fact that no static (wired) network connections
are needed between the devices. The efﬁciency of the various technological
alternatives is increasing every year. Current fast-charging protocols achieve up
to 84% efﬁciency for WPT up to distances of 15 m [22], while at the same time
keeping thermal dissipation signiﬁcantly low [23]. A WPT enabled system consists
of several wireless transmitter and receiver devices. A wireless transmitter (charger)
is a device that has a dedicated power source with signiﬁcant power supply and
can transfer power wirelessly to receivers. A receiver (node) is a device that is
powered by harvesting the radio frequency energy from the chargers. A receiver is
usually an electronic device that is needed to perform a speciﬁc task in the wireless
system, for example a sensor mote in a wireless sensor network. Systems of wireless
devices have to operate under increasing demands of power in order to sustain
various computational and communication tasks. For this reason, the efﬁcient
and distributed cooperation of the transmitters and receivers towards achieving an
effective power allocation in the system is a crucial task.
I. Katsidimas () • S. Nikoletseas • C. Raptopoulos
Department of Computer Engineering and Informatics, University of Patras, Computer
Technology Institute and Press Diophantus, Patra, Greece
e-mail: ikatsidima@ceid.upatras.gr; nikole@cti.gr; raptopox@ceid.upatras.gr
T.P. Raptis
Institute for Informatics and Telematics, National Research Council, Pisa, Italy
e-mail: theofanis.raptis@iit.cnr.it
© Springer International Publishing AG 2018
D.N.K. Jayakody et al. (eds.), Wireless Information and Power Transfer:
A New Paradigm for Green Communications, DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-56669-6_10
297

298
I. Katsidimas et al.
Our Contribution While considerable research efforts have been invested into
power management in wireless systems, most of the models studied in the literature
neglect key features of electromagnetic ﬁelds. As a result, such models are unable
to explain various phenomena occurring in real applications (e.g., cancellation and
superadditive charging effects; see Sect. 10.3), yielding some algorithmic solutions
impractical. In view of the above, our contribution in this chapter is the following:
•
We algorithmically study a more realistic model for WPT at far-ﬁeld region
in wireless systems, which was nicely initiated in [17]. In particular, this is
a “vector” model that takes into account the superposition of electromagnetic
ﬁelds created by independent wireless transmitters, as well as fundamental
properties of the superposition of waves from physics. To the best of our
knowledge, this is the ﬁrst algorithmic study of a vector model for WPT.
•
We deﬁne two new computational problems for the efﬁcient utilization of
power resources in a wireless system consisting of a family of transmitters
C and a family of receivers R. In particular, we ﬁrst consider the problem
MAX-POWER of ﬁnding a conﬁguration (set of operation levels) for transmitters
that maximizes the total power received by R. Second, we consider the problem
MAX-kMIN-GUARANTEE of ﬁnding a conﬁguration that maximizes the mini-
mum cumulative power1 among all the sets of k receivers.
•
We formulate MAX-POWER as a quadratic program and we prove that we can ﬁnd
an optimal solution efﬁciently by presenting a family of distributed algorithms
using different levels of knowledge of the system. We prove that these algorithms
run in pseudopolynomial time, but we experimentally show that they are quite
faster in practice.
•
We
design
and
experimentally
evaluate
three
efﬁcient
heuristics
for
MAX-kMIN-GUARANTEE that provide good approximations of the optimal
solution. The ﬁrst heuristic is a generalization of our algorithmic solution to
MAX-POWER, while the second samples a few representative k-sets of receivers
and then solves the problem considering only those sets. Finally, our third
heuristic is a hybrid of the previous two ideas and we show that it outperforms
both in typical deployments of transmitters and receivers on the plane.
A preliminary version of this work [8] was appeared in the proceedings of the
18th International Conference on Distributed Computing and Networking (ICDCN
2017).
10.2
Related Work
WPT methods in large-scale networked systems have attracted much attention from
researchers worldwide. The reader can ﬁnd comprehensive reviews of the relevant
literature in [11, 12, 26], and [10]. Also, the book [20] is the ﬁrst systematic
1The cumulative power for a set of nodes is the aggregate received power by the nodes of a set
from all the operational chargers.

10
Power Maximization in the Vector Model for Wireless Energy Transfer
299
exposition on the domain of wireless energy transfer in ad hoc communication
networks. Several works study applications in sensor networks [1, 6, 25] and
wireless distributed systems [13, 19], UAVs [5, 14]. Different to all those works,
in this chapter we investigate a static setting, where transmitter and receiver
locations are predeﬁned and stationary, and there are no mobile elements in the
system.
There have been some works on closely related themes to this chapter, which
investigate different aspects of the WPT process. In [27], given a set of candidate
locations for placing chargers, the authors provide a charger placement and a
corresponding power allocation to maximize the charging quality, subject to a
power budget. In a recent paper [18], a subset of the authors of this chapter
study the Low Radiation Efﬁcient Charging Problem, in which we optimize the
amount of useful energy transferred from chargers to nodes (under constraints on
the maximum level of imposed electromagnetic radiation). In a similar setting, the
authors in [3] consider the Safe Charging with Adjustable Power (SCAPE) problem
for adjusting the power of chargers to maximize the charging utility of devices,
while assuring that electromagnetic intensity at any location in the ﬁeld does not
exceed a given threshold. It is worth noting that, even though all the above works
nicely demonstrate the gains of carefully distributing the power in a wireless setting,
they use one-dimensional models, which fall short of capturing various intricate
aspects of WPT.
Wireless transfer of energy through directed radio frequency waves has the
potential to realize perennially operating sensor nodes by replenishing the energy
contained in the limited on-board battery. However, the high power energy transfer
from energy transmitters interferes with data communication, limiting the coex-
istence of these functions. In [15], the authors provide an experimental study to
quantify the rate of charging, packet loss due to interference, and suitable ranges
for charging and data communication of the energy transmitters. They also explore
how the placement and relative distances of multiple energy transmitters affect the
charging process, demonstrating constructive and destructive energy aggregation
at the sensor nodes. Finally, the authors investigate the impact of the separation
in frequency between data and energy transmissions, as well as among multiple
concurrent energy transmissions. Their results aim at providing insights on radio
frequency-based energy harvesting wireless sensor networks for enhanced protocol
design and network planning.
Furthermore, in [17], they formulate the location-dependent power harvesting
rates in generalized 2D and 3D placement of multiple (RF) energy transmitters for
recharging the nodes of a wireless sensor network. In particular, they study the
distributions of total available and harvested power over the entire network. They
then provide closed matrix forms of harvestable power at any given point in space
due to the action of concurrent energy transfer from multiple energy transmitters,
explicitly considering constructive and destructive interference of the transmitted
energy signals. The authors also analyze the performance of energy transfer in the
network through power outage probability, interference, and harvested voltage as a
function of the wireless energy received from the energy transmitters. The results
reveal that the network wide received power and interference power from concurrent

300
I. Katsidimas et al.
energy transfers exhibit Log-Normal distributions, and the harvested voltage over
the network follows a Rayleigh distribution.
In [24], the authors investigate the impact of wireless charging technology on
sensor network deployments and routing arrangements, formalize the deployment
and routing problem, prove it as N P-complete, develop heuristic algorithms to
solve the problem, and evaluate the performance of the solutions through extensive
simulations.
In [4], the authors introduce a scheme for improving the transmission power
of nodes to bound end to end delay. They provide an algorithm for ﬁnding the
minimal sleep latency from a node to a sink by increasing the minimal number of
nodes whose transmission power improved. For bounding the end to end delay from
the source node to the sink, the authors propose an end to end delay maintenance
solution and demonstrate its efﬁciency in provide end to end delay guarantees in
rechargeable wireless sensor networks.
Finally, in [16, 21], through an experimental study, the authors ﬁrst demonstrate
how the placement, the chosen frequency, and number of the RF energy transmitters
affect the sensor charging time. These studies are then used to design a MAC
protocol called RF-MAC that optimizes energy delivery to desirous sensor nodes
on request.
10.3
The Charging Model
In a recent paper [17], the authors considered a model for the superposition of
electromagnetic ﬁelds created by independent wireless energy sources, which takes
into account fundamental properties of the superposition of waves from physics. The
model of [17] goes beyond (in fact, it is a generalization of) the one-dimensional
abstraction suggested by Friis’ formula2 for the power received by one antenna
under idealized conditions given another antenna some distance away. In particular,
the electric ﬁeld created by an energy transmitter (charger) C, operating at full
capacity, at a receiver R at distance d D dist.C; R/ is a two-dimensional vector
given by
E.C; R/
def
D ˇ  1
d  ej 2
 d D ˇ  1
d 
2
64
cos

2
 d

sin

2
 d

3
75 ;
(10.1)
2Given two antennas, the ratio of power available at the input of the receiving antenna, Pr, to
output power to the transmitting antenna, Pt, is given by Pr
Pt D GtGr.

4R/2 where Gt and Gr are
the antenna gains (with respect to an isotropic radiator) of the transmitting and receiving antennas,
respectively,  is the wavelength, and R is the distance between the antennas.

10
Power Maximization in the Vector Model for Wireless Energy Transfer
301
where  depends on the frequency at which the transmitter operates, and ˇ is a
constant that depends on the hardware of the transmitter and the environment.3
The main point of the charging model of [17], which also sets it apart from other
(less realistic, but more tractable) models in the wireless charging literature, is that
the total electric ﬁeld created by a family of energy transmitters C at a receiver R is
the superposition (vector-sum) of their individual electric ﬁelds, that is,
E.C ; R/
def
D
X
C2C
E.C; R/:
(10.2)
Furthermore, the total available power at the receiver R is given by
P.C ; R/ D   kE.C ; R/k2;
(10.3)
where k  k denotes the length (2-norm) of the vector. The constant  depends on
the hardware of the transmitter, the hardware of the receiver, and the RF-to-DC
conversion efﬁciency.
It is worth noting that the above model arises naturally from fundamental
properties of the superposition of energy ﬁelds and has been shown to be more
realistic than other one-dimensional models that have been used in the past and
can capture superadditive and cancellation effects [7, 9, 15]. To ﬁx ideas and
to demystify the above deﬁnitions, we present the following ﬁctitious example:
Assume that there are two transmitters C1 and C2 placed at points .0; 0/ and .2; 0/ in
the two-dimensional plane. First, consider a receiver R placed at .1; 0/. Assume also,
for the sake of clarity, that all constants in the above model are set to 1, i.e.,  D ˇ D
 D 1. When only one of the two transmitters is operational, the power received by
R is P.C1; R/ D P.C2; R/ D kE.C1; R/k2 D kE.C2; R/k2 D

1
dist.C1;R/
2
D 1. On
the other hand, if both transmitters are operational, the power received by R is given
by Eq. (10.2), that is,
P.fC1; C2g; R/ D kE.C1; R/ C E.C2; R/k2:
Furthermore, it is not hard to see that, since R is equidistant from either C1 or
C2, the vectors E.C1; R/ and E.C2; R/ point to the same direction. Therefore,
P.fC1; C2g; R/ D 4P.C1; R/ D 2.P.C1; R/ C P.C2; R// D 4. Notice then that the
power received by R when both transmitters are operational is larger than the sum
of the powers it receives when only one of the transmitters is operational; this is the
so-called superadditive effect and is visible in local maxima in the curve shown in
Fig. 10.1b.
3In fact, the exact formula used in [17] for the electric ﬁeld is E.C; R/
def
D
q
Z0GCPC
4d2
 ej 2
 d, where
Z0 is a physical constant indicating the wave-impedance of a plane wave in free space, GC is the
gain, and PC is the output power of the transmitter. In this chapter, without loss of generality of our
algorithmic solutions, we assume that all wireless transmitters and receivers are identical, thus the
aforementioned parameters are the same for each charger.

302
I. Katsidimas et al.
C1
C2
R
R÷
0
1
5
4
2
charger
node
(a)
1/4
2/4
3/4
1
5/4
6/4
7/4
Power (watts)
Position (m)
both operational
only (0,0) operational
only (2,0) operational
sum of chargers
(b)
Fig. 10.1 Example showing the superadditive and cancelation effects. (a) Chargers’ and nodes’
placement on a straight line at points .0; 0/, .0; 2/, and .0; 1/, .0; 5
4/, respectively. (b) The power
distribution between the two chargers. Different curves represent different operation levels of the
chargers
Second, consider a receiver R0 placed at

5
4; 0

. Then by Eq. (10.1), E.C1; R0/ D
4
5 
"
0
1
#
, and also E.C2; R0/ D
4
3 
"
0
1
#
. By Eq. (10.2), the power received by
R0 when both transmitters are operational is P.fC1; C2g; R0/ D

8
15
2
 0:28.
Notice then that the power received by R0 when both transmitters are operational
is much less than minfP.C1; R0/; P.C2; R0/g D

4
5
2
 0:64; this is the so-called
cancellation effect and is visible in local minima in the curve shown in Fig. 10.1b.

10
Power Maximization in the Vector Model for Wireless Energy Transfer
303
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
x(m)
y(m)
Chargers
Nodes
Fig. 10.2 Chargers’ and nodes’ deployment for the simulation
In view of our discussion in this chapter, it is worth noting that, even in the above
toy example, it is nontrivial to provide a closed formula for the point in the line
between the two chargers where the received power is maximized.
We also conducted a simple simulation in a 3 m  3 m plane with 10 chargers
and 10 nodes, randomly deployed in the ﬁeld (Fig. 10.2). The parameters of this
simulation are the same with those mentioned in Sect. 10.7. In this simulation, we
present the results of two different conﬁgurations. As the scalar model suggests,
we turn on all the chargers to get the maximum cumulative received power which
is valued to 0.217 W (the evaluation is done with respect to the vector model). On
the other hand, a better conﬁguration with respect to the vector model turns on all
the chargers except of the two at position .2:2165; 0:7708/ and .2:9343; 0:3512/.
That conﬁguration returns 0.230 W of cumulative received power in the network.
Therefore, the claim of the toy example holds also for a more general case.
Finally, to further verify the vector model, we present the experiment, described
in the technical report of [9]. In this experiment, the distance between the node and
charger 1 is ﬁxed to 0.3 m while the distance between the node and charger 2 varies
from 0.4 m to 1.1 m in increments of 0.1 m. The results are presented in Table 10.1,
where the second and third rows record the received power when either charger 1 or
charger 2 is turned on. The fourth row records the actual power measured when both
chargers are turned on. The next two rows give the results for each of the two models
we compare. Observe that the vector model approaches the actual measurements of
row three better than the scalar model. This can be veriﬁed from the last two rows,
which present the relative error of each model.

304
I. Katsidimas et al.
Table 10.1 Charging power of two chargers
Harvesting power (mW)/Distance to
charger 2 (m)
0:4
0:5
0:6
0:7
0:8
0:9
1:0
1:1
Charger 1
6:48
6:48
6:48
6:48
6:48
6:48
6:48
6:48
Charger 2
3:21
1:92
1:96
0:09
0:71
0:33
0:35
0:06
Charger 1 and charger 2
3:57
2:05
3:47
7:78
2:11
1:32
9:04
6:04
Scalar model (Friis)
9:69
8:40
8:44
6:57
7:19
6:81
6:83
6:54
Vector model
6:21
5:11
8:19
6:58
5:77
6:62
6:74
6:42
Relative error of scalar model (Friis)
6:12
6:35
4:97
1:21
5:08
5:49
2:21
0:14
Relative error of vector model
2:64
3:06
4:72
1:2
3:66
5:3
2:3
0:02
10.3.1
A Basic Assumption
A necessary condition that is required in Friis’ formula, and by extension in the
above model, is that the wireless transmitter and receiver need to be at distance at
least  (not in the near-ﬁeld region). In fact, for transmitters to receivers distances
less than , more complex laws apply but we do not consider them here as they
are beyond the algorithmic focus of the paper. A similar constraint also holds for
the power received by receivers that are very close to each other. In particular, if
receivers R; R0 are closer than

2 apart, then the power received by each receiver
no longer follows Friis’ law. This was to be expected, since otherwise we could
have wireless transmitters of bounded capabilities that could theoretically provide
inﬁnite power (e.g., by placing receivers arbitrarily close to each other and to the
transmitter).
In this chapter, we consider algorithmic problems related to power guarantees
with respect to a ﬁxed deployment of a family C of wireless transmitters and a
family R of receivers. To avoid confusion, we will assume that any placement of
chargers and receivers satisﬁes the above placement constraints. In particular: (a)
For each charger C 2 C and receiver R 2 R, we have dist.C; R/   and (b) for
any pair of receivers R; R0 2 R, we have dist.R; R0/ 

2 .
We ﬁnally note that, since

2 is usually smaller than a few centimeters, in
practical situations, the above placement constraints will not be restrictive, as
the nontrivial volume of any transmitting or receiving device guarantees that
transmitters and chargers are far enough from each other.
10.4
Problem Deﬁnition
Consider a system consisting of a family C of identical wireless chargers and a
family R of identical wireless receivers (nodes). For each charger C 2 C , we denote
by xC 2 Œ0; 1
 a variable that determines the level of operation of C. We assume that
the chargers are able to operate at a level of operation between 0 and 100%. x equal

10
Power Maximization in the Vector Model for Wireless Energy Transfer
305
to 1 means that C is fully operational (i.e., operates at 100% capacity), while x
equal to 0 means that C is nonoperational (operates at 0%). Clearly, we must have
x 2 Œ0; 1
. In particular, generalizing Eq. (10.1), the electric ﬁeld vector created by
C at the location of a receiver R, when the former operates at level xC is given by
xC  E.C; R/ D xC  ˇ 
1
dist.C;R/  ej 2
 dist.C;R/.
We will refer to the vector x 2 Œ0; 1
T as the conﬁguration of the chargers in the
system. Slightly abusing notation, we will denote by C .x/ a family of chargers that
operate according to conﬁguration x.
We initially consider the following problem:
Deﬁnition 1 (MAX-POWER). Given a family of chargers C
and family
of receivers R that satisfy the placement constraints of Sect. 10.3.1, ﬁnd a
conﬁguration for the chargers that maximizes the total power to R. That is, ﬁnd x
such that
x 2 arg max
x2Œ0;1
C P.C .x/; R/;
(10.4)
where P.C .x/; R/ D P
R2R P.C .x/; R/.
We will denote by
R
k

the family of all subsets of R containing k nodes. In this
chapter, we also study the following generalization of MAX-POWER, which ﬁnds
a conﬁguration that provides a minimum charging guarantee among all k-sets of
nodes:
Deﬁnition 2 (MAX-kMIN-GUARANTEE). Given a family of chargers C and a
family of receivers R that satisfy the placement constraints of Sect. 10.3.1, ﬁnd
a conﬁguration for the chargers that maximizes the minimum cumulative power
among all subsets of R of size k. That is, ﬁnd x such that
x 2 arg max
x2Œ0;1
C min
A2.R
k /
P.C .x/; A/;
(10.5)
where P.C .x/; A/ D P
R2A P.C .x/; R/.
10.5
Maximum Total Power
In this section, we present an efﬁcient algorithm for MAX-POWER. For simplicity,
consider a family of wireless chargers C D fC1; : : : ; Cmg, where m D jC j, and a
family of receivers R D fR1; : : : ; Rng, where n D jRj. Let also x 2 Œ0; 1
m be the
conﬁguration of the chargers, where xj is the level of operation of charger Cj; j 2 Œm
.
We ﬁrst show that the MAX-POWER problem can be expressed as a quadratic
program. To this end, for each R 2 R, deﬁne Q.R/ be a 2  m matrix whose j-th
column is the two-dimensional vector of the electric ﬁeld created from Cj at R, i.e.,
Q.R/
W;j D p  E.Cj; R/, for each j 2 Œm
. Notice now that we can write the power
harvested by the receiver R as follows:

306
I. Katsidimas et al.
P.C .x/; R/ D kE.C .x/; R/k2
D 

X
C2C
xCE.C; R/

2
D
0
@X
C2C
xC
pE.C; R/
1
A
T 0
@X
C2C
xC
pE.C; R/
1
A
D .Q.R/x/TQ.R/x;
where ./T denotes the transpose of a matrix or vector. Therefore, setting H
def
D
P
R2R

Q.R/T
Q.R/, the solution to MAX-POWER is given by
x 2 arg max
x2Œ0;1
m xTHx:
(10.6)
It is worth noting that, in general, the maximization of a quadratic form is a non-
convex quadratic program (even when H is positive semi-deﬁnite, which is the
case here), hence cannot be solved in polynomial time. Nevertheless, by taking
into account several properties and the special form of our problem, we are able
to provide an efﬁcient algorithm for MAX-POWER.
We ﬁrst need the following elementary lemma that considerably reduces the size
of the search space.
Lemma 1. If x is an optimal solution to MAX-POWER, then x 2 f0; 1gm. In
particular, there exists an optimal solution to MAX-POWER in which each charger
either operates at full capacity or not at all.
Proof. Let y 2 Œ0; 1
m be such that
(a) y 2 arg maxx2Œ0;1
m xTHx (i.e., it is an optimal solution to MAX-POWER) and
(b) y has the minimum number of elements that are neither 0 nor 1; let also k be
the number of such elements, i.e., k
def
D jfi W yi … f0; 1ggj. If k D 0, then there is
nothing to prove, so we will assume for the sake of contradiction that k > 0. Let j
be an index such that yj … f0; 1g and deﬁne vectors y.0/ and y.1/ that are equal to y
everywhere, except on position j, where y.0/
j
D 0 and y.1/
j
D 1. Notice now that, by
the optimality and minimality assumptions on y, we have that yTHy >

y.0/T
Hy.0/
and yTHy >

y.1/T
Hy.1/.
On the other hand, for z 2 .0; 1/, deﬁne the vector y.z/ def
D .1  z/y.0/ C zy.1/.
In particular, y.z/ is the m-dimensional vector that is equal to y everywhere, except
on position j, where y.z/
j
D z. Consider now the function f.z/ D

y.z/T
Hy.z/.
Notice that f.z/ is a single variable polynomial of degree 2, and it is a simple

10
Power Maximization in the Vector Model for Wireless Energy Transfer
307
matter of calculus to show that its second derivative satisﬁes
d2f
dz2
D Hj;j D
P
R2R kE.Cj; R/k2
D P.Cj; R/, which is strictly positive. But this implies
that f.z/ < maxff.0/; f.1/g, for all z 2 .0; 1/. However, this is a contradic-
tion, since we have already established that, by assumption, f.yj/ D yTHy >
maxf

y.0/T
Hy.0/;

y.1/T
Hy.1/g D maxff.0/; f.1/g. We conclude that in any
optimal solution to MAX-POWER each charger either operates at full capacity or
not at all.
ut
We now prove a useful property of global maxima of the objective function
xTHx in Œ0; 1
m. The proof uses properties of positive semi-deﬁnite (PSD) matrices
(see [2] for an introduction to PSD matrices and their properties). We note here
that Lemma 1 and Theorem 1 below imply that any local maxima of the objective
function P.C .x/; R/ D .Qx/T Qx are also global maxima that belong to f0; 1gm.
In particular, this means that the gradient descent method can be used to ﬁnd a
global maximum (i.e., an optimal solution to MAX-POWER). Nevertheless, in our
experimental evaluation, we used a pseudopolynomial distributed algorithm for
computing the exact optimum conﬁguration for MAX-POWER, which is quite fast
in practice. We present this algorithm later in this section.
Theorem 1. A conﬁguration x 2 f0; 1gm is an optimal solution to MAX-POWER
if and only if P.C .x/; R/  P.C .y/; R/, for each y that comes from x by setting
exactly one of its coordinates to either 0 or 1.
Proof. For a conﬁguration x 2 f0; 1gm and for all j 2 Œm
 and a 2 f0; 1g, deﬁne
x.j;a/ def
D x C .a  xj/ej, where ej is the j-th vector in the standard basis of Rm. Notice
that x.j;1/ (respectively, x.j;0/) is the conﬁguration that is identical to x, with the only
difference that charger j operates at full capacity (respectively, does not operate).
Clearly, if x is an optimal solution, then P.C .x/; R/  P.C .x.j;a//; R/, for
any j 2 Œm
 and a 2 f0; 1g. Therefore, it remains to prove the “only if” part of
the Theorem. To this end, let x be such that P.C .x/; R/  P.C .x.j;a//; R/, for
any j 2 Œm
 and a 2 f0; 1g, and assume for the sake of contradiction that there is a
conﬁguration z such that P.C .x/; R/ < P.C .z/; R/.
By Lemma 1, we only need to consider conﬁgurations in f0; 1gm. Therefore,
assume that x 2 f0; 1gm and z D x C Pm
jD1 ajej D x C a, for some a 2
f1; 0; 1gm, such that zTHz D P.C .z/; R/ > P.C .x/; R/ D xTHx.
Note that, since H is symmetric, for any j 2 Œm
 we have eT
j Hx D xTHej,
and so
.x C ajej/TH.x C ajej/ D xTHx C 2ajeT
j Hx C a2
j Hj;j:
(10.7)
Rearranging, and using the assumption that P.C .x/; R/  P.C .x C ajej/; R/,
we get
2ajeT
j Hx C a2
j Hj;j  0;
(10.8)

308
I. Katsidimas et al.
for any j 2 Œm
. By a similar computation, we have
zTHz D xTHx C 2aTHx C aTHa
D xTHx C
m
X
jD1
2ajeT
j Hx C aTHa:
(10.9)
Summing (10.8) over all j 2 Œm
 and substituting in (10.9), we get
zTHz  xTHx  
m
X
jD1
a2
j Hj;j C aTHa:
(10.10)
It is now a simple matter of algebra to show that the right-hand side of the above
inequality is nonpositive. Indeed, let H0 be the m0  m0 principal submatrix of H
corresponding to rows (and columns) j for which aj ¤ 0 (in particular, m0 is the
number of nonzero elements of a). Clearly, since H is PSD, then so is H0. Let 0
1 
    0
m0  0 and v0
1; : : : ; v0
m0 be the eigenvalues and eigenvectors of H0. Now
notice that Pm
jD1 a2
j Hj;j D Pm0
jD1 a2
j H0
j;j D tr.H0/ D Pm0
jD1 0
j, where tr.H0/ is the
trace of H0 and we have used the fact that the trace of a matrix is equal to the sum
of its eigenvalues. Finally, since a is an orthonormal rotation of the vector Pm0
jD1 v0
j,
we have aTHa D Pm0
jD1 0
j.
In view of the above, by inequality (10.10), we get that zTHz  xTHx 
0, which is a contradiction. Therefore, we conclude that if P.C .x/; R/

P.C .x.j;a//; R/, for any j 2 Œm
 and a 2 f0; 1g, then x is an optimal solution.
ut
Lemma 1 and Theorem 1 suggest that the following distributed algorithm
(which we call IterativeMaxPower) can be used to ﬁnd an exact optimum
conﬁguration for MAX-POWER: Initially, we begin from an arbitrary conﬁguration
in f0; 1gm. In each subsequent step, we parse the set of chargers in order to ﬁnd a
charger C 2 C such that the total power received by R can be increased by ﬂipping
the operation level of C (e.g., if C operates at full capacity, it checks whether the
received power is increased if it is not operational). The algorithm terminates if there
is no such charger C.
For a given placement of a family C of chargers and a family R of receivers,
deﬁne ı.C ; R/
def
D minfjP.C .x/; R/  P.C .xj;a/; R/j W x 2 f0; 1gm; a 2 f0; 1g; j 2
Œm
g. In particular, ı.C ; R/ is the minimal increment in the total received power
that can be incurred by a single iteration of IterativeMaxPower. In addition,
notice that every such iteration takes O.m3/ time. Finally, given that the chargers
and receivers satisfy the placement constraints of Sect. 10.3.1, a crude upper bound
for the maximum total power is nm2ˇ2 42
2
D O.nm2/. Therefore, we have the
following:
Theorem 2. Given a family C of m chargers and a family R of n receivers that sat-
isfy the placement constraints of Sect. 10.3.1, Algorithm IterativeMaxPower
ﬁnds an optimal solution of MAX-POWER in O

1
ı.C ;R/nm5
.

10
Power Maximization in the Vector Model for Wireless Energy Transfer
309
Algorithm 1: IterativeMaxPower
Input : dist; R; C , communication_range
Output: x
1 begin
2
x 2 f0; 1gm is a random initial charger conﬁguration;
3
while 9Cj 2 C W P.C .x/; R/ < P.C .x.j;a//; R/; a 2 f0; 1g do
4
choose randomly a charger Cj 2 C ;
5
RCj D 0 ;
6
foreach R 2 R do
7
if dist.Cj; R/  communicationrange then
8
RCj D RCj [ R
//at this point Cj communicates with R and receives E.C .x/; R/;
9
end if
10
end foreach
11
xCj D arg maxa2f0;1g P.C .x.j;a//; RCj/;
12
end while
13
return x;
14 end
Note In our experiments, we implemented IterativeMaxPower using different
levels of knowledge of the wireless system. In particular, we deﬁne the communi-
cation range of a charger as the maximum radius of the disc area within which it
can send and receive messages from nodes. Hence, a transmitter ignores any node
that is outside its communication range. Whenever a charger Cj communicates with
a node R, the latter sends to Cj the energy ﬁeld vector E.C .x/; R/, where x is the
conﬁguration at the time when the communication took place. This information
is enough for the charger to compute P.C .x.j;a//; R/, for each a 2 f0; 1g, since
P.C .x.j;a//; R/ D kE.C .x/; R/ C .a  xj/E.Cj; R/k2. By using the above, it is
easy to compute P.C .x.j;a//; RCj/ for each a 2 f0; 1g, where RCj 
 R includes
the nodes in the communication range of the charger Cj. The pseudocode of
IterativeMaxPower can be found in Algorithm 1 that simulates the distributed
process in order to have an output.
10.6
Maximum k-Minimum Guarantee
In this section, we present our algorithmic solutions to MAX-kMIN-GUARANTEE.
This is more general than MAX-POWER and, even though we believe that it is
computationally hard, we were unable to prove this formally. It is worth noting that
the hardness of this problem does not lie in the computation of the minimum power
among all k-set of receivers for a given conﬁguration x. It is not hard to see that this
quantity is equal to the sum of powers of nodes having the k minimum powers.
On the other hand, exhaustive search algorithms do not work in the general
case. In particular, Lemma 1 does not apply, as we show in the following example
in which it is established that fractional operation power level of the transmitters
can achieve better performance than x 2 f0; 1gm. Assume again that there are

310
I. Katsidimas et al.
C1
C2
R1
R2
0
−3
4
13
4
4
charger
node
(a)
 -3/4  
 
0
 
 
 
1
 
 
 
2
 
 
 
 13/4
Position (m)
Power (watts)
both operational
only (0,0) operational
only (4,0) operational
(b)
Fig. 10.3 Counterexample
for
fractional
operation
level
of
the
chargers
in
MAX-kMIN-GUARANTEE problem. (a) Chargers’ and nodes’ placement on a straight line
at points .0; 0/; .0; 4/ and .0;  3
4/; .0; 13
4 /, respectively. (b) The power distribution in the straight
line from the two chargers. Different curves represent different operation levels of the chargers
two transmitters C1 and C2 placed at points .0; 0/ and .4; 0/ and two receivers
R1 at . 3
4; 0/ and R2 at . 13
4 ; 0/, respectively (see Fig. 10.3a). Also, assume that all
constants in the above model are set to 1, i.e.,  D ˇ D  D 1. Figure 10.3b
demonstrates the example on how the fractional operation level of C1 can increase
the minfP.fC1; C2g; fR1g/; P.fC1; C2g; fR2g/g. So, if x 2 f0; 1g2, there are three
operation cases (obviously when both chargers are closed is excluded). Firstly, if
only C1 is on, then P.C1; R1/ D . 4
3/2 D 1:77 and P.C1; R2/ D . 4
13/2 D 0:094. On

10
Power Maximization in the Vector Model for Wireless Energy Transfer
311
the other hand if C2 is only on, the minfP.C2; R1/; P.C2; R2/g D . 1
4/2 D 0:0625. In
the ﬁnal case, where xC1 D xC2 D 1, the power at the points is P.fC1; C2g; R1/ D
. 4
3 C 4
19/2 D 2:38 and P.fC1; C2g; R2/ D . 4
3  4
13/2 D 1:025. Clearly if the power
from R1 is reduced by a small amount e, then P.fC1; C2g; R2/ achieves a better
minimum and at the same time P.fC1; C2g; R1/ remains high.
In view of the above hardness indications, we consider a relaxation of
MAX-kMIN-GUARANTEE in which we are only interested in optimal conﬁgurations
in f0; 1gm, i.e., conﬁgurations in which each charger is either full operational or does
not operate.
Optimal Conﬁguration in f0; 1gm We consider the following exhaustive search
solution, which we use as a measure of comparison for our heuristics. In particular,
Optimal Algorithm (OPT) uses brute force to ﬁnd an optimal solution. Due to its
high time complexity O.2m/, it is not practical when the problem size tends to grow.
OPT can serve as a performance upper bound when benchmarking our algorithms.
Algorithm 2 crushingly searches (without taking anything into consideration)
among all the possible conﬁgurations of the chargers the one that maximizes the
cumulative power of the k-set of nodes with the least power received.
Greedy Algorithm (GRE) The algorithm initiates from a random conﬁguration
which through an iterative process improves. The algorithm’s decision for the
chargers’ operation level is the one that contributes more to the cumulative received
power of the k-set that consist of the nodes with the least power received. Although
the heuristic disambiguation can sometimes perform badly, it may yield locally
optimal solution that approximates the global optimum in reasonable time. Clearly,
time complexity depends on the number the algorithm checks to calibrate the
chargers.
Algorithm 2: Brute-force (OPT)
Input : dist; R; C ; k
Output: xOPT
1 begin
2
maxpowerof kset D 0;
3
foreach x 2 f0; 1gm do
4
foreach R 2 R do
5
p.R/ D P.C .x/; R/;
6
end foreach
7
sort.p; asc/;
8
if (Pk
iD1 p.i/  maxpowerof kset) then
9
maxpowerof kset D Pk
iD1 p.i/;
10
xOPT D x;
11
end if
12
end foreach
13
return xOPT;
14 end

312
I. Katsidimas et al.
Algorithm 3: Greedy (GRE)
Input : dist; R; C ; k
Output: Chargers conﬁguration
1 begin
2
choose an arbitrary x 2 f0; 1gm;
3
y D a random chargers sequence;
4
for i D 1 ! length.y/ do
5
foreach R 2 R do
6
p1.R/ D P.C .x.y.i/;1//; R/;
7
p0.R/ D P.C .x.y.i/;0//; R/;
8
end foreach
9
sort.p1; asc/;
10
sort.p0; asc/;
11
if (Pk
jD1 p0.j/  Pk
jD1 p1.j/) then
12
xy.i/ D 1;
13
else
14
xy.i/ D 0;
15
end if
16
end for
17
return x
18 end
Algorithm 3 tries to ﬁnd an optimal solution after a number of iterations. In each
step, it randomly chooses a charger y.i/, computes the power received from each
node R, and stores them in the vector p1 when y.i/ is activated and at vector p0 when
it is deactivated. Subsequently, GRE measures the cumulative received power of the
k nodes that receive the less power from p1 and p0, respectively. The operation
level that is providing the larger amount of cumulative received power will be the
algorithm’s choice for the current step.
Sampling Algorithm (SAM) Instead of going through all possible solutions
extensively as the Brute-force algorithm does, and in order to avoid the greedy
approach and its disadvantages, we propose a sampling heuristic. It randomly
samples  k-sets of nodes and aims to maximize the cumulative received power
of all possible k-sets with the conﬁguration that will come up from the sample. In
this way, the algorithm overcomes the threat of a locally optimal solution but due
to the random grouping, it does not take into account the nodes that form the k-set
with the least received power.
Algorithm 4 consists of two phases. During the ﬁrst phase, it randomly chooses
 k-sets of nodes and ﬁnds their optimal chargers conﬁguration xi W i 2 Œ1; 
via Algorithm 1. The second phase is iterative. Within each iteration, it chooses a
charger perm.j/ from a random permutation (perm) of the chargers set and measures
the cumulative received power of each k-set that belongs to the sample when the
charger is activated and when it is not. Then, it sums the gain when the charger
is activated (gain1) and compares it with the gain when it is closed (gain0). The
operation level with the larger sum of gain is decided as the ﬁnal operation level

10
Power Maximization in the Vector Model for Wireless Energy Transfer
313
Algorithm 4: Sampling (SAM)
Input : dist; R; C ; k
Output: x
1 begin
2
choose randomly  k-sets of nodes fk1; k2; : : : ; kg;
3
for i D 1 !  do
4
xi D IterativeMaxPower.dist; ki; C ; open/;
5
end for
6
perm D a random permutation of chargers;
7
for j D 1 ! m do
8
gain0 D 0;
9
gain1 D 0;
10
for i D 1 !  do
11
p0.i/ D P.C .xi..perm.j/;0//; ki/;
12
p1.i/ D P.C .xi..perm.j/;1//; ki/;
13
if (p1.i/  p0.i/) then
14
gain0 D gain0 C p0.i/  p1.i/;
15
else
16
gain1 D gain1 C p1.i/  p0.i/;
17
end if
18
end for
19
if (gain1  gain0) then
20
8 i 2 Œ
; xi
perm.j/ D 0;
21
else
22
8 i 2 Œ
; xi
perm.j/ D 1;
23
end if
24
end for
25
return any xi W i 2 Œ
26 end
of the charger. Thus, at the end of the process the  k-sets share the same chargers
conﬁguration. Finally, the conﬁguration of the sampled k-sets is SAM’s output.
Fusion Algorithm (FUS) Our last algorithm tries to combine the advantages of
the previous ones and at the same time to restrict their weaknesses. FUS initiates
by having the best chargers conﬁguration for each node individually. Step by step it
changes the operation level of one charger at the time. This way, the algorithm fuses
the n different conﬁgurations to one with respect to the received power sum of the
k nodes with the least power. FUS takes into consideration the received power for
each node separately and aims to keep it as high as possible.
Algorithm 5 consists of two phases. During the ﬁrst phase, it ﬁnds the optimal
chargers conﬁguration xR via Algorithm 1 for each node R individually. During
the second phase, it proceeds iteratively. Within each iteration, it chooses a charger
perm.j/ from a random permutation of the chargers set and measures the power of
each node when it is activated and when it is not. Those power values are stored
in two vectors, p1 and p0, respectively. In the sequel, it sums the k nodes with the

314
I. Katsidimas et al.
Algorithm 5: Fusion (FUS)
Input : dist; R; C ; k
Output: Chargers conﬁguration
1 begin
2
//ﬁnd optimal conﬁguration for each node;
3
foreach R 2 R do
4
xR D IterativeMaxPower.dist; R; C ; open/;
5
end foreach
6
perm D a random permutation of chargers;
7
for j D 1 ! m do
8
foreach R 2 R do
9
p0.R/ D P.C .xR..perm.j/;0//; R/;
10
p1.R/ D P.C .xR..perm.j/;1//; R/;
11
end foreach
12
sort.p1; asc/;
13
sort.p0; asc/;
14
if (Pk
iD1 p1.i/  Pk
iD1 p0.i/) then
15
8R 2 R; xR
perm.j/ D 0;
16
else
17
8R 2 R; xR
perm.j/ D 1;
18
end if
19
end for
20
return any xR W R 2 R
21 end
Table 10.2 Summary table
Algorithm
Assumption
Knowledge
Running
time
Performance
Greedy
Initiate from a random
conﬁguration for chargers
Checks all the nodes of
the network
Fast
Low
Sampling
Initiate with  different
conﬁguration, optimal for
each sample
Checks only the nodes
of the sample
Average
Low for small
k, Average
Fusion
Initiate with n different
conﬁguration, optimal for
each node
Checks all the nodes of
the network
Slow
High
least power for each operation level and compares them. The operation level of the
charger with the larger sum will be chosen. That way FUS changes the charger’s
operation level to the one that has the less negative impact on the k-set with the
least received power that has risen. At the end of the algorithm, all the nodes share
the same chargers conﬁguration. In Table 10.2 you can ﬁnd a list of advantages and
limitations for each algorithm.

10
Power Maximization in the Vector Model for Wireless Energy Transfer
315
10.7
Evaluation
We conducted simulations in order to evaluate our methods and reveal insights of the
proposed design performance, using Matlab R2016a. The system that we consider
for the performance evaluation consists of chargers and nodes randomly deployed
in a square ﬁeld of 10 m10 m. Each charger delivers to the transmit antenna power
equal to 2 W and it has 2 dbi gain, while the gain of the receiver’s antenna is 1 dbi.
The number of chargers and nodes is set to 15 and 200, respectively, and all the
experiments run on the same system where the wavelength is 29 cm. Figure 10.4a
depicts an instance of the deployment. For statistical smoothness, we conducted
each simulation 100 times. Even though the statistical analysis of the ﬁndings
demonstrates very high concentration around the mean, in the following simulation
results we also depict the conﬁdence intervals. Actually, we provide the conﬁdence
intervals for 20 repetitions, in order to demonstrate an earlier convergence.
In this section, we provide our simulation results on three performance metrics:
(a) cumulative power fuelled into the system, (b) communication overhead (the
number of messages that has been sent or received from nodes), and (c) power
balance (the variation of power among nodes).
Cumulative Power In general, as the communication range of the chargers grows,
the distributed Algorithm 1 achieves a near optimal solution. Figure 10.4b depicts
the cumulative received power by the nodes by varying the communication range of
the chargers over time (for 90 rounds). In each round, a charger is chosen randomly
and decides on its operation level.
We can see that the cumulative power with the open communication range never
decreases over time like the others do. This is because every charger has global
knowledge of the power exchange in the system. Indeed, when a charger has limited
communication range, then its choice serves the nodes in the communication range
that covers, but for the rest of the nodes the result might be negative. On the other
hand, at the ﬁrst steps of the distributed algorithm, choices made from chargers with
short communication range can beneﬁt temporarily the cumulative power for the
next steps, but in the end, the one with the global knowledge will perform better.
We also observe that when the communication range is 1 m we achieve a near
optimal solution. The reason behind this is that the received power of the nodes far
from the charger is reduced due to distance and they do not contribute that much
to the cumulative received power. The conﬁdence intervals which are presented
in the Fig. 10.4c show a high concentration around the mean. As the time passes,
Algorithm 1 has higher concentration around the mean and without overlaps unlike
at the ﬁrst steps.
As mentioned before, it is impractical to run OPT because it uses brute-force
approach. For this reason, we use the same experimental setup with a small number
of chargers as above for comparing GRE, SAM, and FUS with OPT. Figure 10.4a
shows the corresponding deployment.
We are also interested in the impact of the number k. Figure 10.5a depicts the
cumulative power of the k nodes with the least power over various k. An interesting
observation is that SAM does not perform much better than GRE for low k. On the

316
I. Katsidimas et al.
Fig. 10.4 Deployment and
cumulative power for
IterativeMaxPower. (a)
Chargers’ and nodes’
deployment. (b) Cumulative
power over time for different
knowledge levels. (c)
Conﬁdence intervals
for Fig. 10.4b. open
1
0.6,
0.4
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
x(m)
y(m)
Chargers
Nodes
(a)
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
1.1
1.2
1.3
1.4
Time (rounds)
Cumulative Power (watts)
open
0.4
0.6
1
(b)
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
1.1
1.2
1.3
Time (rounds)
Cumulative Power (watts)
(c)

10
Power Maximization in the Vector Model for Wireless Energy Transfer
317
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
0
0.002
0.004
0.006
0.008
0.01
0.012
0.014
0.016
0.018
0.02
k
Cumulative Power (watt)
OPT
 GRE
 SAM
 FUS
(a)
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
k
0
0.002
0.004
0.006
0.008
0.01
0.012
0.014
0.016
0.018
0.02
Cumulative Power (watts)
(b)
Fig. 10.5 Performance of different algorithms. (a) Cumulative power (of k-set with minimum
power) for different values of k. (b) Conﬁdence intervals for Fig. 10.5a. GRE
SAM
FUS

318
I. Katsidimas et al.
Fig. 10.6 Impact of
communication range on
different metrics. (a)
Communication overhead
over different communication
ranges. (b) Cumulative power
over different communication
ranges at the 90th round of
Algorithm 1. (c) Ratio of
cumulative power to
communication overhead
over different communication
ranges
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
1.6
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4 x 104
Communication Range (m)
Communication Overhead (messages)
(a)
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
1.1
1.2
1.3
1.4
1.5 open
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
1.1
1.2
1.3
1.4
Communication Range (m)
Cumulative Power (watts)
(b)
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
1.6
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2 x 10−3
Communication Range (m)
Cumulative Power / Communication Overhead
(watts/messages)
(c)

10
Power Maximization in the Vector Model for Wireless Energy Transfer
319
other hand, for k > 27 we have a considerable improvement. The reason behind this
is the sampling that SAM does. On the contrary, the rest of the algorithms compare
the k least power values of all the system without any restriction. So for small k
SAM by default has a disadvantage. For example, it is hard to sample in the same
k-set for k D 10 even the two of the nodes with the least received power among 200
nodes. Thus, as k increases, the performance of SAM improves. At the experiments
 D 30 (the size of the sample for SAM). Different values of  did not provide
any signiﬁcant improvement, but if it is too small the sample is not representative
and poor. As expected, FUS outperforms the other two algorithms and it is the one
that approximates OPT better. This is because FUS checks the power received for
all the nodes and has more than one initial chargers’ conﬁguration unlike GRE.
The conﬁdence intervals are also presented in the Fig. 10.5b. As we claimed, the
algorithms present high concentration around the mean and there are no overlaps as
the value of k grows.
Communication Overhead Figure 10.6a meters the number of messages for
ranges from 0:3 to 1:5 that have been exchanged in the system during the running
time of the distributed algorithm. When the communication range of the chargers
increases, the communication overhead goes up. Moreover, the effect of different
communication ranges (from 0:3 to 1:5 and open) on the cumulative received
power of the system is depicted in Fig. 10.6b. As we mentioned above, a limited
communication range (1.1–1.5 m) can achieve the performance of open. We observe
that there is a trade-off between the communication overhead and the cumulative
power that the nodes receive (Fig. 10.6c). As the communication range grows,
the ratio of cumulative received power to communication overhead decreases. It
is evident that the contribution of the messages drops for communication range
bigger than 1–1.2 m. After that point, the contribution of the extra messages, which
are many, is very low. Note that the communication overhead depends on the
relative position of the chargers and the nodes. As the number of nodes in the
communication range of a charger increases, then the number of messages increases
as well. The chargers’ placement for communication optimization is not considered
in this study.
Power Balance We ﬁnally study the impact of our methods on the system in
relation to power balance (the variation of power among the various nodes). The
simulation results are shown in Fig. 10.7 where we examine the performance of the
algorithms in the general case. Obviously, there is room for improvement in this
area, as our methods do not take power balance into consideration and we leave this
as an open problem for future work.
10.8
Conclusion and Future Work
In this chapter, we studied the problem of ﬁnding the best conﬁguration setup of the
wireless power transmitters in a wireless system with respect to the maximization
of the cumulative received power and we proposed heuristic algorithms to succeed

320
I. Katsidimas et al.
0
0.02
0.04
OPT
0
0.02
0.04
GRE
0
0.02
0.04
SAM
Power (watts)
0
0.02
0.04
FUS
Nodes
Fig. 10.7 Power balance achieved by different algorithms
in this goal. Finally, we evaluated the performance of the proposed algorithms
through experimental simulation and provided numerical results to validate their
efﬁciency. A main contribution of our work lies on the fact that, for the ﬁrst time
power maximization algorithms are given under the vector model which realistically
addresses the superposition of energy ﬁelds.
In future work, we opt to improve the power balance of the algorithms in
exchange of a small amount of the cumulative received power. We will also explore
solutions with good approximation ratios to maximize the cumulative received
power from the point of view of nodes or chargers deployment.
References
1. C.M. Angelopoulos, S. Nikoletseas, T.P. Raptis, Wireless energy transfer in sensor networks
with adaptive, limited knowledge protocols. Comput. Netw. 70, 113–141 (2014)
2. S. Boyd, L. Vandenberghe, Convex Optimization (Cambridge University Press, New York,
2004)
3. H. Dai, Y. Liu, G. Chen, X. Wu, T. He, Scape: safe charging with adjustable power, in 2014
IEEE 34th International Conference on Distributed Computing Systems (ICDCS), June (2014),
pp. 439–448
4. D. Gao, G. Wu, Y. Liu, F. Zhang, Bounded end-to-end delay with transmission power control
techniques for rechargeable wireless sensor networks. AEU Int. J. Electron. Commun. 68(5),
395–405 (2014)

10
Power Maximization in the Vector Model for Wireless Energy Transfer
321
5. B. Grifﬁn, C. Detweiler, Resonant wireless power transfer to ground sensors from a UAV,
in 2012 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), May (2012),
pp. 2660–2665
6. S. Guo, C. Wang, Y. Yang,
Mobile data gathering with wireless energy replenishment in
rechargeable sensor networks, in 2013 Proceedings IEEE INFOCOM, April (2013), pp. 1932–
1940
7. S. He, J. Chen, F. Jiang, D.K.Y. Yau, G. Xing, Y. Sun,
Energy provisioning in wireless
rechargeable sensor networks. IEEE Trans. Mob. Comput. 12(10), 1931–1942 (2013)
8. I. Katsidimas, S. Nikoletseas, T.P. Raptis, C. Raptopoulos,
Efﬁcient algorithms for power
maximization in the vector model for wireless energy transfer, in Proceedings of the 18th
International Conference on Distributed Computing and Networking (ACM, New York, 2017),
pp. 30:1–30:10
9. Y. Li, L. Fu, M. Chen, K. Chi, Y.H. Zhu, RF-based charger placement for duty cycle guarantee
in battery-free sensor networks. IEEE Commun. Lett. 19(10), 1802–1805 (2015)
10. X. Lu, D. Niyato, P. Wang, D.I. Kim,
Wireless charger networking for mobile devices:
fundamentals, standards, and applications. IEEE Wirel. Commun. 22(2), 126–135 (2015)
11. X. Lu, P. Wang, D. Niyato, D.I. Kim, Z. Han, Wireless networks with RF energy harvesting: a
contemporary survey. IEEE Commun. Surv. Tutorials 17(2), 757–789 (2015, Secondquarter)
12. X. Lu, P. Wang, D. Niyato, D.I. Kim, Z. Han, Wireless charging technologies: fundamentals,
standards, and network applications. IEEE Commun. Surv. Tutorials 18(2), 1413–1452 (2016,
Second quarter)
13. A. Madhja, S. Nikoletseas, T.P. Raptis, Distributed wireless power transfer in sensor networks
with multiple mobile chargers. Comput. Netw. 80, 89–108 (2015)
14. A. Mittleider, B. Grifﬁn, C. Detweiler, Experimental Analysis of a UAV-Based Wireless Power
Transfer Localization System (Springer International Publishing, Cham, 2016), pp. 357–371
15. M.Y. Naderi, K.R. Chowdhury, S. Basagni, W. Heinzelman, S. De, S. Jana, Experimental study
of concurrent data and wireless energy transfer for sensor networks, in 2014 IEEE Global
Communications Conference, Dec (2014), pp. 2543–2549
16. M.Y. Naderi, P. Nintanavongsa, K.R. Chowdhury, RF-MAC: a medium access control protocol
for re-chargeable sensor networks powered by wireless energy harvesting. IEEE Trans. Wirel.
Commun. 13(7), 3926–3937 (2014)
17. M.Y. Naderi, K.R. Chowdhury, S. Basagni,
Wireless sensor networks with RF energy
harvesting: energy models and analysis,
in 2015 IEEE Wireless Communications and
Networking Conference (WCNC), March (2015), pp. 1494–1499
18. S. Nikoletseas, T.P. Raptis, C. Raptopoulos, Low radiation efﬁcient wireless energy transfer
in wireless distributed systems, in 2015 IEEE 35th International Conference on Distributed
Computing Systems (ICDCS), June (2015), pp. 196–204
19. S. Nikoletseas, T.P. Raptis, C. Raptopoulos, Interactive wireless charging for energy balance,
in 2016 IEEE 36th International Conference on Distributed Computing Systems (ICDCS), June
2016
20. S. Nikoletseas, Y. Yang, A. Georgiadis (eds.), Wireless Power Transfer Algorithms, Technolo-
gies and Applications in Ad Hoc Communication Networks (Springer International Publishing,
Cham, 2016)
21. P. Nintanavongsa, M.Y. Naderi, K.R. Chowdhury, Medium access control protocol design for
sensors powered by wireless energy transfer, in 2013 Proceedings IEEE INFOCOM, April
(2013), pp. 150–154
22. Powercast
TX91501
Transmitter,
http://www.powercastco.com/products/powercaster-
transmitters/
23. TI BQ501210 Wireless Power Transmitter Manager, http://www.ti.com/product/BQ501210
24. B. Tong, Z. Li, G. Wang, W. Zhang, How wireless power charging technology affects sensor
network deployment and routing, in 2010 IEEE 30th International Conference on Distributed
Computing Systems (ICDCS), June (2010), pp. 438–447

322
I. Katsidimas et al.
25. L. Xie, Y. Shi, Y.T. Hou, H.D. Sherali, Making sensor networks immortal: an energy-renewal
approach with wireless power transfer. IEEE/ACM Trans. Netw. 20(6), 1748–1761 (2012)
26. L. Xie, Y. Shi, Y. T. Hou, A. Lou, Wireless power transfer and applications to sensor networks.
IEEE Wirel. Commun. 20(4), 140–145 (2013)
27. S. Zhang, Z. Qian, F. Kong, J. Wu, S. Lu, P3: joint optimization of charger placement and power
allocation for wireless power transfer, in 2015 IEEE Conference on Computer Communications
(INFOCOM), April (2015), pp. 2344–2352

Chapter 11
Enabling Green Heterogeneous Cellular
Networks via Balanced Dynamic Planning
Muhammad Ismail, Mohamed Kashef, Erchin Serpedin,
and Khalid A. Qaraqe
11.1
Introduction
The past decade has witnessed a wide deployment of wireless access networks,
which is motivated by the increasing demand of wireless communication ser-
vices. Moreover, mobile terminals (MTs) have evolved into more sophisticated
devices with advanced processing and displaying capabilities that can support
video streaming and data applications besides voice calls. Unfortunately, such a
great advancement in wireless communication services has resulted in high energy
consumption for both network operators and mobile users. Speciﬁcally, there exist
3 million base stations (BSs) and around 3 billion MTs worldwide that annually
consume 4:5 GW and 0.2–0.4 GW of power, respectively [1]. The high energy
consumption of network operators and mobile users has result in environmental,
ﬁnancial, and quality-of-experience (QoE) concerns. From an environmental point
of view, the telecommunications industry is responsible for about 2% of the total
CO2 emissions worldwide, and the percentage is expected to double by 2020 [2].
Furthermore, the rechargeable batteries of MTs have an expected lifetime of 2–3
years, leading to 25,000 tons of annual disposed batteries, which has signiﬁcant
environmental (and ﬁnancial) impacts [3]. From a ﬁnancial standpoint, it has been
estimated that the energy bills of service providers cost about 18–32% of their
M. Ismail () • M. Kashef • K.A. Qaraqe
Electrical and Computer Engineering Department, Texas A&M University at Qatar, Education
City, P.O. Box No. 23874, Doha, Qatar
e-mail: m.ismail@qatar.tamu.edu; mohamed.hany@qatar.tamu.edu;
khalid.qaraqe@qatar.tamu.edu
E. Serpedin
Electrical and Computer Engineering Department, Texas A&M University, College Station, TX,
USA
e-mail: serpedin@ece.tamu.edu
© Springer International Publishing AG 2018
D.N.K. Jayakody et al. (eds.), Wireless Information and Power Transfer:
A New Paradigm for Green Communications, DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-56669-6_11
323

324
M. Ismail et al.
operational expenditure [4]. From a QoE consideration, it has been estimated that
almost 60% of mobile users suffer from a limited battery capacity, a problem
that is further complicated by the slow advance in the battery technology. The
aforementioned concerns have motivated the research in green communications for
energy efﬁcient wireless network operation.
In general, the green solutions that are deployed by network operators can be
classiﬁed based on the call trafﬁc load condition. At a high call trafﬁc load, radio
resource scheduling techniques are adopted to satisfy the MTs’ required quality-of-
service (QoS) at a reduced BS transmission power [5, 6]. At a low call trafﬁc load,
network operators switch-off some of their BSs to save energy and MTs are served
by the remaining active BSs, which is referred to as dynamic planning [2, 7–9].
Such an approach is very useful in today’s heterogeneous wireless medium where
lightly loaded small cells (e.g., pico and femto cells) can be switched off and the
call trafﬁc load is mainly served by the remaining active macro/micro BSs, leading
to a green heterogeneous cellular network. The main objective of the dynamic
planning research is to switch off as many lightly loaded BSs as possible provided
that the remaining active BSs satisfy the mobile users QoS in the downlink (e.g.,
the users minimum required downlink throughput). However, the existing research
does not provide any QoS guarantee for the uplink mobile users and the relationship
between the QoS of uplink mobile users and their incurred energy consumption
is not well investigated. From a network operator’s perspective, energy saving can
be achieved by switching off dense small cells and radio coverage is provided by
large cells. However, this could result in associating the uplink mobile users to a
faraway BS which leads to higher energy consumption for MTs in the uplink due
to larger transmission distances. Given the MT available energy, it might not be
able under such circumstances to satisfy its minimum required throughput in the
uplink. Even worse, high energy consumption in the uplink might lead the MT
to drain its battery at a faster rate which might eventually result in call dropping
due to battery depletion. However, the existing research does not quantify such a
relationship between dynamic planning and the incurred uplink energy consumption
and its impact on QoS degradation for uplink mobile users.
In this chapter, we aim to capture the trade-off between the mobile users’ uplink
energy consumption and their perceived QoS and employ such a relationship to
design a balanced dynamic planning framework that can save energy for network
operators while providing service quality guarantee for mobile users with data calls
in the uplink and downlink. We ﬁrst review the fundamentals of the traditional
dynamic planning approaches along with the motivation for a dynamic planning
framework with balanced energy efﬁciency [8]. Subsequently, we present a dynamic
planning approach with balanced energy efﬁciency based on a multi-timescale
decision process whose objective is to save energy for the service provider in a
heterogeneous cellular network while ensuring the QoS of mobile users in the uplink
and downlink [7]. The two-timescale problem decouples the BS operation (on–
off switching) and MT association into two separate timescales, namely slow and
fast timescales. The slow timescale captures the long-term temporal ﬂuctuations
in the call trafﬁc load density while the fast timescale captures the short-term

11
Enabling Green Heterogeneous Cellular Networks via Balanced Dynamic Planning
325
temporal ﬂuctuations in terms of mobile users arrivals and departures. Such a
balanced dynamic planning formulation offers a novel BS switching criterion as BS
switching-off might be infeasible due to service quality degradation in the uplink
[9]. Due to the associated computational complexity of the decision problem, we
present a sub-optimal dynamic planning framework following a feasibility analysis.
We prove that the feasibility-based framework leads to an optimal BS switching
decision from the downlink QoS perspective and a sub-optimal BS switching
decision from the uplink QoS perspective. To further reduce the computational
complexity, we present a tunable heuristic algorithm that iteratively activates the
small cells until uplink and downlink QoS parameters are satisﬁed in an average
sense. Simulation results indicate that the balanced dynamic planning framework
can save energy for network operators (compared with an all active state that keeps
all BSs active) while ensuring a target QoS for mobile users both in the uplink and
downlink, unlike the unbalanced dynamic planning approach.
11.2
Dynamic Planning in Green Networks
This section discusses the motivation for adopting a dynamic planning approach to
enable an energy efﬁcient network operation. Furthermore, we discuss some design
fundamentals and the motivation for a balanced dynamic planning approach [8].
11.2.1
Motivations and Design Principles of Dynamic
Planning
In cellular network planning, the cell size and capacity are traditionally designed
to satisfy the peak call trafﬁc load. However, it has been shown that the call
trafﬁc load exhibits temporal and spatial ﬂuctuations [4]. Speciﬁcally, real trafﬁc
traces have demonstrated a sinusoidal trafﬁc proﬁle in every cell. The call trafﬁc
load during day time (i.e., 11 am–9 pm) is much higher than that during the night
(i.e., 10 pm–9 am) [10]. Furthermore, the peak call trafﬁc load during weekends
and holidays is much lower than that of a normal weekday. In addition, the real
trafﬁc traces have demonstrated a diverse behavior among closely located BSs [10].
Consequently, networks are over-provisioned at a low call trafﬁc load, which lead to
energy wastage. Thus, BS on–off switching is proposed to adapt the network energy
consumption according to the call trafﬁc load condition, an approach that is referred
to as dynamic planning. Hence, at a low call trafﬁc load, lightly loaded BSs are
switched off and MTs are served by the remaining active BSs.
Two fundamental issues must be tackled while designing a dynamic planning
mechanism, namely MT association and BS operation, as discussed in the following.

326
M. Ismail et al.
11.2.1.1
MT Association
This issue deals with associating each MT to a given BS for service. In the following,
we discuss the design objectives of the MT association mechanism in the context
of dynamic planning. Then, we review decision criteria of some existing MT
association mechanisms.
11.2.1.2
Design Objectives
In literature, the MT association serves two objectives for dynamic planning
deployment. The ﬁrst objective is related to concentrating the MTs’ trafﬁc in a few
BSs to switch off the remaining BSs. Hence, newly incoming MTs are associated
with a subset of BSs. In addition, handover is triggered for MTs already in service
to allow for trafﬁc load concentration. The second objective aims to balance the
trade-off between network energy efﬁciency and ﬂow-level performance of the
MTs (e.g., data rate, time delay, etc.) [11]. The rationale behind such an objective
is to ensure that the target QoS of MTs is not jeopardized while reducing the
network energy consumption. Hence, in [11], a weighted multi-objective function
is introduced to control the MT association. Based on the weighting factor value,
the MT association favors whether the network energy consumption or the users’
received QoS. Furthermore, it has been shown that more energy is saved when
mobile users can tolerate some service delay [12, 13].
11.2.1.3
Decision Criteria
Several decision criteria are deﬁned in literature for the MT association problem to
enable an efﬁcient dynamic planning. The simplest decision criterion for the MT
association problem is an MT-BS distance based, where MTs with downlink trafﬁc
are associated with the nearest BSs [14]. As a result, low transmission power is
consumed due to the short transmission distances. The network impact is another
decision criterion introduced in [15] where MTs’ trafﬁc is concentrated in the BSs
that lead to lower intercell interference. Furthermore, coverage hole avoidance is a
decision criterion that aims to concentrate the call trafﬁc load in a subset of BSs that
can provide an acceptable network coverage [16, 17].
11.2.1.4
BS Operation
The BS operation speciﬁes which BSs are switched off, when to wake-up a given
BS, and how to implement the switching decisions. The associated design issues are
discussed in the following.

11
Enabling Green Heterogeneous Cellular Networks via Balanced Dynamic Planning
327
11.2.1.5
Prediction of Future Trafﬁc Demands
The BS mode (on or off) lasts for a long duration (i.e., in hours) to avoid frequent BS
on–off switching. This is mainly because frequent on–off switching of BSs is not
favored as it leads to increased energy consumption during the BS start-up [2] and
service unavailability for the inactive cells during the decision computation phase
[18]. Hence, the BS on–off switching decision should consider not only the current
trafﬁc load (through MT association) but also the future demands to guarantee an
acceptable QoS [2]. As a result, extra radio resources should be reserved at the
active BSs to satisfy the future trafﬁc demands [18]. Several studies in literature
have demonstrated a repetitive call trafﬁc load patterns for weekdays and weekends
[19], a fact which can be used to predict the future call trafﬁc demands. In addition,
neighbor BSs can cooperate with each other to predict their future trafﬁc proﬁle via
an online stochastic game as in [20].
11.2.1.6
BS Wake-Up Design
As a subset of BSs is switched off, the remaining active BSs should provide service
coverage for the inactive cells. When the call trafﬁc load served by the active BSs
increases beyond their capacity limitation, some of the switched-off BSs have to
be turned on. Hence, in dynamic planning, it is necessary to specify the wake-
up instants for the inactive BSs. Different BS wake-up schemes are proposed in
literature. For instance, in [21], an M-based and V-based wake-up schemes are
proposed. Speciﬁcally, in the M-based scheme, an inactive BS wakes up only when
M MTs request service, which is also investigated in [22] via queuing analysis
techniques and in [23] based on game theory tools. On the other hand, in the V-
based scheme, an inactive BS wakes up after a vacation time V. Moreover, the
work in [24] presents a Markov decision problem (MDP) that employs optimal
switching schemes to activate femto BSs in overlapping coverage with a macro BS
by exploiting information about the call trafﬁc load and user localization. In this
context, the switching decision can be BS controlled, MT controlled, or network
controlled [25]. A sleep femto BS monitors the user activity to wake up in the BS
controlled mode, while the MT sends an activation message to the sleep femto BS
in the MT controlled mode, and the core network sends activation messages to the
sleep femto BS over the backhaul link in the network controlled mode.
11.2.1.7
Switching Off Mode Entrance and Exit
An MT may not be able to complete its handoff procedure to an active BS and
suffers from call dropping if its associated BS is switched off too fast. This is due to
the low received signal from the neighboring BSs and the limited signaling channel
capacity. The switch-off mode entrance speciﬁes how a BS transits from the on to
the off state. In [26], BS wilting is proposed for a smooth switch-off mode entrance,

328
M. Ismail et al.
where the BS transmit power is progressively halved until the BS is turned off.
Hence, the MTs initiate a handover process to the nearby BSs during the wilting
process. Similarly, MTs in service can suffer from a strong interference if a BS is
switched on too fast. The switch-off mode exit speciﬁes how a BS transits from the
off to the on state. A BS blossoming process is proposed in [26] for smooth switch-
off mode exit, where the BS transmit power is progressively doubled until the BS is
turned on.
11.2.2
Dynamic Planning with Balanced Energy Efﬁciency
A major limitation with the existing contributions on dynamic planning is that
they focus only on enhancing energy efﬁciency of network operators regardless of
the energy consumption performance of the mobile users. Speciﬁcally, the related
research considers only MTs with downlink trafﬁc. In this context, the main goal
is to balance the BS energy consumption performance with the MTs’ ﬂow-level
performance [11]. However, in reality, there exists a mixture of mobile users with
uplink trafﬁc and mobile users with downlink trafﬁc. Unfortunately, the existing
research does not pay attention to the relation between the mobile users’ perceived
service quality and their incurred uplink energy consumption. For instance, an MT
might not be able to satisfy a target minimum uplink throughput due to the required
high transmission power. Furthermore, if the MT is consuming high energy in
the uplink, it is expected to drain its battery at a fast rate, eventually leading to
call dropping. Consequently, dynamic planning approaches with balanced energy
efﬁciency among network operators and mobile users should be investigated.
As discussed above, dynamic planning deals with two fundamental issues,
namely user association and BS operation. When the main scope of dynamic
planning is to enhance energy efﬁciency of network operators, which is the
case for the existing research, the BSs’ switch-off decisions can result in energy
inefﬁcient user association from the mobile users’ standpoint. As shown in Fig. 11.1,
accounting only for the downlink performance, MTs with uplink trafﬁc can be
associated with a faraway macro BS, due to a switched-off nearby femto/pico BS.
Because of the long transmission distance, high energy consumption of MTs in
the uplink is expected, which leads to energy depletion for MTs at a faster rate.
Although energy consumption for MTs is not that much compared with the BS
energy consumption, yet a fast rate battery depletion for MTs results in high rate
of dropped services in the uplink, which jeopardizes the mobile users’ perceived
service quality. In addition, MTs might be incapable of supporting a minimum
required throughput due to the associated high transmission power. Hence, the
dynamic planning approach should be designed to capture and balance the trade-off
in the resulting energy efﬁciency for network operators and mobile users. Towards
this objective, in the following, we ﬁrst quantify the impact of dynamic planning on
the service quality of mobile users in the uplink and downlink. The uplink mobile
users’ QoS is measured in terms of supporting a minimum required throughput

11
Enabling Green Heterogeneous Cellular Networks via Balanced Dynamic Planning
329
Fig. 11.1 Dynamic planning with unbalanced energy saving. MTs with uplink trafﬁc are associ-
ated with faraway BSs [8]
(which is related to the MT transmission power, the available energy at the battery
of the MT, and the number of uplink users) and satisfying a maximum threshold on
call dropping probability due to the MT battery depletion (which is related to the
available energy at the battery of the MT, the minimum required throughput, and
the number of uplink users). On the other hand, the downlink mobile users’ QoS is
measured in terms of satisfying a minimum required throughput (which is related to
the BS transmission power and the number of downlink users).
11.3
Impact of Dynamic Planning on Mobile Users’ Service
Quality
In this section, we aim to quantify the dynamic planning impact on mobile users’
service quality [7, 9]. Such an investigation is very useful in designing dynamic
planning approaches that can balance energy saving for network operators with
uplink and downlink service quality. In the following, we ﬁrst present the system
model, then, we investigate the impact of dynamic planning on the mobile users’
service quality.
11.3.1
System Model
This subsection presents the system model in terms of the employed heterogeneous
cellular network, call trafﬁc load ﬂuctuations, power consum models, and QoS
metrics. Mathematical symbols used in this chapter are summarized in Table 11.1.

330
M. Ismail et al.
Table 11.1 Summary of important symbols
Symbol
Deﬁnition
BUL=DL
s
Available bandwidths for uplink/downlink users at BS s
Ds
Separation distance between the macro BS and the pico/femto BS s
Ec
i;m
MT m energy consumption till time slot i C 1
Etrp;m
Trapping energy for MT m
fPits.pits/
PMF of vector of transmission power actions adopted by BS s over time
slots
fPitm.pitm/
PMF of vector of transmission power actions adopted by MT m over
time slots
fEm.em/
PDF of initial available energy em at MT m
GUL=DL
s
Average channel power gain for the uplink/downlink mobile users with
BS s
Hs
Height of BS s
I
Set of periods for the fast timescale
K
Set of service areas
lm
File size for MT m
MUL=DL
s
Maximum user capacity in the uplink/downlink at BS s
M1s
Set of MTs served by pico/femto BS s in the double coverage area
M2s
Set of MTs served by macro BS in the double coverage area
M0
Set of MTs served by macro BS in the single coverage area
mUL=DL
s
Number of MTs served by BS s in the uplink/downlink
mUL=DL
Number of MTs in the geographical region with uplink/downlink trafﬁc
Ps
Average power consumption of BS s
q.mUL=DL/
Steady state probabilities of having mUL=DL mobile users in the
uplink/downlink
Q.m0
UL=DLjmUL=DL/
Transition probabilities of uplink/downlink queues
RUL=DL
min;m
Minimum required data rate by MT m in the uplink/downlink
RUL=DL
m;i;t
Number of bits transmitted till time slot i C 1 for MT m in the
uplink/downlink
S
Set of BSs covering the geographical region
T
Set of periods for the slow timescale
X
Vector of the operation mode of all pico/femto BSs in the geographical
region
m
Upper bound on the call dropping probability
UL=DL
Call arrival rates (per unit ) for uplink/downlink mobile users
!
Duration of fast timescale period
UL=DL
ks
Spatial distributions of the MTs within service area covered by BS s
s
Slope of the load dependent power consumption for BS s

11
Enabling Green Heterogeneous Cellular Networks via Balanced Dynamic Planning
331
Fig. 11.2 Illustration of the
heterogeneous wireless
medium [9]
11.3.1.1
Heterogeneous Cellular Network
Consider a geographical region that is covered by a set S D f0; 1; 2; : : : ; Sg of
BSs where s D 0 denotes a macro BS and s 2 S n f0g represents small cells (i.e.,
pico and femto BSs), as shown in Fig. 11.2. A green hybrid solution is considered
to power the BSs similar to the model described in [6] where a controller (switch)
is utilized to power the BS either via energy harvesting or the grid energy. As a ﬁrst
step of research, in this work, it is assumed that the BS is connected to the grid.
Using the insights obtained from this analysis, our future extension will investigate
the case when the BS is powered via energy harvesting. The small cells follow a
cell-on-edge deployment strategy, which is shown to be more energy efﬁcient than
a uniform distribution deployment strategy [27]. Interference mitigation techniques
(e.g., enhanced intercell interference coordination (eICIC), adaptive frequency reuse
[28] in the downlink, and successive group decoding [29] in the uplink) are adopted
for interference avoidance among the macro and pico/femto BSs.
The BSs operate in the frequency division duplex (FDD) mode and the available
bandwidths for uplink and downlink users are denoted by BUL
s
and BDL
s , respectively,
for s 2 S . Mobile users can be covered only by the macro BS or both macro
and pico/femto BSs. Given the mobile users minimum required data rates and the
BS maximum available bandwidth, each BS s 2 S has a maximum user capacity
MUL
s
and MDL
s
for uplink and downlink mobile users, respectively, which can be
determined according to the call admission control policies [30]. The mobile user-
BS association rules are as follows:
•
In the single coverage area (i.e., the area covered solely by the macro BS), MTs
are served by the macro BS. The set of MTs that fall under this category are
denoted as M0.
•
In double coverage areas (i.e., areas covered by both macro and pico/femto BSs),
an MT is served by the active pico/femto BS if the BS has not reached its capacity
limitation. The rationale behind this is the short transmission range between the

332
M. Ismail et al.
MT and the pico/femto BS compared with the distance to a macro BS, which
leads to a lower transmission power consumption. The set of MTs that fall under
this category are denoted as M1s.
•
In double coverage areas where active pico/femto BSs have exceeded their
capacity limitations, MTs are associated with the macro BS. The set of MTs
which are in the coverage area of BS s that fall under this category are denoted
as M2s.
Denote mUL
s
and mDL
s
as the number of MTs served by BS s 2 S in the uplink
and downlink, respectively, and mUL
s
 MUL
s
and mDL
s
 MDL
s . All mobile users are
legitimate subscribers of the network (i.e., malicious users are not assumed). Each
BS s 2 S equally distributes its available bandwidth among its associated MTs. Let
mUL D P
s mUL
s
and mDL D P
s mDL
s
denote the number of MTs in the geographical
region with uplink and downlink trafﬁc, respectively.
Let Ds represent the separation distance between the macro BS and the
pico/femto BS s 2 S n f0g. Denote Hs as the height of BS s 2 S . Let GUL
s
and GDL
s
denote the average channel power gain for the uplink and downlink mobile
users served by BS s 2 S . The average channel power gains are characterized by
the path loss (GUL=DL
s
D 10PLŒdB
=10), and PLŒdB
 is given by
PLŒdB
 D C1 log10

dŒm

C C2 C C3 log10
fcŒGHz
5

;
(11.1)
where d denotes the average distance between the transmitter and receiver, fc repre-
sents the carrier frequency, and C1, C2, and C3 are model dependent constants. The
average path loss is determined based on the MT location within the geographical
region. Speciﬁcally, we use the results in [31] to estimate the average distance
between a BS and an MT located in a speciﬁc coverage region, as follows:
•
For MTs in the single coverage area that are served by the macro BS (i.e.,
m 2 M0), the average distance d in (11.1) is calculated as the diagonal distance
between the BS antenna (with height H0) and an MT located at the coverage
region. The average ground distance of an MT in a coverage region is calculated
using the probability density function (PDF) derived in [31].
•
For MTs in the double coverage area that are served by the pico/femto BS (i.e.,
m 2 M1s), the distance d in (11.1) is calculated similarly to the above framework
but using the pico/femto BS height and the average ground distance between
pico/femto BS and the MT.
•
For MTs in the double coverage area that are served by the macro BS (i.e., m 2
M2s), the distance d in (11.1) is calculated as the diagonal distance using the
height of the macro BS, while the average ground distance is dominated by the
ground distance between the macro BS and the pico/femto BS.
Deﬁne xs as a binary decision variable that represents the operation mode of the
pico/femto BS s 2 S where xs D 1 indicates an active BS while xs D 0 denotes a
sleep BS. Let X D Œx1x2 : : : xS
 be the operation mode vector of all pico/femto BSs
in the geographical region. The macro BS is always active to provide radio coverage
within the geographical region.

11
Enabling Green Heterogeneous Cellular Networks via Balanced Dynamic Planning
333
11.3.1.2
Call Trafﬁc Load Fluctuations
The call trafﬁc load in the geographical region exhibits temporal and spatial
ﬂuctuations as follows.
11.3.1.3
Temporal Trafﬁc Fluctuations
Time is divided into slow and fast timescales to capture the long and short
term temporal trafﬁc ﬂuctuations at both BS operation and MT association level,
respectively.
11.3.1.4
Long-Term Temporal Trafﬁc Fluctuations
At the slow timescale (in scale of hours), time is partitioned into a set of periods
T D f1; 2; : : : ; Tg with equal duration . The set T covers the 24 h of a day and
captures the temporal variations in the call arrival rates (per unit ). Let UL.t/ and
DL.t/ represent the call arrival rates (per unit ) for uplink and downlink mobile
users, which are ﬁxed during each period t 2 T and vary from one period to
another. The user arrival rates exhibit peak values by mid-day and low values at
early morning and late night [2]. The values of UL.t/ and DL.t/ can be inferred
from the historical trafﬁc load patterns of the geographical region [2].
11.3.1.5
Short-Term Temporal Trafﬁc Fluctuations
In order to determine the average MT dropping probability and uplink and downlink
throughput within a speciﬁc long-term period, short-term trafﬁc ﬂuctuations are
introduced. Each period t 2 T is further partitioned into the set of periods I D
f1; 2; : : : ; Ig with equal duration ! D d=Ie and it represents the fast timescale (in
scale of minutes) and captures the variations in the number of mobile users that are
being served in the geographical region in the uplink and downlink. Speciﬁcally,
let mUL.i; t/ and mDL.i; t/ represent the number of mobile users being served in the
geographical region in the uplink and downlink during period i 2 I of period
t 2 T , respectively. Both mUL.i; t/ and mDL.i; t/ are ﬁxed during the same i 2 I
and vary from one period i to another according to the users arrival and service
rates. During period i 2 I , the mobile user arrivals in the uplink and downlink
follow Bernoulli processes with probabilities 	UL.t/ D UL.t/!= and 	DL.t/ D
DL.t/!=, respectively [32]. Hence, the overall arrival process is memoryless
and has a geometric distribution. The departure process depends on the taken
actions, and hence, it does not follow a known distribution. Hence, we approximate
the service process by a geometric distribution for mathematical tractability with
service rates UL.i; t/ and DL.i; t/ (to be calculated in Sect. 11.3.2 as a function
of the number of MTs served in the uplink/downlink, the MT/BS transmission

334
M. Ismail et al.
power, and the ﬁle size) [32]. The maximum number of MTs that can be served in
the geographical region in the uplink and downlink (MUL and MDL, respectively)
depends on the BS operation mode, i.e., MUL D P
s2S xsMUL
s
and MDL D
P
s2S xsMDL
s . Consequently, the short-term temporal ﬂuctuations in the uplink
and downlink can be described by Geo=Geo=MUL=MUL and Geo=Geo=MDL=MDL
queues, respectively. The conditional probability that a certain number of users QmUL
has completed their uplink service given the number of users in the queue MmUL is
denoted by c. QmULj MmUL/ and takes the expression [33]
c. QmULj MmUL/ D
MmULŠ
QmULŠ . MmUL  l/Š QmUL
UL .1  UL/ MmULQmUL:
(11.2)
Deﬁne q.mUL.i; t// and q.mDL.i; t// as the steady state probabilities of having
mUL.i; t/ and mDL.i; t/ mobile users in the uplink and downlink, respectively, during
period i 2 I in t 2 T . In (11.3) and for brevity, we refer to mUL.i; t/ and mDL.i; t/
by mUL and mDL, respectively. The balance equations for the uplink queue, for a
given i and t, are
	ULq.0/ D
MUL
X
lD1
q.l/.1  	UL/cUL.ljl/
q.mUL/ D
MUL
X
lDmUL
q.l/Œ.1  	UL/cUL.l  mULjl/ C 	ULcUL.l C 1  mULjl/
Cq.mUL  1/	ULcUL.0jmUL  1/; 1  mUL  MUL  1
q.MUL/ D q.MUL1/	ULcUL.0jMUL1/Cq.MUL/Œ	ULcUL.1jMUL/
CcUL.0jMUL/
:
(11.3)
Similar equations can be written for the downlink queue. Given the balance equa-
tions, the steady state probabilities q.mUL.i; t// and q.mDL.i; t// can be derived and
the transition probabilities Q.mUL.i C 1; t/jmUL.i; t// and Q.mDL.i C 1; t/jmDL.i; t//
can be found by solving a set of linear equations.
11.3.1.6
Spatial Trafﬁc Fluctuations
Due to the overlapping coverage from macro and pico/femto BSs, the geographical
region is partitioned into a set of service areas K
D fk0; k1; : : : ; kSg, where k0
represents the single coverage area (i.e., region covered only by macro BS) and ks
represents the double coverage area (i.e., region covered by both pico/femto BS s
and the macro BS). The spatial distributions of the MTs within different service
areas are captured using the probability mass functions (PMFs) UL
k0 and DL
k0 for the
single coverage area and UL
ks and DL
ks for the double coverage areas, for uplink and
downlink mobile users, respectively. Speciﬁcally, UL
ks
and DL
ks
yield the fraction

11
Enabling Green Heterogeneous Cellular Networks via Balanced Dynamic Planning
335
of uplink and downlink mobile users in the proximity of pico/femto BS s (i.e., in
the double coverage area of pico/femto BS s and the macro BS) and UL
k0
D 1 
P
s2S UL
ks and DL
k0 D 1  P
s2S DL
ks represent the fraction of users in the single
coverage area.
11.3.1.7
Power Consumption Models
This subsection describes the power consumption models for the BSs (to serve the
downlink trafﬁc) and the MTs (to support the uplink trafﬁc).
11.3.1.8
BS Power Consumption
The average power consumption of BS s 2 S in the downlink depends on its mode
of operation, and is given by Auer et al. [34]
Ps D
8
<
:
PF;s C sPtx;s;
xs D 1
PL;s;
xs D 0;
(11.4)
where PF;s is the BS ﬁxed power consumption that accounts for the power supply,
cooling, backhaul, and other circuits, s represents the slope of the load dependent
power consumption, Ptx;s denotes the BS average transmission power, and PL;s
stands for the BS sleep power. The BS transmission power is chosen from a discrete
set of actions Ptx;s D fPmin;s; P1;s; : : : ; Pmax;sg, which represent Vs power levels
uniformly distributed in the range ŒPmin;s; Pmax;s
. For a given period t 2 T , the
selected BS transmission power action at time slot i 2 I within period t 2 T is
denoted as Ptx;s.i; t/.
Let Pits represent a vector of transmission power actions adopted by BS s over
time slots 1; 2; : : : ; i 2 I within period t 2 T , and which is assumed to have a
PMF fPits.pits/. The PMF fPits.pits/ can be inferred from system dynamics as in [35].
11.3.1.9
MT Power Consumption
Each MT m 2 M0; M1s; or M2s with uplink trafﬁc communicates with a macro or
pico/femto BS using transmission power Ptx;m. Denote  as the transmission power
ampliﬁer efﬁciency. The MT circuit power consumption scales with the uplink
achieved throughput Rm.i; t/ [36]. Hence, the overall power consumption of MT
m is given by
Pm.i; t/ D Ptx;m.i; t/

C m C ˇmRm.i; t/;
(11.5)
where m and ˇm are two constants, measured in Watts and Watts per bit per second.

336
M. Ismail et al.
The MT transmission power is chosen from a discrete set of actions Ptx;m D
fPmin;m; P1;m; : : : ; Pmax;mg, which represent Vm power levels uniformly distributed in
the range ŒPmin;m; Pmax;m
. For a given period t 2 T , the selected MT transmission
power action at time slot i 2 I within period t 2 T is denoted as Ptx;m.i; t/.
Let Pitm represent the vector of transmission power actions adopted by MT m over
time slots 1; 2; : : : ; i 2 I within period t 2 T , which is also assumed to follow a
PMF fPitm.pitm/. The PMF fPitm.pitm/ can be inferred from the system dynamics as
in [35].
The initial available energy em at MT m is a random variable that follows a PDF
fEm.em/, which can be inferred from behavioral studies as in [37]. The initial energy
random variable takes a value within the range ŒEmin; Emax
. For a given MT m 2
M0; M1s or M2s at a given period t 2 T , the energy consumed at time slot i 2 I
is given by Ec
m.i; t/ D Pm.i; t/!. The MT energy consumption till time slot i C 1 is
given by Ec
i;m.t/ D Pi
jD1 Ec
m.j; t/.
11.3.1.10
QoS Guarantee
Mobile users request service for data calls, either in the uplink or the downlink (i.e.,
ﬁle uploading or ﬁle downloading). For MT m 2 M0; M1s, or M2s, the ﬁle size
lm (in bits) is a random variable that follows a hyper-exponential distribution given
by [30]
fLm.lm/ D
am
am C 1
am
NLm
exp

amlm
NLm

C
1
am C 1
1
am NLm
exp

 lm
am NLm

;
(11.6)
where am  1 is a constant, lm  0, and NLm denotes the average ﬁle size.
11.3.1.11
Uplink Target QoS
Two QoS metrics are deﬁned for the uplink users:
•
Minimum required throughput: Each mobile user requires a minimum uplink
throughput RUL
min;m. For an MT associated with BS s with mUL
s
uplink mobile
users, the achieved uplink throughput at each time slot i 2 I within period
t 2 T until ﬁle transmission completion given the MT uplink transmission power
should satisfy
RUL
m .i; t/ D
BUL
s
mUL
s .i; t/ log2
0
B@1 C Ptx;m.i; t/GUL
s
N0
BUL
s
mUL
s
.i;t/
1
CA  RUL
min;m;
(11.7)

11
Enabling Green Heterogeneous Cellular Networks via Balanced Dynamic Planning
337
where N0 denotes the one-sided noise power spectral density and (11.7) follows
Shannon’s formula. The number of bits transmitted at time slot i is given by
RUL
m .i; t/! and the number of bits transmitted till time slot i C 1 is represented by
RUL
m;i;t D Pi
jD1 RUL
m .j; t/!.
•
Maximum dropping probability: It is required not to violate an upper bound
on the call dropping probability m due to depletion of MT batteries before
transmission completion of their ﬁles. Such an upper bound is speciﬁed by the
network operator in the network design stage. The trapping energy Etrp;m.i; t/ is
deﬁned as the minimum required energy available at the MT in order to satisfy
the minimum required uplink throughput RUL
min;m. Using Shannon’s formula,
Etrp;m.i; t/ is given by
Etrp;m.i; t/ D
N0BUL
s
mUL
s .i; t/
1
GUL
s
0
@2
mUL
s
.i;t/RUL
min;m
BUL
s
 1
1
A !:
(11.8)
Before ﬁle transmission completion, if the available energy at the battery of MT
m is below Etrp;m.i; t/, the call is dropped.
11.3.1.12
Downlink Target QoS
Each mobile user requires a minimum downlink throughput RDL
min;m. For an MT
associated with BS s with mDL
s .i; t/ downlink mobile users, the achieved downlink
throughput at each time slot i 2 I until ﬁle transmission completion given the BS
downlink transmission power should satisfy the condition
RDL
m .i; t/ D
BUL
s
mDL
s .i; t/ log2
0
B@1 C Ptx;s.i; t/GDL
s
N0
BDL
s
mDL
s
.i;t/
1
CA  RDL
min;m:
(11.9)
In the downlink, it is assumed that the MT consumed power for ﬁle download
is negligible since data transmission is performed by the BS, and hence, the call
will not be dropped and the MT continues the ﬁle download as long as there is
some energy Emin available at the MT battery. Such an assumption is reasonable
when compared with the uplink energy consumption where the MT consumes high
transmission power for ﬁle uploading. The number of bits transmitted at time slot
i is given by RDL
m .i; t/! and the number of bits transmitted till time slot i C 1 is
represented by RDL
m;i;t D Pi
jD1 RDL
m .j; t/!.

338
M. Ismail et al.
11.3.2
Derivation of Service Process Parameters
The system short-term temporal ﬂuctuations have been modeled in Sect. 11.3.1 as
Geo=Geo=MDL=MDL and Geo=Geo=MUL=MUL queues for the downlink and uplink
systems, respectively. The user arrivals follow a discrete geometric distribution and
are assumed to depart following a similar model. In this subsection, we ﬁrst derive
the service rate to calculate the transition probability of the queue states using the
solution of (11.3). The service process parameters are determined while taking into
account the BS behavior (in terms of its mode of operation and available radio
resources) and the mobile user behavior (in terms of ﬁle length, required throughput,
and the MT available energy). The main aspect of data calls is the impact of
allocated resources on the call presence in the system [38]. The allocated resources
(e.g., transmission power) to a data call affect the call throughput, and hence, its
duration, which also impacts energy consumption. Hence, the derived service rate is
a function of the current number of users and the selected transmission power such
that the transition probability is a function of the current queue state and the taken
action.
11.3.2.1
Downlink Service Process Parameters
In the downlink, the mobile user leaves the system only when ﬁle download is
complete. Hence, a mobile user remains in service at BS s during time slot i C 1
with probability Pr.lm > RDL
m;i;tjpits/ using BS s transmission power vector pits.
Denote fI;Pits.ijpits/ as the conditional PMF that MT m remains in service at BS s
during time slot i C 1 when the BS transmission power vector is pits over time slots
1; 2; : : : ; i during period t 2 T . Consequently, we have
fI;Pits.ijpits/ D Pr.lm > RDL
m;i;tjpits/ D 1 
Z RDL
m;i;t
0
fLm.lm/dlm:
(11.10)
Using the hyper-exponential distribution of the ﬁle size lm and the distribution of
pits, we have
fI;Pits.i; pits/ D fPits.pits/
8
<
:
am
am C 1 exp
 
amRDL
m;i;t
NLm
!
C
1
am C 1 exp
 
 RDL
m;i;t
am NLm
!9
=
; ;
(11.11)
Let s;DL.mDL
s .i; t/; Ptx;s.i C 1; t// represent the exit probability (service rate),
which denotes the probability that a mobile user exits the system at time slot i C 1
if mDL
s .i; t/ users are being served by BS s in the downlink and the BS transmission
power is Ptx;s.i C 1; t/. The probability of a complete ﬁle download is given by
Pr.RDL
m;i;t < lm  RDL
m;i;t C RDL
m .i C 1; t/jRDL
m;i;t < lm; Ptx;s.i C 1; t//

11
Enabling Green Heterogeneous Cellular Networks via Balanced Dynamic Planning
339
D
X
i
X
pits
8
ˆˆ<
ˆˆ:
R RDL
m;i;tCRDL
m .iC1;t/
RDL
m;i;t
fLm.lm/dlm
R 1
RDL
m;i;t fLm.lm/dlm
:fI;Pits.i; pits/
9
>>=
>>;
:
(11.12)
In the downlink, the mobile user exits the system when the ﬁle download
is complete. Following (11.11) and (11.12), the exit probability (service rate)
s;DL.mDL
s .i; t/; Ptx;s.i C 1; t// can be expressed as
s;DL.mDL
s ; Ptx;s.i C 1; t// D
X
i
X
pits
˚
fI;Pits.i; pits/

N
am
amC1 exp


amRDL
m;i;t
NLm

C
1
amC1 exp


RDL
m;i;t
amNLm

9
>=
>;
;
(11.13)
where
N D
0
BB@
am
am C 1
0
B@exp
0
@
amRDL
m;i;t
NLm
1
A  exp
0
@
am.RDL
m;i;t C RDL
m .i C 1; t//
NLm
1
A
1
CA
C
1
am C 1 
0
BB@exp
0
@
RDL
m;i;t
am NLm
1
A  exp
0
B@

RDL
m;i;t C RDL
m .i C 1; t/

am NLm
1
CA
1
CCA
1
CCCA : (11.14)
For a given action vector piC1;t D Ptx;0.i C 1; t/; : : : ; Ptx;s.i C 1; t/; : : : Ptx;S.i C 1; t/,
the average downlink service rate in the geographical region is given by
DL.mDL; piC1;t/ D
X
s
DL
ks s;DL.mDL
s .i; t/; Ptx;s.i C 1; t//:
(11.15)
11.3.2.2
Uplink Service Process Parameters
In the uplink, the mobile user leaves the system based on which event occurs ﬁrst:
ﬁle upload is complete or due to MT battery depletion which leads to call dropping.
Following (11.6), the conditional probability that ﬁle upload is not complete can be
expressed as
Pr.RUL
m;i;t < lmjpitm/ D
am
am C 1 exp
 
amRUL
m;i;t
NLm
!
C
1
am C 1 exp
 
 RUL
m;i;t
am NLm
!
:
(11.16)

340
M. Ismail et al.
On the other hand, the conditional probability that the MT battery is not depleted
and can support the required QoS for i C 1 can be expressed as
Pr.MT battery can hold for i C 1jpitm/ D
8
ˆˆˆˆˆ<
ˆˆˆˆˆ:
1;
Ec
i;m.t/ C Etrp;m.i; t/  Emin
1 FEm.Ec
i;m.t/ C Etrp;m.i; t///;
Emin < Ec
i;m.t/ C Etrp;m.i; t/ < Emax;
0;
Ec
i;m.t/ C Etrp;m.i; t/  Emax;
(11.17)
where FEm.em/ is the cumulative density function of the initial available energy at
MT m. Using (11.16) and (11.17), we have
fI;Pitm.i; pitm/ D fPitm.pitm/  Pr.RUL
m;i;t < lmjpitm/
Pr .MT battery can hold for i C 1jpitm/:
(11.18)
The probability of call dropping in time slot i C 1 if mUL
s
users are being served
by BS s in the uplink and the MT transmission power is Ptx;m.i C 1; t/ (and hence,
the consumed energy is Ec
m.i C 1; t/) is expressed as
PD.mUL
s ; Ptx;m.i C 1; t// D
8
ˆˆ<
ˆˆ:
P
i
P
pitm fI;Pitm.i; pitm/  A.i; pitm/;
Ec
i;m.t/ C Ec
m.i C 1; t/  Emin C Etrp;m.i; t/;
0;
Ec
i;m.t/ C Ec
m.i C 1; t/ < Emin C Etrp;m.i; t/;
(11.19)
where
A.i; pitm/ D
FEm.Ec
i;m.t/ C Ec
m.i C 1; t/ C Etrp;m.i; t//
1  FEm.Ec
i;m.t/ C Etrp;m.i; t//

FEm.Ec
i;m.t/ C Etrp;m.i; t//
1  FEm.Ec
i;m.t/ C Etrp;m.i; t//:
(11.20)
For a given action vector piC1 D Ptx;0.i C 1; t/; : : : ; Ptx;mUL.i C 1; t/, the average
call dropping probability in the geographical region is given by
PD.mUL; piC1/ D
X
s
UL
ks PD.mUL
s ; p.i C 1; m//:
(11.21)
The uplink service rate s;UL.mUL
s ; Ptx;m.i C 1; t// represents the probability that
a mobile user exits the system if mUL
s
user exists in the uplink and the MT transmits

11
Enabling Green Heterogeneous Cellular Networks via Balanced Dynamic Planning
341
with power Ptx;m.i C 1; t/ during time slot i C 1, and it is expressed as follows:
s;UL.mUL
s ; Ptx;m.i C 1; t// D Pr

File upload completion
or MT battery depletionjPtx;m.i C 1; t/

;
(11.22)
where the ﬁle upload completion event can be calculated similar to the downlink
case in (11.12). Consequently, the uplink service rate is given by
s;UL.mUL
s ; Ptx;m.iC1; t// D
8
ˆˆˆˆˆ<
ˆˆˆˆˆ:
P
i
P
pitm fI;Pitm.i; pitm/  fB C A  B  Ag;
Ec
i;m.t/ C Ec
m.i C 1; t/  Emin C Etrp;m.i; t/;
P
i
P
pitm fI;Pitm.i; pitm/  fBg;
Ec
i;m.t/ C Ec
m.i C 1; t/ < Emin C Etrp;m.i; t/;
(11.23)
where
B.i; pitm/ D
am
am C 1
0
@exp
 
amRUL
m;i;t
NLm
!
 exp
 
am.RUL
m;i;t C RUL
m .i C 1; t//
NLm
!
C
1
am C 1 
0
@exp
 
 RUL
m;i;t
am NLm
!
 exp
 
.RUL
m;i;t C RUL
m .i C 1; t//
am NLm
!1
A ;
(11.24)
and A.i; pitm/ is given in (11.20).
The average service rate in the geographical region is given by
UL.mUL; piC1/ D
X
s
UL
ks s;UL.mUL
s ; p.i C 1; m//:
(11.25)
11.3.3
Performance Evaluation
This subsection presents numerical results for the uplink QoS performance under
dynamic planning. Two simulation set-ups are implemented. The ﬁrst is used in
Fig. 11.3 and it assumes an overlapping coverage between a macro BS and a pico
BS with 	UL D 0:3 and UL
k1 D 0:6. Here, it is assumed that the pico BS is switched
off. The second set-up is used in Fig. 11.4 and it considers an overlapping coverage
between a macro BS and two pico BSs with 	UL D 0:3, and UL
k0 D 0:4. Simulation
parameters are in Table 11.2. In the following, the low energy level available at MTs
resembles a night time scenario where BS switching-off is practical.

342
M. Ismail et al.
1
2
3
4
5
0.5
0.55
0.6
0.65
0.7
0.75
0.8
Number of mobile users in service (mUL)
Service rate (νUL)
ptx,m = 100 mW
ptx,m = 75 mW
ptx,m = 50 mW
ptx,m = 25 mW
(a)
1
2
3
4
5
0.65
0.7
0.75
0.8
0.85
0.9
Number of mobile users in service (mUL)
Service rate (νUL)
ptx,m = 100 mW
ptx,m = 75 mW
ptx,m = 50 mW
ptx,m = 25 mW
(b)
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
x 106
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
Minimum required data rate in bps (Rmin.m
UL
)
Dropping probability (PD)
(c)
Fig. 11.3 Performance evaluation for the ﬁrst simulation scenario [9]. (a) Service rate UL for
Emax D 500 J. (b) Service rate UL for Emax D 250 J. (c) Call dropping probability for Emax D
250 J
Table 11.2 Simulation parameters
Parameter Value
Parameter Value
Parameter Value
Parameter Value
BUL
0
10 MHz BUL
1;2
5 MHz MUL
0
10
MUL
1;2
5
D1
110 m
D2
130 m
H0
100 m
H1;2
50 m
C1
18:7
C2
46:8
C3
20
N0
174 dBm/Hz
!
5 min
m
0:05 W ˇm
1010 W/bps Pmax;m
0:1 W
NLm
2 Gbits
am
6

0:1
Emin
10 J
Figure 11.3a shows the service rate UL at different transmission power levels
for variable number of users being served in the uplink mUL with Emax D 500 J.
Overall, the service rate increases with transmission power level due to faster ﬁle
upload complete. On the other hand, the service rate decreases with mUL because as
the number of mobile users in service increases, the allocated bandwidth per user
is decreased, which results in slower ﬁle upload complete. Figure 11.3b shows the
service rate UL at different transmission power levels for variable number of users
being served in the uplink mUL with Emax D 250 J. In this ﬁgure, the performance
is dominated by call dropping due to the low available energy level at the MT.
As the transmission power level increases, the service rate increases either due to

11
Enabling Green Heterogeneous Cellular Networks via Balanced Dynamic Planning
343
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
0.3
0.35
0.4
0.45
0.5
0.55
0.6
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.1
0.12
Spatial distribution of uplink users around 1st Pico BS (ρk
1
UL)
Dropping probability (PD)
Macro only
Macro and 1st Pico
Macro and 2nd Pico
Fig. 11.4 Call dropping probability in the second simulation scenario [9]
ﬁle upload complete or faster battery depletion. Also, as the number of mobile
users in service increases, the allocated bandwidth per user is decreased, which
means slower ﬁle upload complete. Due to the low available energy at the MT,
call dropping occurs before ﬁle upload complete, which results in higher service
rate (due to MT battery depletion before ﬁle upload complete unlike Fig. 11.3a).
Figure 11.3c shows the call dropping probability for variable target throughput
with Emax D 250 J and Ptx;m D 100 mW. As the required throughput increases,
the trapping energy level is increased. Since mobile users are mainly concentrated
around the pico BS (which is switched off), they suffer from long transmission
distance with the macro BS. Due to the high transmission power, low available
energy in MTs, and larger trapping energy level, high call dropping probability
(exceeding ) occurs with increased throughput.
Figure 11.4 shows the call dropping probability for variable user spatial distribu-
tion UL
k1 with Emax D 250 J and Ptx;m D 100 mW. Overall, activating only the macro
BS leads to a high call dropping probability, since more users are concentrated
around the pico BSs than around the macro BS, and hence, mobile users suffer
from long transmission distance that depletes their MT batteries at faster rate. As
UL
k1 increases, more users are concentrated around the ﬁrst pico BS leading to an
improved call dropping probability when the macro and ﬁrst pico BS are activated
(unlike the case when the macro and second pico BS are activated).

344
M. Ismail et al.
11.4
Design of a Balanced Dynamic Planning Approach
Simulation results in Sect. 11.3.3 demonstrate that BS switching-off decisions that
do not account for the uplink QoS requirements can result in severe service quality
degradation. In this section, the derived QoS measures in Sect. 11.3.2 are used to
develop dynamic planning approaches that can ensure QoS guarantee for mobile
users both in the downlink and uplink.
11.4.1
Two-Timescale Optimal Switching Decision Problem
In this section, the optimal switching decision problem is formulated [7]. We start
by formulating the minimization problem of the total average energy consumed by
the BSs. The problem is constrained by the various QoS measures as follows:
min
Ptx;s.i;t/;Ptx;m.i;t/;X.t/
1
IT
X
i2I
X
t2T
X
s2S
Ps.i; t/!
s:t:
RDL
m .i; t/  RDL
min;m;
8m; i; t;
RUL
m .i; t/  RUL
min;m;
8m; i; t;
PD.t/  ;
8t;
X.t/ D Œx1; : : : xS
; xs 2 f0; 1g;
8t;
Ptx;s.i; t/ 2 Ptx;s; Ptx;m.i; t/ 2 Ptx;m;
8s; m; i; t:
(11.26)
where X.t/ is the BS activation vector at the time slot t and PD.t/ represents the
value of the expected dropping probability calculated in (11.21) at the time slot t for
the optimal transmission powers.
The objective function in (11.26) represents the expected energy consumed by
all the BSs. The minimization problem in (11.26) is subject to uplink and downlink
QoS in terms of achieved throughput and call dropping probability which reﬂects
the mobile device lifetime in terms of battery energy depletion. The decisions are
to select the downlink and uplink transmission powers at each time slot for the
fast timescale. Moreover, the vector X.t/ is selected at every time slot at the slow
timescale for switching the BSs. These decision variables are correlated on time
as the evolution of the available number of users follows a geometric distribution.
As a result, the problem can be considered as an average reward MDP with
ﬁnite horizon. The value iteration technique can be optimally used to solve the
formulated problem, which is computationally intensive due to employing the back-
trace dynamic programming approach as shown in [39].

11
Enabling Green Heterogeneous Cellular Networks via Balanced Dynamic Planning
345
11.4.2
Feasibility Test-Based Balanced Dynamic Planning
Approach
Due to the associated complexity, we split (11.26) into two sub-problems. The ﬁrst
sub-problem speciﬁes the operation mode of the BSs and the second sub-problem
determines the uplink and downlink transmission powers. Since the second sub-
problem (i.e., determination of optimal transmission powers for an active BS in
the downlink and MT in the uplink) has been extensively studied in literature, for
example, in [40–43], we focus our attention on this work to specify the BS operation
mode while accounting for uplink and downlink QoS requirements. In this section,
a sub-optimal framework is proposed based on a feasibility test inspired by the
optimal problem formulation for the downlink and uplink [7]. The rationale behind
the feasibility test is as follows: activate the minimum number of BSs that can satisfy
the target QoS for downlink and uplink mobile users. We will show that such a
framework results in an optimal switching decision from the downlink perspective
and a sub-optimal switching decision from the uplink perspective. We start with a
simple case that investigates if only the macro BS is sufﬁcient to satisfy the required
QoS for uplink and downlink mobile users, and hence, all remaining pico/femto BSs
can be switched off.
11.4.2.1
Downlink
In the downlink, the user minimum required data rate should be satisﬁed. To
determine a performance upper bound at the beginning of some period t 2 T ,
we let Ptx;0.i; t/ D Pmax;0 and RDL
m .i; t/ D RDL
min;m 8i 2 I and ﬁnd the corresponding
maximum number OmDL
0
of users that can be supported by the macro BS under these
conditions. Two cases can be distinguished:
1. OmDL
0
< MDL
0 : In this case, the minimum required data rate cannot be supported
for OmDL
0
< mDL
0
 MDL
0 . Hence, we check if there is some probability that
OmDL
0
< mDL
0
 MDL
0 . Speciﬁcally, we determine 0;DL.mDL
0 ; Pmax;0/ and use it
in the balance equations of the downlink queue to determine the steady state
probabilities q.mDL/. If PMDL
0
mDLD OmDL
0 C1 q.mDL/  "DL (for a small tolerance "DL),
then the minimum required data rate is satisﬁed in the downlink and it is sufﬁcient
to activate only the macro BS and switch off all other femto/pico BSs, from the
downlink perspective. Otherwise, it is infeasible to activate only the macro BS,
from the downlink perspective, since this will violate the minimum required data
rate, and consequently, other femto/pico BSs should be activated.
2. OmDL
0
 MDL
0 : In this case, the minimum data rate requirement can be satisﬁed
using only the macro BS for any mDL
0
 MDL
0 .

346
M. Ismail et al.
11.4.2.2
Uplink
In the uplink, two QoS measures should be satisﬁed which are the user minimum
required data rate and the call dropping probability. To determine performance
bounds at the beginning of some period t 2 T , we let Ptx;m.i; t/ D Pmax;m and
RUL
m .i; t/ D RUL
min;m 8i 2 I and ﬁnd the corresponding maximum number OmUL
0
of
users that can be supported by the macro BS under these conditions. Two cases can
be distinguished:
1. OmUL
0
< MUL
0 : In this case, the minimum required data rate cannot be supported
for OmUL
0
< mUL
0
 MUL
0 . Hence, we check if there is some probability that
OmUL
0
< mUL
0
 MUL
0 . Speciﬁcally, we determine 0;UL.mUL
0 ; Pmax;m/ and use it
in the balance equations of the downlink queue to determine the steady state
probabilities q.mUL/. If PMUL
0
mULDb OmUL
0 cC1 q.mUL/ > "UL (for a small tolerance "UL),
then it is infeasible to activate only the macro BS, from the uplink perspective,
since this will violate the minimum required data rate, and consequently, other
femto/pico BSs should be activated. If PMUL
0
mULDb OmUL
0 cC1 q.mUL/  "UL, then the
minimum required data rate is satisﬁed, and only the call dropping probability
should be checked. Hence, we use (11.19) and (11.21) to ﬁnd the call dropping
probability for Ptx;m.i; t/ D Pmax;m and OmUL
0 . If the call dropping probability is
also satisﬁed, then it is sufﬁcient to activate only the macro BS and switch off
all other femto/pico BSs, from the uplink perspective since all constraints are
satisﬁed. On the other hand, if the call dropping probability is not satisﬁed, it is
not clear that it is infeasible to activate only the macro BS. The reason is that
maybe there exists another transmission power level than the upper bound Pmax;m
that does not lead to a high rate of MT battery depletion, and hence, satisﬁes
the call dropping probability along with the other constraints. In this case, we
check a lower bound power level Ptx;m.i; t/ D OPm that satisﬁes RUL
m .i; t/ D RUL
min;m
for mUL
0
D b OmUL
0 c. This power level already satisﬁes the minimum data rate
constraint. Hence, we only check the call dropping probability by substituting
in (11.19) and (11.21) using Ptx;m.i; t/ D OPm and b OmUL
0 c. If the call dropping
probability is also satisﬁed, then it is sufﬁcient to activate only the macro BS
and switch off all other femto/pico BSs, from the uplink perspective since
all constraints are satisﬁed. Otherwise, it is not deﬁnite if it is insufﬁcient to
activate only the macro BS since there might exist another power level inside
the range OPm and Pmax;m that can satisfy all the constraints. In this condition, a
conservative decision is to activate other femto/pico BSs besides the macro BS,
which represents a sub-optimal decision.
2. OmUL
0
 MUL
0 : In this case, the minimum data rate requirement can be satisﬁed
using only the macro BS for any mUL
0
 MUL
0 . The dropping probability needs to
be checked to decide if it is sufﬁcient to activate only the macro BS. Speciﬁcally,
we determine 0;UL.mUL
0 ; Pmax;m/ and use it in the balance equations of the uplink
queue to determine the steady state probabilities q.mUL/. We substitute in (11.19)
and (11.21) to ﬁnd the call dropping probability for Ptx;m.i; t/ D Pmax;m and

11
Enabling Green Heterogeneous Cellular Networks via Balanced Dynamic Planning
347
MUL
0 . If the call dropping probability is satisﬁed, then it is sufﬁcient to activate
only the macro BS and switch off all other femto/pico BSs, from the uplink
perspective, since all constraints are satisﬁed. On the other hand, if the call
dropping probability is not satisﬁed, it is not deﬁnite that it is infeasible to
activate only the macro BS. In this condition, we check a lower bound power
level Ptx;m.i; t/ D OPm that satisﬁes RUL
m .i; t/ D RUL
min;m for mUL
0
D MUL
0 . If the call
dropping probability is satisﬁed, then it is sufﬁcient to activate only the macro
BS and switch off all other femto/pico BSs, from the uplink perspective, since all
constraints are satisﬁed. Otherwise, it is not deﬁnite if it is insufﬁcient to activate
only the macro BS since there might exist another power level inside the range
OPm and Pmax;m that can satisfy all the constraints. In this condition, a conservative
decision is to activate other femto/pico BSs besides the macro BS, which is a
sub-optimal decision.
Theorem 1. The feasibility tests result in optimal switching decisions from the
downlink perspective and optimal or sub-optimal switching decisions from the
uplink perspective.
Proof. From the downlink perspective, the only QoS requirement is the minimum
required data rate of each user. As a result, we let the macro BS operate at its
maximum power Pmax;0. From the monotonicity of Shannon’s rate equation and for a
ﬁxed required rate, maximizing the power maximizes the number of supported users
by the macro BS. Hence, the macro BS can optimally support the maximum number
of users, which is denoted by OmDL
0
and it is obtained by solving Shannon’s rate
equation. Further, two cases need to be studied: (1) If the macro-cell user capacity,
MDL
0 , is less than or equal to the obtained value OmDL
0 , all the associated users can
be supported by data rates larger than or equal to the minimum required data rate.
Hence, it is optimal from the downlink perspective to switch on only the macro BS.
(2) The second case occurs when MDL
0
is greater than OmDL
0 . In this case, we employ
queuing analysis to calculate the steady state probabilities of having m user in the
system for all m between OmDL
0
and MDL
0 . If the sum of these probabilities is less than
a very small threshold "DL, then the minimum required rate is achieved as having
a larger number of users presents a negligible probability tends to zero. Hence, the
optimal decision is activating the macro BS only. Finally, if the sum of the steady
state probabilities is greater than the threshold, the system will exhibit a situation
where there exists a number of users greater than OmDL
0 , and hence, they will not
achieve the minimum required data rate. Then, it is optimal to switch on other small
cells.
From the uplink perspective, two performance bounds are investigated, namely
an upper bound with Ptx;m.i; t/ D Pmax;m and RUL
m .i; t/ D RUL
min;m and a lower bound
with Ptx;m.i; t/ D OPm that satisﬁes RUL
m .i; t/ D RUL
min;m at the nearest lower feasible
number of mobile users. The upper bound represents the case where the users
operate at the maximum power while achieving the minimum data rate, and hence,
the obtained number of users is the maximum number that satisﬁes these constraints.
The lower bound represents the case in which we obtain the transmission power,

348
M. Ismail et al.
OPm, corresponding to the number of users m such that the minimum data rate
constraint is satisﬁed and the number of users in the system can be greater than
m with probability "UL that tends to zero. If either bound satisﬁes the target QoS,
then there exists a power level in the interval ŒOPm; Pmax;m
 that can satisfy the target
QoS and it is feasible to activate only the macro BS, which represents an optimal
switching decision. If neither bound satisﬁes the target QoS, then there could exist
a transmission power level inside the range OPm and Pmax;m that can satisfy the
target call dropping probability while supporting the minimum required data rate.
Hence, the conservative solution of activating other femto/pico BSs represents a sub-
optimal switching decision that preserves the uplink users QoS. The main difference
between the downlink and uplink scenarios is the MT battery depletion effect in
the uplink and its impact on the target call dropping probability. Hence, while
Ptx;0.i; t/ D Pmax;0 is a sufﬁcient bound in the downlink case, no bound is sufﬁcient
in the uplink scenario to prove the infeasibility of activating only the macro BS
(except for the case when OmUL
0
< MUL
0
and PMUL
0
mULDb OmUL
0 cC1 q.mUL/ > "UL which
is infeasible due to the inability to support the target data rate, and represents an
optimal switching decision).
If both downlink and uplink feasibility tests are passed, then it is sufﬁcient to
activate only the macro BS and switch off all other femto/pico BSs. Otherwise,
more femto/pico BSs should be activated. In this case, all possible combinations
of X D Œx1x2 : : : xS
 will be checked where xs 2 f0; 1g and the set of possible
combinations is denoted by X . For each value of the vector X, the association rules
mentioned in Sect. 11.3.1 are applied and the downlink and uplink feasibility tests
are checked for the active BSs. The value of X that passes the feasibility tests and
incurs the minimum BS energy consumption represents the sub-optimal feasibility
test-based switching decision. The proposed sub-optimal framework is described
in Algorithm 1. While the feasibility-test-based algorithm has a reduced computa-
tional complexity compared with the optimal algorithm, the feasibility test-based
algorithm is based on exhaustive search, and hence, presents an exponential time
complexity O.2S/, where S is the number of BSs. Consequently, the feasibility test-
based algorithm requires intensive computation in a dense small cell deployment
scenario.
11.4.3
Heuristic Balanced Dynamic Planning Approach
To further reduce the associated complexity, we propose a heuristic algorithm that
iteratively activates the small cells until uplink and downlink QoS parameters are
satisﬁed in an average sense [7]. For the uplink and downlink queues, the average
service rate is given as the ratio of the minimum required throughput to the average
ﬁle length (i.e., NUL D RUL
min;m=NL and NDL D RDL
min;m=NL). Consequently, the uplink
and downlink queues can be approximated by M=D=1 queues. The stationary
distribution of such queues are given by

11
Enabling Green Heterogeneous Cellular Networks via Balanced Dynamic Planning
349
Algorithm 1: Sub-optimal balanced dynamic planning
for X 2 X do
Downlink Feasibility Test
Calculate OmDL
s
using Ptx;s D Pmax;s and RDL
m D RDL
min;m
if OmDL
s
< MDL
s
then
Calculate s;DL.mDL
s ; Pmax;s/
if PMDL
s
mDLDOmDL
s
C1 q.mDL/  "DL then
TDL D 1
else
TDL D 0
end if
else
TDL D 1
end if
Uplink Feasibility Test
Calculate OmUL
s
using Ptx;m D Pmax;m and RUL
m D RUL
min;m
if OmUL
s
< MUL
s
then
Calculate s;UL.mUL
s ; Pmax;m/
if PMUL
s
mULDOmUL
s
C1 q.mUL/ > "UL then
TUL D 0
else
Use (11.19) and (11.21) to calculate the call dropping probability for Ptx;m D Pmax;m
and OmUL
s
if PD   then
TUL D 1
else
Calculate OPm that satisﬁes RUL
m D RUL
min;m for mUL
s
D b OmUL
s c
Use (11.19) and (11.21) to calculate the call dropping probability for OPm and OmUL
s
if PD   then
TUL D 1
else
TUL D 0
end if
end if
end if
end if
Calculate s;UL.mUL
s ; Pmax;m/
if PD   then
TUL D 1
else
Calculate OPm that satisﬁes RUL
m D RUL
min;m for mUL
s
D MUL
s
Calculate s;UL.MUL
s ; OPm/
if PD   then
TUL D 1
else
TUL D 0
end if
end if
if TDL D 1 AND TUL D 1 then
Calculate the total energy consumption of active BSs
Save X in
Q
X
end if
end for
X D arg min
X2
Q
X
Total energy consumption of active BSs

350
M. Ismail et al.
q.m/ D .	N/m exp.	N/
mŠ
;
m  0:
(11.27)
Deﬁne M to be an upper bound on the number of mobile users in service (in the
uplink or the downlink) such that
M
X
mD0
q.m/  :
(11.28)
The heuristic algorithm starts with only the macro BS active and all the small cells
are assumed deactivated. The algorithm iteratively activates the small cells until
uplink and downlink QoS are satisﬁed in an average sense.
In the uplink, when only the macro BS is activated, we ﬁrst determine Np using the
Shannon’s data rate formula for MUL

and RUL
min;m. If Np 2 ŒPmin; Pmax
, we check the
condition on call dropping probability. The average energy required to complete the
ﬁle upload is approximated as Np=NUL. Then, the average call dropping probability in
the uplink is approximated as
NPD D 1 
Z Emax
Np=NUL
fEm.em/dE:
(11.29)
If either the minimum required throughput or the uplink call dropping probability
threshold is not satisﬁed, the heuristic algorithm iteratively activates the small cells
starting from the small cell with the largest UL
ks . We calculate for each BS, Nps
using the Shannon’s data rate formula for UL
ks MUL

and RUL
min;m. If Nps 2 ŒPmin; Pmax
,
the average uplink call dropping probability is calculated for each cell (NPDs)
using (11.29) and the average uplink call dropping probability for the geographical
region is determined as P
s UL
ks NPDs. At each iteration, one small cell is activated
until all QoS conditions are satisﬁed.
In the downlink, we ﬁrst use the combination of small cells activated according
to the uplink test. We ensure that DL
ks MDL

mobile users can satisfy their minimum
required throughput RDL
min;m when the BS transmits with its maximum transmission
power. If this condition is not satisﬁed, we iteratively activate additional small cells
starting from the small cell with maximum DL
ks until all conditions are satisﬁed. The
proposed heuristic algorithm is summarized in Algorithm 2, which decides at the
beginning of each slow timescale slot if a given BS should be activated or switched
off. The algorithm presents a worst case computational complexity of O.S/, which
represents a polynomial time complexity.

11
Enabling Green Heterogeneous Cellular Networks via Balanced Dynamic Planning
351
Algorithm 2: Heuristic balanced dynamic planning
Determine MUL

and MDL

for a speciﬁc tolerance  using (11.27) and (11.28)
Set TUL D 0 and TDL D 0
Activate only the macro-cell and deactivate all small cells
Determine Np and NPD
if Np 2 ŒPmin; Pmax
 AND NPD   then
TUL D 1
end if
Deﬁne UL as a descending order of UL
ks ; 8s 2 S
while TUL D 0 do
Set xs D 1 for s D arg max UL and update X
Update UL to exclude the activated small cell
Determine Nps and NPD
if Np 2 ŒPmin; Pmax
 AND NPD   then
TUL D 1
end if
end while
Deﬁne Dl as a descending order of DL
ks ; 8s 2 S
while TDL D 0 do
Calculate RDL
m given DL
ks MDL

mobile users and BS maximum transmission power
if RDL
m  RDL
min;m then
TDL D 1
else
Set xs D 1 for s D arg max DL and update X
Update DL to exclude the activated small cell
end if
end while
11.4.4
Performance Evaluation
In this section, we present simulation results for the optimal balanced dynamic
planning framework (using (11.26)), feasibility test-based framework (using Algo-
rithm 1), heuristic framework (using Algorithm 2), and the traditional unbalanced
approach (which accounts only for the downlink QoS in determining the BS
switching decision) that resembles the state-of-the-art research efforts. Three
simulation scenarios are investigated. The ﬁrst scenario considers a macro BS that
presents overlapping coverage with one pico BS. In this scenario, we compare
the performance of the optimal framework, the feasibility test-based framework,
and the heuristic approach with the traditional dynamic planning approach. The
second scenario considers a macro BS that presents overlapping coverage with
two pico BSs. Due to the high computational complexity, only the performances
of the feasibility test-based framework and the heuristic approach are compared
with the traditional dynamic planning approach. In the last simulation scenario, we
consider an overlapping coverage between one macro BS and 50 pico-cells that
represent a dense small cell-on-edge deployment. Due to the extensive computation
complexity, only the proposed heuristic approach is compared with the traditional

352
M. Ismail et al.
Table 11.3 Simulation parameters
Parameter Value
Parameter Value
Parameter Value
Parameter Value
BUL=DL
0
10 MHz
BUL=DL
1;2
5 MHz
MUL=DL
0
10
MUL=DL
1;2
5
D1
110 m
D2
130 m
H0
100 m
H1;2
50 m
C1
18:7
C2
46:8
C3
20
N0
174 dBm/Hz
!
5 min
0
4:7
1;2
2:6
PF;0
390 W
PF;1;2
120 W
PL;0
75 W
PL;1;2
39 W
Pmax;0
23:4 W
Pmax;1;2
3:1 W
Pmin;0;1;2
0
V0;1;2
5
m
0:05 W
ˇm
1010 W/bps Pmin;m
0
Pmax;m
0:1 W
Vm
5
NLm
2 Gbits
am
6

0:1
Emin
10 J
Emax
250 J
RDL
min;m
15 Mbps RUL
min;m
6 Mbps 
1 h
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
520
560
600
640
Uplink minimum required data rate (Mbps)
BS power consumption (W)
Heuristic, κ = 0.95
Unbalanced
Optimal, Feasibility, 
Heuristic, κ = 0.9
Heuristic, κ = 0.85
(a)
2
4
6
8
10
0
5
10
15
20
25
Uplink minimum required data rate (Mbps)
Achieved data rate (Mbps)
Unbalanced
Heuristic,
κ = 0.95
Uplink
Downlink
Unbalanced
Heuristic, κ = 0.85
Optimal, Feasibility, 
Heuristic, κ = 0.9, 0.95
Optimal, Feasibility, 
Heuristic, κ = 0.9
(b)
2
4
6
8
10
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
Uplink minimum required data rate (Mbps)
Uplink dropping probability
Unbalanced
Optimal, Feasibility,
Heuristic, κ = 0.9, 0.95
Heuristic, κ = 0.85
(c)
Fig. 11.5 Performance of dynamic planning for the ﬁrst simulation scenario [7]. (a) BS power
consumption vs. RUL
min;m. (b) Achieved data rate vs. RUL
min;m. (c) Uplink call dropping vs. RUL
min;m
dynamic planning approach. Simulation parameters are adopted from [30, 34] and
summarized in Table 11.3 unless otherwise stated. The low energy level at the MTs
represents a night time scenario which is practical for BS switching-off.
In Fig. 11.5, the following parameters are assumed: 	UL D 0:6, 	DL D 0:6,
UL
k1 D 0:6, and DL
k1 D 0:3. In Fig. 11.5a, the unbalanced approach activates only the
macro BS, and hence, leads to the minimum BS energy consumption as compared
with the balanced approach that activates both the macro and pico BSs whenever the
uplink QoS is violated. As shown in ﬁgure, the resulting switching decision for the
feasibility test-based framework matches the decision for the optimal framework.
In addition, by varying , the heuristic approach can either be less conservative or
more conservative depending on the choice of . As the value of  increases, the
heuristic algorithm accounts for the presence of more number of mobile users in the

11
Enabling Green Heterogeneous Cellular Networks via Balanced Dynamic Planning
353
uplink and downlink, and hence, it is more inclined towards the activation of the
pico BS. While Fig. 11.5a suggests that the unbalanced dynamic planning approach
is more energy efﬁcient than the balanced dynamic planning framework, this is not
true when the uplink QoS is considered. Figure 11.5b plots the achieved data rate
for the different dynamic planning approaches. As shown in ﬁgure, the unbalanced
dynamic planning approach fails to satisfy the target uplink throughput for high
values of RUL
min;m. This is mainly because it activates only the macro BS which faces
high uplink trafﬁc demand that cannot be satisﬁed for all the mobile users as RUL
min;m
increases. On the other hand, the balanced dynamic planning approaches satisfy the
target RUL
min;m by activating the pico-cell and associating some mobile users to it.
For the heuristic dynamic planning approach with smaller values of , the minimum
required uplink throughput can be violated for some values of RUL
min;m, as the heuristic
planning algorithm accounts for the presence of less number of users. However, for
larger values of , the uplink minimum required throughput will always be satisﬁed.
All the dynamic planning algorithms can satisfy the minimum required throughput
in the downlink, as shown in ﬁgure. In addition, the unbalanced dynamic planning
approach cannot satisfy the target threshold on uplink call dropping probability for
large values of RUL
min;m due to the associated high target trapping energy and the
limited available transmission power, as shown in Fig. 11.5c. On the other hand,
the balanced dynamic planning approaches activate the pico BS, and hence, mobile
users in proximity of the small cell can enjoy a minimum transmission distance,
and hence, can satisfy the target trapping energy with low transmission power.
This signiﬁes the trade-off between energy saving for network operator and uplink
service quality guarantee.
In Fig. 11.6, the following simulation set-up is adopted. The minimum required
data rate in the uplink is 5 Mbps, 	UL D 	DL D 0:6, DL
k0
D 0:7, DL
k1
D 0:2,
UL
k0 D 0:4, and  D 0:07. As shown in Fig. 11.6a, the balanced dynamic planning
approach always activates the macro and one pico BS, which presents a total power
consumption of 630 W. When uplink mobile users are concentrated more around the
second pico BS UL
k1  0:3, the balanced planning approach chooses to activate the
second pico BS and switch off the ﬁrst pico BS (switching decision 3). As more
users are concentrated around the ﬁrst pico BS, the balanced dynamic planning
approach chooses to activate the ﬁrst pico BS and switch off the second pico
BS (switching decision 2). The unbalanced dynamic planning approach activates
only the macro BS and deactivates both pico BSs resulting in a minimum power
consumption of 540 W, however, it fails to satisfy the uplink QoS. As shown
in Fig. 11.6b, both uplink and downlink required throughput are satisﬁed for all
planning algorithms. For the feasibility test-based algorithm uplink throughput, as
more users are concentrated around the ﬁrst pico BS, activating the second pico BS
presents a longer transmission distance which reduces the achieved throughput in
the range UL
k1 2 Œ0:1; 0:3
. Switching off the second pico BS and activating the ﬁrst
one presents a lower transmission distance which leads to an improved throughput
in the range UL
k1
2 Œ0:3; 0:5
. For UL
k1
 0:5, more users are concentrated around
the pico BS and compete over the limited available bandwidth which results in the

354
M. Ismail et al.
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
1
2
3
Spatial distribution of uplink users around 1st Pico BS
Switching Decision
Feasibility
Heuristic, κ = 0.95
Unbalanced
(a)
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
5
10
15
Spatial distribution of uplink users around 1st Pico BS
Achieved data rate (Mbps)
Downlink
Uplink
Feasibility and 
Heuristic
Unbalanced
(b)
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.05
0.07
0.09
0.11
Spatial distribution of uplink users around 1st Pico BS
Uplink dropping probability
Feasibility
Heuristic, κ = 0.95
Unbalanced
(c)
Fig. 11.6 Performance of dynamic planning for the second simulation scenario [7]. (a) Switching
decision vs. UL
k1 . (b) Achieved data rate vs. UL
k1 . (c) Uplink call dropping vs. UL
k1
reduced throughput. While the unbalanced dynamic planning approach can satisfy
the target uplink and downlink throughput, it cannot satisfy the target call dropping
probability, as shown in Fig. 11.6c, unlike the balanced dynamic planning approach.
The behavior of the uplink call dropping probability for the sub-optimal algorithms
follows the same argument made for the uplink throughput.
In Fig. 11.7a, the minimum required data rate in the uplink is 10 Mbps, 	DL D
0:6, DL
k0 D 0:7, UL
k0 D 0:4, UL
ks and DL
ks are uniformly distributed among the pico-
cells. In Fig. 11.7a, the switching decisions are shown for the heuristic planning
approach, where the red cross indicates an inactive pico-cell, while the green
circle denotes an active pico-cell, while the unbalanced approach activates only
the macro BS. As 	UL increases, the geographical region experiences an increasing
number of mobile users, which are more concentrated around the cell edge since
UL
k0
D 0:4. As a result, the heuristic algorithm activates more pico-cells to serve
the increasing number of uplink mobile users who compete over the available radio
resources to satisfy their minimum required QoS. This in turn results in increased
BS power consumption as shown in Fig. 11.7b, unlike the unbalanced approach
which presents the minimum power consumption of 540 W. Both balanced and
unbalanced approaches satisfy the target call dropping threshold. However, only the
heuristic algorithm can support the increasing uplink trafﬁc demand and satisﬁes
the minimum required throughput, unlike the unbalanced approach which suffers
from a decreasing achieved uplink throughput with the increasing number of uplink
mobile users (see Fig. 11.7c).

11
Enabling Green Heterogeneous Cellular Networks via Balanced Dynamic Planning
355
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
10
20
30
40
50
Arrival rate of of uplink users ηUL (calls/time slot)
BS identity
(a)
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
0
2
4
6
8
Arrival rate of of uplink users ηUL (calls/time slot)
BS power consumption (kW)
Heuristic, κ = 0.9
Unbalanced
(b)
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
0
10
20
30
40
Arrival rate of of uplink users ηUL (calls/time slot)
Achieved data rate (Mbps)
Uplink − Heuristic, κ = 0.9
Uplink − Unbalanced
Downlink − Heuristic, κ = 0.9
Downlink − Unbalanced
(c)
Fig. 11.7 Performance of dynamic planning for the third simulation scenario [7]. (a) Switching
decision vs. 	UL. (b) BS power consumption vs. 	UL. (c) Achieved data rate vs. 	UL
Discussion Gains: In Fig. 11.7a, b, based on the uplink call arrival rate, only 1
BS can be switched off when 	UL D 0:1 and 49 pico BSs can be switched off,
which presents an energy saving of 92:8% compared with an all active state (which
keeps all BSs active). When the call arrival rate increases to 0:3, an energy saving of
75:7% can be achieved. At a half load state (i.e., call arrival rate of 0:5), the balanced
approach still can achieve an energy saving of 42:8%. Trade-offs: From Fig. 11.7b,
while the unbalanced approach can save 92:8% of energy compared with the all
active state for the entire range of 	UL, it violates the uplink required throughput
as in Fig. 11.7c. Although the unbalanced approach achieves more energy saving
compared with the balanced approach, the latter one always satisﬁes the uplink
service quality, which demonstrates the trade-off between energy saving and uplink
QoS guarantee. The same arguments hold for the gains and trade-offs for Figs. 11.5
and 11.6.
11.5
Conclusions
This chapter presents a balanced dynamic planning approach that can save energy
for the network operators by switching off lightly loaded BSs while satisfying
the user required QoS in the uplink and downlink. First, we have quantiﬁed the
impact of dynamic planning on the service quality of mobile users in the uplink and
downlink. For uplink mobile users, the QoS is measured in terms of the minimum
required throughput and call dropping probability due to MT battery depletion. For

356
M. Ismail et al.
downlink mobile users, the QoS is measured in terms of the minimum required
throughput. Then, the balanced dynamic planning problem is formulated as a two-
timescale problem that decouples the BS operation (on–off switching) and MT
association into two separate timescales. Due to computational complexity, we have
presented a sub-optimal dynamic planning framework based on the analysis of the
decision problem behavior. In addition, we have proposed a less complex tunable
heuristic dynamic planning algorithm (with tuning parameter ). The selection of 
can lead to a performance that ranges from the unbalanced approach performance
which overlooks the uplink QoS requirement for small values of , and as 
increases the performance of the heuristic algorithm gets closer to the performance
of the optimal and sub-optimal algorithms. Simulation results have indicated that
the balanced dynamic planning framework can save energy for network operators
while ensuring a target QoS for mobile users both in the uplink and downlink,
unlike the unbalanced dynamic planning approach. Future extension of this work
will investigate balanced dynamic planning when the BS is powered via energy
harvesting.
Acknowledgements This publication was made possible by NPRP grant # NPRP 9-055-2-022
from the Qatar National Research Fund (a member of Qatar Foundation). The statements made
herein are solely the responsibility of the authors.
References
1. S. Mclaughlin, P.M. Grant, J.S. Thompson, H. Haas, Techniques for improving cellular radio
base station energy efﬁciency. IEEE Wirel. Commun. 18(5), 10–17 (2011)
2. M. Ismail, W. Zhuang, Network cooperation for energy saving in green radio communications.
IEEE Wirel. Commun. 18(5), 76–81 (2011)
3. K. Pentikousis, In search of energy-efﬁcient mobile networking. IEEE Commun. Mag. 48(1),
95–103 (2010)
4. L. Budzisz et al., Dynamic resource provisioning for energy efﬁciency in wireless access
networks: a survey and an outlook. IEEE Commun. Surv. Tutorials 16(4) 2259–2285 (2014)
5. M. Ismail, W. Zhuang, Green radio communications in a heterogeneous wireless medium.
IEEE Wirel. Commun. 21(3), 128–135 (2014)
6. M. Ismail, M. Shakir, K. Qaraqe, E. Serpedin, Green Heterogeneous Wireless Networks (Wiley-
IEEE Press, Hoboken, 2016)
7. M. Kashef, M. Ismail, E. Serpedin, K. Qaraqe, Balanced dynamic planning in green heteroge-
neous cellular networks. IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun. 34(12), 3299–3312 (2016)
8. M. Kashef, M. Ismail, E. Serpedin, K. Qaraqe, On balancing energy efﬁciency for network
operators and mobile users in dynamic planning. IEEE Commun. Mag. 53(11), 158–165 (2015)
9. M. Kashef, M. Ismail, E. Serpedin, K. Qaraqe, Impact of dynamic planning on uplink service
quality in heterogeneous cellular networks, in IEEE Vehicular Technology Conference (VTC)-
Fall, 1–5, September (2016)
10. E. Oh, B. Krishnamachari, X. Liu, Z. Niu, Toward dynamic energy-efﬁcient operation of
cellular network infrastructure. IEEE Commun. Mag. 49(6), 56–61 (2011)
11. K. Son, H. Kim, Y. Yi, B. Krishnamachari, Base station operation and user association mech-
anisms for energy-delay tradeoffs in green cellular networks. IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun.
29(8), 1525–1536 (2011)

11
Enabling Green Heterogeneous Cellular Networks via Balanced Dynamic Planning
357
12. S. Gamboa, A. Pelov, P. Maille, X. Lagrange, N. Montavont, Reducing the energy footprint of
cellular networks with delay-tolerant users. IEEE Syst. J. (2015, to appear)
13. J. Wu, Y. Bao, G. Miao, S. Zhou, Z. Niu, Base station sleeping control and power matching for
energy-delay tradeoffs with bursty trafﬁc. IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol. 65(5), 3657–3675 (2016)
14. T. Han, N. Ansari, On greening cellular networks via multicell cooperation. IEEE Wirel.
Commun. 20(1), 82–89 (2013)
15. E. Oh, K. Son, B. Krishnamachari, Dynamic base station switching-on/off strategies for green
cellular networks. IEEE Trans. Wirel. Commun. 12(5), 2126–2136 (2013)
16. C.Y. Chang, W. Liao, H.Y. Hsieh, D.S. Shiu, On optimal cell activation for coverage
preservation in green cellular networks. IEEE Trans. Mob. Comput. 13(11), 2580–2591 (2014)
17. C. Liu, B. Natarajan, H. Xia, Small cell base station sleep strategies for energy efﬁciency. IEEE
Trans. Veh. Technol. 65(3), 1652–1661 (2016)
18. Z. Niu, Y. Wu, J. Gong, Z. Yang, Cell zooming for cost-efﬁcient green cellular networks. IEEE
Commun. Mag. 48(11), 74–79 (2010)
19. T. Han, N. Ansari, On optimizing green energy utilization for cellular networks with hybrid
energy supplies. IEEE Trans. Wirel. Commun. 12(8), 3872–3882 (2013)
20. N. Saxena, B.J.R. Sahu, Y.S. Han, Trafﬁc-aware energy optimization in green LTE cellular
systems. IEEE Commun. Lett. 18(1), 38–41 (2014)
21. J. Wu, S. Zhou, Z. Niu, Trafﬁc-aware base station sleeping control and power matching for
energy-delay tradeoffs in green cellular networks. IEEE Trans. Wirel. Commun. 12(8), 4196–
4209 (2013)
22. Z. Niu, X. Guo, S. Zhou, P.R. Kumar, Characterizing energy-delay tradeoff in hyper-cellular
networks with base station sleeping control. IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun. 33(4), 641–650
(2015)
23. J.B. Seo, Rewarded access to a sleeping base station. IEEE Commun. Lett. 19(9), 1612–1615
(2015)
24. L. Saker, S.E. Alayoubi, R. Combes, T. Chahed, Optimal control of wake up mechanisms of
femtocells in heterogeneous networks. IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun. 30(3), 664–672 (2012)
25. S. Navaratnarajah, A. Saeed, M. Dianati, M.A. Imran, Energy efﬁciency in heterogeneous
wireless access networks. IEEE Wirel. Commun. 20(5), 37–43 (2013)
26. A. Conte et al., Cell wilting and blossoming for energy efﬁciency. IEEE Wirel. Commun. 18(5),
50–57 (2011)
27. M.Z. Shaker, K.A. Qaraqe, M.S. Alouini, E. Serpedin, M.A. Imran, Green heterogeneous
small-cell networks: toward reducing the CO2 emissions of mobile communications industry
using uplink power adaptation. IEEE Wirel. Commun. 51(6), 52–61 (2013)
28. G. Huang, J. Li, Interference mitigation for femtocell networks via adaptive frequency reuse.
IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol. 65(4), 2413–2423 (2016)
29. P. Liu, X. Wang, J. Li, Uplink co-tier interference management in femtocell networks with
successive group decoding. IEEE Trans. Commun. 14(9), 4797–4809 (2015)
30. W. Song, Y. Cheng, W. Zhuang, Improving voice and data services in cellular/WLAN
integrated network by admission control. IEEE Trans. Wirel. Commun. 6(11), 4025–4037
(2007)
31. Y. Zhuang, Y. Luo, L. Cai, J. Pan, A geometric probability model for capacity analysis and
interference estimation in wireless mobile cellular systems, in IEEE Global Telecommunica-
tions Conference (GLOBECOM) (2011), pp. 1–6
32. B. Chandrasekaran, Survey of network trafﬁc models (2006). http://www.cs.wustl.edu/~jain/
cse56706/ftp/trafﬁc_models3/index.html
33. V. Goswami, U.C. Gupta, Analyzing the discrete-time multiserver queue Geom/Geom/m queue
with late and early arrivals. Inf. Manag. Sci. 9(2), 55–66 (1998)
34. G. Auer, V. Giannini, C. Desset, I. Godor, How much energy is needed to run a wireless
network? IEEE Wirel. Commun. 18(5), 40–49 (2011)
35. W. Wiesemann, D. Kuhn, B. Rustem, Robust Markov decision processes. Math. Oper. Res.
38(1), 153–183 (2013)

358
M. Ismail et al.
36. C. Isheden, G.P. Fettweis, Energy-efﬁcient multi-carrier link adaptation with sum rate-
dependent circuit power, in IEEE Global Telecommunications Conference (GLOBECOM)
(2010), pp. 1–6
37. D. Ferreira, A.K. Dey, V. Kostakos, Understanding human-smartphone concerns: a study of
battery life. Pervasive Comput. 6696, 19–33 (2011)
38. R. Litjens, H. van den Berg, R.J. Boucherie, Throughputs in processor sharing models for
integrated stream and elastic trafﬁc, in MobiHeld, vol. 65, no. 2 (ACM, New York, 2008),
pp. 152–180
39. E. Altman, Constrained Markov Decision Processes (Chapman & Hall/CRC, Boca Raton,
1999)
40. C.W. Tan, Optimal power control in Rayleigh fading heterogeneous wireless networks.
IEEE/ACM Trans. Networking 24(2), 940–953 (2016)
41. M. Monemi, M. Rasti, E. Hossain, Low-complexity SINR feasibility checking and joint power
and admission control in prioritized multi-tier cellular networks. IEEE Trans. Wirel. Commun.
15(3), 2421–2434 (2016)
42. A. Zappone et al., Energy-efﬁcient power control: a look at 5G wireless technologies. IEEE
Trans. Signal Process. 64(7), 1668–1683 (2016)
43. C. Yang, J. Li, A. Anpalagan, M. Guizani, Joint power coordination for spectral-and-energy
efﬁciency in heterogeneous small cell networks: a bargaining game-theoretic perspective. IEEE
Trans. Wirel. Commun. 15(2), 1364–1376 (2016)

Index
A
AF. See Amplify-and-forward (AF)
Age of information, xxviii, 254–255
Amplify-and-forward (AF), 13, 123–125,
132–139, 147, 152, 270
B
Beamforming, xxvii, xxviii, 12, 18–20, 31, 33,
34, 41, 44–48, 52, 66, 67, 69, 70, 75, 78,
82, 84, 85, 93, 97, 102–109, 111, 112,
114–118, 169, 193, 210, 216, 219–220,
226, 253
Beamforming optimization, 38–43, 45
BS on-off switching, 322, 323, 325, 354
C
Cognitive network, 5, 21, 195, 226, 271, 281
Cognitive radios (CRs), 5, 30, 95, 195, 199,
225–226, 271, 281
Constructive interference, xxvii, 12, 68,
87–119
Cooperative communications, 10, 11
Cooperative relay communications, 11
Cooperative relaying, 270, 271
Cooperative spectrum sharing (CSS), xxix,
270–272, 281, 282, 293
CRs. See Cognitive radios (CRs)
CSS. See Cooperative spectrum sharing (CSS)
D
Decode and forward (DF), 20, 21, 43, 123–132,
272
Delay analysis, 255–265
DF. See Decode and forward (DF)
Dynamic planning, xxix, 321–354
E
EH. See Energy harvesting (EH)
Energy costs of sensing and transmission.,
254–265
Energy efﬁciency, xxvi, xxviii, xxix, 3, 8, 18,
19, 32, 88, 153, 158, 172–173, 177,
183, 272, 322, 324, 326–327
Energy harvesting (EH), xxv, xxvi, xxvii,
xxviii, xxix, 5–13, 15–22, 30–33, 44,
45, 47, 51, 55, 57–60, 65–68, 70, 78, 85,
114–116, 123–153, 157–183, 189–227,
240–249, 251, 253–257, 260, 269–293,
297, 329, 354
Error rate, 125
F
5G and beyond, xxv, xxvii, xxix, 4, 14, 19–22,
24, 30, 32, 43, 113, 269
5G communications, 4, 14, 20, 22
G
Green networking, 321–354
H
Heterogeneous networks, xxix, 321–354
© Springer International Publishing AG 2018
D.N.K. Jayakody et al. (eds.), Wireless Information and Power Transfer:
A New Paradigm for Green Communications, DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-56669-6
359

360
Index
I
Interference, xxvi, xxvii, 11, 12, 18, 20, 51,
53, 58, 67, 68, 70, 71, 73, 76, 80, 84,
87–119, 125–133, 135, 153, 174, 212,
223, 225, 271, 272, 275, 281, 297, 324,
326, 329
Interference exploitation, xxvii, 16, 58, 88, 95,
96, 100, 103–114, 117, 118
Internet of Things (IoT), 3, 5, 14, 15, 17, 21,
33, 65, 157, 160, 223, 227, 240, 242,
248, 254, 269
M
Massive MIMO, 6, 19, 20, 85
Millimeter wave (mm wave) communications,
14–15
Molecular communication, 172–174, 178–181,
183
Multi-objective optimization (MOO), xxvii, 5,
65–85
Multi-scale, xxviii, 157–183
O
Outage probability, 49–52, 125, 134, 256,
275–281, 289–293, 297
P
Performance analysis, xxvii, 13, 47–53, 133,
162, 195, 247–248, 253–254, 272–278,
282–288, 390–391
Precoding, 12, 13, 55–58, 95–103, 107, 109,
111–114
R
Radiofrequency identiﬁcation (RFID), 11, 159,
192, 199, 210–216, 225
Relay and multiple-input-multiple-output
(MIMO), 5, 6, 8–11, 13, 17, 19–21,
33–35, 41, 43–46, 49, 52, 53, 59, 67,
85, 110, 123, 125, 126, 129, 132, 133,
138–141, 146–151, 153, 159, 169, 180,
183, 251, 270–272, 283, 289
Relaying, xxvii, 8–11, 17, 20, 33, 47, 123–153,
169, 182, 251, 270, 271
Resource allocation, xxvii, 10, 18, 19, 31, 34,
65–85, 109–114, 219, 250, 252, 336
RFEH. See RF energy harvesting (RFEH)
RF energy harvesting, xxv, xxvi, xxviii, 5, 10,
17, 158, 160, 161, 169, 181, 189–227,
252, 253, 270, 271
RF energy harvesting (RFEH), 4, 6–8, 11,
12, 16–19, 24, 158, 160, 161, 169,
189–227, 253, 270, 271
RFID. See Radiofrequency identiﬁcation
(RFID)
RF wireless power transfer, 214
S
Satellite communications, 22–23, 193
Simultaneous wireless information and power
transfer (SWIPT), xxv, xxvi, xxvii,
xxviii, 4–16, 18–24, 31–35, 59, 65–85,
115–119, 158, 169, 173, 217, 219, 220,
226, 251–253
Small-cell network, xxvii, 30, 65–85, 162
Stochastic geometry, 125, 161, 170, 181, 195
Supercapacitors, 203, 204, 206–209, 214, 222
SWIPT. See Simultaneous wireless information
and power transfer (SWIPT)
Symbol-level precoding, 12–13
T
Throughput, xxvi, 10, 21, 22, 30, 33, 35, 43,
47–50, 52, 53, 59, 60, 67, 68, 124,
125, 127–131, 133, 135–138, 141–143,
153, 247, 251, 253, 254, 272, 322, 326,
327, 331, 333–336, 341, 342, 346, 348,
351–354
Time switching (TS), 8, 15, 20, 32, 66–75, 84,
115, 124, 203, 218, 219, 251, 271, 272,
282, 283
U
Update age, xxviii, 254, 255, 258–263, 265
Update cycle, xxviii, 254, 255, 258–265
W
Wireless energy harvesting (WEH), xxvi, 6–7,
12, 15, 31
Wireless information and power transfer, xxv,
xxvi, 3–24, 219
Wirelessly powered communications, 29–60
Wireless power, 5, 22, 31, 33, 59, 114, 115,
153, 189, 199, 214, 216, 217, 248
Wireless power transfer (WPT)
charger conﬁguration, 301–303, 305–307,
309–312, 317
distributed algorithm, 296, 305, 306, 313,
317

Index
361
power management, 296, 303–307,
313–317
power transfer models, 251–252, 295–318
wireless power networks, 7–8, 297, 301
Wireless sensor networks (WSN), xxvi, xxviii,
5–7, 15, 16, 65, 195, 206, 209, 210,
213, 214, 220, 223, 239–265, 269, 270,
282, 290–292, 295, 297, 298
Wireless sensor nodes, xxviii, 4, 15, 16, 226,
241, 242, 269–293
WSN. See Wireless sensor networks (WSN)

