WIRING A JUNCTION BOX 
Part P of the new building regulations could involve a check on any additional circuitry 
by qualified electricians when you sell your home. This can affect your sale, you could 
be breaking the law and your house insurance may not be valid. Please be absolutely 
sure you know what you are doing and get all of your work checked by a qualified 
electrician. 
Junction boxes can be used to connect additional sockets to circuits, add 
lighting points, extend circuits, and in general they are a way of getting power 
from an existing source and taking it somewhere else. They can also be used 
for repairs. 
Junction boxes are rated in amps to protect them, you and the circuit. Make 
sure you have the right box for the right job. A ring main or radial circuit will 
need a 30 amp junction box, a lighting circuit (although you can buy 5amp 
junction boxes) will need a 20amp junction box. Junction boxes come with 
either 3, 4, 5 or 6 terminals so work our which you will need to complete your 
project. To use junction boxes to add lights and switches please see our 
project. 
Double checking that the power is off connect your junction box as shown 
below. 

    
 
Junction boxes must be fixed solidly to a firm, suitable surface and must be accessible. This 
does not mean they have to be visible and can be fixed in floor or roof voids. Accessible 
means to a builder or electrician who can easily remove part of the floor or ceiling etc. 
Junction boxes may not be buried in plaster. 
 Please also check the rules very carefully for ring mains and radial circuits. You are 
limited in the length of cable you are allowed to use in both circuits and long spurs 
could make you exceed the limit. If this is the case you are asking the circuit to use 
much more energy than the circuit is designed for. More energy = more heat and 
cables can catch fire. Part P of the new building regulations could involve a check on 
any additional circuitry by qualified electricians when you sell your home. This can 
affect your sale, you could be breaking the law and your house insurance may not be 
valid. Please be absolutely sure you know what you are doing and get all of your work 
checked by a qualified electrician. 
 

