Cover-image not available

WOMEN IN PRISON
A Reference Handbook

Other Titles in ABC-CLIO’s
CONTEMPORARY
WORLD ISSUES
Series
American Homelessness, Third Edition, Mary Ellen Hombs
Capital Punishment, Second Edition, Michael Kronenwetter
Families in America, Jeffrey Scott Turner
Nuclear Weapons and Nonproliferation, Sarah J. Diehl and James
Clay Moltz
Police Misconduct in America, Dean J. Champion
Rainforests of the World, Second Edition, Kathlyn Gay
Religion and Politics, Glenn H. Utter and John W. Storey
Tax Reform, James John Jurinski
Tobacco, Harold V. Cordry
U.S. National Security, Cynthia Watson
War Crimes and Justice, Howard Ball
World Population, Geoffrey Gilbert

Books in the Contemporary World Issues series address vital
issues in today’s society such as genetic engineering, pollution,
and biodiversity. Written by professional writers, scholars, and
nonacademic experts, these books are authoritative, clearly
written, up-to-date, and objective. They provide a good starting
point for research by high school and college students, scholars,
and general readers as well as by legislators, businesspeople,
activists, and others.
Each book, carefully organized and easy to use, contains an
overview of the subject, a detailed chronology, biographical
sketches, facts and data and/or documents and other primary-
source material, a directory of organizations and agencies,
annotated lists of print and nonprint resources, and an index.
Readers of books in the Contemporary World Issues series will
find the information they need in order to have a better
understanding of the social, political, environmental, and
economic issues facing the world today.


WOMEN IN PRISON
A Reference Handbook
Cyndi Banks
CONTEMPORARY
WORLD ISSUES
Santa Barbara, California
Denver, Colorado
Oxford, England

Copyright © 2003 by Cyndi Banks
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced,
stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means,
electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise, except for
the inclusion of brief quotations in a review, without prior permission in
writing from the publishers.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Banks, Cyndi.
Women in prison : a reference handbook / Cyndi Banks.
p. cm.—(Contemporary world issues)
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 1-57607-929-5 (hardcover)—ISBN 1-57607-930-9 (e-book)
1.  Women prisoners—United States. 2.  Female offenders—United
States. 3.  Reformatories for women—United States.  I. Title. II.
Series.
HV9471 .B365 2003
365'.43—dc21
2002154379
07
06
05
04
03
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
This book is also available on the World Wide Web as an e-book. Visit
abc-clio.com for details.
ABC-CLIO, Inc.
130 Cremona Drive, P.O. Box 1911
Santa Barbara, California 93116-1911
This book is printed on acid-free paper
.
Manufactured in the United States of America
∞

Contents
Preface, xi
1
The History of Women’s Prisons, 1
Imprisoning Women, 1
“Fallen Women” in Prison, 2
Women’s Crime, 3
Women’s Imprisonment—Early Period to Reform, 3
Women’s Prison Reform, 5
Early Period of Reform, 1840–1860, 5
The Women’s Reformatory Movement, 1870–1900, 7
Treating Women Differently, 9
Female Staff and Management, 12
Prison Design: The Cottage System, 14
Women’s Crimes and Women Prisoners, 15
Retraining Women in Reformatories, 16
A Progressive Approach, 1900–1920, 18
Social, Economic, and Psychological Approaches to
Women’s Crime, 18
Preventive Approaches, 19
Anti-Institutional Approach, 20
The Period after 1920, 21
Regional Differences, 21
The Demise of the Reformatory, 22
Custodial Prisons for Women, 1870–1935, 23
Prison Farm Camps in the South, 35
Independent Prisons for Women, 36
Race and Racism in State Prisons Holding Women,
1865–1935, 37
The Women’s Prison System since 1935, 38
vii

2
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions, 41
Women’s Criminality, 42
Race and Women’s Imprisonment, 44
Women and Capital Punishment, 46
Female Youthful Offenders Confined in Adult
Prison, 47
The Experience of Imprisonment, 48
Prison Subculture, 49
Importing Traditional Gender Roles, 50
Race, 52
Self-Mutilation, 52
Separation from Families, 53
Prison Visiting, 55
Conjugal Visits, 57
Location of Women’s Prisons, 62
Prison Programs for Women, 62
Classification, 65
Discipline, 67
Women Prisoners and Prison Staff, 68
Sexual Abuse in Prison, 69
Criminal Justice Policy Issues, 72
“Three Strikes and You’re Out,” 73
The “War on Drugs,” 74
Boot Camps for Women, 76
Health and Medical Issues, 79
Medicalizing Women, 79
Reproductive Freedom, 81
Women’s Medical Needs, 83
HIV/AIDS, 88
Legal Challenges—Equal Protection, 90
Possible Solutions, 92
Decriminalize Offenses for Which Women Are
Imprisoned, 93
Develop Community Interventions for Female
Offenders, 94
Avoid Confinement by Increased Use of Probation
and Parole, 95
Make More Use of Local Jails in the Women’s
Community, 96
Design Treatment Programs Specifically for
Women’s Problems, 96
viii
Contents

Devote More Resources to the Prevention of Crimes
that Result in Women’s Incarceration, 98
Employ Restorative Justice Options in Place of
Imprisonment, 98
Allow Women Prisoners to Keep Their Children in
Prison, 99
3
Voices of Women behind Bars, 107
Victims of Domestic Violence, 107
Crack Cocaine Users, 108
Victims of Child Sexual, Physical, and Emotional
Abuse, 109
Prison Life, 110
Guards and Inmates, 115
Visiting Husbands in Prison, 116
The “Free World,” 117
4
Chronology, 119
5
Guarding Women in Prison, 125
Women in Corrections, 125
Women Guarding Men, 127
Male and Female Officers, 131
Constraints Faced by Women Correctional Officers, 132
6
People and Events, 141
People, 141
Clara Barton (1821–1912), 141
Maud Booth (1865–1948), 141
Zebulon Brockway (1827–1920), 142
Elizabeth Buffum Chance (1806–1899), 142
Rhoda Coffin (1826–1909), 143
Katherine Bement Davis (1860–1935), 144
Sarah Doremus (1802–1877), 144
Eliza Wood Farnham (1815–1864), 145
Ellen Foster (1840–1910), 145
Elizabeth Fry (1780–1845), 146
Margaret Fuller (1810–1850), 146
Abby Hopper Gibbons (1801–1893), 147
Emma Hall (1837–1884), 148
Mary Belle Harris (1874–1957), 148
Contents
ix

Jessie Donaldson Hodder (1867–1931), 149
Ellen Johnson (1829–1899), 150
Caroline Kirkland (1801–1864), 151
Josephine Shaw Lowell (1843–1905), 151
Edna Mahan (1900–1986), 152
Eliza Mosher (1846–1928), 153
Catherine Sedgwick (1789–1867), 153
Sarah Smith (1814–1885), 154
Mary Surratt (1823–1865), 154
Julia Strudwick Tutwiler (1841–1916), 155
Mary Waln Wistar (1765–1843), 155
Caroline Bayard Wittpenn (1859–1932), 156
Events, 156
7
Facts and Data, 163
Women Offenders, 163
Female Corrections Populations, 164
Characteristics of Female Prisoners, 165
Prison Expenditure, 167
Gender in State Prisons, 167
Massachusetts, 168
Indiana, 172
California, 174
8
Directory of Organizations, Associations, and
Government and International Agencies, 179
9
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources, 189
Bibliography, 189
General Books, 189
Criminological and Feminist Works, 192
Popular Works, 198
Book Chapters and Journal Articles, 199
Government Publications, 200
Core Periodicals, 201
Nonprint Resources, 202
Videos, 202
Internet Sites, 207
Index, 209
About the Author, 227
x
Contents

Preface
T
he United States maintains the largest prison system in the
world and imprisons more people, both men and women, than
any other country. This book focuses on women in the prison
system and answers questions such as: How did women histori-
cally come to be sent to prison? How were they treated in prisons
and reformatories? What kinds of offenses do women commit that
end in their incarceration? How do women experience imprison-
ment? How do they cope with life in prison on a daily basis?
In the past it has been argued by those who study prisons
that women prisoners were “invisible” because they made up
such a small proportion of all persons imprisoned. Although
women still comprise only a very small proportion of all prison-
ers, they are now more visible due to the many research studies
that have been carried out since the late 1960s that have explored
women’s experience in the prison system and brought to light
many issues, including the kinds of treatment available to women
in confinement, how women are classified and disciplined by
prison authorities, the effect of certain policy approaches like the
so-called “war on drugs” and the “three strikes and you’re out”
legislation on the rate of women’s imprisonment, and impor-
tantly, the differences that exist in the treatment of men and
women within correctional systems.
My interest in this subject derives from my teaching at the uni-
versity level in the areas of women in prison and gender and crime,
as well as in my pedagogical practice that includes gender as a fun-
damental component in all criminology and criminal justice
courses; from my own research into women and juveniles in prison
and institutions; and from my published articles on punishment
and incarceration generally.
xi

This book contains a comprehensive history of women in
prison, an in-depth examination of issues and controversies that
affect women in prison, a chronology of events in the history of
women in prison, and a list of persons who were influential in the
history of women’s imprisonment in the United States. This infor-
mation is supplemented with the actual voices of women “doing
time,” who describe in their own words how it feels to be incarcer-
ated. This feminist approach allows the reader to grasp more fully
the experience of incarceration and the background of women who
find themselves criminalized. Although women are guarded as
prisoners, they are also guards themselves; I have therefore
included a chapter on women performing the work of correctional
officers and the issues that arise as women carry out these duties
alongside their male counterparts. For those interested in pursuing
these issues further, various sources of information are listed to
enable students, researchers, and social activists to make connec-
tions and investigate particular aspects of this subject more deeply
and thoroughly.
Any serious study of women in prison should begin with the
history of women’s incarceration in prisons and women’s refor-
matories. This approach helps reveal the historical importance of
gender in societal attitudes toward women in confinement:
reformers attempted to “save” some women offenders and trans-
form them into the “true woman” imbued with middle-class val-
ues and attitudes while women prisoners—languished, forgotten,
and rejected by society—were considered “fallen women” and
beyond redemption. The significance of this social and cultural
history is that the same attitudes are reproduced today in modi-
fied forms as readers will see in the present issues and controver-
sies studied. Most fundamentally, however, the material
presented here shows how women’s issues should not be sub-
sumed under men’s issues in any study of imprisonment, as once
was the case. Women’s crimes, their experience of incarceration,
and their treatment needs are radically different from men’s and
should therefore continue to be the subject of discrete studies.
xii
Preface

1
The History of Women’s
Prisons
T
he history of women in prison* in the United States is marked
by a number of stages and developments that parallel, in part,
the history of men in prison. In the first stage, from the time
that imprisonment as a sanction was introduced in the colonies
until the 1870s, all women prisoners were housed with men
within the same prison complex. During the second stage,
between 1870 and 1930, the conditions of some women prisoners
changed after the women’s reformatory movement succeeded in
altering their living conditions and a new philosophy of redemp-
tion and training came into being. However, it is important to
appreciate that for many women, custodial conditions did not
change, and they continued to be housed in conditions similar to
those for male prisoners. In the third stage (1931–present),
women staff were hired to supervise women in prison and were
appointed to govern women’s institutions.
Imprisoning Women
The period between 1815 and 1860 was one of great social change
in the United States due to migration from rural to urban areas,
immigration from overseas, and the development of a market 
*This history of women’s prisons developed in this chapter is primarily
based on Feinman (1984), Freedman (2000), Lekkerkerker (1931), and
Rafter (1985), although other sources are also referred to.
1

economy, all of which greatly disrupted the lives of many men and
women. Urban growth resulted in numerous social and economic
problems for women, who occupied a marginal position in the
economy due to limited opportunities for wage earning and lower
salaries. These limited opportunities after the Civil War compelled
many women to take up prostitution in order to survive, and
many also resorted to property crime. Peculiar to women, how-
ever, were the many laws that regulated sexual conduct, such as
adultery, lewd behavior, and idle and disorderly conduct.
Conviction for such offenses resulted not only in punishment but
also in labeling criminalized women as “fallen women,” a stigma
that once attached could never be removed. Other men and
women refused to associate with such women or to employ them,
and this could easily lead to further criminal acts when a woman
tried to survive even though outcast and penniless.
“Fallen Women” in Prison
Political leaders of the time showed little concern about living
conditions for women in prisons. This may have resulted from
the low status of these “fallen” women, from their small num-
bers—that made their situation invisible—and from the general
opinion that they were beyond reform. Male penal officials
resented the extra demands that a few women placed on them
and viewed hiring a matron to look after so few prisoners as a
waste of money. Prisoners during this era were expected to work
and earn money to support their institution, but female prisoners
were regarded as unprofitable noncontributors.
This differential treatment of women had its roots in the per-
ception that women criminals were depraved creatures who had
denied their own pure womanly natures when committing crime.
Male prisoners did not suffer the same perception and were
regarded as still capable of redemption. Women’s conduct was
considered more serious than men’s criminal conduct because of
the belief that a woman who ignored her roles and influence as
wife and mother actually encouraged male criminality. In addi-
tion, “fallen” women were considered disruptive to the harmony
of society because they were a temptation for men to engage in
sin. These perceptions of women were linked to the Victorian ide-
ology developed during that era with its notions concerning the
ideal woman as the angel in the house, and its insistence on
2
The History of Women’s Prisons

women’s role as the moral exemplar within the family, responsi-
ble for maintaining spiritual and moral values.
Women’s Crime
During this period of history, women were significantly involved
in the category of crimes against public order, including drunk-
enness, vagrancy, streetwalking, and petty larceny. Women were
incarcerated for these crimes in local jails (penitentiaries were
reserved for the more dangerous offenses of murder, arson, and
burglary). Common thought was that women committed fewer
crimes than men because of the strict sexual division of labor
resulting from confining women to the home to carry out domes-
tic duties. However, after 1840 the rate of imprisonment for
women began to increase; in the New York courts, for example,
convictions of women increased at a much higher rate than for
men in the period 1847 to 1860. The greatest increase in women’s
rates occurred in the 1860s, when the female inmate population in
Massachusetts and New York increased by one third while the
rate of men’s imprisonment declined by one half. This trend was
attributable not only to the incidence of public order offenses—
especially prostitution, which had become more visible during
the Civil War—but also in crimes against other persons. It is likely
that stricter laws and their intensive enforcement brought about
this increase, although some commentators of the time believed
the increasing practice of abortion to be a significant contributing
factor.
Women’s Imprisonment—Early
Period to Reform
During the early period of women’s imprisonment, men and
women were housed in the same prison building. This thinking
reflected the practices the colonists brought with them to the
United States from their countries of origin. Gradually, women
were separated from men, lodged within separate prison build-
ings either within the same prison or in separate institutions.
The early colonists followed British penal practice, and
local jails were generally used to detain those awaiting trial or
Women’s Imprisonment—Early Period to Reform
3

punishment. Punishment for both men and women involved
not only imprisonment but visible forms of sanctioning, such as
whipping, ducking, or being placed in the stocks or pillories.
However, by the late eighteenth century, the United States
became influenced by developments in penology in Europe,
where capital punishment was being replaced with imprison-
ment. One impetus for this change was the reformers’ belief that
incarceration would encourage repentance. Incarceration would
also isolate criminals from society, allow for supervision of their
daily lives, and establish compulsory inmate labor.
After 1815, many states erected penitentiaries based on two
competing models—the Pennsylvania system used by Quakers,
which isolated prisoners in individual cells and required com-
plete silence both day and night; and the Auburn model, named
after a prison in New York that opened in 1817, where the inmates,
although isolated in cells at night, worked together in silence dur-
ing the day and were subjected to extensive scrutiny and surveil-
lance backed up by a rigid system of discipline. Both men and
women were imprisoned in penitentiaries, but the scant evidence
available reveals limited imprisonment of women up until 1840.
In 1850, for example, women made up only 3.6 percent of the total
inmate population of thirty-four state and county prisons.
During the 1820s, women prisoners in the Auburn system
were not subjected to the same disciplinary regime as men because
the lack of specific accommodation for them made this impossible.
Rather, the women were crowded together, often in one room,
away from the male cellblock. Their quarters were overcrowded,
and they were commonly subjected to harsh treatment and abuse.
The death of one woman prisoner after being flogged in the
Auburn prison in New York may have brought about legislation
that in 1828 required county prisons to separate male and female
inmates. In 1832 a matron was hired for the women’s part of the
Auburn prison. Along with the harsh and appalling conditions for
women in penitentiaries came sexual abuse, sexual assaults, and
illegitimate births, which were often systematic and overt.
The gradual segregation of women from men prisoners
occurred in phases and patterns and varied from state to state.
Broadly, there were three stages in this process. In the first,
women were part of the general prison population and were con-
fined in large rooms or in individual cells but were not segregated
further. In the second, the women were placed in separate quar-
ters within or attached to the men’s section of the prison. During
4
The History of Women’s Prisons

the third stage, women were relocated to a more remote place on
or near the main prison grounds. The evolution of separate hous-
ing for women was most rapid in the northeast, slower in the
Midwest, slower still in the South, and slowest of all in the West.
(Even in the late 1970s, some states in the West remained in the
second stage since they continued to incarcerate their few female
prisoners in small units attached to male prisons.)
By the mid-nineteenth century, a number of states had hired
matrons to supervise the female prisoners, but they seldom per-
formed more than custodial duties. In many prisons there was only
one matron to supervise all the female inmates, and she usually
lived in the prison and was on duty twenty-four hours a day, six
and a half days a week. The matrons were mostly older women,
often widowed and forced to undertake this work through eco-
nomic hardship. In some cases they were the wives of warders.
In 1835, the Mount Pleasant Female Prison at Ossining, New
York, was established as the first women’s prison in the United
States. Although it was physically close to and administratively
dependent on the men’s prison, Sing Sing, it was housed in sepa-
rate buildings and had its own staff. The Mount Pleasant Female
Prison followed the Auburn plan with three tiers of twenty-four
cells each and contained a nursery and workshop as well as two
large separate cells for punishment cases. It was administered by
a matron, who in turn supervised several assistant matrons.
Women prisoners worked at tasks considered appropriate for the
time, including button making, hat trimming, and sewing clothes
for the male inmates. Women at Mount Pleasant were not disci-
plined as brutally as men (punishments included gagging but not
the lash), and the most common punishment was confinement to
one’s cell with a reduction in food. In 1846 the list of violations that
resulted in punishment included “noise in room” and “rushing
from cell when the door was open,” which carried punishments of
twelve days in solitary confinement and chaining to the wall.
Women’s Prison Reform
Early Period of Reform, 1840–1860
In the period between 1840 and 1860 reformers made radical
changes to the physical conditions in some women’s prisons, and
they questioned the prisoners’ label as “fallen women” and their
assumed lack of capacity for reform. To a great extent, these
Women’s Prison Reform
5

reformers took their cue from the English women’s prison
reformer, Elizabeth Fry, who had entered London’s Newgate jail
in 1813 and met starving, drunken, and partly clothed women
inmates. She subsequently wrote her treatise Observations in
Visiting, Superintendence and Government of Female Prisoners in
1827, setting forth the principles that came to guide American
women’s prison reform. Fry, a Quaker, believed that women pris-
oners could be reformed, and so she devised methods for achiev-
ing reform through religious salvation, a structured daily
schedule, and compassion, and stressed that women generally
had a responsibility to aid their fallen sisters.
Nearly all of the thirty or so women in the United States
active in prison reform during the nineteenth century came from
middle- and upper-class homes, and almost one third were
Quakers. Many also worked for other causes such as the abolition
of slavery, temperance, and women’s emancipation. Most had
acquired the ideology of the “ideal” woman in school, and their
socialization as moral guardians influenced their desire to obtain
some “purposeful work” before marriage. This included teach-
ing, missionary work, and religious instruction; some women
reformers also gained experience as nurses and administrators.
During the 1820s and 1830s, reformers propagated the notion
of salvation and brought to life movements for the redemption of
sinners, temperance, and moral reform, as well as for the reform
of the prison system. Women who joined this movement for sal-
vation believed that even the most hardened sinners—and this
included “fallen” women—could be brought to salvation. They
considered the task of reforming women and children to be their
special responsibility, and by 1823 the Quakers of Philadelphia
had begun to visit women’s prisons to offer instruction, a library,
and sewing and writing classes to women inmates.
By the 1840s, Protestant missionaries in New York and even
some male reformers were becoming concerned about the status
and conditions of women in prison, especially about the sexual
license that was permitted in institutions. The male Prison
Association of New York asked women reformers to form a
women’s auxiliary called the Female Department, and those
women who joined this organization followed Elizabeth Fry in
trying to encourage religious feelings in the female prison popu-
lation. An early leader of the Female Department was Abby
Hopper Hopkins, who together with women like Sarah Doremus,
Catherine Sedgwick, and Caroline Kirkland proposed a number
6
The History of Women’s Prisons

of plans to assist women in prison, including a scheme for a
halfway house that would provide shelter and prayer and pre-
vent recidivism. Generally, they saw domestic training as the key
to the women’s salvation and believed this salvation would only
take place in a “home” where the “fallen” women would reclaim
their moral purity. Margaret Fuller, an outstanding early feminist
and the editor of the New York Tribune, supported this proposal.
She had visited the women’s department at Sing Sing Prison in
New York and concluded that the women there were victims who
needed help to overcome the circumstances that had led them
into crime. Fuller published a series of articles in the Tribune in
1845 exposing the conditions for women in prison and question-
ing the perception that these women were beyond redemption.
Once the home for discharged women was opened, she led a
campaign for funds to support it and promoted the acceptance of
social responsibility for “fallen” women.
Along with the reformers’ insistence that women in prison
were not beyond redemption came their scrutiny of women’s
criminality. The reformers perceived many of the women as inno-
cent victims of male seduction rather than designing temptresses,
and they questioned whether, in view of their poverty, the
women had any real choice in adopting a life of crime. In the
1850s this group of reformers rebelled against men’s influence on
their work and asserted their independence by forming the
Women’s Prison Association of New York in 1854. At this stage,
the reform movement for women in prison limited itself to
improving women prisoners’ living conditions and to their moral
renewal through prison visiting and the provision of halfway
houses.
The Women’s Reformatory Movement,
1870–1900
The women’s reformatory movement was part of a broad current
in penal reform that began soon after the end of the Civil War pro-
moting the treatment or rehabilitation of the incarcerated. Many
persons involved in penal reform had become disillusioned with
existing custodial methods and practices and rejected the philos-
ophy of retribution in favor of the new aim of prisoner reforma-
tion. The new penology was initially presented to a gathering of
prison administrators and reformers in Cincinnati, Ohio, in 1870.
The meeting endorsed a series of principles that shaped U.S.
Women’s Prison Reform
7

penology for the next century. Among them was the classification
of inmates as a preliminary step in designing the treatment plan
for an inmate; this logically led to recognition that separate pris-
ons were required for women prisoners. In fact, the meeting’s
Declaration of Principles stated explicitly, “prisons, as well as
prisoners, should be classified or graded so that there shall
be . . . separate establishments for women.” This declaration gave
the women reformers their basis for continuing to urge change in
the treatment of women in prison.
Between 1870 and 1900, reformers advocated an alternative
model for women’s incarceration based on three principles: the
separation of women prisoners from male prisoners, the provi-
sion of specific feminine care to women, and control over
women’s prisons by female staff. By the end of the nineteenth
century, reformers had been successful in the states where they
were most active—Indiana, Massachusetts, and New York—in
that separate women’s prisons were established.
After 1860, reform efforts expanded to a movement that
sought professional status for women prison reformers through
their appointment to prison boards and to the boards that gov-
erned institutions. The conclusion of the Civil War brought more
women into the reform movement, and in the 1870s, Abby Hopper
Gibbons joined with Josephine Shaw Lowell to campaign for
women to run the separate women’s prisons in New York. Lowell
was from one of Boston’s oldest families and had been active in
charitable work. She investigated the situation of women in jails
and argued for women’s control of public institutions. In the
Midwest, the Quakers began working for prison reform after 1860;
their most active reformer was Rhoda Coffin of Indiana, who with
Sarah Smith campaigned for a separate women’s prison in that
state. The Civil War had taught women that they could serve com-
petently alongside men, and many had worked for the state as
nurses and charity workers. After the war, they wanted to con-
tinue their work with social causes and, because of their experi-
ence, looked for public and professional roles from which to do
this. A good example of this new interest in professionalism was
Elizabeth Buffum Chace, a Quaker from Rhode Island who cam-
paigned for female membership of prison boards. Thanks to her
efforts, Rhode Island in 1870 passed legislation for a Board of Lady
Visitors to inspect prisons housing women. Similarly, in
Connecticut, the state Board of Charities formed a department
with female members in 1876 to inspect jails and prisons.
8
The History of Women’s Prisons

In terms of national organizations, women became members
of the National Prison Association (later called the American
Prison Association, or APA) and the National Conference on
Charities and Corrections. At its founding meeting in 1870, the
APA called for women to be deployed in improving the prison
system, and in 1875, Rhoda Coffin gave the first paper by a female
member to the organization speaking about the importance of
women’s prisons being placed under the control of other women.
As she put it, “a woman’s prison should be entirely under the
control of women, from the board of managers to the lowest offi-
cer” (Coffin 1877, 208).
The legislation that established women’s reformatories per-
mitted the incarceration of women for short terms for petty
offenses for which they had previously been sent to jails rather
than to prison. The laws also extended the time that women were
required to spend in prison and, in doing so, created a category of
female prisoner that had no counterpart among male prisoners.
The reformatories for men held only felons, and men convicted of
minor crimes such as drunkenness continued to be punished out-
side the state prison system and given only brief jail terms.
Reformers overlooked the fact that they were creating a double
standard that punished women more severely than men for com-
mitting the same offenses.
Treating Women Differently
By the 1860s, several new “women-only” quarters had been
established in prisons throughout the country. American reform-
ers continued to take their cues from English reforms for women
prisoners; one such influence was the book Our Convicts, written
by English prison reformer Mary Carpenter. Subsequent to
observing the Mount Joy Female Convict Prison in Ireland,
Carpenter published Our Convicts in 1864, arguing that women
prisoners should be housed together in one prison where a merit
system would regulate their treatment and privileges and female
guards rather than male guards would be employed. Attracted to
Carpenter’s ideas, American reformer Elizabeth Buffum Chance
met with Carpenter in London in 1872. Rhoda Coffin also visited
Mount Joy and praised its representation of family life. At the
same time that women reformers were urging separation of the
sexes, male prison officials such as Zebulon Brockway, superin-
tendent of the Detroit House of Corrections, began to support
Women’s Prison Reform
9

separation. In 1869, Michigan enacted the country’s first indeter-
minate sentencing law, which enabled Brockway to hold women
convicted of prostitution for up to three years on the theory that
during this extended period of imprisonment the prostitutes
might be reformed. This new sentencing tool was not applied to
men. With this three-year sentence, parole became possible, and
so the House of Shelter was created as a halfway house for
paroled women, who would be given shelter there until their sen-
tences concluded. The important consideration for Brockway was
that residents of the House of Shelter would be under the mater-
nal care of more mature, respectable women. He therefore
engaged Emma Hall, a former Detroit public school teacher, as
matron. Hall set up a merit system and formed a group with
thirty female prisoners who lived as a family in well-furnished
surroundings. She stressed spiritual study, domesticity, and aca-
demic improvement and pioneered the type of training offered in
reformatories—propriety, decorum, and preparing women to
lead a “good womanly” life. The House of Shelter closed in 1874
after both Brockway and Hall resigned from the Detroit House of
Corrections.
The campaign for separate prisons was not without its diffi-
culties. For example, in Massachusetts, implementing sexual sep-
aration required a four-year campaign by commissioners and
private reformers. Reformers argued that women would remain
incurably criminal unless they were separated from men and
received a new form of treatment. They emphasized that this
treatment would not be more lenient than previously but would
be different. What they envisioned was a product of their own
socialization. They believed that inculcating the women with
their own Victorian middle-class values of true womanhood—
purity, piety, domesticity, and submission—would transform
them. It was important to them to treat the women as women, to
recognize their femininity and encourage it to grow. Officials now
recognized that women were more emotional and needed differ-
ent management than men, and that they were more likely to
respond to kind treatment than rigid discipline. The softening
and nurturing influences would include flowers, farm animals,
music, and visits to the infant nursery within the prison.
Educating delinquent women to be women first was perceived as
the prime task, and domesticity was therefore seen as the focal
point for this teaching. For the reformers, the home became a
symbol of transformation, able to restore womanhood to criminal
10
The History of Women’s Prisons

women. Courses included reading, writing, and sewing together
with Bible study, and a regime of piety was emphasized based on
early rising, the banning of profanity and profane substances
such as tobacco and alcohol, regular work, and on developing
habits of neatness and industry. Both Josephine Lowell and
Emma Hall advocated establishing homes where tender care
would be provided and rejected the silent model of the peniten-
tiaries. Thanks largely to Lowell’s efforts, the Hudson House of
Refuge opened in 1887 in New York as the first cottage-based
adult female reformatory staffed almost entirely by women. It
was filled to capacity within two years. The Western House of
Refuge, opened in Albion, New York, in 1893, also followed the
household model, and Bedford Hills in Westchester County, New
York, opened as a reformatory in 1901.
In Indiana, Rhoda Coffin opened the Indiana Reformatory
for Women and Girls in 1873. It was the first completely inde-
pendent women’s prison as well as the first to be administered
and operated by an entirely female staff. Previously women had
been kept in custody at the Indiana State Prison, and while visit-
ing that prison, Coffin observed that male guards carried keys to
the women’s cells—with very adverse results for the women.
There were also reports of sexual abuse involving bribing female
inmates as well as inmate beatings in the presence of other
guards. Also, on Sundays, the guards forced women inmates to
bathe in front of them (Swain 2001, 202).
Coffin served on the board of the reformatory as its president.
Like other female prison reformers, she believed that women were
best suited to take charge of female prisoners and that only
another woman could understand the “temptations” and “weak-
nesses” that surround female prisoners (203). The Indiana Refor-
matory expanded the theme of domestic treatment, allowing
women to wear dresses and emphasizing refinement in decoration
and furnishing. Again, though, the main activities were launder-
ing, sewing, and knitting. The Reformatory received only adult
felons and delinquent girls and did not use indeterminate sen-
tencing initially. It made no attempt at reformation through the
provision of education; however, the institution was considered
an advancement of the model of the House of Shelter in Detroit
because it was completely independent of any prison for men and
those in authority were all females. As the first prison operated
solely by women for women, the Indiana Reformatory was con-
sidered to have set the standard for prison reform in that state and
Women’s Prison Reform
11

in the nation, and Coffin received national recognition as the pres-
ident of this pioneering institution (Swain 2001, 208). Coffin
resigned her position as president in 1881, having encountered
opposition to her leadership of the board resulting largely from
disputes within the Society of Friends (210).
Female Staff and Management
Elizabeth Fry argued that it was essential to the proper order and
regulation of prisons that female prisoners be placed under the
control of officers of their own sex. American prisons adopted the
practice of hiring matrons when women’s departments of prisons
were established in the first decades of the nineteenth century,
but these matrons did not have the authority to reform “fallen”
women and were not assigned to that task. In addition, male
management staff usually supervised the matrons. With the
increased number of female prisoners by 1870 and criticism of
male custodians came justification for hiring more prison
matrons. Also by this time, women were beginning to enter pro-
fessions they considered natural extensions of their nurturing
role, and correctional work joined the list of careers thought
acceptable for women. Women reformers argued that female staff
should be preferred because men contributed to women’s delin-
quency, especially in view of their vulnerability to sexual abuse
within prisons. For example, it was common practice for female
prisoners to be searched by male guards, and these women were
easy targets for men. Illegitimate births observed in a number of
prisons were evidence of sexual activity, and in one state prison,
a system of forced prostitution of women prisoners run by the
guards was exposed. After examining this evidence, the reform-
ers concluded that men did contribute to women’s delinquency
and suggested that the solution was to remove male influence
altogether by separating female prisoners both from male prison-
ers and male officers or guards. The reformers were able to con-
vince many of their cause by arguing that women’s moral
strength qualified them for custodial duties. However, some male
correctional officials denied their claims, arguing that female
warders would be too weak with the prisoners. In response,
women continued to emphasize women’s special skills to reform
female prisoners.
Men also were reluctant to allow women to have control over
separate institutions designed only for women, arguing that they
12
The History of Women’s Prisons

did not possess the required skills and that a home for women
ought to also include men. However, the argument that only
women could teach the virtues that so-called “fallen women”
required was persuasive, and the domesticity model was finally
endorsed by male prison officials. By 1891, the APA acknowl-
edged that female staff and management worked efficiently in
Massachusetts and Indiana, and by 1900 the managers of
women’s reformatories had won their fight for female control:
Every officer in these institutions, from the warden down to the
lowest matron, was now a woman.
With these new prisons operated by female staff came female
wardens like Eliza Mosher, who in 1877 joined the women’s refor-
matory in New York as prison doctor. Cases of venereal disease,
insanity, drug addiction, and the birth of illegitimate children
overwhelmed her. In addition, she judged the superintendent of
the institution as too severe in her discipline of the women (there
were an average of ten cases of solitary confinement each day).
Mosher resigned in 1879 but returned within a year, having been
encouraged to accept the position of superintendent. In this role,
Mosher attempted to improve conditions, including showing
respect for the inmates by calling them women rather than girls,
establishing a merit system, and hiring new staff members who
could provide teaching and training. When she resigned in 1882
she was replaced by Clara Barton, who worked for the Red Cross
and who continued Mosher’s strategy of kindness and respect by
giving women open access to her and attempting to deal with
their problems and issues. Barton and Mosher were outstanding
women of their generation in the progress of reform of women’s
prisons. Following in the footsteps of Barton, Ellen Johnson was
appointed as superintendent and adopted an approach that
organized the reformatory around the theme of training for self-
control. She believed that rehabilitation resulted from the control
provided by the prison routine in that it offered a structure for the
women, and from the efforts of the inmates themselves. She
introduced strict discipline but also appealed to the women’s
emotions. Generally, however, women’s reformatories found it
difficult to secure adequate and competent staff.
The standards set for women prisons in the 1870s and 1880s
survived almost intact for the next 100 years, and differential
treatment for women remained a fundamental cornerstone of
women’s treatment in prison until the emergence of a feminist
approach in the 1970s.
Women’s Prison Reform
13

Prison Design: The Cottage System
From the time of their conception, it was considered necessary for
penitentiaries to symbolize incarceration through their physical
structure, and so prison structures were massive and imposing,
reflecting their objectives of isolation, discipline, and order. The
usual design, based on Jeremy Bentham’s panopticon of 1787,
was that of a central building from which radiated wings of long
hallways comprising tiers of cellblocks that could be viewed
without obstruction by the warders. Cells averaged only fifty
square feet, and prisoners were housed in isolation from each
other and moved according to rigid schedules, always maintain-
ing silence.
Reformers of the women’s prisons did not want to duplicate
these features. They instead sought an atmosphere that reflected
the domestic ideals they were attempting to inculcate in the
women prisoners. It is for this reason that many advocated the
cottage system already in use in juvenile reformatories. If this sys-
tem were not achievable for all women’s prisons, women reform-
ers wanted at least a diminution in the strict and rigid discipline
and routine, and amelioration in the style of military discipline
employed. Most male penal officials agreed that prisons designed
purely for women did not need the same system of security and
believed they should be homelike. A good example of the new
style for women was the Massachusetts Reformatory Prison for
Women, established on thirty acres of land thirty miles west of
the city of Boston, suggesting a pastoral setting away from urban
problems and temptations. In place of cells were private rooms
ranging in size from fifty to ninety square feet, with iron bed-
steads and white linens instead of the normal bare cot. If inmates
conducted themselves according to expectations, they were
allowed to decorate their rooms and have their windows
unbarred. In the New York Refuges, also utilizing the cottage
plan, the cottages were fitted out as much as possible like an aver-
age family home, and the cottages were assigned names instead
of numbers to make them appear less like a prison. These institu-
tions also contained chapels, workrooms, libraries, and infir-
maries. Women were permitted to circulate within the public
areas and cultivate the prison gardens. The presence of children
assisted with the domestic atmosphere since at that time children
were permitted to remain in prison with their mothers until the
age of two years.
14
The History of Women’s Prisons

Some women’s prisons did not follow this approach, instead
relying on the traditional massive prison structure with wings
containing rows of rooms. Space was often a problem in both
styles of prison, as was overcrowding, so that women could not
be separated into different offense classes.
Women’s Crimes and Women Prisoners
Each state employed different criteria for determining whether a
woman should be committed to its prisons; for example, the
Indiana prison admitted only those convicted of felonies,
whereas New York concentrated on young miscreants, and the
Massachusetts Reformatory Prison focused on prisoners con-
victed of crimes ranging from “stubbornness” to murder. A con-
sideration of the statistics maintained by several institutions from
their opening until 1910 provides an overview of the female
prison population and reveals that the majority of women were
under the age of twenty-five, white, and native born. Nearly two
thirds had been married at some time, although their family lives
had been erratic, and most had received some formal education.
Most had no previous convictions, but of those who did, the most
common was for drunkenness. In two institutions, New York and
Massachusetts, drunkenness and prostitution accounted for
about half of the female prison population. The typical sentence
was less than two years for a minor offense against public order,
and the average stay was one year.
Based on a sample of inmates analyzed by Eliza Mosher,
there were three classes of offenders. In the first category were
those offending against public order, especially for drunkenness,
who had a high recommitment rate and were generally regarded
as victims and treated sympathetically by the prison staff. The
second category included offenders against chastity, namely pros-
titutes and adulteresses, or lewd and lascivious women. This
group included the “fallen” women to whom prison officials
showed sympathy and regarded as prime candidates for refor-
mation. It also included those committed for what was termed
“stubbornness,” referring to the inability of their relatives to con-
trol their behavior (for example, those who had run away from
home). Only a few members of this group—the professional pros-
titutes—might be termed “criminal,” and most had committed
victimless crimes. In the third category were grouped the most
dangerous offenders—those with crimes against property and
Women’s Prison Reform
15

person. Domestic workers tended to have been convicted of
property offenses, usually petty larceny from employers, and fac-
tory workers committed crimes against other persons. The mem-
bers of this group received the longest sentences and included
habitual or professional criminals.
Retraining Women in Reformatories
Women’s reformatory prisons were intended to retrain women
through their sympathetic female staff, prayer, education, and an
atmosphere of domesticity. Nevertheless, the underlying ration-
ale of prisons—to control people—reasserted itself, and like tra-
ditional prisons, women’s reformatories increasingly relied on
discipline. This naturally gave rise to tensions between discipline
and domesticity.
The kind of training provided to women inmates was varied.
Reformers were keen to have women learn some skills they could
use to secure an income and prevent recidivism for economic rea-
sons. However, at this time, most women who worked in employ-
ment did so in domestic service; thus there was an emphasis on
teaching domestic skills. The kinds of prison industry available to
male prisoners were frequently not made available to women,
and gravitation toward domestic skills was often supplemented
only with outdoor work, such as working on chicken farms and
in vegetable gardens maintained by the prison. In Massachusetts,
a unique scheme indentured women to private employers for
whom they provided domestic services. This was intended to
bring women under the influence of “authentic” family life. Most
of the homes selected were located away from the city of Boston
in semi-rural areas, with the aim of reducing the perceived evil
influence of the city on the indentured women. Most of the
women released in this way completed their service without inci-
dent; in this respect, the scheme resembled a form of parole.
In reformation aimed at women’s characters, the notion of
the ideal woman guided the prison staff. Virtues of purity, domes-
ticity, and piety were those most valued. At the same time, there
was a concern to engender self-sufficiency for women to avoid
recidivism; this approach acknowledged reformers’ concerns
about women’s dependence leading to crime. Staff taught these
values by themselves assuming the role of a loving but strict par-
ent who forgave past errors but insisted on obedience. Spiritual
services were provided by chaplains who visited prisons and
16
The History of Women’s Prisons

wrote letters for those unable to write and conducted daily reli-
gious services. Overall, the domestic strategy offered women a
supportive atmosphere, especially when contrasted with the
hardships of joint incarceration with men.
As mentioned earlier, however, discipline and rules were
also considered of prime importance. This resulted in the banning
of certain perceived unwomanly vices, such as smoking, and
sometimes the prohibition of newspapers other than religious
publications. Ellen Johnson in the New York reformatory disap-
proved of idle unsupervised talk among prisoners and, as a
result, suspended recreation periods, substituting them with spe-
cial events such as spiritual meetings. Johnson’s successor,
Frances Morton, explicitly rejected the kindness approach and cut
out all recreational hours on the basis that they were detrimental
to good order and discipline. Instead, she stressed obedience and
relied more on the principle of establishing total control over the
women’s lives rather than on any notion of sisterhood with the
women inmates.
The merit system placed the burden on the women for main-
taining their status within the prison. When indeterminate sen-
tences were first introduced at the end of the nineteenth century,
merit became paramount in the determination of sentences. As an
incentive to good behavior in prison, reformers had long advo-
cated setting a maximum and minimum range of sentence, but
for women it brought a new source of tension and stress.
Punishments for rule infractions remained severe even in the
reformatories, and solitary confinement and a diet of bread and
water were imposed on women who were disrespectful, talked at
meals, or attempted to escape. Disciplinary sanctions varied
among the facilities, with some maintaining corporal punishment
and using means of restraint such as handcuffs and straitjackets.
Nevertheless, most women’s prisons relied on the merit system to
keep order and maintain control.
It is difficult to reconstruct the experience of prison for
women at that time; most documentation of their experience
comes from prison officials and reformers rather than the women
themselves. Institutional records mostly document favorable
comments from the inmates and according to the records, women
inmates generally complied with prison rules and tried to make
themselves into the dutiful daughters that staff expected. This
process was assisted by the condition of the women when they
arrived at the prison: The women often were already humbled
Women’s Prison Reform
17

and humiliated by their life experiences, including sexual mis-
treatment. On arrival, they were stripped of their identities and in
the process of being classified, they were placed in solitary con-
finement for a time. The complex merit system regulated all
details of their lives, and there is some evidence to suggest that
whatever resistance might have existed gradually gave way in
the face of the overwhelming power of reformatory values, and
the women eventually became passive recipients of whatever
training was imposed on them.
A Progressive Approach, 1900–1920
Social, Economic, and Psychological
Approaches to Women’s Crime
By the end of the nineteenth century, the process of reforming
women’s prisons had reached a point of stagnation. Between 1890
and 1910 the original activist reformers, women like Gibbons,
Coffin, and Chace, died, and the women who took their places
were officials and part of the system rather than agitators and
activists from outside it. Within a decade, however, a new spirit
came to invigorate the reform movement. The new generation of
reformers did not necessarily accept the philosophies of its pred-
ecessors, and at the same time, the newly established discipline of
criminology was questioning criminality generally and empha-
sizing not the ideals of womanhood, but the social and economic
backgrounds of women implicated in crime. The new reformers
were exceptionally well educated, many having attended
women’s colleges and earned advanced degrees. This was espe-
cially true after the 1890s, when the University of Chicago first
admitted women as graduate students. Having been trained in
social science, social work, law, and medicine, these new women
reformers placed less reliance on religion and the conversion of
“fallen” women. Instead, they viewed the women prisoners more
in terms of professional clients or research subjects. It was during
this period that innovations in penology brought in new preven-
tive social services, as well as probation and specialized courts,
such as those for juveniles.
The new criminologists were interested in establishing a sci-
entific basis for crime; they focused less on emotion and character
and more on amassing and analyzing data concerning crime and
18
The History of Women’s Prisons

criminals. Physical and mental factors were thought to be impli-
cated in criminal activity, and intelligence tests were used as tools
for assessing criminality. The new women reformers were able to
gain access to the captive prison population of women to test their
theories and to collect data. Some institutions, like Bedford Hills in
New York, established positions for psychologists and set up clin-
ics and laboratories to study the inmates and generate data. The
new science of psychology gave impetus to the diagnosis of
women as psychotic or psychopathic, and to a notion of specialist
treatment for those with psychological problems. Inevitably, this
had an effect on prison programs and training regimes. As well as
the psychological approach, researchers and criminologists began
to focus on the economic context of crime, asserting, for example,
that social forces played a major role in female crime, including
the channeling of women into prostitution.
Seventeen women’s reformatories came into being during
the Progressive period and in the years immediately after it, with
reformatory construction concentrated in the Northeast and
Midwest. Reformers emphasized the need to rescue women from
local jails and state prisons as well as the need to protect society,
an issue usually expressed in terms of their preoccupation with
prostitution and venereal disease. In fact, campaigns for women’s
reformatories were allied to campaigns against prostitution, so
that the former was seen as a solution to the latter.
Preventive Approaches
Having identified the causes of women’s crime as social and eco-
nomic rather than bad character and moral sin, the new reform-
ers did not see prison as a solution to those issues. In addition, the
new reformers rejected the notion of women having a separate
sphere from men and did not subscribe to the traditional refor-
matory goals. As a result of these new approaches, the new prison
superintendents adopted a strategy of more sophisticated classi-
fication systems for inmates and more education and diversified
training so as to better equip women to deal with their economic
issues after release. Around 1910, widespread concern about
prostitution came to a head and facilitated the expansion of
women’s prison reform. In contrast to the earlier reformers, who
had stressed the redemption of “fallen” women, the new reform-
ers concentrated their efforts on preventing their “falling” at all.
New women’s organizations reached out to women already
A Progressive Approach, 1900–1920
19

involved in prostitution and to those in danger of becoming
involved, as preventive services. A closely related development
was the recruitment of women police. Between 1910 and 1925,
over 150 cities appointed female police officers whose duties cen-
tered on the protection of women and children. Now the
Women’s Prison Association (WPA) urged probation or fines for
convicted women rather than imprisonment, and women’s courts
were set up in some states mainly to provide a more dignified
arena for trying morality cases.
Anti-Institutional Approach
These experiments outside the prison were aimed at the social
causes of crime and helped to instill an anti-institutional outlook
for women’s prisons. Katherine Bement Davis and Jessie
Donaldson Hodder in New York and Massachusetts, respectively,
pursued this strategy. They attempted to follow two lines of inno-
vation: to emphasize the cottage system and break down the
institutionalism of prison in that way; and to expand training and
reduce the emphasis on domesticity to include nontraditional
work and training. Davis became the first superintendent of
Bedford Hills, which opened in 1901. It was located on 200 acres
in rural Westchester County, had no fences around it, and was
modeled on the cottage plan. Each cottage had a flower garden, a
kitchen with good linen and china, and single furnished rooms
for the inmates that they could decorate as they pleased. Davis
wanted her residents to learn about the law, not as something
abstract, but as a factor in their lives, and she began a series of
talks on the law, democracy, and civics. She also believed that an
essential aim of prison ought to be early release on parole and
that this emphasis required different training methods. She hired
academic instructors in addition to providing vocational training
such as carpentry, bookbinding, and painting. In spite of these
efforts, women released from prison continued to find themselves
in domestic positions because the opportunities available to them
in other forms of employment were still limited. Davis also
focused on the physical well-being of women inmates and intro-
duced outside recreation in open areas, exercise, gardening, and
farming.
Like Davis, Hodder brought innovation to women’s prisons,
though she focused on the nature of the institution as adverse to
the interests of the prisoners. She went so far as to seek a special
20
The History of Women’s Prisons

state appropriation to fund a new building; if this was not possi-
ble, she recommended the building be abandoned. Her goal was
to change the women’s prison to an industrial training institute
for women and to make the reformatory a laboratory for the
study of criminology, but her requests for funding were frus-
trated. She was able to achieve limited success in diversifying
training, in organizing physical fitness classes, and in introducing
training in farming. The influence of Hodder and Davis was felt
in other new institutions, such as the women’s prison in New
Jersey, opened in 1910, which adopted an anti-institutional struc-
ture from the outset, using the cottage plan with specialized cot-
tages and introducing inmate self-government in 1914.
Although these reforms broke down the domestic pattern of
institutions and allowed women more freedom and opportunity
to learn useful things, they did not succeed in fulfilling the
reformers’ aim of fostering self-sufficiency for women so that
they could live outside the institution without dependency. In
some states, reforms were not adopted at all, and in the case of
Bedford Hills, Davis noted that because of its good reputation, it
was increasingly used as a dumping ground by the New York
courts for the most difficult cases, including the mentally defec-
tive, drug addicts, and those suffering from sexual disease. This
resulted in serious overcrowding, adding to tensions within the
institution, so that by 1915 Bedford Hills held 100 more inmates
than its capacity. By 1919 the inmate population at Bedford Hills
was composed mainly of recidivists, and it ceased to be the show-
case institution that Davis had struggled to establish. Finally, in
1921 the state appointed a male superintendent.
The Period after 1920
Regional Differences
By the end of the reformatory movement in the early 1930s,
regional differences were apparent in the women’s prison system
reflective of the reformatory movement’s impact in those regions.
In the Northeast, where the movement had been strongest, every
state except New Hampshire and Vermont had a reformatory, and
they tended to exclude custodial aspects to a greater extent than
reformatories in other states. In the Midwest, seven states had
established reformatories, but four did not set up reformatories at
all, and reformatories there generally failed to exhibit a high
The Period after 1920
21

degree of zeal for reform. The South established only a few refor-
matories and produced only weak institutions. In the West, the
only women’s reformatory was located in California; it consti-
tuted that state’s sole prison for women until the 1960s. Generally,
most states continued to hold women in male prisons. For many
states, and for the reformatories themselves, funding was the
major problem. States could not afford to finance the reformatory
plan, and reformatories needed substantial secured funding to
operate their institutions. The reformatory was an expensive and
inefficient operation ideally requiring a number of cottages, each
with its own cooking and dining facilities and staff, a chapel,
classrooms, administrative quarters, staff accommodation, a farm
with buildings for animals, and so on. No other adult penal insti-
tutions demanded such resources.
Separate women’s prisons had been generally accepted by
the end of World War I and were considered useful in enforcing
social control both during and after the war, when many women
were imprisoned for prostitution. This necessitated a new build-
ing program for women prisons, most of which abandoned the
reform aims and instead focused on custody and detention. The
first federal women’s prison was opened in 1927, the initial impe-
tus for it being the increase in the number of women imprisoned
for federal offenses in the years after World War I, after laws were
passed outlawing narcotics, the prohibition of alcohol consump-
tion, and the federalizing of automobile theft. It was located in
West Virginia on a 500-acre cottage-style campus. By 1940,
twenty-three states had established separate women’s prisons,
but by 1975, sixteen states still lacked such prisons. Despite efforts
for change, the training offered in women’s prisons remained sex-
ually stereotyped as vocational training schemes were rejected in
favor of traditionally feminine skills.
The Demise of the Reformatory
In nearly all the early reformatories, an initial period with a small
population of inmates and good relations between staff and pris-
oners was replaced with overcrowding and rising tensions.
Prisoners flooded in when judges were willing to send petty
offenders to reformatories, parole failures began to accumulate,
and ultimately, administrators began to blame inmates for the
failure of the reformatory ideal. By the 1930s, felons made up a
significant proportion of the inmate population at reformatories.
22
The History of Women’s Prisons

At about the same time, many states elected to close down
women’s units attached to men’s prisons and to transfer their
populations to reformatories, with the effect that women’s refor-
matories ceased to exist in all but name. For example, the
women’s unit at the New Jersey state prison in Trenton was
closed down in 1929 and the inmates were relocated to the refor-
matory at Clinton Farms. In the same year the Ohio Reformatory
was redesignated as an institution for felons only, and petty
female offenders were excluded from the state’s prison system
altogether. Consequently, in state after state the original reforma-
tory inmate population of petty offenders was either diluted by
the intake of felons or pushed out altogether and sentenced there-
after to local jails. In effect, the criminal justice system returned to
the practice that had existed before the reformatory movement.
The crash of the stock market in 1929 and the ensuing Great
Depression also played a major role in the demise of reformato-
ries. Quite simply, states could not afford to continue to hold
petty offenders for these lengths of time. As the male prison pop-
ulation increased, wardens in those prisons pressed for more
space for prisoners, provoking decisions to close down female
units and transfer those female populations to reformatories so
the space could be made available for male inmates. The
Progressive movement also ended, shattered by World War I and
the subsequent move toward a conservative philosophy in penal
matters. The reformatory movement essentially had nowhere else
to go—it had sustained itself for some sixty years and, for the
most part, had achieved its goal of separate prisons for women.
Custodial Prisons for Women,
1870–1935
Concurrent with the reformatory movement, women’s prison
units of the custodial type continued to develop separately
throughout the country. Even after the advent of the reformatory
system, custodial women’s prisons became more numerous, and
in the South and West particularly, they shaped the nature of
women’s imprisonment. They were populated by felons rather
than petty offenders, and therefore did not attract the attention of
reformers. They continued along the lines laid down in the nine-
teenth century, slowly growing and sometimes developing into
Custodial Prisons for Women, 1870–1935
23

separate prisons for women. During the period 1870–1935, three
kinds of state-run custodial prisons existed: units attached to
male prisons, prison farm camps in the South, and independent
prisons that were nonreformatory in style. Of the three kinds, the
unit attached to a male prison was the most common.
Women in these custodial prisons, many of which were old
and dilapidated, suffered extreme neglect along with overcrowd-
ing. The women were not a visible inmate population and were
often left by the warden to the charge of low-level staff. Women
held in units attached to male prisons were often transferred,
sometimes being shifted to larger quarters; for example, in 1926
Missouri transferred its convicts to a nearby farm. Work pro-
grams were common in these prisons, but most prisons offered no
other training or education programs, their aim being nothing
more than to keep the women in custody and keep them busy.
Reliance on the custodial model varied regionally. Female
prisoners in the Northeast and Midwest were more likely to be
sent to reformatories, whereas in the South, the custodial model
dominated. In many respects the South represented the worst in
women’s custodial units because there was a disregard for
inmates’ health and a failure to provide programs or to protect
inmates from violence. Female inmates were charged with hard
labor, mainly in laundries and clothing factories. In addition, pris-
ons in the South lacked proper sanitary facilities and were fre-
quently overcrowded, and medical attention was only available
for the most serious cases. In the West, little attention was paid to
systematic penal development until well into the twentieth cen-
tury. Outside of California, the Western states incarcerated their
women inmates in, or close to, their male penitentiaries.
Between 1876 and 1909, the Arizona Territorial Prison at
Yuma housed both men and women in conditions that reflected
the discomforts of the frontier at the time (Jeffrey 1969, 13). Of the
3,000 prisoners housed at Yuma during this period, only 1 percent
were women, but, according to Jeffrey, the women prisoners were
the source of as much trouble and received more publicity than
the male inmates. Reportedly, all superintendents at Yuma found
the women to be a “terrible nuisance” in a men’s prison (1969, 74).
The situation at Yuma was paralleled in California between
1910 and 1933, when female prisoners were housed in male pris-
ons at San Quentin and Folsom (Bookspan 1991). In fact, in
California, legislation enacted as early as 1851 provided for
female prisoners to have a separate building from male prisoners
24
The History of Women’s Prisons

to avoid sexual contact between them, but it was not until 1933
that the growing number of women convicts led to the establish-
ment of a separate California Institution for Women near
Tehachapi (1991, 69). As was often the case when women prison-
ers were housed in men’s prisons, efforts were made to gain early
pardons and paroles for the women. For example, the first
woman convict entered the Missouri Penitentiary in 1842, and as
early as 1844 a citizen’s petition asked for her release on the
ground that she had just given birth in the prison. With winter
approaching and no separate women’s wing available in the pen-
itentiary as well as no heating in the men’s cells, a pardon seemed
the only solution and was accordingly granted by the governor
(Butler 1997, 78).
The California State Prison at San Quentin was originally
designed to contain nine cells for women in a building separate
from the men; however, the few female convicts sentenced there
during the 1850s were not kept separate in their activities from
the male inmates (Bookspan 1991, 70). There were reports that at
least one guard regularly slept with a female prisoner and that a
guard captain had sexual relations with a female inmate. Despite
detailed reports from prison superintendents and others, no men-
tion was made in such reports or other published documents of
the small group of female prisoners at Folsom Prison, California,
where the first female inmate arrived in 1885 (Bookspan 1991, 72).
At San Quentin, a journalist visiting the prison in 1867 reported
on the conditions of the three women he found there at the time
of his visit, noting that they were confined away from the men
and left their quarters only on Sundays, when the men were
attending church services (73). Apparently the women received
better food than the male inmates because it was issued from the
officer’s mess. However, the women were kept idle, and there
was no matron to supervise them. Another journalist, reporting in
1888, noted that the women prisoners were idle and that due to
their long sentences and lack of activity, he believed they would
be totally unable to make an “honest living” after release (73). The
neglect shown in California to its female prisoners in the nine-
teenth century was reflected elsewhere in the West since many
states built no facilities for women at all during the nineteenth
century and through most of the twentieth. In fact, as late as the
early 1970s, Idaho was still contracting with Oregon to house its
female convicts, and Montana and North and South Dakota were
contracting with Nebraska (73).
Custodial Prisons for Women, 1870–1935
25

At San Quentin Prison the women’s quarters comprised a
“bear pit” fifty feet by ninety feet in dimension with a cell build-
ing forty feet by twenty feet taking up the middle of the space.
The women’s activities were located in the perimeter of this
space, but the women were never allowed out for exercise or air
in case they might communicate with the men (Bookspan 1991,
75). In 1919 legislation was passed in California to establish the
California Industrial Farm for Women at Sonoma. This institution
was located on 645 acres, of which no more than thirty were
arable. It was not until 1922 that Sonoma Farm received its first
inmates from county jails and San Quentin, but in 1923 the main
building was burnt down and the legislature declined to provide
funds to rebuild (79).
At San Quentin, overcrowding in the women’s quarters at
the end of World War I brought a sudden increase in the inmate
population, so that the numbers increased from thirty-four in
1921 to fifty-one in 1923 (81). Women reformers in California had
by 1925 successfully gained an appropriation for a new separate
women’s building at San Quentin. It was to be a three-story con-
struction housing 120 prisoners, located outside the main prison
wall and completely separate from the men’s facilities. This build-
ing was completed in late 1927, by which time 127 women
inmates were relocated there and were occupied in manufactur-
ing flags for use at government offices throughout the state.
Engaged in this traditionally female activity, the women were
expected to gain a sense of pride that would bring about their ref-
ormation (Bookspan 1991, 82). As well as tending to a fully
equipped laundry, the women busied themselves with house-
keeping and food preserving and contributed to what was con-
sidered by the administrators to be an outstanding model of
domestic efficiency. However, the state appropriated no funds for
teachers for the women prisoners, and programs offered by the
women’s department depended on there being instructors avail-
able among the inmates themselves. Thus, for example, inmates
taught the nursing course and typing and stenography, and an
inmate beautician gave instruction in cosmetology. Neither the
teachers nor the students received any financial compensation.
Although these improvements for the women prisoners at
San Quentin were welcomed, they did not fundamentally shift
the focus of male neglect of female prisoners (Bookspan 1991, 83),
and the goal of women prison reformers in California remained
one of achieving a separate reformatory for women administered
26
The History of Women’s Prisons

by women correctional officers. In 1929 the state passed legisla-
tion to establish a separate institution for women, and a 1,600-
acre site was purchased in the Cummings Valley of the Tehachapi
Mountains. This prison, according to its board of trustees, was
not intended to be punitive but corrective, modeled after the fed-
eral prison for women at Alderson, West Virginia (86). At this
prison, the cells were really private rooms (ten feet by eight feet),
colorfully painted, which the inmates were permitted to decorate
and personalize. The initial male administrators of the California
Institute for Women showed no interest in pursuing the educa-
tion and training programs the board of trustees had envisaged
for the institution. However, after the appointment of a female
warden in 1934 and the creation of a board of trustees composed
entirely of women, women were permitted to be treated differ-
ently than similarly convicted men (91).
In Wyoming, the Territorial Penitentiary opened in 1873 and
housed both male and some female inmates despite its longtime
lack of cells or toilet facilities for women (Butler 1997, 65). The
first female convict was admitted in January 1873 and was
housed in the female department, an airy room on the second
floor in the southwest corner of the prison. The room was barely
furnished and included two beds with straw-filled mattresses
and night stands (Brown 2001, 26–27). The prison regime required
all prisoners to rise at 5:30 A.M. Monday through Saturday and
clean their cells before being called to breakfast. Dinner was eaten
at noon, followed by rest or exercise; supper was at 6 P.M.; and
prisoners were back in their cells by 7 P.M. On Sundays, prisoners
were allowed thirty additional minutes of sleep and an additional
half hour to clean their cells. The first female inmate apparently
refused to “keep quiet” and was locked away in the “dark cell.”
This cell could be sealed against the light by closing a small eye-
level port through which bread and water could be passed. There
were strict rules against prisoner communications; violation
would result in confinement in the dark cell for twenty-five con-
secutive hours. In another case, a female inmate was caught writ-
ing notes and in possession of “unauthorized lead pencils” and
was locked in her cell and given nothing but bread and water
from 9 A.M. that day until 4 P.M. two days later (110).
The Wyoming State Penitentiary succeeded the Wyoming
Territorial Penitentiary in 1901. Women were now housed in a
chamber fifteen feet by eighteen feet in dimension that contained
three individual cells. Authorities allowed the women prisoners
Custodial Prisons for Women, 1870–1935
27

to wear whatever clothes friends and relatives provided. Unlike
the men who worked in the prison factory, labored in the fields,
and tended livestock, the women were confined to their ward
where they ate, mended, washed clothes, and slept. Any frater-
nization with male inmates was severely punished and might
result in loss of “good time” as well as in confinement in the dark
cell (Brown 2001, 122).
In Illinois during the nineteenth century female prisoners
were incarcerated in men’s prisons at Alton, Joliet, and Chester.
As the numbers of women in prison increased, prison adminis-
trators were confronted with the problem of managing the female
prisoners within a male institution. In 1896 a separate women’s
prison was established at Joliet across the street from the male
prison (Dodge 1999). In Illinois between 1831 and 1859, only fifty-
nine women were incarcerated, in contrast to over 3,000 men. The
first penitentiary in Illinois was located at Alton in 1830, and at its
highest capacity in 1858 it confined over 600 men and one dozen
women. This prison and its convict body was leased out for an
annual sum, and the lessee was responsible for providing for the
physical and medical needs of the convicts. In exchange, he
received any profits he might earn from using or contracting out
their labor (Dodge 1999, 3). After 1867, the state took over man-
agement of prisons but continued leasing out convict labor to pri-
vate contractors.
Prison reformer Dorothea Dix inspected the conditions at
Alton and condemned them, noting that the site of the prison was
so uneven that the walls were continually falling down while
rainstorms caused rivers of mud to flow through the basements
of the buildings. Standard features of prisons of the time—a
prison yard for exercise, hospital, chapel, and library—did not
exist, and no chaplain or even Bibles were available.
Not until 1842 was the presence of women at Alton publicly
noted. In their biannual report, the Committee on the
Penitentiary noted that two female convicts were being housed in
the cookhouse in the daytime and in the cellar at night (Dodge
1999, 4). The prison inspectors were perturbed by the warden’s
decision to house females alongside men and wanted a female
department because of the impropriety of confining them in cells
adjoining male prisoners and of employing them in the same
shops with the male prisoners (Dodge 1999, 4). However, a
female department, separate from the men’s prison, was not
approved during the 1840s. This may have been connected to the
28
The History of Women’s Prisons

perceived inability of women convicts to reform. Over one half of
the female inmates at Alton were foreign-born immigrant
women, mainly Irish, though after 1890 African American
women constituted the majority of the female population. A large
number had worked as domestic servants and later been con-
victed of larceny, and others were professional shoplifters and
prostitutes who had robbed their clients (5).
It was not until the 1850s that women became a constant
presence in the Alton prison, with an average of six women out of
a daily population of 300 to 600 men. Finally, in 1852 a two-story
hospital building containing six cells and workrooms was con-
verted into a female department. The prison inspectors were not
only concerned about the propriety of housing men with women
but also warned of the “pernicious” influence of the women on
the good order of the men. In 1845 they wrote that “one female
prisoner is of more trouble than twenty males,” and over the next
thirty years it was women who were identified as the focus of dis-
ruption in the prison in all official reports (Dodge 1999, 6).
Why were women considered a source and cause of disrup-
tion? Clearly prison administrators and guards were frustrated in
their efforts to manage and control the women who required
additional supervision. One researcher has argued that the per-
ceived disturbance by women was the outcome of middle-class
expectations of feminine behavior so that foul language, drunk-
enness, and immodesty were viewed as being far more disruptive
when displayed by female convicts (Dodge 1999, 6). Another
cause of frustration was the women prisoners’ demand to be
treated as individuals and to receive individual care and treat-
ment. The issue of threats or punishments that might be imposed
on women prisoners was also problematic, and the official disci-
pline reports show that female convicts were not flogged, that
being the standard punishment for male convicts. In fact, it was
only in the 1870s, when women were separated in isolated attic
quarters and supervised by a female matron, that prison admin-
istrators believed they had them under control (7).
One issue concerning women’s imprisonment was what
should be done with pregnant women. In 1855 prison inspectors
at Alton noted that the prison had no hospital or nurse, and no
official policy was developed for dealing with pregnancies despite
a committee recommendation in 1857 that all pregnant female
prisoners should be immediately released (Dodge 1999, 8). As an
alternative to this proposal, a new warden wanted a nursery
Custodial Prisons for Women, 1870–1935
29

established within the prison, but in the end a policy evolved in
which pregnant women prisoners were pardoned and released.
After 1860, the existence of pregnant women was no longer men-
tioned in prison reports, suggesting that such women were being
pardoned and released as policy dictated.
Pardoning women prisoners, and some men, seems to have
been a common practice in the 1850s, and at Alton nearly one half
of the women and almost a quarter of the men were pardoned
and served less than their full sentences. At that time, the average
sentence for women was 1.6 years and the average time a woman
served in prison was less than a year. Many pardon petitions
were supported by the same lawyers and judges who convicted
the women and by members of the community who had previ-
ously shown no interest in their cases. In one case, a judge in
Chicago told the governor that he had misjudged a woman’s case,
explaining that he had imposed the maximum sentence of six
years for larceny, believing her to be a professional thief (Dodge
1999, 9). Now however, he believed that she had stolen only out
of desperation and to support her children. She was granted a
pardon. The pardon files show how women who had been unsuc-
cessful at avoiding conviction were able to present new evidence
and convince officials that their case had mitigating circum-
stances. Such circumstances included those of the crime itself,
pregnancy, illness, good conduct in prison, and age. However,
after 1860 the rate of granting pardons declined; the rate specifi-
cally for women decreased from 46 percent in the 1850s to 15 per-
cent in the 1870s, stabilizing at only 5 percent through 1910 (10).
This decrease reflected the development of systems allowing for
good time and parole but may also have been an indication of
hardened attitudes toward female offenders—by that time,
longer sentences were being imposed on women, with average
sentences of seven years being awarded in the 1860s and sixteen
years in the 1870s.
Joliet Prison in Illinois housed approximately 700 women
between 1860 and 1896, when a separate women’s unit was built
(Dodge 1999, 10). The original design of Joliet provided a 100-cell
internal female prison located within the main prison yard with
its own surrounding wall. The women’s prison was two stories
with fifty cells on each floor and was adjacent to a large two-story
building known as “the female workshop.” The women were
completely isolated from the male population by the surrounding
wall, a segregation that seemed a suitable arrangement to prison
30
The History of Women’s Prisons

officials. However, a list of prison rules in 1861 specified that no
male guard would be permitted to converse with any woman
prisoner, which suggests that the segregation was not as absolute
as it appeared. During the early years at Joliet, the warden’s wife
may have supervised female prisoners, but after 1869 a female
matron was employed. The state abolished the lease system at
Joliet in 1867, and the following year, the new warden recom-
mended the construction of a female unit to be located completely
outside of the male prison enclosure. In line with complaints at
Alton Prison, the warden wrote that the female department
required extra care and attention and was a great annoyance to
the management. The chaplain agreed with the warden that “no
degree of vigilance secures the great mass of prisoners from the
pernicious influence of these females” (Dodge 1999, 12). Signif-
icantly, it was the women prisoners who were perceived to be the
agents of depravity and not the male inmates. In 1870, the female
prisoners were removed from the prison and relocated in the
fourth-story of the warden’s house. The chaplain reported that
while this move was to be applauded, the best solution was still
to remove them entirely.
As was the case at Alton Prison, the proportion of African
American prisoners at Joliet increased concurrent with a decline
in Irish and foreign-born prisoners (Dodge 1999, 13). In the 1850s
African American women made up only 2 percent of prison com-
mitments in Illinois, but in the years after the Civil War they con-
stituted 25 percent of all commitments even though they made up
only 1.1 percent of the state’s population. It seems that most of
these black women prisoners were former slaves who had
recently entered the state, and nearly half of them were teenagers
sentenced along with two or three others, suggesting that groups
of black migrants were coming under increased surveillance.
In 1896 a separate Joliet women’s prison was constructed.
The women spent their time under a regime of strict silence,
doing contract knitting and light manufacturing as well as mend-
ing and sewing for the male convicts and guards. One prison
photographer described the women as sitting facing their win-
dows all day long with “great piles of stockings in their laps” (14).
He reported that “the women keep their eyes bent on their work”
and that the work was “monotonous” and “a dreary routine”
(Dodge 1999, 14).
When Illinois’s third prison was constructed in Chester in
1878 the architectural plans called for the construction of a female
Custodial Prisons for Women, 1890–1935
31

department similar to that in Joliet, located inside the male prison
and surrounded by a high stone wall. However, the female
department was never constructed, and the few female prisoners
were kept in a cellar at night under one of the workhouses,
employed in making clothing for the male convicts. In 1882 the
prison commissioners recommended a separate female prison be
constructed, but this was ignored, and in 1884 the female prison-
ers were relocated to the warden’s house and a matron engaged
to supervise them. The warden at the time calculated that using
two knitting machines, the female convicts had produced some
4,800 pairs of socks for the male convicts; had made underclothes,
coats, and pants for the guards; and performed all the laundry
work in the warden’s house (Dodge 1999, 15). As at Joliet, the
main concern of the prison administrators was the profitability of
the women prisoners, not their care and treatment. In similar
fashion in 1887, the state assembly resolved that the commission-
ers at Chester should remove the female convicts to Joliet to save
expenses and secure economy.
In Texas, women prison reformers working during the
period 1918 to 1930 sought to advance a program that would
rehabilitate convicted felons and ensure that women had more
say in prison reform and administration (Lucko 1990). In 1918 the
Texas prison system contained a penitentiary housing about 400
prisoners, male and female, at Huntsville, but of the vast major-
ity of the inmates, some 3,750 were located on fifteen farms
owned or leased by the state. In 1874 the warden of Huntsville,
Colonel A. J. Ward, allowed men and women to share bunk
houses, where naked unwashed inmates slept on corncob sacks,
and where women inmates roamed the yard carrying their infant
children conceived and born inside the prison (Butler 1997,
135–137). Ward and his staff imposed many forms of punishment
on the prisoners including beatings, hanging women in the stocks
so the tips of their toes barely met the ground, and forcing them
to ride “the wooden horse,” which consisted of a pick-ax handle
embedded into an upright post that the prisoner had to mount
and sit astride while her ankles were fastened to rings embedded
in the ground and her head tied to the post. Prisoners were forced
to dangle on this wooden horse without moving and typically
passed out (136). In 1910, African American women at Huntsville
spoke of routine punishment by the lash.
The Texas prison farms were run as plantations using gang
labor to raise cotton, sugar cane, and other crops in an attempt to
32
The History of Women’s Prisons

make the prison system self-supporting (Lucko 1990, 4). Condi-
tions on the farms were horrendous, including crowded and
dilapidated housing with filthy bedding covered with vermin
and insects. At one farm, guards often hung prisoners from
chains in a manner that left their toes barely touching the ground.
Employees routinely beat prisoners and allowed prison dogs to
attack them. State law permitted prisoners to be whipped with a
leather strap or bat.
In response, women prison reformers in the Texas Federation
of Women’s Clubs demanded humane treatment of all state con-
victs and asked that the governor appoint a woman to the Board
of Prison Commissioners and that women have exclusive control
over female prisoners. The women reformers wanted to rehabili-
tate criminals rather than hold continual investigations that
exposed awful prison conditions but offered no solutions (6).
Beginning in 1921, women reformers in Texas assisted in abrogat-
ing a proposed contract between the prison system and a private
manufacturer for the purchase of garments produced at Hunts-
ville and supported a ban against chaining prisoners (Lucko 1990,
10). In 1926, Elizabeth Speer was appointed executive secretary to
the Texas Prison Board, giving women reformers an influential
voice in the prison system. From 1927 to 1929, the board under
Speer’s leadership attempted to implement reforms that would
limit corporal punishment, discourage the mistreatment of pris-
oners, and encourage education in prisons. Despite these
attempts, the Texas prison system remained dependent on its
plantation farms and continued to use brutal forms of discipline
(13). By 1947 a campaign by the Texas State Council of Methodist
Women brought about improvements in prison facilities, and in
1972, a prisoner’s lawsuit resulted in the 1980 Ruiz v. Estelle rul-
ing that required a substantial transformation in the state’s penal
policies (14). In effect, therefore, the federal judiciary brought
about the alternative correctional policies advocated fifty years
earlier by the women reformers.
In the 1860s, male and female prisoners in Arkansas were
required to share cells and common waste buckets. Nevada’s
prison system got underway in 1862, but five years later the
prison site had no water supply for bathing and no wall of any
substance around the property (Butler 1997, 65). In Missouri,
there was no intent to incarcerate women with the men in the
penitentiary and so no female quarters were included in the
building. In the end, an area designated as a female department
Custodial Prisons for Women, 1890–1935
33

was considered so inadequate that wardens agitated for it to be
abolished (66). In Kansas, the correctional authorities had no state
female facility and incarcerated women convicts in the men’s
penitentiary. By 1883 its administrators had formulated rules and
regulations for the management of those female prisoners.
During an investigation into punishments at the Kansas State
Penitentiary, matrons of the female ward reported that as late as
1910 guards routinely used strait jackets, handcuffs, and gags as
punishments for female inmates and that one warden had rings
placed in the walls of the female ward so that prisoners’ arms
could be extended as a form of punishment (Butler 1997, 137).
Ultimately, in 1916 Kansas, under pressure to reform, transferred
the female inmates to an old house about one mile from the pen-
itentiary, where the women stayed until the opening of a female
industrial farm in 1917 (Butler 1997, 66).
In the West generally, women were never easily accommo-
dated within the structure of any prison and were always greatly
outnumbered by male inmates. The majority of women impris-
oned in the West had committed crimes against property that
were minor in nature and might better have been accommodated
in a local jail (Butler 1997, 99). Nevertheless, women were sent to
penitentiaries for minor and nonviolent crimes. Vice charges
brought against women could also result in incarceration, espe-
cially if women crossed racial lines. For example, in 1881 Sallie
Wheeler, an African American mother with four young children
who was the only support for her family, was fined $250 after a
conviction for fornication with a white man (102). Unable to pay
a fine of that magnitude, she remained incarcerated until officials
directed her release to care for her children. In the case of Ella
Anderson, a Texas prisoner convicted of adultery with a white
man and sentenced to a convict labor camp to work off a fine of
$300, the camp contractor had fixed the female convict labor rate
at $30 a year, leaving her facing a ten-year sentence for adultery
(102). Her partner in crime was more fortunate, serving only five
years because the contractor priced male convict labor at $60 per
year.
Incarcerated women in the West encountered considerable
violence in the male penitentiaries, beginning with their transport
there. For male prisoners, the transportation routine involved a
group of convicts being bound around the neck, wrists, and
ankles and from waist to feet, forming a human chain and hob-
bling along in line escorted by deputies (Butler 1997, 133). Women
34
The History of Women’s Prisons

were treated in much the same way and on intake were stripped
naked for guards or male trustees to examine their bodies. Jailors
would record every physical feature of a female prisoner includ-
ing height and weight, body scars, and detailed descriptions of
complexion, eyes, ears, and nose. Although not a standard
requirement for women, one humiliating procedure used some-
times was the threat of head shaving, a routine practice for male
inmates (134). As the women moved into the inner prison, they
continued to wear civilian dress, although some prisons required
the women to wear a regulation striped skirt with apron. Women
laborers at the Texas farm camps were barefoot and obliged to
wear skimpy shifts.
Prison Farm Camps in the South
Some Southern states adopted the practice of leasing female con-
victs out to individually owned farms to work or to publicly
owned prison farms. In the beginning, these camp arrangements
were ad hoc solutions to the problem of coping with a multitude
of prisoners in the aftermath of the Civil War. For example, the
state penitentiary might have been destroyed during the war, and
if it still stood, was incapable of accommodating the enormous
number of African Americans sentenced to hard labor for petty
offenses after the war. In effect, penal servitude substituted for
slavery.
As mentioned earlier, in Texas at the turn of the century,
female convicts were sent to a private farm about seven miles from
the main state prison at Huntsville. The farm owner provided
food and clothing for the female inmates and each year paid the
state for their labor. Usually, black women worked in the fields,
and white women served as domestics. As might be expected in a
camp arrangement, living quarters were primitive and there were
no medical facilities. In post–Civil War Georgia, female prisoners
were leased out; legislative investigators subsequently found
women chained to men and occupying the same bunks, and they
revealed instances where the farm lessee had whipped women.
There is no doubt that the farm solution to the prison popu-
lation marked a low point in penology for both women and men.
Convicts sent to farms were required to work long hours in the
fields and maintain a set pace of work, and they were subjected to
the use of the strap or to harassment by guards and their dogs if
they lapsed in their efforts. Unlike administrators in the northern
Custodial Prisons for Women, 1890–1935
35

states, those in the South were uninterested in treating or rehabil-
itating inmates. Rather, their overriding concern was to exploit
the labor that prisoners represented for reward. In line with the
philosophy of slavery that had so recently shaped life in the
South, it seemed natural to many officials to transfer to the prison
system the techniques that had been employed in the system of
slavery.
Independent Prisons for Women
During the period 1870–1935, six independent custodial-style
prisons were established for women: Four operated in reforma-
tory states and received women considered unsuitable for the
reformatories, and two were the only female prison in the state.
Although independent given their separation from men’s prisons
or by legislative act, they did not enjoy the freedom in penal mat-
ters that the reformatories did and were closer in style to the cus-
todial women’s units attached to male prisons. Most were erected
at minimal cost and for reasons of administrative convenience
and certainly not with reform in mind. Establishing these inde-
pendent prisons in the custodial style meant little more than
renaming an already existing institution, usually one considered
no longer suitable for male convicts. In these prisons, women
received treatment much like that accorded to men in male pris-
ons. However, unlike the men’s prisons these institutions seldom
employed a full-time physician, chaplain, or teacher and pro-
vided fewer programs for inmates. Matrons headed these prisons
but were subject to the direction of male administrators in the cor-
rectional system.
In only one case—that of the State Farm for Women at Valatie
in New York—did this pattern vary. Farm administrators
attempted to found a new type of custodial unit for older women
who were repeat but petty offenders and were assigned to the
farm rather than being sent to local jails. The Valatie Farm con-
tained 315 acres and housed about sixty inmates in two cottages.
The founding legislation required that all officers at the farm
would be female, but an exception was made when the nature of
the work was said to necessitate the employment of men. This
was interpreted to mean that the warden should be a man. All
sentences served at the farm were indeterminate, with a maxi-
mum of three years, but the farm received a total of only 146
inmates, most of whom were between the ages of thirty and sixty
36
The History of Women’s Prisons

at the time of commitment, white, and native born; most had been
convicted of drunkenness. There was little employment for the
women save some farming and sewing, and funds were always
short. By 1918 the farm had been turned over to the health
authorities for use as a treatment center for women suffering from
venereal disease, and all remaining inmates were paroled.
Race and Racism in State Prisons
Holding Women, 1865–1935
Before 1865, black women were imprisoned in the Northeast and
Midwest in numbers far out of proportion to their representation
in the general populations of these regions. In the South, how-
ever, few blacks, whether male or female, were held in state pris-
ons before the Civil War because it was the responsibility of
owners to discipline slaves and only freed blacks were eligible for
public punishment. After the Civil War, racism continued to influ-
ence prisoner populations, and the proportion of blacks in prison,
male and female, increased steadily in the Northeast and Mid-
west to an extent that now even the previously white prisons of
the South became full of newly freed blacks. Even in the West,
where there were few prisons and a much smaller population,
blacks were imprisoned in proportions that far exceeded their
representation in the general population.
Historically, the prison system has incarcerated dispropor-
tionate numbers of black women. For example, in Tennessee over
70 percent of the women committed to the Tennessee Penitentiary
during the period 1860–1887 were black; this figure increased to
90 percent at the turn of the century, declining to 65 percent in the
years 1926–1934. Yet, during the period 1860–1930 the black pop-
ulation in Tennessee fell from 26 to 18 percent of the total state
population. Ohio’s black population increased from 2 to 5 percent
during the period 1890–1930, but the proportion of black women
incarcerated in that state increased from 26 to nearly 52 percent.
Only in the Albion reformatory in New York did the black female
inmate population coincide with the proportion of blacks in the
general population in that state.
As for the treatment and conditions of black men and women
in prison, as a rule, the higher the proportion of blacks in a prison
population, the lower the level of care. However, white women
Race and Racism in State Prisons Holding Women, 1865–1935
37

were treated better than black women even in mainly black insti-
tutions. In the South, where some women prisoners were leased
out while others were retained in custody, those leased out were
nearly always black. Of forty white women held in prisons by the
southern states in 1880, only one was leased, as compared to
eighty-one out of 2,220 black women. It is clear that the burden of
leasing fell more heavily on black women and that race was at
least as important as sex in the decision to lease a female prisoner.
In the penitentiaries and plantations of the South, black and white
women were segregated in housing. Prison administrators in
Georgia decided that black women made excellent field hands
based on their perception that these women were accustomed to
that kind of work. White women, in contrast, were assigned to
housekeeping and sewing.
In the reformatories of the North and Midwest, the situation
was somewhat better since racial segregation among women
inmates only occurred if there were sufficient black women in the
prison population. Thus, for example, so few black women were
committed to the Nebraska and Maine reformatories that segre-
gation was impracticable. However, where there were sizeable
populations of black women, segregation was the rule. Racial dis-
crimination also affected programming in prisons. Since most
prison staff were white, they designed programs for white inter-
ests and concerns and ignored all other interests.
Female incarceration rates continue to reveal racial and eth-
nic disparities. As of December 31, 2000, the Bureau of Justice
reported that black females, with an incarceration rate of 205 per
100,000, were more than three times as likely as Hispanic females
(with a rate of 60 per 100,000) and six times more likely than
white females (with a rate of 34 per 100,000) to be in prison
(Bureau of Justice Statistics 2001).
The Women’s Prison System since 1935
Academic research into women in prison began in the 1960s, pro-
viding a wealth of information about the condition of women in
some prisons. Following a nationwide survey of women’s prisons
in 1966, one researcher described the women’s prison as typically
small and patterned on the cottage model. Of the thirty prisons
surveyed, two thirds had populations of less than 200. Most had
less than 150 staff, and many were located in the Northeast. The
38
The History of Women’s Prisons

age range of women inmates was sixteen to sixty-five, and the
majority of prisons used simple classification tests for the assign-
ment of inmates. Of those surveyed, about 18 percent were
termed custodial, 32 percent custody-oriented, 17 percent mixed,
and about 22 percent treatment-oriented.
By 1971 there were two federal prisons for women, and
thirty-four states had completely separate prisons for women.
Most women’s prisons are designated medium-security, and
therefore a single women’s facility must house women convicted
of a wide range of offenses. This contrasts with men’s prisons,
where security grading ranges from minimum to maximum or
even supermax prisons for the most dangerous offenders. Males
are increasingly employed as guards in women’s prisons; by
1988, only 65 percent of correctional officers at female prisons
were female.
In 1971 Texas established the first co-corrections prison. This
was essentially a return to earlier times, as the prison held both
male and female inmates who, although housed in separate
buildings, shared some or all of the prison programs and services.
Five such institutions opened in the 1970s, and by 1977, fifteen
state institutions of the same kind were operating; however, in a
reversal of policy, by 1984 only six states had such facilities.
In the 1980s, the number of women in prison in the United
States tripled. Most of the increase in the female population is
accounted for by minor property crime such as theft, and by drug
and public order offenses. Due to the explosion in women’s
imprisonment, there has been a growth in building women-only
prisons and in adding women’s units to male prisons. Despite
this increase in their incarceration, women still make up only
about 7 percent of all those incarcerated, with considerable varia-
tion across states. For example, as of December 31, 2000,
Oklahoma imprisoned women at the highest rate, 138 per 100,000
women in the population, followed by Mississippi, at 105 per
100,000. This compares to a rate of only seven per 100,000 for
Massachusetts and fifteen per 100,000 for Minnesota (Bureau of
Justice Statistics 2001).
Sources
Bookspan, Shelley. 1991. A Germ of Goodness: The California State Prison
System, 1851–1944. Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press.
Brown, Larry. 2001. Petticoat Prisoners of Old Wyoming. Glendo, WY: High
Plains Press.
The Women’s Prison System since 1935
39

Bureau of Justice Statistics. 2001. Prisoners in 2000. Washington, DC:
Bureau of Justice Statistics, Department of Justice.
Butler, Anne M. 1997. Gendered Justice in the American West: Women
Prisoners in Men’s Penitentiaries. Urbana: University of Illinois Press.
Coffin, Rhoda. 1877. “Systems of Discipline Suited to a Female Prison.”
In Transactions of the Fourth National Prison Congress Held in New York, June
6–9, 1876. New York.
Dodge, Mara. 1999. “‘One Female Prisoner Is of More Trouble Than
Twenty Males’: Women Convicts in Illinois Prisons, 1835–1896.” Journal
of Social History 32 (4): 907–930.
Feinman, C. 1984. “An Historical Overview of the Treatment of
Incarcerated Women: Myths and Realities of Rehabilitation.” Prison
Journal 63 (2): 12–26.
Freedman, E. 2000. Their Sister’s Keepers: Women’s Prison Reform in
America, 1830–1930. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press.
Jeffrey, John Mason. 1969. Adobe and Iron: The Story of the Arizona
Territorial Prison at Yuma. La Jolla, CA: Prospect Avenue Press.
Lekkerkerker, E. C. 1931. Reformatories for Women in the United States. J. B.
Wolters, Groningen, etc.
Lucko, Paul. 1990. “The Next Big Job: Women Prison Reformers in Texas,
1918–1930.” Unpublished Paper, Texas Historical Society.
Rafter, N. 1985. Partial Justice: Women in State Prisons 1800–1935. Boston:
Northeastern University Press.
Ruiz v. Estelle. 1980. 503 Federal Supplement 1265.
Strickland, K. 1976. Correctional Institutions for Women in the U.S.
Lexington, MA: Lexington Books.
Swain, Ellen. 2001. “From Benevolence to Reform: The Expanding Career
of Mrs. Rhoda M. Coffin.” Indiana Magazine of History 97 (September):
190–217.
40
The History of Women’s Prisons

2
Problems, Controversies,
and Solutions
M
ost issues relating to incarcerated women did not come to
light until the late 1960s, when major research studies con-
cerned with women’s incarceration began to be conducted.
It is significant, for example, that there is no mention of women
prisoners in the massive “Report on Crime” completed by the
President’s Commission on Law Enforcement and Administra-
tion of Justice in 1967. The earliest research on women in prison
focused on female prison subculture, especially the aspect of sex-
uality, rather than on living conditions. In contrast to women in
prison, there has been an extensive examination of issues con-
cerning men in prison beginning in the 1940s.
A number of reasons have been advanced for this neglect of
the study of women in prison, including the fact that women con-
stitute only a small proportion of the prison population and are
therefore almost invisible, that women generally are incarcerated
for less serious crimes than men and therefore do not command
the same research attention, and that incarcerated women are less
likely than men to resist their imprisonment through acts such as
riots and disturbances and therefore do not attract attention by
the authorities or the media. In addition, prisoner litigation has
been mounted almost entirely by men, and where women have
brought suits, they have focused almost entirely on obtaining
parity with the conditions in men’s prisons and have not dealt
with the particular problems and issues affecting women.
The following discussion presents a picture of women’s situ-
ation in prisons. The context and background of these issues are
41

presented along with various points of view. In this way it is pos-
sible to develop a fuller appreciation for the female prisoner and
her concerns as well as issues of public policy affecting women
and crime and the consequent societal responses to women’s
criminality. It is helpful to first identify the broad issues that affect
women in prison to help frame the following discussion. They are
women’s criminality, the experience of imprisonment, criminal
justice policy issues, health and medical issues, and legal chal-
lenges (for example, equal protection).
Women’s Criminality
In order to fully appreciate the issues that arise from the incarcer-
ation of women it is first necessary to gain an understanding of
women’s criminality, that is, the kinds of offenses that women
commit, their reasons for offending, and the nature and extent of
female crime. Historically, women’s crime has not been treated
with the same seriousness as men’s crime, and men have always
been seen as the “real” offenders. This perception is attributable
to the fact that women generally commit fewer crimes than men
and women’s crimes tend to be less serious in nature.
What does the data on arrests and crimes tell us about
women’s criminality? Overall, it shows that women most often
commit offenses against property, are guilty of fraud, or incur
drug offenses. Furthermore, it shows no differentiation by gender
according to arrest rates for the first four types of offenses among
the top ten: larceny-theft, assault, drug violations, and driving
under the influence of alcohol. In other words, women generally
commit the same kinds of offenses as men. Data on arrests in 1998
from the Bureau of Justice Statistics (Greenfeld and Snell 1999)
show that almost 22 percent of arrests in that year were of
women, that about 17 percent of all violent crimes arrests were of
women, and that aggravated assault committed by women had
the highest arrest rate, 20 percent. In relation to serious offenses
of murder, manslaughter, robbery, and rape, female arrests made
up just over one tenth for these categories except for rape, where
the rate was 1 percent. Almost 29 percent of property crime
arrests were of women, and the highest incidence within this cat-
egory was larceny-theft. For the crimes of burglary, motor vehicle
theft, and arson, female arrests made up between 13 and 16 per-
cent of all arrests. For the sixth, seventh, and eighth in the top ten
42
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

offenses, males and females share the same offenses, namely, dis-
orderly conduct, violations of laws relating to alcohol, and aggra-
vated assault. For men, burglary and vandalism were ninth and
tenth on the list, but these do not appear at all on the list for
women. However, the crime of fraud, the fifth most common
offense for women, did not make the top ten list for men (Belknap
2001).
Some have argued that the feminist movement in the early
1970s influenced women to commit more offenses, but most
research demonstrates that crime rates for women mainly
remained the same from the 1970s until the present, except in the
cases of less serious property crimes and crimes involving drugs,
which have both increased. In terms of gender stability—that is,
whether there are gender differences in the extent and nature of
offending and whether these differences have changed over
time—most research studies have found that differences have
remained fairly stable over time. At points where rates have
tended to converge, this can largely be explained by four factors:
changes in law enforcement practices so that women are the tar-
gets of increased police enforcement of laws; the worsening eco-
nomic position of women, making them vulnerable to a higher
rate of arrest; technical factors such as changes in data collection
methods; and inflation in the small base of women’s crimes. If
there is any closing of the gender gap it is due to a convergence
in less serious property crimes and possibly for drug abuse.
Though either sex is capable of committing the same
offenses, the law sometimes can be enforced in a way that is
adverse to women. For example, laws against sex work tend to be
enforced against female prostitutes rather than male prostitutes
because police tend to think of women in this role rather than
men. In the case of battered women who commit crimes against
their batterers, offenses they often carry out under duress,
extreme stress, and pressure, the women may take the entire
blame for the violence. Selling drugs can also result in women
becoming targets and accepting culpability even though they
may unknowingly commit the crime at the instigation of their
male partners, or may commit the crime by helping their male
partners to avoid risks to themselves or their children.
In 1998 women committed 11 percent of all homicides in the
United States, and in that year the murder rate for women was
the lowest recorded since 1976. Overall, the murder rate for
women has been declining since 1980 (Greenfeld and Snell 1999).
Women’s Criminality
43

By far the majority of homicides are committed by men, and
when women do commit this offense, their victims tend to be
their male partners—boyfriends, husbands, or ex-husbands. In
cases where women kill their male intimates, women are often
acting in self-defense after a long history of abuse in a particular
relationship.
The typical female inmate is a racial minority aged twenty-
five to twenty-nine, unmarried but with one to three children,
most likely the victim of sexual abuse as a child and of physical
abuse as an adult, with current alcohol and drug abuse problems,
multiple arrests with the first arrest taking place around fifteen
years of age, a high school dropout, on welfare, unskilled, with a
history of holding mainly low-wage jobs (Fowler 1993).
Race and Women’s Imprisonment
More than half the women imprisoned in the United States are
African American or Hispanic. For the year 2000, Bureau of Justice
Statistics data reveal that 83,668 women were imprisoned, of
which 44 percent were African American and 12 percent Hispanic
(Bureau of Justice Statistics 2001). This stands in contrast to the
fact that African American women make up only 13 percent of the
U.S. female population and Hispanic women only 12 percent. The
rate of imprisonment for African American women has escalated
dramatically and coincided with a growth in the number of
women sentenced to imprisonment for drug offenses. In the five-
year period from 1986 to 1991, the number of black women incar-
cerated in state prisons for a drug offense rose by 828 percent. In
the year 2000, drug offenders accounted for the largest source of
the total growth among female inmates of all races. The chances
of receiving a prison term after being arrested for a drug offense
increased by 447 percent between 1980 and 1992. Well over three
times as many black women have contact with the criminal jus-
tice system than do their white counterparts. Research reveals
that the increase in the number of women in prison for drug
offenses is far steeper for Hispanic women and for African
American women than for white women. It follows then that the
so-called “War on Drugs” has had a dramatic effect on the incar-
ceration patterns of these women. The trend of locking up suc-
cessive generations of women is creating a generation of
parentless children and has reinforced the stereotype of the
absentee African American parent. The most obvious policy
44
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

change that could reduce the number of African American
women in prison is decarceration of drug-related offenders, but
current sentencing practices do not generally support this policy.
In contrast with African American and Hispanic women,
American Native and Alaskan Native women tend to be forgot-
ten because they make up such a small proportion of incarcer-
ated women and tend to be located in certain states only.
Nevertheless, as the only indigenous women serving sentences
of imprisonment, they have special needs and concerns not
shared by other women prisoners. Both groups are dispropor-
tionately imprisoned by comparison to their proportion of the
population. Male and female Alaskan Natives, for example,
make up 16 percent of the Alaska population but 34 percent of
the adult inmate population in that state. American Natives in
South Dakota make up 7 percent of the state population but rep-
resent 26 percent of all inmates male and female; and in
Nebraska, the Native American inmate population has ranged
between 3.1 and 4.4 percent in recent years, which is approxi-
mately three times the number of Native Americans living in that
state (Grobsmith 1994, 154, 155).
The cultures of indigenous women continue to play an
important part in their lives and, in fact, those women who may
have lost contact with their native culture often return to it for sol-
ace and support in coping with their imprisonment. For example,
both American Native and Alaskan Native women seek access to
spiritual teachers and ceremonies in the same way that non-
indigenous women may turn to religion for solace. Some prisons
are now prepared to allow sweat lodges to be built within the
prison, and some permit the use of native substances in cultural
ceremonies. As well as this kind of contact with their culture,
indigenous women also have special needs in their interactions
with prison staff and other prisoners that flow from their cultural
specificity. For instance, research has shown that staff often hold
stereotypical images of both American Native and Alaskan
Native women and usually receive no special training that would
alert them to their different value systems, modes of behavior,
and expectations (Banks 2002). Indigenous women living in rural
areas prior to incarceration may have been leading a traditional
subsistence lifestyle (this is especially likely for Alaskan Native
women), and the act of confinement itself presents them with an
emotional challenge that other women from urban areas may not
face. Lack of English speaking skills or experience with structured
Women’s Criminality
45

lifestyles like that in the highly regimented prison environment
present further obstacles to adjustment for these women. Perhaps
most importantly, indigenous women often maintain close rela-
tions with an extended family unit, and relationships with mem-
bers of that unit are a central and fundamental part of their
lifestyle and culture. Being deprived of that contact constitutes
for them a particular hardship (Banks 2002).
Women and Capital Punishment
Historically, the notion of executing women offenders generally
has been accepted in the United States. Though executions of
female offenders rarely occur, there have been 520 confirmed exe-
cutions of women since 1608; this represents about 3 percent of all
executions in the country (Streib 1995). Fewer executions occur
now than in the past, and women accounted for only 0.5 percent
of all executions in the United States in the twentieth century.
Several patterns emerge from a study of the crimes committed by
executed women. Generally, their crimes were not especially
heinous in nature, and collecting insurance was the main motiva-
tion for the murders they committed. In most instances, a male
accomplice assisted the women. During the 1970s women
received only twenty-one death sentences, but this increased dra-
matically during the 1980s and 1990s, when forty-five death sen-
tences were imposed. Women make up 1.5 percent of the total
population on death row on average, and their ages range from
twenty-one to seventy-eight years with the majority between
twenty and twenty-nine years of age. Sixty percent of females on
death row are white, 33 percent are black, and Hispanics account
for the remaining 7 percent.
Women awaiting execution are subject to the same con-
straints and poor conditions as other women prisoners, including
isolation from their families. Death row is segregated from the
general prison population; prisoners interact only with correc-
tional officers, though they may visit and talk to other death row
prisoners if housed in the same cell unit. There is a high rate of
reversal on appeal—about 97 percent—for women sentenced to
death. The prevailing political rhetoric of “get tough on crime”
policies is reflected in the increase in the number of executions
over the past twenty years and in the willingness of the public to
accept the appropriateness of execution for women. In a 1992
study conducted by the National Coalition to Abolish the Death
46
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

Penalty, research revealed that female prisoners on death row are
mainly from poor socioeconomic backgrounds and are therefore
obliged to rely on court-appointed attorneys, many of whom have
no experience in handling capital cases; that the women are some-
times mentally ill; that they are often mothers; and that they are
usually from families where physical or sexual abuse occurred,
which later contributed to their continued victimization in other
abuse relationships (Nelson and Foster 2000).
Female Youthful Offenders Confined in
Adult Prison
In 1996 more than 13,000 juveniles were detained in adult prisons.
Violent youthful offenders are being held in prisons in ever-
increasing numbers (Fleming and Winkler 1999, 1). An example
of the legislative response to the increasing use of adult prisons
for youth is provided by legislation passed in Washington state
that defines the requirements concerning juvenile offenders con-
fined in adult prisons. The law provides that an offender under
the age of eighteen who is sentenced to the Department of
Corrections must be placed in a housing unit separated from
adult inmates and may, if necessary, be placed in administrative
segregation for his/her safety or security. The department also
must provide an education program for offenders under the age
of eighteen, which must enable him/her to obtain a high school
diploma or GED.
Female offenders in Washington state are placed at the
Washington Corrections Center for Women in existing facilities
that have been adapted for this special purpose. A youth offender
program team is formed, consisting of a program manager, two
teachers, a unit supervisor, a counselor, a recreation specialist, a
teacher’s aid, a school psychologist, a principal, and correctional
officers. Youthful offender schedules are based on existing adult
schedules. Among the special programs provided, girls are
offered offense cycle groups, anger management groups, victim
awareness groups, and a cognitive behavioral group (Fleming
and Winkler 1999, 3). The offenders are housed in single-cell units
separated from adult offenders and meet with counselors for at
least an hour a day. Youthful offenders have separate shower and
toilet areas, may order canteen items with the exception of
tobacco products, and have a separate visiting area. Stringent
measures are taken to keep the youthful offenders separate from
Women’s Criminality
47

adults. For example, they are moved through the institution ten
minutes before adult offenders are moved so as to prevent any
contact with adult offenders.
The Experience of Imprisonment
Starting from the 1940s, researchers began to investigate the ways
in which men “did their time” in prison, but it was not until the
mid- to late 1960s that attention was given to the experience of
imprisonment for women. Researching and explaining women’s
experiences of life in prison has illuminated many of the issues
and problems that incarceration has posed for women and gener-
ated a better understanding of the prison experience. Studies con-
tinue to be conducted and ultimately contribute toward the
search for possible alternatives to imprisonment of women. From
the beginning, these explorations of life in prison found that the
world of the women’s prison was quite different than that of male
inmates because personal relationships within the prison and
connections to family and loved ones outside the prison tended to
shape the culture of women’s prisons.
The first few studies of women in prison focused on the
social structures that emerged in prison. These were based on the
family and traditional gender roles as well as on coping with, and
adapting to, prison conditions. As an example, one study con-
ducted in the early 1970s identified three forms of adaptation by
women in prison; these were termed “the Square”, “the Cool,”
and “the Life” (Heffernan 1972). “The Square” denotes a woman
tied to conventional norms and values whereas “the Life” encom-
passes a more criminal identity based on acts in the outside world
judged as criminal, such as prostitution and drug use. “The Cool”
uses control and manipulation within the prison as a strategy for
doing her time.
One recent study of the largest women’s prison in the coun-
try argues that the environment of the women’s prison is shaped
by pre-prison experiences, by traditional gender roles, and by the
manner in which women form relationships within the prison as
coping strategies (Owen 1998). Nevertheless, women still must
adapt to the structure, rules, and demands of the prison and for-
mulate for themselves a structure that helps give them some con-
trol over their lives within an alien environment. In essence,
women are able to survive the prison experience and do their
48
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

time by formulating a routine and by establishing close personal
relations with certain other prisoners.
Apart from these specific aspects of the prison environment,
research studies have brought to the surface the wide range of
adverse features that make up life in women’s prisons. These
include the stigma of incarceration, loss of freedom and conse-
quent claustrophobia, endless and mind-numbing boredom of
daily routine in confinement, strict limitations imposed on move-
ment, states of nervousness and anxiety engendered by being
constantly under the scrutiny and supervision of others, physical
and emotional problems that go with withdrawal from substance
or drug abuse, absence of an advocate to deal with concerns and
needs, total lack of privacy and consequent tension that may
erupt at any time between persons who have not chosen to be
confined in a small space together for many hours of each day,
endless lineups to be counted and checked, being punished for
violations of what seem to inmates like minor rules and which are
always coercive in nature, the fear of being segregated in isolation
as punishment or for medical observation, always being under
the control and power of others and therefore subject to abuse of
that power, unending noise and clamor that accompanies the cus-
todial environment, the dependency that prison promotes and
encourages, and perhaps most importantly, never being sure of
your release date and being always conscious that others who
control you often have the right to influence that point in time.
Prison Subculture
Prison subculture is concerned with the way prisoners adapt to
the conditions of imprisonment and how their individual values
and norms are employed or affected by incarceration. In effect,
the prison subculture comprises the daily life of the prison and
includes how women organize their time each day, how they
interact with other prisoners and with staff, and the overall state
of affairs constituted by the prison environment. Like any new
experience, entering a prison involves learning about prison as a
place in which to live, its preexisting culture, and coping with this
strange new environment. Women learn to adapt and cope in dif-
ferent ways, but always within a general code of conduct, the pri-
mary rules of which tend to follow those in men’s prisons. This
code requires that a woman should “do your own time” and
“protect the inmate interests.” The code points to the need to
The Experience of Imprisonment
49

regulate standards of behavior so that inmates do not interfere in
the business of others and yet take care of each other. Studies sug-
gest, however, that aspects of this code have changed over the
years and that, for example, there is now a distinction in women’s
prisons between those who regard themselves as inmates and
those who see themselves as convicts (Owen 1998). The latter fol-
low the code closely, but the former are less willing to maintain
close solidarity against the staff and the prison regime of rules
and regulations and will, for example, be more willing to inform
on other women inmates to staff. This situation stands in strong
contrast to men’s prisons, where snitching or “ratting” on other
prisoners is not tolerated at all.
Importing Traditional Gender Roles
Researchers argue that women cope differently with the prison
experience than men in that they adjust to the experience by
forming close relationships with other prisoners whereas men
tend to isolate themselves. Like all general statements this can be
challenged with counter arguments that, for example, prisoners
of both genders tend to congregate in racial groupings for sup-
port and solidarity in relation to other prisoners and as a form of
protection against staff abuse. However, a number of researchers
have identified specific forms of association between women
inmates such as groups based on housing assignments, homegirl
networks, and prison family/kinship networks, and, in the case
of Hispanic women, a subdivision according to nationality and
language spoken.
One focus of research on association among women in prison
has been the issue of women forming close emotional and even
sexual bonds with each other while doing their time. Early stud-
ies argued that the informal social order of the women’s prison is
based on identities imported from outside, so that traditional
gender roles of mother, wife, or daughter are repeated within the
prison environment, and family structures emerge that assist
women in coping with the prison experience and create trust and
solidarity among the prisoners. Some rather dated research sug-
gests that pseudo families are formed in women’s prisons, but
research that is more recent tends to suggest that such families are
a logical outcome of women’s socialized roles as homemakers
and as key persons in family relationships (Ward and
Kasselbaum 1965; Giallombardo 1966; Owen 1998). It would not
50
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

be surprising, therefore, to find women developing family-type
structures in prisons for social support.
A very recent study of women in a Midwestern prison sug-
gests that the subculture of women’s prisons might be changing
(Greer 2000). Specifically, there were indications in Greer’s study
of several kinds of relationships including friendships between
offenders, of sexual relationships between offenders, and of a lack
of kinship networks. Generally, the study found that all interper-
sonal relationships were tainted with perceptions of dishonesty,
paranoia, and hostility. Friendships with other inmates were con-
ducted on the basis that any person engaging in such friendships
did so at her own risk, and many women adopted a position of
loners (448). In other words, the women inmates made a con-
scious decision not to seek friendships, and this was reflected in
women referring to “associates” and not to “friends” when asked
whether they had formed any friendships. Several women
believed that the transitory nature of relationships in prison pre-
vented forming friendships because such relationships take time
to develop and temporary relationships did not grow into any-
thing more substantial.
In relation to kinship networks or families within the prison,
Greer’s study found that most of the women interviewed did not
engage in family relationships, which might be said to approxi-
mate kinship networks, but some did establish very loose
arrangements that might include referring to other women by
terms of endearment such as “mom” and “grandma.” Generally,
the women suggested that structured, formal family roles did not
exist in this particular institution (Greer 2000, 460–461).
Owen’s previous study in California suggested that pseudo
families do not necessarily carry with them associations of lesbian
conduct, and studies seem to suggest that while some women
enter prison as lesbians already, others assume that status only
while incarcerated, and still others maintain that status after their
release, having “come out” as lesbians while incarcerated (Owen
1998). In Greer’s study, though the women interviewed noted
that there were a number of reasons for maintaining a sexual rela-
tionship, a high proportion considered the primary reason to be
“economic manipulation,” referring to women who participated
in sexual relationships as a means of improving their economic
standing as “canteen whores” or “commissary whores” (Greer
2000, 454). As one woman put it, “a lot of people do it for money.
Here it is a money thing. It is not about people’s feelings or it is
The Experience of Imprisonment
51

all [a] game really and so, people when you are broke and only
get $7.50 a month and somebody may get $250 a week or
month . . . it begins to be attractive to you” (455). However, some
of the women interviewed in Greer’s study were involved in sin-
cere and committed relationships and saw a great difference
between these stable and caring relationships and those that
existed between persons who “play games” for canteen privileges
(457). Other women thought that loneliness and the need for com-
panionship were reasons for some women to take part in sexual
activities; related to this notion and found in previous research, is
the fact that sexual relationships help women to do their time
with the least degree of psychological discomfort. In other words,
the excitement involved in a romantic relationship in prison can
mitigate the harsh realities of correctional life.
The fact is that the experience of prison will likely intensify
emotions for women, and relations between them in prison may
be more emotional than sexual. It is significant that one study dis-
covered that the strict policy against homosexuality applied in
women’s prisons is more likely to encourage than discourage
such relations and that sometimes women are penalized or pun-
ished simply for forming close relations with their fellow inmates
(Mahan 1984). This in turn may lead to women avoiding any
close relations at all with other women, thereby exacerbating their
feelings of isolation during incarceration.
Race
It seems that race is much less of an organizing factor in women’s
prisons than in men’s, but some research has indicated strained
relations between white and American Native women (Ross
2000), and there exists a unique issue for Spanish-speaking
women who know no other languages but are forbidden to speak
Spanish. This means they incur sanctions not only for speaking a
forbidden language but also for violations of prison rules that
they can neither read nor understand.
Self-Mutilation
Women seem to self-mutilate in prison at a high rate. Forms of
self-mutilation observed in women’s prisons include slashing or
carving the body, head banging, burning, and tattooing. Some
theories attribute these acts to the tendency of women to inter-
52
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

nalize anger in contrast to the rather more open approach that
men take in assaulting prison staff or other inmates (Dobash,
Dobash, and Gutteridge 1986). A variation of this theory has
women directing their anger at themselves in the absence of any
other targets. Other theorists believe that self-mutilation is gener-
ally a means for incarcerated women to experience feelings of
“something” as opposed to the deadness and nothingness that
incarceration and loss of liberty engender (Morris 1987). Some see
childhood sexual abuse among women as a precipitating factor in
self-mutilation, arguing that the act of inscribing tattoos on the
body is a means for women to lay claim to their own bodies
(Heney 1990). Other explanations for self-injurious behavior of
this kind include the view that it is a coping strategy arising out
of childhood abuse by which a woman disassociates herself from
her body, a tactic often used to survive actual abuse in childhood
(Faith 1993). In one survey, prison tension was given as the ration-
ale for slashing. The slashing itself was said to produce a domino
effect because a woman might become emotional when her
prison friend slashes herself and copy it, and other women might
in turn repeat this act. Self-mutilation has been classified as a
health rather than as a security issue on the basis that women
who engage in it often insist they feel the absence of anyone to
talk to about their issues and problems in the prison environment.
This would suggest that the greater presence of counselors would
help to alleviate the problem.
Separation from Families
Separation from the family is a crucial issue for incarcerated
women. As emotional and probably also financial providers,
women experience both guilt and stress when separated from
their families through incarceration. They are more likely than
men to be concerned about custody arrangements for their chil-
dren during their imprisonment and whether their children are
being adequately supervised and nurtured. Data indicates that
four out of five women and three out of five men entering prison
are parents, but almost all imprisoned women have custody of
their children prior to their imprisonment, as compared to fewer
than half of men (Koban 1983). It follows, then, that women are
much more likely to suffer stress than men because of the hard-
ship of being separated from their children. Studies reveal that
grandparents, usually maternal grandmothers, are the most
The Experience of Imprisonment
53

likely caregivers for children whose mothers have been impris-
oned. Giving custody to close relatives while incarcerated often
lessens the likelihood of contests over custody upon the woman’s
release (Belknap 2001). Stress factors for women in prison arising
out of their family role include fear of the effects their absence
will have on their children’s development generally, and practical
matters such as children having to change schools or endure
financial constraints due to the absence of a working mother.
They may have continuing concerns about their children’s wel-
fare when they are placed with relatives, but problems affecting
the children often have to be tolerated since the only alternative
for incarcerated mothers may be having their children institu-
tionalized. The dislocation caused a family when the mother is
incarcerated has been demonstrated to be a likely factor in youth
delinquency, and several researchers have found that incarcera-
tion undermines parental authority. As well, studies have shown
that as the children of inmate mothers grow older they may
become more resentful and angry about parental absence. The
Department of Justice estimates that nearly two million children
have parents or relatives who are in prison or in jail (Butterfield
1999).
Studies concerned with the separation of fathers from the
family through incarceration apply equally to imprisoned moth-
ers. They suggest that the father’s absence from a child’s life may
cause psychological and developmental disruption, including
social and cognitive problems (Hughes 1982; Rosenfeld et al.
1973). Children may experience denial, anger, guilt, and sadness
about the parent’s incarceration and may develop behavioral
problems at home and in school as well as emotional stress and
depression following their father’s incarceration. In many cases
parents fail to fully advise their children of the father’s incarcera-
tion, which may in turn produce confusion and feelings of rejec-
tion in the child (Fishman 1983; Sack 1977; Swan 1981). Wives of
incarcerated men have reported problems with their children
during incarceration, including increased antisocial behavior and
aggression, truancy from school, and disobedience at home (Sack
et al. 1976; Fishman 1990; Gaudin 1984).
In addition, mothers sent to prison are faced with the prob-
lem of telling their children about their incarceration and the rea-
sons for it. Although young children may not be told because of
an inability to understand, this in itself will contribute to mater-
nal anxiety. Some mothers try to hide the fact of their imprison-
54
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

ment, encouraging other family members to speak of them as
though they are on vacation or away at school, but most prefer to
tell their children they are in prison and provide some reason for
it (Baunach 1982, 161). Although there are risks of rejection in this
approach, most women inmates believe it is best to tell the child
directly rather than leave this to strangers or acquaintances.
When mothers return to their families after serving a term of
imprisonment, they must face the problem of reestablishing their
role as mother. They may find that their children have learned to
survive quite well without them; they may be rejected by their
children because of their inmate status; and they must also face
the problem of finding employment, housing, and generally find-
ing their way into the world outside the prison. Sometimes fail-
ures in these areas may be taken out on children or create
pressure to revert to crime, especially in the case of single parents
(Baunach 1985 in Hawkins 1999, 138).
In the federal courts, the fact that a convicted woman cares
for others, especially her children, has been eliminated as a rele-
vant consideration for departing from the mandated federal sen-
tencing guidelines. In the past, family responsibilities mitigated
sentences in order to keep women out of prison. Now the impact
of these guidelines has been to increase the number of women in
prison and to ensure that women who are imprisoned spend
more time there (Raeder 1993). For example, the average federal
prison sentence for drug offenders increased from thirty months
in 1986 to sixty-six months by 1997 following the application of
sentencing guidelines (Sabol and McGready 1999).
Prison Visiting
Fishman’s study of wives visiting their husbands in prison has
suggested that wives, in effect, “do time on the outside” (Fishman
1990) while their husbands are inside. This notion is prompted by
factors such as the hostility shown by guards to visitors, and the
guards’ attitude that visiting wives are no different in character
and conduct than their incarcerated spouses. The regulations that
govern visits in many prisons cover matters such as days allowed
for visits, the time permitted, the degree of physical contact
allowed, and the items that can be brought into the prison. Not
surprisingly, there is a strong emphasis on security, especially in
prisons that are graded at the higher end of custody. There are
often written rules detailing when prisoners and visitors may kiss
The Experience of Imprisoment
55

or embrace, where they may sit, how children are to behave, and
how loudly they may address each other. There is usually a
strong emphasis on the prevention of contraband entering the
prison, and all visitors are searched on entry, going through a
metal detector and having all bags and packages searched. Strip
searches of visitors may also be ordered.
In a recent case in the U.S. Court of Appeals, a number of
inmates sued the Michigan Department of Corrections, claiming
that restrictions on prison visiting violated their constitutional
rights (Bazzetta and others v. Michigan Department of Corrections
[1998]). The facts were that in 1995 the department had issued
new regulations limiting those who could visit prisoners. For
example, the regulations banned visits from minor brothers, sis-
ters, nieces, and nephews; all visits by a prisoner’s children
when parental rights had been terminated; all visits by former
prisoners who were not immediate family; and permanently
banned visitors for prisoners who had twice violated drug abuse
policies. The new regulations were made in response to a growth
in the prison population in Michigan and a consequent increase
in the number of visitors, who were perceived to constitute a
problem for department officials in that supervision became
more difficult, and smuggling of drugs and weapons more
prevalent and difficult to stop.
The court noted that there were two kinds of visits, contact
and noncontact. Contact visits allowed physical contact between
prisoner and visitor whereas noncontact visits require the pris-
oner and visitor to sit in separate rooms but observe each other
through a clear window and speak via a telephone. The court
found that prisoners do retain a limited right to freedom of asso-
ciation even while incarcerated, specifically in the form of non-
contact visits with intimate associates. The court analyzed each of
the new regulations and considered the basis for their justifica-
tion as argued by the department. In terms of banning visits of
minor brothers, nieces, and nephews, the court considered this to
be an “exaggerated response” to the perceived problems that had
arisen in prison visiting and held that the regulations were not
attempts to manage visits so much as to end them altogether.
Regarding the suggestion that new regulations were required to
deal with smuggling contraband, the court found that the depart-
ment offered no testimony to support such claims and, moreover,
noncontact visits would prevent smuggling in any event. The
court also criticized prison officials for stating their opposition to
56
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

visits of children on the ground that this would cause the children
to become “too comfortable with prisons.” The court pointed out
this determination was for the parents to make, not the prison
officials.
Significantly, the department’s argument that letters and
phone calls were adequate alternatives to visits by minor rela-
tions was not accepted, in part because the court reviewed evi-
dence that 40 to 80 percent of inmates were illiterate and unable
to compose letters. The court also held that phone calls were
unsatisfactory, being of only short duration and monitored by
correctional staff. Similarly, the court refused to endorse the ban
on visits by natural children where parental rights had been ter-
minated, finding that the department offered no adequate reason
for this ban that did not relate to a legitimate penological interest.
Too, the court ruled that the blanket ban on visits by former
inmates was an exaggerated response. As for the ban based on
violation of drug abuse policies, the court found there were no
proper criteria for lifting this ban, which could only be removed
at the discretion of prison officials, who did not have to explain
their decisions. Importantly, the court also held that the perma-
nent ban on visitors violated the constitutional prohibition
against cruel and unusual punishments and the protection of due
process. In its conclusion the court wrote,
Instead of crafting policies that would legitimately
meet the very real need to maintain order in prisons,
the department has implemented a series of haphaz-
ard policies that violated these rights and did real
harm to inmates in its care. It then defended these poli-
cies not with reasoned arguments, but with misdirec-
tion and demands that federal courts blindly defer to
corrections officials . . . in the present case, the regula-
tions fall below minimum standards of decency owed
by a civilized society to those it has incarcerated.
Conjugal Visits
A few states allow family members of specified inmates to have
overnight visits, called conjugal visits, and permit some inmates
to be released on furlough, to be spent in their home with their
family (Carlson and Cervera 1992, 38). The major purpose of such
visits is to enhance family ties and thereby assist in the prisoners’
The Experience of Imprisonment
57

adjustment after release (Howser et al. 1983). There have been
concerns about such programs based on perceptions of commu-
nity safety, the fact that the prisoner is released from incarcera-
tion, and moral views about conjugal visits themselves. It is
significant that many countries view marital relations as a right
and not a privilege and see conjugal visits as promoting family
solidarity and contributing to the security and good management
of the prison itself (Balogh 1964). In 1992, seven states operated
these programs, which allow for parents, spouses, children, and
specified family members to visit with the inmate (Goetting
1982).
Conjugal visits take place in specially designated areas, usu-
ally trailers; their duration is seven to seventy-two hours and
their frequency is two to three  months (Goetting 1982). Stringent
conditions must be satisfied in order to earn the privilege of a
conjugal visit, including a legal marriage, a relatively long sen-
tence, and no eligibility for parole. It is essential that the inmate
has maintained a good disciplinary record in the prison. Some
research indicates that those who participate in such programs
have improved discipline records and are less likely to be
returned to custody than those who do not participate.
The issues that arise from conjugal visits include the limita-
tions on physical space available and the eligibility requirements.
In addition, prison administrators are concerned about contra-
band and security, and in policy terms, there is some question as
to whether common-law marriages and girlfriends or boyfriends
should be included (Goetting 1982; Balogh 1964). As a result of
these concerns, furlough programs have been set up as an alter-
native to conjugal visits. The former are considered easier to
administer and provide for greater eligibility. Generally, a tempo-
rary absence from incarceration on furlough will be granted from
four hours to thirty days, with the average length of absence
being forty-eight to seventy-two hours. Furloughs may be
granted for family visits as well as funerals and medical reasons.
Generally, eligibility is based on the inmate having served a min-
imum part of his or her sentence; being close to release date or
parole eligibility; having a good disciplinary record; and not hav-
ing been convicted of violent or sex crimes. Home visits on fur-
lough are considered to be more “natural” than conjugal visits,
which can take on an air of artificiality, especially in view of the
use of trailers within the prison to accommodate the visits. The
evidence suggests that furloughs and conjugal visits can aid in
58
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

keeping families together and that the rate of recidivism is lower
for those maintaining family relationships during incarceration
(Howser and MacDonald 1982).
One alternative to furloughs and conjugal visits for prisoners
and their spouses is procreation through artificial insemination.
In a recent case in the U.S. Court of Appeals, a male inmate in the
California prison system filed a complaint in the federal court
alleging that his constitutional rights were being violated by the
prison not permitting him to provide his wife with a sperm spec-
imen that she might use to become artificially inseminated (Gerber
v. Rodney Hickman). The petitioner’s claim was dismissed by the
district court, which ruled that an inmate had no constitutional
right to procreate while incarcerated; the Court of Appeals
affirmed the district court’s decision. The facts of the case indicate
that the inmate, a forty-one-year-old man, was serving a sentence
of 100 years to life plus eleven years. The inmate and his wife
wanted a baby, but the California Department of Corrections pro-
hibits family visits for inmates sentenced to life without parole. In
its analysis of the issue of fundamental rights in prison, the Court
of Appeals noted that prison walls do not negate the protections
of the Constitution and that a state could not, for example, ban
inmate access to mail or prohibit access to the courts. Neverthe-
less, as the court stated, imprisonment does result in the loss of
significant rights, and prisoners retain only those rights “not
inconsistent with their status as prisoners or with the legitimate
penological objectives of the corrections system” (3).
As far as the right to procreate is concerned, the court noted
that because incarceration removes an inmate from society, this
necessarily involves a separation of the inmate from his spouse
and family and that during the period of confinement a right of
intimate association is necessarily foregone. The court noted a
number of other rights that incarcerated persons could not claim
to exercise while incarcerated, including contact visits and con-
jugal visits. The fact that prison officials may choose to allow
some inmates the privilege of conjugal visits does not carry with
it any constitutional rights to such visits (4). A majority of the
court dissented, ruling that procreation, in the sense of the right
to have a child, is not fundamentally inconsistent with incarcer-
ation, relying, among other things, on the fact that the Supreme
Court has ruled that the fundamental right to marry does sur-
vive incarceration even though it may be subjected to substan-
tial restrictions (8). The dissenters noted also that no law in
The Experience of Imprisonment
59

California authorized the prohibition against procreation
imposed by the prison warden and that the Department of
Corrections authorized denial of the inmate’s request under a
regulation that limited medical services for inmates to those
based on medical necessity (9). It is significant that the process
and procedure sought by the inmate involved him providing a
semen sample to his lawyer either personally or by mail; this in
turn would be delivered to a laboratory, which would perform
the artificial insemination. Analyzing this process, a group of
dissenting judges could see nothing inconsistent with incarcera-
tion in producing semen and mailing or handing it to a lawyer,
and pointed out that once the package was outside prison walls
the prison no longer had any legitimate interest in it.
Accordingly, given the procedure the inmate intended to follow,
there was no reason to refuse his request. In the view of the dis-
senting judges, the inmate was not asking for release to go home
for a conjugal visit or for a conjugal visit within the prison. His
request would not affect his confinement at all. It would appear
that the majority decision was aimed more at the goal of isolat-
ing prisoners, and as one judge pointed out, it would not be right
for prison administrators to
supplement the punishment imposed by the legisla-
ture because they believe doing so would enhance
deterrence and retribution. By cutting off the
[inmate’s] fundamental right to procreate, prison
authorities have enhanced [his] punishment beyond
that authorized by statute and consigned [his wife] to
a childless marriage. (15)
The issue of a prisoner marrying while incarcerated was
tested in the superior court of New Jersey, Appellate Division,
where an inmate appealed against a prison administrator’s denial
of her request to marry a noninmate (Vazquez v. New Jersey
Department of Corrections). According to department regulations,
an inmate must request permission to marry at least ninety days
before the proposed marriage date, and any such request to
marry is to be considered by a marriage committee composed of
a chaplain, social work supervisor, correctional staff officer at the
rank of lieutenant or above, and other staff designated by the
superintendent. Standards for approval of a request to marry
include that the inmate has made a satisfactory adjustment to the
correctional facility, that the marriage does not present a security
60
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

risk, that the intended spouse is not presently incarcerated, and
that the inmate is able to comply with state law requirements
governing marriage. In making its decision, the marriage com-
mittee may consider such factors as the inmate’s maturity, emo-
tional stability, and length and type of sentence.
In this particular case, the inmate, Judith Vazquez, was serv-
ing a life sentence and requested permission to marry a man she
had known for well over twenty-three years. The marriage com-
mittee interviewed the inmate and the potential spouse and rec-
ommended denial of the request to marry on the grounds that
“this marriage would not be in the best interest of either party or
the institution” (3). The basis for this statement was the length of
the inmate’s sentence; the apparent belief by both parties that her
sentence would be reduced; a suggestion that the potential
spouse might have knowledge of the crime for which she was
convicted; and the vagueness of their prior relationships, which
the committee found could not be documented. During question-
ing by the committee, the inmate was very nervous and the
potential spouse was described as “very sarcastic,” suggesting
that he did not even understand why the correctional department
was involved in the decision. In conclusion the committee noted
that the parties had only been in touch for the past six months
and had been visiting each other only for the past three months.
Accordingly, the committee did not feel there was an established
relationship for marriage. The administrator accepted the com-
mittee’s decision, and the inmate then argued that this refusal to
allow her to marry violated her constitutional right to marry and
was an abuse of discretion.
The New Jersey Superior Court noted that the right to marry
is subject to restrictions as a result of incarceration (4).
Nevertheless, inmate marriages, like other marriages, do express
emotional support and public commitment, and that marriage
also has spiritual significance. In addition, eventually most
inmates will be released and therefore inmate marriages are
founded on the belief that they will ultimately be fully consum-
mated. Referring to the Supreme Court decision in Turner v. Safley
(1987), which invalidated part of a regulation stating that permis-
sion to marry would only be given if there were “compelling”
reasons, the New Jersey Superior Court noted that the New Jersey
regulations concerning inmate marriages still contained a blanket
prohibition against approving the marriage of an inmate to
another inmate despite Turner’s decision that such marriages
The Experience of Imprisonment
61

cannot be totally prohibited. Accordingly, the New Jersey regula-
tions did not properly reflect the constitutional position. The
court found that the decisions of the marriage committee and
administrator failed to identify any security or other concerns
that would justify denial of the request to marry. The court con-
sidered that the fact that the potential spouse may have been “sar-
castic” before the committee in responding to what the court
called “overly intrusive questioning” did not mean that he con-
stituted a security threat to the institution. The court was critical
of the “excessive paternalism” shown by the committee in its con-
clusion that the parties did not have an established relationship,
ruling that this conclusion was totally unrelated to any legitimate
security or other concerns.
Location of Women’s Prisons
Women’s prisons are usually sited in isolated locations; conse-
quently, women are often a considerable distance from friends
and families. This often means that women in prison lack family
support because of difficult visiting conditions. The location of
women’s prisons is affected by women’s low rate of imprison-
ment: Since there are relatively few women incarcerated in each
state, administrators usually erect only one prison for women in
each state, and all convicted women are incarcerated there. A
number of prisons built on the cottage design were, in the past,
specifically located in rural areas because it was thought during
the time of the women’s reformatory movement that women
ought to be kept away from the attractions of urban areas.
Therefore, historical circumstances operate to isolate incarcerated
women from towns and cities. In one study, the main reason
given for infrequent visitation or no visitation at all by inmate
mothers’ children was the distance between the child’s residence
and the correctional facility. In that study, over 60 percent of the
children lived more than 100 miles from their mother’s place of
incarceration (Bloom and Steinhart 1993).
Prison Programs for Women
Generally, because so few women are imprisoned, few educa-
tional and other programs are made available to them. Indeed,
their smaller numbers and relatively short periods of imprison-
ment are used to justify this deficiency. Additionally, women
62
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

have historically been viewed as unworthy or incapable of train-
ing or treatment. Other justifications for a lack of treatment
options have included women’s status as nonbreadwinners and
as not needing employment upon release. Generally, one can
expect that programming in women’s prisons will reflect the
gender biases in the broader society, especially the notion that a
woman’s role is to function as housekeeper and caregiver in the
home. It is significant that the American Correctional Association
(1990) has found that fewer work assignments are available to
women in prisons, and those that do exist are not classed as
prison industries with associated skills that can be marketed
after release from prison. Women prisoners often have limited
access to prison libraries and to vocational and educational
opportunities. Only about half of women’s prisons have law
libraries for prisoner use, which means they enjoy only restricted
access to the courts.
In general, programs for women fall into five categories:
institutional maintenance, including clerical work, the food serv-
ice at the institution, and general cleaning and maintenance of the
grounds; education, mainly focused on remedial education; voca-
tional training, which emphasizes stereotypical jobs for women
such as cosmetology and sewing; treatment, including Alcoholics
Anonymous and Narcotics Anonymous; and medical care
(Wilson 1994 in Winifred 1996). In a survey of existing vocational
and technical training programs for women, conducted by the
American Correctional Association, a number of states failed to
respond, and Hawaii, Nebraska, North Carolina, West Virginia,
and Wyoming reported that they had no technical or vocation
training programs for women (Winifred 1996, 2). Almost 94 per-
cent of the programs surveyed gave entry-level job skills as a
stated goal. Several states reported problems with old or aging
equipment, especially sewing machines and computers, and oth-
ers identified constraints including limited funding, an inability
to hire staff willing to work with offenders, a low inmate pay
scale, and low inmate self-esteem. Many recommendations were
made by the states, including the certifying of prison programs
by state boards or industries, equal pay for men and women in
comparable inmate jobs (female inmates are paid on a lower scale
than males, often receiving only half the amount paid to men),
increased interaction with community employers, encouraging
women to enroll in nontraditional programs, and the provision of
new and updated equipment (2).
The Experience of Imprisonment
63

In Belknap’s study conducted at a state prison, sixty-eight
female prisoners were surveyed about access to programs and
programming needs within the prison (2000, 113). Over half of
those interviewed were African Americans, and two identified
themselves as American Indian; almost two thirds reported hav-
ing dependent children. The survey asked which programs and
activities the women participated in and which programs they
would like to participate in if offered. Two thirds of the women
had participated in high school or GED courses, and more than a
third had taken at least one college course. Just over one quarter
had taken part in vocational training, over half had participated
in recreational activities, and four fifths had participated in other
types of programs such as twelve step, self-awareness, parenting,
domestic violence, and stress management (114). The need for
drug programs was emphasized by the fact that almost half the
women were active in twelve-step programs such as Alcoholics
Anonymous or Narcotics Anonymous and one quarter took part
in other drug programs. Concerning programs the women
wanted to participate in but could not get into, 16 percent of the
women wanted to take part in twelve-step programs and over
one quarter wanted to gain access to other drug programs. One
fifth wanted to take part in domestic violence programs. The
study suggests that female prisoners would like to have had eas-
ier access to many existing programs and wanted new programs
offered to them as well (119).
Most lawsuits brought by women since the 1970s have tried
to compare women’s access to job assignments, pay for work,
vocational programs, recreation, and living conditions relative to
men. In the 1980s, legal suits challenged conditions that permit-
ted women to receive vocational training in work such as sewing
while male prisons in the same state received training in a multi-
tude of skills such as electronics and carpentry. In programming,
the ideology of the reformatory—that women should be taught to
be “proper women” and trained in domestic tasks for the home—
seems to still prevail in prisons for women. There is a reluctance
to afford women the opportunity for gender equality in terms of
training and acquiring vocational skills, and many programs for
women remain focused on the home and on training in domestic
skills. Women in prison lack education, and figures show that less
than one third of all imprisoned women hold a high school
degree at intake (American Correctional Association 1990). It is
not surprising, then, that both prisoners and staff rank education
64
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

as the most valuable resource for women during their imprison-
ment. In a report to Congress in December 1999, the United States
General Accounting Office (GAO) identified programs for
women at federal facilities that teach skills such as business tech-
nology, dental hygiene, carpentry, tool machine set up and oper-
ation, bus driving, and forklift operation (United States 1999a).
These programs were gender-specific for female prisoners
whereas, for example, programs identified by the GAO in a sur-
vey of women’s prisons in California and Texas focused on stan-
dardized or equal treatment of male and female prisoners. The
Federal Bureau of Prisons adopted a gender-specific policy in
1997 for programming in women’s prisons and is promoting a
gender-specific policy in all state departments of corrections, but
much remains to be done.
Classification
Classification within prisons for both men and women governs
decisions about issues such as eligibility and access to treatment
and educational programs, housing assignments, selection of cell
mates, safety, access to worker status, and fairness and appropri-
ateness of almost all inmate processing decisions during the
period of incarceration. Importantly, classification appears to
greatly influence how an inmate is informally regarded and per-
ceived by both staff and other inmates. In many women’s pris-
ons, there is generally no segregation of prisoners by risk, so that,
for example, women imprisoned for murder are mixed with
women in prison for check fraud or for minor misdemeanors.
This is in contrast to men’s prisons, where classification systems
are fully developed and sophisticated tools of prison manage-
ment. This failure to segregate means that the mentally ill and
the more serious offenders are not separated from the less seri-
ous offenders, as is routinely done in men’s prisons. The absence
of any system for women prisoners is often the outcome of the
small number of women incarcerated and, in most states, of
housing women in a single prison. Associated with this issue is
the absence of specialized treatment, again justified by reference
to the low numbers of women incarcerated. The few classifica-
tion systems in women’s prisons that do exist are generally
designed for male prisoners and have been applied as if they
were gender neutral. They assume, therefore, that the same clas-
sification factors are equally appropriate for both male and
The Experience of Imprisoment
65

female inmates. However, evidence suggests that this assump-
tion is questionable, for research data suggest that women pres-
ent quite a different profile of needs and risks than male inmates.
In addition, women have been shown to have different social,
medical, and psychological needs.
Correctional administrators have expressed the belief that
systems tend to overclassify females and place them in higher
custody levels than are warranted. Generally, local correctional
staff have wide discretion in determining which method of clas-
sification to apply, if any, in a women’s prison; thus, local culture,
politics, values, and the training background of local decision
makers determine which method is selected. This absence of con-
sistency in definitions and procedures, as well as goals, across dif-
ferent organizations and jurisdictions can obviously work to the
disadvantage of women, who may suffer from the absence of a
discrete system for their needs and may be subjected to ad hoc
and arbitrary decision making. A further complicating factor is
that there tends to be an excessive use of discretionary overrides
by staff engaged in classification work, reflecting their disagree-
ment with the classification procedures. In effect, staff may
replace the supposedly objective assessment process with their
own intuitive judgment as to classification. In one study, the over-
ride rate in a women’s prison was as high as 40 percent, which is
more than twice the usual rate and far higher than that for male
inmates (Brennan 1998).
Associated with the classification issue generally is that for
classification to be effective, housing and treatment options must
exist in a particular institution, and yet housing and program-
ming options for women are frequently lacking. In the case of
housing, commingling women prisoners without classification
can, from the  administrators’ point of view, result in the under-
mining of correctional goals such as safety, order, and the least
restrictive form of custody. With crowding and inadequate hous-
ing comes the breakdown of whatever classification systems do
exist and a reversion to the category of “space available,” mean-
ing that a woman inmate is held in whatever space is available
regardless of security and custody factors. Generally, research has
challenged the notion that women prisoners need to be housed in
conditions of such extreme security given their very low risk of
escape, of violence, or of serious violation of discipline, as com-
pared to male detainees (Brennan 1998). Yet, women continue to
be housed in high-security arrangements, possibly causing them
66
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

psychological damage through the perception given to visitors
that these women are dangerous and need to be kept in condi-
tions of strict confinement. Women may also be denied access to
whatever programs exist in the institution as a result of the ten-
dency of risk systems to overclassify them, because being placed
in a higher classification of risk than is warranted often serves to
deny or limit access to treatment programs. Access to treatment
may also be denied or restricted when the classification system
underestimates or fails to record the real treatment and program-
ming needs of a woman inmate.
Discipline
The regime in women’s prisons is characterized by elaborate sys-
tems of rules and regulations, policies, and procedures designed
to order and control their behavior in confinement. This wealth of
regulations makes it possible for women prisoners to be sanc-
tioned for conduct that might be considered minor but which still
violates disciplinary codes. Compared with men’s prisons,
women’s institutions often have more rules about conduct as well
as rules that are pettier in nature (Pollock-Byrne 1990). However,
even when the rules in both prisons are broadly identical, women
seem to be subject to stricter supervision than men and are often
punished for behavior that would not be sanctioned in men’s
prisons, such as cursing, failing to eat all the food on one’s plate,
and sharing shampoo. Essentially, women are subjected to a
greater degree of surveillance than men, leading to findings of
more rule infractions. This intensive surveillance seems to be a
carry-over from historical times, reflecting the broad societal
belief that women should conform to gender stereotypes of obe-
dience, submission, and dependence. Therefore, successful adap-
tation of women to the prison regime is measured by the extent to
which they conform to this stereotype of the compliant woman. A
study of Texas prisons in 1994 found that women were far more
likely than men to be cited for infractions of prison rules, espe-
cially those minor in nature, and to be far more severely punished
for them (McClellan 1994). For example, women received cita-
tions for drying underwear, talking while waiting in line, dis-
playing too many family photographs, and for failing to
consume all of their food at mealtimes. Rule infractions for pos-
sessing contraband included possessing an extra bra or pillow-
case, a borrowed comb, or candy. Sharing shampoo in the shower
The Experience of Imprisonment
67

or lighting another prisoner’s cigarette were classified as “traf-
ficking.” Other examples include “walking on the grass, rattling
doors and yelling, failing to return towels, or having torn sheets”
(Glick and Neto 1977, 42). Prison regimes that punish women in
this manner have been characterized as treating the women like
children, in effect infantilizing them. As Freedman (2000) points
out, the family model applied to female inmates historically
resulted in women prisoners being referred to as “girls,” and in
modern times, prison guards have continued to view female
inmates as children with the result that women are seen as inher-
ently dependent while men are given adult status. Similarly, cor-
rectional officers, like parents, will often show an excessive
concern with women’s cleanliness, and displaying minor vices,
such as smoking, may result in cleaning work as punishment. For
example, a rule statement in a Wisconsin women’s institution
read:
It is our policy that if you smoke you will be expected
to wash your room walls once every other month. If
you do not smoke you should wash them once every
three months. (Gibson 1976 in Hawkins 1999, 125)
Women Prisoners and Prison Staff
Prison staff historically and in the present day have consistently
perceived female prisoners as more difficult to work with than
male prisoners. This has led to a tendency for correctional staff to
exhibit their discomfort or dislike of working with women pris-
oners or to avoid working in women’s prisons at all. This prefer-
ence for working with male inmates applies to both male and
female correctional staff at all levels and ranks and seems to date
back to the very beginnings of women’s prisons. For example, a
prison matron writing in the 1860s described female inmates as
being “harder to manage . . . more impulsive, more individual,
more unreasonable and excitable than men; will not act in concert
and cannot be disciplined in masses” (Muraskin 2000, 239).
Recent research has revealed that male and female staff do not
necessarily have the same justification for their preference for
male inmates (Pollock-Byrne 1986). Male officers express their
concern over the perceived difficulties in supervising women and
the fear of being accused of rape as well as the need to modify
their normal behavior when supervising women inmates, such as
68
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

being careful of their language and being more circumspect in the
possible use of force. The reasons female officers give for their
preference in working with males include the perception that
male inmates are more likely to treat the women staff with
respect, and to the appreciation they believe is shown them by
male inmates, which, in their view, makes their work more com-
fortable. Both male and female staff consider women inmates to
be more demanding and to complain more often and as more
likely to refuse to comply with orders and directions. Some offi-
cers interviewed in one study did, however, express appreciation
for the challenge of working with female inmates even though
they agreed they were more difficult to control and supervise.
Generally, the research shows that both male and female staff per-
ceive women prisoners as possessing certain attributes that make
them more difficult to work with. Echoing the comments of the
prison matron in 1861, they stated that women prisoners showed
defiance, exhibited open displays of emotion, and were seen as
seeking gratification.
The import of this research is that women and men prisoners
are indeed different in their persons and personalities and that
these many real differences can appropriately be catered to by
management and supervisory approaches that recognize differ-
ence and account for it. Typically there has been a lack of special-
ized training for staff employed in women’s prisons, as once
again, it was assumed that there were no differences between
men and women prisoners in terms of treatment and conditions.
Generally, it seems that most correctional training focuses on
instruction in the skills of security and in handling inmates to pre-
vent disorder, and there is a heavy concentration on the policies,
rules, and regulations of the particular correctional service. After
this type of formal training, officers must learn on the job how to
manage inmates and interact with them on a daily basis within an
actual prison environment; it is only then that officers learn the
occupational culture, including all the stereotypes that have been
developed about differences between male and female prisoners.
Sexual Abuse in Prison
Though the exact number of sexual assaults committed against
female and male prisoners is not known, surveys estimate more
than 290,000 inmates of both sexes are sexually assaulted each
year. In 1995 the Department of Justice estimated 135,000 rapes of
The Experience of Imprisonment
69

female inmates throughout the country (Bureau of Justice
Statistics 1995). A report by the General Accounting Office to
Congress in June 1999 focused on four jurisdictions containing
the largest correctional systems for female offenders and found
that despite training programs and legislation criminalizing such
conduct, sexual misconduct was still occurring, with more than
500 allegations of staff sexual misconduct being made in these
jurisdictions over the period 1995–1998 (U.S. General Accounting
Office 1999b). According to the report, most allegations were of
verbal harassment, improper visual surveillance, improper
touching, and consensual sex. During the 1990s the Justice
Department brought proceedings against the states of Arizona
and Michigan, alleging systemic sexual misconduct by male staff
against women inmates. In both cases, settlement agreements
were entered into requiring those states to revise training,
strengthen investigative techniques, and oblige male officers to
announce their presence when entering areas where female
inmates might be in a state of undress. There is good reason to
believe that the majority of assaults on women inmates are not
reported to correctional authorities. An example of this reluctance
to prosecute assaults against women occurred over a five-year
period between 1990 and 1995, when seventy-six sexual miscon-
duct complaints were filed by inmates at a prison in New York,
the state’s largest prison for women (Williams 1996). Ultimately,
fifty-six of those complaints were not pursued, mainly because
the inmates refused to answer questions about incidents when
questioned, but fourteen cases were proved. The outcome was the
transfer of six officers out of the prison, with one officer receiving
counseling. Cases of abuse may go unreported because of the
woman’s fear of repercussions, or because there is a perception
that correctional officers are more credible witnesses than a
woman incarcerated for criminal conduct. A number of states
have laws that criminalize sex between inmates and correctional
staff, and in New York state, legislation classifies all sex relations
between staff and prisoners as rape, but in spite of this assaults
continue. Anecdotal evidence suggests that a fine line is drawn in
prison between consensual and nonconsensual sex, and female
inmates are always liable to be punished for making an accusa-
tion at all. In one case, for example, immediately after alleging
sexual abuse, the woman prisoner was transferred to a maximum
security facility out of her current minimum security and was
beaten and harassed by guards there (Holmes 1996). Sexual abuse
70
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

can also take place under the guise of security, as in the case of the
strip search normally conducted on all new inmates.
Explanations of women prisoners’ vulnerability to sexual
abuse tend to center on the notion that their presence in prison
proves to male staff that they are no longer members of the “gen-
tle sex,” and for this violation of gender role expectations they are
liable to harsh treatment, including sexual abuse. The institu-
tional culture of the prison emphasizes security and discipline,
but in contrast, correctional staff are also required to give promi-
nence to treatment. Inevitably, tensions arise in the relations
between guard and inmate. Guards have both legitimate and
coercive power, and in situations where these roles are confused,
abuse of power, including using coercive power in sexual
assaults, can occur. It was found not to be unusual for male staff
to force women into performing sexual favors in order to have
their basic needs met, such as seeing visitors and obtaining food
(Henriques and Gilbert 2000). Significantly, there is a greater
degree of sex integration in women’s prisons than in men’s pris-
ons—this despite the fact that female prisoners are much more
likely to be abused by male guards than male prisoners are by
female guards.
In recent years, following a landmark case brought by male
inmates in a Florida prison, female inmates have brought suit in
class action proceedings on behalf of women alleging sexual
harassment and abuse by prison guards (U.S. General Accounting
Office 1999b). In cases brought by women in California, Georgia,
and the District of Columbia, out of court settlements were
reached. Often these cases resulted from advocacy undertaken by
groups that have taken up the cause of female inmates being sex-
ually assaulted, such as the ACLU Prison Project and the
California Prison Focus.
There are practical means of avoiding assaults against
women prisoners: having body searches of women inmates con-
ducted by two officers, one of whom must be a woman; and
ensuring that correctional staff training includes their role in pre-
venting rape and sexual abuse. However, in relation to privacy
rights, the courts have recognized only limited rights holding in
Forts v. Ward (1980), that the privacy rights of women inmates do
not extend to protection against being viewed by male guards
while sleeping, so long as suitable sleepwear is provided and
they are allowed to cover their cell windows while changing
clothes. In Jordan v. Gardner (1993), a circuit court found that the
The Experience of Imprisonment
71

psychological impact of clothed body searches by male prison
guards of women inmates with histories of sexual abuse
amounted to an infliction of pain contrary to the Constitution
(Farrell 2000, 202).
Rape services should be provided to women in prison just as
they are to women on the outside, and correctional staff ought to
always be punished for assaults and rape through the criminal
justice system and not simply internally within the correctional
system. On May 30, 2002, the Boston Globe reported that officials
had agreed to pay $10 million to settle a class action lawsuit insti-
tuted on behalf of some 5,400 women who were routinely and
illegally strip-searched over a four-year period at a local jail
(Boston Globe 2002). The settlement followed the ruling by the U.S.
District Court that the city of Boston and Suffolk County had
engaged in a blanket strip-search policy. The practice followed by
the local sheriff’s department was that women arrested and taken
to the county jail were subjected to the same treatment as female
inmates awaiting trial because they were ordered to strip naked
and bend over while a female officer searched their vaginas and
rectums.
Criminal Justice Policy Issues
The actions of lawmakers and the policies of the federal and state
governments can affect the situation of women in prison and par-
ticularly the rate at which women are imprisoned. Changes in jus-
tice policy, such as declaring a “war on crime” or a “war on
drugs,” affect law enforcement authorities when demands are
made for them to be more proactive in catching criminals.
Changes in sentencing practices may have the effect of increasing
the size of the prison population or extending the time spent in
prison for various offenses. The rate of imprisonment of women
has increased substantially, largely due to the current “war on
drugs” and mandatory minimum sentencing policies. On
December 31, 2000, 91,612 women were housed in federal and
state prisons in the United States (Bureau of Justice Statistics
2001). This compares with 1.2 million men. Over one third of all
female prisoners were held in the three largest jurisdictions of
Texas, California, and in the federal system. Since the 1970s, there
has been a rapid growth in the number of women (and men)
imprisoned, as the criminal justice system has become more puni-
72
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

tive, placing ever-greater reliance on incarceration as the appro-
priate response to criminality. Since 1990 the number of female
prisoners has increased 108 percent, and the female prison popu-
lation has increased at an average rate of at least 10 percent in sev-
enteen states.
”Three Strikes and You’re Out”
In the 1990s legislation was enacted that imposes minimum sen-
tences for repeat offenders in response to a perceived wave of vio-
lent crime. In particular, California has pioneered legislation that
provides for “three strikes and you’re out,” intended originally
by its proponents to target violent male offenders and keep them
behind bars for repeat offenses. Despite its supposed emphasis on
violent offenders, in California the vast majority of second- and
third-strike inmates have been sentenced for crimes that involved
no element of violence. There is general agreement that the legis-
lation has led to absurdities in sentencing. For example, in one
case an offender received a sentence of twenty-seven years to life
for attempting to sell stolen batteries to a retailer. The loss to the
owner of the batteries was $90, and the offender, who was dis-
abled, was collecting disability pay at the time of the offense
(Austin and Irwin 2001, 208). By 1997, twenty-six states and the
federal government had enacted “three strikes” laws. As with
much legislation, no account was taken of gender in designing
the three strikes model due to the perception of the policy makers
that men’s and women’s crime can be equated. This ignores the
gendered nature of female criminality and the different family
responsibilities of men and women.
There are a number of reasons for opposing the use of this
type of legislation against women. For one thing, women offend-
ers are not the type of offenders the legislation is aimed at, yet
they are caught by it anyway. The legislation is intended to keep
violent offenders imprisoned, but the majority of women are not
violent or predatory offenders; they are property and drug
offenders. As well, women often commit property or drug
offenses to ensure the survival of their families and because of
their poverty. Women tend to shoplift and write bad checks; they
do not rob liquor stores with sawn-off shotguns. Nevertheless,
they may be caught by versions of the “three strikes” legislation
that does not limit its penalties to violent criminals and conse-
quently may be incarcerated for long periods. Some argue that
Criminal Justice Policy Issues
73

there is also a moral objection to three strikes legislation, in that it
penalizes future conduct on the assumption that a person will
commit further offenses and should therefore be locked up based
on that prediction. However, legislation like this can overestimate
the likelihood of future criminal conduct by women and can
incarcerate women not deserving severe punishment.
Although the incarceration of female drug offenders has
increased, the proportion of women imprisoned for violent
offenses declined in the 1980s, dropping from 48.9 percent of all
women to 41 percent in 1986 and to 32.8 percent by 1991 (Casey
and Wiatrowski 1996). It is estimated that one half of women
incarcerated for a violent offense killed abusive partners or
spouses. For women involved in robbery, there is support for the
argument that many were not active participants in the crime but
were dependent accomplices to male partners. Clearly, women
are not predatory violent offenders who are suitable for manda-
tory twenty-five-year three strikes sentences, such as those that
apply in California to offenders with three felony convictions,
regardless of the nature of the third conviction. The effect of
imposing a twenty-five-year sentence on a woman with children
is to sever the mother and child bond for the rest of the child’s
formative years. The purpose of three strikes legislation was to
incapacitate persistent violent offenders, but the question must be
asked whether those who formulated the legislation really con-
sidered the effects this law would have on women offenders or
simply promoted yet another measure intended to “get tough on
crime” with no regard to gender at all.
The “War on Drugs”
The so-called war on drugs has really been four recent political
initiatives, with the initial one declared in 1972 by President
Richard Nixon. Others followed in 1982, 1986, and 1988. The
goals of each movement were broadly the same: to reduce indi-
vidual drug use, to stop the inflow of drugs into the United
States, and to reduce drug-related crime. In 1986 and 1988,
antidrug legislation changed the focus away from large drug
dealers and from the treatment of drug abusers toward users and
street-level dealers, especially those involved in dealing and
using crack cocaine. The 1986 and 1988 legislation resulted from
media attention to the issue, with continual reporting about the
use of crack cocaine. The media identified crack cocaine as a
74
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

national epidemic, and it in turn became a major issue in the elec-
tions of 1986. Legislation enacted in that year laid down the
parameters of the current “war” by prescribing mandatory mini-
mum penalties for drug trafficking based on the amount of drugs
involved, and by making a distinction between possession of
cocaine and crack cocaine, with a minimum of twenty-five years
imprisonment for possession of five or more grams of crack
cocaine. In contrast, an offender found guilty of possession of
powder cocaine would only be liable to a mandatory minimum
sentence of five years if the amount of cocaine exceeded or
equaled 500 grams. The legislation was firmly aimed at social
control and included provisions that eliminated probation and
parole for certain drug offenders and allowed for the forfeiture of
assets. Fundamentally, drug abuse had been perceived and
defined as a national security issue, and the “war on drugs” was
portrayed as a matter of national survival. After 1986, however,
media and public attention drifted away from the issue of drug
abuse. The subject reared its head again in 1988 with the passing
of more legislation that enhanced penalties and established the
office of the “drug czar.”
Historically, women have always been greater users of drugs
such as sedatives and tranquilizers than men. This fact cuts across
class and race: middle-class, working-class, and upper-class
women all turn to drug use for similar reasons, including depres-
sion, low self-esteem, and personal trauma, such as physical and
sexual abuse by men. There is no doubt that the “war on drugs”
was the impetus for the policy shift that has greatly contributed
to the increase in the imprisonment of women in the United
States. During the 1980s, the arrest rate for women with drug vio-
lations increased at about twice the rate of arrests for men for the
same violations. In 1991 one out of every three women was in
prison for a drug offense, compared with only one in ten in 1979.
Overall, drug offenses made up 55 percent of the national
increase in women prisoners in the period 1986 to 1991 (Casey
and Wiatrowski 1996). The “war on drugs” has been described as
“a war on women,” particularly women of color (Chesney-Lind
1995; Bloom and Chesney-Lind 2000), since one of the effects of
the legislation is that more women have been brought into the
criminal justice system, producing a tremendous increase in the
number of incarcerated women. The background of most of these
offenders is, as one woman judge put it, from the “lowest, most
easily arrested rung of the drug crime business” (Bush-Baskette
Criminal Justice Policy Issues
75

1999, 224). There is a general consensus among researchers and
professionals working in the drug abuse field that harsh sentenc-
ing has little or no effect on the prevalence of drug offenses and
that such practices do not serve as a deterrent to such offenses.
The question must be asked whether imprisoning large numbers
of women, most of whom are mothers, is an appropriate response
to street-level drug use and abuse when other options such as
treatment or the imposition of sanctions within the community
might better serve the general interests of the women and of soci-
ety in general.
Boot Camps for Women
Boot camps for women constitute a special form of incarceration.
Since the 1980s a variety of boot camp-style programs have been
developed that require participation in military-type drills, strict
discipline, and physical challenges (Clark and Kellam 2001).
According to the Criminal Justice Year Book, at the beginning of
1998 some thirty-three states and the Federal Bureau of Prisons
operated forty-nine boot camp facilities, sixteen of which
included female participants (Clark and Kellam 2001, 1). Research
on the subject of female offenders in boot camps has been limited,
but MacKenzie’s 1996 study assessed several programs using
surveys and interviews (MacKenzie and Donaldson 1996). The
study concluded that in light of their provision for early release,
women should have equal access to boot camp programs, and
that such programs could be tailored to fit women’s special
needs. It noted that only a small number of women participated
in these programs in each state and that women were often pre-
cluded from programs because of their eligibility requirements,
which were originally developed for men. Also, there were high
dropout rates among women, with explanations of health prob-
lems and high levels of stress provoked by the physical demands
of boot camp programs. The study found that given their small
numbers, women felt isolated and vulnerable to harassment in
the male-dominated programs. Further, the military regimes and
harshness of the male drill instructors might have adverse effects
on women who had been in abusive relationships with men.
Angela Gover and others (1999) describe the regimen at a
boot camp as beginning with a predawn reveille, the inception of
a ten to sixteen hour day. During the day, inmates must address
staff as “sir” or “ma’am,” ask permission to speak, and refer to
76
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

themselves as “this inmate.” Frequent punishments for minor
rule violations often involve physical exercises such as pushups
or running (Gover, Styve, and MacKenzie 1999, 385). After dress-
ing, inmates will march to an exercise yard and engage in an hour
or two of physical training, followed by drill and ceremony. At
breakfast, inmates must stand in front of the table until com-
manded to sit and may not speak while eating. The meal is fol-
lowed by a march to work sites involving hard physical labor,
such as cleaning state parks or highways. At the end of the work-
ing day, inmates return to the compound and take part in more
drill and exercise, followed by a series of evening programs and
dinner. For those who complete the program, an elaborate gradu-
ation ceremony occurs and awards are given for achievements in
the program.
MacKenzie and Donaldson (1996) studied six boot camps
with female participants and found that the women inmates had
difficulty with the physical demands of the program and experi-
enced emotional stress due to the majority of staff and inmates
being male. This leads some researchers to argue that it is inap-
propriate to place female boot camp inmates with males. After a
review of the results of adult and juvenile boot camp research,
Sherman and others (1997) concluded there was no evidence that
the military style atmosphere, structure, and discipline of boot
camps reduced recidivism as compared to other forms of punish-
ment. Similarly, although there was no evidence that boot camps
actually changed offenders, there was some evidence that they
could be used to mark those offenders who would have difficulty
in completing probation or parole.
In an attempt to balance the military aspects of shock incar-
ceration in boot camps with therapeutic programming, a Shock
Incarceration Program has been developed for women in New
York; the first women entered the six-month program in
December 1988 (Clark and Kellam 2001, 2). The program is the
largest in the country, with 120 beds for participants and a further
twenty beds for intake, reception, and orientation. The program
models a therapeutic community approach including drug and
alcohol abuse treatment, education, and training in life skills as
well as exercise, discipline, and military drills. It includes 500
hours of physical training, 780 hours of substance abuse treat-
ment, and 260 hours of education aimed at high school equiva-
lency. Women also receive vocational training, focusing on skills
such as upholstery repair, building maintenance skills, and toy
Criminal Justice Policy Issues
77

repair (3). The focus on academic achievement is borne out by the
fact that from 1988 to 1999, 86 percent of program participants
who took the GED test passed, a rate considerably higher than
that in prison facilities. Each year about one third of all new
female admissions to the Department of Correctional Services in
New York are eligible for the Shock Incarceration Program, sub-
ject to a screening process. In that process, females are less likely
than males to qualify because they are often found to suffer seri-
ous health conditions such as hypertension, diabetes, or tubercu-
losis. They may also be precluded from admission because of
mental health needs.
Female offenders are less likely than their male counterparts
to complete the program; more than 66 percent of men complete
the program, compared to 57 percent of the women (Clark and
Kellam 2001, 4). The difference is due mainly to women’s medical
needs, which made women almost twice as likely as men to leave.
Nevertheless, as a proportion of New York’s incarcerated popula-
tion, women are well represented in the program: Though they
comprise 8 percent of the program’s population, they make up
less than 5 percent of the total prison population in New York.
In an attempt to assess the success of the program, the New
York Department of Correctional Services surveyed women who
had completed the program between 1989 and 1995 for a period
of three years after release and compared their rates of return to
prison to two other groups from the same period; that is, women
who were eligible but did not enter the program, and women
who dropped out of the program (Clark and Kellam 2001, 4). The
assessment showed that women who completed Shock
Incarceration were substantially less likely than the other groups
to return to prison within three years, and in fact nearly eight out
of ten graduates of the program avoided a return to prison.
The promoters of Shock Incarceration contend that a prop-
erly designed boot camp has the potential to build women’s self-
esteem, and women participants have credited it with promoting
their sobriety and success. Since 1989 nearly 2,000 women have
graduated from the New York program, which has offered a
viable alternative to longer sentences for women offenders. In
terms of its physical impact, shock incarceration in New York
emphasizes a gradual increase in standards of physical condi-
tioning. The program is available in New York to women with
varying physical conditions (Clark and Kellam 2001, 5).
78
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

Health and Medical Issues
A number of issues relating to health and medical needs affect the
situation of women in prison. Again, the tendency of correctional
administrators has been to treat women as if they had the same
needs as men and to apply traditional gender stereotypes to those
incarcerated.
Medicalizing Women
In prison, medical examinations and checks may be imposed on
women who are unable to resist or reject them due to their status
as incarcerated women. This treatment may occur on occasions
when women returning from court appearances may be subjected
to a strip search and a check of their bodily orifices, or after a
woman prisoner gives birth in the hospital, where she might be
subjected to vaginal searches for contraband. Women prisoners
often experience these security measures as a form of humiliation
and they can be painful and dangerous, resulting in bleeding and
infection. Ironically, although these searches are often routine, the
administration of pap tests for cervical cancer is not often con-
ducted despite the fact this is a standard medical practice for non-
imprisoned women. Concern has also been expressed about the
practice of prescribing tranquilizers and psychotropic drugs to
women in prison. It has been suggested that the underlying
rationale is to control female prisoners as opposed to administer-
ing to medical problems (Velimesis 1981). A recent report of the
government found that 17 percent of women in jails and 23 per-
cent of women in state prisons in the United States receive drug
medication for emotional disorders, and there is a good deal of
evidence that prescribing psychotropic drugs is far more common
in women’s prisons than men’s (Greenfeld and Snell 1999). This
greater allocation of tranquilizing and psychotropic drugs to
women prisoners might be attributable to women suffering more
severe reactions to imprisonment than men, to women experienc-
ing trauma due to a forced separation from their children, or per-
haps to prison staff seeing women as in greater need of the
control that drugs can impose than male prisoners (Belknap
2001).
The issue of using chemical restraints in prisons has been
considered judicially in recent years. In Harper v. State (1988), the
Washington Supreme Court ruled that inmates had the right to
Health and Medical Issues
79

refuse to take antipsychotic drugs prescribed by prison authori-
ties and that this right could be overridden only when the state
proved a compelling state interest to administer these drugs and
that the administration of drugs was necessary and effective to
further that interest (Auerhahn and Dermody Leonard 2000, 2).
However, the U.S. Supreme Court reversed this ruling, holding
that inmates could be medicated against their will if the state
could show that medicating is “reasonably related to legitimate
penological interests,” which the court found to include “the
maintenance of order in the prison environment” (2). The Court
was of the opinion that because a psychiatrist must prescribe this
medication, that prerequisite ensures the protection of the pris-
oner’s medical interest. In the case of Riggins v. Nevada (1992)
the Court ruled that administering antipsychotic drugs to jail
detainees is a violation of due process because it introduces a
strong possibility of prejudice into the trial process having regard
to the possible impact of such drugs on a person’s appearance,
testimony, ability to follow the proceedings, and ability to com-
municate with a lawyer. According to Auerhahn and Dermody
(2000, 3), it is common practice to chemically restrain healthy
inmates, and jail and prison inmates are often medicated without
prior diagnosis or adequate psychiatric and physical assessments.
In 1976 several women in a New York state prison were trans-
ported to a state mental hospital following a determination that
they were a disciplinary problem (Auerhahn and Dermody
Leonard 2000, 3). On arrival at the mental hospital, they were med-
icated with an antidepressant and a few days later given thorazine,
an antipsychotic drug. During the period of their confinement in
the hospital, other drugs were administered of an antipsychotic,
antidepressant, and sedative nature as well as tranquilizers. No
clinical diagnosis of mental disability was made, although staff
psychiatrists did conduct brief interviews and physical examina-
tions of each of the women that lasted ten to fifteen minutes each.
After the women brought a suit against the hospital staff, the staff
psychiatrist admitted that the drugs were not administered for
treatment but “to maintain peace and tranquility on the ward” (3).
Also, it was admitted that the drugs were sometimes administered
forcibly through injections because the women did not like taking
certain drugs because of their effects.
Auerhahn and Dermody Leonard (2000, 8) argue that
responding to female criminality by medicalizing women has its
origins in the nineteenth-century view that the cause for all
80
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

women’s behavior was to be found in their reproductive capacity.
Thus, the nature of a woman was conceptualized as “sickly” and
this, together with the rise of the medical profession, resulted in
curative strategies that emphasized the reproductive function.
Medical cures, therefore, focused on treating these organs and
treatment contained four stages: a manual investigation, leeching,
ejections, and cauterization. During the reformatory movement,
this emphasis on treatment and disease of criminal women was
continued, as female criminals were seen as perversions of the
feminine ideal (9). Allen argues that focusing explanations for
women’s criminality on women’s bodies and physiology serves
to neutralize the threat presented by deviant women (Auerhahn
and Dermody Leonard 2000, 7). The idea that a female offender is
sick is seen as more appealing than the notion of a deviant
woman willfully committing crimes.
In Leonard’s study, drawing on interviews with forty-two
women serving prison terms for the death of their abusive part-
ners, one recurrent criticism was the use of prescription drugs
while these women were committed to county jail facilities pend-
ing trial (in Auerhahn and Dermody Leonard 2000, 11). One
woman reported that at the time of her arrest, she was put on
drugs and told by jail administrators that she needed them. She
felt that she needed something that would make her sleep to
avoid thinking about what was happening to her and she noted
that everyone in the jail slept all the time. Another woman, a for-
mer high school English teacher serving a sentence of twenty-five
years to life, reported that she was put on both a tranquilizer and
an antidepressant while in jail and during her trial. As a result,
she did not testify convincingly and was told that she was per-
ceived as cold and remorseless. She felt that the drugs made her
inarticulate (12). Other women explained that they were admin-
istered drugs that were frequently ordered by nurses, psycholo-
gists, and even by correctional officers. One Native American
woman repeatedly rejected psychotropic drugs and reported that
jail staff attempted to force her to accept this medication in
exchange for releasing her mail.
Reproductive Freedom
Studies indicate that women prisoners as well as girls in juvenile
institutions are encouraged, and perhaps even forced, to give up
their newborns for adoption even if they became pregnant while
Health and Medical Issues
81

incarcerated (Belknap 2001). Most prisons have no facilities for
giving birth, and so pregnant women inmates are transferred to
nearby hospitals when they go into labor. Most states remove
children from their incarcerated mothers within forty-eight hours
after birth. Despite the success of a prison nursery program in
New York, both California and Florida have repealed legislation
allowing women to keep newborn infants in prison with them for
a time (Schoenbauer 1986 in Wright 1997, 89). Only three
women’s prisons have a program where babies and nursing
mothers can remain together for up to eighteen months
(Watterson 1996, 211). These are located in Nebraska, New York,
and Washington. South Dakota allows infants to remain with
their mothers for up to one month after birth. The Bedford Hills
Prison for Women in New York remains the only prison nursery
in the country where babies are permitted to stay until they are
one year old, with extensions possible if the mother’s release date
is within the upcoming six months (Kauffman 2001). In a study
conducted in June 1992, Gabel and Girard (1995, 237) docu-
mented the New York prison nurseries that have been running for
some ninety years. Expectant mothers receive prenatal care, but
the living quarters for mothers and their babies are, according to
the women, dilapidated and overcrowded. However, the mothers
perceive the program to be valuable and important, noting espe-
cially benefits such as bonding with their children and learning
acceptable parenting skills.
In Nebraska, the Correctional Center for Women, which
opened its nursery in 1994, emphasizes bonding with the mother
and continuity in the relationship between the child and its pri-
mary caregiver. In Nebraska, mothers who give birth may keep
their children in prison only if they are due for release before the
child is eighteen months old, and the prison has space for up to
eight mothers on a designated floor of one building (Kauffman
2001, 63).
The newest of the prison nurseries for women opened in
August 1999 at the Washington Corrections Center for Women.
Here, a mother may keep her baby if she has less than three years
to serve after the baby is born. The nursery is open to any mother
who has custody of her child and will be the primary caregiver
when released. This contrasts with other prison programs that
restrict participation in prison nurseries to nonviolent offenders.
The center allows up to twenty mothers and their children to
occupy one wing of a ninety-bed residential unit; intensive par-
82
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

enting classes are provided by the Department of Correction. In
an attempt to simulate real world conditions, mothers return to
work at the prison, or outside the prison if they are granted work
release, six weeks after birth. Other prison inmates who are
trained and take part in parenting classes may also serve as care-
givers.
It is also known that many women have had abortions
against their will while incarcerated, and those who want abor-
tions may not be given access to them. There are no consistent
policies in women’s prisons regarding contraception, abortion,
and general reproductive education, and even if such services are
available, it is often in a noncomprehensive or inconsistent form
(Belknap 2001).
Women’s Medical Needs
There is often hostility, resentment, and discrimination within the
prison system toward pregnant women who have special medical
needs. Studies indicate that about 5 percent of women are preg-
nant at the time of their intake to jails and prisons (Greenfeld and
Snell 1999); a few suggest that up to one quarter of women in
prison were either pregnant on intake or gave birth during the
previous year. Obviously, pregnant women need prenatal care
including special diets, vitamins, and medical examinations. In
fact, some suggest that special nutritional needs are not limited to
pregnant women and that incarcerated women in general have
greater health and dietary needs than nonincarcerated women
(Belknap 2001). To a far greater extent than men, women inmates
seem to incur substantial weight gains and have inadequate diets.
Some suggest that co-corrections, that is, incarcerating women
and men in the same institution, is the answer to meeting the
medical needs of women prisoners. They argue that through co-
corrections, costs can be saved and the range of services offered
to women increased. However, good arguments counter this
view. For example, it is likely that based on gender roles outside
the prison, men will capture most, if not all, leadership roles in
the prison, obtain the best jobs, and dominate all education and
training programs and resources. One study of a co-correctional
facility found that women were routinely denied access to almost
all programs conducted there (Chesney-Lind and Rodriquez
1983), and another found that co-corrections women prisoners are
more likely than co-corrections men to be disciplined (Anderson
Health and Medical Issues
83

1978). As well, there is evidence in such facilities of pregnancies
occurring during incarceration and of prostitution where women
are coerced, or of women agreeing to perform sexual favors in
return for cigarettes or contraband (Belknap 2001, 193). Thus, it is
quite likely that the coeducational prison would offer no more
opportunities for women than do separate women’s prisons.
In one study of women’s prisons in Ohio, researchers exam-
ined the structure of the health care delivery system in those pris-
ons and the medical staff’s perception of that structure (Ammar
and Erez 2000). In the Ohio Reformatory for Women, which
opened in 1916 and now houses about 1,700 inmates, twenty-nine
of the approximately 400 staff members are part of the medical or
paramedical staff. The reformatory contains a hospital with seven
infirmary rooms, but the rooms are archaic and old. The state also
maintains a prerelease center in Columbus housing minimum-
and medium-security female inmates; it opened in 1988 and in
June 1998 housed about 460 inmates. In contrast to the reforma-
tory, this prerelease center is modern, with 135 staff, of which
twelve are medical or paramedical staff. A further prerelease cen-
ter opened in 1988 as a minimum- and medium-security facility;
in 1998 it housed 624 inmates and employed 173 staff, thirteen of
whom are nurses. The three physicians operating at the center are
hired under private contract. According to one of the medical
directors, the prison population has increased in recent years with-
out an equal increase in the staff of women’s prisons; the usual
staffing is three nurses for every three hundred inmates, following
the male model. However, women’s medical needs in prison are
two and a half times the rate of men’s (3). According to one of the
nurses interviewed in the study, most of the women were “physi-
cally a mess,” and at the reformatory, one third of the inmates
were said to be mentally ill and 20 percent seriously mentally ill
(3). The study concluded that health care delivery in the three
institutions for women is managed in a state of crisis, the institu-
tions are overcrowded, and the health workers overworked.
The staff reported that in all three institutions there were no
routine activities for medical staff and no typical day. This was
because the medical staff in the institutions were responsible not
only for treating medical problems but also for evaluating the
medical condition of inmates who were not ill. For example, dur-
ing one interview session, the medical staff were called away as
one inmate in segregation had acted out emotionally and had to
be restrained in a posture that placed pressure on her wrists.
84
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

According to policy, medical staff were required to assess her
physical condition and report their findings.
A major complaint at all three institutions was the shortage
of nurses, and lack of space was a concern in the two prerelease
centers. The reformatory’s infirmary was dilapidated and lacked
basic amenities. It was apparent that hiring qualified candidates
for correctional health care was also an issue because such staff
need not only medical skills but also the skill to assess truth-
telling and manipulation among the prison population, who, staff
said, would use any excuse to gain medical attention and get
away from the boredom of daily routine (Ammar and Erez 2000,
6). The medical staff at all three institutions agreed that female
inmates preferred to be cared for inside the prisons, giving the
reason that the women do not like to be treated outside because
they have to be shackled and they find it demeaning (7).
Medical staff saw a need to educate women inmates about
basic health practices, as most of the women had preexisting con-
ditions that included high blood pressure, diabetes, and HIV
(Ammar and Erez 2000, 9). One health administrator thought that
the prisoners did not comprehend simple things such as washing
their hands after using the bathroom, how to prevent and treat
colds, and what was meant by immunization. He found the pris-
oners to be very poorly educated about health issues. One nurse
observed that 75 percent of the women at one of the prisons
smoked but no smoking cessation classes were available (10).
Medical staff also saw a tension between the concern other staff
had for correctional security and the prisoner’s medical needs.
For the correctional officers, safety was more important than
medical needs, and in one case, an appointment with a cardiolo-
gist outside the prison for one prisoner did not take place because
a correctional officer had cancelled the visit due to weather con-
ditions and understaffing (11).
The medical staff also pointed out that the women often
entered prison without having seen a physician in years and
emphasized that they showed prolonged neglect and abuse of
their bodies and minds (Ammar and Erez 2000, 11). One nurse
found the female prison unique compared to a male facility in
that
you get them here, you dry them out, you get them off
the drugs, the alcohol, get them on their mental health
meds. When you walk out there, it’s like a college cam-
pus. These people say “hi” and “bye.” A lot of the time
Health and Medical Issues
85

they won’t make eye contact because they are told not
to but these people are very respectful by and large.
You’d be surprised how nice they are. (12)
Also, medical staff found women to be less violent than men
inside the prison. As one nurse put it, “men lash out, while women
lash in. They abuse themselves; they cut themselves” (12).
Female inmates have been successful in claiming that the
refusal of a prison to provide them with all medical care relating
to pregnancy, including abortion, amounts to “deliberate indiffer-
ence” to those needs and a violation of the Eighth Amendment
since giving birth in prison is not a routine part of punishment
(Farrell 2000). High miscarriage rates have been documented in
correctional facilities across the country, and one study concluded
that high miscarriage rates in the California correctional system
were related to problems in perinatal care including difficulties in
identifying women with high-risk pregnancies, problems in
transporting pregnant women to outside medical facilities, and
low levels of competence among correctional medical staff
(McCall, Castell, and Shawl 1985). Other issues connected with
pregnancy include using shackles and restraints in the delivery
room, methods of transportation, and the management of perina-
tal drug addiction by a pregnant woman inmate.
In relation to the use of shackles during childbirth, one such
experience was documented by Amnesty International (1999).
The woman reported that she was handcuffed while being taken
to the hospital with intense labor pains and was unable to hold
her stomach or gain some ease from the pain because of the
handcuffs. At the hospital, her right ankle was shackled to a
metal bedpost during seven hours of labor and the shackles were
not removed until thirty minutes before delivery—despite the
fact that a correctional officer was present in the room with her
at all times. She described the shackling as painful, traumatizing,
and stressful. In another report, following a visit in 1998 to a
county hospital in California, Amnesty International delegates
were taken through a ward where women were held when seri-
ously ill or in labor and for a short time after birth. The ward
was locked and four armed guards stationed inside it. Despite
this, each woman’s leg was shackled to her bed. Prison officials
explained that the shackles were only removed if a doctor certi-
fied that it was interfering with medical treatment or was injuri-
ous to the woman’s health. These reports and other
investigations led Amnesty International to conclude that jails
86
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

and prisons use restraints on women routinely and regardless of
whether a woman has a history of violence or has ever attempted
an escape.
In a survey of states who allow the practice of shackling
pregnant women, Amnesty International was informed that in
Ohio, pregnant inmates have one arm or leg secured to the bed
during labor; that in Massachusetts, pregnant inmates are trans-
ported to the hospital in handcuffs but that restraints are not used
on women in active labor unless they are disruptive; that in
Kentucky, pregnant inmates may not be restrained from the
moment they enter labor until they leave the recovery room, but
after that time one leg may be restrained; and that in Michigan,
women are transported to the hospital with belly chains and
handcuffs and kept in restraints while there. One woman
reported that her legs were chained together until shortly before
she gave birth and that she was cuffed to her bed soon after giv-
ing birth. In Illinois, all pregnant prisoners were restrained while
being transported to the hospital and were kept in restraints even
when in labor, unless a doctor asked for them to be removed and
a correctional officer approved. In January 1999, the Department
of Corrections of Illinois informed the organization that it was
preparing to cease using restraints on pregnant women.
Pregnant women in prison may undergo emotional prob-
lems associated with denial of the right to choose to give birth or
to terminate their pregnancy (Bloom 1995, 24). Two case studies
provide examples of the issues faced by pregnant women. In
Harris v. McCarthy (1985) the woman inmate was incarcerated for
one year for a violation of probation. When five and a half
months’ pregnant, she began to experience cramping and vaginal
bleeding and sought medical attention throughout the following
weeks but was never seen by an obstetrician. After nearly three
weeks, she was finally seen by the head physician, an orthope-
dist, who did not physically examine her yet prescribed a drug
usually contraindicated during pregnancy. The following day she
went into premature labor and delivered the baby in an ambu-
lance on the way to the hospital; the baby died two hours later. In
Yeager v. Smith (1987), the woman was incarcerated for one year
on a charge of welfare fraud beginning when she was about five
months’ pregnant. She was obliged to sleep on a thin mattress on
the floor for almost two weeks and confined twenty-four hours a
day for several months in overcrowded cells. She never saw an
obstetrician during her pregnancy and was exposed to several
Health and Medical Issues
87

contagious diseases. Going into labor on a Friday night, she
reported her condition to the guards but was told to wait until the
next morning for medical assistance, as no medical staff were on
duty at the time. She gave birth early the next morning on a thin
mat outside the door of the clinic with the assistance of an
untrained guard.
Harris v. McCarthy was the first of five suits filed on behalf of
pregnant and postpartum prisoners at the California Institution
for Women. The prisoners alleged that the California Department
of Corrections had failed to provide adequate pre- and postnatal
care or proper diets and exercise. At the time there was no obste-
trician on the prison medical staff. In a comprehensive settlement
agreement, the prison was required to hire an obstetrician/gyne-
cologist, adopt protocols covering high-risk pregnancies and
emergencies, increase medical staffing, and assess all pregnant
women. In the second lawsuit, Jones v. Dyer (1986), filed on behalf
of women incarcerated at a county jail in California, the plaintiffs
made similar claims as well as charging that there was a lack of
contact visits for incarcerated mothers and children. Again there
was a settlement agreement.
Another medical issue for female inmates is that of mental
illness. According to the Department of Justice in a survey report
of July 1999, female inmates suffer higher rates of mental illness
than do males (Bureau of Justice Statistics 1999a). The report indi-
cates that about 13 percent of female prisoners in federal prisons
and about 24 percent of female inmates in state prisons were
identified as being mentally ill, compared with 7 percent of male
inmates in federal prisons and about 16 percent of male inmates
in state prisons. Also noted was the fact that about 64 percent of
mentally ill female inmates in federal prisons and 78 percent of
mentally ill female prisoners in state prisons reported prior phys-
ical or sexual abuse.
HIV/AIDS
At the end of 1995, 2.3 percent of all state and federal prisoners
were reported to be HIV infected (Bureau of Justice Statistics
1997). It is commonly believed, however, that the actual number
of HIV and AIDS cases is much higher than the official record due
to the high concentration of intravenous drug users, and many
cases are not revealed due to the long incubation period of the
disease, sometimes lasting several years. Compounding the situ-
88
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

ation are prisoners who are infected with both HIV and tubercu-
losis. In relation to confirmed cases of AIDS, the rate in U.S. pris-
ons is more than six times the rate in the general population, and
in the period 1991–1995, about one in three inmate deaths was
attributable to AIDS-related causes (Bureau of Justice Statistics
1997). At the end of 1995, 4 percent of all female state prison
inmates were HIV-positive, compared to 2.3 percent of males dur-
ing the same period. The number of women inmates in state pris-
ons infected with HIV increased 88 percent, a much faster rate
than that experienced by males, where the increase was 28 per-
cent. Like their male counterparts, female inmates infected with
HIV and AIDS are disproportionately minorities, poor, and have
a history of intravenous drug use.
Clearly, these diseases generate special medical and psycho-
logical needs, and in prisons such needs are rendered more com-
plex by the fact of incarceration itself. Essentially, imprisonment
adds to the suffering by exacerbating feelings of depression, help-
lessness, and grief. Both inmates and staff devalue those inmates
with HIV/AIDS to the extent that they become institutional out-
casts, and the degree of fear and hostility expressed against them
is often magnified in the prison environment. Misinformation
about AIDS can inflame fear and cause hysteria that can result in
discriminatory management practices. For example, in 1992, a
female prisoner in a county jail was awarded damages for what
the court termed humiliating and improper treatment when she
was placed in a forensic unit within the jail that was usually
reserved for suicidal and mentally disturbed inmates, was
required to wear plastic gloves when she used a typewriter in the
library of the jail, and was denied the right to attend Christian
services (Sullivan 1992). As well, staff attached red stickers to her
belongings, indicating she had AIDS, an act in violation of state
law. Currently, each state, the District of Columbia, and the
Federal Bureau of Prisons test their inmates for HIV on the basis
of certain criteria, and most prison jurisdictions will test inmates
if they have HIV-related symptoms or if an inmate requests a test.
Sixteen states test all inmates, and three states and the Federal
Bureau test all inmates on release from confinement. Three states
test all inmates in custody, and two states as well as the Federal
Bureau conduct random testing.
Prisons were never designed to provide the best of medical
care, and with the onset of HIV/AIDS, the situation has deterio-
rated, resulting in prison litigation that has revealed cases alleging
Health and Medical Issues
89

denial of proper medical care. Although this litigation has resulted
in some improvements, the courts have ruled that prisoners do not
have a right to every potential beneficial medical procedure and
that reasonable care is constitutionally sufficient. However, ques-
tions persist as to whether inmates actually receive even basic
care, and it is significant that prisoners with AIDS live about half
as long following diagnosis as persons in the free community. It is
commonly agreed that the lack of medical care is the outcome of
deliberate indifference to the fate of prisoners or is a form of retal-
iation for prisoners contesting charges brought against prison
administrations.
Many women sentenced to imprisonment for drug offenses
as a result of the “war on drugs” are also infected with HIV or
have been diagnosed with AIDS. HIV-infected women are typi-
cally minorities with low socioeconomic status, and the majority
are mothers. Separation from one’s family is a severe hardship for
these women even under normal circumstances, and this situa-
tion is exacerbated in cases where the woman is infected with
HIV/AIDS. When their children are also infected, the emotional
toll for these women is still higher.
As an outcome of the “war on drugs,” therefore, prisons are
increasingly forced to function as providers of medical care for
prisoners with HIV/AIDS. Without sufficient funding, in addi-
tion to being faced with political and public indifference, they are
only in a position to aggravate the suffering caused by the dis-
ease. As well as treatment, education on HIV/AIDS is required
for inmates and can be quite effective. Increasing knowledge
about HIV alone might, however, be insufficient in decreasing the
risk for women contracting HIV. Instead, interventions that are
aimed at women offenders should also aim to increase women’s
ability to make decisions that might prevent HIV infection, such
as condom use. Programs also need to stress the critical nature of
HIV as a disease, since upon release many women inmates are
more immediately concerned about financial resources, shelter,
and food.
Legal Challenges—Equal Protection
The federal government is under no constitutional obligation to
provide any benefits to prisoners beyond basic requirements for
survival. However, this rule does not allow discrimination among
90
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

the recipients of benefits, and case law has shown that benefits
granted to some cannot be denied to others based on race or sex
alone. In equal protection challenges, the issue is whether the sep-
arate classification is reasonable or arbitrary and if it bears “a fair
and substantial relation to the object of the legislation or practice”
(Reed v. Reed [1971]), so for example, sex classifications that have
been established to suit the convenience of the correctional
administrators have been held to be irrational. Most legal chal-
lenges to prison conditions have been initiated by male prisoners,
largely due to the relative lack of numbers of incarcerated
women. However, over time, this situation has changed and
women prisoners have brought actions arguing for parity with
male prisoners using equal protection and due process clauses.
Women have been successful in challenging disparate treatment
in the case of a parole system, where male prisoners in the District
of Columbia were placed under the control of the D.C. Board of
Parole whereas women were subjected to the stricter standards
for women applied by the U.S. Board of Parole (Williams v. Levi
[1976]). In another case, the court held that there must be sub-
stantial equivalence in male and female prisoner opportunities to
take part in work-furlough programs (Dawson v. Carberry [1973]).
Women have brought suit to ensure their access to a prison
law library when the court found they had limited access to it
compared to male prisoners (Bounds v. Smith [1977]); in addition,
a strip search policy requiring women to be subjected to a full
strip search whereas men were not stripped without substantial
reason (based on possession of a weapon or contraband) was
ruled to be a violation of the Constitution (Mary Beth G. v. City of
Chicago [1983]). The practice in North Dakota of routinely trans-
ferring women prisoners to serve their sentence in another state
prison because of alleged lack of facilities was ruled to be a denial
of equal protection. When this matter was brought before the
court, it held that such transfers outside the state must not take
place without a prior hearing (State ex rel Olson v. Maxwell [1977]).
The courts have also ruled that discriminatory selection for work
release, if based on race, religion, sex, or mental impairment, is
not a lawful practice. Such arbitrary or capricious selection for
work programs has since been prohibited.
A landmark case on women’s prison issues is Glover v.
Johnson (1979), where a comprehensive challenge was mounted to
a system that permitted disparate treatment in educational, voca-
tional, and minimum security programs in the Michigan prisons.
Legal Challenges—Equal Protection
91

The court held that women prisoners must be provided with pro-
gramming of parity with that given male prisoners, and the court
further ordered the state to provide specific programs, stating
that the size of the institution was no justification for disparate
treatment for women inmates.
The Prison Litigation Reform Act, enacted in 1996, stated its
two purposes as curbing the filing of frivolous lawsuits by prison-
ers and ending what was thought to be judicial micro-management
of correctional facilities through suits brought by prisoners in fed-
eral and state courts (Branham 2001, 3). In relation to frivolous law-
suits, the act requires that prisoners must first seek redress for
wrongs through a grievance process operated by the correctional
authority and that any such process must be exhausted before a
lawsuit can be filed. Further, prisoners must pay the full court-fil-
ing fee when bringing a lawsuit or appeal in federal court. In addi-
tion, the Act directs courts to dismiss claims that are considered
frivolous, malicious, or fail to state a claim for which relief can be
granted, or seek damages against a defendant with immunity from
such claims. Under the act, prisoners may not obtain relief for men-
tal or emotional injuries suffered in custody unless those injuries
are associated with some form of physical injury. Indigent prison-
ers who have already filed three or more civil actions or appeals
that were dismissed for being frivolous, malicious, or for failure to
state a claim are required to prepay the full filing fee before a court
will adjudicate their claims. Further, the act also placed limits and
restrictions on the kinds of relief that can be granted and severely
limits prospective relief, which must be narrowly drawn and must
be the least intrusive means of rectifying any violation. There are
further restrictions on the recovery of attorney’s fees by prisoners
involving limits to the kinds of work for which such fees can be
awarded (Branham 2001, 4).
Possible Solutions
What do women in prison need provided for them in order to
avoid the kinds of behavior after release that put them in prison
in the first place? What can be done both inside prisons and out-
side in the community to assist in this goal? Should women be
put in prison at all? Are there alternatives to imprisonment for
women that, while sanctioning their criminal conduct, could
more appropriately take account of the many factors, specific to
92
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

women, that make imprisonment such a severe experience for
many of them? These and other questions are concerned with
women’s criminality in the broad sense and with seeking solu-
tions for the benefit of women and society generally. Many solu-
tions have been proposed; the following discussion represents the
range of possibilities.
Decriminalize Offenses for Which Women
Are Imprisoned
At one end of the continuum, some argue that the imprisonment
of women is directly related to their status under patriarchy, and
that imprisoning women is another means of social control and a
manifestation of male dominance over women in society gener-
ally. Women’s crimes, it is argued, have often been based on a sex-
ual definition, and the nature of their imprisonment simply
reflects their position in society. It is also argued that the rising
numbers of incarcerated women result from society’s failure to
properly provide for the needs of women and children who live
marginalized lives through poverty, lack of education, and lack of
economic self-sufficiency. Social and economic factors operate to
make the commission of crime a reasonable choice for some
women in light of the lack of any viable alternative that will
enable them to support themselves and their children. This view
blames women’s incarceration on policy makers and insists that
proper social and economic arrangements for women would
result in a huge decrease in women’s criminality. Therefore, the
argument goes, most women’s “criminality” is not in fact crimi-
nal, and these women should not be treated as a criminal class,
with all that that implies for them and their children. At the other
end of the continuum, the case is made that women should be
treated equally with men and that they must suffer the conse-
quences of the choices they make, including equally lengthy
imprisonment in appropriate cases.
The notion that acts now judged as criminal should be
reevaluated is exemplified in the proposal that the offense of pos-
sessing crack cocaine should be decriminalized. Some argue that
drug possession as opposed to trafficking in drugs is not a crimi-
nal but rather a social issue and that possession of such a drug
should be seen as a health issue rather than as criminality.
Questioning assumptions about criminality in this way could
lead us to the conclusion that women, in particular, should not be
Possible Solutions
93

labeled as criminals for simple drug possession. Instead of being
incarcerated for drug possession, they would be provided treat-
ment for drug abuse. Similar suggestions have been made about
prostitution, but it is obvious that decriminalization requires that
society ask itself difficult questions and challenge long held
assumptions. Consequently, there is little likelihood that the
accepted criminal models will be totally abrogated.
Also associated with decriminalization is the argument that
women’s prisons exist today to deal with the failures of other
social institutions rather than with “real criminality” (Owen 1998).
The proponents of this view argue that institutions such as the
family, the school, and the labor market fail to provide women
with the economic and educational opportunities they require for
survival for both themselves and their children. For women, the
family can be a place, not of comfort and security, but of sexual
and physical violence. When a woman who has been battered
physically and psychologically can see no way out of her pain but
to assault or even kill her spouse or partner, those same justice
agencies that were unwilling or unable to protect her now label
her a criminal that requires punishment through incarceration.
Similarly, for many women school is a place of failure rather than
learning and accomplishment, handicapping their ability to sur-
vive in a society that has little sympathy for those who cannot
keep up. It is argued that problems of this nature are best
addressed outside the punitive custodial environment; however,
in present-day society, complex problems of this nature are still the
province of the criminal justice system. Many argue that attacking
the root causes of these institutional failures is the only way to
resolve them. In the main, prison is an institution designed for
men and one that seems confused about the issue of women in
prison. It has been adapted in order to incarcerate women but the
institution itself does not seem comfortable in this role. Therefore,
decriminalization would be an important first step in recognizing
the failure of society to properly define the complex problems that
go with being a woman in contemporary society.
Develop Community Interventions for
Female Offenders
We have seen that most female crime is not of a serious nature,
and in light of this conclusion it has been argued that appropriate
community sanctions should be developed that can offer treat-
94
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

ment for female offenders. Community-based programs of this
kind could include vocational training and substance abuse treat-
ment, and in general, programs designed to facilitate and pro-
mote self-sufficient and productive lives. Programs of this nature
would also be economically sensible compared to the high cost of
imprisonment, and would promote the notion that early inter-
vention is a more appropriate policy approach to women’s crime
than after-the-fact sanctions.
Avoid Confinement by Increased Use of
Probation and Parole
Both probation and parole are forms of conditional release; failure
to comply with one of the rules or conditions of probation or
parole constitutes grounds for incarcerating or reincarcerating the
person released. Although there is a continuing movement
toward developing a determinate structure of sentencing with
fixed terms of imprisonment, about 78 percent of all persons
released from prisons continue to be released into parole field
supervision. In many states, including those that have abolished
or curtailed discretionary release on parole, inmates are released
to parole supervision at the expiration of their maximum sen-
tence less time off for good behavior. Though it is consistent with
“get tough on crime” policies to keep people in prison for long
prison terms, eventually this becomes a very expensive exercise.
For example, it has been estimated that if the state of Texas were
to abolish parole for all nonviolent offenders for the next fifty
years, the Texas government would need to construct almost
61,000 new prison beds, costing $1.9 billion (Austin 1996).
Large numbers of convicted men and women already are on
probation or parole throughout the United States. At the end of
1996, almost 3.8 million adults were on probation or parole, with
the majority of them under the supervision of probation and
about 18 percent on parole (Bureau of Justice Statistics 1999b). Of
those on probation, approximately 21 percent were female, and
women comprised 10 percent of all parolees. Quite apart from the
expense of imprisoning large numbers of women and separating
them from their children with all the hardship that provokes, it
can be argued that the vast majority of women in prison continue
to be incarcerated for nonviolent crimes and ought properly to be
released on probation or placed on parole to serve their sentences
in the community. It can hardly be said that such women would
Possible Solutions
95

constitute a danger to society. Unfortunately, law-and-order poli-
cies and the rhetoric associated with criminality tend to obscure
this reality.
Make More Use of Local Jails in the
Women’s Community
This idea envisages that rather than sending women long dis-
tances to prisons located away from their families, they would do
their time in local jails and so would have access to their families
and be able to maintain cohesion within the family rather than the
dislocation and disruption that imprisonment in a regular
women’s prison would cause. Those opposed to this view point
to the general lack of capacity in jails, which are often over-
crowded in urban areas, and to the lack of facilities for larger
numbers of women prisoners. Admittedly, treatment and training
programs are often nonexistent in jails because these institutions
are only intended to keep persons in custody for relatively short
periods. Opponents of keeping women prisoners in local jails
therefore stress that women prisoners would be denied even the
limited benefits in terms of training and education currently
available in women’s prisons.
Design Treatment Programs Specifically for
Women’s Problems
The enormous population growth in women’s prisons has exac-
erbated the issue of treatment and training programs for women
inmates. Since 1980 the number of women prisoners has grown
more than 500 percent. Within the prison, women are often pro-
vided with treatment programs or work assignments that do not
promote economic self-sufficiency; this lack of financial stability
is very often the reason a woman commits a crime. Most women
in prison lack employment skills and education, yet they still
must support themselves and their children after release. It
makes sense, therefore, to devote resources in prison to the pro-
motion of economic self-sufficiency so that women can emerge
from confinement with skills and assets that will furnish them
with stable employment. Economic self-sufficiency is central to
women’s success following imprisonment and in keeping out of
prison in future.
96
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

Similarly, substance abuse treatment is critical for women in
prison if they are to have any success after their release. The mes-
sage is clear from the data: Drug-related crime is the single most
significant cause of women’s imprisonment, and substance abuse
acts as a multiplier for other high-risk behavior, as women may
turn to petty theft, prostitution, and other criminal acts to support
a drug habit. This means it is essential for substance abuse pro-
grams, specifically designed for women, to be conducted within
prisons. Historically, such programs have been designed by men
for men because of the preponderance of male prisoners in the
criminal justice system in need of such treatment. Generally,
male-oriented drug programs are inappropriate and ineffective
for women inmates and have been characterized as hierarchical,
punitive, and psychologically destructive for women, who tend
to have self-esteem issues of a more serious nature than male
prisoners. As a result, programs designed specifically for women
tend to be less confrontational and provide more nurturing expe-
riences for those participating. Experience has shown that drug
abuse may recur after release from prison for both men and
women unless there is adequate aftercare upon release into the
community. Thus, community support is essential to complement
in-prison substance abuse programs. A treatment approach to
substance abuse is also cost-effective. For example, one recent
study conducted in California found that every dollar invested in
substance abuse treatment generated seven dollars in savings,
mainly through reductions in crime and reduced hospitalizations.
Many women sent to prison have experienced trauma in the
form of violence within the family, lack adequate parenting skills,
or have been incarcerated because of personal issues that have
affected their lives in ways that have led to criminal conduct. For
this reason, prison programs should address issues that concern
women and the family. Surveys have shown that programs that
help women learn better parenting skills or that increase and
make more effective use of their visitation with their children are
in high demand by women inmates. Individual and group coun-
seling should address a wide range of personal and emotional
issues. Sexual and physical abuse need to be tackled in a context
where women can express their involvement with such issues
and attempt to resolve the way they have affected their lives. If
this opportunity for treatment is lost, there is every likelihood
women will recidivate, and prison will become a revolving door
for these women.
Possible Solutions
97

There is considerable variance between treatment programs
for women in state prisons and those offered in federal prisons. In
the latter, programs, especially those that are vocational in nature,
tend to be more varied and to provide a higher level of compen-
sation. Often the most tangible gain from employment during
incarceration is that women are able to save money that can be
used for expenses on release. In one example of an appropriate
federal program, one woman was able to qualify as a pipe fitter.
Another woman incarcerated in that system was able to secure a
real estate license and a nurse’s aid certificate during her confine-
ment of almost five years. Despite these examples, neither system
offers very much in the way of programs intended to prepare
women for release from prison.
Devote More Resources to the Prevention of
Crimes that Result in Women’s Incarceration
Under this proposal, greater attention would be paid to crimes
such as domestic violence and to improving the economic and sup-
port systems for women generally so they are able to maintain their
families without recourse to criminality. The argument here is that
women’s crimes are largely confined to minor property crimes and
drug abuse, and attacking the root causes of such crimes is a far
more effective way of dealing with women than incarcerating
them. Of course, many would argue that women should not be
given a “free pass” for their crimes, and this proposal would give
them disparate treatment not afforded to male criminals.
Employ Restorative Justice Options in Place
of Imprisonment
This relatively new field offers a new vision for dealing with
criminality that takes the form of interpersonal conflict. Through
its mechanisms such as victim-offender mediation programs,
family group conferencing, and community-based sentencing
boards, responsibility for dealing with interpersonal conflict is
taken on by the communities affected by such problems.
Restorative justice emphasizes dialogue, negotiation, and the
reestablishment of a positive relationship between the offender,
the community, and the victim. In practical terms, this means that
the offender may have to pay financial compensation to the vic-
98
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

tim, perform community service, or undergo mediation in the
form of a face-to-face acknowledgment of guilt. The overall goal
of such programs is to build and maintain a healthy community
with positive social relations. Interest in restorative justice has
grown worldwide; programs have spread throughout Europe
and are especially significant in Australia and New Zealand. In
the United States, victim-offender mediation currently is being
practiced in more than 290 communities. As of 1998, fifteen states
had drafted or proposed legislation promoting restorative justice
programs within their juvenile justice systems. At this early stage,
there is some evidence to indicate that restorative justice pro-
grams have the potential to provide an attractive alternative to
custodial sentencing and would assist in reducing the size of the
prison population (Beckett 2000, 202).
Allow Women Prisoners to Keep Their
Children in Prison
This is a controversial topic, with some arguing that women
inmates should be permitted to keep infants and young children
with them during their period of incarceration and others main-
taining that innocent children should not be exposed to the envi-
ronment of the prison. It can be argued that it is unfair and a
hardship for the mother to be deprived of the custody of her child,
especially when the result is that children are often moved from
one caretaker to another, from one school to another, and generally
suffer major disruptions and dislocations during the formative
period in their lives. Prisons and jails have different policies con-
cerning visitation with children and the placement of babies born
to women inmates. As we have seen, in the early years of women’s
prisons and reformatories, administrators often permitted women
to keep their children with them until they were two years old,
and some provided nurseries and encouraged women to make use
of them. In recent times the decision about the placement of babies
born to pregnant women in prison has been made by social work-
ers who have elected either to place the infant with relatives or to
put the infant up for adoption. According to the American
Correctional Association, only two U.S. prisons allow extended
visits between mothers and children; however, there are a few
prisons that allow women to keep custody of their children up to
the age of two years (Baunach 1982, 1992; Schupak 1986). By
contrast, in Canada, women prisoners may keep their children
Possible Solutions
99

with them up to the age of five or six years (Vachon 1994). In a
recent study, over half of the mothers in prison surveyed reported
that their children had never visited them in prison and that dis-
tance between the child’s home and the prison was the most-cited
reason (Bloom 1993). By its very nature, imprisonment imposes
serious constraints to the maintenance of mother-child relations.
Child welfare laws commonly allow termination of parental rights
if a parent fails to maintain an adequate relationship with a child
placed in foster care. In some cases, the mere existence of a prison
sentence has been regarded as adequate justification to negate
women’s parental rights. Clearly, it is difficult for women to
respond to custody rights hearings in court, and often there is no
available legal assistance or no person present to represent the
woman prisoner. Overall, the development of a consistent and
comprehensive policy on women prisoners and their children that
would recognize the hardship caused to both the parent and the
child resulting from incarceration would ultimately benefit
mother, child, and society.
Sources
American Correctional Association. 1990. The Female Offender: What Does
the Future Hold? Arlington, VA: Kirby Lithographic Company.
Ammar, Nawal, and Edna Erez. 2000. “Health Delivery Systems in
Women’s Prisons: The Case of Ohio.” Federal Probation 64 (1): 19–26.
Amnesty International. 1999. “Not Part of My Sentence”—Violations of the
Human Rights of Women in Custody. AI Index AMR 51/19/99, New York,
NY. Available online: http://www.amnestyusa.org/rightsforall/
women/report/women-27.html. Accessed June 28, 2002.
Anderson, David. 1978. “Co-Corrections.” Corrections Magazine 4: 33–41.
Atwood, Jane Evelyn. 2000. Too Much Time: Women in Prison. London:
Phaidon Press.
Auerhahn, Kathleen, and Elizabeth Dermody Leonard. 2000. “Docile
Bodies? Chemical Restraints and the Female Inmate.” Journal of Criminal
Law and Criminology 90 (2): 599–634.
Austin, James. 1996. “The Effect of ‘Three Strikes and You’re Out’ on
Corrections.” In Three Strikes and You’re Out: Vengeance as Public Policy,
edited by D. Shichor and D. Sechrest. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Austin, James, and John Irwin. 2001. It’s about Time: America’s Imprison-
ment Binge. 3d ed. Belmont, CA: Wadsworth.
Balogh, T. 1964. “Conjugal Visiting in Prisons: A Sociological Perspec-
tive.” Federal Probation 28 (September): 52–58.
100
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

Banks, Cyndi. 2002. “Doing Time in Alaska: Women, Culture, and
Crime.” In It’s a Crime: Women and Justice, 3d ed., edited by R. Muraskin.
Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Baunach, Phyllis. 1982. “You Can’t Be a Mother and Be in Prison . . . Can
You? Impacts of the Mother-Child Separation.” In The Criminal Justice
System and Women, edited by B. Price and N. Sokoloff. New York: Clark
and Boardman.
Bazzetta v. Mcginnis, Director of Michigan Department of Corrections.
2001. 148 F. Supp. 2d 813, 2001 U.S. Dist. Lexis 8819 (E.D. Mich. 2001):
United States Court of Appeals For the Sixth Circuit, 2001.
Beckett, Katherine, and Theodore Sasson. 2000. The Politics of Injustice:
Crime and Punishment in America. Thousand Oaks, CA: Pine Forge Press.
Belknap, Joanne. 2000. “Programming and Health Care Accessibility for
Incarcerated Women.” In States of Confinement: Policing, Detention, and
Prisons, edited by Joy James. New York: Palgrave.
———. 2001. The Invisible Woman: Gender, Crime, and Justice. 2d ed.
Belmont, CA: Wadsworth.
Bloom, Barbara. 1993. “Incarcerated Mothers and Their Children:
Maintaining Family Ties.” In Female Offenders: Meeting the Needs of a
Neglected Population, edited by A. C. Association. Laurel, MD: American
Correctional Association.
———. 1995. “Imprisoned Mothers.” In Children of Incarcerated Parents,
edited by Katherine Gabel and Denise Johnston. New York: Lexington
Books.
Bloom, Barbara, and D. Steinhart. 1993. Why Punish the Children? A
Reappraisal of the Children of Incarcerated Mothers in America. San Francisco:
National Council on Crime and Delinquency.
Bloom, Barbara, and Meda Chesney-Lind. 2000. “Women in Prison:
Vengeful Equity.” In It’s a Crime: Women and Justice, edited by R.
Muraskin. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Boston Globe. “Women Get $10m for Strip Searches at Mass. Jail.”
Available online: http://www.corrections.com/news/justin/todayoncc.
html. Accessed May 30, 2002.
Branham, Lynn. 2001. “Toothless in Truth? The Ethereal Rational Basis
Test and the Prison Litigation Reform Act’s Disparate Restrictions on
Attorney’s Fees.” California Law Review 89: 999–1,053.
Brennan, T. 1998. “Institutional Classification of Females: Problems and
Some Proposals for Reform.” In Female Offenders: Critical Perspectives and
Effective Interventions, edited by R. Zaplin. Gaithersburg, MD: Aspen
Publishers.
Possible Solutions
101

Bureau of Justice Statistics. 1995. National Crime Victimization Survey.
Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Justice.
———. 1997. HIV in Prisons and Jails, 1995. Washington, DC: U.S.
Department of Justice.
———. 1999a. Mental Health and Treatment of Inmates and Probationers.
Washington, DC: Bureau of Justice Statistics Special Report (July).
———. 1999b. Correctional Populations in the United States, 1996.
Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Justice.
———. 2001. Prisoners in 2000. Washington, DC: U.S. Department of
Justice.
Bush-Baskette, Stephanie. 1999. “The ‘War on Drugs’: A War against
Women?” In Harsh Punishment: International Experiences of Women’s
Imprisonment, edited by S. Cook and S. Davies. Boston: Northeastern
University Press.
Butterfield, Fox. 1999. “As Inmate Populations Grow, So Does a Focus on
Children.” New York Times, 7 April.
Carlson, Bonnie, and Neil Cervera. 1992. Inmates and Their Wives:
Incarceration and Family Life. Westport, CT: Greenwood Press.
Casey, Karen, and Michael Wiatrowski. 1996. “Women Offenders and
‘Three Strikes and You’re Out.’” In Three Strikes and You’re Out: Vengeance
as Public Policy, edited by D. Shichor and D. Sechrest. Thousand Oaks,
CA: Sage.
Chesney-Lind, Meda. 1995. “Rethinking Women’s Imprisonment: A
Critical Examination of Trends in Female Incarceration.” In The Criminal
Justice System and Women: Offenders, Victims, and Workers, edited by B.
Price and N. Sokoloff. New York: McGraw-Hill.
Chesney-Lind, Meda, and Noelie Rodriguez. 1983. “Women under Lock
and Key.” Prison Journal 63: 47–65.
Clark, Cheryl, and Leslie Kellam. 2001. “These Boots Are Made for
Women.” Corrections Today 63 (February): 50–54.
Dobash, Russell, Emerson Dobash, and Sue Gutteridge. 1986. The
Imprisonment of Women. Oxford: Basil Blackwell.
Faith, Karlene. 1993. Unruly Women: The Politics of Confinement and
Resistance. Vancouver: Press Gang Publishers.
Farrell, Amy. 2000. “Prisoner Rights.” In Encyclopedia of Women and
Crime, edited by N. Rafter. Phoenix, AZ: Oryx Press.
Fishman, L. 1990. Women at the Wall: A Study of Prisoners’ Wives Doing
Time on the Outside. Albany: State University of New York Press.
Fishman, S. 1983. “The Impact of Incarceration on Children of
Offenders.” Journal of Children in Contemporary Society 15: 89–99.
102
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

Fleming, Gary, and Gerald Winkler. 1999. “Sending Them to Prison:
Washington State Learns to Accommodate Female Youthful Offenders in
Prison.” Corrections Today 61 (2): 132–135.
Fowler, Lorraine. 1993. “What Classification for Women?” In Classifi-
cation: A Tool for Managing Today’s Offenders, edited by A. C. Association.
Lanham, MD: American Correctional Association.
Freedman, Estelle. 2000. Their Sister’s Keepers: Women’s Prison Reform in
America, 1830–1930. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press.
Gabel, Katherine, and Kathryn Girard. 1995. “Long-Term Care Nurseries
in Prisons: A Descriptive Study.” In Children of Incarcerated Parents, edited
by Katherine Gabel and Denise Johnston. New York: Lexington Books.
Gaudin, J. 1984. “Social Work Role and Tasks with Incarcerated
Mothers.” Social Casework 65: 279–286.
Gerber v. Hickman 103 F. Supp. 2d 1214, 2000 U.S. Dist. Lexis 13124 (E.D.
Cal. 2000).
Giallombardo, Rose. 1966. Society of Women: A Study of a Women’s Prison.
New York: John Wiley & Sons.
Glick, Ruth, and Virginia Neto. 1977. National Study of Women’s
Correctional Programs. Washington, DC: National Institute of Law
Enforcement and Criminal Justice.
Goetting, A. 1982. “Conjugal Association in Prison: The Debate and Its
Resolutions.” New England Journal on Prison Law 8: 141–154.
Gover, Angela, Gaylene Styve, and Doris McKenzie. 1999. “Evaluating
Correctional Boot Camp Programs.” In The Dilemmas of Corrections:
Contemporary Readings, 4th ed., edited by Kenneth Haas and Geoffrey
Alpert. Prospect Heights, IL: Waveland Press.
Greenfeld, Lawrence, and Tracy Snell. 1999. Women Offenders.
Washington, DC: Bureau of Justice Statistics, U.S. Department of Justice.
Greer, Kimberly. 2000. “The Changing Nature of Interpersonal
Relationships in a Women’s Prison.” The Prison Journal 80 (4): 442–468.
Grobsmith, Elizabeth. 1994. Indians in Prison: Incarcerated Native
Americans in Nebraska. Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press.
Harris v. McCarthy. No. 85-6002 JGD (C.D. Cal, filed September 11, 1985).
Hawkins, Richard. 1999. “Inmate Adjustments in Women’s Prisons.” In
The Dilemmas of Corrections: Contemporary Readings, 4th ed., edited by
Kenneth Haas and Geoffrey Alpert. Prospect Heights, IL: Waveland Press.
Heffernan, Esther. 1972. Making It in Prison: The Square, the Cool, and the
Life. New York: John Wiley & Sons.
Heney, Jan. 1990. Report on Self-Injurous Behaviour in the Kingston Prison
for Women. Ottawa: Ministry of the Solicitor General, Corrections Branch.
Possible Solutions
103

Henriques, Zelma, and Evelyn Gilbert. 2000. “Sexual Abuse and Sexual
Assault of Women in Prison.” In It’s a Crime: Women and Justice, edited by
R. Muraskin. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Holmes, S. A. 1996. “With More Women in Prison, Sexual Abuse by
Guards Becomes Greater Concern.” New York Times, December 27, 9.
Howser, J., and D. MacDonald. 1982. “Maintaining Family Ties.”
Corrections Today 44: 96–98.
Howser, J., J. Grossman, and D. MacDonald. 1983. “Impact of Family
Reunion Program on Institutional Discipline.” Journal of Offender
Counseling, Services and Rehabilitation 8: 27–36.
Hughes, J. E. 1982. “My Daddy’s Number Is C–92760.” Journal of Children
in Contemporary Society 15: 79–87.
Kauffman, Kelsey. 2001. “Mothers in Prison.” Corrections Today
(February): 62–65.
Koban, Linda. 1983. “Parent in Prison: A Comparative Analysis of the
Effects of Incarceration on the Families of Men and Women.” Research in
Law, Deviance and Social Control 5: 171–183.
MacKenzie, D., and H. Donaldson. 1996. “Boot Camp for Women
Offenders.” Criminal Justice Review 21: 21–43.
Mahan, Sue. 1984. “Imposition of Despair: An Ethnography of Women in
Prison.” Justice Quarterly 1: 357–384.
McCall, C., J. Casteel, and N. Shaw. 1985. Pregnancy in Prison: A Needs
Assessment of Perinatal Outcome in Three California Penal Institutions.
Sacramento, CA: Department of Health.
McClellan, D. S. 1994. “Disparity in the Discipline of Male and Female
Inmates in Texas Prisons.” Women & Criminal Justice 5 (2): 71–97.
Morris, Allison. 1987. Women, Crime, and Criminal Justice. Oxford: Basil
Blackwell.
Nelson, Lane. 2000. “Women on Death Row.” In Death Watch: A Death
Penalty Anthology, edited by L. Nelson and B. Foster. Upper Saddle River,
NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Owen, Barbara. 1998. “In the Mix”: Struggle and Survival in a Women’s
Prison. Albany: State University of New York Press.
Pollock-Byrne, Joycelyn M. 1986. Sex and Supervision: Guarding Male and
Female Inmates. New York: Greenwood Press.
———. 1990. Women, Prison, and Crime. Belmont, CA: Wadsworth
Publishing.
Raeder, M. S. 1993. “Gender and Sentencing: Single Moms, Battered
Women, and Other Sex-Based Anomalies in the Gender-Free World of
the Federal Sentencing Guidelines.” Pepperdine Law Review 20: 905–990.
104
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

Rosenfeld, J., M. Rosenstein, and M. Raab. 1973. “Sailor Families: The
Nature and Effects of One Kind of Father Absence.” Child Welfare 52:
33–44.
Ross, Luana. 2000. “Imprisoned Native Women and the Importance of
Native Traditions.” In States of Confinement: Policing, Detention, and
Prisons, edited by J. James. New York: St. Martin’s Press.
Sabol, W. J., and J. McGready. 1999. Time Served in Prison by Federal
Offenders, 1986–97. Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office.
Sack, W. H. 1977. “Children of Imprisoned Fathers.” Psychiatry 40:
163–174.
Sack, W., J. Seidler, and S. Thomas. 1976. “The Children of Imprisoned
Parents: A Psychosocial Exploration.” American Journal of Orthopsychiatry
46: 618–628.
Schupak, Terri. 1986. “Comments: Women and Children First: An
Examination of the Unique Needs of Women in Prison.” Golden Gate
University Law Review 16: 455–474.
Sherman, L., D. Gottfredson, D. MacKenzie, J. Eck, P. Reuter, and S.
Bushway. 1997. Preventing Crime: What Works, What Doesn’t, What’s
Promising: A Report to the U.S. Congress. Vol. NCJ 165366. Washington,
DC: National Institute of Justice.
Streib, Victor. 1995. “Capital Punishment of Female Offenders.”
Unpublished manuscript. Cleveland-Marshal College of Law, Cleveland
State University.
Sullivan, R. 1992. “Ex-inmate Wins Award in Bias Case.” New York Times,
August 26, 4.
Swan, A. 1981. Families of Black Prisoners. Boston: G. K. Hall & Co.
Turner v. Safley. 1987. 482 U.S. 78, 107 S. Ct. 2254, 96 L. Ed. 2d 64.
U.S. General Accounting Office. 1999a. Women in Prison: Issues and
Challenges Confronting U.S. Correctional Systems: Report to the Honorable
Eleanor Holmes Norton, House of Representatives. Washington, DC: General
Accounting Office.
———. 1999b. Women in Prison: Sexual Misconduct by Correctional Staff:
Report to the Honorable Eleanor Holmes Norton, House of Representatives.
Washington, DC: General Accounting Office.
Vachon, Maria. 1994. “It’s about Time: The Legal Context of Policy
Changes for Female Offenders.” Forum on Corrections 6: 3–6.
Vazquez v. New Jersey Department of Corrections. 2002. 348 N.J. Super. 70,
791 A. 2d 281; 2002 N.J. Super. LEXIS 88.
Velimesis, M. I. 1981. “Sex Roles and Mental Health of Women in Prison.”
Professional Psychology 12 (1): 128–135.
Possible Solutions
105

Ward, David, and Gene Kassebaum. 1965. Women’s Prison: Sex and Social
Structure. Chicago: Aldine-Atherton.
Watterson, Kathryn, and Meda Chesney-Lind. 1996. Women in Prison:
Inside the Concrete Womb. Boston: Northeastern University Press.
Williams, M. 1996. “Bill Seeks to Protect Inmates from Guards who Seek
Sex.” New York Times, April 23, A1, B4.
Winifred, Mary. 1996. “Vocational and Technical Training Programs for
Women in Prison.” Corrections Today 58 (August): 168–170.
Wright, Richard. 1997. “Should Prisons Exist?” In Corrections: An Issues
Approach, 4th ed., edited by M. Schwartz and L. Travis. Cincinnati, OH:
Anderson.
Yager v. Smith. 1987. No. CN-F-87-493-R.E.C. (E.D. Cal., filed September
2, 1987).
106
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

3
Voices of Women
behind Bars
H
aving considered many of the issues surrounding the impris-
onment of women, it is helpful to now gain an understand-
ing of the actual experience of women in prison and of the
circumstances that led to their incarceration. A recent develop-
ment in researching prisons has been the publication of studies
that allow prisoners, including women prisoners, to express
their experience of imprisonment and reveal the circumstances
of their lives before prison. This kind of research has been pro-
moted by feminists who see women’s voices as an essential com-
ponent of such studies, believing that only the authentic
everyday experience of women can accurately communicate the
feeling of being an incarcerated woman. Research studies have
provided a means for women to articulate the experience of
incarceration, and these projects add another dimension to the
facts and figures of women’s imprisonment (Owen 1998;
Bosworth 1999; Banks 2002; Atwood 2000; Watterson 1996;
Wojda and Rowse 1997).
Victims of Domestic Violence 
Janet is serving the first year of a sentence of  seven to twenty-five
years. She is a maximum-security inmate who killed her husband dur-
ing an argument. She is in her late thirties. She explains that her hus-
band made her keep her hair short and forbid her using makeup because
he did not want her to be attractive to other men.
107

He was very manipulative. I was very much in a prison. I was
under watch all the time. I have more freedom here than I had in my
own marriage. (Wojda and Rowse 1997, 7)
She recounts the details of her abusive marriage. Her husband
checked on her all the time at work, and she was constantly made aware
of how to act and how to dress. She tried to leave but always went back;
when she did leave he would seek her out and bring her back. In the
prison she is a member of a battered women’s group, and she explains
that there are women in the prison who have suffered her kind of experi-
ence in marriage and so they understand her situation.
I never thought I’d end up in prison. I never did anything wrong
before. But something happened. I’m still trying to understand why.
(ibid.)
Lori Girshick reports that of the forty women she interviewed in a
medium-security prison in western North Carolina, 90 percent had been
abused as adults, with 85 percent having been physically battered by an
intimate; 83 percent were emotionally abused; and 43 percent had been
raped (1999, 57). One woman described her battering:
The first time he beat me, he nearly killed me. He had struck me so
hard I had six concussions. I had a broke nose, he knocked out my tooth.
I had stitches all the way across my body on the inside of my body. I
looked like something from the monster’s club ‘cause my face was all
swelled. He beat me and I took a warrant out on him and he came and
broke in my house the next night. They didn’t even keep him in jail. And
when he raped me and left, I felt so nasty. I felt so dirty. And now, I have
no choice but to go back to him. They weren’t keeping him in jail. I was
scared to death. I would either commit murder or live with it. And so, I
live with it for about another four months. (59)
Crack Cocaine Users
Lois is serving three to ten years for burglary and one year for violation
of probation. She has used marijuana since the age of thirteen. Her father
was a drug dealer, and drugs, she explains, were always available for free
to her. When she was arrested in 1986, she had been “shooting up speed”
for six years. She also had been introduced to crack cocaine, and for
about two months before her imprisonment she lived for nothing else.
I didn’t care about my kids. I didn’t care about nothing but
smoking crack. I was breaking in houses to get more crack. I turned to
108
Voices of Women behind Bars

prostitution. I turned to the streets, lying, stealing. And it took me
down real quick. (Wojda and Rowse 1997, 12)
She says her husband is an alcoholic and she persuaded him to
smoke crack with her. She notes an absence of discipline in her life, never
being told what to do or where to go and being put out of the house at
the age of fifteen because she was considered old enough to manage on
her own.
Girshick (1999) reveals how drug addiction rules the life of a thirty-
year-old woman who has prostituted herself and been in trouble since
she was a juvenile:
I’ve used alcohol everyday for the past 15 years. I’ve had frequent
blackouts. I say and do things I can’t remember the next day. . . . I was a
heroin addict for about 3 years. I used every day, otherwise I’d be sick.
. . . I was a heavy, heavy addict; once I start smoking cocaine I can’t stop.
I could smoke a thousand dollars a day, I was bad. . . . I like anything
that feels good and makes me not have to deal with anything. (69)
Victims of Child Sexual, Physical, and
Emotional Abuse
Leora is now forty-one years old and into her third prison sentence.
Here is her story:
I was an abused child. I was raped when I was a kid. I couldn’t
perform with my husband because of what had happened as a kid.
(Wojda and Rowse 1997, 14)
She explains that she met a man on the street who made her feel
good about herself and she started to write bad checks to buy his love and
affection and ended up in prison.
More than half of the women Girshick interviewed reported being
emotionally abused as children or adolescents, such as in the following
narrative:
[My dad] would make us stand and strip, literally, strip naked.
Then he would whup us with switches, I mean, until blood would run
out of our legs, or wherever, on us. He did it until I was sixteen years
old and then I finally told him “no.” He started beating me with fists,
and I started hitting him back, which left no respect for neither one of
us. I take that as it was sort of not right in the head. Because a normal
person wouldn’t stand and make a child that’s not a child anymore,
Victims of Child Sexual, Physical, and Emotional Abuse
109

that’s already been turned into a woman, stand naked and gloat and
whup ‘em and stuff. (Girshick 1999, 35–36)
Another woman relates that her parent’s drug abuse influenced her
own drug and alcohol problem:
I think [my childhood emotional abuse is] where my drug and
alcohol problem comes from. And it really bothers me. I figure that if I
was loved more and paid more attention to, instead of my parents
running around doing their own thing. Of course, they were hooked on
drugs, too. My parents were hippies and stuff, and they were just, they
ran crazy, I guess. Not so much my dad, but after my mother left him
he did find a girlfriend. But he was always there. [My mother] drug-
overdosed when I was eight years old . . . but I can remember her.
She’d be under the table, eating pills. I remember her being on the
telephone, lying on the floor. (38–39).
Prison Life
Nancy became a realtor at the age of twenty-two and had a flourishing
career by the age of thirty. She purchased a downtown block, and after a
fire broke out, destroying the entire block, Nancy was convicted of arson.
For her, prison is an alienating experience as she feels she comes from a
different culture and class background than other women in prison. She
feels that she will gain nothing in prison and compares herself to other
women who acquire a GED or learn parenting skills and can leave
prison knowing they have gained something from the experience.
It’s just incarceration. It’s just a lifeless and spiritless existence. But
it’s a very lonely existence for me, because for the most part, the things
I see and the things I witness around here, I want no part of. (Wojda
and Rowse 1997, 10)
Nancy complains that male officers have access to the women’s rooms
in the prison. They can walk in any time, but the women are responsible
for ensuring that they are dressed appropriately when the men enter. She
is bothered by having no privacy and asks her roommate to leave the room
when she has to take a shower or perform normal bodily functions.
Claudia works in the prison garage and is a certified welder. She
thinks the correctional officers are a “mixed bag.” She mentions one guy
who “if you just look at him you get a ticket for sexual advances” (26).
She complains about male officers in her room and mentions a time
when one walked in and she had her blouse off. She says he didn’t
announce himself or call attention to his presence in any way.
110
Voices of Women behind Bars

Anne is in maximum security serving eight to twenty-five years,
and she accepts that the male officers are going to look if they see
women undressed (27). She thinks that if an officer pays attention to
one of the women, she will think he likes her. She knows that the men
like to look.
Leora has no close friends in the prison and “does her time” by her-
self. She has learned not to trust people because she has always trusted the
wrong people. She works in admissions, receiving incoming prisoners.
The women are so scared. They’re sweet and they’re innocent. And
three weeks later, you can’t recognize them. It’s a mixture of all kinds
of people in here. Some want to change. Some get an attitude. Some
just want to do their time. (37)
She says there are sometimes fights in the prison but that tension
isn’t that high and no weapons are used.
Darlene is a middle-class woman of twenty-one serving fifteen
years to life for assisting her lover in the murder of his wife. She believes
it is best not to confide in people in prison. It is too easy to have con-
frontations with other people when they violate your trust.
There is a kind of pecking order in here. The inmates are especially
hard on people who committed crimes involving children. They’re not
physically abusive toward them but they’ll abuse them verbally. “Child
killer, child molester.” They do it to me. “Murderer.” Just to make you
miserable. I’m still catching on. I don’t know all the games but I’m
catching on. But I didn’t come down here to be liked. I pretty much
stay to myself. (39)
Laverne is sixty-two years old and has been in prison for eight
years. She is happy with the prison surroundings and has made good
friends. She sometimes thinks it’s harder for people on the outside but
she does miss the finer things in life.
The food packages and the clothes packages mean a lot. It picks
your spirits up. (39–40)
Twenty-two-year-old Marie is serving three years for forgery. She
complains about the “crazy” prison rules and gives the example that
prisoners are not allowed to be in front of another prisoner’s door. One
time she stopped at the door of a friend to tell her to get up and got into
trouble for it. She lives in a cottage that is just a dorm, just rows of bunk
beds. She complains that things get stolen easily and that you need
money to ease the prison life. She thinks it’s hard to keep out of fights
and mentions trouble over choosing which television programs to watch.
Prison Life
111

She thinks she will not come back and will stay with her father, who is
an alcoholic. She too is an alcoholic (40).
Denise, age thirty-five, has been in prison for over two years and
thinks the only place where you can have privacy is the shower stall. She
thinks there isn’t much violence in the prison, just “cat fights” with no
weapons. She believes women fight over stupid things and that there is
a big difference with the younger women in prison for crack cocaine. She
finds them rude and disruptive with a bad attitude. She contrasts these
women with those serving longer sentences. The short-termers are usu-
ally right back in prison in no time. The advice she would give to a new
prisoner is to get the feel of the place and not to form any close relation-
ships with one person right away to combat the strangeness of prison. If
you do that there will be rumors that you’re lovers. She herself sat back
for six months and watched and didn’t let anyone know her until she
was ready (41).
Joyce, age fifty-one, shot her husband during an argument and is
serving ten to twenty-five years for manslaughter. She describes her typ-
ical day:
I get up about 7:30, get dressed, go out in the common area and have
a cup of coffee. When there are classes, I go to school in the morning.
Then, after lunch I’ll go back to my cottage and do some reading or
crocheting. After dinner, I’ll go to recreation or just relax. It’s normally just
like living out there, only you just don’t get on the phone and you just
don’t go out the door anytime you want to. (45)
Nancy, in contrast to Joyce, says,
It’s generally monotonous. You get up, get dressed, go to work,
work all day. You don’t deviate any day. Same thing day after day after
day. You can feel good or you can go in when everyone’s PMS-ing. (45)
Concerning visitors, she reports:
Before we go into the visiting room, we have to squat and we have
to cough. They look under your arm pits and they lift your breasts up.
They lift up your hair, look in your mouth, have you squat frontwards,
squat back. Then you go in to visit your family. And when you leave,
you go through the same strip, squat, and cough procedure again. (46)
Anne is a maximum-security inmate serving twenty-five years for
manslaughter. Speaking of prison programs, she says:
I’ve taken parenting. I don’t have children. But there’s only so many
programs I can get into because I’m a max. And there is only certain
112
Voices of Women behind Bars

jobs I can have because I have to be escorted. So I try to get all the
certificates I can get so it looks good before the board. (54)
Linda is serving a life sentence and is still six years away from her
first parole hearing. Her four children were taken away from her when
she was sentenced. She has not had any contact with them since then
and does not know where they are. She says, “The loss of children hurts
worse than anything” and that most of the time she doesn’t think about
them because she “can’t handle it.”
I see a lot of people sit and cry and can’t concentrate on their work
after they’ve had a visit. They’ll just be out of it because little Susie at
home has gotten in some trouble or when the kids are sick. That’s a big
thing but you have to shut that off because you can’t do anything. You
just can’t do anything. (61–62)
Interviewing the women in the Central California Women’s
Facility (CCWF), Barbara Owen (1998) gives a voice to women who
describe their pathway to imprisonment. Drug and alcohol problems
shape the lives of many women.
Zoom speaks about her alcoholic parents and says she grew up with
her mother’s drinking and remembers feeding her, undressing her, putting
her to bed, and becoming the parent of her small brothers or sisters from the
age of thirteen or fourteen. Her stepfather was abusive toward her when he
started drinking heavily and then he would become very violent. She
explains that being raised in a home with alcoholic parents is “like walking
on eggshells” (Owen 1998, 51). She would always think, “If I do this, is it
going to tick him off? Her off? Or, is it going to make them fight?”
One time I came home and he was beating my mother. I will never
forget this. I went to the kitchen and got a steak knife and it seems like
I must have stabbed that man fifty thousand times. But I guess I was
not doing any damage because he didn’t stop. So the police came and
handcuffed him and took him away and took my mother to the
hospital. (51)
Owen writes of “the mix” as part of prison culture found at CCWF.
The mix represents “continuing the behavior that got you here in the first
place” (179) and is something to be aware of and avoided because new-
comers are advised to “stay out of the mix” (179). The mix is any behav-
ior that can bring trouble and conflict with staff and other inmates and
can result in reducing “good time” credits and other sanctions.
Tabby says “the mix” is the way you support yourself.
The mix here is the loud types selling drugs, but the mix is really
in you, you are like that on the streets. The homegirls know how things
Prison Life
113

are and [tell you] I have to sell this. Some people don’t have people on
the streets to take care of them, or send them anything. You have to do
something in here to survive [whether it’s] to sell dope or steal. . . . Me,
I get the impression that people in the mix don’t want to go home. That
they have nothing to look forward to on the streets. They like being
here with their buddies. Clowning and talking about people. (181)
Girshick discovered that many women at the minimum-security
facility in North Carolina found the prison rules and regulations too
strict and lacking in certainty.
The rules will change from day to day, like one officer will say do
it this way and another officer will say, “No, you can’t do that” and
write you up, and so-and-so said you could but that don’t matter. You
gonna take a write-up. We just go through a lot of mental anguish
every day. We don’t know what kind of mood the officer may be in or
sergeant or even another inmate. You might just say something in
joking and they might take it serious and it creates a problem there. . . .
Some of the rules here you wouldn’t believe. . . . it’s just petty. I mean,
you can’t sit down, you can’t comb a lady’s hair outside; one person in
the bathroom at a time [after 10 P.M.]. (Girshick 1999, 79–80)
Owen investigated the “play family” as a feature of women’s prison
culture and found that the prison family may be large or small and may
be temporary or last for some time (Owen 1998, 134). Typically an older
woman will play the role of the mother, and a younger woman, the role
of the kid. In creating families, women reproduce gender relations on the
outside. One woman said she was Mom to many people in the prison,
like she was on the streets:
There are about 5 women here who called me Moms on the streets.
I would say this is my play family. Almost everybody is involved in
them one way or another. It could be just 2 people or a bunch. It is just
like the family on the streets—you start depending on them. You treat
them like family. You can tell them anything. Then there is the loose-
knit family. That is just what you call each other, but you don’t really
care that much about each other. All families do not have women who
play the male role—some based on couples, others on friendships. I
think it is about half and half. (136)
Girshick also observed pseudo families in her study:
I had one girl that kinda attached herself to me and used to call me
Momma, which was okay. If I would influence her in the right way
then that’s fine. But I’ve seen them daddies, they call each other daddy
114
Voices of Women behind Bars

and brother all the stuff like that. . . . I don’t partake in that because we
are women.
I think it’s something needed ‘cause it’s kept a lot of girls in line,
out of trouble, because especially the parent figure will get on that child
if that child’s doing things against the rules or doin’ things to hurt
themselves or somethin’. That parent figure will discipline and it’s kept
things in control. (Girshick 1999, 91–92)
Guards and Inmates
Respect and being respected are major issues for women in prison, and
the expectation is that if a prisoner respects her guards, they will in turn
respect her.
There’s a few here that I do respect, and will always respect, and I
show them respect. The other ones I just kind of stay away from
because the way I see it, respect is something that’s mutual. If you want
it, you give it. And I don’t care if I’m an inmate or not, I’m still a
human being. I’m a woman just like they are. Yeah, I may have
committed a crime, but I’m paying for it. I’ve been paying for it almost
a decade of my life. You don’t have to talk to me like I’m a dog, ‘cause
I’m not. If I do something wrong, you write me up for it. Don’t you
stand there and you talk to me like I’m dirt on your shoe just because
you get off on it. (94)
Alice has been in prison for seven months and is serving a one-year
sentence for aggravated trafficking and failure to comply with the police.
She speaks about the rules and the guards:
Some of the rules make no sense at all. It should be common sense,
but it’s not. Some officers go strictly by the book. Disrespect for another
inmate . . . how can you go to the hole for that?
The male officers hit on the women all the time. Sometimes it’s the
women starting it, sometimes the men stop. I think it’s mostly the
women who start it.
You come in here as a woman, 100 percent. But the minute you
step in here, you get into these games because people want to belong
rather than be individuals. (Wojda and Rowse 1997, 42)
Betty, age twenty-five, has been classified as maximum security
after a series of violations in her first two years in prison.
It seems like the unit is not moving me like I want to be moved
[out of maximum custody]. Because I’ve been good. I haven’t laid
down in a year. But you got to beg and plead just to get your status
dropped and I don’t think that’s fair. Because if you work hard and
Prison Life
115

don’t get tickets, I think they should make you what you should be, but
they don’t.
In July, I’m going to re-class, and I don’t know if I’ll get it . . . but I
don’t understand why [not] if I’ve worked hard. They say I don’t get in
enough programs or it is the drug abuse. That has nothing to do with
it. I think it should be based on your attitude and how you accomplish
things for yourself.
I went to re-class in January, and they left me the same. They said I
was doing good, but still they’re not moving me. I have no knowledge
of why. It’s because they want you to suffer. I don’t think nobody
should suffer. (71)
Visiting Husbands in Prison
When wives visit their husbands in prison, as Fishman (1990) puts it,
they are “doing time on the outside”; this is reflected in their experiences
with guards during visits.
I didn’t like going to Newport [prison]. The guards treat you like
you’re an inmate. They’re so snotty to you and they give out smart
remarks. If you bring stuff in, they go through the stuff. When they look
at you, they look like they think we’re beneath them.
At Londonderry [prison] they make you feel like you are dirt. We
have to go through this detector. Sometimes they like to ridicule you by
making the buzzer ring for any object so that you have to go back and
forth through the detector. They think it is funny. (Fishman 1990, 145)
Strip searches take place routinely when wives visit their husbands
in one prison. Strip searches are considered by the wives as indignities
performed on them as innocent persons (145).
I felt degraded. It was especially degrading when I had my period
because you have to remove your Tampax in front of them. One time
when I was being strip searched, a man looked into the window. Now
they assured us that no men could witness the searches. . . . It’s
degrading. When I was strip searched I signed the paper under
protest. . . . [One lieutenant] has made some nasty comments to me like,
“women like you should be strip searched.” (145–146)
For the wives of men in prison, visiting their husbands accompa-
nied by their children is not an easy event.
I don’t feel very comfortable. The guards breathe down your neck.
It’s hard to talk there because there are all these people yelling around
you. And you can’t do nothing when you’re there. You can’t get close to
116
Voices of Women behind Bars

one another. If you do, the guards break it up immediately. . . . When
the kids are there, they can’t do anything but sit quietly. You can’t
expect the kids to sit for hours in one place. But if they don’t the guards
come over and tell the kids to sit. . . . Sometimes when I visit [my
husband], we just sit there and look at each other for one or two hours
without having a thing to say. (161)
The “Free World”
When women make the transition from incarceration to the “free
world,” they reflect on their prison experience and on the future.
Janet speaks about treatment for drug abuse during her time in
prison and how she thinks it has changed her.
What I do now is I have goals. Part of it was in that drug
program. It’s not that they said that, it’s just somethin’ I figured out
on my own when I was in there. When I got out, that if you set a goal,
then you know what you’re workin’ for. Instead of just doin’ it
everyday. So, if you reach a milestone, then it’s like, “Oh I’ve done
this. This is the next thing I need to do.” I want to achieve more,
because this is the first time I’ve ever not done drugs, and I have a
little streak of ambition runnin’ through me that I never knew.
(O’Brien 2001, 70)
In a similar fashion, Ashley believed that her time in prison had
made her a stronger and more positive person.
I’ve seen a hell of a lot. An awful lot. To be real honest and not
meaning to sound silly, I wouldn’t change what’s happened. I think
that it’s made me a hell of a stronger person. I don’t think that there
will be anything on this earth that I cannot deal with. I think that I have
a lot of potential to help others, and I see things in ways that other
people may not. (71)
Some women expressed their belief that their faith in God was a
mainstay in coping with a period of incarceration. Nan, after almost five
years of imprisonment, testifies to her faith.
I know that there is a God, and I believe in Him. The Lord didn’t
send me to prison. The Lord allowed man to sentence me, because
durin’ my sentence, I was originally up for ten years. Now, I do believe
the Lord stepped in and intervened in that and seen to it I only got
five. . . . I look at the Lord knowin’ that He’s here with you and I today.
Without him, I could have been dumped in the road. (84–85)
The “Free World”
117

Family circumstances change while the wife and mother is in
prison, and when she reenters the free world, she may find herself in a
struggle to regain her role as mother and wife. Suzy describes her expe-
rience:
The whole time I was gone, David, my husband, was stayin’ with
my parents, and my Mom had taken over the role of mother, and she
did not and to this day does not want to relinquish the role. That
infuriates the hell out of me. So, that was a lot of adjustment. My Mom
was tryin’ to control every aspect of my life, like when I could shower
and when I could feed my husband and when I could do my laundry. It
was worse than bein’ in prison. So, I told David, “you’ve got to quit
this job and get us a good job, so we can get the heck out of here,” so he
did. We saved every penny we had. We moved into a run-down little
dump, but it was out of my Mom’s house. (98)
Sources
Banks, Cyndi. 2002. “Doing Time in Alaska: Women, Culture and
Crime.” In It’s a Crime: Women and Justice, 3d. ed., edited by R. Muraskin.
Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Bosworth, Mary. 1999. Engendering Resistance: Agency and Power in
Women’s Prisons. Aldershot, England: Dartmouth Publishing Company.
Enos, Sandra. 2001. Mothering from the Inside: Parenting in a Women’s
Prison. Albany: State University of New York Press.
Fishman, L. 1990. Women at the Wall: A Study of Prisoners’ Wives Doing
Time on the Outside. Albany: State University of New York Press.
Girshick, Lori. 1999. No Safe Haven: Stories of Women in Prison. Boston:
Northeastern University Press.
O’Brien, Patricia. 2001. Making It in the “Free World”: Women in Transition
from Prison. Albany: State University of New York Press.
Owen, Barbara. 1998. “In the Mix”: Struggle and Survival in a Women’s
Prison. Albany: State University of New York Press.
Watterson, Kathryn, and Meda Chesney-Lind. 1996. Women in Prison:
Inside the Concrete Womb. Boston: Northeastern University Press.
Wojda, Raymond, and Judy Rowse. 1997. Women behind Bars. Lanham,
MD: American Correctional Association.
118
Voices of Women behind Bars

4
Chronology
T
he following chronological listing of events in the history of
women in prisons encompasses both historical occurrences that
were important in the development of prisons for women and
issues of public policy that have affected women’s incarceration.
1764
The publication in Europe of On Crimes and Punish-
ments by Cesare Beccaria, a leading early criminolo-
gist. He advocates the use of imprisonment as a
punishment, submitting that the harsh punishments
in use did not deter criminal acts. This work, and oth-
ers like it, are extremely influential in changing the
focus in the United States from capital and other
forms of physical punishment to imprisonment as the
principal sanction for criminal activity.
1815
A period of great social change in the United States
begins, marked by the movement from rural to urban
areas, immigration, and the growth of a market econ-
omy. Women begin to experience social and economic
problems resulting from their limited ability to earn
income and the lower salaries paid to them; this
prompts an increase in the rate of women’s imprison-
ment as they begin to be incarcerated for property
offenses such as theft and prostitution, often commit-
ted for economic survival.
1823
The Quakers of Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, begin to
visit women in prison, offering instruction, a library,
119

1823
and sewing and writing classes to female inmates.
(cont.)
This marks the beginning of the influence of the
Quakers on women’s prison reform because, for the
first time, women begin to show concern about the
conditions in which women prisoners are kept.
1827
Elizabeth Fry, the great English prison and social
reformer, publishes Observations in Visiting, Super-
intendence and Government of Female Prisoners, a work
that lays down the principles that will greatly influ-
ence the reform of women’s prisons in the United
States. Contrary to the thinking of the time, Fry
believes that women criminals can be reformed. She
also stresses the responsibility of women to assist their
“fallen” sisters in prison.
1832
Auburn Prison in New York hires a matron to super-
vise female inmates.
1835
The Mount Pleasant Female Prison at Ossing, New
York, is established as the first women’s prison in the
United States.
1845
Margaret Fuller, an early feminist and editor of the
New York Tribune, publishes a series of articles expos-
ing women’s prison conditions and questions the pre-
vailing notion that such women cannot be redeemed.
She later campaigns to raise funds for a home for dis-
charged women and visits the women’s department at
Sing Sing Prison in New York herself. She is among
the first of the reformists to see women in prison as
victims rather than sinners.
1864
Mary Carpenter, an English prison reformer, pub-
lishes Our Convicts, arguing that women prisoners
should be placed together in one prison where a merit
system would regulate treatment, privileges, and
punishments and where female rather than male
guards would be employed. These ideas influence
American women reformers such as Elizabeth Buffom
Chance, who meets with Carpenter in London in 1872.
120
Chronology

1868
Following the passing of legislation allowing for inde-
terminate sentences (and hence, parole) in Michigan,
Zebulon Brockway, the superintendent of the Detroit
House of Corrections, establishes a House of Shelter
for women, adjacent to the House of Corrections but
separate from it, where he is able to hold prostitutes
for up to three years with the aim of reforming them.
Brockway engages a matron, Emma Hall, who sets up
a merit system in the House of Shelter for a group of
thirty female prisoners who live in well-furnished
surroundings intended to replicate the home and the
family. The House of Shelter closes in 1874 after
Brockway’s resignation from the Detroit House of
Corrections.
1870
A new penal philosophy is presented to a meeting of
prison administrators and reformers in Cincinnati,
Ohio, following increasing disillusionment by these
officials about prison conditions and prison reform for
both men and women. Importantly, the meeting
acknowledges the need for a new penal philosophy of
reformation in place of a policy that emphasizes retri-
bution. Their development of the notion of classifica-
tion of prisoners leads to the recognition that separate
prisons ought to be established for women prisoners.
Abby Hopper Gibbons joins with Josephine Shaw
Lowell to campaign for setting up separate prisons for
women in New York that would be run by women.
Gibbons, a leading member of the Female Department
of the Prison Association, supports the idea of
halfway houses for women discharged from prison
that would provide them with shelter and a pious
environment.
Due largely to the efforts of Elizabeth Buffum Chance,
a Quaker from Rhode Island, her native state passes
legislation for a Board of Lady Visitors to inspect pris-
ons housing women.
1873
In Indiana, Rhoda Coffin opens the Indiana Refor-
matory for Women and Girls, the first completely
Chronology
121

1873
independent women’s prison. It is also the first to be
(cont.)
administered and operated by a totally female staff.
Women prisoners are permitted to wear dresses rather
than prison garb, and refinement and decoration are
emphasized.
1879
Eliza Mosher, a doctor, becomes the superintendent of
the Women’s Reformatory in New York and attempts
to introduce reforms and improve conditions, bring-
ing in a merit system, calling the prisoners women
rather than girls, and hiring staff to provide training
and teaching. The standards set by reformers like
Mosher during this period survive into the next cen-
tury, so that differential treatment for women remains
a cornerstone of penal policy until the 1970s and the
advent of the women’s movement.
1887
Due mainly to the efforts of Josephine Lowell, the
Hudson House of Refuge for women opens in 1887 in
New York as the first cottage-based adult female
reformatory, staffed almost completely by women.
The model of the cottage is followed for other refor-
matories, which, like the earlier Detroit House of
Shelter, emphasize a family and home environment
rather than a custodial model.
1900
In Texas, female convicts are sent away from the main
state prison to a private farm, which provides food
and clothing to the women prisoners in exchange for
their labor, for which the state is paid. This form of
contract labor proves to be popular in the southern
states. Indeed, it bears many similarities to slavery,
including the fact that African American women pris-
oners often are assigned to work in the fields under
contract while white women prisoners are assigned
work as domestics.
1901
Bedford Hills Reformatory for Women opens in New
York, pioneering a new anti-institutional approach to
incarceration. Located in rural Westchester County,
Bedford Hills is located on a 200-acre site, uses the cot-
tage system, and attempts to expand the kinds of
122
Chronology

training programs offered to women. This approach
reduces the traditional emphasis on domestic skills.
Gradually this prison gains use for the most difficult
cases, such as those suffering from mental illness, with
the effect that it becomes overcrowded. By 1919 the
prison houses mainly recidivists—a situation quite
the opposite from that originally envisioned.
1927
The first federal prison for women opens in West
Virginia.
1930
The beginning of the end for the reformatory system.
Following the Great Depression, states can no longer
afford the cost of holding petty offenders for substan-
tial periods of time to permit their reformation. In
response, they begin to relocate felons to reformato-
ries, which quickly revert to conventional prisons.
1940
By this date, twenty-three states have established sep-
arate prisons for women.
1971
Texas establishes the first coeducational corrections
prison, housing both men and women prisoners who
share programs and services provided to the prison
population. This cost-cutting sharing of facilities and
assets is intended to improve the training possibilities
for women prisoners.
1980
The number of women incarcerated in the United
States triples, due mostly to drug offenses and an
increase in minor property crime.
1993
In Jordan v. Gardner [986, F.2d. 1521], women prisoners
at the Correctional Center for Women in Gig Harbor,
Washington, argue that their constitutional rights are
being violated by the prison policy that allows ran-
dom body pat-searches by male guards. The court
decides that the policy violates the Eighth
Amendment prohibiting unnecessary and wanton
infliction of pain, noting that women who had been
previously sexually or physically abused would suffer
psychological pain during such searches by male
Chronology
123

1993
guards. Thus, the court recognizes that women
(cont.)
inmates have different histories and treatment needs
than male prisoners.
1994
Legislation providing for “Three Strikes and You’re
Out” is passed in California and adopted in other
states. Originally intended to incapacitate only violent
repeat offenders, the legislation is also applied to
other crimes where there is no element of violence.
This legislation has a significant effect on the rate of
incarceration for women.
1996
Human Rights Watch draws attention to the issue of
sexual abuse of women inmates by male guards with
the publication of a report called All Too Familiar:
Sexual Abuse of Women in U.S. State Prisons. In a cli-
mate where women are more likely to be guarded by
male guards, the report documents incidents of rape,
sexual assault, and sexual misconduct, as well as ran-
dom but mandatory pat-searches and male guards
viewing female inmates while dressing or showering.
1998
Karla Faye Tucker is executed by lethal injection in
Texas, becoming the first female to be executed since
1863. She and her boyfriend were convicted of murder
after killing two people and plunging a pick-axe at
least twenty times into the victims’ bodies. Tucker
never claims to be innocent but believes she should be
spared the death penalty because she had embraced
Christianity. Supporters around the world join
appeals for clemency from the United Nations and the
European Parliament. However, the Texas Parole
Board votes 16 to 0 against commutation. 
124
Chronology

5
Guarding Women in Prison
Women in Corrections
I
n 1793 Mary Weed became the first woman correctional admin-
istrator, having been appointed the principal keeper at the
Walnut Street Jail in Philadelphia (Morton 1992). The first
woman to hold the position of a “corrections officer” was Rachel
Perijo, who was appointed to the post of matron in charge of
female offenders at the Baltimore Men’s Penitentiary in 1822
(Britton 2000, 33). Women entered correctional services initially as
volunteers, visiting women prisoners between 1860 and 1900.
Gradually, through the efforts of women reformers, women came
to be employed as wardens, assistant wardens, and staff in
women’s reformatories and in men’s penitentiaries, where
women were housed in custodial conditions. Female staff were
typically single, working-class women and often had to resign if
they got married. In reformatories, they worked twelve-hour
shifts and lived and took their meals in inmate cottages (Britton
2000, 33). Accordingly, their work conditions differed dramati-
cally from those of male correctional officers in men’s prisons,
who usually lived off the prison grounds.
During the period 1930 to 1970, women who worked as secu-
rity officers, counselors, and probation and parole officers were
rarely allowed to guard male prisoners; indeed, it is only since the
1980s that women have been admitted to all areas of correctional
service (Feiman 1994). In the late 1970s, following legal pressure,
women first worked as correctional officers in men’s prisons. This
came about through the 1972 amendments to Title VII of the 1964
125

Civil Rights Act, which extended protection against discrimina-
tion based on sex to public sector employees (Britton 2000, 33).
However, there was resistance to this movement. For example, in
1977 the Supreme Court in the case of Dothard v. Rawlinson
allowed Alabama to exclude women from correctional officer
positions in men’s prisons, reasoning that they were vulnerable to
sexual assault from “predatory male sex offenders” (Britton 2000).
The prison system went through a period of instability
during the 1960s and 1970s, with riots occurring in some pris-
ons, and court interventions requiring the formalization of
rules and regulation, due process requirements to be followed
in disciplinary action, and a general professionalization of the
role of correctional officers (Irwin 1980). Prior to the 1970s,
white men constituted the majority of correctional officers in
men’s prisons; this changed in the early 1970s, when African
Americans were recruited in significant numbers (Jacobs 1977).
Nowadays, all states and the Bureau of Prisons employ women
as correctional officers at every security level in both men’s and
women’s prisons (Britton 2000, 34). However, though the
Bureau of Prisons allows women to work as correctional offi-
cers in all positions in the twenty-four medium-security federal
institutions, they may not work as guards in the six maximum-
security prisons, where they are employed in nonsecurity posi-
tions. This policy was adopted after an attack and murder on a
part-time female dietician by a prisoner in the Atlanta peniten-
tiary in 1979 (Potter 1980).
The move toward the recruitment of women as correctional
officers fit with notions of rehabilitation that argued that women
would bring “feminine” qualities to prisons, display greater sen-
sitivity to inmates, have greater communication skills than male
officers, and be able to defuse conflict better than men (Jurik and
Halemba 1984). In addition, in prisons located in isolated rural
areas, there was a shortage of male workers, which meant there
was more incentive to recruit women (Crouch 1980). Studies
reveal that women officers tend to favor a treatment approach
over a custody approach and to supervise inmates using a more
personal style than male officers typically exhibit (Crouch 1985;
Jurik and Halemba 1984; Pollock 1986). For example, rather than
tell inmates to perform tasks, women will ask them to do so, and
they will talk to inmates about children and family matters.
Despite these advances, women make up only 13 percent of
the correctional officer force in men’s prisons, although overall
126
Guarding Women in Prison

(Morton 1991a), they comprise about 31 percent of the total cor-
rectional workforce (ACA Vital Statistics in Corrections in
Schmalleger and Smykla 2000, 228). There are considerable varia-
tions between states; for example, a 1988 survey of federal and
state prisons revealed that in Mississippi, 36 percent of correc-
tional officers in men’s prisons were female, as compared with
only 3.1 percent in North Carolina. A total of 10 percent of cor-
rections positions are supervisory, that is, sergeant or above, and
women occupy 22.5 percent of those in adult male and female
institutions but only 18 percent of those at the level of warden or
superintendent. African Americans fill approximately 21 percent
of positions at the level of warden or superintendent (229). A sur-
vey of the principal administrators of women’s prisons revealed
that three quarters of women’s prison administrators are women,
and half have held their positions less than five years (Morash,
Bynum, and Koons 1995).
Women Guarding Men
Studies have shown that women correctional officers employed
in state prisons are more highly educated than their male coun-
terparts, more likely to come from professional urban families,
and are less likely to be married than male officers (Zupan 1992).
African Americans make up a large proportion of women correc-
tional officers. For example, in New York City in 1991, 24.7 per-
cent of the Department of Corrections officers were women, and
of those, 84 percent were African American (Maghan and
McLeish-Blackwell 1991).
Women give a number of reasons for joining the corrections
profession, including an interest in working with people and in
rehabilitation, but they also consider salary and conditions and
lack of other employment opportunities as significant incentives.
Sometimes women come from rural areas where a nearby correc-
tional facility is the largest employer, and sometimes their hus-
band or father may be employed by the institution (Merlo and
Pollock 1995, 98). Typically, women want to work in a prison for
men because the prisons are closer to their home or they have a
chance of getting preferred assignments or shifts. Additionally,
some women report a preference for working with men, believing
male prisoners to be more compliant and easier to handle
(Zimmer 1986; Pollock 1986). Male officers tend to emphasize
Women Guarding Men
127

salary,  job security, and lack of other employment. In a study of
women correctional officers in a county jail, Belknap (1991) found
that most women employed there chose the occupation for its
salary, benefits, and experience, but many wanted to find employ-
ment as police officers; that African American women were more
interested in a career in corrections than in a move into police
work; and that African Americans were more likely to be single
heads of households (Maghan and McLeish-Blackwell 1991).
Generally, correctional officers feel unappreciated because
their occupation carries low prestige (Martin and Jurik 1996, 171).
The constraints of their employment include their being depend-
ent on each other for support, having to work shift hours, and the
isolated location of many prisons. Correctional officers must fol-
low administrative rules in their employment and are subject to
punishment for rule violations. This becomes a tension in their
work because there is a tendency among officers to ignore rules in
situations where they are perceived to be a barrier to effective
action (172).
Formerly, and perhaps now, correctional service is seen as a
working-class occupation with strong connections to maleness
and masculinity because of its social control and risk aspects
(Crouch 1985; Horne 1985). The occupational culture of correc-
tions tends to stress physical and verbal aggression, and because
women correctional officers do not ordinarily exhibit those qual-
ities, the male officers may see their presence as threatening those
values. To this occupational culture must be added a feeling of
alienation and isolation among officers at having to enforce rules
formulated by the courts and by administrators, about which
they are not consulted, but for which they are accountable if
issues arise in their enforcement. For this reason, many correc-
tional officers perceive themselves as subject to unfair treatment
as compared to the due process rights granted to inmates
(Hawkins and Alpert 1989, 352–353).
Masculinity in prisons tends to be identified with demon-
strating competence. Male officers perceive feminine competence
by constructing women officers as “little sisters” who accept the
protection of the male officers, or as “seductresses” who accept
the sexual advances of their male counterparts (Jurik 1985; Owen
1985; Peterson 1982; Zimmer 1986). It is through such construc-
tions that most men rationalize the presence of women as
coworkers in a correctional environment. For many male correc-
tional officers, projecting a masculine identity in prison means
128
Guarding Women in Prison

showing a superiority to what are perceived as feminine qualities.
Women who refuse the protection of their male coworkers or
reject their sexual advances risk being labeled by the men as “too
manly” or as “man haters,” or as “bitches” or “lesbians” (Martin
and Jurik 1996, 1,974). Tensions arising from gender differences
within corrections center on the old-style work culture associat-
ing competence with physical strength and emotional toughness.
Opposed to this is the modern philosophy of corrections that is
managerial in style and calls for educated, rational, and rule-ori-
ented officers able to use conflict management and communica-
tion techniques. It is easier for women to overcome gender
difference by becoming managerial because in this role they can
be seen to be competent in their work since the managerial style
is gender-neutral.
The relationship between male inmates and women correc-
tional officers is quite complex. Initially, studies have shown that
inmates whistle, flirt, stare, and in other ways display their mas-
culinity for new female correctional officers. However, this initial
display becomes muted once the women have demonstrated com-
petence. Among African American male and female officers there
is some discomfort in exercising authority over African American
inmates; these inmates may display special resentment toward
African American women officers, perceiving them to be violat-
ing racial unity and participating in the oppression of African
American men by whites (Martin and Jurik 1996, 175). However,
most surveys suggest that inmates are positive about the presence
of women correctional officers despite points of conflict and ten-
sion, especially in relation to privacy issues for male inmates. For
example, a number of lawsuits have been filed challenging the
inspection of male inmates by women officers as a violation of
their right to privacy. A number of suits have challenged the
assignment of opposite-sex officers in shower, toilet, and dressing
areas (for example, Forts v. Ward [1980], Bowling v. Enomoto [1981],
Avery v. Perrin [1979], and Gunther v. Iowa [1980]). Other suits have
contested the practice of opposite-sex pat-searches (for example,
Smith v. Fairman [1982] and Bagley v. Watson [1983]). The approach
followed by the courts in such cases has been to try to balance
women’s employment rights with inmates’ rights to privacy by
directing changes in institutional policies or in the physical
organization of the prison. An example is Forts v. Ward (1980),
where the court ordered that inmates be permitted to cover the
windows on their cell doors for fifteen minutes each day.
Women Guarding Men
129

A recent decision of the U.S. Court of Appeals found there
was no constitutional violation where female guards were per-
mitted to monitor male inmates in bathrooms and showers
whereas male guards were not used to monitor female inmates
under similar circumstances (Oliver v. Scott [2002]). The case con-
cerned a correctional facility operated by the Corrections
Corporation of America in Texas under a management contract.
During the period in question, the prison housed about 250
females on the ninth floor of a ten-story facility with about 1,750
male inmates on the other floors. A few female guards were
assigned to monitor male housing areas. The plaintiff claimed
that female prison employees conducted strip searches of male
inmates and observed male inmates showering and using the
bathroom, but that male officers did not carry out similar duties
in respect to female inmates. Female prisoners’ showers and toi-
let facilities contained partitions that shielded them from view
while in use, but the same structures were not available for male
inmates. The district court ruled that the prison’s interest in pre-
serving security and equal employment opportunities justified
any privacy invasion. The court of appeals affirmed that decision,
holding that some courts have held cross-sex searches and moni-
toring to be capable of violating the prohibition against cruel and
unusual punishment and that Supreme Court precedent estab-
lishes that any minimal invasion of privacy is justified by the
interest of the state in promoting security. Further, a right of pri-
vacy under the Fourth Amendment is incompatible with the close
and continual surveillance of inmates and their cells, which is
required to maintain security and order. The court mentioned two
previous cases in which it had found that security concerns can
justify the strip search of a male inmate in front of female guards;
that is, the strip search of an inmate during a lock-down after a
fight about food and an increased incidence of prison murders,
stabbings, and suicides as justifying a shake-down that included
mass strip searches in front of female employees. Referring to ear-
lier cases, the Court pointed out that if only men can monitor
showers this means that female guards become less useful to the
prison, and if female guards are not able to perform this task then
the prison must have more guards on hand to cover for them. In
one case, it was pointed out that restricting female guards from
occasionally viewing male inmates would necessitate a complete
rearrangement of work schedules, which might itself introduce a
risk not only to security but also to equal employment opportu-
130
Guarding Women in Prison

nities. Further, many courts have previously identified the pro-
tection of female prison guards’ right to equal employment
opportunities as a legitimate penological objective.
Male and Female Officers
Women officers have identified their male supervisors and
coworkers and not male inmates as their major opposition in
men’s prisons. Male correctional officers continue to argue that
women are too weak physically and emotionally for correctional
work, cannot perform in violent encounters, will become too fear-
ful or depressed to perform the work, or will be taken in by the
machinations of inmates (Jurik 1985). Male officers believe they
have to step in and protect women in conflict situations, and they
then complain that women fail to reciprocate. In one study, 72
percent of male officers reported that they believed they were
occasionally obliged to protect a female correctional officer
(Kissel and Seidel 1980). In the same study, 92 percent of male
staff felt that women made a special contribution to the facility,
and 96 percent believed that women increased its livability. In
contrast, women officers believe they can defend themselves and
that the fears of their male coworkers are unwarranted. In addi-
tion, it has been found that women resent male offers of protec-
tion (Bowersox 1981). In one study that looked at differences in
the frequency and outcome of assaults against male and female
officers, little was found to confirm these male fears because the
study found that women officers were assaulted significantly less
often than male officers and that when women were assaulted
they were as likely as male officers to be injured or suffer a major
injury (Shawver and Dickover 1986). One study, however, found
that there was more reluctance to accept women as coworkers
among older male correctional officers with substantial years of
correctional experience than among younger male officers with
less experience (Lawrence and Mahon 1998, 82). Also, more of the
male officers assigned to maximum-security facilities believe that
women could not work effectively without endangering them-
selves or others. This contrasted with men working in minimum-
and medium-security prisons, who did not share this concern to
the same degree.
Male officers also worry about women becoming intimate
with inmates, and some will watch for situations where they
Male and Female Officers
131

perceive the women as getting too close to the male inmates. In
response, women officers complain that their male counterparts
are not monitored in the same way they are (Martin and Jurik
1996, 176).
Sexual harassment of women officers by their male counter-
parts is seen as an issue by women officers. Belknap’s 1991 jail sur-
vey found that about 31 percent of women correctional officers
complained of sexual harassment, including offensive sexual com-
ments and behavior (Belknap 1991). Complaints of sexual harass-
ment are often handled internally, and women officers have until
recently been poorly informed about procedures for lodging com-
plaints. For many women officers, the correctional workplace is a
hostile environment because of overt and covert sexual harass-
ment, with most complaints involving harassment by their male
coworkers or supervisors (Martin and Jurik 1996, 177).
Constraints Faced by Women
Correctional Officers
Apart from sexual harassment and the privacy issue for male
inmates, there are organizational constraints that women guards
face and men do not. For example, taking leave for pregnancy
becomes an issue because of the demand for shift work in correc-
tions; this means that matters connected with the family, always
seen to be the responsibility of women, produce tensions between
work and home. Initially, some correctional authorities required
that pregnant women take a leave of absence or resign, but an
American Correctional Association survey of 1991 revealed that
over three quarters of correctional agencies responding stated
they had pregnancy or maternity leave policies. Nevertheless, 22
percent had no written policy, which left women officers subject
to the discretion of supervisors in pregnancy or family matters
(Morton 1991b).
Work assignments for women officers have been an issue first
because of the privacy issue for male inmates, and second, because
of the perception that women have a reduced role within the cor-
rectional workplace. Morton (1991a) reported a decrease in the
number of correctional agencies restricting work assignments for
women officers between 1978 and 1988, but some thirty-four agen-
cies nonetheless disclosed limitations on female assignments in
132
Guarding Women in Prison

men’s prisons. The limitations were all concerned with privacy;
for example, in Delaware, women were prohibited from entering
the housing area of the prison, and in other states they were pre-
vented from undertaking strip searches or collecting urine sam-
ples.
These issues point to the ambivalence shown by administra-
tors as to the “proper” role of women in men’s prisons. Different
agencies apply different approaches. For example, the policy of
one department assigned women officers to all areas of the prison
unless such assignment would violate privacy rights in relation to
strip searches and viewing inmates when nude (Morton 1991a).
As a practical matter, policy varies from prison to prison and
supervisor to supervisor, and in some institutions women officers
are restricted to clerical duties or prohibited from working in
yards and housing even when there are no privacy issues at stake.
One outcome of these limitations placed on women officers is that
they are unable to gain complete experience in working with
inmates, which has an adverse effect on their opportunity for pro-
motion. In the end, they may be left only with the “women’s
slots” (Morton 1991a).
A number of studies have looked at evaluating the perform-
ance of women officers; Zimmer (1997) found that women offi-
cers who use unique work strategies may receive adverse
evaluations because their approach is different to that of their
male counterparts. An analysis of one performance evaluation
report (Jurik 1985) showed that of the eighteen categories of per-
formance listed, “security” was emphasized throughout, and
only one category dealt with communication skills and service.
Conflict diffusion was not addressed at all. Jurik also noted that
supervisors scrutinize and take note of the interactions between
women officers and male inmates more carefully than such
encounters between their male counterparts and male inmates. In
terms of actual performance, studies show that women can per-
form in corrections as well as men but tend to experience higher
levels of stress in the work (Cullen et al. 1985) and have to adapt
to the masculine culture prevailing in prisons (Merlo and Pollock
1995, 101). As one woman officer put it, “I work here all day, talk
loud, act tough. I go home at night and find myself talking in a
deep loud voice to my kids” (Jurik 1988, 303).
Gender differences in guarding inmates tend to arise in rela-
tion to the level of discretion that officers may exercise. Male offi-
cers see a need to be granted more discretion, whereas women
Constraints Faced by Women Correctional Officers
133

officers have a preference for a structured environment, which
reduces discretion (Jurik and Halemba 1984). Both men and
women officers rated administrators and supervisors as causing
them the most problems, but women rated coworkers as their
next major source of problems whereas men listed inmates sec-
ond and coworkers last. Similarities exist in their approach,
despite gender, in that both perceived many working conditions
and the needs of inmates in the same way. Studies indicate that
women officers have a more calming effect on male inmates than
male officers, including diffusing potentially violent situations
through nonviolent interventions (Kissel and Katsamples 1980;
Graham 1981); that women help to humanize and normalize the
male prison environment; and that women officers challenge “old
guard” images and are more likely to attempt innovative strate-
gies (Zimmer 1986; Peterson 1982). Peterson (1982) found that a
majority of male inmates sampled believed that the presence of
women officers helped reduce tension and hostility within the
institution. Crouch and Alpert (1982) found that women officers
in women’s prisons held less tough-minded views than male cor-
rectional officers working in men’s prisons.
In terms of the role followed by women officers, Zimmer
(1986) identified three roles: the institutional, the modified, and
the innovative. In the institutional role women adhere closely to
prison rules to maintain professionalism and may be viewed by
other staff as rigid and inflexible. In the modified role, women
rely on the men to protect them from the inmates, believing they
are unable to perform the work as well as men. In the innovative
role, the women officers rely on inmate guidance to do their job
(Zimmer 1986). A contrary view is taken by Jurik (1988) suggest-
ing that women use a variety of strategies and do not fall into eas-
ily classified role types. Such strategies include adopting a
professional demeanor, requiring adherence to rules but not
requiring that rules be enforced at all times, emphasizing consis-
tency and fairness but also showing flexibility, and replacing “old
guard” approaches with conflict management techniques.
Another strategy is for women to identify unique talents they
might possess, such as writing, counseling, or public speaking.
A recent study reports a number of disadvantages women
identify in correctional work. These include not being taken seri-
ously and having to work harder to get respect, being seen as
affirmative action appointees in supervisory roles, and failing to
gain the respect that their male counterparts enjoy automatically.
134
Guarding Women in Prison

In addition, they felt that being visible as a woman tended to
magnify their errors; that a woman’s voice may lack power or not
be audible; that male coworkers might be less willing to share
information with women colleagues; that women were some-
times asked to type, take notes, or check grammar; and that
women were pressured to attend social functions to an extent that
sometimes amounted to sexual harassment. Also identified in the
study were widespread sexual harassment, male coworkers using
premenstrual syndrome (PMS) as an explanation for any
woman’s action of which they did not approve, and differing
communications styles between the genders, with women’s styles
being perceived as less professional (Withrow, Courtnay, and
Peterson 1992 in Merlo and Pollock 1995, 102–103).
The experience of being a woman correctional officer has
been documented in a number of studies; reading the words of
these women adds another perspective to an understanding of
what it means to be a woman guarding women in prison.
Officer Carol Lutes has been a prison guard for more than ten
years at a women’s prison and sums up her experience:
I’ve never had a problem. I go by the rules. I believe
that if you talk to them decently and humanely you get
that back, not all the time, of course, but most of the
times that works. (Wojda and Rowse 1997, 24)
I find it less stressful now, even with more inmates here.
All we had for programs back then was cosmetology,
OPI [prison industries], and the laundry. Today, we
have all kinds of programs. But if they want to be reha-
bilitated, it’s up to them. Some of them have [got] two
or three degrees, and they still come back. I’ve seen
some of them come back four and five times. (67–68)
Claire Adams is a senior administrator at a women’s prison.
She is in her mid-thirties with a no-nonsense approach and a rep-
utation for results:
The women who are in here for killing their husbands
tend to make ideal inmates. They never get a ticket [cita-
tion for misconduct]. They go to church services, visit
their families, and go to school. You see, they had a
problem, and they eliminated their problem. Now
they’re getting on with their lives. . . . One of the biggest
complaints among the inmates is that they are treated
Constraints Faced by Women Correctional Officers
135

like children. That’s true. There’s so much structure
here . . . they’re told where to go and when. But our job
is to teach them the rules. They want to blame everyone
else. But until you assume responsibility for your
actions, you can’t see anything wrong in what you did.
It’s definitely a bigger stigma for a woman to have
been in prison than it is for a man. The public attitude
is much harsher. . . . Personally, I think that 30 to 35 per-
cent of these women don’t belong here. A lot of them
are just kids coming in for drugs. They need treatment,
and they could be rehabilitated on the outside. (23)
Officer Inez Stark, age twenty-six, has worked in several
areas inside a woman’s prison, and her father, sister, husband,
and brother-in-law also work in corrections:
The majority of them want to do their time and go
home. Although they’re here, they want to be with
their friends. They don’t want to go in the hole. They
don’t want to lose their visiting privileges. . . . I don’t
trust any of them. If I was in here, I would do anything
and everything that would help me. There’s always a
motive for what they do. It’s not that you don’t like
some of them. It’s just that you don’t trust them. (22)
Officer Pauline Lightner has worked at a women’s prison for
twelve years and speaks about the stress of being a woman
guarding women:
I think there’s a lot of stress for officers: I think officers
have a lot of responsibility. There’s stress that goes
along with that. You have to account for their every
move, and there’s lots of stress connected with how
the women are getting along, if there’s arguments or
someone is stealing.
We have to be understanding of the inmates’ prob-
lems, but they have to abide by the rules. (21)
When women guard women of another culture, this adds to
their stress because indigenous women may, for cultural reasons,
adopt different behaviors and respond toward guards differently
than members of the dominant culture. In a women’s prison
housing Alaskan Native women, one of the white women guard-
ing them expressed some concern about cultural difference:
136
Guarding Women in Prison

Natives act like they don’t understand when they do,
they act stupid when they’re not, and act confused as
though they don’t understand. This helps get staff off
their back; they can accuse you of prejudice, usually by
telling someone else what they think of you and it gets
back to you. It’s a form of control because staff don’t
want to be accused.
They won’t look you in the eye, don’t show emo-
tions, won’t cry, some will laugh but look away. They
keep to themselves. You don’t even know they are
there unless you go to them.
We don’t have time to seek them out. If they come to
us we’ll talk to them; they are really hard to deal with
because you don’t know what’s going on with them.
(Banks 2002, 244)
Sources
Avery v. Perrin. 1979. 473 F. Supp. 90.
Bagley v. Watson. 1983. 579 F. Supp. 1099 (D.C. Ore.).
Banks, Cyndi. 2002. “Doing Time in Alaska: Women, Culture, and
Crime.” In It’s a Crime: Women and Justice, 3d ed., edited by R. Muraskin.
Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Belknap, Joanne. 1991. “Women in Conflict: An Analysis of Women
Correctional Officers.” Women & Criminal Justice 2: 89–116.
Bowersox, Michael. 1981. “Women in Corrections: Competence,
Competition, and the Social Responsibility Norm.” Criminal Justice and
Behavior 8: 491–499.
Bowling v. Enomoto. 1981. 514 F. Supp. 201.
Britton, Dana. 2000. “History of Corrections Officers.” In Encyclopedia of
Women and Crime, edited by Nicole Rafter. Phoenix, AZ: Oryx Press.
Crouch, B. 1980. The Keepers: Prison Guards and Contemporary Corrections.
Springfield, IL: Charles C. Thomas.
———. 1985. “Pandora’s Box: Women Guards in Men’s Prisons.” Journal
of Criminal Justice 13: 535–548.
Crouch, B., and G. Alpert. 1982. “Sex and Occupational Socialization
among Prison Guards: A Longitudinal Study.” Criminal Justice and
Behavior 9: 159–176.
Cullen, Francis, Bruce Link, Nancy Wolfe, and James Frank. 1985. “The
Social Dimensions of Correctional Officer Stress.” Justice Quarterly 2:
505–533.
Constraints Faced by Women Correctional Officers
137

Dothard v. Rawlinson. 433 U.S. 321 1977.
Feinman, Clarice. 1994. Women in the Criminal Justice System. Westport,
CT: Praeger.
Forts v. Ward. 1980. 621 F.2d. 1210 (2d Cir.).
Graham, C. 1981. “Women Are Succeeding in Male Institutions.”
American Correctional Association Monographs 1: 27–36.
Gunther v. Iowa. 1980. 612 F.2d. 1079, cert. Denied 446 U.S. 996 (8th Cir.).
Hawkins, Richard, and Geoffrey Alpert. 1989. American Prison Systems:
Punishment and Justice. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Horne, Peter. 1985. “Female Corrections Officers: A Status Report.”
Federal Probation 49: 46–54.
Irwin, John. 1980. Prisons in Turmoil. Boston: Little, Brown.
Jacobs, James. 1977. Statesville: The Penitentiary in Mass Society. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.
Jurik, Nancy. 1985. “An Officer and a Lady: Organizational Barriers to
Women Working as Correctional Officers in Men’s Prisons.” Social
Problems 32: 375–388.
———. 1988. “Striking a Balance: Female Correctional Officers, Gender
Role Stereotypes, and Male Prisons.” Sociological Inquiry 58: 291–305.
Jurik, Nancy, and Gregory Halemba. 1984. “Gender, Working
Conditions, and the Job Satisfaction of Women in a Non-Traditional
Occupation: Female Correctional Officers in Men’s Prisons.” The
Sociological Quarterly 25: 551–566.
Kissel, P., and P. Katsamples. 1980. “The Impact of Women Corrections
Officers in the Functioning of Institutions Housing Male Inmates.”
Journal of Offender Counseling, Services and Rehabilitation 4: 213–231.
Kissel, P., and J. Seidel. 1980. The Management and Impact of Female
Corrections Officers at Jail Facilities Housing Male Inmates. Boulder, CO:
National Institute of Corrections.
Lawrence, Richard, and Sue Mahon. 1998. “Women Corrections Officers
in Men’s Prisons: Acceptance and Perceived Job Performance.” Women &
Criminal Justice 9 (3): 63–86.
Maghan, Jess, and Leasa McLeish-Blackwell. 1991. “Black Women in
Correctional Employment.” In Change, Challenge, and Choices: Women’s
Role in Modern Corrections, edited by J. B. Morton. Laurel, MD: American
Correctional Association.
Martin, Susan Ehrlich, and Nancy C. Jurik. 1996. Doing Justice, Doing
Gender. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications.
Merlo, Alida, and Joycelyn Pollock. 1995. Women, Law, and Social Control.
Boston: Allyn & Bacon.
138
Guarding Women in Prison

Morash, M., T. S. Bynum, and B. A. Koons. 1995. Findings from the
National Study of Innovative and Promising Programs for Women Offenders.
Rockville, MD: National Criminal Justice Reference Service.
Morton, Joann. 1991a. “Women Correctional Officers: A Ten-Year Update.”
In Change, Challenge, and Choices: Women’s Role in Modern Corrections, edited
by J. B. Morton. Laurel, MD: American Correctional Association.
———. 1991b. “Pregnancy and Correctional Employment.” In Change,
Challenge, and Choices: Women’s Role in Modern Corrections, edited by J. B.
Morong. Laurel, MD: American Correctional Association.
———. 1992. “Women in Corrections: Looking Back on 200 Years of
Valuable Contributions.” Corrections Today (August): 76–77.
Oliver v. Scott. 2002. United States Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit.
276 F.3d. 736; 2002 U.S. App. LEXIS 278.
Owen, Barbara. 1985. “Race and Gender Relations among Prison
Workers.” Crime and Delinquency 31: 147–159.
Petersen, Cheryl. 1982. “Doing Time with the Boys: An Analysis of
Women Correctional Officers in All-Male Facilities.” In The Criminal
Justice System and Women, edited by B. Raffel Price and N. Sokoloff. New
York: Clark Boardman.
Pollock, Joycelyn. 1986. Sex and Supervision: Guarding Male and Female
Inmates. New York: Greenwood Press.
Potter, Joan. 1980. “Should Women Guards Work in Prisons for Men?”
Corrections Magazine 6 (5): 30–38.
Schmalleger, Frank, and John Ortiz Smykla. 2000. Corrections in the 21st
Century. New York: Glenco, McGraw-Hill.
Shawver, Lois, and Robert Dickover. 1986. “Research Perspectives:
Exploding a Myth.” Corrections Today (August): 30–34.
Smith v. Fairman. 1982. 678 F.2d. 52, cert. Denied 461 U.S. 907 (7th Cir.).
Zimmer, Lynn. 1986. Women Guarding Men. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press.
———. 1997. “How Women Reshape the Prison Guard Role.” In
Workplace/Women’s Place: An Anthology, edited by Dana Dunn. Los
Angeles, CA: Roxbury Publishing Company.
Zupan, Linda. 1992. “The Progress of Women Correctional Officers in
All-Male Prisons.” In The Changing Roles of Women in the Criminal Justice
System: Offenders, Victims, and Professionals, edited by Imogene Moyer.
Prospect Heights, IL: Waveland Press.
Constraints Faced by Women Correctional Officers
139


6
People and Events
People
Clara Barton (1821–1912)
Barton is best known as the first president of the American
National Red Cross, and she served the Red Cross in that capac-
ity for twenty-two years, beginning in 1882. In 1883 she reluc-
tantly succeeded Eliza Mosher as superintendent of Framingham
Women’s Reformatory, serving for only nine months. She was an
enthusiastic superintendent, maintaining on open-door policy for
the women inmates, and was able to deal with state officials who
were skeptical about the existence of the reformatory. She con-
tributed to the professionalism of women’s prison reform by
assuming the financial management of the prison as well as its
overall administration. Barton was a believer in a nonpunitive
approach toward women prisoners, arguing that reformation
would only come through good influence, self respect, and trust,
and that punishment simply degraded and disgraced the women
and contributed nothing to the process of reformation.
Maud Booth (1865–1948)
Born in England, Booth was the leader of the Salvation Army,
cofounder of the Volunteers of America, and a prison reformer.
Booth and her husband were charged with establishing the
United States arm of the Salvation Army in 1887; soon after, she
and her husband began expanding the social work aspects of the
Army, the philosophy of which combined religion with practical
141

work and assistance to others. In 1896 she was invited to speak to
prisoners at Sing Sing Prison; appalled by what she saw there, she
dedicated herself to improving prison administration and the
rehabilitation of prisoners through religion. She formed the
Volunteer Prison League, at first composed of Sing Sing prison-
ers, which was subsequently adopted within other prisons.
Members followed strict standards of conduct, including obeying
prison rules, untiring prayer, and emphasizing the need for them
to change their ways. In 1913 she served as president of the
American Prison Association’s auxiliary Association of Women
Members.
Zebulon Brockway (1827–1920)
A leading penologist in the history of the prison in the United
States, Brockway is best known for trying to introduce the inde-
terminate sentence for first offenders during his time as superin-
tendent of the House of Correction in Detroit, Michigan.
Following a visit to the Lancaster, Massachusetts, Girls Reform
School in 1867, Brockway was inspired to try an experiment in
reformatory treatment for women under his custody in the
Detroit House of Correction. He aided Emma Hall in establishing
a Women’s House of Shelter in Detroit (Hall served as its first
matron). In 1869 Michigan enacted the country’s first indetermi-
nate sentencing law, allowing Brockway to hold women con-
victed of prostitution for up to three years. This was a longer
period of confinement than previously authorized based on the
theory that there would now be sufficient time to reform these
women. The possibility of parole was also present under this leg-
islation. Brockway was therefore able to parole women and send
them to the shelter, which held them until their sentences expired.
Brockway believed that “fallen women” stood a better chance at
reformation if they were placed under the sisterly care, counsel,
and sympathy of other women. In New York, he organized the
first state reformatory for male prisoners at Elmira and was its
first superintendent from 1876 to 1900.
Elizabeth Buffum Chance (1806–1899)
A Quaker, Chance began her career as an abolitionist and after
the Civil War campaigned for the appointment of prison
matrons and for women to be appointed to state prison boards.
142
People and Events

Visiting prisons in Rhode Island, she learned that classes were
available for men but not women, and that female prisoners
received neither exercise nor any intellectual occupation. She
advocated reformatories for women and questioned the useful-
ness of providing only domestic training for female prisoners,
arguing that male prisoners were taught profitable and useful
trades. In 1870 she was named by the governor of Rhode Island
to the Board of Lady Visitors of Prisons. This was the first time
a woman had been appointed to a state board of control.
Finding that the board lacked power to enforce its recommen-
dations, she resigned in 1876 but was reappointed when ade-
quate powers were later granted to the board. She addressed the
first National Prison Congress on the subject of reforming
women in prison, contending that most people accepted the
notion that male prisoners could be redeemed but viewed
“fallen women” as beyond redemption.
Rhoda Coffin (1826–1909)
Having initially learned about the practice of visiting prisons on
a trip East in 1858, Coffin, a Quaker from Richmond, Indiana,
began visiting soldiers’ families and prisoners during the Civil
War. Inspired by Sarah Smith and others, she and her husband
launched a prison reform committee in Indiana in the 1860s. With
Smith, she established a Home for the Friendless in Richmond in
1870. The home attempted to reform women prisoners through
prayer, music, Bible study, and work. She visited state prisons,
undertook a campaign for a separate prison for women in the
state, and campaigned against the sexual abuse of women in
prison. She assisted in setting up the first reformatory for women
in Indiana, which commenced operations in 1874 in Indianapolis
as the first totally separate state women’s prison in the United
States. In 1875, she delivered the first paper by a female member
to the American Prison Association (formed in 1870), arguing that
a prison for women should be entirely under the control of
women, a proposal that met with some unease among male mem-
bers, one of whom expressed his belief that while a prison should
be “homelike,” a home that did not contain men was not a true
home at all. By 1876, she was arguing that the instruction of
women prisoners should not be limited to domestic proficiency
but should also encompass trade skills.
People
143

Katherine Bement Davis (1860–1935)
Davis was a schoolteacher initially and earned sufficient income
from that occupation to attend Vassar, where she graduated at the
top of her class in 1892. Later she earned a Ph.D. from the
University of Chicago. Davis was active in many social fields,
including penology, women’s rights, and higher education. When
she was appointed New York City’s correction commissioner in
New York in 1914, she became the first woman to head a major
New York City agency. She held the office of commissioner for
two years and then became the chair of the City Parole
Commission, which she had helped establish. As superintendent
of the State Reformatory for Women in Bedford Hills,
Westchester, New York, she helped found the Bureau of Social
Hygiene as a center for evaluating inmates to determine suitable
sentencing for women offenders. Her penal philosophy included
the notion that women prisoners should be taught to be self-suf-
ficient; all would receive instruction in cooking, sewing, plain
and fancy laundry, and general household work. As well, she
stressed outdoor life in the form of working in a prison green-
house, vegetable and fruit growing, and recreational games. She
intended that her prison matrons be women of culture and char-
acter who would interact closely with the prisoners at their work,
eat with them, and sit with them in the evening. She emphasized
that each prisoner would be assessed on her performance in the
reformatory rather than on her past record. She sought college
graduates as the reformatory’s instructors. Though she believed
in the influence of hereditary factors in women’s criminality,
especially the existence of a history of mental disorder, she also
adhered to a progressive view that saw society as having con-
tributed to women’s criminality through its failure to provide
them with education and jobs. Davis rejected the argument of the
eugenicists, who asserted that criminality existed as an inherited
genetic trait among immigrants and African Americans.
Sarah Doremus (1802–1877)
Doremus was a wealthy New York philanthropist and a founding
member of the Female Department of the Prison Association in
New York. In the 1840s she visited women incarcerated in the
New York City Tombs and assisted in establishing a house of
industry for poor women, a women’s hospital, a missionary soci-
144
People and Events

ety, and a home for older women. Together with Abby Hopper
Gibbons, Catherine Sedgwick, and Caroline Kirkland she
worked with the Prison Association of New York. She became the
second directress of the Home for Discharged Female Convicts
and was promoted to be the first directress of the same house in
1863 following the resignation of Catherine Sedgwick.
Eliza Wood Farnham (1815–1864)
In 1844, Farnham, a Quaker, became the matron of the Mt.
Pleasant Prison for Women, a division of Sing Sing Prison at
Ossining, New York. She had previously worked as a teacher
and had edited a book concerned with phrenology and crime.
(Phrenology was a “science” of the time that attributed criminal
traits to the state of certain sections of the brain.) On being
appointed matron, Farnham appointed four assistant matrons
and introduced a series of reforms, including a relaxation of the
strict rule of silence in the institution. During Farnham’s appoint-
ment, prisoners were allowed to converse for a half hour each
day.  She also allowed the prison library to acquire novels, which
might be read to the inmates instead of the customary readings
from scripture. Generally, she tried to brighten the prison atmos-
phere, introducing flowers, curtains, and a piano. However, her
innovations shocked the members of the board, which adminis-
tered Sing Sing and Mt. Pleasant, and she was particularly criti-
cized for relaxing the silence rule. She was forced to resign in
1848.
Ellen Foster (1840–1910)
Foster was admitted to the Iowa bar in 1872 and became an
active campaigner in the Women’s Christian Temperance Union
and a board member of the Red Cross. She moved to
Washington, D.C., in 1888 and was assigned to survey labor con-
ditions affecting women and children in the South. In 1907 she
was appointed to the Department of Justice as an examiner, the
position later to be called Superintendent of Prisons. In this
capacity she was required to travel throughout the country
inspecting prisons where federal prisoners were located. She
showed a special concern for the conditions of women prisoners
and proposed a separate cellblock at Leavenworth Prison for
locating all federal women prisoners, who were then scattered
People
145

throughout the federal prison system in men’s prisons. This pro-
posal was implemented in 1910, foreshadowing the first separate
federal prison for women, established in 1927.
Elizabeth Fry (1780–1845)
Born into a prominent Quaker family in England, Fry was eight-
een years old when she heard American Quaker William Savery
preach; afterward, she determined to devote her life to aiding
those in need. Initially she collected clothes for the poor and vis-
ited the sick. When a family friend who had visited Newgate
prison in London told her he had been refused admission to the
women’s yard of the prison because the women were too unruly
and his safety could not be assured, Fry decided to visit the
women. She found 300 women and children confined to two
wards and two cells. The women and children slept on the floor
without bedding or blankets and occupied their time swearing,
gaming, and fighting. She began a program of prison visits and in
1818, together with a group of Quakers, formed a group called the
Association for the Improvement of Female Prisoners in
Newgate. In 1827 she published a treatise called Observations in
Visiting, Superintendence, and Government of Female Prisoners that
laid down principles that would greatly influence the women’s
prison reform movement in the United States.
Margaret Fuller (1810–1850)
Fuller was one of the leading intellectuals and feminists of her
day. After having received an education equal to males of the
time, she became a teacher and then an education administrator.
She was a member of the Transcendentalists and a leading writer
and literary critic. In 1844 she visited the women’s department at
Sing Sing Prison, New York, later defending the women prisoners
in public statements and reaching the public with her views in a
series of articles for the New York Tribune in 1845. She also advo-
cated for the establishment of a home for discharged women pris-
oners, exposing the shocking sights of women and children to be
found in the almshouses and prisons, and stressing the scrutiny
of male visitors and the dreary routines the women had to
endure. She noted the lack of matrons and the appalling condi-
tions in which the women were forced to live and questioned the
view that such women were “fallen” and incapable of being
146
People and Events

redeemed. She argued in favor of classifying women prisoners, of
providing them with training, and installing adequate sanitary
systems. Following the opening of the Home for Discharged
Prisoners she made a public appeal for funds for the home and
called upon “people of leisure” to inspect the sick and ruined
women in the penitentiary and hospitals and to accept that soci-
ety should have some responsibility for them.
Abby Hopper Gibbons (1801–1893)
At the urging of Isaac Hopper, a founding member of the New
York Prison Association, the association established a Female
Department to supervise former women prisoners who needed a
place to live after their sentences were completed. Abby Hopper
Gibbons, the wife of Isaac Gibbons, was a member of the execu-
tive committee of the Female Department. Gibbons and her com-
mittee first visited women in prisons in the state, observing their
unsanitary living conditions, poor food, and severe discipline.
Next, Gibbons and her colleagues rented a three-story house
where they could locate discharged women prisoners while they
prepared to reenter life on the outside. They opened the Home for
Discharged Female Convicts in 1845, having engaged two women
as matrons, thus establishing the world’s first halfway house.
Residents at the home were free to leave, but they had to comply
with the house rules, which prescribed a strict daily schedule that
included rising at 5:30 A.M. and classes on sewing, reading, writ-
ing, and arithmetic. Religious education included daily readings
of the Bible and sermons by local missionaries. Appointed to the
first committee responsible for the oversight of the home,
Gibbons continued to be involved in its operations until she
reached the age of ninety-two, attending board meetings and also
visiting women’s prisons in the state. Gibbons was able to attract
middle-class women with reformist views (including Caroline
Kirkland) to serve with her on the board, which supervised the
home. Over the years Gibbons and her women colleagues of the
Women’s Prison Association in New York maintained an interest
in reformatories for women and considered whether such an
institution might be established in New York, especially in a loca-
tion within commuting distance of the city of New York. This idea
met with resistance from legislators who wanted to locate
women’s institutions in more remote locations. Using the Hudson
House of Refuge as a model, Gibbons had legislation drawn up
People
147

and presented to the state legislature, and she lobbied hard for it
to be passed. However, despite gaining the support of the state
assembly and senate, the plan was vetoed by the governor.
Gibbons decided to shelve the project until after a new governor
was elected and by 1891, with a new governor in place, Gibbons
was ready for another attempt. After much lobbying and delays,
the bill was finally passed and signed by the governor in May
1891; by the end of that year the board of the new institution had
taken an option on land in Bedford, Westchester County, for its
construction. The reformatory was finally opened in 1901 and the
cottage for inmates under the age of twenty-one was named
Gibbons in honor of her efforts.
Emma Hall (1837–1884)
Formerly a Detroit public school teacher, Hall served as teacher
and, later, matron of the House of Shelter in Detroit from 1869 to
1874. About thirty women lived in the shelter as a family in well-
furnished surroundings. Hall introduced a system based on merit
and offered training for employment. She fostered the develop-
ment of strong bonds between the women residents, emphasizing
also religious uplift and domesticity. Under her leadership, edu-
cation became a most important part of the regime at the house;
inmates prepared lessons during their work break and attended
school four evenings each week. By 1871 Hall had trained seven
inmates who assisted with schooling. Along with education, Hall
stressed the need for the women to lead the “true” womanly life
and accomplished this through training them in the practices and
manners of genteel society as well as in the middle-class roles
expected of women at that time. The House of Shelter closed in
1874 following Hall’s resignation from the Detroit House of
Corrections (the reason, according to Zebulon Brockway, was
overcrowding).
Mary Belle Harris (1874–1957)
Harris earned a Ph.D. in Sanskrit from the University of Chicago
in 1900 and taught Latin at Bryn Mawr. In 1914 Katherine
Bement Davis, a former classmate and the Commissioner of
Corrections for New York City, persuaded her to become super-
intendent of the Women’s Workhouse on Blackwell’s Island, a
short-term women’s prison. The daily inmate population at the
148
People and Events

workhouse averaged 700 women living in 150 cells, where they
spent most of their time as there were no recreational facilities.
Harris remained there for three and a half years. Beginning in
1918 she spent five years as superintendent of the New Jersey
State Home for Girls, known as Clinton Farms, an antiinstitu-
tional facility where inmates lived in cottages, each with its own
form of government. At the age of fifty-one she became the first
warden of the first federal women’s prison at Alderson, West
Virginia. Harris was determined to treat the women inmates as
ladies, believing that reform would come through a regime of
kindness, and she endured a degree of conflict with the Federal
Bureau of Prisons, which she thought did not appreciate her spe-
cial position within the federal prison system as a woman custo-
dian of women prisoners. She felt little in common with other
wardens. The Alderson prison was unique in having an advisory
board authorized and defined by legislation that included some
nationally known members. Harris typically had to contest issues
such as the relative importance of inmates working at industrial
or maintenance tasks as opposed to cultural and educational proj-
ects, which she favored. She insisted that staffing be reserved for
women, and staff positions for men were few and kept at low lev-
els. She felt that each prisoner should be given individual treat-
ment and devised a classification system, which operated in
conjunction with a classification committee composed of the res-
ident physician, a psychologist, the head teacher, and the war-
dens of the cottages. Harris retired from the position of warden in
1941 and returned to Pennsylvania, where she served on the state
parole board until 1943.
Jessie Donaldson Hodder (1867–1931)
Along with Katharine Bement Davis, Hodder shared the outlook
that prisons for women should be less institutional and more con-
cerned with preparing inmates for life on the outside. Working in
Massachusetts, she attempted to change the prison system by
stressing the need for a cottage-type environment, for parole, and
for outdoor work and recreation. She also advocated less domes-
tic training for women and a greater emphasis on training for
employment, including employment in occupations not tradi-
tional for women.
Hodder served as matron at the Lancaster State Industrial
School for Girls and in 1910 became the superintendent of the
People
149

Framingham, Massachusetts, Prison for Women. In her first
annual report she urged dropping the word “prison” from the
name of the institution and replacing the term “prisoners” with
“women”; the following year she secured a change of name of the
institution to the Massachusetts Reformatory for Women. She
was concerned about the structure and design of the institution,
calling it a “big shut-in house,” and asked for a special grant from
the state to transform it. As an alternative, she suggested it be
shut down. Hodder believed the facility itself and its standards of
care and training generally were far below those offered in men’s
prisons and reformatories. She wanted to enlarge the area of the
reformatory, create a gymnasium out of an old cellblock, and
establish several cottages with no enclosing walls. Eventually she
intended that the institution become an industrial training insti-
tute for women. Believing in a psychological and scientific
approach to treatment, she tried to segregate women who needed
psychological treatment, hired a resident physician, and invited
students from Harvard to use the institution for a course on the
psychology of delinquency. By 1915, she had expanded the refor-
matory programs to include physical fitness and training in farm-
ing. However, despite her efforts the old regime of domestic
training still survived. Though her success at changing this insti-
tution was limited, Hodder was able to influence events at new
institutions in states such as Connecticut, and her influence
appears in the thirteen women’s reformatories established
between 1900 and 1920, all of which avoided the use of the word
“prison” and over half of which utilized the cottage plan.
Ellen Johnson (1829–1899)
Johnson was an advocate of temperance who taught domestic
skills to women in the city slums. While searching for the depen-
dants of veterans and survivors after the Civil War, she found
many women receiving no attention in local jails and work-
houses. In 1864 she helped establish the Dedham Asylum for
Discharged Female Prisoners. With others, she led a statewide
campaign in Massachusetts for a separate women’s prison; she
later became the superintendent of the Massachusetts
Reformatory Prison for Women following the resignation of Clara
Barton in 1884. She believed that women’s criminality was
caused through social and economic conditions, regarding these
women as downcast but not forsaken. She was a firm believer of
150
People and Events

differential treatment for male and female prisoners and advo-
cated “softening influences” for women such as flowers, animals,
and music. At the same time, however, she saw the rehabilitation
of women prisoners as coming about through a process of con-
trol, first through the prison routine, and then through self-con-
trol by the women inmates themselves. She combined a merit
system with strict discipline and an appeal to the women’s emo-
tions, disapproving of unsupervised conversation among the
inmates. She applied her notions of discipline not only to the pris-
oners but also to the reformatory staff, which helped her win the
support of the Massachusetts legislature. During her term as
superintendent, Johnson promoted outdoor labor, as she believed
this would make women more content if they had to live away
from the city. This meant that women prisoners were to be found
whitewashing walls and painting buildings in the reformatory. In
1896, she became the first woman to serve on a standing commit-
tee of the American Prison Association.
Caroline Kirkland (1801–1864)
Kirkland served with Abby Hopper Gibbons on the board that
supervised the Home for Discharged Female Convicts in New
York. In 1853 she published The Helping Hand, a book that
described the early years of the home. She wrote that it was the
duty of women to see themselves as a community committed to
the proper care of every woman who had encountered misfor-
tune or disgrace.
Josephine Shaw Lowell (1843–1905)
The daughter of a wealthy retired merchant, Lowell was linked
through her large family to prominent New England families and
attended schools in Paris and Rome as well as private schools in
New York City and Boston. During the Civil War she worked with
women’s relief organizations and then served on the Staten Island
visiting committee of the Prison Association of New York. Lowell
helped gain passage of the law that established the New York City
Department of Corrections as a separate city agency. As a member
of the state Board of Charities, she campaigned for the establish-
ment of a house of refuge for women and girls in New York; due
to her efforts, legislation establishing such a house was enacted in
1881. However, the institution itself was not constructed until 1887
People
151

in Hudson, New York. Women were housed in cottages instead of
a single building, and women made up the staff at all levels. The
refuge stressed family responsibilities and domesticity. By 1889
the refuge was fully occupied, and Lowell lobbied for the con-
struction of two further refuges. She was supported in this effort
by the Women’s Prison Association. In 1890, the state legislature
approved plans for a Western House of Refuge in Albion to be
constructed following the same cottage plan as at Hudson.
Throughout her life as a social reformer, Lowell showed support
for workers, not only through advocating the removal of women
and children from poorhouses to reformatories staffed by women
but also in founding a Consumers League of New York, organiz-
ing relief work for the unemployed, and assisting in the formation
of women’s trade unions.
Edna Mahan (1900–1968)
After earning a degree from the University of California at
Berkeley in 1922, Mahan did postgraduate work at the California
Bureau of Juvenile Research. In 1923 she joined the Los Angeles
County Probation Department; the following year she joined
Juvenile Hall. Miriam Van Walters, also an outstanding reforma-
tory superintendent of the time, trained Mahan as superintendent
of a small school for juvenile girls who were wards of the juvenile
court. In 1928, largely through the urging of Van Walters, Mahan
accepted the position of superintendent of the Reformatory for
Women in Clinton, New Jersey, and there she was to remain as
superintendent until her death in 1968. During her period of forty
years as superintendent, Mahan gained a national and interna-
tional reputation as an enlightened superintendent who believed
that allowing inmates the greatest amount of freedom and self-
government was the most effective means of achieving their ref-
ormation. She dispensed with locks and bars on windows during
most of her tenure, and it was only in the period from the late
1950s onwards that she came to believe that she needed to increase
security after she began to receive inmates who were violent and
had committed drug offenses. Very early in her tenure Mahan
worked to integrate African American inmates and children with
the prison population; in this she was far in advance of her time.
She ensured that a full-time physician and psychologist were
added to the staff and insisted on an honor system for the inmates,
believing that reformation is encouraged in an atmosphere of free-
152
People and Events

dom and trust, where persons must assume responsibility for their
own progress. Her main means of enforcing discipline was
through the withdrawal of privileges earned through the honor
system. Mahan’s philosophy centered on knowing the women
intimately, on not making rules that could not be enforced, in
removing causes of friction between staff and inmates, and in a
willingness to keep trying measures to find those most effective.
Eliza Mosher (1846–1928)
Mosher, a Quaker, studied medicine in Boston and at the
University of Michigan and later practiced medicine in New
York. She was invited to serve as physician at the Reformatory for
Women at Framingham, Massachusetts, which opened in 1877.
She had the care of some 350 inmates and organized the dispen-
sary and hospital within the prison as well as performing the
functions of prison surgeon, obstetrician, and dentist. She found
a high incidence of venereal disease, insanity, and drug addiction
among the prisoners and encountered a high birth rate of illegiti-
mate children. The superintendent of the reformatory tried to
interfere with her work and, in the view of Mosher, inflicted
excessively severe punishments on the women, with a daily aver-
age of ten cases of solitary confinement. Mosher believed in a
reforming rather than a punitive approach and took the opportu-
nity to meet with prisoners and read to them from the Bible and
to pray with them. She resigned in 1879 but returned within a
year to the reformatory when the state governor threatened to
appoint a male superintendent if she would not accept the posi-
tion. She served as superintendent only from 1880 to 1882 but was
able to reform the institution to the satisfaction of the prison com-
missioners. As superintendent she improved the conditions that
earlier had caused her great concern as prison physician. She
showed prisoners respect by referring to them as “women” and
“ladies” rather than “girls,” as had been the common practice,
brought in a merit system, attracted new staff members, and
stressed the need for individual teaching and training of women.
Catherine Sedgwick (1789–1867)
Sedgwick worked with Abby Hopper Gibbons, Sarah Doremus,
and Caroline Kirkland within the Prison Association of New
York to improve the situation of women imprisoned in New York.
People
153

Sedgwick became the first directress of the Home for Discharged
Female Convicts in New York and remained there until ill health
forced her to resign in 1863. She wrote many articles on the needs
of discharged prisoners.
Sarah Smith (1814–1885)
A Quaker minister from Indiana, Smith inspired Rhoda Coffin
to turn her social activist efforts toward prison reform and the
visiting of prisoners. She visited soldiers and prisoners during
the Civil War and together with Rhoda Coffin established the
Home for the Friendless in Richmond, Indiana. She cam-
paigned with Coffin for the establishment of a women’s prison
in the state, a proposal finally realized in 1874 in Indianapolis,
where the first completely separate state women’s prison was
established in the United States. A male board of managers con-
trolled the finances of the women’s prison in its earliest years,
and as its first superintendent, Sarah Smith believed they inter-
fered with the internal running of the prison. In 1877 an all-
female board was installed for the women’s prison. When she
received Sallie Hubbard as the first inmate of the new exclusive
women’s prison, Sarah Smith ordered that Hubbard be set free
from the shackles in which she was confined, embraced her as
a “fallen woman,” prayed for her, and allocated her a room in
the prison complete with curtains, a bedspread, and a Bible and
hymn book. Smith believed that love was the first principle of
correction, followed by the strength to resist temptation and by
caring for oneself. She explained that her management strategy
was to offer constant personal interest and oversight, special
care in case of sickness, and kindness tempered by prompt pun-
ishment and firm training. She banned the vice of smoking
tobacco and permitted only religious newspapers within the
prison.
Mary Surratt (1823–1865)
On July 7, 1865, Mary Surratt became the first woman to be exe-
cuted in the United States. At the time of her execution by hang-
ing she was forty-two years old. She was found guilty of
conspiracy in the murder of Abraham Lincoln by virtue of her
association with John Wilkes Booth, with whom she became
infatuated. Her husband and Booth had assembled a group of
154
People and Events

eight individuals who plotted to kidnap Lincoln; in 1865 the
group attempted an abduction but failed when Lincoln changed
his plans at the last minute. Mary Surratt was arrested two days
after Lincoln’s later assassination by Booth and charged with con-
spiracy. Although the nine-member military commission that
found her guilty voted for the death penalty, five of the members
signed a plea for clemency, asking for her to be given life impris-
onment due to her “sex and age.” President Andrew Johnson
claimed he never saw this recommendation and signed the order
of execution. She was hanged in the courtyard of the Old
Penitentiary, now Fort McNair, in Washington, D.C., and buried
on the prison grounds.
Julia Strudwick Tutwiler (1841–1916)
Born in Alabama, Julia Tutwiler grew up in a home that stressed
the importance of education and studied the same subjects as
boys of that time. She and her father taught reading to slaves and
poor white children. After spending some time in Europe, where
she was exposed to vocational education in prisons and visited
several women’s reformatories in Germany, she enrolled in
Vassar College in 1866. Upon her return to Alabama she taught
and campaigned for women’s education. When her maid was
arrested in 1879 she visited her in jail and was shocked by the
conditions she found there and appalled to find that children
were incarcerated with adults and women with men. She criti-
cized the convict leasing system operating in the state, taught
prisoners to read and write, and implemented training programs
for prison guards. The first state prison for women in Alabama at
Wetumpka was named after her.
Mary Waln Wistar (1765–1843)
Inspired by the work of Elizabeth Fry in England, Wistar led a
group of Quaker women in Philadelphia in visiting women pris-
oners in the Arch Street Jail in 1823, reading scripture with them
and supplying them with clothing. That same year she organized
the Female Prison Association of Friends in Philadelphia. Their
efforts met with discouragement from members of the
Pennsylvania Prison Society who believed the women impris-
oned there were beyond redemption. Yet this did not dissuade the
women, who later offered them classes in reading and sewing.
People
155

Nevertheless, Wistar and others persisted, established a House of
Refuge in 1828, and arranged for a matron to supervise the female
prisoners at Arch Street Jail.
Caroline Bayard Wittpenn (1859–1932)
Born into a family in New Jersey with a tradition of philanthropy,
Wittpenn was educated privately and later became the manager
of the New Jersey State Home for Feeble-Minded Girls and
Women in 1897. In 1903 she was appointed by the governor to a
commission to study the possibility of a separate prison for
women, and she urged the creation of a separate institution for
women offenders. In 1910 her son introduced a bill in the state
legislature providing for a separate prison for women; in 1913 the
Clinton Farms reformatory for women was opened.
Events
1835
The Mount Pleasant Female Prison at Ossining,
New York, is established as the first prison for
women in the United States. The founding of this
prison constituted a milestone in the history of
women in prison. It was the first deliberative act of a
legislature to establish a women’s prison, in contrast
to the previously random creation of units within
prisons in which women could be incarcerated. This
prison was still not completely independent since it
relied on the men’s prison at Sing Sing for adminis-
trative support, but it was a vast departure from prior
practice since, for the first time, women were recog-
nized as having different custodial needs than men.
During the period of its administration this prison
became a place for experimentation in penology
affecting women under its matrons, Eliza Farnham
and Georgiana Bruce. According to a description of
the 1860s, the prison was a handsome building, the
interior composed of three tiers of twenty-four cells
each. In addition to the main building, the prison
included a workshop, nursery, and two separate cells
for punishment. Final authority for the administration
of the prison rested with the board of the men’s prison
156
People and Events

at Sing Sing but daily management was in the hands
of a matron and her assistant matrons. The first
matron, Eliza Farnham, was a strict disciplinarian
who nevertheless relaxed the rule of strict silence that
had been copied from men’s penitentiaries; the sec-
ond, Georgiana Bruce, referred to the prison as “our
reformatory.” The inmates worked long hours making
buttons and sewing clothes for the male prisoners.
Mount Pleasant seems to have been the first prison to
include a nursery within its establishment. Here, for
the first time, women were confined apart from men
and supervised by other women, and the inmates
were encouraged to reform, thus marking the begin-
ning of the reformatory movement in women’s pris-
ons. Overcrowding led to the end of the prison, which
by 1865 had almost 200 prisoners, close to double its
planned capacity.
1854
Formation of Women’s Prison Association of New
York. The first prison association devoted to the care
and conditions of female prisoners was created in
response to disagreement with the Prison Association
of New York, formed in 1840 under male tutelage.
When visiting members of the latter organization
became concerned at the presence of female prisoners
alongside male inmates, they formed a Female
Department of the Prison Association. Abby Hopper
Gibbons became a leading member of the Female
Department, 
working 
with 
Sarah 
Doremus,
Catherine Sedgwick, Caroline Kirkland, and other
women from prominent families. The Female
Department decided to open a home for discharged
women prisoners, which, as a halfway house, would
provide shelter, a place for prayer, and training to pre-
vent the women from committing other offenses on
their release. Their campaign for this house had the
support of Margaret Fuller, who raised money for the
cause and wrote articles in support of prison reform in
the New York Tribune. The home was opened in 1845
and named the Isaac Hopper Home after Abby
Hopper’s husband. By 1852 Abby Hopper Gibbons
and her committee were experiencing problems with 
Events
157

1854
the all-male Prison Association of New York, espe-
(cont.)
cially in relation to the Home for Discharged Female
Convicts. Some of the issues included the men’s dis-
interest in fundraising for the home and the men’s
insistence that all women residents of the home must
have been convicted of a crime, thus preventing
access to, for example, women arrested for drunken-
ness in public or vagrancy and then released. In
response, Abby Gibbons and her colleagues formed a
separate and independent association called the
Women’s Prison Association and Home in 1854. The
Women’s Prison Association functioned as an organi-
zation for the propagation of the middle-class values
and images reflected in its members. The new associ-
ation promoted a model of reformation for women
that relied on religion and domesticity and through
which the “true woman” would be reclaimed.
1868
Zebulon Brockway establishes a House of Shelter
for Women in Detroit. The superintendent of the
Detroit House of Correction and a noted penologist,
Brockway established a House of Shelter for Women
in Chicago as an adjunct to the Detroit House of
Correction. Aiming to “save” his women prisoners in
the Detroit House, he utilized recent legislation that
allowed for indeterminate sentencing for women con-
victed of prostitution to release the women on parole
and place them in the House of Shelter, where they
would remain until their sentences expired. Other
women also resided in the shelter, including well-
behaved women from the House of Correction who
had earned a transfer to the shelter as a reward for
their good behavior, and wayward girls. The custodial
regime in the shelter sought to blend a relaxed form of
prison discipline with the atmosphere and environ-
ment of a home. In this, the shelter mirrored the prin-
cipal features of the reformatory for women.
1870
The formation of the American Prison Association
(APA). Originally called the National Prison Associ-
ation, the APA was formed as a meeting place for
prison reformers, public officials, and prison adminis-
158
People and Events

trators. It recommended reforms in penology, includ-
ing training for inmates, the indeterminate sentence,
and the creation of specialized institutions for cate-
gories of offenders. Its first president was the future
U.S. president Rutherford B. Hayes. The Declaration
of Principles adopted at its first meeting in 1870 in
Cincinnati set the tone for future debates in penology
in both the United States and Europe. A central theme
of the declaration was the need to classify prisoners,
seen as an essential first step in individualizing the
treatment of prisoners as a means of reforming them.
The discussion of classification naturally led to the
conclusion that women ought to be treated separately
from male prisoners and should have their own pris-
ons. The declaration formally announced that “pris-
ons, as well as prisoners, should be classified or
graded so that there shall be . . . separate establish-
ments for women.” This action by the congress gave
significant impetus to the women prison reformers’
ideal of having separate institutions for women. In
1954, the APA became the American Correctional
Association.
1873
Sallie Hubbard, known as “the Wabash Murderess,”
becomes the first inmate of an exclusively female
prison in the United States. Hubbard was the first
inmate of the Women’s Prison in Indianapolis,
Indiana. Together with her husband, she had mur-
dered a pioneering family of seven who had sought
refuge in their home. Her husband was executed, and
she received a life sentence.
1887
Opening of the Hudson House of Refuge for
Women. This was the first women’s reformatory to
adopt the cottage plan as opposed to the custodial
style of a central building containing cells for prison-
ers. The House of Refuge was set on forty acres in
northeastern New York and began with four cottages
(three more were later added). The cottages at
Hudson had a combined capacity of only ninety-six
persons, but a central prison building with cells where
new intakes were assigned during a probationary
Events
159

1887
period held up to 150 inmates. The first Hudson cot-
(cont.)
tages did not include living rooms, though those built
later did include such rooms. In 1897 the state Board
of Charities recommended that the cellblocks at
Hudson be removed and the space utilized for dormi-
tories.
1893
Opening of the Western House of Refuge at Albion,
New York. Albion was a refinement of the Hudson
model of cottages; though it also contained a central
building and outlying cottages, its cottages held the
majority of its inmates, and each had its own kitchen
and adjoining dining room that matrons and inmates
used in common and a sitting room where all could
assemble in the evening. Original photographs of the
cottages show homelike interiors, with flowers, table-
cloths, and pictures on the walls promoting the ideal
of family life.
1901
The opening of the Bedford Hills Reformatory for
Women in New York. As well as a central adminis-
tration building, the rolling campus of Bedford Hills
included a reception hall, four cottages, a laundry
building, a powerhouse, a gatehouse, and a stable. In
one wing were three tiers of twenty-four cells each,
along the lines of a traditional prison design, but in
the other wing were individual rooms. The cottages
housed groups of twenty-eight women as well as
babies up to the age of two years. The various cottages
represented different levels of merit and accomplish-
ment among the women so that an inmate might be
promoted from one cottage to another based on her
conduct and performance in the reformatory. Each
cottage had a garden and its own kitchen where
inmates cooked their “family” meals under matron
supervision. Women at the reformatory were sub-
jected to the least amount of restraint in accordance
with the philosophy of superintendent Katherine
Bement Davis. There were no bars or prison walls,
just a fence of wire netting, and women were not
required to wear uniforms, to form squads, or be sub-
jected to the discipline of marching and similar activi-
160
People and Events

ties. In improving facilities at Bedford Hills, Davis
herself organized and conducted construction activity
there, clearing land for farming and laying roads and
sidewalks. She was forced to take this activist role
because of erratic funding by the state, which often
resulted in the governor vetoing money for improve-
ments. Davis welcomed the opportunity for the
women to be engaged in such projects, believing that
exercise and fresh air were vital to building the
women’s confidence and moral fiber. This institution
focused on a medical approach to criminal women
and was considered a leader in that approach.
1913
Opening of the Reformatory for Women in Clinton,
New Jersey. Established by law of the state legislature
in 1910, the reformatory, known as Clinton Farms,
opened with four staff, three old farmhouses, and
some barns and outbuildings, with the largest of the
two farmhouses renovated to accommodate twenty-
four inmates and the staff. Its first superintendent was
May Caughey, a graduate of the University of
Michigan. With its small inmate population, Clinton
Farms began with an informal and flexible regime,
and by 1931 the population had expanded to 230, with
most of the women committed for morals offenses
and property crime. The inmate population reached a
peak of 472 in 1948, a state of gross overcrowding given
the capacity then of about 200 prisoners. Between 1915
and 1930, six cottages were built as well as a chapel
and a sewing room and a storeroom were added while
the staff resources grew from five in 1913 to fifty in
1930. Following the resignation of Caughey in 1917,
four women were appointed as superintendent from
1917 until the appointment of Edna Mahan in 1928.
1927
The first federal prison for women opens in
Alderson, West Virginia. Erected on a site of 515
acres, the Alderson Prison initially was constructed of
two groups of residential buildings that changed the
confinement conditions for federal women prisoners
dramatically into a standard previously not ap-
proached. By the end of 1928 it had more than 200 
Events
161

1927
inmates in an open, campus-like environment.  Women
(cont.)
were housed in cottages complete with private dining
rooms, tablecloths, flowers, and curtains. There was
no perimeter fence or other custodial features. During
the first thirty years of its existence, Alderson permit-
ted inmate mothers to keep babies born there.
1930
The beginning of the end of the women’s reforma-
tory system. After 1920, women’s reformatories had
become custodial institutions through overcrowding.
The science of eugenics had all but supplanted reha-
bilitation as the focus of treatment. As well, following
the economic blight caused by the Great Depression,
states could no longer afford to put resources into con-
fining women for lengthy periods for minor offences.
The era of the women’s reformatory had come to an
end, but aspects of the model continue to be seen in
modern-day imprisonment, such as an overreliance
on domestic skill training for women inmates and in
women’s unequal access to training programs.
1980
During the 1980s, the number of women incarcer-
ated triples. This increase in women’s incarceration is
seen to have happened without any corresponding
increase in women’s criminality, and the proportion of
women imprisoned for violent crimes has actually
decreased. Most of the increase in women’s imprison-
ment is accounted for by minor property crime
(largely larceny/theft) and drug and public order
offenses. Two thirds of women now in prison are there
for offenses such as larceny, prostitution, and disturb-
ing the peace. With this growth in incarceration has
come a surge in the building of women’s prisons and
in adding female units to existing prisons, despite the
minor nature of a large proportion of the offenses for
which women are imprisoned. Some argue that the
War on Drugs became the War on Women in view of
conscious and sustained efforts by law enforcement to
arrest and imprison women for drug offenses, espe-
cially those relating to possession and selling of crack
cocaine.
162
People and Events

7
Facts and Data
T
his chapter provides information about women’s offending and
incarceration, including sentencing, prison populations, and the
characteristics of women prisoners. The statistics quoted are
taken from L. Greenfeld and T. Snell (1999), Women Offenders,
Bureau of Justice Statistics, Department of Justice, Washington, D.C.
Women Offenders
Violence: Based on the reports of victims of violence, women
account for about 14 percent of violent offenders. Three out of
four violent female offenders were convicted of simple assault.
Three out of four victims of violent female offenders were
women, and nearly two out of three victims had a prior relation-
ship with the female offender. The per capita rate of murder by
women in 1998 was the lowest recorded since 1976, and the rate
at which women commit murder has been declining since 1980.
Even so, arrests of adult females for violence in 1998 were at the
highest level ever recorded—about 80 percent higher than the
rate ten years earlier. Nearly 90 percent of the increase in the
number of violent felons was accounted for by aggravated
assault, reflecting perhaps an increase in the number of prosecu-
tions of women for domestic violence.
Arrests: In 1998 there were an estimated 3.2 million arrests of
women, accounting for about 22 percent of all arrests made in
that year. Women made up about 17 percent of those arrested for
violent crimes—murder, rape, robbery, and aggravated assault—
and 29 percent of those arrested for property crimes—burglary,
163

larceny, and motor vehicle theft. An estimated 22 percent of all
female arrests for both violent and property crimes were of juve-
niles. The arrest rate translates into one arrest for every forty-two
adult women aged eighteen years or older. Larceny was the
offense category with the most female arrests.
Drug Offenses: In 1998 there were more than a quarter of a
million female drug arrests, accounting for about 18 percent of all
arrests for drug law violations. This amounts to one arrest for
every 426 adult women. Of women convicted of felonies in state
courts in 1996, 37 percent had been charged with a drug offense;
between 1990 and 1996, the number of drug trafficking convic-
tions grew by 34 percent, and the number of convictions for drug
possession increased 41 percent.
Convictions: Since 1990 the number of female defendants con-
victed of felonies in state courts has grown more than two times
the rate of increase in male defendants. Women made up 8 per-
cent of convicted violent felons, 23 percent of property felons, 17
percent of drug felons, and 41 percent of all felons convicted of
forgery, fraud, and embezzlement.
Property Offenses: For every category of major crime in the
period 1990–1996 the rate of increase in the number of convicted
females had outpaced the changes in the number of convicted
males. This is especially significant in the case of property
felonies, where the number of males convicted of property
felonies dropped by about 0.2 percent while the number of con-
victed female defendants increased 44 percent.
Offender Backgrounds: Nearly six in ten women in state pris-
ons had experienced physical or sexual abuse in the past; of that
amount, just over one third had been abused by an intimate in the
past and just under a quarter reported abuse by a family member.
Female Corrections Populations
Population and Increases: In 1998 there were an estimated 951,900
women under the custody, care, and control of the criminal justice
system. This amounts to a rate of about one out of every 109 adult
women in the United States. Of this total about 85 percent were
being supervised in the community through probation and parole
and 15 percent were confined in prisons and jails. At year-end 2000,
91,612 women were confined in state or federal prisons, amounting
to 6.6 percent of all prison inmates, up from 5.6 percent in 1990.
164
Facts and Data

Since 1990 the number of male prisoners has grown 77 percent, and
the number of female prisoners has increased 108 percent.
The annual rate of growth in the female prison population
has since 1990 averaged 7.6 percent, as compared to a rate of 5.9
percent for male inmates. In proportion to their number in the
resident population, men were about fifteen times more likely
than women to be imprisoned in a state or federal prison. At year-
end 2000, there were fifty-nine sentenced female inmates per
100,000 women in the United States, compared to 915 sentenced
male inmates per 100,000 men.
Jurisdictions Where Women Prisoners Are Held: Over one third
of all female prisoners as at year-end 2000 were held in the three
largest jurisdictions: Texas, California, and the federal system.
The highest female incarceration rates existed in Oklahoma, with
138 female inmates per 100,000 female state residents;
Mississippi, with 105; and Texas and Louisiana, with 100. At the
other end of the scale, Massachusetts had a rate of seven, Maine
ten, and Rhode Island twelve.
Since 1990 the female inmate population has grown at an
annual average rate of at least 10 percent in seventeen states, with
Texas reporting the highest average annual increase of 18.7 per-
cent, followed by Idaho with 15.2 percent.
Characteristics of Female Prisoners
Race: In 1998 nearly two thirds of women confined in local jails
and in state and federal prisons were minorities. In state prisons
48 percent were black, and in federal prisons 35 percent were
black; this is compared to 33 percent and 29 percent who were
white, respectively. Hispanics made up 15 percent of women in
state prisons and 32 percent of those in federal prisons.
Age: The greatest number of female prisoners in state and fed-
eral prisons fall in the age range of twenty-five to forty-four. Women
inmates aged twenty-four or less make up only 12 percent of
women in state prisons and 9 percent of women in federal prisons.
Education: An estimated 56 percent of women inmates in
state prisons and 73 percent of those in federal prisons have com-
pleted high school. Between 30 and 40 percent of high school
graduates have attended some college.
Inmate’s Children: An estimated 65 percent of women in
state prisons and 59 percent of women in federal prisons have
Characteristics of Female Prisoners
165

young children, with the average being two children under the
age of eighteen years. If women on probation are included in the
total, the result is that more than 1.3 million minor children are
the children of women held in the criminal justice system. More
than a quarter million of these children have mothers in jail or
prison.
Economic Background: Generally female inmates had experi-
enced more difficult economic circumstances than males before
incarceration. In state prisons about four out of ten women
reported that they had been employed full time prior to incarcer-
ation. This contrasts with male inmates, where nearly six out of
ten had been working full time before incarceration. In terms of
income, about 37 percent of women and 28 percent of men had
incomes of less than $600 per month prior to arrest, and nearly 30
percent of female inmates reported receiving welfare assistance at
the time just before arrest.
Health: In 1997 an estimated 2,200 women in state prisons
were HIV positive, making up about 3.5 percent of the female
inmate population. This compares to a rate of about 2.2 percent
for male inmates. The highest rate for female inmates occurred in
1993 at 4.2 percent.
Alcohol and Drugs: About half of all women offenders in state
prisons had been users of drugs or alcohol or both at the time of the
offense that resulted in their incarceration. An estimated 29 percent
of women in state prisons and 15 percent of women in federal pris-
ons had been consuming alcohol at the time of their offense. Daily
drinkers accounted for about 25 percent of female inmates and 29
percent of male inmates. In state prisons about six out of ten
women described themselves as using drugs in the month before
the offense, and five out of ten reported they were daily drug users.
Nearly one out of three women in state prisons reported they had
committed the offense that resulted in their incarceration in order
to obtain money to support a need for drugs.
Prior Criminal History: About 65 percent of women in state
prisons had a prior criminal history, compared to 77 percent of
male inmates. Whereas about one third of women inmates had
three or more prior convictions, about 43 percent of male inmates
had at least three prior convictions.
Death Sentences: At the end of 1997, forty-four inmates, or 1.3
percent of the death row population, were women. During that year
two women were sentenced to death and five had their death sen-
tences commuted. Of the forty-four women, thirty were white and
166
Facts and Data

fourteen were black. For these women under sentence of death, an
average of seventy-eight months had elapsed since sentencing.
Recidivism: In a sample of women inmates discharged from
prisons in eleven states in 1983, it was found that 52 percent of the
women were rearrested. An estimated 39 percent were recon-
victed within three years, and 33 percent were returned to prison.
Prior arrest history was a significant predictor of postprison
recidivism. For example, among women with two to three prior
arrests, 33 percent were rearrested, as compared with a rate of 69
percent for those women with seven to ten prior arrests.
The Prevalence of Imprisonment: The most recent estimate,
made in 1999 by the Justice Department, is that about eleven
women out of 1,000 will be incarcerated at some time in their lives
and that the likely rate varies according to race. For white women
the rate is five out of 1,000, for black women it is thirty-six out of
1,000, and for Hispanic women it is fifteen out of 1,000.
Prison Expenditure
For the fiscal year 1996, the fifty states and the District of
Columbia reported spending $22 billion for adult prisons, both
male and female, including the costs of building, staffing, and
maintaining prisons. To this can be added a further $2.5 billion
spent by the Federal Bureau of Prisons. The average cost of hous-
ing each inmate in 1996 was $20,100 in state prisons and $23,500
in federal prisons.
From 1990 to 1996 state prison expenditure increased 83 per-
cent, or a rate of about 11 percent each year. Medical and dental
care for inmates cost an average of $6.54 per day for each inmate,
and inmate programs cost about $3.28 per day.
Gender in State Prisons
Data from three states is presented to give a picture of the state
female inmate population. The states are Massachusetts, home to
the oldest women’s prison in the country at Framingham;
Indiana, which has the Indiana State Prison for Women, now a
maximum-security facility for women; and California, one of the
largest jurisdictions for women prisoners, with eight institutions
housing women offenders.
Gender in State Prisons
167

Massachusetts
According to the Massachusetts Department of Correction
Massachusetts Correctional Institution (MCI), Framingham is a
medium-security correctional facility for female offenders and
the oldest female correctional facility in operation in the United
States. Its inmate population reflects various levels of classifica-
tion and includes women awaiting trial. There are four housing
units within the prison compound and a two-story, 120-bed hous-
ing unit. A minimum-security prerelease facility called Hodder
House with thirty-five beds is located about one quarter of a mile
outside the prison perimeter; its goal is to facilitate community
integration of women inmates. The treatment and educational
opportunities at the prison include the following:
•
Catch the Hope
•
Overeaters Anonymous
•
City Mission Society
•
Parenting Programs
•
Domestic Violence Program •
Computer Technology
•
First Step Program
•
Building Trades
•
Fully Alive Program
•
Manicuring
•
Healthy Human 
•
Mandatory Literacy Program
Relationships
•
English as a Second
Language
Inmate statistics for offense categories, prison offenses, sex
offenses, property offenses, and drug and other offenses are
shown according to gender for the state as follows:
168
Facts and Data
TABLE 7.1
Current Offense Catagories by Gender
 
  
FEMALE 
MALE 
TOTAL
 
  
Number 
(%) 
Number 
(%) 
Number 
(%)
 
Person 
186 
34 
4,596 
48 
4,782 
47
Sex 
15 
3 
1,800 
19 
1,815 
18
Property 
93 
17 
892 
9 
985 
10
Drug 
190 
35 
1,975 
21 
2,165 
21
Other 
60 
11 
288 
3 
348 
3
Total 
544 
100 
9,551 
100 
10,095 
100
Source:  Research and Planning Division, Massachusetts Department of Corrections. “January 1, 2001 Inmate Statistics.”  
December 2001. Available online: http://www.state.ma.us/doc/pdfs/1101.pdf.

Gender in State Prisons
169
TABLE 7.2
Person Offenses by Gender
 
  
FEMALE 
MALE 
TOTAL
 
  
Number 
(%) 
Number 
(%) 
Number (%)
 
Armed Robbery 
27 
15 
1,018 
22 
1,045  
22
Murder 2nd Degree 
18 
10 
734 
16 
752  
16
Murder lst Degree 
15 
8 
704 
15 
719  
15
Assault / A&B with a 
    Dangerous Weapon 
22 
12 
467 
10 
489  
10
Assault with Intent to Rob or 
    Murder, Being Armed 
9 
5 
401 
9 
410  
9
Manslaughter 
21 
11 
353 
8 
374  
8
Unarmed Robbery 
6 
3 
270 
6 
276  
6
Armed Assault in Dwelling Houses 
2 
1 
78 
2 
80  
2
Assault/Assault and Battery 
19 
10 
46 
1 
65  
1
Unarmed Robbery, 
    Victim 60 and Over 
4 
2 
59 
1 
63 
1
Mayhem 
6 
3 
52 
1 
58 
1
Kidnapping 
4 
2 
49 
1 
53  
1
Vehicular Homicide 
5 
3 
42 
1 
47  
1
Carjacking 
1 
1 
43 
1 
44 
1
Assault and Battery upon a Child 
8 
4 
28 
1 
36 
1
Assault with Intent to 
    Commit Murder 
2 
1 
33 
1 
35 
1
Assault with Intent to 
    Commit Felony 
2 
1 
24 
1 
26  
1
Home Invasion 
0 
0 
24 
1 
24  
1
Accessory before the Fact 
3 
2 
19 
0 
22  
0
Accessory after the Fact 
4 
2 
15 
0 
19  
0
Stealing by Confining or 
    Putting in Fear 
0 
0 
19 
0 
19  
0
Conspiracy 
2 
1 
15 
0 
17  
0
Assault to Rob not Being Armed 
1 
1 
15 
0 
16  
0
Stalking 
0 
0 
15 
0 
15  
0
Murder 2nd Degree, 
    Juvenile Offender Law 
0 
0 
15 
0 
15  
0
Attempted Murder 
1 
1 
12 
0 
13  
0
Armed Asst w/Intent to 
    Rob/Murder, Victim 60+ 
2 
1 
9 
0 
11  
0
Violation of Civil Rights 
0 
0 
9 
0 
9  
0
Extortion 
0 
0 
8 
0 
8  
0
Murder 1st Degree, 
    Juvenile Offender Law 
0 
0 
8 
0 
8  
0
A&B with a Dangerous Weapon, 
    Victim 60+ 
1 
1 
7 
0 
8  
0
A&B Upon an Elderly or 
    Disabled Person 
0 
0 
4 
0 
4  
0
Assault with a Dangerous Weapon, 
    Victim 60+ 
1 
1 
1 
0 
2  
0
Total 
186 
100 
4,596 
100 
4,782  
100
Please Note: The offenses are arranged in descending order by offense total
Source:  Research and Planning Division, Massachusetts Department of Corrections. “January 1, 2001 Inmate Statistics.” 
December 2001. Available online: http://www.state.ma.us/doc/pdfs/1101.pdf.

170
Facts and Data
TABLE 7.3
Sex Offenses by Gender
 
  
FEMALE 
MALE 
TOTAL
 
  
Number 
(%) 
Number 
(%) 
Number (%)
 
Rape and Abuse of a Child 
8 
53 
512 
28 
520  
29
Rape of a Child with Force 
2 
13 
379 
21 
381  
21
Rape 
1 
7 
317 
18 
318  
18
Aggravated Rape 
0 
0 
285 
16 
285  
16
Indecent Asslt & Battery 
    on Child under 14 
3 
20 
143 
8 
146  
8
Assault with Intent to 
    Commit Rape 
0 
0 
90 
5 
90  
5
Indecent Asslt & Battery 
    on Victim 14 or Older 
0 
0 
30 
2 
30  
2
Assault with Intent to Rape, 
    Child  under 16 
0 
0 
23 
1 
23 
1
Sexual Assault, Out of 
    State/Federal Inmates 
1 
7 
5 
0 
6 
 0
Sex Offenses Involving a Minor 
0 
0 
5 
0 
5 
 0
Other Sex Offenses 
0 
0 
4 
0 
4  
0
Incest 
0 
0 
3 
0 
3  
0
Indecent A&B on Mentally 
    Retarded Victim 
0 
0 
2 
0 
2  
0
Unnatural Acts with 
    Child under 16 
0 
0 
1 
0 
1  
0
Crimes against Nature 
0 
0 
1 
0 
1  
0
Unnatural Acts 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0  
0
Total 
15 
100 
1,800 
100 
1,815  
100
Please Note: The offenses are arranged in descending order by offense total.
Source:  Research and Planning Division, Massachusetts Department of Corrections. “January 1, 2001 Inmate Statistics.” 
December 2001. Available online: http://www.state.ma.us/doc/pdfs/1101.pdf.
TABLE 7.4
Property Offenses by Gender
 
  
FEMALE 
MALE 
TOTAL
 
  
Number 
(%) 
Number 
(%) 
Number (%)
 
Unarmed Burglary/Breaking 
    and Entering 
10 
11 
483 
54 
493  
50
Theft of Motor Vehicle or 
    non-Motor Vehicle 
4 
4 
87 
10 
91 
9
Shoplifting 
10 
11 
1 
0 
11 
1
Receiving Stolen Goods 
8 
9 
14 
2 
22  
2
Possession of Burglary Tools 
0 
0 
14 
2 
14  
1
Larceny/Stealing 
32 
34 
74 
8 
106  
11
Larceny from the Person 
4 
4 
11 
1 
15  
2
Larceny from Elder or 
    Disabled Person 
4 
4 
5 
1 
9  
1
Fraud 
0 
0 
4 
0 
4  
0
Forgery and Uttering 
8 
9 
21 
2 
29  
3
Embezzlement 
0 
0 
2 
0 
2  
0
Destruction of Property 
2 
2 
19 
2 
21  
2
Common and Notorious Thief 
0 
0 
12 
1 
12 
1
Burglary, Armed or an Assault 
0 
0 
69 
8 
69 
7
Arson and Attempted Arson 
11 
12 
76 
9 
87 
9
Total 
93 
100 
892 
100 
985  
100
Please Note: The offenses are arranged in descending order by offense total.
Source:  Research and Planning Division, Massachusetts Department of Corrections. “January 1, 2001 Inmate Statistics.” 
December 2001. Available online: http://www.state.ma.us/doc/pdfs/1101.pdf.

Gender in State Prisons
171
TABLE 7.5
Property Offenses by Gender
 
  
FEMALE 
MALE 
TOTAL
 
  
Number 
(%) 
Number 
(%) 
Number (%)
 
Being Present Where 
    Heroin is Kept 
1 
1 
0 
0 
1  
0
Possession of Hypodermic 
    Syringe/Instrument 
4 
2 
0 
0 
4  
0
Conspiracy to Violate
    Controlled Substance Act 
2 
1 
32 
2 
34  
2
Possession of Controlled 
    Substance - No Class Specified 
22 
12 
13 
1 
35  
2
Possession of Controlled 
    Substance - Class A 
1 
1 
14 
1 
15  
1
Possession of Controlled 
    Substance - Class B 
2 
1 
3 
0 
5  
0
Possession of Controlled
    Substance - Class D 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0  
0
Fraudulent Prescriptions 
0 
0 
1 
0 
1  
0
Class A Distribution or 
    Possession w/Intent to Distribute 
32 
17 
269 
14 
301  
14
*Class A Distribution or 
    Poss w/Int to Dist, Subsequent 
2 
1 
78 
4 
80  
4
Class B Distribution or Possession 
    w/Int to Distribute 
22 
12 
211 
11 
233  
11
*Class B Distribution or Poss 
    w/lnt to Dist, Subsequent 
10 
5 
112 
6 
122  
6
*Specific Class B Distribution or 
    Poss w/Int to Distribute 
20 
11 
125 
6 
145  
7
*Specific Cl B Possession 
    w/Int to Distribute, Subsequent 
3 
2 
68 
3 
71  
3
Class C Distribution or Possession 
    w/Int to Distribute 
0 
0 
1 
0 
1  
0
*Marijuana Trafficking 50–100 Lbs 
1 
1 
1 
0 
2  
0
*Marijuana Trafficking 100–2,000 Lbs 
0 
0 
1 
0 
1  
0
*Specific Class B Trafficking 
    14–28 Grams 
15 
8 
251 
13 
266  
12
*Specific Class B Trafficking 
    28–100Grams 
10 
5 
294 
15 
304  
14
*Specific Class B Trafficking 
    100–200 Grams 
9 
5 
176 
9 
185  
9
*Specific Class B Trafficking 
    200+ Grams 
10 
5 
141 
7 
151  
7
*Class A Trafficking 14–28 Grams 
0 
0 
10 
1 
10  
0
*Class A Trafficking 28–100 Grams 
4 
2 
18 
1 
22 
1 
*Class A Trafficking 100–200 Grams 
0 
0 
11 
1 
11  
1
*Class A Trafficking 200+ Grams 
0 
0 
7 
0 
7  
0
Class D Distribution or Possession 
    w/Int to Distribute 
2 
1 
5 
0 
7  
0
*Drug Violation, School/Park 
18 
9 
127 
6 
145  
7
Induce Minors in Sale and 
   Distribution of Drugs 
0 
0 
6 
0 
6  
0
Total 
190 
100 
1,975 
100 
2,165  
100
* Denotes an offense which carries a mandatory sentence. 
Please Note: The offenses are arranged in order by drug violation category.
Source:  Research and Planning Division, Massachusetts Department of Corrections. “January 1, 2001 Inmate Statistics.” 
December 2001. Available online: http://www.state.ma.us/doc/pdfs/1101.pdf.

Indiana
Formerly known as the Indiana Reformatory for Women and Girls,
the Indiana Women’s Prison is now a maximum-security facility
with housing in the form of cells. Female offenders in this institu-
tion typically have been convicted of violent or weapons-based
offenses and require close supervision and tight security to protect
the public, prison staff, and other offenders.
The Indiana Department of Correction’s 2001 annual report
states that the prison provides CAD (computer-aided design) and
commercial laundry services. Its educational and other programs
include:
•
Individualized Prerelease and Standard Prerelease
Orientation Programs
•
Substance Abuse Treatment
•
Substance Abuse Education
•
Mental Health Counseling
•
Alcoholics Anonymous Services
•
Community Transition Program for all felons except
murderers with a sentence of at least two years
The department reports that the adult population at the Indiana
Women’s Prison has increased 480 percent since 1981 and 56 per-
cent since 1996. It identifies a number of factors contributing to
this increase, including the fact that a majority of the female
offenders are found in an at-risk group, recent harsher criminal
sanctions against women, an attitude of “getting tough on crime,”
more effective law enforcement, and continued substance abuse.
In contrast to the 480-percent increase in the female prison popu-
lation, the increase in the male prison population was 200 percent
during the same period.
The following provides a picture of the adult female popula-
tion according to offense committed and of the growth in the
female population from 1992 to 2001:
172
Facts and Data

Gender in State Prisons
173
457
420
404
127
119
Class B
29.9%
Class A
7.8%
Murder
8.3%
Class D
26.5%
Class C
27.5%
FIGURE 7.1
Adult Female Female Felon Population by Most Serious Committing Offense Class
(Includes Offenders Held in Jail and Contracted Beds due to Overcrowding)
July 1, 2001
The three most common Class A offenses are: (1) Dealing in Cocaine or Narcotic
Drug, (2) Conspiracy, and (3) Voluntary Manslaughter. Forty-four percent of all
Class A commitments are for drug offenses
The three most common Class B offenses are: (1) Dealing in Cocaine or Narcotic
Drug, (2) Burglary, and (3) Dealing in Schedule I, II, or III Controlled Substance.
Sixty-three percent of all Class B commitments are for drug offenses.
The three most common Class C offenses are: (1) Forgery, (2) Robbery, and (3)
Battery. Eight percent of all Class C commitments are for drug offenses.
The three most common Class D offenses are: (1) Theft, (2) Prostitution, and (3)
Possession of Cocaine or Narcotic Drug. Fifteen percent of all Class D commit-
ments are for drug offenses.
*A person conspires to commit a felony when, with intent to commit the felony, he
agrees with another person to commit the felony. A conspiracy to commit a felony
is a felony of the same class as the underlying felony. For example, if a person con-
spires to deal in cocaine and this is determined to be a Class A felony, then the per-
son will be committed for Class A Dealing in Cocaine or Narcotic Drug.
Source: Monthly Statistical Report, Offender Information System, http://www.ai.org/indcorrection/
AnnRep.pdf

California
Along with Texas and the federal prison system, California has a
high female inmate population. Among its female facilities is the
California Institution for Women (CIW), which opened in 1952 on
a 150-acre site and which housed 2,107 female prisoners in June
2000. Until 1987, CIW was California’s only prison for female
felons, and its campus-like design was in keeping with the then-
notions of prisoner rehabilitation. According to the California
Department of Corrections, CIW accommodates all custody lev-
els of female inmates and houses female inmates with special
needs such as pregnancy, psychiatric care, methadone addiction,
and those with HIV infection.
CIW runs inmate programs, which include textile and cloth-
ing manufacture, and vocational programs that include computer
training, data processing, electronics, graphic arts, printing,
plumbing, and upholstery. Inmate programs are stated to include:
174
Facts and Data
0
200
400
600
800
1,000
1,200
1,400
1,600
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
733
628
679
751
1,123
793
821
879
944
1,065
1,133
1,275
1,369
1,468
July 1 of Each Year
Rated Bed
Actual Population
Source: Monthly Statistical Report, Offender Information System,
http://www.ai.org/indcorrection/AnnRep.pdf
FIGURE 7.2
Adult Female Population
Population and Rated Bed Capacity
1992–2001

•
Prerelease
•
Adult Basic Education
•
Arts in Corrections
•
Victim Awareness
•
Drug Treatment/Diversion
A picture of the female inmate population by offense, race, and
age for the year 1999 follows:
Gender in State Prisons
175
TABLE 7.6
Institution Population by Age Group, Mean Age, and Sex,
December 31, 1999
 
Age 
TOTAL 
MALE 
FEMALE
 
Group 
Number 
(%) 
Number 
(%) 
Number 
(%)
  
Under 18 
115 
0.1 
111 
0.1 
4 
0.0
  
18–19 
2,417 
1.5 
2,351 
1.6 
66 
0.6
  
20–24 
22,147 
13.8 
21,326 
14.3 
821 
7.3
  
25–29 
28,160 
17.5 
26,591 
17.8 
1,569 
14.0
  
30–34 
30,217 
18.8 
27,860 
18.6 
2,357 
21.1
  
35–39 
31,162 
19.4 
28,349 
19.0 
2,813 
25.2
  
40–44 
22,844 
14.2 
20,861 
14.0 
1,983 
17.7
  
45–49 
12,606 
7.8 
11,672 
7.8 
934 
8.4
  
50–54 
6,150 
3.8 
5,762 
3.9 
388 
3.5
  
55–59 
2,692 
1.7 
2,536 
1.7 
156 
1.4
  
60 and Over 
2,177 
1.4 
2,094 
1.4 
83 
0.7
  
   Mean Age 
34.7 
 
34.6 
 
36.0
 Total 
160,687 
100.0 
149,513 
100.0 
11,174 
100.0
Source:  State of California, Department of Corrections, Offender Information Services Branch, Estimates and Statistical Analysis Section, Data 
Analysis Unit. “California Prisoners and Parolees 2000.” Available at http://www.cdc.state.ca.us/pdf/CalPris2000elect2.pdf.

176
Facts and Data
TABLE 7.7
Institution Population by Offense and Sex,
December 31, 1999
    
TOTAL 
MALE 
FEMALE
    
Number 
(%) 
Number 
(%) 
Number 
(%)
 CRIMES AGAINST PERSONS 
70,359 
43.9 
67,777 
45.4 
2,582 
23.3
  Homicide 
21,273 
13.3 
20,242 
13.6 
1,031 
9.3
   Murder 1st 
8,908 
5.6 
8,552 
5.7 
356 
3.2
   Murder 2nd 
9,211 
5.7 
8,761 
5.9 
450 
4.1
   Manslaughter 
2,728 
1.7 
2,548 
1.7 
180 
1.6
   Vehicular Manslaughter 
426 
0.3 
381 
0.3 
45 
0.4
  Robbery 
16,881 
10.5 
16,274 
10.9 
607 
5.5
  Assault and Battery 
18,390 
11.5 
17,616 
11.8 
774 
7.0
   Assault Deadly Weapon 
9,653 
6.0 
9,260 
6.2 
393 
3.5
   Other Assault/Battery 
8,737 
5.5 
8,356 
5.6 
381 
3.4
  Sex Offenses 
11,512 
7.2 
11,410 
7.6 
102 
0.9
   Rape 
2,116 
1.3 
2,109 
1.4 
7 
0.1
   Lewd Act with Child 
6,302 
3.9 
6,248 
4.2 
54 
0.5
   Oral Copulation 
696 
0.4 
692 
0.5 
4 
0.0
   Sodomy 
228 
0.1 
228 
0.2 
0 
0.0
   Penetration with Object 
357 
0.2 
354 
0.2 
3 
0.0
   Other Sex Offenses 
1,813 
1.1 
1,779 
1.2 
34 
0.3
  Kidnap 
2,303 
1.4 
2,235 
1.5 
68 
0.6
 PROPERTY CRIMES 
34,076 
21.3 
30,896 
20.7 
3,180 
28.6
  Burglary 
14,355 
9.0 
13,491 
9.0 
864 
7.8
   Burglary 1st 
7,900 
4.9 
7,556 
5.1 
344 
3.1
   Burglary 2nd 
6,455 
4.0 
5,935 
4.0 
520 
4.7
 Theft 
12,776 
8.0 
11,198 
7.5 
1,578 
14.2
   Grand Theft 
2,666 
1.7 
2,309 
1.5 
357 
3.2
   Petty Theft with Prior 
7,204 
4.5 
6,168 
4.1 
1,036 
9.3
   Receiving Stolen Property 
2,906 
1.8 
2,721 
1.8 
185 
1.7
  Vehicle Theft 
4,494 
2.8 
4,330 
2.9 
164 
1.5
  Forgery/Fraud 
1,870 
1.2 
1,407 
0.9 
463 
4.2
  Other Property 
581 
0.4 
470 
0.3 
111 
1.0
 DRUG CRIMES 
45,328 
28.3 
40,455 
27.1 
4,873 
43.9
  CS Possession 
19,753 
12.3 
17,223 
11.5 
2,530 
22.8
  CS Possession for Sale 
12,974 
8.1 
11,753 
7.9 
1,221 
11.0
  CS Sale 
6,850 
4.3 
6,175 
4.1 
675 
6.1
  CS Manufacturing 
2,992 
1.9 
2,753 
1.8 
239 
2.2
  CS Other 
948 
0.6 
822 
0.6 
126 
1.1
  Hashish Possession 
27 
0.0 
25 
0.0 
2 
0.0
  Marijuana Possession for Sale 
936 
0.6 
900 
0.6 
36 
0.3
  Marijuana Sale 
714 
0.4 
676 
0.5 
38 
0.3
  Marijuana Other 
134 
0.1 
128 
0.1 
6 
0.1
 OTHER CRIMES 
10,497 
6.5 
10,030 
6.7 
467 
4.2
  Escape 
295 
0.2 
265 
0.2 
30 
0.3
  Driving under the Influence 
2,300 
1.4 
2,201 
1.5 
99 
0.9
  Arson 
432 
0.3 
392 
0.3 
40 
0.4
  Possession of Weapon 
4,362 
2.7 
4,283 
2.9 
79 
0.7
  Other Offenses 
3,108 
1.9 
2,889 
1.9 
219 
2.0
 TOTAL 
160,687 
 
149,513 
 
11,174
 OFFENSE DATA UNAVAILABLE 
427 
 
355 
 
72
 TOTAL KNOWN OFFENSE DATA  
160,260 
100.0 
149,158 
100.0 
11,102 
100.0
NOTE: Components may not add to totals due to independent routing.
Source:  State of California, Department of Corrections, Offender Information Services branch, Estimates and Statistical Analysis section, data 
analysis Unit. “California Prisoners and Parolees 2000.” Available at http://www.cdc.state.ca.us/pdf/CalPris2000elect2.pdf.

Gender in State Prisons
177
TABLE 7.8
Institution Population by Racial/Ethnic Group and Sex,
December 31, 1999
 
Racial/Ethnic 
TOTAL 
MALE 
FEMALE
 
Group 
Number 
(%) 
Number 
(%) 
Number 
(%)
  
White 
47,279 
29.4 
42,993 
28.8 
4,286 
38.4
  
Hispanic (Mexican) 
54,690 
34.0 
52,070 
34.8 
2,620 
23.4
  
Black 
50,321 
31.3 
46,570 
31.1 
3,751 
33.6
  
Other 
8,397 
5.2 
7,880 
5.3 
517 
4.6
 Total 
160,687 
100.0 
149,513 
100.0 
11,174 
100.0
Source: State of California, Department of Corrections, Offender Information Services branch, Estimates and Statistical Analysis section, data analysis 
Unit. “California Prisoners and Parolees 2000.” Available at http://www.cdc.state.ca.us/pdf/CalPris2000elect2.pdf.


8
Directory of Organizations,
Associations, and
Government and
International Agencies
I
nformation follows with respect to international, federal, state,
and nongovernmental organizations related to women’s pris-
ons and issues affecting women in prison.
American Civil Liberties Union National Prison Project
733 15th Street NW, Suite 620
Washington, DC 20005
(202) 393-4930
E-mail: check website for local office
Website: http://www.aclu.org/issues/prisons
The National Prison Project was founded in 1972 by the ACLU
and seeks to create constitutional conditions of confinement and
to strengthen prisoners’ rights though class-action litigation and
public education. The focus of the project includes issues relevant
to women in prisons, such as reducing prison overcrowding,
improving medical care in prisons, and eliminating violence and
maltreatment. Project staff publish a quarterly journal and con-
duct public education through conferences. They also work with
a network of private lawyers throughout the country. Among the
publications of the project are a guide for prisoners and the AIDS
179

in Prison Bibliography (1998), which catalogues resource material
on AIDS in prisons.
Amnesty International, Women’s Human Rights
Amnesty International USA
322 Eighth Avenue
New York, NY 10001
(212) 627-1451
E-mail: check website for local office
Website: http://www.amnesty-usa.org
This program aims to promote and advocate for observance and
enforcement of the human rights of women throughout the
world. As well as reporting on concerns affecting women’s rights,
Amnesty International publishes a quarterly bulletin on women’s
rights and handbooks on issues relevant to rights. A recent
report—About Women in Custody: Sexual Misconduct and the
Shackling of Pregnant Women—reveals how states have a poor
record in providing female inmates with protection against sex-
ual abuse and that many allow the shackling of women prisoners
during pregnancy.
Bureau of Justice Statistics, Department of Justice
810 Seventh Street NW
Washington, DC 20531
(202) 307-0765
E-mail: askbjs@ojp.usdoj.gov
Website: http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs
The Bureau of Justice Statistics is an important source of statisti-
cal and other information on the criminal justice system generally,
including women offenders and women in prison. Reports from
the bureau can be downloaded from its website, and it maintains
an e-mail system for advance notification of publications.
California Coalition for Women Prisoners (CCWP)
100 McAllister Street
San Francisco, CA 94102
(415) 255-7036
E-mail: ccwp@igc.org
Website: http://www.womenprisoners.org
The CCWP fights for basic human rights and against the medical
neglect of women prisoners in California. It aims to raise public
180
Directory of Organizations

awareness of the cruel and inhumane conditions under which
women prisoners live and advocates for changes in those condi-
tions. It promotes the leadership of, and the giving of voice to,
women prisoners, including former prisoners and their families.
Coalition members visit women in prison, produce a newsletter,
make protests, and conduct advocacy, education, outreach, and
support for former prisoners. The organization began in 1995 to
support a lawsuit filed by women incarcerated at the Central
California Women’s Facility and the California Institution for
Women seeking adequate medical care.
Chicago Legal Advocacy for Incarcerated Mothers (CLAIM)
220 South State Street, Suite 830
Chicago, IL 60604
(312) 332-5537
E-mail: info@c-l-a-i-m.org
Website: http://www.c-l-a-i-m.org
CLAIM was formed in 1985 to address the gap in legal aid and
advocacy for women inmates and their families. As it has grown
over time, it is now a source of legal aid for female prisoners and
their families and includes two volunteer lawyer programs and
an active board of directors. CLAIM provides legal advice to
assist mothers in taking steps to prevent their incarceration from
causing permanent damage to the family structure. This action
includes enforcing legal rights such as mother-and-child visits,
appropriate placement and guardianship options for children of
women in prison, and the gaining of public benefits for these chil-
dren during their mother’s periods of confinement. Using volun-
teer lawyers and paralegals, the organization assigns appropriate
cases and supports its volunteers with malpractice insurance,
training in family law, and mentoring. CLAIM’s Jail Project
teaches classes on the criminal court system and in family law to
women at Cook County Jail, and its Advocacy Project includes a
women’s peer support group working for personal and institu-
tional change. Through this group, former prisoners address
issues such as reentering the community after a term in prison
and wider issues that affect them and their families.
Correctional Association of New York
135 East 15th Street
New York, NY 10003
(212) 254-5700
Directory of Organizations
181

E-mail: info@correctionalassociation.org
Website: http://www.corrassoc.org
Founded in 1844, the Correctional Association of New York has a
long history of concern about conditions in prison and the lack of
support services for former prisoners. The association was
granted the right in 1846 by special law to inspect prisons and
report its findings to policy makers and the public. It now runs
four working projects: the Public Policy Project, the Women in
Prison Project, the Prison Visiting Project, and the Juvenile Justice
Project. Through advocacy, public education, and the develop-
ment of workable alternatives the Correctional Association seeks
to create a fairer and more humane criminal justice system and a
safer and more just society.
The Corrections Connection
159 Burgin Parkway
Quincy, MA 02169
(617) 471-4445
E-mail: contact from website
Website: http://www.corrections.com
The Corrections Connection calls itself “the official home of cor-
rections” and provides a directory of information as well as links
to many topics in corrections. It came on line in 1996 as the first
weekly news source committed to improving the lives of correc-
tions professionals and their families. Although not directly
focusing on the subject of women in prison, it is a good source of
daily information on corrections generally and through its chat-
rooms and bulletin boards provides a useful insight into how cor-
rectional professionals see their task and the constraints they
believe they face in providing effective correctional services.
The Drug Reform Coordination Network (DRCNet)
2000 P Street NW, #210
Washington, DC 20036
E-mail: drcnet@drcnet.org
Website: http://www.drcnet.org
DRCNet was founded with the objective of stopping the chaos
and violence of the illegal drug trade and to end the mass incar-
ceration suffered by hundreds of thousands of nonviolent offend-
ers. It aims to reform drug laws, opposes the building of prisons,
and supports reforms that it argues have been compromised by
182
Directory of Organizations

the war on drugs. DRCNet advocates public dialogue on the
range of alternatives to current drug policy and the implementa-
tion of public health-based approaches to reduce the suffering
caused by drug use and the “war on drugs”. The organization
offers to provide professional information to activists and mem-
bers of the public interested in becoming involved in its mission.
Families Against Mandatory Minimums Foundation (FAMM)
1612 K Street NW, Suite 1400
Washington, DC 20006
(202) 822-6700
E-mail: contact from website
Website: http://www.famm.org
FAMM is a nonprofit organization founded in 1991 with the
objective of challenging inflexible and excessive penalties
required under mandatory sentencing laws. The organization
promotes sentencing laws that give judges the discretion to dis-
tinguish between appropriate sentences for defendants, taking
into account factors such as offense seriousness, potential for
rehabilitation, and the role played by the defendant in the com-
mission of the crime. FAMM aims to educate people about the
unjust nature of mandatory minimum sentences and to mobilize
a reform movement through lobbying federal and state lawmak-
ers, building coalitions, and promoting efforts at the grassroots
level. FAMM believes that judicial discretion is the appropriate
method of arriving at a just sentence and that judges and not law-
makers should determine an appropriate sentence for a crime. It
wants to see mandatory penalties replaced with sentencing laws
with flexible sentencing guidelines.
Family and Corrections Network (FCN)
32 Oak Grove Road
Palmyra, VA 22963
(434) 589-3036
E-mail: fcn@fcnetwork.org
Website: http://www.fcnetwork.org
Family and Corrections Network is concerned with the families
of offenders and offers information, training, and technical assis-
tance relating to the children of prisoners, parenting programs for
prisoners, prison visiting, incarcerated fathers and mothers,
returning to the community, and prison marriage. It publishes the
Directory of Organizations
183

FCH Report, which is devoted to issues concerning families of
offenders. It has an online reading room with over ninety articles
and links to related sites.
Legal Services for Prisoners with Children (LSPC)
1540 Market Street, Suite 490
San Francisco, CA
(415) 255-7036
E-mail: info@prisonerswithchildren.org
Website: http://www.prisonerswithchildren.org
LSPC advocates for the civil rights and for the empowerment of
incarcerated parents, children, family members, and people at
risk of incarceration. It responds to requests for information,
training, technical assistance, litigation, and community activism.
Its focus is on women in prison and their families, and it stresses
that race is a core issue in any discussion of incarceration.
National Criminal Justice Reference Service, Department of
Justice (NCJRS)
P.O. Box 6000
Rockville, MD 20849-6000
(800) 851-3420
E-mail: askncjrs@ncjrs.org
Website: http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov
NCJRS is a resource maintained by the Department of Justice that
offers justice information to support research and policy and pro-
gram development worldwide. Its resources are available to all,
and it offers extensive reference and referral services to deal with
questions about crime and crime related issues, including correc-
tions. This information includes statistics, publications, and com-
piling information packages and assistance tailored to particular
needs. By registering online with NCJRS, it is possible to receive
a bimonthly newsletter and e-mail notifications about new publi-
cations and resources. Many reports are available through the
NCJRS website, including reports on prison and jail inmates,
mental health treatment in state prisons, and HIV in prison and
jails.
National Institute of Corrections (NIC), U.S. Department of
Justice
320 First Street NW
184
Directory of Organizations

Washington, DC 20534
(800) 995-6423
E-mail: asknicic@nicic.org
Website: http://www.nicic.org
The NIC Information Center provides research assistance and
document delivery for correctional policy makers, practitioners,
elected officials, and members of the public interested in correc-
tions issues. Its services are provided free of charge and cover a
wide range of policy and program issues concerning prisons and
prisoners. The center produces a series of publications such as
those concerned with jails, community corrections, and those of
general interest.
Parents and Children Together, Inc. (PACT)
2836 Hemphill
Forth Worth, TX 76110
(817) 924-7776
E-mail: dkpact@juno.com
Website: http://www.fcnetwork.org
PACT is a nonprofit organization established in 1984 with the aim
of preserving and strengthening the families of those incarcerated
in prisons. Its primary objective is to prevent the incarceration of
future generations by encouraging stronger and healthier fami-
lies. PACT provides a community network and referral service to
the families of incarcerated prisoners and former offenders, a
family support group, a hospitality house for inmate families,
parent education and life skill classes to various correctional insti-
tutions across the country, a volunteer mentor program designed
to provide emotional support to prisoners and their families, and
a program called SKIP—Support Groups for Kids with
Incarcerated Parents—to elementary schools in the Fort Worth
area. PACT also issues a newsletter and runs other kinds of pro-
grams concerned with the general issue of prisoners and their
families.
The Prison Activist Resource Center (PARC)
P.O. Box 339
Berkeley, CA 94701
(510) 893-4648
E-mail: parc@prisonactivist.org
Website: http://www.prisonactivist.org
Directory of Organizations
185

PARC states that it is the source for progressive and radical infor-
mation on prisons and the criminal prosecution system. Among
the prison issues in which it is interested are women in prison. It
provides news and support to activists and advocacy groups
working on prison reform as well as prison support, working
with other groups in the Bay area and nationally. It also organizes
public forums, film showings, and demonstrations to build pub-
lic awareness. The main goals of PARC are to expose the myths
that sustain widespread injustices in prisons, to inspire and moti-
vate people to take positive action against the mass incarceration
system and for prisoners’ civil and human rights, and to provide
practical support to activists engaged in this advocacy. The PARC
website contains many links to other organizations concerned
with prison and prison reform, including those involved with
women in prison.
Stop Prisoner Rape (SPR)
6303 Wiltshire Boulevard, Suite 205
Los Angeles, CA 90048
(323) 653-7867
E-mail: info@spr.org
Website: http://www.spr.org
SPR seeks to put an end to sexual violence committed against
men, women, and youth in confinement. As well as posting rele-
vant news items on its website, SPR has issued a number of pub-
lications, press releases, and news items. A number of legal
articles concerned with rape and sexual assault laws, and a state-
by-state review of custodial sexual misconduct laws, are also
published on its website. The organization was founded by sur-
vivors of prison rape over twenty years ago.
United Nations Asia and Far East Institute for the Prevention
of Crime and the Treatment of Offenders (UNAFEI)
1-26, Harumi-cho, Fuchu-shi
Tokyo 183-0057
Japan
81-42-333-7021
E-mail: unafei@moj.go.jp
Website: http://www.unafei.or.jp
UNAFEI is a United Nations regional institute established in 1962
by agreement between the United Nations and the government of
186
Directory of Organizations

Japan with the aim of promoting the development of criminal jus-
tice systems and cooperation in the Asia and Pacific region. The
activities of the institute include training courses and seminars
for personnel in crime prevention and research studies of the
treatment of offenders. UNAFEI also organizes two international
training courses and one international seminar each year and
publishes information on the criminal justice systems and treat-
ment of offenders in the Asia and Pacific region.
Vera Institute of Justice
233 Broadway, 12th Floor
New York, NY 10279
(212) 334-1300
E-mail: webmaster@vera.org
Website: http://www.vera.org
The Vera Institute was established forty years ago by an active
philanthropist to campaign against the bail system, regarding it
as a practice that granted liberty based only on income. Sentenc-
ing and corrections is one of the current areas of interest of the
institute. Its website provides information about past and current
projects, which span the core areas of the criminal justice system,
including the diversion of drug abusers from prison, the effect of
state sentencing guidelines, and support for drug-abusing offend-
ers and their families. Its research department has just completed
an evaluation of New York City’s system of alternatives to incar-
ceration for felons.
Women Coping in Prison
Institute for Law, Psychiatry, and Public Policy
P.O. Box 800660
1107 West Main Street
University of Virginia
Charlottesville, VA 22908
E-mail: contact from website
Website: http://curry.edschool.virginia.edu/prisonstudy/
Women Coping in Prison is a joint project of the University of
Virginia and the Fluvanna Correctional Center for Women. The
project is intended to explore the subjective and objective param-
eters of the experience of women living in a prison environment,
including patterns of victimization that existed prior to incarcera-
tion, the extent of violence occurring within a maximum-security
Directory of Organizations
187

prison for women, patterns of adjustment made by women as a
result of incarceration, and family stress caused by confinement in
prison. Inmates participate in this research through structured
interviews and other studies.
Women’s Prison Book Project (WPBP)
2441 Lyndale Avenue South
Minneapolis, MN 55405
E-mail: wpbp@prisonactivist.org
Website: http://www.prisonactivist.org/wpbp/
Since 1994, the WPBP has been providing women in prison with
free reading materials covering a range of subjects from law and
education to politics, history, and health. The project believes that
incarcerated women have needs for particular kinds of informa-
tion such as that on families, children, women’s self-help,
women’s health, and legal aid for women who fight back against
those who abuse them. WPBP is an all-volunteer organization
composed of an administrative collective and a group of volun-
teers who assist with weekly book mailings and with fundraising
events.
188
Directory of Organizations

9
Selected Print and Nonprint
Resources
Bibliography
T
his bibliography classifies books into categories: general books
by criminologists that include material on women in prison,
more detailed criminological works and works with a feminist
focus, and popular works. Also included are relevant chapters in
books, journal articles, government publications, core periodicals,
and nonprint resources.
General Books
Belknap, J. 2001. The Invisible Woman: Gender, Crime, and
Justice, 2d ed. Belmont, CA: Wadsworth. 446 pages.
A standard textbook on women and crime, this volume covers the
field of women in the criminal justice system and has an informed
and comprehensive section concerned with incarcerating, pun-
ishing, and treating offending women and girls.
Butler, Anne. 1997. Gendered Justice in the American West:
Women Prisoners in Men’s Penitentiaries. Urbana and Chicago:
University of Illinois Press. 262 pages.
Focusing on groups of women who lived in the American West
during the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, the
author explores the circumstances of women imprisoned with
189

men in the West, including the circumstances that caused them to
be incarcerated, and the life of the male prison world and the vio-
lence women encountered inside men’s prisons. The nature of
work performed by women and women’s health issues are also
examined. The book reveals how gender shaped the experience of
women incarcerated in the West.
Chesney-Lind, M. 1997. The Female Offender: Girls, Women, and
Crime. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications. 219 pages.
Beginning with the subject of female delinquency, this book
brings a focus on trends in women’s crime, discusses the place of
drugs and violence in women’s criminality, and addresses the
issue of sentencing women to prison, arguing that effective com-
munity-based strategies and programs would be more appropri-
ate than building more prisons for women.
Cook, S., and S. Davies. 1999. Harsh Punishment: International
Experiences of Women’s Imprisonment. Boston: Northeastern
University Press. 326 pages.
This comparative volume examines women’s imprisonment in a
number of countries including the United States, Canada,
England, New Zealand, and Thailand and discusses issues such
as the “war on drugs” and African American women in U.S. pris-
ons. It also provides personal accounts from women of their expe-
rience of incarceration.
Fishman, L. 1990. Women at the Wall: A Study of Prisoners’
Wives Doing Time on the Outside. Albany: State University of
New York Press. 337 pages.
The author presents women’s accounts of the issues they face as
wives of prisoners and describes their experience as “doing time
on the outside.” She explores the women’s knowledge about their
criminal husbands before incarceration and their domestic lives
and fast living and traces events from before their husbands’
arrest, through the court process and sentencing, ending in their
incarceration. She presents accounts of how the wives are stigma-
tized as prisoners’ wives and their experiences in prison visiting,
living alone, and coping with their husbands’ reentry into society
after release.
190
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

Fletcher, B. R., L. D. Shaver, and D. G. Moon. 1993. Women
Prisoners: A Forgotten Population. Westport, CT: Praeger. 212
pages.
An examination of prison subculture that presents an in-depth
study of incarcerated women and the attitudes, beliefs, and val-
ues of the women and correctional staff.
Heidensohn, F. 1995. Women and Crime. Washington Square:
New York University Press. 242 pages.
The author presents the experiences of women and crime and
addresses the issue of women and the penal system as well as
providing a discussion of female criminality through various
criminological theories. The author shows how feminist analysis
of family life has a bearing on the social constraints faced by
women and brings a comparative approach to the subject using
material from England, Australia, Canada, and the United States.
Muraskin, R., ed. 2000. It’s a Crime: Women and Justice, 3d ed.
Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice-Hall. 488 pages.
This edited volume focuses on issues affecting women coming
into contact with the criminal justice system. There are sections on
women and drugs, HIV, and women offenders, as well as a sec-
tion concerned with women in prison that covers a wide range of
topics including the long-term incarceration effects on women in
prison, the issue of three-strikes legislation and its impact on
women, and the relationship between correctional officers and
female offenders. As well, the issues of sexual abuse of women in
prison and women on death row are given detailed treatment.
Price, B. R., and N. Sokoloff, eds. 1995. The Criminal Justice
System and Women: Offenders, Victims, and Workers. New York:
McGraw-Hill. 456 pages.
This edited book covers the field of women and crime beginning
with theories and facts about female offenders, moving to
address the subject of women as victims of crime, and concluding
with some issues affecting women workers in the criminal justice
system. It contains a chapter analyzing the conflict experienced
by women correctional officers and has a strong focus on wife
battering and domestic violence as well as drugs and racial issues
affecting women and crime.
Bibliography
191

Rafter, N., ed. 2000. Encyclopedia of Women and Crime. Phoenix,
AZ: Oryx Press. 361 pages.
As well as covering crimes by women and theories of female
crime, this volume has sections on punishment and treatment of
women, both in the United States and in Britain, Canada, and
Australia. Each entry is supplemented by further reading lists,
and an extensive bibliography is provided.
Zaplin, R., ed. 1998. Female Offenders: Critical Perspectives and
Effective Interventions. Gaithersburg, MD: Aspen Publishers. 398
pages.
This edited volume addresses theoretical and applied aspects of
female criminality and incarceration. There is an emphasis on
treatment issues including mental health and childhood mistreat-
ment, and a discussion of institutional programs for female
offenders.
Criminological and Feminist Works
Bacon, M. 2000. Abby Hopper Gibbons: Prison Reformer and
Social Activist. New York: State University of New York. 217
pages.
This book, by a historian who has focused on the contribution of
Quaker women in social reform, traces the background and
career of Abby Hopper Gibbons, who made a major contribution
to prison reform for women in the United States in the nineteenth
and early twentieth centuries. In discussing Gibbons’s work she
presents a history of the women’s reformatory movement and
shows how Quaker and non-Quaker women collaborated to
change conditions for women in prison.
Butler, A. M. 1997. Gendered Justice in the American West:
Women Prisoners in Men’s Penitentiaries. Urbana: University of
Illinois Press. 262 pages.
The author, a historian, explores the history of women’s incar-
ceration in men’s penitentiaries in the West, focusing particu-
larly on the experience of women in that form of confinement,
their health, and the forms of violence they suffered prior to
incarceration.
192
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

Enos, S. 2001. Mothering from the Inside: Parenting in a Women’s
Prison. New York: State University of New York. 176 pages.
The author reveals how women cope with motherhood from
inside prison, showing how they find places for their children to
live, manage relationships with their children’s caregivers,
demonstrate their fitness as mothers, and negotiate rights to their
children in difficult circumstances.
Faith, K. 1993. Unruly Women: The Politics of Confinement and
Resistance. Vancouver: Press Gang Publishers. 335 pages.
Taking a feminist approach to women’s confinement, the author
begins with a historical overview of women’s “unruliness,” dis-
cusses modern crimes by women with an emphasis on the con-
nection between victimization and criminalization, and then
moves to a discussion of the “pains of imprisonment” located
against a review of prison programs and services designed to
respond to the fact of imprisonment. Resistance is a focus of this
work, which presents a comparative approach using material
from Canada and the United States. 
Freedman, E. 2000. Their Sister’s Keepers: Women’s Prison
Reform in America, 1830–1930. Ann Arbor: University of
Michigan Press. 248 pages.
This book is one of the leading historical presentations of
women’s imprisonment, especially in relation to the reformatory
movement. It provides a comprehensive account of that move-
ment and subsequent developments in women’s incarceration.
Girshick, L. 1999. No Safe Haven: Stories of Women in Prison.
Boston: Northeastern University Press. 201 pages.
Pointing out that incarcerated women constitute a largely invisi-
ble population because of their small numbers and their involve-
ment in less serious offenses, the author draws on the life stories
of forty women inmates at a minimum-security prison in North
Carolina. In exploring their lives before incarceration, she asks us
to see their criminality in the context of their childhood and ado-
lescent experiences. Girshick argues that society’s treatment of
these women has led some of them to commit crime, and she
makes recommendations for social change and community pro-
grams intended to reduce women’s imprisonment.
Bibliography
193

Grobsmith, E. 1994. Indians in Prison: Incarcerated Native
Americans in Nebraska. Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press.
205 pages.
The author’s focus is the incarceration of Native Americans in
Nebraska, and she argues that for Native Americans imprisoned
there, adjustment to prison life involves more than acceptance of
incarceration, bringing also a need for a process through which
each Native American must determine how to merge being
Indian with being incarcerated, where sacrifices in maintaining
heritage and identity can be made, and where they cannot.
Beginning with the historical framework, the author examines life
in prison for Native Americans and focuses on alcohol and sub-
stance abuse as a particular aspect of the specificity of Native
American imprisonment.
Hawkes, M. 1994. Excellent Effect: The Edna Mahan Story.
Laurel, MD: American Correctional Association. 243 pages.
A history of the life and career of Edna Mahan, who for forty
years was the superintendent of the Clinton Farms Reformatory
for Women in New Jersey.
Heffernan, E. 1972. Making It in Prison: The Square, the Cool,
and the Life. New York: John Wiley & Sons. 231 pages.
An early attempt to explore and explain the culture in a women’s
prison. The author identifies certain typologies within the prison
culture that women adopt as a means of coping with the prison
experience.
James, J., ed. 2000. States of Confinement: Policing, Detention,
and Prisons. New York: St. Martin’s Press. 368 pages.
This book contains a section on sexuality and confinement with a
discussion of various aspects of incarceration, including fighting
HIV and health care accessibility. There are also chapters on race,
ethnicity, and culture.
Lekkerkerker, E. C. 1931. Reformatories for Women in the United
States. J. B. Wolters, Groningen, etc. 615 pages.
An important historical resource on women’s imprisonment, this
book, written in 1931, describes the state of women’s prisons and
194
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

reformatories at that time and provides valuable historical evi-
dence of the reformatory movement.
Martin, Susan Ehrlich, and Nancy C. Jurik. 1996. Doing Justice,
Doing Gender. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications. 270 pages.
A study of women in the justice system covering police officers,
lawyers, and corrections that reveals how gender informs and
shapes perceptions of women and women’s performances in the
criminal justice system. The book is a standard in its field and
explores the historical roles of women in the criminal justice sys-
tem, the contributions that women have made and continue to
make to the system, the barriers women encounter and the strate-
gies and tactics they perform to counter them, and the effect that
women have had on the system, on victims, offenders, coworkers,
and the public.
O’Brien, P. 2001. Making It in the “Free World”: Women in
Transition from Prison. New York: State University of New York
Press. 201 pages.
This book addresses the topic of how women return to the “free
world” after the experience of incarceration. The author presents
detailed descriptions of the experiences of women with a range of
criminal histories, and she suggests policy changes particularly in
terms of alternatives to incarceration. Issues such as the concrete
establishment of a home and address after leaving prison, how
relationships formed within prison affect the transition from con-
finement to freedom, and how parole supervision affects
women’s ability to sustain themselves in the “free world” are also
covered.
Owen, B. 1998. “In the Mix”: Struggle and Survival in a Women’s
Prison. Albany: State University of New York Press. 219 pages.
This book is a detailed exploration of the struggle and survival of
women confined in the largest women’s correctional facility in
the world. Her research centers on the culture existing in a con-
temporary women’s prison in California. She examines closely
how imprisoned women learn about, negotiate, and shape the
prison experience. The book is written with a feminist perspective
and deals not only with the actual prison experience but family
life before incarceration. Relationships inside and outside the
Bibliography
195

prison, and race, figure prominently as aspects of the discussion,
and the author identifies access to information about prison and
interpersonal coping skills as two key factors in women learning
to negotiate the prison world.
Pollock, J. 2002. Women, Prison, and Crime. 2d ed. Belmont, CA:
Wadsworth. 258 pages.
Addressing women’s criminality and women in prison, the
author presents a comprehensive and comparative discussion of
these subjects. The experience of living in prison, legal issues for
incarcerated women, and programming for women in prison are
addressed in addition to staffing and administration issues such
as the position of men guarding women and the constraints faced
by female correctional officers.
Rafter, N. 1985. Partial Justice: Women in State Prisons,
1800–1935. Boston: Northeastern University Press. 269 pages.
One of the leading histories of women’s imprisonment, this book
discusses both reformatory and custodial prisons and presents
the theoretical underpinnings of women’s incarceration. The
author’s focus is historical and criminological, and the volume
presents material not found in other histories, including racism in
state prisons and the special nature of women’s imprisonment in
the South.
Rierden, A. 1997. The Farm: Life inside a Women’s Prison.
Amherst: University of Massachusetts Press. 224 pages.
This is a study of the dynamics of a women’s prison, the
Connecticut Correctional Institute in Niantic, located in a rural
area. The author studied the women prisoners from 1992 to 1995;
her narrative focuses on several older inmates and on changes
that took place within the prison as the population shifted from
minor to serious repeat offenders.
Ross, L. 1998. Inventing the Savage: The Social Construction of
Native American Criminality. Austin: University of Texas Press.
314 pages.
The author draws on the life histories of imprisoned Native
American women to show how race/ethnicity, gender, and class
contribute to the criminalizing of women’s behavior. She reveals
196
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

the violence in the lives of these women prior to incarceration and
their responses and, through a comparison with the experiences
of white women in the same prison, brings out the significant role
that race plays in determining women’s experience within the
criminal 
justice 
system. 
Importantly, 
she 
presents 
a
historical/colonial view of the Native American experience,
showing how this extra dimension has played a role in the crim-
inalization of the Native American population.
Shichor, D., and D. Sechrest, eds. 1996. Three Strikes and You’re
Out: Vengeance as Public Policy. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage
Publications. 290 pages.
This book comprehensively considers aspects of legislation pro-
viding for the three-strikes rule, including the historical, legal,
economic, and social aspects. One section discusses the effects of
three-strikes legislation on women and presents arguments
opposing the use of this legislation for women offenders. A his-
torical perspective on female offenders discusses their crimes,
sentences, and imprisonment rates. The authors argue that the
impact of three-strikes laws on women is problematic in view of
evidence that women often commit violent crime in response to
physical and emotional abuse.
Sommers, E. 1995. Voices from within: Women Who Have Broken
the Law. Toronto: University of Toronto Press. 167 pages.
The author presents the voices of women confined in prison,
describing what they feel led to their imprisonment, and identi-
fies through a feminist analysis the ways in which oppression in
the form of sexism, racism, and classism has rendered women
powerless and isolated. The author’s detailed focus on women’s
lives brings a multidimensional approach to the study of women
in prison as she highlights the social context of their incarceration.
Watterson, K., and M. Chesney-Lind. 1996. Women in Prison:
Inside the Concrete Womb. Boston: Northeastern University
Press. 402 pages.
The book draws on candid interviews with over 400 women
inmates and correctional officers to explore the experience of
incarceration.
Bibliography
197

Popular Works
Atwood, J. E. 2000. Too Much Time: Women in Prison. London:
Phaidon Press. 196 pages.
A documentary survey of the experience of women in prison by
a photojournalist. The book presents photographs and interviews
with women and correctional officers and produces an account of
society’s attitude to women’s criminality and incarceration. The
author visited about forty prisons, and the book contains striking
photographs as well as the voices of the incarcerated women.
Furio, J. 2001. Letters from Prison: Voices of Women Murderers.
New York: Algora Publishing. 240 pages.
This book concerns communications between prison activist
Furio and incarcerated women convicted of murder. The author
established relationships with thirteen women, and the book con-
tains their letters and explores the backgrounds of these women
in biographical essays. Using the women’s letters, Furio draws
attention to their humanity, their shared backgrounds of abuse,
and the biases they encounter in dealing with the criminal justice
system.
Jones, A. 1996. Women Who Kill. Boston: Beacon Press. 448 pages.
This book explores how and why women have killed throughout
American history and what their circumstances reveal about soci-
ety, its prejudices, and the criminal justice system. The studies are
historical in nature and include explorations of the events con-
cerning female murderers such as Lizzie Borden and Jean Harris.
Wojda, Raymond, and Judy Rowse. 1997. Women Behind Bars.
Lanham, MD: American Correctional Association. 75 pages.
A vivid insight into life in prison that takes the form of women’s
first-person accounts of the circumstances that led to their incar-
ceration and life in a women’s prison. The photographs add an
extra dimension to the personal accounts to bring the prison
experience to life for the readers.
198
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

Book Chapters and Journal Articles
Banks, C. 2002. “Doing Time in Alaska: Women, Culture, and
Crime.” In It’s a Crime: Women and Justice, 3d ed., edited by R.
Muraskin. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Feinman, C. 1984. “An Historical Overview of the Treatment of
Incarcerated Women: Myths and Realities of Rehabilitation.”
Prison Journal 63 (2): 12–26.
Koban, L. 1983. “Parent in Prison: A Comparative Analysis of the
Effects of Incarceration on the Families of Men and Women.”
Research in Law, Deviance, and Social Control 5: 171–183.
Mahan, S. 1984. “Imposition of Despair: An Ethnography of
Women in Prison.” Justice Quarterly 1: 357–384.
McClellan, D. S. 1994. “Disparity in the Discipline of Male and
Female Inmates in Texas Prisons.” Women and Criminal Justice 5
(2): 71–97.
Raeder, M. S. 1993. “Gender and Sentencing: Single Moms,
Battered Women, and Other Sex-Based Anomalies in the Gender-
Free World of the Federal Sentencing Guidelines.” Pepperdine
Law Review 20: 905–990.
Schupak, T. 1986. “Comments: Women and Children First: An
Examination of the Unique Needs of Women in Prison.” Golden
Gate University Law Review 16: 455–474.
Vachon, M. 1994. “It’s about Time: The Legal Context of Policy
Changes for Female Offenders.” Forum on Corrections 6: 3–6.
Velimesis, M. I. 1981. “Sex Roles and Mental Health of Women in
Prison.” Professional Psychology 12 (1): 128–135.
Weston-Henriques, Z., and D. Jones-Brown. 2000. “Prisons as
‘Safe Havens’ for African-American Women.” In The System in
Black and White: Exploring the Connections between Race,
Crime, and Justice, edited by M. Markowitz and D. Jones-Brown.
Westport, CT: Praeger.
Bibliography
199

Zimmer, L. 1997. “How Women Reshape the Prison Guard Role.”
In Workplace/Women’s Place: An Anthology, edited by D. Dunn.
Los Angeles: Roxbury Publishing.
Government Publications
Bureau of Justice Statistics. 1995. National Crime Victimization
Survey. U.S. Department of Justice, Washington, DC.
———. 1997. HIV in Prisons and Jails, 1995. U.S. Department of
Justice, Washington, DC.
———. 1999. “Mental Health and Treatment of Inmates and
Probationers.” BJS Special Report, Washington, D.C.
———. 2001. Prisoners in 2000. U.S. Department of Justice,
Washington, DC.
Greenfeld, L. and T. Snell. 1999. Women Offenders. Bureau of
Justice Statistics, U.S. Department of Justice, Washington, DC.
Sabol, W. J., and J. McGready. 1999. ‘Time Served in Prison by
Federal Offenders, 1986–1997.” U.S. Government Printing Office,
Washington, DC.
U.S. General Accounting Office. 1999. Women in Prison—Issues
and Challenges Confronting U.S. Correctional Systems: Report to
the Honorable Eleanor Holmes Norton, House of Representa-
tives. General Accounting Office, Washington, DC.
———. 1999. Women in Prison—Sexual Misconduct by
Correctional Staff: Report to the Honorable Eleanor Holmes
Norton, House of Representatives. General Accounting Office,
Washington, DC.
U.S. General Accounting Office, General Government Division.
1999. Women in Prison—Transition of District of Columbia
Female Felons to the Federal Bureau of Prisons. General
Accounting Office, Washington, DC.
200
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

Core Periodicals
Corrections Today
American Correctional Association Publications
4380 Forbes Boulevard
Lanham, MD 20706
This is the magazine of the American Correctional Association
and provides current information about the correctional scene
with a focus on those employed in the correctional system.
Federal Prisons Journal
U.S. Department of Justice, Federal Bureau of Prisons
320 First Street NW, Room 738
Washington, DC 20534
This journal includes articles on management and policy issues
concerned with the federal prison system.
International Journal of Offender Therapy and Comparative
Criminology
Sage Publications, Inc.
2455 Teller Road
Thousand Oaks, CA 91320-2218
Covering both treatment issues for prisoners and alternatives to
imprisonment, this journal provides a broad forum for research
and discussion on offenders and incarceration. It also has a com-
parative focus.
Journal of Offender Rehabilitation
Haworth Press
10 Alice Street
Binghamton, NY 13904
This journal provides a forum for the publication of research
studies and discussion concerned with the rehabilitation of
offenders.
Bibliography
201

National Prison Project Journal
National Prison Project
ACLU Foundation
1875 Connecticut Avenue NW, #410
Washington, DC 20009
This is published by the American Civil Liberties Union and is a
valuable resource for current information on litigation affecting
prisoners’ rights.
The Prison Journal
Sage Publications, Inc.
2455 Teller Street
Thousand Oaks, CA 91320-2218
This journal presents material on imprisonment in the form of
research studies and discussions of penal policy, incarceration,
and alternatives to imprisonment. It contains comparative mate-
rial and is a leading periodical in its field.
Punishment and Society: The International Journal of Penology
Sage Publications
2455 Teller Road
Thousand Oaks, CA 91320-2218
The leading journal in the field of punishment, this periodical
covers penal institutions as well as penal theory, punishment, and
comparative penology.
Sexual Abuse: A Journal of Research and Treatment
Association for the Treatment of Sexual Abusers
10700 SW Beaverton-Hillside Highway, Suite 26
Beaverton, OR 97005–3035
This journal is an important source of information on this subject,
dealing with the clinical, treatment, and theoretical aspects of sex
abuse.
Nonprint Resources
Videos
Abused Women Who Fought Back: The Framington Eight
Format: VHS format
202
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

Length: 44 minutes
Date: 1999
Source: Films for the Humanities
This program explores the problem of domestic violence through
the dramatic stories of women who became known as the
Framington Eight. Each woman was imprisoned for killing a
spouse or partner they say abused them repeatedly. Each claimed
Battered Woman Syndrome as a defense. The program looks at
both sides of this issue, speaking with women who say they would
be dead now if they hadn’t killed their partners, and to prosecutors
and family members of those who were killed, who believe the use
of Battered Woman Syndrome as a defense has gone too far.
American Justice
Type: VHS format
Length: 50 minutes
Source: A & E
This film focuses on women’s experiences on death row. Women
talk about their crimes, their life in prison, and their sorrow over
not being able to see their children or grandchildren grow up.
Battered
Type: VHS format
Length: 56 minutes
Date: 1989
Source: Home Box Office and Ambrose Video Publishing
Battered wives, wife beating, abuse in the home. Includes inter-
views with middle-class white and educated women in prison who
have been systematically beaten by their husbands and boyfriends.
Blind Spot: Murder by Women
Type: VHS format
Length: 87 minutes
Date: 2000
Source: Women Make Movies, New York
This documentary combines one-on-one interviews with six
women murderers with reenactments of their background expe-
rience and visual recreations of their interior lives. The women
describe their actions as perpetrators in detail and face the issue
of having taken a life.
Nonprint Resources
203

Breaking Silence
Type: VHS format
Length: 60 minutes
Date: 1988
Source: Future Educational Films and Aquarius Productions
A documentary film on incest and the sexual abuse of children.
Childhood Sexual Abuse
Type: VHS format
Length: 26 minutes
Date: 1990
Source: Films for the Humanities
Three women relate their experiences of being abused sexually as
children. Two psychologists offer perspectives and statistics. Apolice
officer also describes procedures used to question abused children.
Convicts on the Street: One Year on Parole
Type: VHS format
Length: 60 minutes
Date: 1990
Source: Ambrose Video
Follows a parole officer and his fifty charges. He makes surprise
visits to the homes of those he suspects of violating their paroles.
The Correctional Officer: Recognizing and Preventing Closed-
Custody Male Sexual Assaults
Format: VHS format
Length: 40 minutes
Date: 1996
Source: American Correctional Association
Sexual assault is the second most frequently committed crime in
prison. Three out of every ten newly admitted inmates will be
forcibly raped within 48 hours of their arrival. This training video
teaches correctional officers how to detect these attacks and how
to prevent closed-custody sexual assaults.
The Correctional Officer: Working with the Female Offender
Format: VHS format
Length: 22 minutes
204
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

Date: 1998
Source: American Correctional Association
Identifies the most common factors shared by female offenders
and discusses how these issues will impact the offender’s inter-
action with staff and other offenders. The video describes the key
differences between the behavior and motivation of male and
female inmates and demonstrates techniques for communicating
positively with female offenders. It points out that staff profes-
sionalism plays an important role in helping female offenders
achieve positive goals after their release.
Crack U.S.A.
Type: VHS format
Length: 42 minutes
Date: 1990
Source: Home Box Office
Focuses on Palm Beach County, Florida, which has seen entire
neighborhoods wiped out by crack. Teenagers discuss the des-
perate measures they have taken to obtain the drug.
Cross Gender Supervision
Format: VHS format
Length: 20 minutes
Date: 2000
Source: American Correctional Association
As the national prison population grows, so do the number of
female correctional officers and inmates, and therefore instances
of cross-gender supervision. Consequently, new supervision
issues have arisen such as violence and sexual misconduct. The
video also addresses ways these problems can be avoided.
Defending Our Lives
Type: VHS format
Length: 43 minutes
Date: 1997
Source: Cambridge Documentary Films, Inc.
Shows the magnitude and severity of domestic violence in this
country. Features four women imprisoned for killing their batter-
ers and their terrifying personal testimonies. Each of these
Nonprint Resources
205

women tells her own horrific tale of beatings, rape, and torture at
the hands of her husband or boyfriend.
Investigative Reports: Women in Prison
Format: VHS format
Length: 50 minutes
Source: A & E
A first-hand look at the daily life among gangbangers and drugs.
For women inmates there is the added pain of worrying about their
children. The film shows interviews with inmates, prison officials,
and psychologists, and argues for changes in the current system.
Nine Hundred Women
Type: VHS format
Length: 73 minutes
Date: 2000
Source: Gabriel Films, Women Make Movies
The Louisiana Correctional Institute is located in the swamps of
southern Louisiana in the small town of St. Gabriel. Built in 1970,
it houses the state’s most dangerous female prisoners and often
exceeds its population capacity of 900. Seventy-five percent of
these women are mothers, and one fourth are serving sentences
of fifteen years or more. The filmmaker delivers a portrait of life
in this deceptively peaceful atmosphere that is filled with stories
of life on the streets, abuse, freedom, childbirth, and motherhood.
Six women—a grandmother, a young high school student, a preg-
nant woman, a recovering heroin addict, a prison guard, and the
only woman on death row—share their frustrations and hopes.
Survivors
Type: VHS format
Length: 32 minutes
Date: 1989
Source: MTI Film & Video
Documents the problem of child abuse in our society as it affects
the adults who were victimized as children. It explores the dam-
aging psychological impact of abuse on children and how it con-
tinues to haunt them as adults.
Suzanne Suzanne
Type: VHS format
206
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

Length: 26 minutes
Date: 1982
Source: Third World Newsreel
A documentary film that focuses on the tense relationship
between a young black woman named Suzanne, a former drug
addict, and her mother. Both were victims of the father’s abu-
siveness.
To Love, Honor, and Obey
Type: VHS format
Length: 63 minutes
Date: 1980
Source: Third World Newsreel
This documentary about domestic assaults against women pres-
ents interviews with battered women and scenes of victims seek-
ing or receiving help. It includes statements by doctors, lawyers,
social workers, and police concerning wife abuse. It concludes
with an update on one woman’s case.
Internet Sites
Amnesty International USA–Sexual Abuse of Women in Prison
http://www.amnestyusa.org/rightsforall/women/
Drug War Facts
http://www.drugwarfacts.org/
Faces from the Human Rights and Drug War Exhibit
http:// www.hr95.org/hr95faces.html
Families Against Mandatory Minimums
http://www.famm. org/index2.htm
Prison Activist Resource Center: Women
http://www.prisonactivist. org/women/
The Sentencing Project
http://www.sentencingproject.org/
Women in Prison (WIP)
http://www.womeninprison.org.uk
Women in Prison: A Call for Feminist Action
http://www. rohan.sdsu.edu/~rbowman/essay1.htm
Nonprint Resources
207


Abortion, 83, 86
ACLU Prison Project, 71
Adams, Claire, 135–136
Administrators. See Women
prison administrators
Adoption, 81–82, 99
Adultery, 2, 15
African American women
prisoners, 44–46
in Alton Prison, 31
on death row, 46
in Huntsville prison, 32
in Illinois, 29
and incarceration, rate of, 38
and racism, 37–38
See also Women prisoners
African Americans, 35
as correctional officers, 126, 127,
129
Age, of women prisoners, 165, 177
(table 7.8)
Aggravated assault, 42, 43
Alabama
prisons in, and sex
discrimination and prison
employees, 126
state prison for women, 155
Alaskan Native women prisoners,
45
Albion, New York, reformatory,
African American women
prisoners in, 37. See also
Women’s reformatories
Alcohol
consumption, prohibition of, 22
use, and women prisoners, 166
Alcoholics Anonymous, 63, 64
Alcohol-related crimes, 43
Alderson Prison, 27, 149, 161–162
All Too Familiar: Sexual Abuse of
Women in U.S. State Prisons,
124
Alton Prison, 28, 30, 31
American Civil Liberties Union
National Prison Project,
179–180
American Correctional
Association, 63, 159
American National Red Cross, 141
American Prison Association
(APA), 9, 151, 158–159
Association of Women
Members, 142
Declaration of Principles, 159
and female staff, 13
Amnesty International, 86–87
Women’s Human Rights, 180
Anderson, Ella, 34
Antidepressants, 81
Anti-institutional approach, to
women’s crimes, 20–21
Antipsychotic drugs, 80
APA. See American Prison
Association
Arch Street Jail, 155, 156
Arizona, prisons in, and sexual
abuse of women prisoners, 70
Arizona Territorial Prison at
Yuma, 24
Arkansas, prisons in, 33
Arrests, and women offenders,
163–164
209
Index

210
Index
Arson, 3, 42
Artificial insemination, 59
Assault, 42
“Associates,” 50–51
Association for the Improvement
of Female Prisoners, 146
Atlanta penitentiary, 126
Attire, prison, 35
Attorney’s fees, recovery of, 92
Auburn Prison, 4, 5, 120
Australia, restorative justice in, 99
Automobile theft, federalizing, 22
Avery v. Perrin, 129
Bad character, 19
Bagley v. Watson, 129
Baltimore Men’s Penitentiary, 125
Barton, Clara, 13, 141, 150
Battered women, 43, 44, 81, 94
and “three strikes” laws, 74
See also Domestic violence
Bazzetta and others v. Michigan
Department of Corrections, 56
Beatings, 11, 32
Beccaria, Cesare, 119
Bedford Hills reformatory, 11, 19,
20, 21, 122–123, 144, 160–161
and prison nursery program, 82
See also Women’s reformatories
Benefits, and equal protection, 91
Bentham, Jeremy, 14
Boards, prison, female
membership of, 8
Body searches, clothed, 72
Body-pat searches, opposite sex,
123–124, 129. See also Strip
searches
Boot camp programs, 76–78
daily regimen, 76–77
Booth, John Wilkes, 154–155
Booth, Maud, 141–142
Boston, Massachusetts, 72
Bounds v. Smith, 91
Bowling v. Enomoto, 129
Bread and water, diet of, 17
Brockway, Zebulon, 9–10, 121,
142, 148, 158
Bruce, Georgiana, 156, 157
Bureau of Justice Statistics, 180
Bureau of Prisons, 126
Bureau of Social Hygiene, 144
Burglary, 3, 42, 43
California, 165
reformatories in, 22
and “three strikes” laws, 73
California, prisons in, 24–27, 72,
124, 174–177
and pregnancy, 86–87, 88
and prison nursery program,
82
and prisoners rights, 59–60
and programs, 65
and sexual abuse, of women
prisoners, 71
California Bureau of Juvenile
Research, 152
California Coalition for Women
Prisoners (CCWP), 180–181
California Department of
Corrections, 88
and visitation, 59–60
California Industrial Farm for
Women at Sonoma. See
Sonoma Farm
California Institution for Women
(CIW), 25, 27, 88
programs at, 174
California Prison Focus, 71
California State Prison at San
Quentin. See San Quentin
Prison
Canada, and children and
mothers, in prison, 99–100
Capital punishment, 46–47
colonial period to 1840s, 4
Carpenter, Mary, 9, 120
Caughey, May, 161
CCWF. See Central California
Women’s Facility
CCWP. See California Coalition
for Women Prisoners
Central California Women’s
Facility (CCWF), 113
Chace, Elizabeth Buffum, 8, 18
Chaining, at Huntsville prison, 33
Chance, Elizabeth Buffum, 9, 120,
121, 142–143

Index
211
Chaplains, 16–17
Chastity crimes, 15
Chemical restraints, 79–80
Chester Prison, 28, 31–32
Chicago House of Shelter for
Women, 158
Chicago Legal Advocacy for
Incarcerated Mothers
(CLAIM), 181
Child emotional abuse. See
Emotional abuse, child
Child physical abuse. See Physical
abuse, child
Child sexual abuse. See Sexual
abuse, child
Childbirth, 12, 25
shackling during, 86–87
Children 
and parents, imprisonment of,
54–55, 74
and visitation, 56, 57, 97, 99,
100, 113
and women prisoners, 14,
54–55, 74, 81–82, 99–100,
165–166
Civil Rights Act, Title VII, 125–126
Civil War, 37
and prison farms, 35
and prostitution, 3
and women prison reformers,
professional status of, 8
CIW. See California Institution for
Women
CLAIM. See Chicago Legal
Advocacy for Incarcerated
Mothers
Classification system, 65–67, 121
and equal protection, 91
Clinton Farms reformatory, 23,
149, 152, 156, 161. See also
Prison farms; Women’s
reformatories
Clothed body searches, 72
Clothes packages, 111
Cocaine, 75
Co-correctional facilities, 39
and health care, for women,
83–84
Code of conduct, 49–50
Coeducational corrections
prisons, 123
Coercive power, and sexual abuse,
of women prisoners, 71
Coffin, Rhoda, 8, 9, 11–12, 18,
121–122, 143, 154
College courses, 64
Committee on the Penitentiary, 28
Communication techniques and
correctional officers, 129
Community interventions, 94–95
Community-based programs, 95
Community-based sentencing
boards, 98
Conflict management, and
correctional officers, 129
Conjugal visitation, 57–62. See also
Visitation
Connecticut, prison reform in, 8
Connecticut Board of Charities, 8
Consensual sex vs. sexual abuse,
70
Consumers League of New York,
152
Contact visitation, 56–57, 88. See
also Visitation
Contraband
and conjugal visitation, 58
possession of, and discipline,
67–68
and visitation, 56
Contraception, 83
Control, 16, 17
Convicts vs. inmates, 50
“The Cool,” 48
Corporal punishment, 17
Correctional Association of New
York, 181–182
Correctional officers
African Americans as, 129
and gender differences, 127–132
See also Women correctional
officers
The Corrections Connection, 182
Corrections Corporation of
America, 130
Cottage system, 11, 14–15
Counseling, 97
Court-filing fee, 92

212
Index
Courts
specialized, 18
women’s, 20
Crack cocaine, 74–75
decriminalization of, 93
users of, 108–109
Crime
and child physical and sexual
abuse, 164
prevention of, 98
scientific basis for, 18–19
Crime rate, 43
and gender stability, 43
Crimes, women’s. See Women’s
crimes
Criminal conduct and gender
differences, beliefs about, 2–3
Criminal history, prior, and
women prisoners, 166
Criminal justice policy issues,
72–78
Criminality
assessing, 19
women’s. See Women’s
criminality
Criminologists, 18–19
Culture, and indigenous women
prisoners, 45–46
Custodial prisons, 23–37
kinds of, 24
See also Women’s prisons
Custody
approach, and women
correctional officers, in men’s
prisons, 126
arrangements, 53–54, 99–100
Dark cell, 27
Davis, Katherine Bement, 20, 144,
148–149, 160–161
Death row, 46–47
Death sentences, and women
prisoners, 166–167
Decriminalization, of women’s
crimes, 93–94
Dedham Asylum for Discharged
Female Prisoners, 150
Delaware, prisons in, and women
correctional officers,
constraints faced by, 133
Dependent accomplices, women
as, 74
Design, prison, 14–15
Detroit House of Corrections,
9–10, 121, 142, 148, 158
Detroit House of Shelter, 10, 11,
121, 122, 142, 148, 158
Discipline, 33, 67–68
colonial period to 1840s, 4
1870–1935, 16, 17, 29
Disorderly conduct, 2, 43
Disrespect, 17
District of Columbia, prisons in
and equal protection, 91
and sexual abuse, of women
prisoners, 71
District of Columbia Board of
Parole, 91
Dix, Dorothea, 28
Doctors, prison. See Women
prison doctors
Documentation, of prison
experience for women, 17–18
Domestic model, 11
Domestic service, 16
Domestic skills, 16
Domestic violence, victims of,
107–108. See also Battered
women
Domestic violence program, 64
Domesticity model, 10–11, 13, 14.
See also Rehabilitation
Doremus, Sarah, 6–7, 144–145,
153, 157
Dothard v. Rawlinson, 126
DRCNet. See The Drug Reform
Coordination Network
Driving under the influence of
alcohol, 42
Drug abuse
and harsh sentencing,
effectiveness of, 76
reasons for, and women, 75
treatment for, 94
“Drug czar,” 75
Drug medication, 79–81
Drug possession,
decriminalization of, 93

Index
213
Drug programs, 64
and gender bias, 97
The Drug Reform Coordination
Network (DRCNet), 182–183
Drug trafficking vs. drug
possession, 93
Drug use, and women prisoners,
166
Drug violations, 42, 43, 123, 162
and “three strikes” laws,
73–74
and “war on drugs,” 74–76, 90
and women of color prisoners,
44–45
and women offenders, 164
Drugs, selling of, 43
Drunkenness, 3, 15, 29. See also
Public-order crimes
Ducking, 4
Due process, 91
Economic background, and
women prisoners, 166
Economic factors, and women’s
crimes, 19, 93
Education, 16
and HIV/AIDS, 90
and women prisoners, 165
Education model, 10–11. See also
Rehabilitation
Educational programs, 62–63, 64
and equal protection, 91–92
Elmira, New York, 142
Emotional abuse, child, victims of,
109–110
Emotional disorders, drug
medication for, 79–81
Employees, prison. See Prison
employees
Environment, prison. See Prison
environment
Equal employment
opportunities, and
women correctional officers,
130–131
Equal protection, 90–92
Escape attempts, 17
Europe, restorative justice in, 99
European Parliament, 124
Faith in God, 117
“Fallen women,” 2–3, 15
and reform, capacity for, 6
Families Against Mandatory
Minimums Foundations
(FAMM), 183
Family
failure of, and decriminalization
of women’s crimes, 94
and “free world,” transition to,
118
pseudo, 50–52, 114–115
separation from, 53–55
Family and Corrections Network
(FCN), 183–184
Family group conferencing, 98
FAMM. See Families Against
Mandatory Minimums
Foundations
Farming, 21
Farnham, Eliza, 145, 156, 157
Fathers, imprisonment of, 54. See
also Parents, imprisonment of
FCN. See Family and Corrections
Network
Federal Bureau of Prisons, 76, 149,
167
and prison programs, gender
bias in, 65
Federal offences, 22
Federal prisons, 22, 72, 123, 165
and programs for women, 65
vs. state prisons, treatment
programs in, 98
and women correctional
officers, 126
Felony convictions
and custodial prisons, 23
and reformatories, 23
and women offenders, 164
Female Department of the Prison
Association, 6, 121, 144, 147, 157
Female Prison Association of
Friends in Philadelphia, 155
Female staff, 1, 8–9, 12–13, 16, 125
colonial period to 1840s, 4
1870–1900, 8
male arguments against, 12–13
See also Prison staff

214
Index
Feminist movement, and crime
rates, 43
Feminists, and research, on
women prisoners, 107
Fights, prison. See Prison fights
Florida, prisons in
and prison nursery program, 82
and sexual abuse, of women
prisoners, 71
Folsom Prison, 24–25
Food packages, 111
Fort McNair, 155
Forts v. Ward, 71, 129
Foster, Ellen, 145–146
Foul language, 29
Framingham prison, 150
programs at, 168
Framingham Women’s
Reformatory, 141, 153. See also
Women’s reformatories
Fraud, 42
“Free world,” transition to,
117–118
Freed blacks, 37
“Friends,” 50–51
Friendships, 51
Fry, Elizabeth, 6, 12, 120, 146, 155
Fuller, Margaret, 7, 120, 146–147,
157
Funding for reformatories, 22
Furloughs, 57–58, 58–59
and equal protection, 91
Gagging, of prisoners, 34
Gang labor, in Texas, 32–33
GEDs, 47, 64
and Shock Incarceration
Program, 78
Gender and offense, 168 (table
7.1), 169 (table 7.2), 170 (table
7.3 and 7.4), 171 (table 7.5)
Gender bias
and petty offences, punishment
for, 9
and prison programs, 63–65,
96–98
Gender differences
and correctional officers,
127–132
and criminal conduct, beliefs
about, 2–3
Gender stability, and crime rate,
43
Georgia, prisons in, 35
and African American women
prisoners, 38
and sexual abuse, of women
prisoners, 71
Gerber v. Rodney Hickman, 59–60
“Get tough on crime” policies, 95
Gibbons, Abby Hopper, 8, 18, 121,
145, 147–148, 151, 153,
157–158
Gibbons, Isaac, 147
“Girls,” 68
Glover v. Johnson, 91–92
God, faith in, 117
Great Depression, 23, 123, 162
Grievance process, 92
Guards, prison. See Prison guards
Gunther v. Iowa, 129
Halfway houses, 6–7, 10, 121
Hall, Emma, 10, 11, 121, 142, 148
Handcuffs, 17, 34
Harassment, and boot camp
programs, 76
Harper v. State, 79–80
Harris, Mary Belle, 148–149
Harris v. McCarthy, 87, 88
Harsh treatment, 71
Hawaii, prisons in, and training
programs for women, 63
Hayes, Rutherford B., 159
Head shaving, 35
Health, 24
Health care, 83–88
Health issues, 79–90
and boot camp programs, 76, 78
and women prisoners, 166
The Helping Hand (Kirkland), 151
High school courses, 64
Hispanic women prisoners, 44–46,
50
on death row, 46
and incarceration, rate of, 38
and language issues, 52
See also Women prisoners

Index
215
HIV/AIDS, 88–90
misinformation about, 89
Hodder, Jessie Donaldson, 20–21,
149–150
Hodder House, 168
Home for Discharged Female
Convicts, 145, 151, 154, 158
Home for Discharged Female
Prisoners, 147
Home for Discharged Prisoners,
147
Home for the Friendless in
Richmond, Indiana, 143, 154
Homicides, 43–44
Homosexuality, policy against, 52
Hopkins, Abby Hopper, 6–7
Hopper, Isaac, 147
Hospital staff, 80
House of Refuge, 156
Household system. See Cottage
system
Housing, prison. See Prison
housing
Hubbard, Sallie, 154, 159
Hudson, New York, 152
Hudson House of Refuge, 11, 122,
147, 159–160
Human Rights Watch, 124
Huntsville prison, 32, 33, 35
Husbands in prison, and
visitation, 116–117
Idaho, prisons in, 25, 165
Idle conduct, 2
Idle unsupervised talk, 17
Illegitimate births, 12
Illinois, prisons in, 28–32
and shackling, during
childbirth, 87
Illinois Department of
Corrections, 87
Immigrant women prisoners
in Alton Prison, 31
in Illinois, 29
See also Women prisoners
Immigration, 1–2
Immodesty, 29
Imprisonment
experience of, 48–72
women’s. See Women’s
imprisonment
Incarceration, rate of, and women
prisoners, 38, 72, 165
Indentured women, 16
Independent women’s prisons,
36–37, 122. See also Women’s
prisons
Indeterminate sentencing, 10, 11,
121, 142
and merit system, 17
See also Sentencing
Indiana, prison reform in, 8
Indiana, prisons in, 15, 121–122,
159, 172–174
and female staff, 13
Indiana Reformatory for Women
and Girls, 11–12, 121–122, 172.
See also Women’s
reformatories
Indiana State Prison, 11
Indiana Women’s Prison, 172
programs at, 172
Indianapolis, Indiana, 154, 159
Women’s Prison, 159
Indigenous women prisoners, 52
and culture, 45–46
and white women correctional
officers, 136–137
See also Women prisoners
Infantilization, of women
prisoners, by prison guards, 68
Inmates
and prison guards, 115–116
study of, 19
vs. convicts, 50
Institutional maintenance
programs, 63
Interpersonal conflict, 98
Interpersonal relationships, 50–51
Ireland, 9
Isaac Hopper Home, 157
Johnson, Andrew, 155
Johnson, Ellen, 13, 17, 150–151
Joliet Prison, 28, 30–31, 32
Jones v. Dyer, 88
Jordan v. Gardner, 71–72, 123
Juvenile court, 18

216
Index
Juvenile Hall, 152
Juvenile reformatories, 14
Juvenile women offenders, in
adult prison, 47–48
Kansas, prisons in, 34
Kansas State Penitentiary, 34
Kentucky, prisons in, and
shackling, during childbirth, 87
Kindness approach, 17
Kinship networks, 51
Kirkland, Caroline, 6–7, 145, 147,
151, 153, 157
Labeling, 2
Labor market, failure of, and
decriminalization, of women’s
crimes, 94
Lancaster State Industrial School
for Girls, 149
Language issues, and Hispanic
women prisoners, 52
Larceny-theft, 42
Law enforcement
authorities and criminal justice,
72
and prostitution, 43
Lawsuits
frivolous, 92
and prison programs, gender
bias in, 64
Leasing, 35
at Joliet Prison, 31
Leavenworth Prison, 145–146
Legal Services for Prisoners with
Children (LSPC), 184
Lesbian conduct, 51–52
Letters vs. visitation, 57
Lewd and lascivious behavior, 2,
15
Library. See Prison law library
“The Life,” 48
Life, in prison. See Prison life
Lightner, Pauline, 136
Lincoln, Abraham, 154–155
Local jails
colonial period, 3–4
increased use of, 96
Londonderry Prison, 116
Los Angeles County Probation
Department, 152
Louisiana, incarceration rates in,
165
Lowell, Josephine Shaw, 8, 11, 121,
122, 151–152
LSPC. See Legal Services for
Prisoners with Children
Lutes, Carol, 135
Mahan, Edna, 152–153
Maine
and African American women
prisoners, 38
incarceration rates in, 165
See also Women’s reformatories
Male dominance and women’s
crimes, 93
Male staff and matrons,
supervision of, 12. See also
Prison staff
Manslaughter, 42
Market economy, 1–2
Marriage and prisoner rights,
60–62
Mary Beth G. v. City of Chicago, 91
Massachusetts, 72
incarceration rates in, 165
prison reform in, 8, 10, 20
Massachusetts, prisons in, 141,
168
and female staff, 13
and indentured women, 16
and prison population, 39
and shackling, during
childbirth, 87
Massachusetts Girls Reform
School, 142
Massachusetts Reformatory
Prison for Women, 14, 15,
150–151. See also Women’s
reformatories
Maternity leave and women
correctional officers, 132
Matrons, 5
in independent women’s
prisons, 36
supervision of, 12
See also Female staff

Index
217
Meals, talking at, 17
Medical care, 63
and HIV/AIDS, 89–90
Medical examinations, 79
Medical issues, 79–90
Medical staff, 84–86
Medicalizing women, 79–81
Men prisoners
and children, 54. See also
Parents, imprisonment of
and sexual abuse, 69, 71
Men supervisors and women
correctional officers, 131–132
Men’s prisons
and discipline, 67
women correctional officers
in, 125–126, 126–127,
129–132
women’s units attached to,
24–35. See also Women’s
prisons
Mental illness, 88
Merit system, 10, 13, 17–18
Michigan, prison reform in, 10
Michigan, prisons in, 56–57, 121,
142
and equal protection, 91–92
and sexual abuse, of women
prisoners, 70
and shackling, during
childbirth, 87
Michigan Department of
Corrections, 56–57
Midwest
African American women
prisoners in, 37, 38
reformatories in, 19, 21–22, 24
Minimum security programs and
equal protection, 91–92
Minnesota, prisons in, and prison
population, 39
Miscarriage, rates of, 86
Mississippi
incarceration rates in, 165
prisons in, and women
correctional officers, in men’s
prisons, 127
Missouri, prisons in, 24, 33–34
Missouri Penitentiary, 25
“The mix,” 113–114
Montana, prisons in, 25
Moral sin, 19
Morality crimes and women’s
courts, 20
Morton, Frances, 17
Mosher, Eliza, 13, 15, 122, 141, 153
Mothers, imprisonment of. See
Women prisoners, and
children
Motor vehicle theft, 42
Mount Joy Female Convict Prison
(Ireland), 9
Mount Pleasant Prison for
Women, 5, 120, 145, 156–157
Murder, 3, 42
and women offenders, 163
Narcotics, laws against, 22
Narcotics Anonymous, 63, 64
National Coalition to Abolish the
Death Penalty, 46–47
National Conference on Charities
and Corrections, 9
National Criminal Justice
Reference Service (NCJRS),
184
National Institute of Corrections
(NIC), 184–185
National organizations, female
membership in, 9
National Prison Association, 158
National Prison Congress, 143
Native American women
prisoners, 45, 52
Nebraska, prisons in, 25
and African American women
prisoners, 38
and Native American women
prisoners, 45
and prison nursery program,
82
and training programs for
women, 63
Nebraska Correctional Center for
Women, 82
Nevada, prisons in, 33
New Hampshire, reformatories in,
21

218
Index
New Jersey
prison reform in, 21
prisons in, and marriage rights
of prisoners, 60–62
reformatories in, 23
New Jersey State Home for
Feeble-Minded Girls and
Women, 156
New Jersey State Home for Girls,
149
New York, 3
and African American women
prisoners, 37
and medicalizing women, 80
and prison nursery program, 82
prison reform in, 8, 20, 21
prisons in, 5, 6–7, 15, 19, 120,
121–122
and sexual abuse, of women
prisoners, 70
and Shock Incarceration
Program, 77–78
New York Board of Charities, 151,
160
New York City, prisons in, 127
New York City Department of
Corrections, 151
New York City Tombs, 144
New York Department of
Correctional Services, 78
New York Prison Association, 147
New York reformatory, 17. See also
Women’s reformatories
New York Refuges, 14
New York Tribune, 7, 120, 146, 157
New Zealand, restorative justice
in, 99
Newgate prison, 6, 146
Newport prison, 116
NIC. See National Institute of
Corrections
Nixon, Richard, 74
Noncontact visitation, 56–57. See
also Visitation
North, African American women
prisoners in, 38
North Carolina, prisons in
and training programs for
women, 63
and women correctional
officers, in men’s prisons, 127
North Dakota, prisons in, 25
and equal protection, 91
Northeast
African American women
prisoners in, 37
reformatories in, 19, 21, 24
Nursery programs. See Prison
nursery programs
Nursing staff, 85
Nutrition, 83
Observations in Visiting,
Superintendence and
Government of Female Prisoners
(Fry), 6, 120, 146
Offenders, 23, 73. See also Women
offenders
Ohio, prisons in, 121
and African American women
prisoners, 37
and health care, 84–86
and shackling during
childbirth, 87
Ohio Reformatory for Women,
23, 84. See also Women’s
reformatories
Oklahoma
incarceration rates in, 165
prisons in, and prison
population, 39
Old Penitentiary, 155
Oliver v. Scott, 130
On Crimes and Punishments
(Beccaria), 119
Oregon, prisons in, 25
Our Convicts (Carpenter), 9, 120
Pap tests, 79
PACT. See Parents and Children
Together, Inc.
PARC. See The Prison Activist
Resource Center
Pardons, 25
at Alton Prison, 30
and pregnancies, 30
Parenting skills programs, 64,
97

Index
219
Parents, imprisonment of
and children, 54–55, 74
and youth delinquency, 54
See also Women prisoners, and
children
Parents and Children Together,
Inc. (PACT), 185
Parole, 10, 16, 121
and equal protection, 91
increased use of, 95–96
Patriarchy, and women’s crimes, 93
Pecking order, 111
Penal servitude, and slavery, 35, 36
Pennsylvania, prisons in, 4
Pennsylvania Prison Society, 155
Performance evaluations, and
women correctional officers,
133–134
Perijo, Rachel, 125
Person, crimes against, 16
Petty larceny, 3
Petty offences, punishment for,
and gender bias, 9
Petty offenders
in custodial prisons, 23
and reformatories, demise of, 23
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania,
Quakers of, 4, 6, 119–120
Philadelphia Walnut Street Jail, 125
Phone calls vs. visitation, 57
Phrenology, 145
Physical abuse, 88
child, 97, 109–110, 164
Physical fitness classes, 21
Physical punishments, 5
Pillories, 4
Play families, 114. See also Pseudo
families
Police, women. See Women police
Population, prison. See Prison
population
Prayer, 16
Predatory offenders, and “three
strikes” laws, 73
Pregnancy, 29–30, 83, 86–88
Prenatal care, 83
President’s Commission on Law
Enforcement and
Administration of Justice, 41
Prevention
of crime, 98
of sexual abuse, of women
prisoners, 71
Preventive approaches, 19–20
Prison, cost of, 167
The Prison Activist Resource
Center (PARC), 185–186
Prison administrators, and
classification system, 66
Prison Association of New York,
6, 145, 151, 153, 157–158
Female Department, 6, 121, 144,
147
Prison attire, 35
Prison boards, female
membership of, 8
Prison design, 14–15
Prison employees
and sex discrimination, 126
See also individual employees
Prison environment
adverse features of, 49
social structure of, 48–49
Prison experience, for women,
documentation of, 17–18
Prison farms, 32–33, 34, 35–36,
122. See also Women’s prisons;
individual prison farms
Prison fights, 111–112
Prison guards
and infantilization, of women
prisoners, 68
and inmates, 115–116
and privacy rights, 71–72
and sexual abuse, of women
prisoners, 71, 124
and visitation, 55, 115–116
Prison housing, 3–5, 8–12, 22,
24–34, 121, 123
and classification system, 66–67
evolution of, 4–5
and men’s prisons, women’s
units attached to, 24–35
and separate prisons, 4–5, 8,
9–12, 22, 121, 123
and separate quarters, 9
Prison law library, access to, and
equal protection, 91

220
Index
Prison life, 110–115
daily regimen, 112
Prison Litigation Reform Act, 92
Prison nursery programs, 29–30,
82–83. See also Women
prisoners, and children
Prison population, 39, 72–73,
164–165, 172
by age group, mean age, and
sex, 177 (table 7.8)
by offense and sex, 175 (table 7.6)
by racial/ethnic group and sex,
176 (table 7.7)
Prison programs, 62–65, 112–113
and equal protection, 91–92
five categories of, 63
and gender bias, 63–65, 96–98
Prison reform, 2–3, 5–18, 20–21
vs. retribution, 121
Prison reformers. See Women
prison reformers
Prison rules, 17, 67, 111, 114, 115
Prison staff, 80, 84–86
and classification system, 66
and indigenous women
prisoners, 45
and sexual abuse, of women
prisoners, 71
and sexual misconduct, 70–72
and women prisoners,
perception of, 68–69
See also Female staff
Prison subculture, 49–50, 51
Prison tasks, 5
Prison time, 15
Prison transfers, and equal
protection, 91
Prisoner rights
and marriage, 60–62
and procreation, 59–60
Prisoners, men. See Men prisoners
Prisoners, women. See Women
prisoners
Prisons, men’s. See Men’s prisons
Prisons, women’s. See Women’s
prisons
Privacy issues, 110–111, 112
vs. security, 130–131
and women correctional
officers, in men’s prisons, 129
Privacy rights, and prison guards,
71–72
Probation, 18
increased use of, 95–96
Procreation, and prisoner rights,
59–60
Programs, prison. See Prison
programs
Progressive movement, and
World War I, 23
Progressive-era approach, 18–21
Property crimes, 2, 15–16, 42, 43,
123, 162
and “three strikes” laws, 73
and women offenders, 164
Prostitution, 2, 3, 15, 19, 22
decriminalization of, 94
forced, of prisoners, 12
and indeterminate sentencing,
10
and law enforcement, 43
preventive approaches to,
19–20
Protestant missionaries, and
women prison reformers, 6
Pseudo families, 50–52, 114–115
Psychological factor, and
women’s crimes, causes of, 19
Psychologists, 19
Psychotropic drugs, 79, 81
Public-order crimes, 3, 15, 162
Punishment
colonial period to 1840s, 4
at Huntsville prison, 32
for petty offences, and gender
bias, 9
Quakers, 12
as women prison reformers, 4,
6, 8, 119–120
Race issues, 52
and women prisoners, 165
Racism, 37–38
Rape, in prison, 69–70, 71, 72
prevention of, 71
See also Sexual abuse, of women
prisoners

Index
221
Rape offenses, 42
Rape services, 72
Ratting, 50
Recidivism, 16
and boot camp programs, 77
and Shock Incarceration
Program, 78
and women prisoners, 167
Recreation, 17, 64
outside, 20
Red Cross, 13, 141, 145
Redemption, 1, 2
Reed v. Reed, 91
Reform, prison. See Prison reform
Reformatories, women’s. See
Women’s reformatories
Reformatory for Women in
Clinton, New Jersey. See
Clinton Farms reformatory
Reformers, prison. See Women
prison reformers
Rehabilitation, 7–8, 10–11, 13. 
See also Domesticity model;
Education model; Self-control
model
Religion, and women prison
reformers, 6
Religious services, 16–17
“Report on Crime” (President’s
Commission on Law
Enforcement and
Administration of Justice),
41
Reproduction, and medicalizing
women, 81
Reproductive education, 83
Reproductive freedom, 81–83
Resistance, 18
Respect, 115
Restorative justice, 98–99
Retraining, 16–18
Retribution vs. reformation, 121
Rhode Island
incarceration rates in, 165
prison reform in, 8
prisons in, 121
Rhode Island Board of Lady
Visitors, 8, 121, 143
Richmond, Indiana, 143, 154
Richmond Home for the
Friendless, 143, 154
Riggins v. Nevada, 80
Rights, prisoner. See Prisoner
rights
Rights, privacy. See Privacy rights
Rings, in the walls, 34
Robbery, 42, 74
Ruiz v. Estelle, 33
Rules, prison. See Prison rules
Salvation Army, 141–142
San Quentin Prison, 24–25, 26–27
Sanctions, 67
colonial period to 1840s, 4
1870–1900, 17
Savery, William, 146
School, failure of, and
decriminalization, of women’s
crimes, 94
Security
and conjugal visitation, 58
vs. privacy, 130–131
Sedgwick, Catherine, 6–7, 145,
153–154, 157
Self-awareness program, 64
Self-control model, 13. See also
Rehabilitation
Self-defense and battered women,
44
Self-mutilation, 52–53
Self-sufficiency, 16
Sentencing, 15, 34, 72
absurdities in, 73
harsh, effectiveness of, and drug
abuse, 76
mandatory minimum, 72
and maximum and minimum
range, 17
and “three strikes” laws, 73
and “war on drugs,” 75
See also Indeterminate
sentencing
Sentencing boards, community-
based, 98
Separation, from families, 53–55
Sex classifications, and equal
protection, 91. See also
Classification system

222
Index
Sex discrimination, and prison
employees, 126
Sexual abuse, 88
of male prisoners, 69, 71
See also Sexual abuse, child;
Sexual abuse, of women
prisoners
Sexual abuse, child
and crime, 164
treatment for, 97
victims of, 109–110
See also Sexual abuse; Sexual
abuse, of women prisoners
Sexual abuse, of women
prisoners, 11, 12, 35, 69–72
prevention of, 71
and prison guards, 71, 124
See also Rape, prison; Sexual
abuse; Sexual abuse, child
Sexual conduct, 2
Sexual favors, 71
Sexual harassment, 71
of women correctional officers,
132, 135
Shackling during childbirth,
86–87
Shock Incarceration Program
daily regimen, 77–78
recidivism in, 78
screening process, 78
Sing Sing Prison, 5, 7, 142, 145,
146, 156–157
women’s department at, 120
Sisterhood, 17
Slavery, 37
and penal servitude, 35, 36
Smith, Sarah, 8, 143, 154
Smith v. Fairman, 129
Snitching, 50
Social control and women’s
crimes, 93
Social factors and women’s
crimes, 19, 20–21, 93
Social services preventive, 18
Social structure of prison
environment, 48–49
Society of Friends, 12. See also
Quakers
Sonoma Farm, 26
South
African American women
prisoners in, 37, 38
custodial prisons in, 23, 24
prison farms in, 35–36
reformatories in, 22
South Dakota, prisons in, 25
and American Native women
prisoners, 45
and prison nursery program,
82
Specialized treatment, 65
Speer, Elizabeth, 33
Spiritual meetings, 17
Spouses and visitation, 55–57
SPR. See Stop Prisoner Rape
“The Square,” 48
Staff, prison. See Prison staff
Staff psychiatrists, 80
Stark, Inez, 136
State ex rel Olson v. Maxwell, 91
State Farm for Women at Valatie.
See Valatie Farm
State prisons, 23
vs. federal prisons, treatment
programs in, 98
race and racism in, 37–38
Stock market crash of 1929, 23
Stocks, 4, 32
Stop Prisoner Rape (SPR), 186
Straitjackets, 17, 34
Streetwalking. See Prostitution
Stress management program, 64
Strip searches, 72, 79
and equal protection, 91
and sexual abuse, of women
prisoners, 71, 72
and visitation, 56, 112
of visiting wives, 116
and women correctional
officers, in men’s prisons,
130
See also Body-pat searches
Stubbornness, crime of, 15
Subculture, prison. See Prison
subculture
Superintendent of Prisons, 145
Superintendents, African
Americans as, 127

Index
223
Supervisors, men. See Men
supervisors
Surratt, Mary, 154–155
Tasks, prison. See Prison tasks
Technical training programs, 63
Tennessee, prisons in, and
African American women
prisoners, 37
Tennessee Penitentiary, African
American women prisoners
in, 37
Testing and HIV/AIDS, 89
Texas, incarceration rates in, 165
Texas, prisons in, 32–33, 39, 72,
122, 124
and discipline, 67
and programs, 65
Texas Board of Prison
Commissioners, 33
Texas Federation of Women’s
Clubs, 33
Texas Parole Board, 124
Texas Prison Board, 33
Texas State Council of Methodist
Women, 33
“Three strikes” laws, 73–74, 124
Time, prison. See Prison time
“Trafficking,” 68
Training, 1, 21, 22
Training programs and gender
bias, 96–98
Tranquilizers, 79, 81
Transfers, prison. See Prison
transfers
Treatment, specialized, 65
Treatment approach, and women
correctional officers, in men’s
prisons, 126
Treatment options and
classification system, 66, 67
Treatment programs, 63
and gender bias, 96–98
in state vs. federal prisons, 98
Tuberculosis, 89
Tucker, Karla Faye, 124
Turner v. Safley, 61–62
Tutwiler, Julia Strudwick, 155
Twelve step program, 64
UNAFEI. See United Nations Asia
and Far East Institute for the
Prevention of Crime and the
Treatment of Offenders
United Nations, 124
United Nations Asia and Far
East Institute for the
Prevention of Crime and the
Treatment of Offenders
(UNAFEI), 186–187
University of Chicago, 18
Urban growth, 1–2
U.S. Board of Parole, 91
U.S. Department of Justice, 70,
145
Bureau of Justice Statistics, 180
National Criminal Justice
Reference Service, 184
National Institute of
Corrections, 184–185
Vagrancy, 3
Valatie Farm, 36
Van Walters, Miriam, 152
Vandalism, 43
Vazquez, Judith, 61
Vazquez v. New Jersey Department
of Corrections, 60–61
Venereal disease, 19
Vera Institute of Justice, 187
Vermont, reformatories in, 21
Vices, unwomanly, 17
Victim-offender mediation
programs, 98–99
Violence, prison, 24, 34–35
Violent offenders, 42, 163
and “three strikes” laws, 73, 74
Visitation
and children, 56, 57, 97, 99, 100,
113
conjugal, 57–62
contact, 56–57, 88
of husbands in prison, 116–117
noncontact, 56–57
and prison guards, 55, 115–116
and spouses, 55–57
and strip searches, 56, 112
Visiting wives, strip searches of,
116

224
Index
Vocational training programs, 20,
63, 64
and equal protection, 91–92
Volunteer Prison League, 142
Volunteers of America, 141
“The Wabash Murderess,” 159
“War on crime,” 72
“War on drugs,” 44, 72, 162
and drug violations, 74–76, 90
“War on women,” 75, 162
Ward, A. J., 32
Wardens, 13
African Americans as, 127
Washington, prisons in, 123–124
and juvenile offenders, 47
and prison nursery program,
82
Washington Correctional Center
for Women, 47, 82, 123
Washington Department of
Correction, 83
Weed, Mary, 125
West
custodial prisons in, 23
prisons in, 24, 25, 34–35
reformatories in, 22
West Virginia, prisons in, 22, 27,
123
and training programs for
women, 63
Western House of Refuge, Albion,
New York, 11, 152, 160
Wetumpka, Alabama, 155
Wheeler, Sallie, 34
Whipping, 4
Williams v. Levi, 91
Wisconsin, prisons in, and
discipline, 68
Wistar, Mary Waln, 155–156
Wittpenn, Caroline Bayard, 156
Women and children, protection
of, and women police,
recruitment of, 20
Women Coping in Prison, 187–188
Women correctional officers, 125
constraints faced by, 132–137
and equal employment
opportunities, 130–131
and indigenous women
prisoners, 136–137
and men supervisors, 131–132
in men’s prisons, 125–126,
126–127, 129–131
personal experiences of, 135–137
role followed by, 134
sexual harassment of, by male
counterparts, 132
strategies used by, 134
See also Correctional officers
Women of color, 75. See also
African American women
prisoners; Hispanic women
prisoners
Women offenders
and arrests, 163–164
backgrounds of, 164
and drug violations, 164
and felony convictions, 164
juvenile, 47–48
and murder, 163
and property crimes, 164
and “three strikes” laws, 73–74
and violence, 42, 163
Women police, recruitment of, 20
Women prison administrators,
125, 127
Women prison doctors, 13
Women prison reformers
1840–1860, 6–7
1870–1890, 8–9
1900–1920, 18–19
professional status of, 8–9
Quakers as, 4, 6, 8, 119–120
See also individual reformers
Women prison superintendents, 13
Women prison wardens, 13
Women prisoners
age range of, 39
association among, 50–52
characteristics of, 44, 165–167
and children, 14, 54–55, 74,
81–82, 99–100, 165–166. See
also Prison nursery programs
and incarceration, rate of, 38, 72,
165
infantilization of, by prison
guards, 68

Index
225
location of, 165
perception of, and prison staff,
68–69
research on, 38–39, 41, 107
and sexual abuse, 11, 12, 35,
69–72, 124
as source of disruption, 29
See also African American
women prisoners; Hispanic
women prisoners; Immigrant
women prisoners; Indigenous
women prisoners
Women’s Christian Temperance
Union, 145
Women’s crimes
anti-institutional approach to,
20–21
categories of, 15–16
causes of, and progressive
approach, 18–21
decriminalization of, 93–94
preventive approaches to, 19–20
Women’s criminality, 42–48
categories of, 3
and kinds of offenses, 42–44
and race, 44–46
and reasons for offending, 43
Women’s imprisonment
colonial period to 1840s, 3–5
1840–1860, 5–7
1870–1900, 7–9
1900–1920, 18–21
after 1920, 21–23
since 1935, 38–39
Women’s Prison Association
(WPA), 7, 20, 152, 157–158
Women’s Prison Association and
Home, 158
Women’s Prison Book Project
(WPBP), 188
Women’s prisons, location of, 62
See also Custodial prisons;
Independent women’s
prisons; Men’s prisons,
women’s units attached to;
Prison farms; Women’s
reformatories; individual
prisons; under individual states
Women’s reformatories, 19
demise of, 22–23, 123, 162
and female staff, 13
regional differences in, 21–23
and retraining, 16–18
See also Women’s prisons;
individual reformatories
Women’s Reformatory in New
York, 122
Women’s reformatory movement,
1, 7–9
and medicalizing women, 81
Women’s reformatory system,
123, 162
Women’s units. See Men’s prisons,
women’s units attached to
Women’s Workhouse on
Blackwell’s Island, 148–149
Wooden horse, riding of, 32
Work assignments and women
correctional officers, 132–133
Work programs, 24
Work release and equal
protection, 91
Work-furlough programs and
equal protection, 91
World War I and progressive
movement, 23
WPA. See Women’s Prison
Association
WPBP. See Women’s Prison Book
Project
Wyoming, prisons in, 27–28
and training programs for
women, 63
Wyoming State Penitentiary, 27–28
Wyoming Territorial Penitentiary,
27
Yeager v. Smith, 87–88
Youth delinquency and parents,
imprisonment of, 54


About the Author
C
yndi Banks is Associate Professor of Criminal Justice at
Northern Arizona University. She teaches courses on women
in prison, juvenile justice, justice ethics, and comparative
crime and culture. Her published work includes a study of
Alaskan Native women in prison. She has also published numer-
ous articles on gender, sexual violence, and comparative crimi-
nology and is the author of two books.
227


