
WOMEN IN
DEVELOPING
COUNTRIES

Selected Titles in ABC-CLIO’s
CONTEMPORARY
WORLD ISSUES
Series
Animal Rights, Clifford J. Sherry
Autism Spectrum Disorders, Raphael Bernier and Jennifer Gerdts
Climate Change, David L. Downie, Kate Brash, and Catherine
Vaughan
DNA Technology, David E. Newton
Domestic Violence, Margi Laird McCue
Education in Crisis, Judith A. Gouwens
Environmental Justice, David E. Newton
Gay and Lesbian Rights, David E. Newton
Genocide, Howard Ball
Global Organized Crime, Mitchel P. Roth
Global Refugee Crisis, Mark Gibney
Identity Theft, Sandra K. Hoffman and Tracy G. McGinley
Lobbying in America, Ronald J. Hrebenar and Bryson B. Morgan
Modern Piracy, David F. Marley
Modern Sports Ethics, Angela Lumpkin
Obesity, Judith Stern and Alexandra Kazaks
Same-Sex Marriage, David E. Newton
Sentencing, Dean John Champion
Sexual Crime, Caryn E. Neumann
Sexual Health, David E. Newton
Substance Abuse, David E. Newton
U.S. Border Security, Judith A. Warner
U.S. Space Policy, Peter L. Hays, Ph.D.
U.S. Trade Issues, Alfred E. Eckes, Jr.
Women in Combat, Rosemarie Skaine
For a complete list of titles in this series, please visit
www.abc-clio.com.

Books in the Contemporary World Issues series address vital
issues in today’s society, such as genetic engineering, pollution,
and biodiversity. Written by professional writers, scholars, and
nonacademic experts, these books are authoritative, clearly
written, up-to-date, and objective. They provide a good starting
point for research by high school and college students, scholars,
and general readers as well as by legislators, businesspeople,
activists, and others.
Each book, carefully organized and easy to use, contains an
overview of the subject, a detailed chronology, biographical
sketches, facts and data and/or documents and other primary-
source material, a directory of organizations and agencies,
annotated lists of print and nonprint resources, and an index.
Readers of books in the Contemporary World Issues series will
ﬁnd the information they need to have a better understanding of
the social, political, environmental, and economic issues facing
the world today.


WOMEN IN
DEVELOPING
COUNTRIES
A Reference Handbook
Karen L. Kinnear
CONTEMPORARY
WORLD ISSUES

Copyright 2011 by ABC-CLIO, LLC
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced,
stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any
means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise,
except for the inclusion of brief quotations in a review, without prior
permission in writing from the publisher.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Kinnear, Karen L.
Women in developing countries : a reference handbook / Karen L.
Kinnear.
p. cm. — (Contemporary world issues)
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 978–1–59884–425–2 (hard copy : alk. paper) —
ISBN 978–1–59884–426–9 (ebook)
1. Women—Developing countries. 2. Women—Developing countries—
Social conditions. 3. Women’s rights—Developing countries.
I. Title.
HQ1870.9.K577
2011
305.40917204—dc22
2011013356
ISBN: 978–1–59884–425–2
EISBN: 978–1–59884–426–9
15 14 13 12 11
1 2 3 4 5
This book is also available on the World Wide Web as an eBook.
Visit www.abc-clio.com for details.
ABC-CLIO, LLC
130 Cremona Drive, P.O. Box 1911
Santa Barbara, California 93116-1911
This book is printed on acid-free paper
Manufactured in the United States of America

To Evelyn—world traveler, constant inspiration,
and dear friend


Contents
Preface, xv
List of Developing Countries, xvii
1
Background and History, 1
Basic Concepts Important to the Study of Women in
Developing Countries, 2
Sex Roles versus Gender Roles, 2
Social Stratiﬁcation, 4
Patriarchy, 4
Cultural Relativism, 5
History of Women in Development, 6
The United Nations, 7
Development Agencies and Approaches, 9
Structural Adjustment Programs, 11
Millennium Development Goals, 12
Overview of Women’s Status and Experiences in the World
Today, 13
Family Relations, 13
Marriage, 13
Preference for Males, 15
Education, 16
Health Care, 18
Nutrition, 20
Occupational Health, 21
Contraceptives, 21
Abortion, 22
Maternal Mortality, 22
Female Genital Mutilation, 23
Sexually Transmitted Diseases, 24
Prostitution and Sex Trafﬁcking, 25
ix

Violence against Women, 25
Employment, 27
Women’s Rights as Human Rights, 30
Empowerment of Women, 30
References, 31
2
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions, 35
Problems, 35
Tradition, 35
Education, 37
Marriage and Family, 40
Preference for Male Children, 40
Child Marriage, 42
Domestic Violence, 44
Dowry, 45
Health Care, 47
Family Planning, 48
Maternal Mortality, 49
Prostitution and Sex Trafﬁcking, 52
HIV/AIDS and Other Sexually Transmitted Diseases, 53
Women and Work, 54
Ability to Work Outside the Home, 54
Gender Gap in Pay and Positions, 56
Microenterprise, 56
Land Ownership and Property Rights, 57
Information and Communications Technologies, 61
Female Refugees and Victims of War, 64
Controversies, 66
Female Genital Mutilation, 66
Abortion, 68
Honor Killings, 70
Solutions, 71
References, 71
3
U.S. Concerns, 77
Immigration, 78
Asylum, 79
Refugee Status, 80
Determination of Asylum, 80
Derivative Asylum, 81
Reasons for Asylum, 81
Female Genital Mutilation, 82
x
Contents

Domestic Abuse, Rape, 86
Religion, 89
Forced Marriage, 89
Detention While Awaiting Asylum Determination, 90
Guestworker Programs in the United States, 93
Trafﬁcking, 94
Immigrants’ Life in the United States, 95
Family Planning Policy, 98
Lack of Ratiﬁcation by the United States of Key International
Conventions, 101
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Discrimination against Women, 101
The Convention on the Rights of the Child, 103
References, 104
4
Chronology, 107
References, 139
5
Biographical Sketches, 141
Aminah Al-Said, 141
Aduke Alakija, 142
Corazon Aquino, 142
Aung San Suu Kyi, 143
Sirimavo Bandaranaike, 144
Ela Bhatt, 145
Benazir Bhutto, 145
Ester Boserup, 147
Elise Boulding, 147
Angie Brooks-Randolph, 148
Charlotte Bunch, 149
Violeta Barrios de Chamorro, 149
Eugenia Charles, 150
Gaositwe Keagakwa Tibe Chiepe, 151
Jeanne Martin Cisse´, 151
Shirin Ebadi, 152
Nawal El Saadawi, 152
Ana Figuero, 153
lndira Gandhi, 154
Lydia Gueiler Tejada, 155
Asha Hagi, 155
Asma Jahangir, 156
Annie Ruth Baeta Jiagge, 157
Contents
xi

Fatima Jinnah, 157
Ellen Johnson-Sirleaf, 158
Begum Liaquat Ali Khan, 159
Gwendoline Konie, 159
Chandrika Bandaranaike Kumaratunga, 160
Bertha Lutz, 160
Wangari Maathai, 161
Rigoberta Menchu Tum, 162
Fatima Mernissi, 163
Shushila Nayar, 164
Teurai Ropa Nhongo, 164
Isabel Peron, 165
Fumilayo Ransome-Kuti, 166
Aisha Ra´teb, 166
Dhanvanthi Rama Rau, 166
Nibuya Sabalsajaray, 167
Gita Sen, 167
Huda Shaarawi, 168
Leticia Ramos Shahani, 168
Helvi Sipila¨, 169
Margaret Snyder, 170
Mu Sochua, 171
Mary Tadesse, 171
Sakena Yacoobi, 172
Begum Khaleda Zia, 172
References, 173
6
Facts and Data, 175
International Conventions and Protocols, 176
The Charter of the United Nations, 176
Commission on the Status of Women, 176
Universal Declaration of Human Rights, 177
Convention on the Suppression of the Trafﬁc in Persons and
of the Exploitation of the Prostitution of Others, 177
Equal Remuneration Convention, 178
Convention on the Political Rights of Women, 179
Convention on the Nationality of Married Women, 179
Discrimination (Employment and Occupation) Convention,
179
Convention against Discrimination in Education, 180
International Covenant on Economic, Social, and Cultural
Rights, 180
xii
Contents

International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, 181
Declaration on the Elimination of Discrimination against
Women, 182
Declaration on the Protection of Women and Children in
Emergency and Armed Conﬂict, 182
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Discrimination against Women (CEDAW), 183
International Convention on the Protection of the Rights
of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their
Families, 183
Fourth World Conference on Women Beijing Declaration, 184
Home Work Convention, 184
Protocol to Prevent, Suppress, and Punish Trafﬁcking in
Persons, Especially Women and Children,
Supplementing the UN Convention against
Transnational Organized Crime, 185
UN Security Council Resolution 1325 on Women and Peace
and Security, 185
Regional Conventions: Inter-American Conventions, Statutes,
and Declarations, 186
American Convention on Human Rights (“Pact of San Jose,
Costa Rica”), 186
Additional Protocol to the American Convention on
Human Rights in the Area of Economic, Social, and
Cultural Rights (“Protocol of San Salvador”), 187
Statute of the Inter-American Commission of Women, 187
Inter-American Convention on the Granting of Civil Rights
to Women, 188
Inter-American Convention on the Granting of Political
Rights to Women, 188
Inter-American Convention on the Prevention,
Punishment, and Eradication of Violence against
Women (“Convention of Belem do Para”), 188
Inter-American Convention on Support Obligations, 189
Convention on the Nationality of Women, 189
Regional Conventions: Africa, 189
African (Banjul) Charter on Human and Peoples’
Rights, 190
Protocol to the African Charter on Human and Peoples’
Rights on the Rights of Women in Africa, 190
Condition of Women in Developing Countries, 191
Health, 191
Contents
xiii

Female Genital Mutilation or Cutting, 192
Education, 192
Domestic Violence and Rape, 207
Prostitution and Sex Trafﬁcking, 222
Voting and Elections, 222
Labor and Employment, 222
References, 242
7
Directory of Organizations, 243
Nongovernmental Organizations, 244
Government and Government-Afﬁliated Organizations, 273
UN Entities, 274
8
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources, 279
Books, 279
Agency Reports, 300
Journals and Journal Articles, 304
Videos and Electronic Resources, 306
Websites and Blogs, 311
Glossary, 315
Index, 317
About the Author, 349
xiv
Contents

Preface
T
he purpose of this book is to provide a survey of the literature
and other resources on the topic of women in developing
countries and to provide sources for further research. The vast
range of literature and resources available offers many opportuni-
ties to learn more about these women’s lives, including the chal-
lenges many of them face on a daily basis. A tremendous
amount of growth in knowledge and research has occurred in this
ﬁeld in recent years and this volume reviews current knowledge
and resources in order to help the reader understand the evolving
issues surrounding this important and timely topic.
While some progress has been made in alleviating the many
problems faced by women in developing countries, there is still
much room for improvement. International law and many
national laws prohibit various forms of discrimination against
women, but in reality discrimination and abuse still exist.
This book, like other books in the Contemporary World
Issues series, provides a balanced survey of the resources avail-
able and a guide to further research on the topic of women in
developing countries. Chapter 1 provides background and his-
torical information. Chapter 2 discusses important issues and
controversies in the area of women and development. Issues that
are of concern to the United States are examined in Chapter 3.
Chapter 4 provides a chronology of signiﬁcant events in the
recent history of women in developing countries. Chapter 5 offers
biographical sketches of women who have played or are playing
key roles in transforming developing societies and cultures.
Chapter 6 provides statistical and other data and information
and includes summaries of the key UN conventions designed to
provide women with rights equal to men. Chapter 7 contains a
xv

directory of representative private and public organizations, asso-
ciations, and government agencies involved in working with
women in developing countries in a variety of areas, including
education, health, family planning, and development. Chapter 8
annotates books and other materials that focus on women in
developing countries.
xvi
Preface

List of Developing Countries
Africa
Angola
Benin
Botswana
Burkina Faso
Burundi
Cameroon
Central African Republic
Chad
Comoros
Congo, Democratic Republic of
Congo, Republic of
Cote d’Ivoire
Djibouti
Equatorial Guinea
Eritrea
Ethiopia
Gabon
Gambia
Ghana
Guinea
Guinea-Bissau
Kenya
Lesotho
Liberia
Madagascar
Malawi
Mali
Mauritania
Mauritius
Mozambique
Namibia
Niger
Nigeria
Rwanda
Sao Tome and Principe
Senegal
Seychelles
Sierra Leone
Somalia
South Africa
Sudan
Swaziland
Tanzania
Togo
Uganda
Zambia
Zimbabwe
xvii

East Asia and the Paciﬁc
Brunei Darussalam
Burma
Cambodia
China
Fiji
Indonesia
Kiribati
Korea, Democratic People’s
Republic of
Korea, Republic of
Laos
Malaysia
Marshall Islands
Micronesia, Federated States of
Mongolia
Nauru
Palau
Papua New Guinea
Philippines
Samoa
Singapore
Solomon Islands
Thailand
Timor-Leste
Tonga
Tuvalu
Vanuatu
Vietnam
South and Central Asia
Afghanistan
Bangladesh
Bhutan
India
Maldives
Nepal
Pakistan
Sri Lanka
Near East and North
Africa
Algeria
Bahrain
Egypt
Iran
Iraq
Jordan
Kuwait
Lebanon
Libya
Morocco
Oman
Qatar
Saudi Arabia
Syria
Tunisia
United Arab Emirates
Yemen
xviii
List of Developing Countries

Latin America and the Caribbean
Antigua and Barbuda
Argentina
Barbados
Belize
Bolivia
Brazil
Chile
Colombia
Costa Rica
Dominica
Dominican Republic
Ecuador
El Salvador
Grenada
Guatemala
Guyana
Haiti
Honduras
Jamaica
Mexico
Nicaragua
Panama
Paraguay
Peru
Saint Kitts and Nevis
Saint Lucia
Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines
Suriname
Trinidad and Tobago
Uruguay
Venezuela
List of Developing Countries
xix


1
Background and History
T
his chapter provides an overview of women in developing
countries—their status, the conditions under which they live,
and many of the social, political, and economic forces that
affect them. But ﬁrst, we need to deﬁne what we mean by the
term developing countries and several other key concepts used
throughout this book.
In previous decades, the commonly used term was Third
World countries, rather than developing countries. Third World is
still used today, but fewer people, organizations, and governments
are using this term because of political and economic changes in
the world, as well as the negative connotation of the term to many
people. The term generally means less developed countries, or
countries with relatively low per capita incomes, short life expec-
tancies, and high rates of illiteracy.
First World countries are industrialized, democratic countries,
such as the United States, Canada, many European countries,
Australia, New Zealand, Japan, and other countries that are not
considered communist. Second World countries refers to countries
that were part of the communist bloc, including Poland, Hungary,
Romania, Bulgaria, the former Soviet Union, China, and Cuba.
Today, the line between Second and Third World countries has
blurred, and together, many of these countries are considered
emerging or developing countries (see the front of the book for a
list of developing countries).
The term developing countries describes countries in which the
majority of people earn less income and have less access to basic
public services than those living in industrialized countries. Other
1

characteristics of developing countries include a population pri-
marily located in rural areas, an agriculturally based economy,
and low levels of education, health, transportation, infrastructure,
and potable water. Historically, many developing countries were
once colonies of European countries.
Developing countries are also referred to as the Global South,
based on the geographical location of most developing countries—
the majority of countries south of the equator are classiﬁed as devel-
oping countries. Global North refers to the more industrialized,
developed countries. The usage of the term Global South is becoming
more widespread than many other terms, in part because it is not
perceived as an emotionally loaded, demeaning term; it is seen as
less divisive than the contrast between developed versus develop-
ing countries, industrialized versus nonindustrialized countries, or
rich versus poor countries.
Basic Concepts Important to the Study of
Women in Developing Countries
In order to understand the study of women in developing countries,
an understanding of several basic sociological terms is helpful.
These concepts include sex roles, gender roles, social stratiﬁcation,
patriarchy, and cultural relativism.
Sex Roles versus Gender Roles
Sex roles are behaviors that are determined by the biological
differences between women and men, such as pregnancy, lacta-
tion, erection, and ejaculation. Gender roles, on the other hand,
are behaviors that are determined by the social and cultural con-
text in which people live and how they deﬁne femininity and
masculinity. Societies organize themselves based on these deﬁni-
tions; they rank women’s and men’s roles according to their
importance to the society as a whole. Gender roles are one of the
basic sources of division and deﬁnition in a particular society.
They determine who is considered a citizen, who is allowed to
vote, who is allowed to own land, and who is granted other
rights. Gender deﬁnes men and women according to the social
relationship between them. Approaches to development in terms
2
Background and History

of gender are concerned with the ways that such relationships are
socially constructed.
Societies use gender as a primary means of determining the
division of labor and the provision of rights and responsibilities
for citizens. Gender roles may vary across cultures, although
there are many similarities; most often women are assigned roles
in domestic and family areas while men are expected to partici-
pate primarily in public and political areas. Women’s status
within each country is determined by institutional factors such
as family, politics, religion, and economic systems within the
culture, as well as by the level of power, prestige, and control over
property that they have. The power women wield and their inﬂu-
ence over others may change as they age, with added prestige
provided to elderly women in some cultures. Women’s roles and
positions also vary by the socio-economic class within cultures
and countries; women in the upper classes of all countries enjoy
many advantages that women in lower classes within those same
countries are denied.
Women have both reproductive and productive roles in most
societies. Their reproductive role includes biological reproduction
(bearing children, rearing children, and maintaining the household)
and social reproduction (maintaining the status quo in their soci-
ety). Productive work includes all activities that generate income
or have some sort of exchange value. Women’s reproductive role is
often undervalued; most societies do not see reproductive work
as productive, that is, as having any economic value—even though
if a woman gives birth to a male child, that child is expected to
provide value to the family. As a result, the value of women to a
society is considered to be less than that of men because value is
most frequently measured in terms of economic value.
Even when women participate in income-generating activ-
ities, men often control the ﬁnancial part of the enterprise. For
example, while on a trip to Kenya, I visited a Maasai village; the
men came out to greet us, invited us into their community, and
explained their way of life to us. Then we were escorted to an area
just outside the central community circle where many of the
women were displaying beaded jewelry and other items that they
were selling. Each visitor was accompanied by a male from the
village; when I ﬁnished choosing the items I wanted to purchase,
my male guide gathered them up and took me back into the
village center and we bargained until we agreed on the total cost.
Basic Concepts Important to the Study of Women in Developing Countries
3

When I asked why his wife and mother-in-law were not doing the
bargaining, he explained to me that they knew nothing about
money and were better off just making the items; besides, they
“couldn’t speak English, so what good would they be?”
Social Stratification
When examining the role and experiences of women in developing
countries, we also must understand how a society organizes or
classiﬁes individuals. Social stratiﬁcation is the hierarchical
arrangement of individuals in a society based primarily on eco-
nomic and power factors. Societies often are stratiﬁed based on
class, race, and gender; this stratiﬁcation controls the distribution
of power, wealth, and prestige.
People who have similar economic status, often based on
income, occupation, and education, form a particular social class
within society. Those in the upper class have more power, author-
ity, and prestige than those in the middle class or lower class.
Gender also deﬁnes the position of a person within the stratiﬁca-
tion system; men are granted higher social status than women
in most societies simply because they are men. Finally, race or eth-
nicity also deﬁnes the position of a person in a society. Racial
minority groups are often seen as having a lower position, with
less power and authority, than the racial majority of a particular
society.
This system for ranking individuals is important to under-
stand and acknowledge when studying women in developing
countries because women who are in higher social classes may
have more rights than those in lower classes. Depending on the
overall status of women in a particular country, women in the
upper classes may have more access to education, economic
opportunities, health care, and other areas critical to their quality
of life.
Patriarchy
Some sociologists believe that male dominance is universal—that
is, found in every culture throughout the world. They believe that
some form of patriarchy is found in all cultures. Others believe
that sexual differentiation is found in all societies but that females
are not always the ones who are considered of lower status
(Rogers 1978; Eitzen and Zinn 1991).
4
Background and History

Patriarchy is deﬁned as the “principle of male dominance
that forms both a structural and ideological system of domination
in which men control women” (Chow and Berheide 1994, 14).
Walby (1996) sees it as a system in which “men dominate,
oppress, and exploit women” (20). It is not a static condition or
universal in its characteristics. The speciﬁc forms that patriarchy
may take vary by class, race, and age. Patriarchy is most com-
monly seen and studied in relation to its role in the family. In the
patriarchal family, men have the power to determine the status,
privileges, and roles of women and children within the family.
This power is also reinforced by traditional gender role belief
systems.
Patriarchy can be both public and private. Private patriarchy
generally is practiced in the family environment, while public
patriarchy is practiced by the state and within public activities
such as government and the economy. Historically, international
relations theory and practice has primarily been developed by
men who have based their theories on their own knowledge and
experience as men. Women are often left out of this equation,
and as a result their impact on society is not considered or valued.
In many countries women are not encouraged to participate in the
national government, although increasing numbers of countries
have set aside a certain number or percentage of seats in legisla-
tive bodies for women (see Chapter 6). Patriarchy and patriarchal
structures also inﬂuence the role of women in the economy, spe-
ciﬁcally their position in and control over income-generating
activities.
Cultural Relativism
Cultural relativism is the principle that the beliefs an individual
holds and the actions he or she takes should be examined in terms
of the individual’s own culture. In other words, the actions and
behaviors of others should not be evaluated based on one’s own
culture. For example, Americans should not condemn the practice
of arranged marriages in a developing country solely because it is
not accepted practice in the United States.
Years ago, attempts by Westerners to study the problems and
issues of women in developing countries often created resentment
on the part of those women studied. Western researchers, includ-
ing sociologists and anthropologists, were often viewed as coming
into a developing country with a grant to study a particular issue;
Basic Concepts Important to the Study of Women in Developing Countries
5

they asked questions, and then returned home to write a report in
the comfort of their own familiar worlds. Often, careers were
boosted by these studies but little or nothing was provided to help
improve the welfare and lives of the people who were studied.
Many researchers asked questions that were meant to elicit inti-
mate details of the lives of the people studied, but most had no idea
of the impact this intrusion had on those involved. Outsiders
who had little understanding of local culture came in and studied
polygamy, purdah (the seclusion of women from the public, prac-
ticed by Muslims and some Hindus), veiling, dowry (in India, the
money and/or goods that a bride’s family brings to her husband
and his family), brideprice, and child marriages and condemned
these practices based on Western beliefs and traditions. Little if
any attempt was made to understand these practices within their
cultural context before condemning them. Many individuals in
developing countries had difﬁculty understanding this attitude
and resented the implication that their societies were viewed as
primitive and problematic while Western societies were seen as
more advanced and problem-free.
Research and development work conducted today is often
more sensitive to the characteristics of other cultures. The world
has become smaller in the sense that more people have traveled
outside of their countries of origin, and the widespread availabil-
ity and usage of the Internet, including social media, have
enabled individuals to learn about other cultures and practices
and gain a greater understanding of the differences as well as
the similarities among various cultures. Development workers
and social scientists today are generally more sensitized to cul-
tural variations and understand the importance of respecting the
cultural values and traditions in other countries.
History of Women in Development
The practice of incorporating women into the development pro-
cess has evolved over time. From the ﬁrst development programs
in the 1960s, most development professionals did not even con-
sider women in their planning of development activities. If women
were considered at all, it was to the extent that if men were pro-
vided with training and development activities in developing
countries, women’s lives would be improved. The improvement
of women’s lives was not a focus or even an anticipated outcome;
6
Background and History

it was a side effect. However, in the 1970s, many development
program planners began to understand that women had to be
included in the development process. Finally, in the 1980s, the
focus shifted to gender and development, where development
projects incorporated a gender perspective. The focus of these
programs was on understanding the role that gender played in
development and then developing programs that would beneﬁt
entire communities.
The United Nations
The United Nations played a major role in development projects in
developing countries, along with the World Bank and the
International Monetary Fund. In 1946, the Economic and Social
Council of the United Nations (ECOSOC) established the Commis-
sion on the Status of Women (CSW) with a mandate to “prepare
recommendations and reports to the Economic and Social Council
on promoting women’s rights in political, economic, civil, social
and educational ﬁelds” (ECOSOC 1946). The CSWalso was tasked
with identifying urgent problems and recommending corrective
action to the ECOSOC. The CSW was to play a major role in the
drafting and review of several UN Conventions (see Chapter 6
for details on various Conventions relevant to women).
In 1967 the General Assembly of the United Nations adopted
the Declaration on the Elimination of Discrimination against
Women. The Declaration was a statement on the importance of
granting various human rights to women. Eleven articles speci-
ﬁed various rights that women should be granted (see Chapter 6
for a summary).
The Commission on the Status of Women was upgraded by
the United Nations in 1972, becoming the Branch for the Promotion
of Equality for Men and Women, led by Helvi Sipila¨, the ﬁrst
woman named a UN Assistant Secretary-General. Following its
recommendation to designate 1975 as the International Women’s
Year, one of CSW’s mandates was to prepare for the First UN World
Conference on Women, set up to coincide with the International
Women’s Year. Held in Mexico City in 1975, the conference was
attended by delegates from 133 countries and focused on themes
of equality, development, and peace. A parallel NGO forum, the
International Women’s Year tribune, attracted approximately
6,000 participants. Women from the Global North focused their
attention on equality (during this time the focus of many U.S.
History of Women in Development
7

women was on ratiﬁcation of the Equal Rights Amendment to the
U.S. Constitution), while women from the Global South were more
concerned with basic issues of survival. Global South women
viewed the focus on equality as divisive. This difference in focus
led to a major division between women from the North and the
South and between women from capitalist countries and those
from noncapitalist countries. Because this Conference was held
during the United Nations’s Second Development Decade, partici-
pants were already realizing the existence of growing gender dis-
parities as a result of the development process (Friedlander 1996).
Following one of the recommendations of the ﬁrst World
Conference, the United Nations launched the UN Decade for
Women: Equality, Development and Peace (1976–1985). This des-
ignation contributed to the growth of the international women’s
movement and changed the focus of development agencies from
focusing on men to a realization that women had to be included
in development activities. Another one of the major tasks of the
Commission during this decade was the drafting of the Conven-
tion on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against
Women (CEDAW).
The Second World Conference on Women, held in Copenhagen,
Denmark, in 1980, was attended by over 1,300 delegates from
145 countries, with over 8,000 women participating in the parallel
NGO Forum. This conference reviewed progress in implementing
the recommendations from the First World Conference on Women
and updated the Plan of Action. Focused on employment, health,
and education, the Conference also recommended that the govern-
ments of its member states ensure women’s ownership and control
of property and improve inheritance rights and child custody
rights.
In 1985, the Third World Conference on Women, and the par-
allel NGO Forum, were held in Nairobi, Kenya. The Conference
was attended by approximately 1,400 delegates from 157 coun-
tries, while over 13,000 people attended the parallel NGO forum.
Its primary focus was to review the achievements of the UN
Decade for Women. The role and format of development activities
were questioned by many participants, including women from
both the Global South and North. Conference delegates adopted
the Forward-Looking Strategies for the Advancement of Women,
which called for equal participation of women in all political,
social, and economic activities, including equal access to education
and training.
8
Background and History

In 1995, the Fourth World Conference on Women was held in
Beijing, China, and included over 6,000 delegates from 189 coun-
tries. The parallel NGO Forum attracted over 30,000 women.
The Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action was adopted by
the delegates and identiﬁed 12 areas of concern to women, includ-
ing poverty, education, health care, violence, and human rights.
Since the 1995 Conference in Beijing, additional sessions have
been held every ﬁve years to measure progress toward the goals
set out in the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action. In 2000,
a special session of the UN General Assembly convened Women
2000: Gender Equality, Development and Peace in the 21st Century to
review progress; the General Assembly agreed to conduct a full
review in 2005. The 2005 World Summit was held at UN head-
quarters in New York and reviewed the progress made in meeting
the Millennium Development Goals (MDG) established in 2000.
In 2010, the Commission on the Status of Women conducted
a 15 year review of the progress on implementing the Beijing
Declaration and Platform for Action and for reaching the MDGs.
It was noted that gender perspectives were not currently being
speciﬁcally addressed or identiﬁed in strategies developed for
reaching the MDGs. Gender perspectives needed to be more
clearly articulated and mechanisms developed to ensure account-
ability of States and other stakeholders. The commonalities and
relationships between the Beijing Declaration and the MDGs were
not understood which contributed to the limited progress in
reaching the MDGs.
Development Agencies and Approaches
Running parallel to the UN conferences, and prior to understand-
ing the important role played by women in development activ-
ities and the need to include women in the development
process, the U.S. government, the World Bank, and other entities
were involved in development activities in the Global South.
Early development activities in the developing world focused
on the production and industrial sectors of the economy, which
were predominantly male. The relationships between resources
and individuals had not yet been examined. Governmental agen-
cies and ﬁnancial institutions believed that development activities
should focus on the economics of development. In developing
countries, this focus led to the involvement of men in development
activities because, for the most part, men were the ones engaged in
History of Women in Development
9

and responsible for the economic activities of families. The devel-
opment agencies did not consciously exclude women from these
activities; they simply did not recognize that development activ-
ities were male-oriented, and never considered that women might
play a role in development activities.
Beginning in the early 1970s, and following publication of
Ester Boserup’s book on women in development (Boserup 1970),
the focus of many development programs shifted from being
male-oriented and excluding women to one of bringing women
into the development process. This program focus was referred
to as women in development (WID). WID challenged the gender
bias in early programs, understood the importance of women’s
contributions, and focused on integrating women in development
programs. Many programs were successful in reaching these goals
and improved the general conditions of women; however, they
often did not put women on an equal footing with men when it
came to social and economic power. Women were still seen as sec-
ondary to men in the development process; they were not included
in the initial phases of development but their contributions were
acknowledged.
The U.S. government’s experience in WID programs illus-
trates the problems with this approach. The Percy Amendment to
the U.S. Foreign Assistance Act of 1973 required the U.S. Agency
for International Development (USAID) to encourage foreign
governments to include women in their countries’ local econo-
mies, and established an Ofﬁce of Women in Development in
USAID to assist State Department employees in their work with
foreign governments. Many people inside USAID were unclear
on how to implement the required policies, while others believed
this focus was the product of a few vocal women in the women’s
liberation movement and did not believe that it was important or
necessary for women to be involved in the development process.
However, by the early 1980s, many development experts believed
that the WID approach was not effective in incorporating gender
issues into the development process. Women saw the WID
approach as patriarchal—with a focus on involving women in the
market economy and looking for income-generating activities,
but only to the extent they would support men’s contributions to
the economy.
In the late 1980s, the frustration over the issues with the WID
approach led to the development of what was believed to be a
more comprehensive approach to development—the gender and
10
Background and History

development (GAD) approach. GAD took WID one step further
by emphasizing the need to understand the importance of gender
roles in development activities. GAD saw the importance of
encouraging the redistribution of power in social relations
between men and women. Its proponents understood that wom-
en’s role in the basic institutions of family, education, and work
had to change to bring women into an equal relationship with
men; both men and women had to equally prosper from develop-
ment activities. Female-focused programs and activities had often
been segregated from mainstream development activities in the
WID approach, and the GAD approach aimed to mainstream
women into development activities (Jaquette and Summerﬁeld
2007). The overall goal was to put women and men on an equal
footing.
The GAD approach is still being employed, although doubts
exist concerning its effectiveness. When it ﬁrst became popular,
the word “gender” did not have an equivalent word in many lan-
guages; it was sometimes confusing to those in local commun-
ities, and some NGOs and other advocacy groups suggest that
women are still being excluded from many development activ-
ities. Jaquette and Staudt (2007) suggest that the lessening interest
in the GAD approach and the increasing “war on terror” and
other militarization policies may present opportunities to rethink
development approaches to incorporating and beneﬁting women.
Structural Adjustment Programs
During the late 1970s and early 1980s, as the governments of
many developing countries incurred increasing debt, several gov-
ernments turned to the International Monetary Fund (IMF) and
the World Bank for help. The IMF and World Bank instituted
structural adjustment programs to assist countries in rebuilding
their economies and restructuring their debt. These programs
were designed to help debtor nations by increasing their exports
through higher commodity production in order to repay their
loans while at the same time reducing the drain on government
funds through job cuts, lowered wages, reduced services to citi-
zens, and other cost-cutting measures.
In some countries, structural adjustment policies had harm-
ful consequences for women’s work and the well-being of chil-
dren and families. Unemployment increased, with women
losing the most jobs; education, health, and other social programs
History of Women in Development
11

that were funded by the government lost funding or suffered
reduced funding; and, in some instances, women’s access to land
and credit decreased (Kahne and Giele 1992; Murray 2008).
Overall, structural adjustment programs were detrimental to
most developing countries, but the impact on women was devas-
tating in many areas. More individuals entered informal income-
generating activities during this period, and men were better
positioned to succeed in these activities because they had more
access to income to invest in these activities. Cutbacks in federal
spending on social welfare programs were more likely to impact
women because women and children were usually the recipients
of these government programs (McMurtry 1998). For example,
in Africa, structural adjustment programs required reductions
in government spending; spending on infrastructure and social
programs was frequently cut, and because women and children
compose the majority of the poor in any society, they bore the
burden of these cuts and were hurt the most. When governments
cut back on spending on infrastructure, such as building and
maintaining roads and providing telecommunications services,
ease in transporting goods to markets suffered. In Africa, where
many women are in agriculture, these policies made it even more
difﬁcult for rural areas to succeed in business. Health care serv-
ices also suffered, as well as education. In a study on structural
adjustment programs, Cornia, Jolly, and Stewart (1987) found that
reductions in spending on social programs were detrimental
to children. These programs also affected women as they
attempted to care for their children without any support from
the government.
Millennium Development Goals
In 2000, 189 government ofﬁcials attended the Millennium Summit
to discuss critical issues the international development community
would face in the 21st century. The resulting Millennium Declara-
tion provided a road map for international cooperation in con-
fronting the world’s major development challenges. The overall
aim is to reduce extreme poverty; with eight speciﬁc goals estab-
lished, the ultimate goal is to halve extreme poverty by the year
2015.
Two of the eight major goals focus attention on women,
including promoting gender equality and empowering women
(Goal 3) and improving maternal health (Goal 5). The remaining
12
Background and History

goals impact women to some degree, including eradicating
extreme poverty and hunger (Goal 1), achieving universal
primary education (Goal 2), reducing child mortality (Goal 4),
combating HIV/AIDS, malaria and other diseases (Goal 6), ensur-
ing environmental sustainability (Goal 7), and developing a global
partnership for development (Goal 8).
However, all of the goals are impacted by the progress made
on establishing gender equality around the world. Women play a
prominent role in child welfare, are more susceptible to HIV/
AIDS and other major diseases, and play a large role in natural re-
sources management. In addition, all the goals are related in some
way; progress in achieving one goal may help in achieving
another goal. For example, by achieving universal primary educa-
tion (Goal 2), maternal health may improve over the long term as
girls mature and understand what they need to do to maintain
their health. If women are empowered (Goal 3), they will under-
stand the importance of keeping their children healthy and be
able to determine ways to achieve that goal.
Overview of Women’s Status and
Experiences in the World Today
As the Millennium Development Goals indicate, progress has
been slow in providing women with equal opportunities in the
areas of family, education, work, and other critical aspects of their
lives. Women still lag behind in many areas and are often still
treated as inferior to men. This section brieﬂy describes some of
the experiences of women in developing countries based on their
status as women. See Chapters 2 and 6 for additional discussion
and details regarding these topics.
Family Relations
Marriage
Most women throughout the world are expected to marry at some
time during their lives. In many developing countries, women are
seen as property, having value to their birth families only to the
extent that when they are married off, preferably at an early age,
the family will receive money or goods for their “purchase.” The
wife in many families is expected to care for her husband and to
Overview of Women’s Status and Experiences in the World Today
13

bear children, preferably boys. Women often bear the major
responsibility for taking care of the home; their tasks may include
tending the family’s garden; caring for live animals that the
family may have; gathering fuel for cooking; gathering water for
drinking, cooking, and bathing; caring for the children; and
caring for and supporting their husbands. In many cases, women
are also expected to ﬁnd paying work to help support the family
ﬁnancially.
In many developing countries, arranged marriages are still a
common practice. In these cases, parents make all arrangements
to ﬁnd a wife or husband for their child. The prospective bride
and groom have little or no say in the wedding and often do not
even have a chance to meet their future spouse until the day of
the wedding. Cultural norms are changing, in that some families
allow marriages based on love, that is, marriages in which the
young man and young woman choose each other. As more girls
are allowed to go to school, enter college, and ﬁnd jobs, the oppor-
tunities expand for them to ﬁnd their own mates. However, while
many parents around the world expect to at least informally
“approve” their future son- or daughter-in-law, many marriages
in developing countries still require the approval of the parents,
who are determined to ensure that their sons marry properly
and successfully. Even in developed countries, parents often
approve or disapprove of their child’s choice of spouse.
Increasing attention is being focused on child marriage, its
prevalence, and the serious effects it has on girls in developing
countries. In some developing countries, girls are engaged when
they are still very young, even 11 or 12 years old. The marriage
may actually take place when they are older, but they will have
no choice in the matter. Based on some estimates, 100 million girls
will become child brides between 2004 and 2014 (Bruce and Clark
2004). Some young girls are matched with older men; especially
in Middle Eastern countries and many African countries, older
men prefer to marry young virgins, who they believe will protect
them from becoming infected with HIV/AIDS.
In India and many countries in Africa, once a girl marries,
she will be expected to live with her husband’s family. Her family
loyalties must change from her birth family to her new family.
Emotionally, economically, and legally, a girl is property that is
transferred to another family. In-laws may make life difﬁcult for
the new bride and may interfere in the relationship between her
and her husband. The wife may be required to help her husband’s
14
Background and History

parents with many of the household chores, especially if she does
not have outside employment or other income-generating
activity.
In several Islamic countries, women’s behavior is severely
restricted. The practice of purdah, a Persian word meaning “cur-
tain,” is an institutionalized system that requires women to cover
their bodies and faces and to remain in seclusion from the rest of
society. Purdah has three major parts: women are physically sep-
arated with their own living space; they are socially segregated
from all but their immediate kinship circle; and they must cover
their bodies and their faces whenever they appear in public pla-
ces. Purdah keeps women secluded and isolated from the rest of
society by conﬁning them to the surroundings of their home, fam-
ily, immediate kinship circle, and neighborhood (Dankelman and
Davidson 1988).
Preference for Males
Even before young women are engaged and married, they under-
stand the place they hold in their families and society. From the
time they are born, many girls do not hold an honored place within
their families. Many families, especially in developing countries,
prefer boys over girls. Girls are biologically stronger than males
in their early years, and they are estimated to have a mortality rate
lower than males (1 to 1.15) (Royston and Armstrong 1989).
Research conducted by the United Nations in the early 1980s
indicated that while mortality rates for girls are generally lower
than rates for boys, rates for girls were 1.5 times higher than boys
in Sri Lanka and Pakistan, 1.4 times higher in Bangladesh, and
1.3 times higher in Colombia (UNFPA 1989). However, more recent
research indicates that in much of the world girls now have a lower
mortality rate than boys. Only in a few countries, such as India
and China, are their rates higher. Current rates in Bangladesh,
Pakistan, Sri Lanka, and Colombia indicate that girls have a lower
mortality rate than boys (WHO 2010).
Boys are expected to become wage earners to support their
own families as well as to provide support to their parents in
old age. In many developing countries, the extended family is still
common, with the male usually bringing home his bride to live in
their own home or in the home of his parents. The preference for
males also often extends to access to health care and education.
Families are more likely to provide their sons with all available
health care and with an education. Girls are seen as providing
Overview of Women’s Status and Experiences in the World Today
15

service to their families by staying home and helping their moth-
ers with housework, child care, and income-generating activities
if available.
Education
Education is recognized as an inalienable right for every person
by the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and the
International Covenant on Economic, Social, and Culture Rights.
Both have been adopted by the United Nations and its member
nations. Governments around the world recognize the impor-
tance of educating their citizens—education enhances economic,
political, social, and cultural development and provides beneﬁts
to the community as well as the nation. Women who are well edu-
cated have more control over their lives, including reproduction,
and have fewer children than women with little or no education.
While governments see value in educating all citizens, the
reality is that many women in developing countries have not
had access to education. As young girls, they are less likely to
attend school than boys, especially in many sub-Saharan African
and South Asian countries. Many possible reasons exist for this
discrepancy. First, cultural or religious beliefs may keep parents
from enrolling their daughters in school. Second, parents may
believe that it is important for their sons to attend school in order
to become successful in life, but they expect their daughters will
get married and move into their husband’s homes and therefore
not provide the parents with any return on their investment.
Third, parents may also hold their daughters out of school
for their safety; girls attending school may be threatened with vio-
lence, including physical assault, emotional abuse, sexual abuse,
or rape. Fourth, in many developing countries, while primary
education is free, students may have to pay for uniforms, school
supplies, and other accessories, and their families may not be able
to afford these costs. Finally, parents may need their daughters to
stay home and take care of younger siblings, help with house-
work and cooking duties or, in rural areas, spend time gathering
water and fuel.
Within schools, attitudes of the teachers toward the value or
lack of value of educating girls, gender biases in the curriculum,
male teachers who may prey on young female students, few
female teachers to act as role models, gender-based violence,
and lack of adequate bathroom facilities and other hygiene and
16
Background and History

sanitation provisions may make daily school attendance difﬁcult.
Families living in rural areas may have a more difﬁcult time send-
ing their children to school; students may have to travel some
distance to get to school and their safety along the way, especially
for girls, is often not ensured. Families living in urban areas are
more likely to have access to schools as well as to income to pay
for their children’s education, and are more likely to understand
the importance of an education.
Even if girls complete primary school, they are less likely to
enter and complete secondary school. Girls may need to take on
more responsibility at home. In many countries, by the time a girl
reaches puberty her parents may have arranged her marriage and
see no reason for continuing her education. Safety may also be a
factor, as girls may experience growing levels of school-based
gender violence; teachers may require sexual relations in
exchange for good grades or to remain enrolled in school. For
example, in one study of girls in three African countries, while
attending school, almost 50 percent of women in Uganda
reported some level of sexual, physical, or psychological abuse
from male teachers (African Child Policy Forum 2006). In some
instances, a girl may also ﬁnd herself pregnant and not able to
continue her education. Schools may not have adequate bathroom
facilities for girls who are menstruating and the girls may be too
embarrassed to attend school during that time.
Once a girl completes her primary and secondary education,
she may have limited options in terms of ﬁnding paid employ-
ment. Studies have shown that paid employment opportunities
for women, especially in developing countries, are expanding
very slowly, with paid employment outside of the agricultural
sector difﬁcult to ﬁnd (United Nations 2009). Geographical loca-
tion also is a factor; if a woman is from a rural area or indigenous
group, there may be even fewer opportunities for gainful employ-
ment. In difﬁcult economic times, men are usually seen as the
“breadwinners” of the family and may be given preference over
women in hiring and retention decisions. In addition to trying to
ﬁnd employment, women at this stage in their lives may have
recently gotten married and started a family. Their priorities
may be higher in terms of raising a family than in ﬁnding paid
employment.
Even though a woman may not ﬁnd paid employment, she
and her community still beneﬁt from her education. Research
has demonstrated that an educated woman is more likely to
Overview of Women’s Status and Experiences in the World Today
17

understand the value of an education and encourage her children,
including daughters, to go to school (Grown, Gupta, and Kes
2005; Murray 2008; UNICEF 2007). An educated woman is also
more likely to participate in civic affairs, at the local community
as well as the national level. Many studies have demonstrated that
educating girls and young women provides many beneﬁts to
them, their families and the larger society. These beneﬁts include
later marriages and pregnancies, healthier children, smaller fami-
lies, and lower infant mortality rates. Young women who go on to
higher education may come back to their local communities as
teachers, thereby providing positive female role models for young
girls, which may encourage them to stay in school. Educated
women also contribute to their countries’ economic growth
by entering the paid labor force, which can lead to increased job
creation. They also play important roles in improving public
health and have the opportunity to play a central role in their
countries’ civic affairs.
Health Care
Most women will face a variety of health issues related to their
reproductive systems at some point in their lives. During preg-
nancy women can experience vitamin deﬁciency, high blood pres-
sure, miscarriage, and anemia, among other problems. Lack of
prenatal care endangers the lives of both the mother and the
child. Contraceptives may pose their own risks, but lack of access
to contraceptives may create unwanted pregnancies and result in
children that cannot be adequately cared for. Abortion services
are not always available. Maternal mortality rates are higher in
developing countries than in developed countries, often because
of lack of access to medical care, numerous pregnancies, poverty,
and overwork. The practice of female genital mutilation or female
genital cutting in many societies can lead to several health prob-
lems, including excessive bleeding, painful menstruation, painful
sexual intercourse, infection and even death for some young girls.
Sexually transmitted diseases, including AIDS, threaten the
health and lives of many women, including those forced into
prostitution. During wars and internal conﬂicts, women often
are raped by soldiers.
Knowledge of health care issues that affect them as well as
access to health care is often lacking for women in developing
countries. Access to health care may be limited for several
18
Background and History

reasons, including lack of infrastructure; lack of services for refer-
ral, poverty, unavailability of midwives; the lack of acceptance
of traditional birth attendants by community maternal health
programs; lack of information about health care and the need for
it; lack of self-esteem; and the position of the woman in the family
and her ability to make her own decisions concerning health care.
Medical facilities, hospitals, and clinics, along with medical
staff, including physicians, nurses, midwives, and traditional
birth attendants are often only available in major cities. If facilities
are not located in the same village or town, women need trans-
portation to get to these facilities; many do not have access to cars
or bicycles, are not on a bus route, or do not have the money to
spend on transportation. Some women do not have the time to
go to a doctor or another medical practitioner, they cannot get
time off from work, or they cannot leave their children alone.
Some do not have money to pay for medical services. Some
women live in rural areas that do not provide easy access to medi-
cal facilities. Lack of communications, for example, telephone ser-
vice, also plays a role in women’s ability to gain information
concerning their medical conditions or to make appointments.
If midwives or traditional birth attendants (women from the
local village who are untrained in modern medicine) are not
available, maternal and child mortality levels may increase. For
example, in Kenya, a skilled person was only present at 41 percent
of all births, and maternal mortality was over twice the world
average (Population Reference Bureau 2005). However, in Matlab,
Bangladesh, maternal mortality decreased by 68 percent over
three years when midwives staffed two health clinic sites
(Fauveau 1991). Midwives in Ghana were trained in advanced
lifesaving techniques and midwifery skills, and as a result, mor-
tality has been reduced signiﬁcantly. Midwives have developed
good supportive relationships with community and traditional
practitioners in Ghana, which has contributed to improved
maternal and child health. These cooperative, mutually respectful
relationships among all health care workers are critical to the suc-
cess of health care programs.
The sex of the health care provider also plays a role in
whether or not a woman will seek health care. For example, most
doctors in Egypt are male; custom dictates that women, once past
puberty, should not be seen by any male other than a close rela-
tive. Even in an emergency situation, many women must get their
husband’s permission to seek treatment. A woman’s reputation
Overview of Women’s Status and Experiences in the World Today
19

could be ruined if she seeks out a male doctor for treatment of any
kind; many will question her purity and accuse her of sexual mis-
conduct (el Saadawi 1980; Krieger 1991). Islamic married women
in Cameroon cannot be touched by a male without the husband’s
permission. Women interviewed in one study claimed that they
would rather die than seek medical care without their husband’s
approval (Alexandre 1991).
Lack of knowledge concerning the human body and the need
for health care in certain circumstances also limits the ability of
women to seek help. In some cases, women do not recognize their
or their child’s need for medical attention. Sometimes women
deny, or refuse to acknowledge, their pregnancy in its early stages,
when prenatal care may be critical to the health of the mother and
the fetus. Sometimes women are afraid to tell their husbands they
are pregnant again, especially if birth control is not available or
not encouraged for religious or cultural reasons and the family
cannot afford another child.
Nutrition
Because most women put in long hours and play many roles, as
wife, mother, and income earner, they are vulnerable to malnutri-
tion. Poverty also inﬂuences a woman’s nutritional status. The
men and boys in a family often are fed before girls and women
because boys and men are perceived as more valuable and there-
fore deserving of as much food as they need to stay healthy and
satisﬁed.
As a result of numerous pregnancies, low food intake, and
high work demands, women may not able to meet the nutritional
needs of their bodies. They may experience deﬁciencies of speciﬁc
vitamins and minerals or a condition of chronic malnutrition may
exist. Women tend to suffer from anemia as a result of iron deﬁ-
ciency or stunted growth as a result of lack of protein and calories.
As women age, their health may deteriorate as a direct result of
poor nutrition throughout their lives.
During pregnancy, many women have difﬁculty meeting their
additional nutritional needs. Pregnant women may have a deﬁ-
ciency of iron and become anemic, which may lead to infections
and problems with the health of the fetus. Four of the major causes
of maternal mortality are related to poor nutrition: hemorrhage,
infection, obstructed labor, and eclampsia (Koblinsky, Timyan,
and Gay 1993).
20
Background and History

Occupational Health
Women’s occupational health is also at risk in many developing
countries. While few statistics are available to determine the size
of the problem, many health hazards do exist. For example,
women working in agriculture may be exposed to dangerous pes-
ticides and other chemicals used to enhance crop size. Women
working at home maybe exposed to eyestrain and more serious
vision problems as a result of close production work. Poor light-
ing may contribute to this problem. They may also be exposed to
dangerous fumes emitted from various fuel sources when cook-
ing indoors. Many countries do not have safety laws that protect
workers from common dangers in the workplace, including
exposed wiring, lack of ﬁre protection equipment such as sprin-
kler systems, and crowded conditions without adequate exits.
Locked doors have proven deadly in several developing coun-
tries; ﬁres have started somewhere in the building and women
have not been able to get out.
Contraceptives
Family planning programs provide individuals and families with
the ability to safely control their fertility. In many countries,
government policies and laws determine the availability of con-
traceptives to the general population. These policies and laws
may be based on the need to reduce population growth, or on reli-
gious beliefs, cultural traditions, or political expediency.
The use of contraceptives challenges the belief that men have
the right to control women’s fertility and sexuality. In areas where
contraception resources are available, the level of education that a
woman has achieved inﬂuences her willingness to use contracep-
tives. The more education a woman has, the more likely she is to
use some form of birth control. Educated women are more likely
to understand the way contraceptives work and their side effects
and are less likely to be inhibited about discussing their use with
their sexual partners and about actually using them.
Even where family planning policies are in effect, some coun-
tries prohibit the advertising of services, prevent trained medical
personnel from distributing contraceptives, or in some other
way prohibit their use. In some countries nurses are not allowed
to insert intrauterine devices (IUDs) or distribute oral contracep-
tives. If women do not have the consent of their husbands or if
Overview of Women’s Status and Experiences in the World Today
21

adolescent girls do not have the permission of their parents
(rarely given), contraceptives are not provided. In many develop-
ing countries, the decision to use contraceptives is often made by
the husband. The prevailing belief may be that a woman’s fertility
is the property of the husband; the husband is the only one
allowed to determine whether or not to use birth control and
what type to use.
The cost of contraceptives may also be a factor in whether or
not a woman uses them. Other problems include the availability
of contraceptives, the distance one has to travel to procure them,
the poor quality of services provided in procuring them, fear of
negative health consequences and side effects, limited choice of
method, prohibitive cost, or the woman’s belief that she is not at
risk of becoming pregnant.
Abortion
Abortion is one of the most controversial topics today throughout
the world. Many countries outlaw abortion because it goes
against the particular religious beliefs of the country. Other coun-
tries allow abortions when the life of the mother is in danger or
when the pregnancy is a result of rape or incest (see Chapter 6).
In developed countries as well as developing countries, discus-
sions and policies concerning abortion are usually controversial.
Induced abortion is probably the oldest and perhaps the most
widely used form of fertility control (Royston and Armstrong
1989). According to Murray (2008), approximately 50 million
pregnancies are terminated each year by induced abortions.
Approximately one-half of these abortions are illegal and most
often occur in developing countries with restrictive abortion laws,
while the other half are legal abortions most often performed in
countries with more liberal laws that allow abortions. Physical
results of unsafe abortions include hemorrhage, uterine perfora-
tion, cervical trauma, and even the death of the woman. Other costs
include psychological trauma, guilt, expense, and the stigma asso-
ciated with having an abortion. See Chapter 2 for a discussion of
the issues surrounding abortion and other family planning options.
Maternal Mortality
Women’s work is often devalued or considered less valuable than
men’s work. This belief often leads to gender discrimination in
22
Background and History

the distribution of basic resources, including food and health care,
and may lead to early death. Women often die from many of the
same causes as men, but one gender-speciﬁc cause of maternal
mortality is childbirth. Hemorrhage, obstructed labor, infections,
hypertension, and complications from induced abortion are the
major causes of maternal death during pregnancy, labor, and
delivery. Maternal deaths in developing countries account for a
high proportion of all deaths of women in their reproductive
years. According to the World Health Organization, in 2005 there
were approximately 500,000 maternal deaths and 99 percent of
those occurred in developing countries (WHO 2009). While statis-
tics on other mortality rates indicate declines over the years,
maternal mortality rates have stayed about the same or shown
only small declines (see Chapter 2 for additional discussion).
Female Genital Mutilation
Often referred to as female circumcision or female genital cutting,
the practice of female genital mutilation (FGM) has seen increased
attention in recent years. Even in the United States, many states
have outlawed the practice, considering it a form of child sexual
abuse (see Chapter 3 for further discussion). Physical complications
from this surgery are often severe, and may include hemorrhage,
tetanus, blood poisoning, and shock from the pain of the operation.
The World Health Organization (1996) has designated four
types of FGM: Type 1, known as clitoridectomy, involves the
removal of the prepuce, and may include removal of the clitoris.
Type 2, known as excision, includes removal of the clitoris and
the labia minora. Type 3, referred to as inﬁbulation, includes
removal of the clitoris, labia minora, and labia majora and the
stitching of the remaining labia to narrow the vaginal opening.
Type 4 includes all other forms of genital alteration, including
pricking or piercing of the clitoris or labia, cauterization, or inci-
sions in the vaginal wall.
FGM is primarily found in Africa and a few countries in the
Middle East and Asia. In many rural parts of Africa, traditional
midwives often perform the circumcision, although barbers and
male priests are also known to perform it. In urban areas, doctors,
nurses, or midwives perform the procedure and are known to use
anesthesia and antiseptics.
According to common belief, circumcision continues today
primarily because it has always been done—it is the custom of
Overview of Women’s Status and Experiences in the World Today
23

many cultures. Reasons for continuing the practice include the
protection of women from unwanted sexual intercourse, the pro-
tection of women from their own sexuality or from an uncontrolled
sexual appetite, to keep young girls virgins, to enhance fertility, to
enhance femininity, to keep married women faithful, to prevent
women from masturbating, and because many men will only
marry a woman who has undergone this procedure.
Long-term effects of circumcision include loss of any sexual
feeling, chronic urinary tract infections, painful intercourse, pel-
vic infections, and severe scarring that can result in hemorrhaging
during childbirth. Women often must be cut open on the wedding
night and when giving birth in order to make sexual relations and
childbirth possible.
Sexually Transmitted Diseases
Sexually transmitted diseases, including gonorrhea, syphilis, HIV,
and AIDS, affect both men and women throughout the world. In
developing countries, these diseases can cause more problems
than in more developed countries, due to lack of medical facilities
and treatment options, lack of medications, expense of medica-
tions, and the stigma associated with contracting any of these dis-
eases, especially HIV and AIDS. Many women in developing
countries do not seek timely medical attention for many reasons,
including the unavailability of doctors or nurses, especially in
rural areas, poverty, lack of time, cultural inhibitions, problems
in communicating with male doctors, and feelings of shame over
their condition (Koblinsky, Timyan, and Gay 1993).
For some women, the inability to deny sex to their husbands
creates an additional vulnerability to sexually transmitted diseases.
In many countries, men are allowed, even expected, to seek sex out-
side of their marriage. If they contract a sexually transmitted dis-
ease, they are often unaware of their infection and eventually
transmit the infection to their wives.
Child marriage also contributes to the spread of sexually
transmitted diseases, especially HIV and AIDS. According to a
WHO study, one-half of all new infections of HIV occur in young
people between the ages of 15 and 24 (WHO 2006). The majority
of these young people are female, since girls are physiologically
more susceptible to infection. In many areas of Africa, girls and
young women make up 48 percent of those living with AIDS
(UNAIDS 2006).
24
Background and History

Prostitution and Sex Trafficking
Prostitution is big business in many countries. Previously, several
Southeast Asian countries were known as places in which women
could be found for “rest and recreation” activities for foreign mili-
tary personnel. Currently, these countries and several others have
expanded these services to include wealthy businessmen and
tourists as clients; men traveling alone are creating a new market
for prostitutes. Developing countries often encourage these activ-
ities either openly or quietly behind the scenes because foreign
currency beneﬁts the countries’ economies.
Women participating in prostitution may do so voluntarily or
may have been coerced into this activity. Some women choose to
become prostitutes because they ﬁnd that it can be ﬁnancially
lucrative for them and their families. In other cases, young girls
and women may be forced into it; parents may sell their young
daughters to trafﬁckers or other individuals believing that they
will have an opportunity to earn income for the family. Many
women who migrate to urban areas in search of employment
may be coerced into it by employment agencies that act as fronts
for prostitution rings, crime rings, or other groups that are traf-
ﬁcking in women (Hyland 2001).
Prostitution places women in danger. The most common
danger is from sexually transmitted disease, including gonorrhea,
syphilis, and AIDS, but physical violence also endangers women.
Male sexual aggression may lead to beatings and other physical
harm. In Bangkok, a study sponsored by the United Nations
found that two-thirds of women in Bangkok were afraid of being
raped or physically assaulted while walking on the city’s streets.
The researchers found that hospital statistics of rapes and assaults
supported this fear (Buendia 1989).
Violence against Women
Throughout the world, women are threatened with violence,
including violent acts committed against them by their husbands.
In many developing countries, women are expected to obey their
husbands and the husbands often have customary if not also legal
authority to discipline and control their wives in whatever way
they see ﬁt. In the 1980s in Bangladesh, Stewart (1989) found that
the murder of wives by their husbands accounted for 50 percent
of all murders in the country. Almost 75 percent of all women
Overview of Women’s Status and Experiences in the World Today
25

murdered in Papua New Guinea were killed by their husbands
(Bradley 1988).
Many women have died in India as a result of the practice of
dowry. The custom of the woman’s family providing a dowry to
the husband has been prohibited by law since 1961. However,
the practice itself, along with bride-burning or dowry deaths,
has grown in recent years. Providing a dowry may help elevate
the economic status of the husband and his family, and may be
encouraged by greed. When the husband decides that his wife’s
family has not provided him with an adequate dowry, he may
resort to burning his wife alive. Police often have a difﬁcult time
proving that the woman was intentionally murdered, primarily
because the husbands often make the death look like a cooking
accident.
Rape may be one of the most underreported crimes against
women throughout the world. The stigma and shame that are
often associated with rape appear universal. Estimates in devel-
oping countries are believed to be even less accurate than in
developed countries because the report rate in developing coun-
tries is even lower than in developed countries. In both developed
and developing countries, statistics indicate that most women
who have been raped know their assailant. In countries that
highly value a woman’s virginity, including many Asian, Middle
Eastern, and African countries, women who have been raped
have lost all value. Women are driven to suicide, beaten, or mur-
dered as a result of the dishonor that they have brought upon
their families.
In some countries, rape is used as a weapon against the
women of one’s enemies. Because female sexuality is seen as
sacred by many cultural traditions, rape becomes a show of force
against one’s enemy. Hindu fundamentalists have raped Muslim
women as a way of attacking the Muslim population in India;
Hutu rebels raped Tutsi women in 2000 as part of the state-
sponsored genocide against the Tutsis; and women have been
raped in Bosnia, Burma, Kenya, Rwanda, Darfur, and other coun-
tries as part of wars and internal conﬂicts. Rape in this setting
humiliates the male members of the women’s family and often
dishonors the family.
In many countries, marital rape is not considered rape. In
India in the early 1980s, many women’s groups demanded that
forced intercourse by a husband with his wife without her consent
should be considered rape, but the Criminal Law (Amendment)
26
Background and History

Act of 1983 stated that “sexual intercourse by a man with his own
wife, the wife not being under ﬁfteen years of age, is not rape”
(Calman 1992, 121). Today in India, however, marital rape is con-
sidered rape and prohibited by law, but is still widespread.
Women have a difﬁcult time leaving violent husbands, no
matter what country they live in. In many developing countries,
leaving is virtually impossible. For many of these women,
returning to their birth families is not an option. The women’s
parents may have died or may be living with a son or economi-
cally dependent on a son and have no room and no economic re-
sources to provide to the woman. In some cases, parents may
talk to their son-in-law about his violent behavior and request
that he stop. Marriage is often seen as a permanent union and
women are expected to suffer within the marriage.
Employment
Most women’s work is unpaid and not recognized as having any
economic value. In employment, women face discrimination and
multiple challenges. Access to jobs may be limited within certain
cultures that restrict the position of women. The general economic
conditions of the area in which they live affect women’s standard
of living and ability to ﬁnd work outside the home. Women often
earn less than men in many occupations and are usually found in
lower-level jobs. Changing economic policies have affected
women and their position in the economy of many developing
countries. Women’s lack of access to assets such as land and other
forms of collateral hurts their ability to get loans to start busi-
nesses. However, in many areas, despite the many restrictions
faced by women, women are increasing their participation in the
workforce and assuming greater economic responsibility for their
families.
In the past, women have traditionally had trouble obtaining
credit from banks and other lending institutions. In many devel-
oping countries women have not been allowed to own property;
husbands or fathers have had total ownership and control of prop-
erty. Therefore, women have been unable to provide any form of
collateral to back up a bank loan. However, by the 1980s, some
institutions had begun to realize that women are usually excellent
credit risks. NGOs and several small business lenders have dem-
onstrated that providing loans to women entrepreneurs is good
business. The Grameen Bank in Bangladesh, the Self-Employed
Overview of Women’s Status and Experiences in the World Today
27

Women’s Association (SEWA) Cooperative Bank in India, and
Banco Solidario in Bolivia have pioneered efforts to provide loans
to poor women who have no collateral.
Women play a major role in the agricultural activities of
many developing countries, including many African countries,
although very few women hold title to land; for example, they
own less than 20 percent of all the land in Africa (Cotula 2006).
Nevertheless, many governments now recognize this role that
women play in the local economy. In the 1980s in Kenya, a
national agricultural extension system speciﬁcally targeted
women. Extension agents reported that over half the farmers they
meet with were women (Herz 1989). This experience inﬂuenced
extension efforts in other African countries, including Cameroon,
Somalia, Nigeria, and Zimbabwe, where women are now seen as
farmers in their own right.
In Asia, many women are involved in rice farming activities,
especially in the production and post-harvest phases. Their roles
vary widely, depending on economic, religious, and social factors
within each country. Women can beneﬁt from technological
advances in agriculture as long as they have some control over
the income received, and this varies from country to country. In
Java, women are allowed to own land and control household
ﬁnances, while women in Bangladesh have had little input or con-
trol over agriculture-related decisions (Stoler 1977; Abdullah and
Zeidenstein 1982).
Industry is one of the fastest growing sectors in developing
countries. Women in many developing countries have found
employment in export-oriented industries, including garment
and circuit board production. In Bangladesh, the export garment
business has opened up 500,000 jobs for young women (UBINIG
1991). Even though pay is low, hours are long, health hazards
exist, and job security is nonexistent, many women move from
rural areas speciﬁcally to take these jobs. Many women ﬁnd that
employment frees them from oppressive social and cultural
traditions.
Women have increased their participation in industry in
recent years; however, this has tended to reinforce sexual stratiﬁ-
cation in the labor market. Unless training and other incentives
are provided to women, they will continue to remain in low-
paying, dead-end, and often hazardous jobs. The mechanization
of tasks may also reduce the number of women employed in this
sector, unless other industries move in to provide new jobs. When
28
Background and History

women, especially rural women, participate in wage labor, they
are often vulnerable to discrimination, primarily in the form of
lower wages. Many employers also ﬁnd that rural women are
usually more docile and less likely to complain about working
conditions, low wages, or other problems with their jobs.
In addition to employment in industrial facilities, many
industries operate in the form of small workshops, and women
work in their own homes. Wages are usually lower in these cases,
women receive fewer fringe beneﬁts, and job security remains
nonexistent.
Women participate heavily in several service sectors, includ-
ing community services, such as health, education, and social
welfare, as well as commerce and domestic service. Tourism is a
major employer of women in many developing countries.
Informal activities account for a larger percentage of female
employment than employment in the formal sector in most devel-
oping countries. Many reasons for this trend exist. The informal
labor market is usually easier to enter, in part because it usually
requires fewer skills than the formal market. Informal work can
be done at home or at times of the day that enable women to take
care of their families and work at the same time. Cultural patterns
and expectations about women and work also make it easier for
women to enter the informal labor market.
Outwork, or subcontracting work that can be done in the
home, is becoming more popular for women, especially in devel-
oping countries. Employers are able to cut costs and avoid paying
beneﬁts to many of these workers. Women who work these jobs
provide their own tools—for example, sewing machines—and
can set their own hours, as long as they meet quotas set by their
employers. The drawbacks for women include low wages, little
or no beneﬁts, and no formal organization or union to protect
their rights.
Women in many countries are beginning to see the beneﬁts of
organizing among themselves. One of the best-known groups is
India’s Self-Employed Women’s Association (SEWA), established
in 1972 by a group of garment vendors, head-loaders (individuals
who are hired to transport loads on their heads), and vegetable
sellers. SEWA has organized over 40,000 women workers in
Gujarat and ﬁve other states in India, helping them to get licenses,
organize industrial and service cooperatives, and obtain legal
help. Women members receive assistance in obtaining loans and
banking services. The group also advocates for women’s rights.
Overview of Women’s Status and Experiences in the World Today
29

Women’s Rights as Human Rights
Long before the phrase “women’s rights are human rights” was
used prominently at the Fourth World Conference on Women in
Beijing, social reformers, writers, philosophers, and others were
writing about the lack of human rights available to most women.
In 1792, Mary Wollstonecraft, a British feminist, wrote Vindication
of the Rights of Women, in which she challenged the prevailing atti-
tudes of the day concerning human rights. Both liberals and con-
servatives at the time advocated for rights for men, but did not
think that women needed these same rights. Later, in 1869, John
Stuart Mill wrote The Subjugation of Women, in which he advo-
cated equal opportunities for women and suggested ways to
eliminate the basic causes of women’s oppression. Today, even
though many international documents exist to protect women
and their rights (see Chapter 6), women in many areas of the
world are not aware of their rights or are denied these rights by
common practice, by cultural traditions, or by law. In many cases,
women are not aware of the fact that they have certain rights, or of
how to get access to information on how to gain their rights.
Many NGOs as well as governmental agencies today emphasize
the belief that women’s rights are human rights and should not
be separated from the global attempts to gain equal rights for
everyone.
Empowerment of Women
Changing laws to grant women certain rights in many countries
does not necessarily mean that the laws will be followed. Tradi-
tions are difﬁcult to change; the laws may not be followed, or they
may not be enforced. Passing laws is relatively easy compared
with changing attitudes. Possibly the best, most effective way to
empower women is to do it on an individual basis. Provide a
woman with the means to support her family—through micro-
loans, for example—and her family will see the beneﬁt to every-
one of this policy. Husbands will see the value in supporting
their wives in these endeavors, and sons will see the advantages
of allowing their mothers to ﬁnancially support their families,
which may change the way the sons later view their wives and
daughters.
30
Background and History

References
Abdullah, Tahrunnesa, and Sondra Zeidenstein. 1982. Village Women of
Bangladesh: Prospects for Change. Oxford: Pergamon Press.
African Child Policy Forum. 2006. Violence against Girls in Africa: A
Retrospective Survey in Ethiopia, Kenya and Uganda. Addis Ababa: African
Child Policy Forum.
Alexandre, Marie. 1991. “The Role of Gender: Socio-Economic, Cultural,
and Religious Pressure on the Health of Women in Cameroon.” Paper
presented at the 18th Annual NCIH International Health Conference,
Arlington, VA.
Boserup, Ester. 1970. Women’s Role in Economic Development. London:
Allen and Unwin.
Bradley, Christine. 1988. “The Problem of Domestic Violence in Papua
New Guinea.” In Guidelines for Police Training on Violence against Women
and Child Sexual Abuse. London: Commonwealth Secretariat, Women and
Development Programme.
Bruce, J., and S. Clark. 2004. The Implications of Early Marriage for HIV/
AIDS Policy. New York: Population Council.
Buendia, Hernando Gomez, ed. 1989. Urban Crime: Global Trends and
Policies. Tokyo: U.N. University.
Calman, Leslie J. 1992. Toward Empowerment: Women and Movement Politics
in India. Boulder, CO: Westview Press.
Chow, Esther Ngan-ling, and Catherine White Berheide, eds. 1994.
Women, the Family, and Policy: A Global Perspective. Albany: State
University of New York Press.
Cornia, Giovanni Andrea, Richard Jolly, and Frances Stewart. 1987.
Adjustment with a Human Face, vol. 1. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Cotula, Lorenzo. 2006. Gender and Law: Women’s Rights in Agriculture.
Rome: FAO Legal Ofﬁce.
Dankelman, Irene, and Joan Davidson. 1998. Women and Environment in
the Third World: Alliance for the Future. London: Earthscan Publications.
ECOSOC Resolution E/RES/2/11, June 21, 1946.
El Saadawi, Nawal. 1980. The Hidden Face of Eve. Translated and edited by
Sherif Hetata. London: Zed Press.
Eitzen, D. Stanley, and Maxie Baca Zinn. 1991. Conﬂict and Order:
Understanding Society. Fifth ed. Boston: Allyn and Bacon.
Fauveau, Vincent. 1991. “Mortality Impact of a Community-Based
Maternity Care Program in Rural Bangladesh.” Presentation at the 18th
References
31

Annual NCIH International Health Conference, Arlington, VA.
Friedlander, Eva, ed. 1996. Look at the World through Women’s Eyes: Plenary
Speeches from the NGO Forum on Women, Beijing ’95. New York: Women,
Ink.
Grown, Caren, Geeta Rao Gupta, and Aslihan Kes. 2005. Taking Action:
Achieving Gender Equality and Empowering Women. Sterling, VA:
Earthscan.
Herz, Barbara. 1989. “Women in Development: Kenya’s Experience.”
Finance and Development 26(2): 43–46.
Hyland, Kelly. 2001. “Protecting Human Victims of Trafﬁcking: An
American Framework.” Berkeley Women’s Law Journal 29–71.
Jaquette, Jane S., and Kathleen Staudt. “Women, Gender, and
Development.” 2007. In Women and Gender Equity in Development Theory
and Practice: Institutions, Resources, and Mobilization, edited by Jane
Jaquette and Gale Summerﬁeld. Durham: Duke University Press, 17–52.
Jaquette, Jane S., and Gale Summerﬁeld, eds. 2007. Women and Gender
Equity in Development Theory and Practice: Institutions, Resources, and
Mobilization. Durham: Duke University Press.
Jiggins, Janice. 1994. Changing the Boundaries: Women-Centered Perspectives
on Population and the Environment. Washington, D.C.: Island Press.
Kahne, Hilda, and Ganet Z. Giele, eds. 1992. Women’s Work and Women’s
Lives: The Continuing Struggle Worldwide. Boulder, CO: Westview Press.
Koblinsky, Marge, Judith Timyan, and Jill Gay, eds. 1993. The Health of
Women: A Global Perspective. Boulder, CO: Westview Press.
Krieger, Laurie. 1991. “Male Doctor, Female Patient: Access to Health
Care in Egypt.” Presentation at the 18th Annual NCIH International
Health Conference, Arlington, VA.
McMurtry, John. 1998. Unequal Freedoms: The Global Market as an Ethical
System. West Hartford, CT: Kumarian Press.
Murray, Ann Firth. 2008. From Outrage to Courage: Women Taking Action for
Health and Justice. Monroe, ME: Common Courage Press.
Population Reference Bureau. 2005. 2005 Women of Our World.
Washington, D.C.: Population Reference Bureau.
Rogers, Susan Carol. 1978. “Women’s Place: A Critical Review of
Anthropological Theory.” Comparative Studies in Society and History 20(1):
123–162.
Royston, Erica, and Sue Armstrong. 1989. Preventing Maternal Deaths.
Geneva: World Health Organization.
32
Background and History

Stewart, Denise. 1989. The Global Injustice. Ottawa: Canadian Council on
Social Development.
Stoler, A. 1977. “Class Structure and Female Autonomy in Rural Java.” In
Wellesley Editorial Committee, Bunster B. Ximena et al., Women and
National Development: The Complexities of Change. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press.
UBINIG. 1991. Bangladesh’s Textile and Clothing Industry: The Role of
Women. Working Paper prepared for UNIDO (United Nations Industrial
Development Organization) and presented at a seminar in Dhaka on 7
October.
United Nations. 2009. 2009 World Survey on the Role of Women in
Development: Women’s Control over Economic Resources and Access to
Financial Resources, including Microﬁnance. New York: United Nations.
UNAIDS. 2006. Global Summary of the AIDS Epidemic. Geneva: UNAIDS.
UNFPA. 1989. State of the World Population Report. New York: UNFPA.
UNICEF. 2007. A Human Rights-Based Approach to Education for All. New
York: UNICEF.
U.S. Department of State. 2009. Country Reports. Available at http://
www.state.gov/g/drl/rls/hrrpt/.
Walby, Sylvia. 1996. “The ‘Declining Signiﬁcance’ or the ‘Changing
Forms’ of Patriarchy.” In Patriarchy and Economic Development: Women’s
Positions at the End of the Twentieth Century, Valentine M. Moghadam, ed.
New York: Oxford University, 1996, 19–33.
World Health Organization. 1996. Female Genital Mutilation: Report of a
Technical Working Group. Geneva: WHO.
World Health Organization. 1999. Abortion in the Developing World. New
Delhi: Vistaar Publications.
World Health Organization. 2003. The World Health Report 2003: Shaping
the Future. Geneva: WHO.
World Health Organization. 2005. WHO Multi-Country Study on Women’s
Health and Domestic Violence against Women: Initial Results on Prevalence,
Health Outcomes and Women’s Responses. Geneva: WHO.
World Health Organization. 2006. The World Health Report 2006: Working
Together for Health. Geneva: WHO.
World Health Organization. 2009. Women and Health: Today’s Evidence,
Tomorrow’s Agenda. Geneva: WHO.
World Health Organization. 2010. World Health Statistics. Geneva: WHO.
References
33


2
Problems, Controversies,
and Solutions
T
his chapter examines speciﬁc problems that women in devel-
oping countries face in their daily lives in the areas of educa-
tion, marriage and family, and employment, as well as some
controversial issues involving women such as female genital
mutilation, abortion, honor killings, and property rights and
inheritance. We will also explore general solutions to these
ongoing problems and issues that have emerged within local
cultures as well as in law and government.
Problems
Many women in developing countries face problems in their daily
lives that most women in developed countries do not encounter.
Some of these problems include the lack of educational opportuni-
ties, a cultural preference for male children rather than female chil-
dren, dowry demands, child marriages, lack of access to health
care facilities and treatment, the inability to own or manage real
property, and limited employment and other income-generating
opportunities. This section examines these problems and offers
several possible solutions.
Tradition
One of the primary factors that inﬂuences many of the decisions
governments make about the rights of their citizens, especially
35

the role of women in society, is the country’s cultural and religious
traditions. These traditions play an important role in the position of
women in many developing countries. Individuals, communities,
and entire nations rely on these traditions to structure, organize,
and maintain order in their communities and societies. Traditions
play a central role in guiding people in the proper and expected
way to behave. For example, in the United States it is traditional
for young people to socialize and make their own decisions regard-
ing their marriage partners. However, in many developing coun-
tries the parents play a major, or the only, role is choosing their
child’s marriage partner.
Who decides which practice is “correct” or “fair”? Should we
study the divorce rate in each country to see which system offers
more long-lasting marriages? Should we interview a representative
sample of married couples in both countries in an attempt to under-
stand which system appears to work better? For the most part each
tradition has its positive and negative aspects, and we must have
some grasp of the power of tradition in order to begin to under-
stand the experiences of women in developing countries.
A growing number of programs administered by foreign
governments and international nongovernmental organizations
(NGOs) working in developing countries are taking a human
rights perspective when advocating on behalf of women in those
countries. That is, they look at the current status of women in a
particular area and examine whether tradition or statutes infringe
on the individual’s rights as a human being. Cultural tradition
alone is no longer considered a valid reason for denying women
their basic human rights.
While many researchers and NGOs view women’s lives from
the perspective of human rights, governments in many countries
believe they have the right to dictate the treatment of their citizens
and male members of many societies believe they have the right to
control their family members. This issue is loaded with emotion;
supporters of local/national control believe they have the best
interests of everyone in mind and that outsiders should stay out
of the nation’s affairs. Their detractors believe that human rights
are universal and that the treatment of women in many countries
demonstrates a clear denial of their basic human rights.
As discussed in Chapter 1, cultural relativism often inﬂuences
the supporters and detractors of the policies and practices of indi-
vidual countries toward their citizens. It is difﬁcult to analyze
and make recommendations for future policies and programs
36
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

regarding the treatment of women without understanding the
underlying reasons for the past and current treatment of women.
Local tradition, especially in many rural communities, may be the
only practice people know; it deﬁnes who they are and what they
can do and provides general order to the community. Changing
traditional practices can be difﬁcult and frightening, especially if
the changes are in conﬂict with local traditions. Changes also take
time, especially when they are seen as drastic; individuals and
communities must be able to understand how the proposed
changes will beneﬁt them.
Local and national governments often see tradition as an
important means of controlling their citizens and local practices
often have their roots in religious observances and practices,
which provide the local governments and communities with an
incentive to maintain the status quo. Changing traditions and
practices also may be seen as conceding control to Western inﬂu-
ences. Individuals and governments in many countries resent
and decry the inﬂuence of Western society, especially when it
takes the form of consumerism and what may be viewed as the
out-of-control behavior of Western society, particularly as it plays
out in the United States. Many view the adoption of human rights
legislation as an adoption of a “Western” lifestyle.
Understanding the role and importance of a country’s cultural
and religious beliefs and practices in the treatment of women is
critical to understanding the challenges that women face in their
everyday lives regarding the care of their families and their own
health and welfare.
Education
Estimates from various governmental agencies and nongovern-
mental agencies such as the United Nations, the World Bank,
UNICEF, and UNESCO suggest that there are between 600 and
700 million girls and women around the world, but primarily in
developing countries, who are illiterate. Illiteracy is a major prob-
lem and governments and international organizations are working
to reduce it, especially among women.
In 2000, 189 government ofﬁcials attended the Millennium
Summit, sponsored by the United Nations, to discuss critical issues
the international development community would face in the 21st
century. The resulting Millennium Declaration provided a road
map for international cooperation in confronting the world’s major
Problems
37

development challenges. Millennium Development Goal (MDG)
No. 3 is to achieve universal primary education by the year 2015;
the means for achieving this goal are left up to participating
governments. Other agencies and organizations are also advocat-
ing for universal primary education. In 2000, and in addition to
the MDGs, the World Education Forum met in Dakar, Senegal,
and drafted the Dakar Framework for Action, which committed
the world community to achieving education for all (EFA), includ-
ing girls and women, indigenous communities, and other often
marginalized groups. Among the goals of EFA are providing free
and compulsory universal primary education, meeting the learn-
ing needs of young people and adults, increasing adult literacy,
especially for women, and achieving gender parity and equality.
Progress is being made toward the goal of universal primary
education. According to the United Nations, 88 percent of chil-
dren in developing countries are enrolled in school; however,
the common belief is that the goal will not be met by 2015 (United
Nations 2009). One reason for this failure is that getting education
out to remote rural areas is difﬁcult and costly. Also, in many
areas, education for girls is seen as unnecessary, and it places a
burden on parents who need their daughters to assist with youn-
ger children, household work, and income-generating activities.
In other, often rural, communities, parents do not believe that
girls need to be educated; many girls will be married by the time
they enter puberty or soon after, and the cost of educating them
is seen as a waste of limited ﬁnancial resources. Members of some
communities are hostile to the idea of girls going to school; for
example, in Kunduz province in Afghanistan in April 2010, over
80 girls in three schools became ill, and authorities believe this
may have been the result of the actions of local militants who do
not believe that girls should be educated (CNN.com/Asia 2010).
Earlier, in 2009, several young women in Afghanistan were
attacked with acid while in school (Abawi 2009).
While most governments believe that education is important,
the ﬁnancial resources to support education may not be available.
The ongoing ﬁnancial crisis that began in 2007–2008 in the United
States and spread to many countries around the world has exacer-
bated the problems many governments are facing in their attempts
to fund the building or expansion of schools and the hiring of
teachers. The global recession has created an added economic
burden that has led many families to choose between sending their
children to school or keeping them home to help with necessary
38
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

domestic work and income-generating activities. If a family has to
limit the number of children they send to school, they are most
likely to choose to send their sons, and keep their daughters home.
In order to reduce illiteracy and encourage parents to send
their daughters to school, education must be viewed as a basic
right for all individuals. This approach is necessary for the elimina-
tion of gender-based discrimination in schools and in educational
policies. Many policy makers and researchers believe that it is the
most effective means for addressing the many deep-seated and
widely held cultural values and norms that prevent women from
having access to educational opportunities. Several successful
programs, such as Campaign for Female Education (CAMFED),
work with community leaders and other community members to
teach the importance of educating the girls in their communities.
Since 1993, CAMFED has educated over one million children in
Ghana, Malawi, Tanzania, Zambia, and Zimbabwe (see Chapter 7).
The quality of education must also be improved. Most of the
recent efforts regarding universal primary education have been
focused on helping children get into school. Efforts must shift to
improving the quality of the education that students receive.
Many students leave school without the skills necessary to be
productive, successful adults. There is little point in providing
students with the opportunity for an education without helping
them to succeed in life. Improvements must be made to school
curricula to make them comprehensive and useful, learning mate-
rials including books and other resources must be available to all
students, and teachers must be trained to constructively interact
with students to encourage learning and to understand the need
to remove gender bias from the curriculum.
Schools must be made safe for all students, but especially
girls, which can be accomplished through stronger school infra-
structure, teacher training, improved working conditions for
teachers and staff, training and hiring of female teachers, devel-
opment of codes of conduct for students and teachers and
enforcement provisions for them, and effective discipline for
those who violate the code of conduct.
Statistical data from developing countries should also be
improved to more accurately measure successes as well as identify
failures so they can be corrected. Current statistics are often unreli-
able; inconsistent methods of gathering data, differing interpreta-
tions of data collected, difﬁculties getting to rural and other
remote areas of a country, and other factors contribute to this
Problems
39

unreliability. Consistent measures of school enrollment and atten-
dance must be established in order to determine the true picture
of how many girls are actually in school. For example, there is a
big difference between being enrolled in school and actually
attending school; parents may enroll their daughters, but then hold
them out because they are needed at home or for cultural or reli-
gious reasons.
It is often more difﬁcult to educate women as adults. By the
time girls become young adults, most of them have family respon-
sibilities, which can include child care, growing food for the family,
income-generating activities, and other household duties. Several
programs that provide loans to women to start their own busi-
nesses also provide basic literacy training, including ﬁnancial and
other business-related classes. Microﬁnance programs such as the
Grameen Bank have extensive training programs to provide basic
literacy education for the recipients of its loans along with business
courses to aid recipients in developing and maintaining their small
businesses.
Finally, if education is viewed by parents as preparing chil-
dren for the working world, to earn income to support a family,
then many families will not understand the value of educating
their daughters. If, on the other hand, education is seen as contrib-
uting to the health and welfare of society in general, the obvious
beneﬁts to educating women are enormous. An educated woman
is more likely to understand the importance of medical care and
immunizations for her children and the dangers of HIV/AIDS to
herself and her family, and will have the ability to contribute to
her local community and the larger society.
Marriage and Family
The family environment is central to a woman’s life, especially in
developing countries, and it has been a focus of study and con-
cern for many researchers, policy makers, and NGOs. The posi-
tion and role that a woman plays in the family, preferences for
male children, arranged marriages, dowry, domestic violence,
and selling female children into prostitution are some of the criti-
cal issues facing women today.
Preference for Male Children
Male children are preferred in many countries, even in the
Global North. Male children are valued for a variety of cultural,
40
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

religious, social, and economic reasons, while female children are
seen as a burden—they will cost the family money to raise them
and to pay for their marriages, whether through the cost of a wed-
ding to be paid for by the girl’s parents or the provision of dowry
to the family of the groom. Even in the United States and other
developed countries, the birth of a girl is not always greeted with
as great a joy as when the child is a boy.
As a result of the widespread belief that female children are a
burden on their families and on society, families, for a variety of
cultural and economic reasons, may choose to abort a female fetus,
or murder a female child either passively through the denial of
food and other necessities of survival or actively through the
murder of the child. In rural areas of many developing countries,
limited access to education, health care, and economic resources
for families and lack of access to abortion may lead to female infan-
ticide. In urban areas, sex-selective abortions are often the choice of
families who have access to ultrasound technology and do not
want to give birth to a female child.
Female infanticide is still a major concern in several develop-
ing countries. India and China are the most well-known countries
that may tacitly allow the intentional killing of female infants,
and China’s one-child policy has led to numerous abortions of
female fetuses and female infanticide. Along with sex-selective
abortions, female infanticide demonstrates the low status of
women in and the patriarchal nature of these countries. While
China has enacted legislation that bans female infanticide, the
practice continues in many areas. India has also banned infanti-
cide, but it is currently practiced in many parts of the country and
the perpetrators are rarely if ever prosecuted. India’s child sex ratio
according to the 2001 census was 927 girls to 1,000 boys (John et al.
2008). Local traditions and customary laws are the guiding
standard for many local communities, while national laws, even
if known and understood by the local community, are often not
followed. According to Sen (2001), the number of girls “missing”
through sex-selective abortion or infanticide may range from
between sixty and one hundred million.
Several ways to combat the preference for males in many
countries have been suggested. First, laws that provide girls and
women with equal rights should be universal. Public education
campaigns should be undertaken to educate individuals and com-
munities about the valuable contributions girls and women make
to society, and the importance of equal rights for all. Countries
Problems
41

should pass laws, if they have not already done so, outlawing
infanticide and sex-selective abortion. In countries with one-child
only policies, exceptions should be made if the ﬁrst child is female.
Finally, communities might consider incorporating preferential
policies for families that have no sons, such as guarantees for social
security for the parents (Bannister 2003).
Child Marriage
Child marriage is also a major issue in many developing coun-
tries, even though it is considered a violation of human rights.
This practice is most often found in sub-Saharan Africa and South
Asia. According to UNICEF (2005), over 64 million women
between the ages of 20 and 24 were married before they were
18 years old and approximately 14 million girls between the ages
of 15 and 19 gave birth each year.
Why are so many children, primarily girls, married when
they are still children? The parents of many of these children con-
sent to the marriage of their daughters to adult males for ﬁnancial
or social reasons. They believe their daughters will be protected by
the adult husbands, will be provided with a means of support, will
relieve the parents of having to support children who are viewed
as burdens to them, will be protected from sexual assault, or will
be protected from pregnancy outside of marriage. The adult
husbands may value these young brides because they are virgins
and therefore less likely to have been exposed to HIV/AIDS or
other sexually transmitted diseases. Young brides will have a
potentially longer life to produce more children and will be
expected to be more obedient to their husbands’ wishes because
they are younger and have not yet been exposed to an education
in which they are taught to think critically or understand their
rights.
While the Universal Declaration of Human Rights includes
the right to “free and full” consent to a marriage, a child who is
promised in marriage by her parents does not have that right.
The Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination
against Women includes the right to protection from child
marriage (Article 16), and the Convention on the Rights of the
Child indirectly links child marriage with other rights, such as the
right to be protected from harmful traditional practices and
the right to protection from all forms of abuse. In many countries,
however, these conventions are not supported by statutory or
customary law.
42
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

Over the past several years, statistics indicate that the median
age at marriage is rising around the world, including in develop-
ing countries (UNICEF 2005b). Several authors suggest that this
increase is due to the growing number of girls attending school
and the growing labor force participation by women (Mathur,
Greene, and Malhotra 2003; UNICEF 2005b).
Women who marry when they are still children are exposed to
a variety of reproductive health issues, especially if they become
pregnant while still very young. They and their babies are more
likely to die from complications during pregnancy or during child-
birth. A young girl’s body is not mature enough to sustain the rig-
ors of pregnancy and childbirth, and her child is more likely to be
born prematurely and have a low birth weight (Save the Children
2004). Early marriage often eliminates the opportunity to attend
school, to gain an education or vocational training, and to ﬁnd
rewarding employment. Girls who are married young are more
likely to become socially isolated because they have not had an
opportunity to develop friendships with other women. They are
also more likely to contract HIV than unmarried young girls
(Clark, Bruce, and Dude 2006).
In a study by UNICEF (2005b), researchers found that women
who were married by the age of 18 were more likely to be from
rural areas and from poor families and were unlikely to have had
any education or to have had only limited education. In many of
the countries studied, women who were already married by age
18 were less likely to use contraception than women who were
married when they were over 18. One explanation for this statistic
is that men may choose young girls to marry in order to have a
longer period of childbearing, resulting in the birth of a larger
number of children for their young wives than for those women
who marry later in life.
Effective means to eliminate the practice of child marriage
include providing girls with access to education, alleviating pov-
erty and other social problems that create pressure for parents to
arrange marriages for their young daughters, developing public
awareness programs to educate families on the negative effects
of early marriage, and advocating for the passage of legislation
to prohibit the practice. However, providing ﬁnancial incentives
may be one of the most effective means to help lift a family out
of poverty and eliminate the major reason for a family to arrange
for a child marriage. Microﬁnance programs that help women
support themselves and their families have been successful in
Problems
43

lifting participants out of poverty. Other programs have been
developed that have shown some success; for example, the
government of Bangladesh instituted a program that encouraged
the secondary school enrollment of girls by offering parents com-
pensation for the loss of their daughter’s labor and covering the
cost of school fees and books if the parents signed an agreement
to refrain from arranging a marriage for their daughters before
they turned 18 (Amin and Huq 2008).
Domestic Violence
Violence against women and girls takes place throughout the
world, cutting across cultures, class, education, income, race,
and ethnicity. Domestic violence is probably the most common
and also the most difﬁcult to measure and to address because of
its private, hidden nature, but some studies estimate that between
10 and 50 percent of women in every country have experienced
physical, including sexual, violence from a husband or family
member (WHO 2005).
The reasons for and causes of domestic violence are complex
and often difﬁcult to measure, but they all stem from gender
inequality and unequal power relations between men and women.
Cultural reasons include deﬁnitions of appropriate sex roles; belief
in male superiority; marriage customs, including dowry; belief
that what happens behind closed doors in the family setting is a
private matter between family members; and norms that allow
men proprietary rights over women. Other reasons include the
legal view that women have less status than men, statutory and
customary laws that support men’s superiority over women, lim-
ited understanding by women of their legal rights, and less legal
standing of women in court systems. Economic factors include
women’s limited access to credit, employment opportunities, and
education and training; laws that discriminate against women in
land ownership and property rights; and women’s general ﬁnan-
cial dependence on men for care and support (UNICEF Innocenti
Research Centre 2000).
The physical costs to women are enormous. In addition to
broken bones, the acquisition of sexually transmitted diseases
including HIV/AIDS, gynecological problems, and internal inju-
ries, women also suffer from other physical ailments as a result
of the stress associated with living with recurring abuse, includ-
ing headaches, ulcers, and high blood pressure that, when left
untreated, can lead to strokes and heart attacks. Psychologically,
44
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

women can suffer from low self-esteem, depression, anxiety, and
the constant fear of another attack.
One of most serious acts of violence is referred to as “femicide,”
deﬁned by Diane Russell as the murder of women simply because
they are women (Russell 1990). Femicide can result from domestic
violence, rape, actions to protect the family honor, dowry practices,
or female infanticide. Measuring the extent of femicide is difﬁcult;
data collection is often unreliable and many family members and
jurisdictions hide the occurrences by deﬁning these deaths in some
other way. For example a husband might be angry with his wife so
he sets her on ﬁre while she is in the kitchen; he subsequently claims
that it was a tragic kitchen ﬁre. Studies conducted in Australia,
Bangladesh, Canada, Kenya, Thailand, and the United States have
documented incidents of femicide as a result of domestic violence
(United Nations 1996).
In order to eliminate domestic and other violence against
women, the power relationships between men and women must
change, and women must have equal rights. Health care clinics
and personnel must be available to all women, especially in rural
areas of developing countries, to recognize and treat injuries from
acts of domestic violence. The education system must begin to
teach children at an early age about human rights and the proper
relationships between men and women.
Public awareness campaigns must provide information
regarding treatment for victims of domestic violence as well as
legal enforcement of statutes and international conventions. Men
can participate in public awareness campaigns, teaching other
men that violence is not acceptable. Governments must outlaw all
forms of domestic and other violence and support those laws with
sufﬁcient law enforcement ofﬁcers who are required to uphold the
law no matter what cultural norms and customary laws suggest.
Problems with the reliability of data hamper researchers’ ability
to gather and interpret data regarding violence against females
and better data collection and tracking systems must be adopted
to accurately measure the incidence and prevalence of domestic
violence acts.
Dowry
Dowry is deﬁned as the ﬁnancial and material goods that a
bride’s family provides to the groom’s family as payment for the
marriage of their daughter into the groom’s family. Despite the
passage of the Dowry Prohibition Act in India in 1961, which
Problems
45

banned the payment of a dowry, and a later amendment in 1983,
which prohibited dowry deaths, dowry demands and dowry
murders persist in India.
Families of both brides and grooms continue to believe in and
practice dowry for a variety of reasons. Because male children are
valued over female children, the bride’s family may believe that
the cost of the dowry is worth moving her out of the family so that
she is no longer their responsibility. In India’s strong patriarchal
society in which men traditionally control all aspects of women’s
lives, female children are generally considered a burden rather
than an asset. They are seen as unable to provide income to their
birth family or support their parents, and, if unmarried and living
at home as young adults, they may bring shame to their family, as
outsiders may view them as women who are unwanted or of no
value to any man. For the groom’s family, demanding and receiv-
ing dowry provides them with ﬁnancial beneﬁt along with any
additional value the bride may provide to the groom’s family. It
indicates to the family that the groom is a worthy husband, and
provides compensation to the groom’s family in the event that
the wife is an “economic liability” in their view, that is, if she does
not bring value to the family by bearing sons or providing income
to the family. If the groom’s family chooses to provide the bride
with only limited amounts of food and other necessities, they gain
additional ﬁnancial beneﬁt by minimizing their expenses.
In India, the Dowry Prohibition Act of 1961 prohibited the
request, payment, or acceptance of any sum presented as a require-
ment for marriage. The penalty for demanding dowry is up to two
years in prison and a 10,000 rupee ﬁne. If a person is caught and
convicted of advertising that a dowry must be provided, he or she
could be imprisoned for between six months and ﬁve years and
also be liable for a 15,000 rupee ﬁne. In 1983, authorities amended
the Act to include additional protection for women; a husband or
the relative of a husband could receive a punishment of up to three
years in prison and a ﬁne if convicted of subjecting the wife to cru-
elty, such as any action likely to seriously injure her or drive her to
suicide. In 1986, the Indian Penal Code was amended to provide a
penalty for causing the death of a woman within the ﬁrst seven
years of her marriage if it can be demonstrated that she had been
subjected to cruelty during the marriage.
Despite these and other laws designed to protect women from
domestic violence and murder, many families of brides continue to
pay dowry to their husbands and their families. In a country
46
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

steeped in tradition, these practices are difﬁcult to overcome, espe-
cially in rural areas of the country. Many families are not aware of
the law and of the recourse available to wives and their families
of origin. There are few incentives for the bride’s family to report
dowry requests or dowry murders to the authorities because
cultural traditions or customary laws condone these practices. In
many cases, the authorities are aware of what is going on but have
little reason to intervene.
Demands for dowry may continue during the marriage in
order to enhance the husband’s social status or simply to gain
additional material goods. The husband or his family may need
additional funds, goods, or property, and ask the wife’s family
to provide these items. The wife’s safety may be threatened if
her family does not comply or the husband or his family may
threaten to return her if her family does not pay.
Health Care
Problems women face regarding health care generally relate to
reproductive health issues, including access to contraceptives
and abortion, high rates of maternal mortality, prevention and
treatment of sexually transmitted diseases including HIV/AIDS,
and health care during pregnancy and childbirth. This section
examines issues surrounding the provision or lack of availability
of health care to women and consequences that result when
women are denied access to basic health care. The issue of abor-
tion is examined in the following section on controversies.
Two major factors impact the availability of health care to
women in developing countries: the availability of health care
workers and facilities and the cultural norms that may not allow
women to have control over their lives or their health care deci-
sions. The shortage of health care workers, including doctors,
nurses, and midwives, according to the World Health Organiza-
tion, covers all areas except Europe, and the shortfall is approxi-
mately 4.3 million skilled medical personnel. A survey conducted
by WHO estimates that Africa has over 24 percent of the world’s
disease but only 3 percent of its health care workers, while North
America, the Caribbean, and Latin America account for only
10 percent of the global disease but have 37 percent of the world’s
health care workers (WHO 2006).
Health care workers frequently prefer to work in urban areas
because of the availability of higher income, better equipment
Problems
47

and facilities, better living conditions, and the active social life
present in urban areas. Women—and men—living in rural areas
often do not have access to health care because of a lack of local
facilities or the limited stafﬁng of those facilities, lack of transpor-
tation to reach existing facilities, lack of income to pay for the
services provided, and other poverty-related reasons.
Cultural and religious practices also inﬂuence the ability of a
woman to seek out health care. Some religious and cultural tradi-
tions dictate that a woman cannot be examined by a male physician
or is only allowed to go to the doctor when accompanied by her
husband or other male relative. In patriarchal cultures the woman
may have no power to decide on her own whether to seek medical
or other care, and may not have access to ﬁnancial resources to pay
for that care.
Family Planning
According to various estimates, approximately 67,000 women die
each year as a result of unsafe abortions, and 97 percent of these
women are living in developing countries (Sedge et al. 2007).
Many of the rest of the 20 million women who have had unsafe
abortions are faced with the resulting health issues caused by
these unsafe procedures. If family planning services were more
widely available, many women would have other options beside
an unsafe and illegal abortion.
Family planning services provide one of the most cost-effective
means to improve the health of women in developing countries; in
areas where family planning services are available and utilized,
rates of maternal and child mortality and transmission of HIV/
AIDS between mother and child are lowered and women are more
likely to actively participate in their health and pregnancy deci-
sions. Yet family planning information and services are unavailable
to many women, especially in developing countries. What factors
limit women’s access to these services?
First, women have to be allowed to learn about and use family
planning services if they are available. Young girls in many cul-
tures are not taught about their bodies, especially their reproduc-
tive systems, because cultural traditions valuing modesty and
virginity deny them this knowledge (Murray 2008). Many women
do not have the ability to control their reproductive choices
because they live in cultures in which their husbands make all the
decisions about sexual relations, pregnancy, and family respon-
sibilities. When women are provided with knowledge concerning
48
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

family planning, have these services available, and are able to use
contraceptives, their chances for living a healthy life are greatly
improved.
Second, the many barriers to accessing family planning serv-
ices must be removed. In addition to limited knowledge about the
use and value of contraceptives and cultural and religious beliefs
that are contrary to any type of family planning, the ability to
travel to health care facilities must be improved. Many develop-
ing countries lack the infrastructure to make travel to these facili-
ties simple and inexpensive. Even if a woman has control over the
decision to use contraceptives, if she does not have control over
the family’s resources she will be less likely to be able to travel
to a health care facility.
Maternal Mortality
Pregnancy and childbirth are dangerous periods for a woman in a
developing country. Although maternal mortality has received
increased attention throughout the world and many efforts have
been made to lessen the danger to women, pregnancy and child-
birth remain one of the most dangerous threats to a woman’s
health and life, and to the health and life of her child. According
to a UNICEF report on maternal and child mortality, approxi-
mately 1,500 women die each day as a result of complications
from pregnancy and childbirth (UNICEF 2008a).
Millennium Development Goal No. 5 is to improve maternal
health and to reduce the 1990 maternal mortality rate by 75 per-
cent by 2015 and to achieve universal access to reproductive
health care by 2015. In 1990, the maternal mortality rate for all
developing regions was 480 per 100,000 live births. In 2005, the
rate was 450 maternal deaths for every 100,000 live births. Based
on current trends, this goal will not be met.
As in other areas of concern regarding the status and condi-
tions of women in developing countries, statistics on maternal
mortality are inconsistent, often unreliable, and difﬁcult to gather.
Since 1990, the World Health Organization, UNICEF, and the UN
Population Fund (UNFPA) have cooperated in pooling resources
to determine a more accurate estimate of maternal mortality
around the world. In 2006, these organizations were joined by
the World Bank. Other researchers have also been working on
data collection techniques to create better, more accurate esti-
mates. Even the statistics for developed countries are not reliable
or consistently measured.
Problems
49

Maternal mortality rates that are provided vary from region
to region, suggesting that some regions of the world are more
successful than others in reducing mortality. South Asia reduced
its rate from 650 to 500 maternal deaths per 100,000 live births,
East Asia and the Paciﬁc reduced their rate from 220 to 150, and
Latin America and the Caribbean reduced their rate from 180 to
120 maternal deaths per 100,000 live births. The area having the
most difﬁculty in reducing maternal mortality is sub-Saharan
Africa; the rate in West and Central African countries stayed the
same between 1990 and 2005 (1,100 maternal deaths for every
100,000 live births), while Eastern and Southern African countries
were able to reduce their rates slightly, from 790 to 760 maternal
deaths per every 100,000 live births (WHO, UNICEF, UNFPA,
and World Bank 2007).
Most maternal deaths occur between the third trimester and
the ﬁrst week after giving birth. Several conditions can cause
death at this stage, including infections, eclampsia, post-partum
hemorrhage, and problematic or prolonged labor. Complications
from an abortion can also contribute to the death of a woman.
These conditions are exacerbated by the lack of skilled health care
personnel and equipment in many developing countries. Other
factors may contribute indirectly to the woman’s death, including
anemia, iodine deﬁciency, malaria, diabetes, and HIV/AIDS
(UNICEF 2008a).
Other factors also play a role in contributing to maternal
mortality. Prenatal care is accessed by fewer than half of all preg-
nant women in South Asia and sub-Saharan Africa (United Nations
2009). Limited access to health care personnel and facilities is a real-
ity for many women in developing countries, especially in rural
areas. Without trained health personnel to monitor their pregnan-
cies and provide guidance regarding proper nutrition and other
important pregnancy-related health issues, women may encounter
a variety of problems. Many women may not have access to healthy
food to provide proper nutrition. Without any education or knowl-
edge about their bodies, women may be unaware of the problems
that can arise during a pregnancy or are unaware of ways to rem-
edy these problems. Poverty and gender discrimination also are
factors limiting women’s access health care facilities and services.
Several suggestions have been made regarding ways to
improve the chances of survival for pregnant women in develop-
ing countries. A crucial one regards providing access to family
50
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

planning so that women and their husbands can make conscious
decisions regarding children; women must have a choice when it
comes to becoming pregnant. Easily accessible prenatal care
including general health guidance as well as information speciﬁc
to pregnancy is critical because having medical personnel avail-
able to guide and monitor a pregnancy can make a huge difference
in whether a woman survives her pregnancy and delivers a
healthy baby. Provision of other medical and health-related serv-
ices such as immunizations, nutritional counseling and vitamins,
and insecticide-treated mosquito netting to protect against malaria
will also help to keep the expectant mother healthy. Emergency
obstetric care should be available within a reasonable distance in
case women experience serious symptoms. The presence of a
skilled medical professional, a doctor, nurse, or midwife at the
time of delivery offers women a safety net in case an unexpected
problem arises. Finally, postnatal visits to ensure that women
understand how to care for their children and to answer any
health questions they have about themselves and what they are
experiencing will give many women conﬁdence.
There are also nonmedical suggestions for improving mater-
nal survival. Women and their families need access to water and
sanitation to keep them healthy. Providing girls with access to edu-
cation can empower them to understand their bodies and take
charge of their health, along with many other beneﬁts. Training in
life skills and what to expect during their pregnancies will provide
women with the knowledge to understand their experiences and
the ability to cope when situations arise in which they need to seek
medical help.
The experience of Sri Lanka has been studied by many NGOs
and foreign governments because of that country’s success in
reducing maternal mortality, among other improvements the
government was able to make in the lives of its citizens. During
the early 20th century the Sri Lankan government focused on
offering universal and improved health care to its citizens, and
then added speciﬁc provisions to improve the lives of women
and children. Between 1947 and 1950, the rate of maternal mortal-
ity was reduced by half. Maternal mortality was cut in half again
thirteen years later, and continued to be halved every 6 to 11 years.
Overall, Sri Lanka’s maternal mortality rate dropped from 340 to
43 per 100,000 live births between 1960 and 2005 (Padmanathan
et al. 2003; UNICEF 2008b).
Problems
51

Prostitution and Sex Trafficking
Prostitution and sex trafﬁcking continue to be major issues
concerning women in developing countries. The total number of
people trafﬁcked (men and women, for sex and other reasons) is
estimated at 12.3 million (U.S. Department of State 2010); the num-
ber of female sex trafﬁcking victims is estimated by the United
Nations to be between two and four million every year. Sex traf-
ﬁcking is deﬁned as “a commercial sex act [that] is induced by
force, fraud, or coercion or in which the person induced to perform
such an act has not attained 18 years of age” (U.S. Department of
State 2010). While some women may voluntarily become involved
in prostitution, the majority are coerced into this activity.
Locating and protecting victims of all forms of trafﬁcking,
including sex trafﬁcking, is difﬁcult. When they arrive in their desti-
nation country, they are often unable to speak the language, do not
understand cultural practices, and are not aware of organizations
that might be able to assist them. They are often captives of their
trafﬁckers, not allowed out or given opportunities to escape. If they
were tricked into believing that they were traveling to a new coun-
try with the promise of paid employment, they may be embarrassed
and reluctant to admit to anyone that they have been victimized.
Large organized crime syndicates are involved in many traf-
ﬁcking operations. They use many tactics to prevent victims from
leaving, including debt-bondage, violence or threat of violence,
food and sleep deprivation, threats of rape, or threats of deporta-
tion. When victims have entered a country illegally, they are less
likely to be able or willing to go to the authorities for protection.
In fact, trafﬁckers may threaten victims with reporting them to
the local authorities if they do not adhere to the trafﬁckers’
demands (Program for Appropriate Technology in Health 2002).
Many laws have been enacted to prevent all forms of trafﬁck-
ing, including the Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish Traf-
ﬁcking in Persons, Especially Women and Children (the Palermo
Protocol), which supplements the UN Convention against Trans-
national Organized Crime. This protocol focused the world’s atten-
tion on the problems and extent of human trafﬁcking and helped
nations begin to work together to combat all forms of trafﬁcking.
Most countries have also enacted laws to criminalize trafﬁcking
within their borders. In order to effectively combat all forms of traf-
ﬁcking, these laws must be enforced and programs developed to
assist trafﬁcking victims.
52
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

HIV/AIDS and Other Sexually Transmitted
Diseases
Throughout the world, HIV/AIDS is one of the primary causes of
death and disease among women in their reproductive years
(UNICEF 2009). Sub-Saharan African women have been particu-
larly hard hit; girls between the ages of 15 and 24 are three times
more likely than boys their age to be infected with HIV (UNAIDS
2004). Why are women more likely to be infected with HIV/AIDS
than men and what can be done to protect them?
A variety of biological and cultural/social factors play a role
in women’s increased vulnerability. Physiologically, during vagi-
nal intercourse, a woman has a greater amount of soft tissue that
can be exposed to the virus. If a woman has unprotected sexual
intercourse with her husband or other male partner, she is at
increased risk; condoms may not be available to her, her husband
may not want to use a condom, or she may not be able to refuse
sexual intercourse.
The highest rates of HIV/AIDS are generally found in coun-
tries and cultures that experience the highest gender inequality,
where women are subordinate to men and are generally unable
to control the incidence of sexual intercourse with husbands or
partners. In fact, in many of these cultures men are encouraged,
or at a minimum not discouraged, from having sexual relations
with women outside of their marriage. For example, over 90 per-
cent of the 1.7 million women living with HIV/AIDS in Asia were
infected by their husbands or partners while in long-term rela-
tionships (UNAIDS 2010).
Women, especially in many areas of developing countries,
may have other sexually transmitted infections (STI) that have
not been treated, either because doctors and health care facilities
are not locally available or because these infections have few
symptoms and women are unaware that they are infected
(Lamptey et al. 2006). STIs may lower a woman’s ability to ﬁght
off additional infections such as HIV/AIDS.
Women and girls can also be infected as a result of forced sex-
ual encounters. The incidence of sexual assault on girls in school
is increasing; one reason why girls leave school without complet-
ing their educations is because of sexual assaults on them, espe-
cially by teachers. One study conducted in South Africa
determined that teachers perpetrated 33 percent of the sexual
assaults on girls under the age of 15 (Jewkes et al. 2002).
Problems
53

Girls who are married while still in their teens are more likely
to become infected with STIs, including HIV/AIDS. They are likely
to have unprotected sexual intercourse with their husbands, who
in many cases have more sexual experience than they do, which
increases their chances of becoming infected. Older men who
marry young girls are likely to be the patriarchs of the family and
their wives are not in a position to insist on the use of condoms.
Treatment of HIV/AIDS may be difﬁcult to ﬁnd and too
expensive to use. Cultural prohibitions against women going to
male physicians may hinder a woman’s ability to receive treat-
ment. Prevention is also difﬁcult in many areas of the world. Aside
from the physical options to prevent HIV/AIDS, such as the use of
condoms and refusal to have sexual relations with someone who
insists on not using protection, there are also societal causes that
need to be addressed. Governments and NGOs must continue
their promotion of gender equality in all areas and must increase
women’s economic independence and encourage legal reforms
regarding discrimination against people living with HIV/AIDS,
as well as upholding the principle of human rights for all.
Women and Work
Women’s contribution to the economy in developing countries is
undervalued because their domestic work, including agricultural
work growing crops to feed their families, is not viewed as income-
generating work. In some cases, when women ﬁnd employment
working for someone else they provide income to their families,
but they may also suffer from hazardous working conditions, espe-
cially in developing countries. The growth of microcredit programs
has helped many women to support themselves and their families
through the creation of income-generating self-employment
opportunities.
According to the ILO (2009), three billion people were
employed throughout the world in 2008 and 40 percent of them
were women. Worldwide, 17 percent of women are employed in
industry, 40 percent in services, and 43 percent in agriculture.
Within sub-Saharan Africa, 71 percent are in agriculture, 23 percent
in the service industry, and only 6 percent in industry.
Ability to Work Outside the Home
For many women in developing countries, working outside the
home is not an option. In some cases, they spend most of their time
54
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

on household tasks, such as child care, cooking, crop farming
(growing food for the family’s consumption), and in rural areas,
gathering water and fuel for cooking. In other cases, women are
not allowed to work outside the home for religious or cultural
reasons; their husbands may forbid them to do so, or may allow
them to work only in speciﬁc areas or for a limited amount of time.
Again, in rural areas, there may be a limited amount of income-
producing jobs.
When examining women’s opportunities for employment
outside the home in the paid employment sector, we must account
for differences in urban and rural areas. Urban areas offer many
more job opportunities for women, while in rural areas, income-
producing jobs may be scarce and the competition for them ﬁerce.
In rural areas, women often spend more time on fulﬁlling their
families’ basic needs, including gathering fuel for cooking, gather-
ing water, caring for children, cooking, and other basic tasks. Even
if jobs are available, many women may not have the time or energy
to work outside the home.
According to the ILO (2002), the majority of new employment
opportunities have occurred in the informal sector of the economy.
These jobs are the most insecure and lowest paying, usually with-
out beneﬁts and without protection through government legisla-
tion, labor agreements, or other types of agreements or legislation.
Informal sector jobs are generally jobs that are “under the radar”
in terms of what are considered primary income-producing work
and include domestic labor or piece-rate work, such as making a
set number of items for a set price (Chant and Pedwell 2008; Carr
and Chen 2002). According to one study, the average number of
jobs for all nonagricultural employment in developing econo-
mies/countries in the informal sector is 24 percent, with rates of
70 percent in sub-Saharan Africa and 47 percent in the Middle East
and North Africa (Charmes 2009). In developing countries, women
account for 60 percent of all workers in the informal sector (Chen et
al. 2005). Poor women who work in the informal sector are exposed
to health and safety risks, dangerous working conditions, sexual
and other types of violence, lack of infrastructure, unequal pay,
and other potentially harmful conditions (Chant and Pedwell
2008). Women who work in the informal sector often have no alter-
native in terms of ﬁnding work and therefore employers are able to
take advantage of them, not only paying them exploitative wages
but also endangering their lives through poor working conditions
and violence (United Nations 2009b).
Problems
55

Gender Gap in Pay and Positions
Women overall are paid 16 percent less than men for the same
work, and the gap would be larger if salary information from the
informal sector were available and included in these statistics
(International Trade Union Confederation 2008). The percentage
varies from country to country, but the evidence clearly demon-
strates that women are discriminated against solely because they
are women when it comes to salary. Even educated women in
developed countries often do not fare better because of their
education.
Microenterprise
Microﬁnance has become in recent years a powerful tool for help-
ing poor individuals, primarily in developing countries, gain
access to capital in order to create income-generating projects.
Loans ranging from $25 to $100 in some of the poorest regions of
the world have changed lives by giving their recipients the oppor-
tunity to lift themselves out of poverty and create proﬁtable self-
employment opportunities. Many of the programs that have been
set up to provide these loans also provide education and training
to their recipients, including training on setting up a small busi-
ness, basic ﬁnancial information, marketing techniques, and other
related training.
But how successful are these programs? They tout individual
successes in their public relations materials but only a few rigorous
studies have been conducted to measure their success rate and the
results are mixed. When a poor family is attempting to start a small
business from their home other factors can come into play and in-
ﬂuence the success or failure of the program. For families living
in poverty, a microloan to start a business can bring income to the
family and provide the basic necessities. However, if a serious
illness strikes the loan recipient or another member of the family,
any economic gains the family realized could be gone.
Several programs have been established that play a large role
in providing microloans to individuals. The Grameen Bank pro-
vides services to poor landless women in Bangladesh. More than
two-thirds of all villages in Bangladesh are covered by this bank,
which provides banking and other ﬁnancial services as well as
skills development. Formed by the Self-Employed Women’s
Association of India, the SEWA Cooperative Bank has one main
ofﬁce and mobile credit ofﬁcers. The bank works with rural credit
groups and provides individual loans and group lending to rural
56
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

associations. The Banco Solidario in Ecuador is a commercial
bank that offers a variety of services, ﬁnancial as well as nonﬁnan-
cial, to clients. Programs are continually being established to offer
a wide range of microloans, literacy training, and business devel-
opment help.
Women’s World Banking (WWB) is a global network of over
50 institutions that provides credit, savings, and business services
to women. The network offers technical assistance and the local
afﬁliates provide direct ﬁnancial services to their clients. FINCA
International is another afﬁliate network of nongovernmental
organizations in Latin America, the Caribbean, and Africa. Afﬁli-
ates provide credit through village banks; the main ofﬁces provide
loan capital and technical assistance. The World Council of Credit
Unions, located in Washington, D.C., is a network of 17,000 credit
unions in 67 developing countries. Another afﬁliate network is
Friends of WWB/India, an NGO with a national network of grass-
roots NGOs that provide ﬁnancial services to poor rural women.
The organization offers technical assistance and loan support to
NGOs and organizes credit and savings groups.
Land Ownership and Property Rights
Women play a pivotal role in agricultural activities around the
world. They run farm activities as well as work on farms, but
often they have no rights to the land they farm. They often have
no access to credit to help support their agricultural activities.
Governments of several countries, such as Mali and Liberia, have
enacted legislative reforms to provide ownership rights to
women. But have changes to laws in these countries actually been
put into practice? Are women better off now than they were 10 or
20 years ago, before governments enacted laws giving them the
right the own land?
Women have an increased burden in the rural areas of many
developing countries; in addition to all their household duties,
many husbands have migrated to urban areas in search of jobs
and income to support their families, leaving their wives respon-
sible for working the land. In many areas, women are responsible
for growing food crops, that is, food to feed their families, while
men are more involved in the growing of cash crops, meaning
crops that will be sold to provide income for the family. In other
areas, women are heavily involved in both food and cash crops.
In many cases, this may be an important distinction when it
Problems
57

comes to providing women with the rights to land ownership,
because when women own the land and grow cash crops, they
are viewed as a business, thereby providing value to themselves,
their families, and their communities. They are empowered by
being able to decide what is grown, how much is grown, and are
able to set the price for their crops.
International laws provide for women’s rights to land and
other natural resources. For example, the Universal Declaration
of Human Rights states that women have the right to own property
(Articles 2 and 17) and the right to adequate food (Article 25). The
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination
against Women (CEDAW) gives women the right to own property
(Article 15), the right to “equal treatment in land and agrarian re-
form” (Article 14[2][g]), and the right to adequate living condi-
tions, which include water rights (Article 14[2][h]). The
International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights
provides women with the right to adequate food (Article 11).
In 1998 the Sub-Commission on the Promotion and Protection
of Human Rights of the United Nations passed Resolution 15,
which encouraged governments to repeal laws that discriminated
against women in the acquisition of land. This resolution declared
that such discrimination was a violation of human rights law. Prin-
ciple 20 of the Rio Declaration noted the critical role that women
play in the management and development of natural resources,
stating that their participation is critical to the success of sustain-
able development.
Various regions of the world have also adopted resolutions
and conventions to encourage individual countries to reform their
positions on women’s access to land and other natural resources.
For example, the Protocol on the Rights of Women in Africa encour-
ages a gender perspective in legislation enacted in all African coun-
tries including equal spousal rights with regard to property and the
rights of women to acquire property, to have access to land, to have
equal property rights upon divorce, and to have the right to inherit
land upon the death of a spouse or other family member. However,
while this Protocol and other African legal documents encourage
women’s equal rights when it comes to land and other natural
resources, other instruments do not provide women with these
same protections and do not discourage discrimination against
women. For example, the African Charter on Human and Peoples’
Rights guarantees the right to property without discrimination
(Articles 2 and 14); however, it does not speciﬁcally refer to equal
58
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

spousal rights in marriage and it promotes the protection of tradi-
tional African values in local communities (Articles 17[3] and 18[2]).
With this international encouragement of anti-discrimination
laws to provide land ownership rights to women, are women
better off today than they were before these types of laws were
enacted? While legislation has given women rights in many areas
of land and resource ownership and management, traditional prac-
tices have not always gone along with these changes.
In Africa, Asia, Latin America, and other developing regions,
customary or traditional law exists alongside statutory law. Statu-
tory laws have given women greater property rights regarding
land acquisition and ownership, management decisions, and
inheritance, but customary laws and practices have often made
these rights difﬁcult to enforce. For example, in Mali, statutory
law provides women with equal property rights; however, tradi-
tional and customary laws give men the edge in property matters.
In Tanzania, all property is owned by the government but statutory
law provides both men and women with the right to use and trans-
fer land. Implementation of the law is difﬁcult, however, in large
part because many women are unaware of it (U.S. Department of
State 2009).
In Central and South America, the American Convention on
Human Rights (ACHR), entered into force in 1978, provides the
right to use and enjoy property without discrimination based on
sex, as well as the equality of rights within marriage. However,
in practice, the vast majority of women do not own land in many
countries—for example, less than 25 percent own land in Brazil,
Mexico, Nicaragua, and Peru (Mason and Carlsson 2005). Some
women have started social movements within their countries to
ﬁght for property and land rights and have often been successful;
some of these movements include Moviemento dos Trabalha-
dores Sem Terra in Brazil, the Federacio´n Honduren˜a de Mujeres
Campesinas in Honduras, and the Asociacio´ n Nacional de
Mujeres Campesinas e Indigenas in Colombia (FAO undated).
Women’s legal rights to ownership of land in Central and
South America can also vary among and within countries. For
example, in Mexico civil laws vary from state to state, while in
Brazil civil laws are created at the national level and apply across
the country. But even though women may have rights through
international law and the statutes in their own country or state
within the country, community and local norms and customary
laws often dictate their reality. For example, studies reveal that
Problems
59

in rural areas in Mexico the eldest male son is usually the one who
inherits the land upon the passing of the father, while daughters
often inherit only if they do not receive any dowry at the time of
their marriage (Quintana et al. 1998).
In the Middle East and Northern Africa, the Arab Charter on
Human Rights recognizes every person’s right to own private
property without discrimination based on gender, but in practice
this provision is not enforced by the individual states. Most land
ownership and land succession practice is based on Shari’a law,
which generally discriminates against women in its focus on the
male as the unquestioned head of the family. The position of
women is somewhat better in countries such as Tunisia, which
has enacted laws that, while incorporating the Shari’a standards,
provide some relief to women. Women are allowed to control
their own property although succession rights are still given to
the male in the family (FAO undated).
In sub-Saharan Africa, the African Charter on Human and
People’s Rights guarantees the right to property without discrimi-
nation and directs individual African states to eliminate all dis-
crimination against women. In reality, however, few women hold
title to land in sub-Saharan Africa and when they do own land,
they usually own less land than men; this limited amount of land
ownership is based on legal factors as well as cultural factors and
customary laws.
Property rights and natural resources law vary widely across
Asian countries. For example, in Pakistan and Bangladesh, the
law is predominantly based on Shari’a law, while in Central Asian
countries such as Kyrgyz Republic and Uzbekistan land inherit-
ance goes to the head of the household, and in India, land succes-
sion largely depends on location and religious afﬁliation. In many
of these countries, statutory law is generally not enforced when it
comes to land ownership and succession; rather, customary and
religious laws and practices dictate the right of ownership and
succession.
Overall, property ownership and succession rights in devel-
oping countries do not often favor women. Customary and reli-
gious laws provide guidance over statutory laws. In order to
change laws and practices that discriminate against women
regarding land and property issues, women must become
involved in local, state, and national governments in order to inﬂu-
ence legislation. They need to have basic access to education in
order to become knowledgeable regarding land and natural
60
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

resources issues in their local communities and countries. Public
education activities should focus on educating men on the beneﬁts
of providing these rights to women, empowering them, for exam-
ple, to become more involved in every stage of crop production.
Local social movements such as those in Latin America may be
effective in turning public opinion in favor of women’s rights.
The statutory laws already enacted must be enforced, which will
require a change in perception of the customary and religious laws
and practices.
Information and Communications
Technologies
Information and communications technologies (ICTs) comprise a
variety of information, telecommunications, and network technolo-
gies. They are tools used to handle information, that is to produce,
store, process, distribute, and exchange information. Information
technologies involve computers, including hardware and software.
Telecommunications technologies include older tools, such as tele-
phones, radios, and television. Network technologies include the
Internet, mobile phones, satellite communications, VoIP (Voice over
Internet Protocol), and other developing broadband connectivities
(Association for Progressive Communications 2003).
The growth of ICTs has been enormous and rapid in recent
years. In the last two decades, the Internet and other ICTs have
changed the way many people receive and send information
and communicate with each other. Mobile phone technology
advances and the widespread availability of the Internet have
led to increasing numbers of users, and the number of people
using social networking sites has increased dramatically. The
effects of these technologies can be seen around the world.
At the UN World Conference on Women in Nairobi in 1985,
participants realized the importance of technology and its poten-
tial to assist women around the world; however, media representa-
tions of women had a history of not fulﬁlling that potential.
According to the Forward-looking Strategies for the Advancement
of Women (1985), “It is expected that the ever-expanding commu-
nications network will be better attuned than before to the
concerns of women and that planners in this ﬁeld will provide
increasing information on the objectives of the Decade – equality,
development and peace – on the Forward-looking Strategies, and
Problems
61

on the issues included in the sub-theme – employment, health and
education” (para. 30).
Participants at the Fourth UN World Conference on Women in
Beijing in 1995 also saw opportunities for women in the growing
technology industry. A review of the monitoring process set up in
Nairobi demonstrated that women’s concerns were not resolved;
while recognizing the potential for empowerment of women,
participants noted that the content, structure, and access to these
technologies were not reaching women. Largely as a result of these
concerns, the UN began to focus more attention on gender-
sensitive ICT policies and projects. It developed the WomenWatch
website in 1997 to provide a central source for gender-related
information and resources and to promote gender equality and
women’s empowerment.
By 2000 the WomenWatch website was getting approximately
10,000 hits per month. However, women’s participation in ICTs
was limited. According to a UN report, women “have been slow
to enter ICT-based professions worldwide and have been largely
excluded from designing and shaping information technologies. . . .
Traditionally, gender differences and disparities have been ignored
in policies and programmes dealing with the development and dis-
semination of improved technologies.” (UN 2001, 295) Women did
not beneﬁt from advances in ICTs and were actually found to be dis-
advantaged by them.
The United Nations held its ﬁrst World Summit on the Infor-
mation Society (WSIS) in 2003. Its goal was to develop a plan for
addressing issues raised by evolving ICTs in order to develop an
information society available to everyone for the sharing of infor-
mation. While the importance of gender equality in ICTs has been
emphasized in subsequent sessions held in 2009 and 2010, reports
continue to suggest that more attention should be given to those
individuals and organizations working in the areas of women’s
rights, women’s empowerment and gender equality in ICTs.
(WSIS 2010).
The term digital divide was coined to describe the wide gap in
access to ICTs between industrial nations and developing coun-
tries. Industrialized nations have made great advances in the
availability of many ICTs, while many developing countries are
struggling to make these technologies available to their citizens.
Traditional forms of ICTs, including television, radio, and tele-
phones are available in most urban areas of developing countries,
and somewhat less likely to be found in many rural areas. Newer
62
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

digital technologies are also found in many urban areas, but less
likely in rural areas of developing countries.
There is also a gender divide within the digital divide, in
which men are more likely than women to have access to and
use ICTs, even though these can be powerful tools in helping
women overcome poverty, empower them, and aid in business
development. Girls and women living in countries where they
have limited access to education also have limited access to ICTs.
Many developing countries have little infrastructure for ICTs
especially in rural areas or in poor urban areas where the majority
of women live. Accessibility to ICTs, especially computers and the
Internet, is limited for many women in developing countries
because of social and cultural norms that discourage or forbid
them from visiting cybercafe´s or other types of information
centers, where access to the Internet is available.
However, accessibility of ICTs to women in developing coun-
tries has expanded in recent years. NGOs are developing programs
to provide these resources to women. For example, the Grameen
Bank developed the ﬁrst cell phone network in Bangladesh,
Grameen Phones, and provided cell phones to women who are
able earn a living by selling phone airtime to local villagers. The
Asian Women’s Resource Exchange (AWORC), an Internet-based
network, encourages increased access to ICTs through the develop-
ment of partnerships and other cooperative approaches. The
International Institute for Communication and Development
(IICD), a nonproﬁt organization, uses ICTs to improve the lives of
individuals in developing countries. IICD partners with local
NGOs and other public and private agencies to provide modern
media, including cell phones and computers, for use in education,
health, agriculture and government activities. Many NGOs in
developing countries have their own websites to provide informa-
tion to interested individuals and organizations.
The increased accessibility and availability of ICTs have dem-
onstrated their power to improve the lives of many women and
men. Politically, this effect is especially clear in the civil unrest
seen in 2011 in many countries in North Africa and the Middle
East. News reports were ﬁlled with images of young people on
the streets communicating via cell phones, using Facebook, and
tweeting their friends. In response, some governments cut Inter-
net access to rein in protestors, but many individuals were able
to continue communicating through Facebook and other social
media tools. While women of all ages participated in these civil
Problems
63

resistance, including Gigi Ibrahim and Nawal El-Saadawi in
Egypt, it is unclear the impact that regime change will have on
women. But it is clear that ICTs are changing the way the world
communicates.
ICTs clearly have a role in creating social mobilization and
change and providing greater access to information throughout
the world. They have the ability to empower women, by provid-
ing educational and business opportunities, information, and
networking opportunities. Yet they are not available equally to
women and men in developing countries. Governments and
NGOs must develop policies and strategies for making ICTs
accessible to all, because men can continue their dominance and
control over women if they are allowed to use existing ICTs to
reinforce that dominance (Primo 2003). Policymakers must
include a gender perspective when developing ICT policies
(Buskens and Webb 2009). The use of ICTs in educational settings
must be expanded; they can be effective tools in improving the
relevance of education in today’s digital environment and the
quality of education.
Female Refugees and Victims of War
Another issue is the safety of women during periods of internal
strife within countries and in refugee camps. Even though
women do not normally instigate wars or other conﬂicts, they
are most often the victims; they face additional complications in
caring for their families, and they may be separated from family
members, displaced from their homes, and raped, tortured, or
even killed. In fact, they are often targeted for rape and murder
in order to humiliate their male family members and to demon-
strate that their enemies have total control. The majority of civil-
ians killed in wars and other conﬂicts are women and children
(Murray 2008).
Women and girls are often targeted for rape and other sexual
violence in these armed conﬂict situations. There are three major
reasons for this speciﬁc violence. Enemies use rape as a tactic to
terrorize women and their families into leaving certain territories.
Male family members of victims are humiliated, which serves to
break down social norms. When women and girls become preg-
nant and give birth to a child fathered by a racial or ethnic enemy,
the enemy views it as a means to start a new race by purging what
they consider the “inferior” race (Nikolic-Ristanovic 2000).
64
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

As women and their families ﬂee conﬂict they are exposed to
additional dangers. Finding a safe haven is difﬁcult, predators
prey on refugees as they are escaping the violence, and the basic
necessities of life are frequently unavailable or in short supply.
The Ofﬁce of the UN High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR)
is actively involved in protecting women and children in refugee
situations. They recognize that everyone is exposed to violence
during conﬂict and war but that women and girls are often
targeted because of their sex and their status in society. Sexual
violence, including “rape, forced impregnation, forced abortion,
trafﬁcking, sexual slavery, and the intentional spread of sexually
transmitted infections, including HIV/AIDS is one of the deﬁning
characteristics of contemporary armed conﬂict. Its primary targets
are women and girls” (UNHCR 2008, 7).
The UNHCR has developed a ﬁve-point action plan to help
refugee women gain empowerment in situations of internal dis-
placement. Women are to be included in decision-making in these
situations, a system of registration and documentation is to be pro-
vided, ways to combat sexual and gender violence are to be devel-
oped and implemented, women are to be participants in food
distribution, and sanitary materials are to be provided (UNHCR
2008). Women and girls are to be provided with equal access to
education, health care, and economic opportunities, and the
UNHCR is to develop and implement programs to help shift the
power relations between men and women, giving women and
girls equality.
As the primary international agency working to protect refu-
gees, the UNHCR examines the role that cultural traditions play
in the treatment of women and girls in refugee situations. Because
women and girls often have less access to education and less expo-
sure to social situations, spending the majority of their time work-
ing in domestic and agricultural activities, they are less likely to
seek out and interact fully with authorities and humanitarian
workers. Domestic violence is often hidden from humanitarian
workers, who must ﬁnd ways to detect violence and threats of vio-
lence and protect women and children. A coordinated approach
must be developed with partners, including other agencies and
NGOs, to provide protection to women (UNHCR 2008).
Women also play a role in ﬁghting wars and other internal con-
ﬂicts. In some countries women have played active roles in wars
and insurgency movements. More recently, they have participated
in terrorist attacks as suicide bombers, willingly or unwillingly
Problems
65

giving up their lives. In some cases they may be coerced into these
roles with the understanding that authorities would not normally
suspect a woman of being a terrorist and willing to kill innocent
people. In recent events in Tunisia, Jordan, Yemen, and Egypt, we
see women out in the streets protesting repressive regimes and
encouraging new governments.
Controversies
Providing all women with basic human rights creates major
controversy around the world, not just in developing countries.
Emotions run high in debates over many issues regarding wom-
en’s rights, including the right to have control over one’s body,
especially in the areas of abortion and female genital mutilation.
Protecting young girls from female genital mutilation (FGM), also
referred to as female genital cutting, is opposed by many tradition-
alists. Saving a family’s honor by murdering a wife, mother, or
daughter who has brought shame to the family is still tradition in
many developing countries. This section describes these and other
major controversies faced by women in developing countries
today.
Female Genital Mutilation
Estimates vary concerning the number of women who have
undergone this procedure, ranging from 92.5 million in Africa
(Pathmanathan et al. 2003) to 130 million around the world
(Population Reference Bureau 2001). It is still practiced in many
African countries, several countries in the Middle East, and in
parts of Asia, including Indonesia and Malaysia.
The movement to prevent FGM began in African countries in
the 1960s and continues today. The Inter-African Committee on
Traditional Practices Affecting the Health of Women and Children,
as well as many professionals, including physicians and nurses,
gather information concerning FGM and advocate an end to this
practice. The African Charter on the Rights and Welfare of the
Child calls for an end to harmful social and cultural practices.
The Programme of Action of the International Conference on
Population and Development as well as the Convention on the
Rights of the Child also condemn traditional practices that may
negatively impact the health of children.
66
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

Over the past ten to twenty years, an increasing amount of
attention has been focused on FGM and local, national, and
international NGOs and governmental bodies have stepped up
their efforts to eliminate this practice. Although gathering reliable
data is often difﬁcult, based on available statistics the World
Health Organization reports that small decreases in the incidence
of FGM have been observed recently, and that when the practice
does occur, it is increasingly being performed by health care pro-
fessionals. But FGM remains widespread and the average age at
which girls undergo the practice is declining, meaning that the
number of girls undergoing this before the age of ﬁve is growing
(World Health Organization 2009).
Most NGOs view this practice as a human rights violation,
similar to other traditional practices that are harmful to women
in developing countries. In March 2010, the Economic and Social
Council of the United Nations adopted a resolution condemning
the practice, recognizing that FGM is a violation of the human
rights of women and girls. The practice is seen as an example of
the continuing inequality between the sexes and a violation of
the individual’s right to health, security, and life, as well as the
right to be free from torture and cruel, inhumane, or degrading
treatment.
There are no known health beneﬁts to the practice but many
problems associated with it, including the pain and trauma it
causes, and the fact that it interferes with the natural functioning
of the female body. FGM leads to long-term health problems
including infections, chronic pain, decreased sexual enjoyment,
and problems during pregnancy and childbirth. Babies born to
women who have undergone the procedure are more likely to
die during or immediately after childbirth (WHO Study Group
on Female Genital Mutilation and Obstetric Outcome 2006).
While some supporters of the practice argue that it is similar to
male circumcision, studies have demonstrated that the beneﬁts
from male circumcision include lowering men’s risk for contracting
HIV/AIDS (Bailey et al. 2007). In fact, many supporters refer to it as
female circumcision or female cutting in an attempt to equate it and
its effects with male circumcision. However, more and more NGOs
and other groups ﬁghting the practice believe that it should be
called female genital mutilation because its only effect is to mutilate
a girl’s body.
If FGM is so harmful and a violation of girls’ and women’s
human rights, why is it still practiced today and why does it
Controversies
67

appear to have the support of many people, including women?
FGM demonstrates the deeply entrenched nature of gender
inequality, demonstrating society’s control over women. In coun-
tries where it is widely practiced, both men and women support
it, and those who do not agree are often harassed, condemned,
and ostracized; great pressure is put on those detractors to support
the practice (WHO 2008). A study conducted by UNICEF revealed
a strong correlation between a woman’s ability to have control
over her life and her belief that the practice of FGM should be
ended (UNICEF 2005c).
Some families who practice FGM and other long-held tradi-
tions are immigrating to other countries, including the United
States, Canada, and many European countries; they frequently
continue practicing their cultural traditions in their new country,
and many of these countries are now enacting legislation to
prohibit what they view as harmful practices. France has had
issues with Muslim women wearing burqas, and the government
is especially concerned with this practice when the women are
driving because of the problem of limited vision. See Chapter 3
for a discussion of issues facing the United States and other
countries.
Abortion
Abortion is an emotional topic for many people throughout the
world. In the United States, demonstrators picket clinics where
abortions are performed, threaten the lives of workers in those
clinics, and even murder doctors who perform abortions. Most
people see this as a black or white issue; there is no middle
ground. On the one hand, supporters of abortion argue that a
woman’s body is her own, that she should have control over what
happens to her, and that basically this is a human rights issue.
Meanwhile, detractors believe that abortion is murder; that the
fetus should also have rights, speciﬁcally the right to life; and that
women should have considered the risk of becoming pregnant
before engaging in sexual activities.
For women in developed countries such as the United States,
abortions are generally readily available. Women may choose not
have abortions due to their religious beliefs, the insistence of their
husbands or boyfriends that they carry the fetus to term, the cost
of an abortion, the embarrassment or scorn of their families or
68
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

friends, or other personal reasons. However, the option is available
to them. Women in developed countries also are more likely to
have access to contraception and therefore are able to limit their
chances of becoming pregnant.
Women in developing countries may not have options. In
rural areas of many developing countries, health clinics may not
be available for basic health needs, much less for abortions. Reli-
gious beliefs may not permit abortions. Husbands in strong patri-
archal societies may forbid their wives from aborting a fetus.
Many developing countries, such as Nicaragua, Chile, Honduras,
and other countries in Latin America, as well as Egypt, Angola,
Senegal, Somalia, and other countries in Africa, have enacted
laws banning abortions completely (see Chapter 6 for complete
list). Other countries may permit abortion only to save the life of
the pregnant woman, or to protect a woman’s mental health, on
socioeconomic grounds, or without restrictions.
But abortions are performed around the world, in every
country, whether or not it is legal to do so. In some countries,
statutory laws allow abortions but customary laws do not. In
other countries, abortion under certain circumstances may be
allowed, but in actuality, abortion services are available only in
urban areas or in limited rural locations.
Unsafe abortions are a major health concern throughout the
world, but especially in developing countries. Unsafe induced
abortions are the leading cause of female mortality. These are the
most preventable maternal deaths. Abortions by themselves are
not responsible for women’s deaths; abortions that are unsafely
performed are the cause of death. According to a World Health
organization study conducted in 2003, approximately 70,000 of
the 500,000 maternal deaths were the result of illegal abortions
(WHO 2003). Unfortunately, in countries that have made abortion
illegal, women who ﬁnd themselves pregnant sometimes go to
extreme measures to terminate a pregnancy.
According to one report, only 22 percent of the world’s 190
countries allow abortion, and only 6 percent of developing coun-
tries do (WHO 1999). Abortion policies vary from country to
country; each country’s policy is inﬂuenced by several factors,
including religion, birth rates, and population policies. Countries
with large numbers of Muslims or Roman Catholics tend to
restrict or prohibit abortion. Countries may watch their birth rates
and, as they drop, institute laws restricting abortion.
Controversies
69

Honor Killings
One of the most extreme forms of domestic violence is the killing
of a woman allegedly to save her family’s or community’s honor.
It is most often practiced in the Middle East and South Asia.
Many of these countries have statutory laws against honor killing,
but traditional or customary law permits the practice. Consider-
ing it a harmful cultural practice, several countries, including
Kuwait and Iran, have prohibited it, but have minimized the pen-
alties associated with it.
In Egypt, the law does not speciﬁcally prohibit honor crimes
and no reliable statistics exist regarding its extent but it is believed
to occur, especially in rural areas. In Iran, a husband is allowed to
kill his wife if she is caught in the act of adultery and if he is certain
that she was a willing partner. In Iraq in 2008, 117 women report-
edly died as a result of honor killings; Iraqi legislation considers
killing to preserve the family’s honor as a mitigating circumstance
when sentencing (U.S. State Dept. 2009). In Jordan, the criminal
courts established a special criminal court tribunal to hear all cases
involving honor crimes and have issued some serious sentences for
those found guilty; however, the government has made no changes
to its current statutes to improve sentencing guidelines, which
allow judges to consider honor killings as “crimes of passion” even
when premeditated. While honor crimes are prohibited by law in
Kuwait, the Kuwaiti penal code allows the crime to be reduced to
a misdemeanor. In Lebanon, a male can receive a reduced sentence
if he can prove that the victim was involved in a socially unaccept-
able sexual relationship. In India and Pakistan, honor killings
continue to be a problem, with 73 crimes reported in India and over
600 in Pakistan in 2009 (U.S. State Dept. 2009).
As is clear from the above examples, honor killings may be
considered crimes, but perpetrators are often able to get off with
light sentences or even their freedom if they can prove it was a
crime of passion. NGOs are working with the governments in
many countries to create public awareness campaigns to educate
the public regarding this practice and to convince them that
honor killings truly are crimes. Tracking the number of incidents
and determining the number of victims is difﬁcult; few govern-
ments keep statistics on these crimes, which may be disguised as
other types of crime. Meanwhile customary law and tradition
continue to permit and, in many cases, encourage the murder of
women for “dishonoring” their families.
70
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

Solutions
It is easy to say that laws should be enacted and enforced to
ensure that women receive equal rights with men and protection
against discrimination. However, in many cases and in many
countries, governments have enacted laws and signed UN Con-
ventions but continue to allow abuse and other discriminatory
behaviors. Governments must enforce the laws that have been
enacted, overriding customary law and traditions.
In order to protect women from discrimination and provide
them with equal rights in all aspects of their lives, governments
can take several additional actions. First, they can enact laws that
prohibit discrimination against women and grant them equal
rights. However, even when these actions are taken, customary
laws and traditions frequently permit citizens, including family
members, to abuse women, deny them their rights, and even mur-
der them. Public awareness campaigns must be initiated to edu-
cate the public on the wrongness of denying women equal rights
and to highlight the beneﬁts of providing these rights. Public atti-
tudes must be changed to encourage equal treatment for women.
Women must be provided with access to education and eco-
nomic opportunities to give them more power to determine the
course of their lives. Existing NGOs should work with govern-
ments to change public attitudes about the detrimental effects of
denying women access to education, health care, and employ-
ment opportunities. Successful NGOs should be showcased,
demonstrating to men and women that women, given freedom
and opportunity, are able to contribute to society, support their
families, and improve the standard of living without detracting
from the quality of men’s lives.
References
Abawi, Atia. 2009. “Afghan Girls Maimed by Acid Vow to Go to School.”
CNN.com/Asia. Available at http://www.cnn.com/2009/WORLD/
asiapcf/01/22/acid.attacks/index.html?iref=allsearch.
Amin, Sajeda, and Lopita Huq. 2008. “Marriage Considerations in
Sending Girls to School in Bangladesh: Some Qualitative Evidence.”Policy
Research Division Working Paper No. 12. New York: Population Council.
Association for Progressive Communications. 2003. ICT Policy: A
Beginner’s Handbook. Johannesburg: APC.
References
71

Bailey, R. C., S. Moses, C. B. Parker, K. Agot, I. Maclean, and J. N. Krieger.
2007. “Male Circumcision for HIV Prevention in Young Men in Kisumu,
Kenya: A Randomized Controlled Trial.” Lancet 369: 643–656.
Bannister, Judith. 2003. Shortage of Girls in China Today: Causes,
Consequences, International Comparisons, and Solutions. Washington, D.C.:
Population Reference Bureau.
Buskens, Ineke and Anne Webb, eds. 2009. African Women and ICTs:
Investigating Technology, Gender and Empowerment. New York: Zed Books.
Carr, Marilyn, and Martha Chen. 2002. Globalization and the Informal
Economy: How Global Trade and Investment Impact on the Working Poor.
Working Paper on the Informal Economy No. 1. Geneva: ILO.
Chant, Sylvia, and Carolyn Pedwell. 2008. Women, Gender and the Informal
Economy: An Assessment of ILO Research and Suggested Ways Forward.
Geneva: ILO.
Charmes, J. 2009. “Concepts, Measurement and Trends.” In Is Informal
Normal? Towards More and Better Jobs in Developing Countries, edited by
Johannes Jutting and Juan de Laiglesia. Paris: Organization for Economic
Cooperation and Development (OECD).
Chen, Martha, Joann Vanek, Francie Lund, and James Heintz, with
Renana Jhabvala and Christine Bonner. 2005. Progress of the World’s
Women 2005: Women, Work and Poverty. New York: UNIFEM.
Clark, S., J. Bruce, and A. Dude. 2006. “Protecting Young Women from
HIV/AIDS: The Case against Child and Adolescent Marriage.” International
Family Planning Perspectives 32(2): 79–88.
CNN.com/Asia. 2010. “Taliban Suspected of Sickening Female Afghan
Students.” Available at http://www.cnn.com/2010/WORLD/asiapcf/
04/25/afghanistan.school.illness/index.html?iref=allsearch.
Food and Agriculture Organization. N.d. Gender and Law: Women’s Rights
in Agriculture. Rome: Food and Agriculture Organization.
International Labour Organization. 2002. Decent Work and the Informal
Economy. Report VI, 90th Session of the International Labour Conference.
Geneva: ILO.
International Trade Union Confederation. 2008. The Global Gender Pay
Gap. Brussels: ITUC.
Jewkes, R., et al. 2002. “Rape of Girls in South Africa.” Lancet 359: 319–320.
John, Mary E., Ravinder Kaur, Rajni Palriwala, Saraswati Raju, and
Alpana Sagar. 2008. Planning Families, Planning Gender: The Adverse Child
Sex Ratio in Selected Districts of Madhya Pradesh, Rajasthan, Himachal
Pradesh, Haryana, and Punjab. New Delhi: International Development
Research Centre.
72
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

Lamptey, Peter R., Jami L. Johnson, and Marya Khan. 2006. “The Global
Challenge of HIV and AIDS.” Population Bulletin 61(1): 1–24.
Mason, K. O., and H. M. Carlsson. 2005. “The Development Impact of
Gender Equality in Land Rights.” In Human Rights and Development,
edited by P. Alston and M. Robinson. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Mathur, S., M. Greene, and A. Malhotra. 2003. Too Young to Wed: The Lives,
Rights and Health of Young Married Girls. Washington, D.C.: International
Center for Research on Women.
Murray, Ann Firth. 2008. From Outrage to Courage: Women Taking Action for
Health and Justice. Monroe, ME: Common Courage Press.
Nikolic-Ristanovic, Vesna. 2000. Women, Violence and War: Wartime
Victimization of Refugees in the Balkans. Budapest: Central European
University Press.
Pathmanathan, Indra, et al. 2003. Investing in Maternal Health: Learning
from Malaysia and Sri Lanka. Washington, D.C.: The World Bank.
Population Reference Bureau. 2001. Abandoning Female Genital Cutting:
Prevalence, Attitudes, and Efforts to End the Practice. Washington, D.C.:
Population Reference Bureau.
Primo, Natasha. 2003. Gender Issues in the Information Society. Paris: UNESCO.
Program for Appropriate Technology in Health. 2002. Reproductive Health
and Rights: Reaching the Hardly Reached. Washington, D.C.: PATH.
Quintana, R. D., L. Concheiro Borquez, and R. Perez Aviles. 1998. Peasant
Logic, Agrarian Policy, Land Mobility, and Land Markets in Mexico. North
American Series, Working Paper 21. Madison: University of Wisconsin.
Russell, Diana E. H. 1990. Rape in Marriage. Bloomington: Indiana
University Press.
Save the Children. 2004. Children Having Children: State of the World’s
Mothers 2004. Westport, CT: Save the Children.
Sedge, G., S. Singh, S. Henshaw, E. Ahman, and I. Shah. 2007. “Induced
Abortion: Estimated Rates and Trends Worldwide.” Lancet 370: 1338–1345.
Sen, Amartya. 2001. “Many Faces of Gender Inequality.” Frontline 18(22),
October/November.
World Health Organization. 2005. WHO Multi-country Study on Women’s
Health and Domestic Violence against Women. Geneva: WHO.
World Health Organization. 2006. World Health Report 2006: Working
Together for Health. Geneva: WHO.
World Health Organization. 2008. Eliminating Female Genital Mutilation:
An Interagency Statement—OHCHR, UNAIDS, UNDP, UNECA, UNESCO,
UNFPA, UNHCR, UNICEF, UNIFEM, WHO. Geneva: WHO.
References
73

World Health Organization. 2009. Women and Health: Today’s Evidence,
Tomorrow’s Agenda. Geneva: WHO.
WHO Study Group on Female Genital Mutilation and Obstetric
Outcome. 2006. “Female Genital Mutilation and Obstetric Outcome:
WHO Collaborative Prospective Study in Six African Countries.” Lancet
367: 1835–1841.
WHO, UNICEF, UNFPA, and the World Bank. 2007. Maternal Mortality in
2005: Estimates Developed by WHO, UNICEF, UNFPA, and the World Bank.
Geneva: WHO.
United Nations. 1985. Forward-looking Strategies for the Advancement of
Women (A/CONF.116.28/Rev.1). Available at http://www.un.org/
womenwatch/confer/nﬂs/Nairobi1985report.txt.
United Nations 2001. From Beijing to Beijing+5. New York, NY.
United Nations. 2009a. The Millennium Development Goals Report 2009.
New York: United Nations.
United Nations. 2009b. 2009 World Survey on the Role of Women in
Development. New York: United Nations.
United Nations ECOSOC. 1996. Report of the Special Rapporteur on Violence
against Women. E/CN.4/1996/53. New York: ECOSOC.
UNAIDS. 2004. 2004 Report on the Global AIDS Epidemic: 4th Global Report.
Geneva: UNAIDS.
UNAIDS. 2010. Annual Report 2009. Geneva: UNAIDS.
UNHCR. 2008. UNHCR Handbook for the Protection of Women and Girls.
Geneva: UNHCR.
UNICEF. 2005. The State of the World’s Children 2006. New York: UNICEF.
UNICEF. 2005b. Early Marriage: A Harmful Traditional Practice. New York:
UNICEF.
UNICEF. 2005c. Changing a Harmful Social Convention: Female Genital
Mutilation/Cutting. Florence: Innocenti Digest.
UNICEF. 2008a. The State of the World’s Children 2009: Maternal and
Newborn Health. New York: UNICEF.
UNICEF. 2008b. Sri Lanka: Annual Report 2007. Colombo: UNICEF.
UNICEF. 2009. ChildInfo: Monitoring the Situation of Children and Women.
New York: UNICEF.
UNICEF Innocenti Research Centre. 2000. Domestic Violence against
Women and Girls. Florence, Italy: UNICEF Innocenti Research Centre.
74
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

U.S. Department of State. 2009 Country Reports. Available at http://
www.state.gov/g/drl/rls/hrrpt/.
U.S. Department of State. 2010. 2010 Trafﬁcking in Persons Report.
Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of State.
WSIS. 2010. WSIS Forum 2010: Final Executive Brieﬁng. Available at http://
www.itu.int/wsis/implementation/2010/forum/geneva/report/
ﬁnal_exec_brieﬁng_full.html
References
75


3
U.S. Concerns
T
his chapter examines issues and controversies of central con-
cern to the United States regarding women in developing coun-
tries. It will consider immigration, both legal and illegal,
including immigration policies; trafﬁcking of women and children
into the country; asylum requests from women in developing
countries, speciﬁcally the reasons women give when asking for
asylum or refugee status; and the current immigration and court
rulings regarding asylum. It will also review the history of the
Mexico City Policy, often referred to as the Global Gag Rule, along
with its effect on women in developing countries. Finally, it will
look at the effects of the United States’ failure to ratify the Conven-
tion on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against
Women (CEDAW).
Of course, the basic issues of survival and the prevention and
elimination of discrimination and violence against women
throughout the world are also of concern to the United States.
The government, through the Department of State and its Agency
for International Development and other aid programs, helps
support vital programs to assist women in developing countries
gain access to education, health care, and the other critical needs
discussed in Chapter 2. This chapter, however, will focus on internal
issues and concerns of the United States as they relate to the lives of
women who leave developing countries, whether voluntarily or
involuntarily.
77

Immigration
Policies regarding immigration to the United States have fre-
quently been a controversial topic, with strong views on all sides
of the subject concerning the numbers of immigrants allowed to
enter and from which countries. Economic conditions in other
countries, a relative abundance of jobs available in the United
States, at least historically, and the persecution of various individ-
uals and groups by governments or others in power in developing
countries encourage many individuals and families to attempt to
enter the United States.
From the 1965 Immigration and Nationality Act, which elim-
inated country-speciﬁc quotas and increased the total number of
immigrants permitted to enter the country, to the Refugee Act of
1980, which broadened the deﬁnition of allowable refugees and
allowed 125,000 refugees annually, lively debate has surrounded
the issue of immigration in the United States. The 1986 Immigra-
tion Reform and Control Act legalized approximately 2.7 million
unauthorized aliens and instituted penalties against employers
who knowingly hired illegal aliens in an attempt to stop the ﬂow
of illegal immigrants into the country. The 1990 Immigration Act
raised the annual limit on immigrants from 270,000 to 700,000
during the years 1992 through 1994 and to 675,000 from 1995 on,
allowed unlimited visas for immediate family members of U.S.
citizens, and stipulated that the 125,000 allowed refugees would
not be counted as part of the total number of allowed immigrants.
In 1996, the Illegal Immigration Reform and Immigrant
Responsibility Act of 1996 (Public Law 104-208) (IIRIRA) was
enacted to place more responsibility on immigrants, including
those requesting asylum, and on the authorities responsible for
enforcing the law. It emphasized heightened border enforcement;
increased penalties for transporting undocumented aliens into
the country, both willingly and for involuntary servitude;
described acceptable practices for examining, arresting, imprison-
ing, and removing deportable aliens; delineated allowable
parameters of alien employment; solidiﬁed the government’s role
in assisting aliens; and contained various other stipulations.
IIRIRA makes the asylum process more difﬁcult for many ali-
ens by, among other requirements, (1) barring aliens from applying
for asylum if they are able to move to a third country that has a fair
asylum process and where their freedom would not be threatened;
78
U.S. Concerns

(2) requiring applications for asylum to be ﬁled within one year of
entering the United States, with certain exceptions; (3) not
allowing reapplication if an alien’s ﬁrst application has been
denied unless the circumstances have changed; (4) denying
asylum to certain convicted criminals and those who have partici-
pated in persecuting others; (5) requiring certain applicants to sub-
mit ﬁngerprints and photographs; and (6) authorizing application
fees.
The act also speciﬁcally deﬁnes female genital mutilation
(FGM), requires that information be provided to all aliens who
are issued immigrant or nonimmigrant visas concerning the harm
to physical and psychological health caused by FGM, prohibits the
practice on anyone under the age of 18 years, and subjects anyone
who performs FGM to ﬁnes and/or imprisonment of not more than
ﬁve years. The IIRIRA also addresses the “mail-order bride” busi-
ness. It requires international matchmaking organizations to pro-
vide information to foreign spouses regarding immigration
regulations; this information is to be provided in the spouse’s
native language and explain conditional permanent residency
and domestic violence statutes. It also requires the explicit disclo-
sure that matchmaking organizations are not regulated by the
U.S. government.
Asylum
Every year, thousands of people apply for political asylum or refu-
gee status in the United States. In order to qualify, an individual
must ﬁrst meet the deﬁnition of a refugee: “[A]ny person who is
outside any country of such person’s nationality or, in the case of
a person having no nationality, is outside of any country in which
such person last habitually resided, and who is unable or unwilling
to return to, and is unable or unwilling to avail himself or herself of
the protection of that country because of persecution or a well-
founded fear of persecution on account of race, religion, nationality,
membership in a particular social group, or political opinion . . .”
(Immigration and Nationality Act, Section 101[a][42]).
The United States may grant asylum to individuals who are
currently in the country and, for speciﬁc reasons, are unable or
unwilling to return to their native country. Individuals seeking
asylum are required to request it at an airport or other port of entry
or ﬁle an application within one year of their arrival in the United
States. If circumstances change in their home countries or their
Immigration
79

personal circumstances have changed within the year before they
ask for asylum and those circumstances have changed their
eligibility for asylum, they may be granted additional time to ﬁle
their applications. Additional time may also be allowed if extraor-
dinary circumstances exist that prevent individuals from ﬁling
their applications within one year. Once individuals are granted
asylum, they can apply for a Green Card and eventually for U.S.
citizenship. As of 2011, the annual cap on the number of people
granted asylum is 10,000.
Refugee Status
The U.S. government can grant individuals located outside of the
United States refugee status if their lives or freedom are being
threatened or if they are being persecuted. Individuals also must
prove that their home governments are unwilling or unable to pro-
tect them from persecution. Most frequently, applicants for refugee
status are referred to the U.S. Refugee Program by ofﬁcials of
the UN High Commissioner for Refugees; other individuals
are referred by U.S. embassies or consulates. When they enter the
United States, authorization is given allowing them to become
employed. After they have been in the country for one year, they
are eligible for an adjustment in their status to lawful permanent
resident. They are eligible for U.S. citizenship after ﬁve years.
Determination of Asylum
Two primary ways exist to obtain asylum. Afﬁrmative asylum
cases are processed through the U.S. Citizenship and Immigration
Services (USCIS). Applicants apply for asylum afﬁrmatively by
completing an application for asylum and sending it to a USCIS
Service Center. Interviews are conducted in a nonadversarial
manner by USCIS asylum ofﬁcers located in one of eight Asylum
Ofﬁces throughout the country, or in an ofﬁce closer to the indi-
vidual’s residence. The USCIS attempts to interview the applicant
within 43 days of the ﬁling of the application and a decision is
generally rendered within two weeks of the interview.
Defensive asylum cases are initiated when an applicant is
defending herself or himself against removal from the United
States; they are processed by Immigration Judges from the Execu-
tive Ofﬁce for Immigration Review (EOIR). The Immigration Judge
(IJ) holds a hearing in adversarial proceedings for the applicant’s
80
U.S. Concerns

claims as well as the government’s arguments against the granting
of asylum. An applicant reaches this stage following the denial of
his or her application, or upon his or her arrival at a U.S. port of
entry without proper travel documents, or because he or she was
placed in the expedited removal process and found to have a credi-
ble fear of persecution or torture by an asylum ofﬁcer.
Once a case is heard by an IJ and a ruling issued, the appli-
cant can appeal a negative ruling to the Board of Immigration
Appeals (BIA), and then to the appropriate U.S. Circuit Court of
Appeals if the BIA issues a negative ruling. Federal courts have
generally deferred to the immigration judges but in some cases
have overturned the BIA determination.
Derivative Asylum
Many asylum seekers want protection for their families as well as
for themselves. Once a person has been granted asylum, he or she
is allowed to apply for derivative asylum for a spouse and for chil-
dren under the age of 21 years. Stepchildren are eligible for deriva-
tive asylum if the applicant and the spouse were married before
the child turned 18 years old. Adopted children are required to
have been adopted before they turned 16 years old and the appli-
cant must have been the legal parent of the child for at least two
years. The applicant must seek derivative asylum within two years
of the date he or she was granted asylum.
Reasons for Asylum
Women in developing countries often have a number of reasons
for wanting to apply for asylum in the United States or another
developed nation. They may suffer persecution simply because
they are female: they are beaten or sexually assaulted by their
husbands or other male family members, they are raped and then
blamed for causing their families dishonor, they or their daughters
are victims of female genital mutilation, trafﬁcked for sexual
purposes or forced labor, or exposed to other physical dangers or
life threatening situations. However, current asylum law does not
allow an application based solely on gender; an individual must
request asylum based on alleged persecution based on her race,
religion, nationality, particular social group, or political opinion.
U.S. laws and the Department of Homeland Security are reluctant
to recognize the unique types of persecution that women in
Immigration
81

developing countries face, such as female genital mutilation, or
rape or torture, especially in conﬂict situations, even though
international law does recognize these issues (Goeller 2007).
Female Genital Mutilation
Fear of female genital mutilation is one reason women and other
family members apply for asylum, and immigration ofﬁcials and
courts have supported several requests for asylum in recent
years, often considering FGM as severe harm that constitutes
persecution of a particular social group.
Several BIA and appellate court cases have reviewed asylum
cases regarding FGM, with mixed results. The case In re Fauziya
Kasinga provided a key ruling on FGM as a legitimate reason for
a claim of persecution under the asylum regulations. Fauziya
Kassindja (her name was incorrectly recorded by immigration
authorities) was a 19-year-old citizen of Togo, a member of the
Tchamba-Kunsuntu tribe. Young girls in Togo usually undergo
FGM at age 15 but she was protected by her father, who opposed
this practice. Upon his death in 1993, her aunt became the family
matriarch and forced Kassindja into a polygamous marriage in
1994 at the age of 17. Her 45-year-old future husband, who had
three other wives, required that she undergo FGM prior to the
consummation of the marriage. She did not want to undergo the
procedure and, with the help of her sister, ﬂed to Ghana and
then to Germany. There she was befriended by a Nigerian who
suggested she purchase his sister’s British passport and travel to
the United States. She purchased the passport and landed at
Newark International Airport on December 17, 1994, where she
immediately requested asylum.
Kassindja ﬁled her completed application for asylum in
April 1995 and was detained by the INS until April 1996. In her
request for asylum, she claimed that because Togo was a small
country, her husband and aunt would have little trouble ﬁnding
her with the help of the police. She would not have been able to
ﬁnd any safe place in her country or in Ghana because her family
and her husband could track her within Togo or to Ghana with
the help of the authorities. She did not want to remain in Germany
because she did not speak German, nor did she have any relatives
in Germany. She did have an aunt, uncle, and cousin in the United
States.
The immigration judge determined that Kassindja’s reasons
and support for her application were not credible and denied her
82
U.S. Concerns

request for asylum. She appealed the decision to the Board of
Immigration Appeals (BIA), who found Kassindja to be a credible
witness. The BIA adopted the description of FGM as deﬁned
in the record and agreed that “this level of harm can constitute
‘persecution’ within the meaning of section 101(a)(42)(A) of the
Act, 8 U.S.C. § 1101(a)(42)(A)(1994)” (In re Fauziya Kasinga 1996,
365). Further, they found that “the particular social group to be
the following: young women of the Tchamba-Kunsutu Tribe who
have not had FGM, as practiced by that tribe, and who oppose
the practice” (In re Fauziya Kasinga 1996, 365). The BIA granted
Kassindja’s request for asylum. Following the ruling in Fauziya
Kassindja’s case for asylum and the outrage over the initial ruling
in her case and her treatment by the INS, the BIA issued a determi-
nation in 1996 that asylum could be granted to a woman based on
her fear of female genital mutilation. This case was a landmark in
asylum law for women who feared FGM but it did not provide
help for every woman.
The situation for women who had already undergone FGM
was seen as different from women like Kassindja, who had not
yet undergone the practice. In Oforji vs. Ashcroft, the Seventh
Circuit Court of Appeals upheld the Immigration Judge’s deter-
mination that because she had undergone FGM before coming
to the United States, “there is no chance that she would be person-
ally tortured again by the procedure when sent back to Nigeria”
(Oforgi vs. Ashcroft 2003, 615). The opinion set a stringent standard
for review, ruling that because she had already undergone the
procedure there was no fear of further persecution. When she
raised the fear that her two daughters, born in the United States
and therefore U.S. citizens, would face FGM if they were sent
back to Nigeria with her, and that she had no one to leave her chil-
dren with, the court reasoned that the children had the legal right
to remain in the United States and therefore had no bearing on
Oforgi’s argument for remaining in the country. She could not
make a derivative asylum claim given the fact that her daughters
were U.S. citizens, but the court recognized the dilemma faced by
Oforgi. It indicated that the under the current law “a woman who
is otherwise a deportable alien does not have any incentive to
bear a child (who automatically becomes a citizen) whose rights
to stay are separate from the mother’s obligation to depart”
(Oforji vs. Ashcroft 619).
In another Seventh Circuit case, Olowo vs. Ashcroft (2004),
Olowo applied for asylum based on her inclusion in a social
Immigration
83

group composed of women who feared FGM, although she had
already undergone the procedure. She also argued that her two
daughters, who were legal permanent residents of the United
States, would be forced to return to Nigeria with her and faced
the prospect of being forced to undergo FGM. The court’s deci-
sion was consistent with Oforji vs. Ashcroft; it ruled that Olowo
could not make a claim for asylum based on her past experience
with FGM and that, because her daughters had the option of
legally remaining in the United States, they would be able to
avoid FGM. The court also reasoned that if Mr. Olowo returned
to Nigeria with his family, he would be able to protect his daugh-
ters from undergoing FGM. Alternatively, Mr. Olowo could stay
with his daughters in the United States and therefore protect
them from FGM.
Women who have already undergone FGM were having a
more difﬁcult time requesting asylum based on FGM because, as
one court determined, FGM is an act that cannot be repeated; once
a woman has undergone FGM, she will not be threatened with it
again. As the Oforji and Olowo decisions make clear, some
parents have argued that they have a derivative asylum claim
because their children may face FGM if the parents are deported.
When the children are U.S. citizens this becomes a difﬁcult deci-
sion for the parent, but it does not expose the daughters to forced
deportation with their parents.
Prior to the Oforgi decision in 2003, there were no court deci-
sions regarding the deportation of a parent who feared that his or
her daughter would be forced to undergo FGM upon return to her
or her parents’ native country. Following the Oforgi and Olowo
decisions, and as more parents began to request asylum based
on their fears that their daughters would be exposed to FGM,
immigration judges, the BIA, and U.S. appellate courts began
seeing more cases regarding persecution of women as victims of
FGM and the follow-up requests for derivative asylum.
In Abay vs. Ashcroft (2004), Yayeshwork Abay and her nine-
year-old daughter Burhan Amare were natives and citizens of
Ethiopia and in 1996 requested refugee status in the United States
based on Abay’s fears that Amare would be circumcised. Abay
had already been a victim of FGM, performed by her mother,
and was afraid for her daughter. Abay’s three other daughters
were still living with her mother in Ethiopia; the mother had
attempted to circumcise them but was stopped by Abay. How-
ever, Abay was afraid that she would not be able to prevent the
84
U.S. Concerns

circumcision of her other daughters once they were married or
promised in marriage. She could still protect Amare. The IJ and
BIA denied their request for asylum and the case was appealed
to the U.S. Sixth Circuit Court of Appeals.
The court concluded that, given the evidence that FGM is
condoned and practiced nearly universally throughout Ethiopia,
the fact that Abay had been a victim, her mother had already
attempted to subject her daughters to the practice, Abay could
not protect her daughters from the wishes and actions of their
future husbands, and Ethiopia does not enforce laws to prohibit
certain harmful practices, “a rational factﬁnder would be com-
pelled to ﬁnd that Abay’s fear of taking her daughter into the
lion’s den of female genital mutilation in Ethiopia and being
forced to witness the pain and suffering of her daughter is well-
founded” (642).
Other appellate courts have supported the ﬁndings of the Sev-
enth Circuit and issued similar rulings. For example, in Mohammed
vs. Gonzales (2005), Mohammed was 17 years old when she applied
for asylum, claiming she had a fear of future persecution based on
her membership in a social group (the Benadiri clan). Mohammed
and her family ﬂed Somalia for Ethiopia following the disappear-
ance of her father and brother, the rape of her sister, and the mili-
tia’s attempt to imprison all members of her clan. Following her
arrival in the United States, Mohammed requested asylum. The
Immigration Judge denied her request because she did not demon-
strate that she was eligible for asylum, entitled to withholding
or protection under the Convention against Torture. The BIA
afﬁrmed the decision of the IJ.
Mohammed appealed the decision of the BIA, claiming that her
attorney at the time failed to present evidence of her past experience
with FGM in order to establish past persecution. The Ninth Circuit
Court of Appeals ruled that the BIA did not review all the evidence;
the case was remanded back to the BIA to examine the evidence of
past FGM. The court found that “persecution in the form of female
genital mutilation is similar to forced sterilization and, like that
other persecutory technique, must be considered a continuing harm
that renders a petitioner eligible for asylum, without more” (3085).
Further, the court determined that “genital mutilation permanently
disﬁgures a woman, causes long term health problems, and
deprives her of a normal and fulﬁlling sexual life” (3086).
Overall, the United States has made progress in asylum law,
but according to Schubert (2007), still must protect the rights of
Immigration
85

women who do not want to return to their native countries because
of their fear of FGM. She encourages further improvements in
the law regarding asylum. As a member of the United Nations,
the United States has a responsibility to protect all human rights
while remaining sensitive to particular cultural practices. This
need for sensitivity has created a dilemma for many people regard-
ing FGM and other “cultural” practices because of the concern of
labeling it an illegal and immoral act. Some individuals who have
undergone the practice argue that it is a legitimate cultural prac-
tice. In fact, women who have undergone the practice are often
the ones who arrange for their daughters to undergo FGM. Some
argue that it should be referred to as “female circumcision” to
remove the negative connotation.
The federal law that prohibits FGM provides that “no account
shall be taken of the effect on the person on whom the operation is
to be performed of any belief on the part of that person, or any
other person, that the operation is required as a matter of custom
or ritual” (18 USC § 116[c]). This prevents the perpetrator from
arguing that it is a legitimate cultural or religious practice.
International law and conventions, including the Convention on
the Rights of the Child, protect children from inhumane treatment;
in this respect, FGM violates international human rights law
(Aherne 2006).
Domestic Abuse, Rape
Domestic abuse, including rape, is a frequent occurrence in many
developing countries. It is most likely to occur in situations where
the balance of power between the sexes is overwhelmingly in the
male’s favor and sex discrimination against women is considered
legitimate. The ﬁrst case to come before an immigration judge,
the BIA, and ultimately, the U.S. Attorney General, was the Matter
of R-A-.
The Matter of R-A- concerned the case of Rodi Alvarado, a
native and citizen of Guatemala. Married at 16 to a 21-year-old
former soldier, Alvarado was consistently physically and sexually
abused by her husband. He controlled every aspect of her life; she
attempted to ﬂee several times from him, but each time he tracked
her down and beat her, often to the point of unconsciousness. She
enlisted the help of the Guatemalan police, who at ﬁrst issued
summonses to her husband; he ignored them, and the police did
not follow up. Calls to the police did not result in any action.
Alvarado went before a judge and complained, but the judge told
86
U.S. Concerns

her that he would not interfere in domestic disputes. Finally, with
help, Alvarado was able to ﬂee Guatemala for the United States,
where she requested asylum.
The Immigration Judge ruled in Alvarado’s favor, granting
her asylum based on her past persecution and well-founded fears
of future persecution. The IJ deﬁned her membership in a social
group as “Guatemalan women who have been involved intimately
with Guatemalan male companions, who believe that women are
to live under male domination” (In re Alvarado, 8). The IJ relied on
the decision in the Matter of Fauziya Kasinga and ruled that Alva-
rado, “and others like her, are targeted for persecution speciﬁcally
because they are women” (In re Alvarado, 8).
The INS appealed the IJ’s ruling in the Alvarado case, and the
BIA in 1999 reversed the grant of asylum to her. While they
agreed that the abuse suffered was egregious and that the
government of Guatemala had failed to protect her, they deter-
mined that she had not established that the harm she had suffered
was because of her membership in a particular social group.
The BIA’s decision received criticism from a variety of sour-
ces and prompted the intervention of U.S. Attorney General Janet
Reno and the Department of Justice, who proposed new regula-
tions that would address the issues in Alvarado and similar cases.
The regulations were never ﬁnalized; however, Reno vacated the
BIA’s decision in 2001 and remanded the case back to the BIA
until the proposed regulations became ﬁnal. In 2003 U.S. Attorney
General John Ashcroft certiﬁed the case to himself, asking the BIA
to send the case to his ofﬁce. In 2004 the Department of Homeland
Security ﬁled a brief with the Attorney General, providing an ana-
lytical framework for deciding claims such as Alvarado’s and
arguing in favor of granting asylum to Alvarado. Ashcroft did
not take any action in the case and remanded the case back to
the BIA.
In 2008 the Department of Justice regulations remained in
draft form and U.S. Attorney General Michal Mukasey took juris-
diction of the case, ruling that the BIA did not have to wait
for ﬁnal regulations and could decide the case. The case was
sent back to an Immigration Judge for ﬁnal determination, and
Alvarado was granted asylum in 2008.
In a Second Circuit Court of Appeals case, Carmen Gomez
appealed the BIA decision denying her request for asylum on
the basis of her membership in a social group consisting of young
women who had been beaten and raped by guerrilla forces in El
Immigration
87

Salvador (Gomez vs. INS 1991). Between the ages of 12 and 14,
Gomez’s life was threatened and she was raped and beaten by
guerrilla forces, who also vandalized her home; this occurred on
ﬁve separate occasions.
Gomez entered the United States illegally and made her way
to New York, supporting herself with a variety of odd jobs. At one
point, unable to pay her rent, she resorted to selling cocaine. She
pled guilty to the criminal sale of a controlled substance and other
indictments. The INS sought her deportation back to El Salvador;
she requested asylum, and an Immigration Judge conducted a
hearing on the INS request. The IJ ordered her deported to El
Salvador and the BIA upheld the deportation order. The Second
Circuit agreed with the IJ and BIA rulings, indicating that Gomez
was unable to produce evidence that women who had previously
been attacked by guerrilla forces could be identiﬁed as members
of a particular social group and were in continuing danger.
In the case of L-R-, a woman from Mexico lived with a man to
whom she was not married; when she became pregnant with
their child she attempted to escape her partner’s physical abuse.
He found her, assaulted her, and forced her to return home. She
complained to the police, who told her that her problems were
private and they did not believe her life was in danger. She ﬂed
to the United States but did not apply for asylum within one year
of her arrival because she did not know she could. She applied
“within months” of her arrival. She claimed that her particular
social group was “Mexican women in an abusive domestic rela-
tionship who are unable to leave.” The IJ believed her fears and
reasons for asylum were credible, but nevertheless denied asylum
based on her failure to meet the requirement to apply within one
year of arrival.
The case was appealed to the BIA and, in addition to the
briefs ﬁled by the parties, the Department of Homeland Security
ﬁled a supplemental brief. This brief acknowledged that the
DHS believed that persons who have experienced domestic
violence could be granted asylum and that “DHS accepts that in
some cases, a victim of domestic violence may be a member of a
cognizable particular social group and may be able to show that
her abuse was or would be persecution on account of such mem-
bership. This does not mean, however, that every victim of
domestic violence would be eligible for asylum” (DHS Brief, 12).
The case was sent back to an IJ to allow LR to submit additional
materials.
88
U.S. Concerns

Religion
Applications for asylum based on religion are often difﬁcult to
prove for women in developing countries and these claims
are not used as frequently as claims based on membership in a
particular social group. In 2002, the Seventh Circuit Court of
Appeals heard the case of Nazani Yadegar-Sargis vs. INS, in which
the plaintiff was an Iranian woman who claimed her particular
social group was Iranian women of the Armenian Christian faith
who chose not to wear traditional Islamic dress. She argued that
she was not able to freely practice her religion, and that the state
would not protect her from harassment and other problems she
faced by refusing to wear the traditional dress. The court ruled
that, while Yadegar-Sargis had proved that she was a member of
a particular social group, she did not prove that she suffered from
persecution because of that membership; she was never detained,
imprisoned, or physically threatened. The court agreed with the
BIA ruling that while Ms. Sargis’s experiences were deplorable,
they constituted harassment, not persecution.
Forced Marriage
In 2006 the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit heard the
appeal of Hong Ying Gao, who had ﬂed from China to the United
States seeking asylum based on her membership in a particular
social group, in this case “women who have been sold into
marriage (whether or not that marriage has yet taken place)” (Gao
vs. Gonzales 70). Prior to ﬂeeing to the United States Gao had lived
in Fujian Province, in an area where parents would routinely sell
their daughters into marriage and the local residents and author-
ities supported and enforced these forced marriages. She was
promised in marriage to Chen Zhi in exchange for a monetary
payment; Gao’s parents used this money to pay off their debts
and promised their daughter to Zhi when she turned 21. Gao
discovered Zhi to be bad-tempered, violent, and a gambler, and
attempted to break the agreement. Zhi refused and followed her
when she moved away from her district. Zhi continued to harass
her family, insisting that Gao marry him, and discovered her
new location. She ﬂed to the United States approximately six
months later.
The IJ determined that Gao’s situation did not meet a pro-
tected ground such as membership in a particular social group
but was only “a dispute between two families.” The Judge also
found that the record did not establish that the local authorities
Immigration
89

would not protect Gao and that she did not require asylum
because she was able to safely move to another location. The
BIA afﬁrmed the IJ’s determination. The Second Circuit Court of
Appeals reversed the IJ and BIA rulings and remanded it back
to the BIA for additional proceedings consistent with the Court’s
ruling. The Court deﬁned Gao’s particular social group as consist-
ing “of women who have been sold into marriage (whether or not
that marriage has yet taken place) and who live in a part of China
where forced marriages are considered valid and enforceable.” It
also ruled that Gao established a nexus between the particular
social group to which she belonged and the persecution she
feared, and vacated the ﬁndings that Gao had not established that
the government would not protect her and that she was able to
safely relocate in another area. This decision was the ﬁrst of its
kind focusing on forced marriages.
Overall, women have generally had a difﬁcult time gaining
asylum in the United States because they are not able to apply
simply on the basis of being a woman and because they face dis-
crimination or violence in developing countries. Immigration
authorities are increasingly accepting claims within the “member-
ship in a particular social group” as a valid reason for granting
asylum, but more must be done to allow women fearing further
persecution in their native countries to claim asylum simply
because of their gender. Even the UN High Commissioner for Ref-
ugees encourages the use of “membership in a particular social
group” to protect female asylum seekers as long as they meet
the deﬁnition of a refugee (UNHCR 1994).
Detention While Awaiting Asylum
Determination
The history of detention of immigrants to the United States goes
back to the 1890s, when the detention center at Ellis Island was
opened. As a result of the passage of the Immigration and Nation-
ality Act (INA) in 1952, detention facilities, including Ellis Island,
were eventually closed. Immigrants who posed a danger to soci-
ety or were considered a ﬂight risk were still held in other federal
facilities.
The United States supported the UN Refugee Convention
adopted in 1951 and the follow-up Protocol adopted in 1951, and
enacted the Refugee Act of 1980 to comply with these conventions.
The government and many NGOs have been strong supporters of
90
U.S. Concerns

refugee rights around the world. Almost three million refugees
have been admitted to the United States in the past 30 years by the
U.S. resettlement program, which has served as a model for other
nations (Acer & Chicco 2009).
In the 1990s the U.S. government changed its policy again and
instituted detention in order to enforce its immigration policies.
With the passage of the Antiterrorism and Effective Death Penalty
Act and the IIRIRA in 1996 detention policies were expanded,
including detention without bond for many groups of noncitizens.
The numbers of detainees grew dramatically between 2001, when
95,000 individuals were detained, and 2009, when 380,000 individ-
uals were detained (see http://www.detentionwatchnetwork.org).
The IIRIRA gave inspectors from the Immigration and Naturaliza-
tion Service (INS) stationed at airports and borders the authority to
order the immediate deportation of persons arriving without
proper documentation and to detain asylum seekers who qualify
for the expedited removal process.
The U.S. Department of Homeland Security (DHS) became
responsible for immigration and asylum matters in 2003 follow-
ing the elimination of the Immigration and Naturalization Service
(INS) and amid additional immigration policy changes. The
Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE) division became
responsible for immigration detention and their attorneys
represent ICE in asylum hearings, generally opposing the asylum
seeker’s request. An asylum ofﬁcer with the U.S. Citizenship and
Immigration Services (USCIS) is responsible for interviewing
individuals before they are allowed to request asylum.
Under the expedited removal process, individuals seeking
asylum can be summarily deported if immigration ofﬁcers deter-
mine that they have arrived in the United States without the
proper travel documents. In the past, this decision-making power
resided with immigration judges. Many individuals and families
ﬂeeing their countries because of some type of persecution
do not carry ofﬁcial travel documents with them because their
governments would not issue these documents; they have man-
aged to travel to the United States without proper documentation.
The law prohibits asylum seekers who have genuine fears
about returning to their native countries from being subjected to
expedited removal; however, in practice they are sometimes
quickly sent back to their native countries to face an uncertain
future. If they are not returned to their native countries, they are
faced with mandatory detention until their reason for requesting
Immigration
91

asylum is determined to be a “credible fear of persecution.” If a
U.S. asylum ofﬁcer or immigration judge determines that their
fears of persecution are not credible, they are deported; if their fears
are determined credible, they are allowed to apply for asylum, but
are still detained.
Although one of the DHS duties is to ensure that the United
States lives up to its commitments to the international community
regarding asylum, many asylum seekers have been detained for
months, and sometimes years, in jails and other jail-like facilities
without any freedoms. Handcuffed when detained and issued
prison-like clothing, many asylum seekers are allowed to visit
with friends and family members only through glass partitions;
in essence, they are treated as criminals. According to a 2009
report by the General Accounting Ofﬁce, the average daily popu-
lation of people detained grew by almost 40 percent from 2003
through 2007 (Acer & Chicco 2009).
The U.S. Commission on International Religious Freedom
(USCIRF) studied the facilities used by ICE and the conditions
under which detained persons were kept and issued a report in
2005 indicating that the facilities in which detainees were kept
were inappropriate for asylum seekers, and that the operating
standards were similar to correctional standards (USCIRF 2005).
The Commission recommended that asylum seekers should be
detained in “non–jail-like” facilities and that standards should be
developed that are tailored to the requirements of asylum seekers
and survivors of torture.
ICE issued a report in 2008 describing the detention standards
that had been developed and would be implemented in 2010 in
response to the USCIRF report. These performance-based stan-
dards were developed to ensure that asylum seekers in detention
are provided with humane treatment, including access to health
care services; that their health care needs will be met in a timely
manner; and that they are given access to counsel, due process,
and other requirements necessary to meet humanitarian concerns.
However, according to a Human Rights First report (2009),
the standards continue to be based on standards for correctional
systems, such as not allowing detained asylum seekers to wear
their own clothes, have access to outdoor activities, have freedom
of movement within the facility, or have face-to-face meetings
with their families and friends. They are also not permitted
to have an immigration court custody hearing to determine their
eligibility for release from detention.
92
U.S. Concerns

Women requesting asylum as a result of their fears of persecu-
tion have often escaped from female genital mutilation, forced
marriage, forced sterilization, rape, domestic violence, and other
serious situations they face in their native countries. They often
travel at great peril to the United States to request asylum, only to
be detained under demoralizing conditions. Even though the
United States has generally supported and protected female refu-
gees and asylum seekers, including through the development of
guidelines that help U.S. asylum ofﬁcers assess women’s claims,
problems remain.
Women seeking asylum should not be detained if they meet
the “credible fear” standard and appear to have a reasonable
opportunity of gaining asylum. If they are detained, they should
not be shackled and treated like criminals. Women who are
responsible for the care of children who have traveled with them
to the United States should have access to parole if they present
no reason to believe they will ﬂee, supervised release should be
used where appropriate, and detention facilities should be
improved along with services to detainees. Finally, women com-
ing from countries where male authority is often absolute should
be interviewed by female ofﬁcers and interpreters in order to
lessen their fear of male authority ﬁgures (Lawyers’ Committee
for Human Rights 2002).
Guestworker Programs in the United States
The current U.S. program for allowing guestworkers into the
country is known as the H-2 program under the Immigration
and Nationality Act. Approximately 121,000 guestworkers were
brought into the United States by employers in 2005, including
32,000 for agricultural work. According to the Southern Poverty
Law Center (SPLC), these workers are not in fact treated as guests
but are abused and exploited, and do not have any rights similar
to U.S. citizens. They are tied to the employers who brought them
into the country, and often have little or no access to legal counsel.
The SPLC indicates that they are frequently cheated out of earned
wages; coerced into mortgaging their futures in order to be hired
for low-wage, temporary jobs; become virtual captives as their
employers seize their documents; live in squalid conditions; and
are often denied health care (Bauer 2007).
Agricultural workers are brought in under the H-2A program,
and nonagricultural workers come in under the H-2B program.
Immigration
93

These workers are only allowed to work for the employers that
brought them in and are not allowed to bring their families with
them. While the H-2A program has some legal protections accord-
ing to federal law and Department of Labor regulations, similar
regulations do not exist for H-2B workers. Even though the majority
of these workers are male, women from developing countries come
in under these programs and suffer discrimination and sexual
harassment. According to a study conducted in 1993 by Maria Elena
Lopez Trevino, over 90 percent of female farm workers in California
experienced sexual harassment on the job (Ontiveros 2003).
The Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC)
investigated reports of female farm workers subjected to sexual
harassment and sexual assault in Fresno, California, in 1995. The
investigation determined that hundreds, possibly thousands, of
women were forced to have sex with their employers in order to
retain their jobs. In one case, the women referred to one ﬁeld as
the “ﬁeld of panties” because so many women had been raped
there by their supervisors (Tamayo 2000).
Women, and men, who come to the United States on H-2
visas have a right to protection from discrimination and abuse;
the government must develop labor regulations that protect both
H-2A and H-2B workers and afford them legal protection and
available resources. The government must develop mechanisms
to monitor employers in order to ensure that they comply with
guest worker contracts and do not abuse or discriminate against
their workers.
Trafficking
Trafﬁcking is a major human rights concern in developing coun-
tries and in the United States. The ﬁrst comprehensive law
concerning trafﬁcking in the United States was the Trafﬁcking
Victims Protection Act of 2000; its goals were to combat trafﬁcking
in persons, ensure punishment of trafﬁckers, and protect victims of
trafﬁcking. Two categories of trafﬁcking were deﬁned: sex trafﬁck-
ing and labor trafﬁcking. Sex trafﬁcking includes prostitution,
pornography, live sex shows, mail-order brides, military prostitu-
tion, and sex tourism. Labor trafﬁcking includes domestic servitude,
restaurant work, sweatshop and factory work, agricultural work,
and construction.
As in other countries, victims of trafﬁcking within the United
States can be U.S. citizens or legal or illegal immigrants who are
94
U.S. Concerns

desperate to support themselves and their families; this despera-
tion leaves them vulnerable to force, coercion, and fraud. Victims
need a variety of services to overcome their victimization, includ-
ing emergency, short-term, and long-term assistance; these needs
encompass health care, ﬁnancial help, housing, counseling, job
training, legal assistance, and other key services. International
victims within the United States may also need legal help with
their immigration status.
Law enforcement authorities have had little success in catch-
ing trafﬁckers and protecting victims. As a result, the Trafﬁcking
Victims Protection Reauthorization Act of 2003 provided civil rem-
edies for victims; for example, the law gave victims a means to sue
their trafﬁckers in U.S. district court. These civil actions enable the
victims to hold their trafﬁckers accountable; large ﬁnancial awards
may serve as a deterrent to other trafﬁckers, and these monies can
assist victims in recovering from their experiences. However, to
date very few cases have been ﬁled against trafﬁckers.
The government must ﬁnd ways to successfully reach these
victims and stop the trafﬁcking. There are many barriers to locat-
ing and providing services to victims. Lack of public awareness
of the extent of trafﬁcking in the United States, the isolation of
victims, their fears related to reporting the crime, and the stigma
of sexual exploitation are some of the barriers. Cultural and
language barriers also plague immigrants along with illiteracy,
making it difﬁcult to reach these victims.
Immigrants’ Life in the United States
If women from developing countries who decide, for any reason, to
settle in the United States are willing and able to adapt to U.S.
culture, their lives may be relatively uncomplicated. If they choose
or are required to hold to their cultural beliefs, however, life may
be more challenging. For example, if their husbands or other family
members require them to maintain cultural practices that are against
the law in the United States, they have a difﬁcult choice to make.
In particular, family members may insist that girls and
women residing in the United States undergo female genital
mutilation, as required by their cultural traditions or for religious
or other reasons. The federal government enacted legislation
related to FGM in 1995. The Federal Prohibition of Female Genital
Mutilation Act deﬁned the practice of FGM as a criminal offense
Immigrants’ Life in the United States
95

except in instances to protect a person’s health, directed the Immi-
gration and Naturalization Service (INS) to provide information
concerning the health effects of FGM to all aliens when issuing
visas, and required the Department of Health and Human Serv-
ices to gather information regarding FGM and conduct public
awareness and education activities.
The Illegal Immigration Reform and Immigrant Responsibility
Act of 1996 criminalized the practice of FGM in the United States,
specifying that “whoever knowingly circumcises, excises or inﬁbu-
lates the whole or any part of the labia majora or labia minora or
clitoris of another person who has not attained the age of 18 years
shall be ﬁned under this title or imprisoned not more that 5 years
or both.” Exceptions are made to protect the health of the minor
or if the operation is performed for medical reasons on a woman
who is in labor or who has just given birth. The legislation does
not permit the practice on the basis of custom or ritual.
Several states have also enacted laws prohibiting FGM (see
Table 3.1). Most states deﬁne FGM similarly to the federal legisla-
tion’s deﬁnition. Many states also specify that performing FGM
for religious, cultural, customary, or ritual reasons is prohibited.
96
U.S. Concerns
TABLE 3.1
State Statutes Addressing Female Genital Mutilation
State
Statute
Year Enacted
Age Limit
Arkansas
Ark. Code. Ann. § 9-13-402 (2010). Deﬁnitions.
2005
Under 18
Included in the deﬁnition of human rights is the
protection of children from genital mutilation.
California
Cal. Penal Code § 273.4 (2009). Female Genital
Mutilation Act.
1996
Not speciﬁed
Cal. Health & Saf. Code § 124170 (2010). Establishment
of education and outreach activities
Colorado
Colo. Rev. Stat. § 18-6-401(b)(I) (2010). Child abuse:
speciﬁc reference to excision or inﬁbulation, in whole or
in part, of a child’s labia majora, labia minora, vulva, or
clitoris.
1999
Females under 16
Delaware
Del. Code Ann. Tit. 11, § 780 (2010). Female genital
mutilation
1996
All ages
Florida
Fla. Stat. Ann. § 794.08 (2010). Female genital
mutilation
2007
Females under 18
Georgia
Ga. Code Ann. § 16-5-27 (2010). Female genital
mutilation
2006
Females under 18

Idaho
Idaho Code Ann. § 18-1506A (2010). Ritualized abuse of
a child: person is guilty of a felony when he “actually or
in simulation, tortures, mutilates or sacriﬁces any . . .
human” as part of a ceremony, rite or any similar
observance.
1990
Children under 18
Illinois
325 Ill. Comp. Stat. 5/3 (2010). Speciﬁcally deﬁnes child
abuse as committing or allowing to be committed “the
offense of female genital mutilation . . . ”
1998
All ages
720 Ill. Comp. Stat. 5/12-32 (2010). Ritual mutilation
720 Ill. Comp. Stat. 5/12/33 (2010). Ritualized abuse of
a child
720 Ill. Comp. Stat. 5/12-34 Female genital mutilation
Maryland
Md. Code Ann., Health-Gen. § 20-601 (2010). Female
genital mutilation
1998
Females under 18
Minnesota
Minn. Stat. § 144.3872 (2009). Female genital
mutilation; education and outreach
1994
All ages
Minn. Stat. § 609.2245 (2009). Female genital
mutilation; penalties
Missouri
Mo. Rev. Stat. §568.065 (2010). Genital mutilation of a
female child; penalty
2000
Females under 17
Nevada
Nev. Rev. Stat. Ann. § 200.5083 (2010). Mutilation of
genitalia of female child; penalties; deﬁnitions
1997
Under 18
New York
N.Y. Penal Law § 130.85 (2010). Female genital
mutilation
1997
Under 18
North
Dakota
N.D. Cent. Code § 12.1-36-01. Surgical alternation of the
genitalia of female minor; penalty; exception
1995
Not speciﬁed
Oklahoma
Okla. Stat. Ann. Tit. 21, § 760 (2010). Female genital
mutilation
2009
Not speciﬁed
Oregon
Or. Rev. Stat. § 163.207. Female genital mutilation
1999
Not speciﬁed
Or. Rev. Stat. § 431.827 (2010) Female genital
mutilation prevention and education activities
Rhode
Island
R.I. Gen. Laws § 11-5-2 (2010). Felony assault: includes
physical injury that “causes serious permanent
disﬁgurement or circumcises, excises or inﬁbulates the
whole or any part of the labia majora or labia minora or
clitoris of a person”
1996
All ages
Tennessee
Tenn. Code Ann. § 39-13-110 (2010). Female genital
mutilation
1996
All ages
Texas
Tex. Health & Safety Code Ann. §167.001 (2010).
Female genital mutilation prohibited
1999
Females under 18
West
Virginia
W.Va. Code Ann. § 61-8D-3A (2010). Female genital
mutilation; penalties; deﬁnitions
1999
Females under 18
Wisconsin
Wis. Stat. Ann. § 146.35 (2010). Female genital
mutilation prohibited
1996
Not speciﬁed

Many immigrants may be concerned with these laws but
nonetheless continue to practice FGM. Watson (2005) explained
this anomaly as follows:
Criminalizing, on its surface, seems a justiﬁable
response for practices that are thought to harm or maim
another. Nevertheless, the history of criminalizing, par-
ticularly of cultural practices, tends to divert the practice
underground, and therefore, lead to more rather than
less concerns. Criminalization of such practices is also
seen as paternalistic—one society’s attempts to evaluate
their own practices as the correct or moral ones and neg-
ate another culture’s practices as lesser or immoral. Stat-
utes requiring educational initiatives rather than
criminalization initiatives might be the most appropriate
compromise. (435)
The U.S. Congress also enacted legislation as part of the 1997
Omnibus Appropriations Spending Bill requiring U.S. executive
directors of international ﬁnancial institutions “to oppose non-
humanitarian loans to countries where female circumcision was
practiced and whose governments had not implemented any
educational programs to prevent the practice” (Sec. 579, Omnibus
Consolidated Appropriations Act, 1997).
Family Planning Policy
As part of U.S. foreign policy, the U.S. Department of State’s
Agency for International Development (USAID) makes funds
available to foreign countries to assist in furthering the govern-
ment’s foreign policy initiatives. USAID and other government
agencies will sometimes attach conditions to the funds given to
foreign governments in order to ensure that they will be used
to improve the well-being of citizens of developing countries or
to encourage the spread and stability of political democracies
(Crimm 2007). Abortion has always been a controversial issue,
drawing strong emotions on both sides. In recent years, the
government has been under increasing pressure from the religious
right to overturn Roe vs. Wade and prohibit abortion in the United
States. The Mexico City Policy, more familiarly known by its oppo-
nents as the Global Gag Rule, was a product of this pressure.
98
U.S. Concerns

Historically, the U.S. government supported family planning
services as part of larger global health and population initiatives.
Beginning with the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961 and continuing
up until the presidency of Ronald Reagan, government aid agen-
cies’ support to developing countries included aid to NGOs to
provide family planning services. With the Foreign Assistance
Act of 1961, research on international family planning and other
population concerns was authorized by the U.S. Congress. Family
planning policies and programs in developing countries were
examined and their relationship to economic development was
debated. Supporters of family planning believed that population
growth should be limited if developing countries wanted to pros-
per. Detractors believed that a growing population would pro-
vide additional productive capacity and aid economic growth.
Family planning was becoming a growing controversial issue.
At the International Conference on Population in 1974, the
debate intensiﬁed. Many developed countries theorized that high
rates of population growth detracted from economic develop-
ment and interfered with development objectives. Many develop-
ing countries disagreed, believing that they would beneﬁt from
the additional people entering the work force and becoming pro-
ductive citizens (Nowels and Veillette 2006). In the United States
in 1974 debate over family planning led Senator Jesse Helms, with
the urging of the religious right, to sponsor an amendment to the
Foreign Assistance Act that prohibited NGOs from using federal
funds to provide abortions as a method of family planning. At
that time, NGOs were still permitted to use other income sources
to provide abortions.
That policy changed at the 1984 International Conference on
Population in Mexico City. Developing countries were beginning
to believe that high population growth was detrimental to their
economic development and a large number encouraged develop-
ment of family planning programs, many of which included the
provision of abortion services. The United States under President
Reagan believed that high population growth might not be
contrary to economic development and changed direction on pol-
icies regarding family planning and abortion. The Mexico City
Policy, announced at the 1974 population conference, prohibited
USAID from providing funding to foreign NGOs that perform
or actively promote abortion as a method of family planning in
other countries, even if their funding did not come from the U.S.
government.
Family Planning Policy
99

Politicsand policies changed as the occupant of the White House
changed.OnJanuary22,1993,PresidentClintonrescindedtheMexico
City Policy, stating that the “excessively broad anti-abortion condi-
tionsareunwarranted... .[T]heyhaveunderminedeffortstopromote
safe and efﬁcacious family planning programs in foreign nations”
(WoolleyandPeters2011).Clintonbelievedthatthiseffortwouldhelp
stabilize the world’s population. At the 1994 Conference on Popula-
tion in Cairo, U.S. government ofﬁcials continued to proclaim that the
U.S. government was supporting family planning and reproductive
health services, including the provision of safe abortions.
However, President George W. Bush reinstated the ban on
funding NGOs that promoted or provided abortion services on
January 22, 2001. He implemented it by attaching conditions to
USAID grant awards, and eventually extended the policy to include
“voluntary population planning” assistance that was provided to
developing countries by the U.S. Department of State. Bush made it
clear that U.S. taxpayer funds should not be used to promote or
pay for abortions. However, abortions would be permitted to save
the life of the mother or in cases of rape or incest, and family plan-
ning counselors in developing countries would also be allowed to
provide “passive” responses to questions regarding abortion in cases
where pregnant women had already decided to have an abortion.
Counselors were also allowed to refer pregnant women to abortion
services when their lives were in danger, and in cases of rape and
incest. On January 23, 2009, President Barack Obama rescinded the
ban on funding NGOs that promoted or provided abortion services,
stating that this policy and its restrictions were excessively
wide-ranging and had undermined developing countries’ attempts
to provide safe and effective family planning programs.
Depending on the party afﬁliation of the current president and
the political climate, the policy will likely go through several rounds
of rescinding and reinstating as governmental leadership changes.
The impact of this on-again-off-again policy on NGOs and develop-
ing countries has been devastating. NGO activities, including the
providing of reproductive health care and family planning services,
have been limited or halted. Some NGOs have closed their doors.
NGOs in countries that have legalized abortion have been forced
to lay off doctors, nurses and other health care professionals at great
cost to their clients; they have cut back their outreach activities,
especially in rural areas (Hoodbhoy et al. 2005). In many developing
countries, the Global Gag Rule has halted efforts to reform abortion
and reproductive health laws. Public awareness activities have been
100
U.S. Concerns

limited, especially in countries where safe abortions are legal and
available, depriving many women of the knowledge that abortion
is a safe and available option. It also prevents health care profes-
sionals from working to lower rates of maternal mortality that result
from unsafe abortions (Skuster 2004).
NGOs that receive money from USAID are unable to counsel
women on the full range of contraceptive services available to
them. In many developing countries the NGOs are the only prov-
iders of health care services, including family planning services,
to women, especially in rural areas. According to Crimm, it “is
horrendous that the GGR [Global Gag Rule] exacerbates the harm
to a large, vulnerable audience of women and children about
whom this nation should be concerned” (Crimm 2007, 614).
Lack of Ratification by the United States of
Key International Conventions
Over time, many countries have looked to the United States for
direction in ratifying certain UN conventions and in determining
their own governmental policies toward human rights. Citizens in
many countries hoped, and continue to hope, that the United States
will lead in the ﬁght for women’s rights. While the United States
and its agencies annually spend billions of dollars assisting govern-
ments and NGOs throughout the world, the United States is one of
the few countries that have not ratiﬁed several key conventions that
support women’s rights. The Convention that generally garners the
most attention is the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Discrimination against Women (CEDAW); the Convention on the
Rights of the Child is another important treaty not yet ratiﬁed by
the United States. The lack of ratiﬁcation of these two conventions
is viewed as compromising the credibility of the United States as a
world leader in the ﬁght for human rights.
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms
of Discrimination against Women
The United States is the only industrialized country in the world
that has not ratiﬁed CEDAW; other countries include Iran, Sudan,
Somalia, Iran, Nauru, Palau, and Tonga. President Jimmy Carter
Lack of Ratification by the United States
101

initially signed the Convention within one year of its adoption by
the United Nations, but the United States is not bound by its pro-
visions until it is ratiﬁed by the U.S. Senate. President Clinton
pushed for ratiﬁcation in 1994 and the Senate Foreign Relations
Committee held hearings and recommended ratiﬁcation to the
full Senate. However, the Senate never held a ﬁnal vote on the
measure due to the opposition of Senator Jesse Helms, a noted
conservative. President George W. Bush supported ratiﬁcation
early in his presidency and the Senate Foreign Relations Commit-
tee again held hearings in 2002 and recommended ratiﬁcation.
Again, a ﬁnal vote on the Senate ﬂoor was never held.
Opponents to ratiﬁcation include many members of the reli-
gious right and other conservatives. They believe that the Con-
vention will threaten the laws and culture of the United States
by undermining traditional “family values” and current statutes
concerning the family, including parental rights. They believe it
will also ensure access to abortion and contraceptives, legalize
prostitution, and allow same-sex marriage. Some also believe that
it will force employers to pay women a salary equal to men, which
they argue will undermine the free market system. Other argu-
ments include the observation that CEDAW does not include
any mechanisms for enforcing its recommendations and policies.
Many in the government, as well as opponents of CEDAW,
believe that women are already protected in the United States
from discrimination, including in the Constitution, and therefore
do not require any Conventions or other documents to provide
them with basic human rights and prevent discrimination.
Supporters believe that it is important for the United States to
stand up and show its support for women’s rights by ratifying the
Convention. In addition, women in the United States, while
enjoying many opportunities not available to women in develop-
ing countries, still experience discrimination and violence.
Women still lag behind men in income, earning only 78 cents for
every dollar earned by a man. Despite the passage of the Violence
against Women Act, domestic violence currently affects at least
2 million women every year—possibly more since this is an
underreported crime. The United States is ranked 41st out of 184
countries on maternal mortality. Based on these facts, supporters
urge passage of this Convention. Ratiﬁcation would also continue
the bipartisan tradition in the United States of encouraging and
promoting human rights around the world. No costs would be
incurred by the government if it ratiﬁed CEDAW.
102
U.S. Concerns

CEDAW provides a roadmap for governments and NGOs to
work together to improve the lives of women and eliminate and
prevent discrimination and violence against them. Women in
many developing countries are successfully working with their
governments to achieve gender parity in education, reduce vio-
lence against women, provide inheritance rights and property
rights to women, and give women the right to vote, and ratiﬁca-
tion by the U.S. Senate would send a strong message of support
to these women, their governments, and local NGOs.
The administration of President Barack Obama has indicated
that it supports ratiﬁcation of CEDAW. On January 5, 2011, a res-
olution was introduced to the U.S. House of Representatives sup-
porting ratiﬁcation by the U.S. Senate and indicating that “the full
realization of the rights of women is vital to the development and
well-being of people of all nations.” The bill has 70 co-sponsors
and has been sent to the House Committee on Foreign Affairs
for further action.
The Convention on the Rights of the Child
The Convention on the Rights of the Child (CRC), adopted in
1989, has not been ratiﬁed by the United States; Somalia is the
only other country that has not ratiﬁed this Convention. The
CRC promotes and protects the health and well-being of all chil-
dren, focusing on children’s right to survival; to develop to their
greatest potential; to be protected from abuse, neglect, and exploi-
tation; and to participate in family and cultural life.
Similar to the arguments that opponents raise for not ratify-
ing CEDAW, opponents argue that this Convention will override
the U.S. Constitution and become the ultimate law of the land.
However, just as with CEDAW, the U.S. Supreme Court has
already ruled, citing the Supremacy Clause of the Constitution,
that no agreement or treaty can override the U.S. Constitution.
Again, there are no provisions or requirements for implementing
the CRC; each country can determine how it chooses to enforce
the CRC provisions. Finally, as with CEDAW, ratiﬁcation can
always be subject to certain reservations, understandings, and
declarations—a practice that many other countries have used
when ratifying a treaty.
Opponents also believe that the CRC will undermine paren-
tal authority by allowing minors to have abortions, choose their
own religion, join gangs, and gain unrestricted access to any
Lack of Ratification by the United States
103

information they want, including pornography; they believe, fur-
thermore, that it will provide children with the same rights
afforded to adults and allow them to sue their parents. One of
the major objections opponents have voiced against ratiﬁcation
is that it prohibits the use of capital punishment against children
(Art. 37). In 2005, the U.S. Supreme Court found that the use of
capital punishment against juveniles was unconstitutional, which
effectively removed that argument.
Proponents believe that because the U.S. government, along
with NGOs, will be responsible for how the CRC is implemented,
there is no danger that the United Nations will override all U.S.
laws and control the lives of its citizens, including children. The
CRC describes and encourages the important role parents play
in the lives of the children, and does not dictate how parents
are to raise their children. Children are permitted to practice their
religion free from government interference, but parents may
guide their children in this respect. Since ratiﬁcation, many coun-
tries have improved access to a variety of programs for children
and their families, strengthened programs and policies regarding
children’s rights, and reformed laws affecting children.
References
Abay vs. Ashcroft, 368 F.3d 634 (6th Cir. 2003).
Acer, Eleanor, and Jessica Chicco. 2009. U.S. Detention of Asylum Seekers:
Seeking Protection, Finding Prison. Washington, D.C.: Human Rights First.
Aherne, Meredith. 2006. “Olowo vs. Ashcroft: Granting Parental Asylum
Based on a Child’s Refugee Status.” Pace International Law Review, Paper
249. Available at http://digital commons.pace.edu/intlaw/249.
Bauer, Mary. 2007. Close to Slavery: Guestworker Programs in the United
States. Montgomery, AL: Southern Poverty Law Center.
Crimm, Nina J. 2007. “The Global Gag Rule: Undermining National
Interests by Doing unto Foreign Women and NGOs What Cannot Be
Done at Home.” Cornell International Law Journal 40: 587–633.
Gao vs. Gonzales, 440 F.3d 62 (2nd Cir. 2006).
Goeller, Cara. 2007. “Forced Marriage and the Granting of Asylum: A
Reason to Hope after Gao v. Gonzales.” William and Mary Journal of
Women and the Law 14: 173–195.
Gomez vs. INS, 947 F.2d 660 (2nd Cir. 1991).
104
U.S. Concerns

Hoodbhoy, Mehlika, et al. 2005. “Exporting Despair: The Human Rights
Implications of U.S. Restrictions on Foreign Health Care in Kenya.”
Fordham International Law Journal 29: 1.
In re Alvarado, No. A73753922 (Immigration Court 20 September 1996).
In re Fauziya Kasinga, 21 I&N. Dec. 357 (BIA 1996).
Lawyers’ Committee for Human Rights. 2002. Refugee Women at Risk:
Unfair U.S. Laws Hurt Asylum Seekers. New York: Lawyers’ Committee for
Human Rights.
Nowels, Larry. 2001. CRS Report for Congress, International Family
Planning: The Mexico City Policy CRS-3. Washington, D.C.: Congressional
Research Service.
Nowels, Larry, and Connie Veillette. 2006. CRS Report for Congress,
International Population Assistance and Family Planning Programs: Issues for
Congress 2. Washington, D.C.: Congressional Research Service.
Oforji vs. Ashcroft, 354 F.3d 609 (7th Cir. 2003).
Olowo vs. Ashcroft, 368 F.3d 692 (7th Cir. 2004).
Ontiveros, Maria. 2003. “Lessons from the Fields: Female Farmworkers
and the Law.” Maine Law Review 55: 157.
Qu vs. Gonzales, 399 F.3d 1995 (9th Cir. 2005).
Schubert, Katie Ann. 2007. “Female Circumcision in the United States: An
Analysis of Laws and Policies.” Master’s Thesis Abstract, Graduate
School of the University of Florida. Available at http://etd.fcla.edu/UF/
UFE0021016/schubert_k.pdf.
Skuster, Patty. 2004. “Advocacy in Whispers: The Impact of the USAID
Global Gag Rule upon Free Speech and Free Association in the Context of
Abortion Law Reform in Three East African Countries.” Michigan Journal
of Gender and Law 11: 97.
Tamayo, William R. 2000. “Forging Our Identity: Transformative
Resistance in the Areas of Work, Class and the Law: The Role of the
EEOC in Protecting the Civil Rights of Farm Workers.” University of
California Davis Law Review 33: 1075.
Tarnoff, Curt, and Larry Nowels. 2004. CRS Report for Congress, Foreign
Aid: An Introductory Overview of U.S. Programs and Policy 2. Washington,
D.C.: Congressional Research Service.
UNHCR. 1994. Memorandum: Female Genital Mutilation. Geneva: UNHCR,
Division of International Protection.
USCIRF. 2005. Report on Asylum Seekers in Expedited Removal, Vol. 1:
Findings and Recommendations. Washington, D.C.: USCIRF.
References
105

Watson, M. 2005. “Female Circumcision from Africa to the Americas:
Slavery to the Present.” The Social Sciences Journal 42: 421–437.
Woolley, John T., and Gerhard Peters. N.d. The American Presidency
Project (online). Santa Barbara, CA. Available atat http://www
.presidency.ucsb.edu/ws/?pid=46311.
Yadegar-Sargis vs. INS, 297 F.3d 596 (7th Cir. 2002).
106
U.S. Concerns

4
Chronology
T
he history of the status and rights of women in developing
countries is rich in detail from its earliest moments. Because
so many events affecting women have occurred throughout
history, this chapter will focus only on recent history. Most of the
events described here occurred after 1974, although several before
1975 are included to provide a perspective on women’s lives and
activism in developing countries. References at the end of this
chapter provide additional sources of information concerning
important dates in women’s history.
1919
Women in Egypt participate in street demonstrations
to protest the many oppressive policies of the British
protectorate, marking the beginning of the ﬁght for
their rights as women.
1919
The Paris Peace Conference is held. The women’s
delegation to the conference lobbies for an 8-hour
workday, a 44-hour work week, an end to child labor,
support for social insurance and pensions, maternity
beneﬁts, equal pay, and minimum wages for house-
work. Most delegates believe that these proposals are
too radical and they are quickly shelved. Delegates
also urge Conference leaders to nominate women to
positions of inﬂuence in the League of Nations, to
eliminate trafﬁc in women and children and state-
supported prostitution, and to recognize universal
suffrage.
107

1927
The All-India Women’s Conference opens with dis-
cussions concerning women’s education. Participants
expand their focus to include the elimination of pur-
dah, child marriage, and other problems that were
ﬁrst tackled by nineteenth-century reformers.
1928
Female delegates to the Conference of American
States propose an Inter-American Commission of
Women. This group is ofﬁcially endorsed at the 1933
conference. The commission is the ﬁrst regional inter-
governmental body whose speciﬁc purpose is to
advance women’s rights.
1933
The ﬁrst women’s bank is founded in Indonesia.
1936
Victoria Ocampo leads the effort to form the Argen-
tine Union of Women. The union’s main goal is to
stop a proposed “reform” of the Argentine civil code
that would again consider married women as legal
minors, and therefore not allowed to control their
wages or work but rather dependent on their hus-
band’s permission.
1937
In response to requests from several women’s organ-
izations, the League of Nations establishes a Commit-
tee of Experts on the Legal Status of Women. This
committee has the authority to conduct a comprehen-
sive and scientiﬁc inquiry into the legal status of
women in countries throughout the world.
1945
Legislation is passed that outlaws inﬁbulation in
Sudan. This law will be ignored by many people.
1946
The Sudanese Women’s League is formed. This is the
ﬁrst modern women’s organization in the Sudan.
1946
After leaders of 51 governments ratiﬁed the UN
Charter the previous year, they meet in London for
the ﬁrst time to discuss their role in preventing future
wars and in solving the worldwide economic crisis that
followed World War II. Several women serve as dele-
gates to the UN General Assembly as representatives
108
Chronology

1946
(cont.)
or alternates from their countries. The ﬁve represen-
tatives are Eleanor Roosevelt (United States), Minerva
Bernardino (Dominican Republic), Jeane McKenzie
(New Zealand), Evdokia I. Uralova (USSR), and Ellen
Wilkinson (United Kingdom). The alternates come
from Czechoslovakia, Denmark, France, Greece,
the Netherlands, Norway, the United Kingdom, and
the United States.
1946
The Commission on the Status of Women is estab-
lished by the United Nations. It is one of the earliest
intergovernmental agencies set up to monitor the
implementation and status of women’s rights
throughout the world. Helvi Sipila¨, a lawyer from
Finland, is its chairperson.
1947
Rani Gaidinliu, an Indian freedom ﬁghter; is released
after spending 14 years in jail for her protests against
the British occupation and rule of India. At the age of
16, she led a group of guerrilla ﬁghters and was cap-
tured only after the British sent out a large number
of troops.
1947
A group of women in Nepal found the Adharsa
Mahila Sangh (Model Women’s Organization) to ﬁght
child marriage. They also ﬁght for the right of wid-
ows to remarry.
1950
Planned Parenthood International is founded by
Indian family planning advocate Dhanvanthi Rama
Rau.
1951
The marriage of girls under 12 is allowed in Sri Lanka
as long as each wedding is approved by a religious
court.
1953
The UN General Assembly elects Indian diplomat
Vijaya Pandit as its ﬁrst female president.
1953
The Federation of Ghana Women, a trade and
business association, is founded by Dr. Evelyn
Amartieﬁo.
Chronology
109

1954
Divorce is legalized in Argentina; women have
worked for decades for this legal reform. However,
the law will be repealed the following year.
1954
Women in Nepal stage a protest over the lack of
women in the King’s Advisory Assembly. As a result,
the government forms a second assembly and
includes four female members in a total of
113 members.
1954
The National Federation of Indian Women, a broad-
based, moderate feminist group, is founded in India.
1955
In India, legislation outlaws polygamy for Hindus
but Muslim men are still allowed to marry up to four
women. Both women and men may sue for divorce
on the grounds of adultery, desertion, physical or
mental cruelty, religious conversion, insanity, leprosy,
sexually transmitted disease, disappearance for
seven years, or persistent and long-term refusal of
conjugal rights. Women are also allowed to sue for
divorce from a husband who is found guilty of rape,
sodomy, or bestiality. Women who marry before age
15 have until age 18 to divorce their husbands, as
long as the marriage has not been consummated.
1955
Women band together in India to found Bharatiya
Grammen Mahila Sangh. This organization offers
family planning services, maternity and child care,
and vocational training for women.
1956
In India, legislation is passed that outlaws sati, or
widow-burning; reafﬁrms the father’s right to cus-
tody of his children; allows equal inheritance rights
to both Hindu sons and daughters; allows women to
adopt children; and provides equal rights to adopted
sons and daughters.
1956
Recognizing the need for an organized approach to
family planning, the government of Egypt establishes
the Supreme Council of Family Planning.
110
Chronology

1956
Believing that girls should be able to go to school,
Saudi Arabian queen Iffat, the wife of King Faisal,
establishes a government school for girls.
1957
Lee Tai Young, Korea’s ﬁrst woman lawyer, estab-
lishes the Korean Legal Aid Center for Family Rela-
tions. She helps women who have a variety of legal
problems, especially women who need help getting
divorces from their husbands.
1957
The UN General Assembly approves the Convention
on the Nationality of Married Women, which no
longer ties a woman’s nationality to that of her
husband.
1958
Afghanistan’s prime minister calls for women to
reject the veil.
1958
Recognizing the need for family planning programs,
the Nepal Family Planning Association is founded.
1958
Nigeria opens its ﬁrst birth control clinic.
1958
The Economic and Social Council of the United
Nations and the Commission on the Status of Women
call on the World Health Organization (WHO) to
study the persistent custom of female genital circum-
cision and the steps that governments plan to take to
end the practice. The following year, WHO rejects this
request because circumcision is based on local social
and cultural practices and therefore is outside the
realm of WHO’s interest.
1960
The Commission on the Status of Women urges gov-
ernments to afﬁrm women’s access to all levels of
education. The Convention on Eliminating Discrimi-
nation in Education is adopted by the United
Nations.
1960
Sirimavo Bandaranaike becomes the prime minister
of Ceylon following the assassination of her husband,
Chronology
111

1960
(cont.)
Solomon Bandaranaike. She is the world’s ﬁrst female
prime minister.
1961
The Dowry Prohibition Act is passed in India. This
legislation makes the act of asking for a dowry illegal,
but the law has little effect on actual practice through-
out the country. “Presents” can still be legally offered
to the groom’s family by the bride’s family. If a groom’s
family believes that these “presents” are not sufﬁcient,
they may still harass the bride and sometimes kill her.
The practice, known as dowry murder, continues
despite protests from India’s many women’s groups.
1961
The Mount Carmel International Center for Commu-
nity Training is formed at a meeting in Haifa, Israel.
The meeting is attended by women from 23 African
and Asian countries who are inspired by Golda
Meir’s desire to help rural women in Third World
countries. The center offers agricultural and business
training for women.
1962
Feminists in Brazil win a change of the law that considers
women legal minors; they are now considered adults.
1962
Thailand outlaws prostitution, primarily as a result of
the efforts of Pierra Hoon Veijjabu, Thailand’s ﬁrst
female physician.
1967
The Declaration on the Elimination of All Forms of
Discrimination against Women is written by the
Commission on the Status of Women. It is the ﬁrst
comprehensive measure concerning women’s rights.
1968
Iranian politician Farrokhrou Parsa, who had become
one of the ﬁrst six women in the Iranian Parliament in
1964, becomes her country’s ﬁrst female cabinet min-
ister. She is named minister of education.
1968
The idea that family planning is a human right is ﬁrst
recognized at the U N International Conference on
Human Rights in Tehran, Iran.
112
Chronology

1969
The government of Ecuador institutes a “malaria con-
trol” program throughout the country. In reality, this
program is an excuse to sterilize peasant women.
1969
Several women are elected or appointed to ofﬁce during
this year. These women include Jordan’s ﬁrst female
ambassador, Laurice Hlass; Ecuador’s ﬁrst female sena-
tor, Isabel Robalino; Venezuela’s ﬁrst female cabinet
minister; Minister of Development Aura Celina Casa-
nova; South Africa’s ﬁrst female judge, Leonora Neeth-
ling; and Puerto Rico’s ﬁrst female cabinet member;
Secretary of Labor Julia Rivera de Vincenti.
1969
The ﬁrst feminist group in Venezuela, the Movi-
miento de Liberacion de la Mujer (Women’s Libera-
tion Movement), is founded.
1970
In Libya, women who are employed receive a pay
bonus when they get married. A new law mandates
that women receive equal pay for equal work but
restrictions are placed on women working under cer-
tain conditions. These restrictions are that women
cannot hold jobs that are dangerous, cannot work at
night in most cases, and cannot work more than
48 hours per week.
1971
Women in India win the right to have an abortion
(one and a half years before Roe vs. Wade legalizes
abortion in the United States).
1971
Women’s rights forces continue to lose ground in
Islamic countries. President Numairi of the Sudan is
openly hostile to the radical Sudanese Women’s
Union and forces the dismantling of the group.
1972
Aida Gindy of the Social Development Division of
the United Nations recognizes the need for more
understanding of the role of women in economic
development. She calls for and plans an Expert
Group Meeting to discuss these issues. Sir Arthur
Lewis, president of the Caribbean Development
Chronology
113

1972
(cont.)
Bank, presides over the meeting; he is joined by Inga
Thorssen (Sweden), Aziza Hussein (Egypt), Annie
Jiagge (Ghana), Vida Tomsic (Yugoslavia), Mina Ben
Zvi (Israel), Laticia Shahani (Philippines), and Elizabeth
Koontz (United States). Margaret Snyder is the Eco-
nomic Commission of Africa (ECA) Observer. Members
discuss common strategies to effectively integrate
women into the development process.
1972
The Economic Commission of Africa establishes its
own Women’s Programme, explaining that women
are neglected as resources and that their contribu-
tions to society are rarely seen or measured. Women’s
social and economic activities and contributions
within their families, communities, and nations are
not acknowledged or supported, which leads to
missed opportunities for development and negative
effects on productivity. The ECA Women’s Pro-
gramme is designed to help communities and nations
recognize women’s contributions.
1973
The Institute for Women’s Studies in the Arab World
is created as part of Beirut University College. Its
goals are focused on academics and include creating
and maintaining contacts with people throughout
the world interested in women’s issues, increasing
awareness of the advances made by Arab women,
and advocating for the integration of women into
development activities.
1973
The United States Congress passes the Percy Amend-
ment to the Foreign Assistance Act. The amendment
requires that development assistance programs pay
particular attention to integrating women into
national economies in order to improve their status.
1975
The ﬁrst regional conference on Gulf women is
organized by the Kuwaiti Women’s Social and Cul-
tural Society, an NGO that works closely with
government ofﬁcials to encourage the participation
of women in the development process.
114
Chronology

1975
International Women’s Year is proclaimed by the
United Nations. A conference is held in June in Mexico
City and is the ﬁrst world conference of governments
focusing on women. Delegates create the World Plan
of Action, the ﬁrst international public policy to
improve women’s status. The conference is the largest
consciousness-raising event held on this subject and
advances women’s claim to full citizenship. The
conference is signiﬁcant because it marks the merger
of two distinct agendas: the women’s agenda, deﬁned
and developed by the Commission on the Status of
Women (CSW), and the larger political agenda of the
United Nations. Delegations from 133 nations and
representatives from eight UN agencies, 12 UN pro-
grams, and 192 NGOs in consultative status attend
the Conference on International Women’s Year. Over
6,000 participants attend an unofﬁcial parallel
conference at the opposite end of Mexico City.
1975
In October, the World Congress for International
Women’s Year is held in Berlin. Almost 2,000 dele-
gates, observers, and guests from throughout the
world gather to unite diverse social forces to encour-
age the world’s women to maintain peace and to ﬁght
for democracy and the fulﬁllment of their legitimate
rights. Delegates come from 29 European countries,
33 Asian countries, 44 African countries, and 33 coun-
tries in North, Central, and South America, as well as
Australia and New Zealand.
1975
The Committee on the Status of Women in India pub-
lishes its ﬁndings in a report entitled Towards Equality.
This government report examines the ways in which
the status of women affects their lives.
1976
The International Tribunal on Crimes against Women
convenes in Brussels to discuss the violence against
women that occurs throughout the world. Over one
thousand women from around the world discuss the
extent and prevention of violence, including rape,
battering, genital mutilation, and imprisonment.
Chronology
115

1976
The United Nations develops its World Plan of
Action, which suggests ways to integrate both men
and women into the development process. Among
its recommendations are the development of wom-
en’s bureaus, advisory committees, commissions,
ministries, and government ofﬁces at all levels to
monitor and promote the causes of women.
1976
Egypt becomes the ﬁrst Arab nation to reverse the
gains that women have made throughout the region.
The government amends article 2 of the constitution
to make the Shari’a, or Islamic, law the principal law
of the country.
1976
At the National Conference of the Mozambican Wom-
en’s Organization, members deﬁne the problems that
face them in Mozambique: illiteracy, unemployment,
tribalism, racism, prostitution, and forced marriage.
1977
The World Bank creates the post of Adviser on
Women. The president of the World Bank pledges to
monitor the impact of bank activities on women and
to ensure that attention will be paid to the role of
women in development activities.
1977
A ten-day Pan-African Conference on the Role of
Trade Women is held in Nairobi. It is sponsored by
the African-American Labor Center and the AFL-
CIO. Issues debated include why more women do
not actively participate in their unions and what can
be done to increase women’s participation.
1977
General Zia al-Haq seizes power in Pakistan. He rolls
back all the gains that women had made under the
ﬁrst president of Pakistan, Mohammad Ali Jinnah,
and requires that they wear Islamic dress, including
the chador. (Jinnah had believed that women should
not be conﬁned and that Islamic law did not require
their subjugation and conﬁnement.)
1977
In Buenos Aires, Argentina, the Mothers and Grand-
mothers of the Plaza de Mayo publicly protest against
116
Chronology

1977
(cont.)
military rule and begin their search for missing rela-
tives. The military government had set up a network
of more than 340 secret concentration camps to hold
those they perceived as enemies of the state. Over
30,000 people, including approximately 10,000 women,
were kidnapped from homes, schools, and places of
employment. Families were not notiﬁed of the kidnap-
pings or of the location of their relatives. The protest in
the Plaza de Mayo brings world attention to the abuses
of the military government.
1979
In February, the World Health Organization holds a
conference in Khartoum, the capital of Sudan, on tradi-
tional practices affecting the health of women. As a
result of this conference, the practice of female circum-
cision is examined and many participants begin to
question the reasons for this custom. Estimates suggest
that as many as 30 million girls have been circumcised
to some degree. Most participants are health ofﬁcials of
countries in which female circumcision is practiced.
The conference participants unanimously condemn
circumcision as a practice that is disastrous to the
health of women in these countries and one that cannot
be defended on either medical or humane grounds.
1979
Egyptian feminist Nawal El Saadawi publishes The
Hidden Face of Eve: Women in the Arab World, in which
she discusses female genital mutilation, rape, the
Arab emphasis on female virginity before marriage,
family honor, and women in Arab history.
1979
On March 8, 6,000 women march in Tehran, Iran, to
protest the oppressive policies of Iran’s new leader,
Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini. They chant, “In the
dawn of freedom, there is no freedom.” On March 10,
Iran’s Palace of Justice is seized by 15,000 women
protesting the loss of their rights. On March 13, two
women attack Khomeini’s spokesman. They do not
win any reforms of the repressive policies.
1979
The market in Accra, Ghana, is destroyed by the
government, which believes that the market women
Chronology
117

1979
(cont.)
are responsible for food shortages throughout the
area. The women become scapegoats and are per-
secuted because many people believe that the women
are wealthy and powerful. The women have no real
power and no way to ﬁght back.
1979
The ﬁrst widely publicized demonstrations against
dowry murder in India take place. Women march
through neighborhoods in New Delhi to the home
where one dowry murder has recently occurred;
other demonstrators march to the homes where sus-
pected dowry murders have occurred.
1979
The ﬁrst global feminist meeting is held in Bangkok,
Thailand.
1979
In Medellin, Colombia, a National Women’s
Congress is held. Representatives from 19 women’s
groups meet to discuss abortion and the abuse of
sterilization procedures.
1979
The Hudood Ordinances are passed in Pakistan.
These four laws govern adultery, fornication, rape,
and prostitution. The testimony of women is banned
in certain types of serious criminal trials, including
trials for murder, theft, adultery, and rape. A woman
must have four adult male witnesses who are Muslim
to prove that she has been raped. However, if the
accused rapist is found not guilty, the woman can be
sentenced to 80 lashes for “false testimony.”
1979
In Iran, Farrokhrou Parsa, Iran’s ﬁrst female cabinet
member, is executed by ﬁring squad as a result of
her feminist views. She had believed that schoolgirls
should not have to wear the veil. She had also advo-
cated that schools use non-sexist teaching materials.
1980
The King of Saudi Arabia decrees that brides and
grooms must be permitted to meet each other before
the wedding. Most Saudi Arabian women are mar-
ried by the time they are 16 years old and are bought
by the groom with a bride price.
118
Chronology

1980
The UN Children’s Emergency Fund (UNICEF)
pledges to assist community groups and organizations
willing to work toward the prevention of female genital
circumcision. As a result, several women’s organiza-
tions are formed, including the Somali Democratic
Women’s Organization, the Women’s Group against
Sexual Mutilation (France), Le Mouvement Femmes et
Socie´te´ (Senegal), and the Babiker Bedri Foundation
for Women’s Studies and Research (Sudan).
1980
In Namibia, Ida Jimmy makes a speech at the South
West African People’s Organization (SWAPO) and is
sentenced to seven years in prison for speaking out
against the current regime. Gertrude Kandanga,
deputy secretary of SWAPO’s Women’s Council, also
is arrested and held in jail for one year without being
charged with a crime or given a trial.
1980
A workshop on national liberation and development
is held at The Hague, the Netherlands. Women from
all over the world converge to discuss the liberation
struggles in which they have been involved (for exam-
ple, in South Africa, Angola, Namibia, Mozambique,
and Zimbabwe). They examine their participation and
the gains, if any, they have made in their own liberation
struggles once national liberation has succeeded. Most
often, they discover, women return to their old (subser-
vient) status following the national struggle.
1980
The mid-decade Conference for the International
Women’s Decade is held in Copenhagen. It has two
goals: to measure progress in the ﬁrst half of the
Decade for Women (1976–1985) and to develop strat-
egies and programs for the remaining ﬁve years. Poli-
tics appears to enter into every major item of
discussion; for example, the Iran delegation with-
draws; Jihan el-Sadat, the wife of President Anwar
Sadat of Egypt, discusses Middle East issues and
prompts a walkout by Palestinian representatives;
and the concept of sexism is not included in the draft
of the Programme of Action because many women
insist that it does not exist in their countries. At the
Chronology
119

1980
(cont.)
conclusion, four delegations—from the United States,
Canada, Australia, and Israel—vote against the Pro-
gramme of Action, while the rest of the Western dele-
gations abstain. U.S. representatives believe that the
conference is a diplomatic defeat and many others
believe that the women’s movement has been dam-
aged beyond repair.
1980
Following the murders of two women by their hus-
bands, Brazilian feminists establish the Center for
the Defense of the Rights of Women.
1981
The government arrests Egyptian feminist Nawal el
Saadawi because she has published articles that criti-
cize President Sadat’s policies. Many other feminists
are also arrested because of their activities protesting
government actions and policies. El Saadawi is held
in prison for 80 days and released after Sadat is
assassinated.
1981
The ﬁrst All Latin American Women’s Conference is
held in Colombia. The conference is attended by 250
delegates from 25 countries and focuses on the status
of women in Latin America.
1981
The ﬁrst battered women’s shelter is opened in Thai-
land by activist Kanitha Wichiencharoen.
1981
Peruvian feminists protest pornography and violence
against women.
1981
In Geneva, a conference on Women and Health is
convened. Over 250 women from 35 countries gather
to discuss health issues of importance to women.
1981
Several NGOs appear before the UN Working Group
on Slavery to argue that female circumcision and
other traditional practices are human rights viola-
tions. The Working Group recommends that a study
be conducted to examine the extent of this problem.
120
Chronology

1981
The International Labor Conference adopts a new
convention, the Workers with Family Responsibil-
ities Convention (No. 156), as well as a new Workers
with Family Responsibilities Recommendation (No.
165). This is the ﬁrst time at the international level that
child care is acknowledged as the concern of men as
well as of women. Convention 156 requires that
member states of the International Labor Organization
develop national policies that will “enable persons with
family responsibilities who are engaged or wish to
engage in employment to exercise their right to do so
without being subject to discrimination and, to the
extent possible, without conﬂict between their employ-
ment and family responsibilities” (Article 3). Recom-
mendation 165 elaborates the steps that can be taken
to implement the convention. These include reduced
working hours and overtime, ﬂexible work schedules,
parental leave of absence following maternity leave,
and protection for part-time workers.
1982
Two women in Nicaragua become justices on the
Supreme Court (Sandra Day O’Connor became the
ﬁrst woman on the U.S. Supreme Court in 1981).
1982
An Expert Meeting on Multidisciplinary Research on
Women in the Arab World is held in Tunis. The meet-
ing is sponsored by the UN Educational, Scientiﬁc
and Cultural Organization (UNESCO). As a result of
this meeting, the Association for the Development of
Research on Women in the Arab World is formed.
1982
In Chile, the Movement of Women Slum Dwellers
(MOMUPO) is founded with the purpose of uniting
and coordinating the activities of grassroots women’s
groups. There are over 50,000 people in the Santiago
area who belong to 500 organizations to ﬁght poverty.
1982
The Islamic Ideology Council of Pakistan proposes
passage of a Law of Evidence that would value a
woman’s testimony in court half as much as a man’s.
Chronology
121

1982
(cont.)
It also recommends that the lives of murder victims
who are women should be valued half as much as
murder victims who are male.
1982
A pro-contraceptive campaign is begun in India to
curb large population increases. Women are paid
$22 to be sterilized and men are paid $15.
1982
Kenya outlaws traditional genital mutilation of women.
1983
UNESCO begins to implement strategies with member
states and NGOs to encourage literacy programs
among women in developing countries. It launches
Equal Opportunities in Education for Women and
Girls, a special program whose aim is to reduce gender
inequities in all areas but especially in education.
1983
The second Latin American and Caribbean Feminist
Meeting is held in Lima, Peru. The focus is decidedly
feminist; topics include patriarchy and the church,
feminist research, domestic work, women in exile,
health, literature, development programs, sexuality,
power, violence and sexual slavery, paid work, fam-
ily, peasant women, psychotherapy, feminism, and
general problems in daily life.
1983
Thirteen women’s organizations send a memoran-
dum requesting government action to the lieutenant
governor of Delhi, India, claiming that the number
of young women who have died as a result of burns
in New Delhi grew from 311 in 1977 to 610 in 1982
(Indian Express, 3 December 1983).
1983
Several women’s organizations publicly protest the
Pinochet regime in Chile. The Manifesto of the Femi-
nist Movement is written, including the slogan
“Democracy in the Country and in the Home.” Sev-
eral organizations coordinate their activities in
opposition to military rule.
1983
In Brazil, women are outraged when a woman who
killed her husband is sentenced to 14 years in prison
122
Chronology

1983
(cont.)
while a man who murdered his wife is given a two-
year suspended sentence. The court’s position is that
the man was defending his honor and therefore had
a right to murder his wife.
1984
In Egypt, the Committee on the Conditions of Women
is created by the Arab Lawyers Federation. This com-
mittee examines the status of women and encourages
interest in human rights in general and women’s
rights in particular.
1984
The Women’s Cultural and Social Society of Kuwait
works to mobilize women and to encourage them to
work with, and lobby, key government ofﬁcials to
extend voting rights to women. Members are pri-
marily upper- and middle-class women.
1984
The ﬁrst Regiona1 Meeting on Women and Health in
Latin America is held in Colombia and includes 70
participants from 10 countries. This is one of many
conferences in which women’s health concerns are
made known and protests are registered against
male-dominated health policy decisions.
1984
The Inter-African Committee on Traditional Practices
is formed. The committee’s two major tasks are sup-
porting the creation of national organizations to
address the issue of female circumcision and other
traditional practices and encouraging research into
those practices that are harmful to women. The com-
mittee also proposes strategies for eliminating female
circumcision.
1984
The Dowry Prohibition (Amendment) Act of 1984 is
passed in India. The purpose of this act is to
strengthen the Dowry Prohibition Act of 1961, which
was ignored by most Indians. There are no provisions
for enforcing the act, however.
1984
In Argentina, the world’s ﬁrst Housewives’ Trade
Union is created to provide support and advocacy
for housewives.
Chronology
123

1984
The International Tribunal and Meeting on Repro-
ductive Rights is held in Amsterdam.
1985
The Tunisian Human Rights Organization creates a
committee to defend the rights of women. The commit-
tee circulates a petition that supports women’s equal
access to work, education, civil and political rights,
divorce, guardianship of children following the death
of the husband, and improvement in the inheritance
rights of single female children. A series of debates is
organized on these issues and many of them are dis-
cussed on television and radio programs. The cam-
paign concludes with a large demonstration to show
popular support for the ﬁght for women’s rights.
1985
The lack of progress in improving women’s health is
a major concern at the annual meeting of the World
Health Assembly, which consists of representatives
of all member states of the World Health Organiza-
tion. The group also notes that women’s rights
should be protected and recognizes the link between
equal rights and women’s participation in health
activities.
1985
Nairobi, Kenya, hosts the ﬁnal conference of the UN
Decade for Women, 1975–1985, and the parallel
NGO Forum ’85. Approximately 1,900 ofﬁcial dele-
gates and more than 14,000 NGO representatives
arrive in Nairobi for these meetings. The main pur-
pose of the meeting is to review and appraise the
achievements of the Decade for Women and to adopt
the major conference document, the Nairobi Forward-
Looking Strategies for the Advancement of Women.
1985
The National Conference on Perspectives for Wom-
en’s Liberation is held in Bombay, India. Almost 400
delegates from over 100 women’s organizations
throughout India attend the conference.
1985
Over 5,000 landless peasants from the Paraguayan
Peasants’ Movement (MCP) organize a mass public
demonstration for their rights. Over 1,000 peasant
124
Chronology

1985
(cont.)
women participate in a demonstration to celebrate
the formation of the Women’s Commission of the
MCP.
1986
The International AIDS Conference recognizes the
impact of HIV and AIDS on women for the ﬁrst time
and begins to focus attention on the neglect of women
in AIDS-prevention activities.
1986
The UN Economic and Social Council recognizes that
family violence violates the rights of women.
1987
Eight international agencies and organizations
launch the Safe Motherhood Initiative, which focuses
on attempts to reduce the number of maternal deaths
throughout the world by half by the year 2000.
Organizers place high priority on improving the
socioeconomic status of girls and women, providing
family planning services to all women, offering high
quality prenatal and delivery care for all women,
and providing skilled obstetric care for emergency
and high-risk cases.
1987
In Uruguay, the Women’s Institute is established
within the Ministry of Education and Culture to pro-
mote policies that help women improve their status
and their lives in general.
1987
Women from Latin America and the Caribbean meet
in Taxco, Mexico, to discuss major issues of concern
to them. The 1,500 participants include women from
government ministries, NGOs, and Catholic feminist
organizations.
1987
The ﬁfth International Women and Health Conference
is held in Costa Rica.
1988
The Korean Women’s Association United, a coalition
of 24 women’s organizations in South Korea, holds a
news conference to announce the launch of a crusade
against trafﬁcking in women and to focus attention
on the increasing number of women who are being
Chronology
125

1988
(cont.)
kidnapped off the streets and sold into prostitution.
The coalition calls for the government to take action
against this practice and to slow down the rapidly
growing entertainment industry, thought by many to
be the cause of the increase in prostitution.
1988
The NGO Working Group on Refugee Women holds
a meeting of 150 representatives from refugee wom-
en’s groups, NGOs, intergovernmental groups, and
governments to discuss refugee women’s issues and
to determine how these issues can be more effectively
addressed. Five major themes are the focus at the
meetings: protection, health, education, cultural
adjustment, and employment.
1988
May 28 is set aside by women’s groups and organiza-
tions throughout the world as an international day of
action for women’s health. Protests and demonstra-
tions, lobbying activities, and publicity events are
held to focus attention on the need to provide women
with accessible, humanized, and competent health
services and to lower maternal mortality. This will
become an annual event.
1989
The International Conference on the Implications of
AIDS for Mothers and Children is held in Paris, France.
Two conclusions are reached at this conference con-
cerning women and children with AIDS. First, AIDS
prevention programs for women and children do not
exist in most countries. Second, countries that have
prevention programs for women often focus on female
sex workers—that is, prostitutes and others involved in
promiscuous sexual activities—rather than on women
in the general population who are at risk of contracting
AIDS.
1990
Recognizing the importance of education, especially
in developing countries, the United Nations declares
International Literacy Year.
1990
The South Asian Association for Regional Co-operation
declares the Year of the Girl Child, recognizing the
126
Chronology

1990
(cont.)
detrimental attitudes of many parents toward their
daughters.
1990
The Permanent Working Group on the Situation of
Women in the UN High Commissioner on Refugees
(UNHCR) suggests that more women professionals
should be hired at UNHCR. Because the majority of
refugees are women and children, the Working
Group believes that more women on staff at local
sites will encourage more refugee women to partici-
pate in activities designed to help them and their
children.
1990
Women from Latin America and the Caribbean meet
in San Bernardo, Argentina, to discuss relevant wom-
en’s issues. Almost 3,000 participants come from a
variety of ﬁelds and levels of activism and include
ecologists, paciﬁsts, union organizers, squatters, par-
liamentarians, political party militants, Christians,
lesbians, indigenous women, and black women. The
women form new women’s networks and coordinate
regional campaigns on issues such as abortion and
representations of women in the media.
1990
In Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, 47 women drive cars to pro-
test the law against women driving. They are brieﬂy
imprisoned, with religious leaders believing that they
have tried to corrupt society by their behavior. They
are ﬁred from their jobs, some are threatened, and
many of their families are also threatened. The
government reinforces the ban on driving by women.
1990
In Algeria, Islamic fundamentalists increase their
efforts to suppress women’s rights and force women
to follow strict Islamic practices.
1990
In Chile, the government creates the National Wom-
en’s Service (SERNAM) to develop and promote pro-
grams that focus on women.
1991
The Inter-American Development Bank (IDB) devel-
ops an action plan for changing its approach to
Chronology
127

1991
(cont.)
women in development (WID) activities. This plan
changes the ways that the IDB participates in various
country programs, project development, and project
analysis. The plan calls on the IDB to treat women’s
participation as an integral part of all IDB activities
and mandates that WID issues be addressed at the
beginning of projects or during the planning process.
1991
In Kenya, over 300 schoolboys attack a girls’ dormi-
tory following the girls’ refusal to join a protest
against the headmaster. The boys kill 19 girls and
rape 71. When questioned about the boys’ behavior,
a deputy principal claims that the “boys never meant
any harm against the girls. They just wanted to rape.”
1991
The Pakistani government adopts Islamic (Shari’a)
law. Women’s rights as witnesses, judges, and law-
yers are limited.
1991
According to a report by the United Nations, the
number of rural women in developing countries
who are living in poverty has increased by 50 percent
in the past 20 years. The number of rural men living
in poverty is found to be much lower.
1992
An Expert Group Meeting on Population and Women
is held in Botswana. Participants develop several rec-
ommendations concerning the promotion of respon-
sible fatherhood. Recommendations encourage the
participation of both parents in providing material
and emotional support to their children. Govern-
ments are encouraged to support responsible parent-
ing and to develop measures to facilitate this
practice through educational activities, information
services, employment legislation, and institutional
support. The overall message is that family respon-
sibilities should be equitably shared by both parents.
1992
At the annual meeting of the World Health Assembly,
which consists of representatives of all members of
the World Health Organization, a call is made to
implement international policies that focus on
128
Chronology

1992
(cont.)
improving women’s health. The group recognizes
that although recommendations have been made
over the years to improve the health of women
throughout the world, little progress has actually
been made.
1992
The UN Conference on Environment and Develop-
ment is held in Rio de Janeiro. Participants focus
attention on women as managers of natural resources
and as the moving force behind sustainable develop-
ment, as well as on the need for planners to recognize
women’s role in development when creating devel-
opment projects. Experts at this meeting blame the
growing population in Rwanda on husbands who
refuse to let their wives use birth control pills because
of the belief that pills weaken women, making them
unable to work in the ﬁelds.
1992
In Kenya, 50 women, some over 70 years old, demon-
strate for the release of political prisoners and are
attacked by police with batons and tear gas. Four
of them, including environmental activist Wangari
Maathai, are knocked unconscious.
1992
Religious leaders in Nigeria blame a severe drought
in the country on “indecent” women. Women who
are wearing nontraditional dress are attacked and
many women protest these attacks. The ofﬁces of the
Association des Femmes Nigeriennes are burned.
1993
At the UN World Conference on Human Rights in
Vienna, Austria, in June, the women’s caucus
demands that violations of female human rights be
examined when UN Treaty Committees meet to mon-
itor and enforce the provisions of their treaties. Wom-
en’s rights are ﬁnally seen as an important
component of international human rights. But at the
meeting, many Muslim governments who had sup-
ported the Universal Declaration of Human Rights
in 1948 withdraw their support, believing that uni-
versal human rights is a Western concept, that Mus-
lim societies should not be judged in terms of these
Chronology
129

1993
(cont.)
Western concepts, and that Islam can provide the
basic elements of a fair society, including women’s
basic rights.
1993
The Canadian government grants refugee status to a
female Saudi national on the basis of gender-related
persecution. The woman’s advocates argue that her
basic human rights to life, liberty, and security of the
person are threatened because she does not accept
the restrictions imposed on her by Saudi society. Her
freedom to work, study, and dress as she wants is
restricted, along with her freedom of movement into
and out of the country. In addition, government pol-
icy, as well as public attitudes, led to her persecution,
since she was subjected to violence whenever she
walked down the street without covering her face.
1993
The UN General Assembly unanimously adopts the
Declaration on the Elimination of Violence against
Women. The Declaration deﬁnes violence against
women as “any act of gender-based violence that
results in, or is likely to result in physical, sexual or
psychological harm or suffering to women, including
threats of such acts, coercion or arbitrary deprivation
of liberty, whether occurring in public or in private
life.” The declaration states that acts of violence against
women include battering, sexual abuse of female chil-
dren, dowry-related violence, marital rape, female
genital mutilation, non-spousal violence, rape, sexual
abuse, sexual harassment, intimidation at work and in
schools, trafﬁcking in women, and forced prostitution.
1993
The World Health Organization condemns the genital
mutilation of women following lengthy and intense
lobbying on the part of Ghanaian-British feminist
Efua Dorkenoo.
1993
In Tehran, Iran, almost 800 women are arrested for
violating Islamic dress codes requiring them to cover
everything but their hands and faces when they are
out in public. Some of the women arrested are sen-
tenced to be ﬂogged.
130
Chronology

1993
Over 1,300 women in Latin America meet for their
biannual encuentro (encounter) in Costa del Sol, El
Salvador. They discuss human rights violations,
women’s rights, electoral quotas, and problems of
discrimination they face within the women’s move-
ment. The organizers of the meeting receive death
threats and consider moving subsequent gatherings
to another country.
1994
The International Conference on Population and
Development is held in Cairo, Egypt. Participants
agree that population and development policies
should focus on women’s equality, empowerment,
reproductive rights, and sexual health. Attendees
state that women must be empowered and their sta-
tus improved in order for them to realize their full
potential in the areas of economic, political, and
social development. Empowering women is also an
important goal in and of itself. As women achieve sta-
tus, opportunities, and social, economic, and legal
rights equal to men, human health and well-being
will be enhanced. At the conference, the Muslim gov-
ernments join forces with representatives from the
Vatican to oppose human rights for women.
1994
The Inter-American Development Bank forms a Task
Force on Women in response to requests by the
Bank’s Professional Women’s Network. The task
force analyzes gender differences in hiring practices,
pay, assignments, advancement opportunities, work
quality, and other areas of concern. Recommenda-
tions are made to improve the situation of women
employees.
1994
The United Nations declares 1994 the International
Year of the Family to promote policies that foster
equality between women and men within the family
and to bring about a fuller sharing of domestic
responsibilities and employment opportunities.
1994
Vast numbers of Rwandan women are subjected to
sexual violence during the genocide perpetrated by
Chronology
131

1994
(cont.)
Hutu militias. Over 20,000 children are born as a
result and many of the women contract AIDS during
this period.
1994
Women’s World Banking (see Chapter 7) convenes
the UN Expert Group on Women and Finance in
preparation for the Fourth World Conference on
Women to be held in Beijing. The group focuses on
transforming ﬁnancial systems to open access to
low-income women entrepreneurs and producers.
Delegates to the meeting include world leaders in
banking with the poor as well as representatives from
NGOs, ﬁnancial institutions, research organizations,
and funding sources.
1994
The UN Secretariat for the Fourth World Conference
on Women convenes an Expert Group Meeting on
Women and Economic Decision-Making. Women
leaders from government organizations, the private
sector, NGOs, and research organizations participate
in this meeting.
1995
The Geneva-based Women’s World Summit Founda-
tion awards the 1995 Prize for Women’s Creativity in
Rural Life to ten rural women and women’s groups
from eight countries. The awards honor the women’s
courage and creativity and their innovative projects
that enhance their quality of life and contribute to
sustainable development. The women, who win cash
awards, come from Africa, Asia, and Latin America,
and include Domitila Barrios of Bolivia, an interna-
tionally known grassroots leader; Lia Junqiao of
China, who built a village skills-training school; Lai
Xiao, a Mongol herdswoman who developed a scien-
tiﬁc strategy for breeding and raising sheep; Gawaher
Saad El Sherbini Fadi of Egypt, a leader of land recla-
mation cooperatives; Joan Abgo of Ghana, who coor-
dinates activities of rural women in farming and
trading; Samuben Ujabhai Thakore and Ranbai
Jemalji Rauma of India, who share one prize for lead-
ing a union of 14,000 rural women to secure employ-
ment programs from the government; Samake
132
Chronology

1995
(cont.)
Nekani and Sangare Aminata of Mali, who share a
prize for being effective group leaders in their efforts
to ﬁght poverty, Huda Abdel-Elhameid of Sudan,
who expanded her ﬁshing abilities into a successful
business; and the Coordinating Bureau for Women’s
Groups in Togo, led by Segou Tida, which trains
women in poverty-stricken areas to earn and manage
money and provides health care, food, housing, and
clothing.
1995
President Alberto Fujimori of Peru, in his second-
term inaugural speech, announces an aggressive
government campaign to provide family planning
services to low-income Peruvians. The Peruvian bish-
ops’ conference protests the campaign, arguing that
contraception is not morally acceptable. Although
Peru is 90 percent Roman Catholic, a poll suggests
that many people support the president’s position
on family planning.
1995
The World Summit for Social Development is held in
Copenhagen. Women’s issues are on the agenda, but
at this meeting women also help set the agenda.
Women’s empowerment is a major issue, and it is
also accepted as a necessary element in all strategies
that seek to solve social, economic, and environmen-
tal problems. Participants recognize the importance
of empowering women politically, socially, and eco-
nomically in order to eliminate poverty, unemploy-
ment, and other social problems.
1995
The Fourth World Conference of Women is held in
Beijing, China, in September. The key points estab-
lished in the Platform for Action note the importance
of women’s rights as human rights superseding cul-
tural restrictions on women’s rights, a guarantee of
reproductive and sexual rights, a call for review of
laws that mandate punishment of women who have
abortions, recognition of adolescent rights, and ﬁnally,
the importance of women’s right to control their sex-
uality. Prior to this meeting, ﬁve regional conferences
are held in Indonesia, Argentina, Austria, Senegal,
Chronology
133

1995
(cont.)
and Jordan to focus on speciﬁc regional priorities.
These meetings helped each region offer concrete sug-
gestions for the meetings in Beijing.
1995
Over 30,000 participants attend the NGO Forum on
Women in Huairou, China. It is the largest inter-
national gathering on women to date.
1995
The First International Conference on Dowry and
Bride-Burning convenes at Harvard Law School. The
conference organizers focus attention on the practice
of dowry-related violence toward women in India.
The National Crimes Bureau of India reports that
there were 5,817 dowry deaths in 1993 and 5,199
deaths in 1994, although the Supreme Court of India
estimates that up to 15,000 women die each year from
dowry disputes. These deaths occur despite the fact
that in 1961, the Indian government enacted the
Dowry Prohibition Act. The conference suggests
practical ways that dowry and bride-burning can be
eliminated, such as providing residential training
centers and apartment complexes for abused women.
1995
An International Symposium on Women and the
Media: Access to Expression and Decision-Making is
organized by UNESCO and held in Toronto. As one
of UNESCO’s contributions to the Fourth World
Conference on Women, the symposium brings
together 200 media experts, journalists, researchers,
and representatives from international organizations
and NGOs. Participants examine women’s success
stories, women’s access to expression and decision-
making in and through the media, and ways to
encourage more female representation in the media.
1996
The city of Khartoum, Sudan, issues a public law that
orders the separation of the sexes in public in order to
conform to fundamentalist Muslim law. The law
requires that barriers must be erected between men
and women at social events, weddings, parties, pic-
nics, and all other social gatherings. Buses must dis-
play a verse from the Koran that reminds people
134
Chronology

1996
(cont.)
that they are prohibited from looking at members of
the opposite sex. Male students are to be separated
from female students.
1996
Forty Kuwaiti women—lawyers, scientists, and
teachers—protest outside the Kuwaiti legislature to
demand the vote and the right to run for parliament.
Many of the women were members of the civilian re-
sistance during Iraq’s occupation from 1990 to 1991;
during the occupation, Sheik Jaber al-Ahmad al-
Sabah had said that he would consider giving women
the vote because of their bravery during the resis-
tance to Iraqi rule. In Kuwait, women occupy top
positions in the civil service, oil industry, and educa-
tion; they are allowed to drive and to wear Western-
style clothes. However, they do not have political
rights and equality with men on social issues.
1996
In Afghanistan, the Taliban outlaws the examination
of women and girls by male physicians and bans
female physicians and nurses from providing any
type of health care.
1997
The Ofﬁce of Special Advisor to the Secretary-
General on Gender Issues and Advancement of
Women is created within the United Nations.
1997
The Secretary General of the United Nations encour-
ages all UN entities to mainstream human rights into
their programs and activities.
2000
The progress of the Beijing Platform for Action is
reviewed at the 23rd Special Session of the UN Gen-
eral Assembly, Women 2000: Gender Equality, Devel-
opment and Peace for the 21st Century.
2000
Eight Millennium Development Goals are adopted by
the UN General Assembly. One of the goals is to “pro-
mote gender equality and empower women.”
2000
Women in Zimbabwe begin to organize to demand
their human rights following forced evictions from
Chronology
135

2000
(cont.)
their homes and market spaces among other abuses
by the government.
2000
The ﬁrst UN Security Council resolution (Resolution
1325) recognizing that the experiences of women in
war and conﬂict are different from men’s experiences
is adopted.
2000
The UN Protocol to Prevent, Suppress, and Punish
Trafﬁcking in Persons is signed by 80 countries.
2001
The UN Children’s Fund issues a report examining
the continuing practice of forced marriages of under-
age girls.
2002
The government of Peru adopts a health care plan that
will provide health care to pregnant women, new moth-
ers, and children under four years old, but many
women, especially in rural areas, do not have access to it.
2004
Louise Arbour becomes the UN High Commissioner
for Human Rights.
2004
The Third Session of the Permanent Forum on Indige-
nous Issues focuses on the situation of indigenous
women. Over 150 million indigenous women
throughout the world are marginalized and face dis-
crimination in their daily lives.
2005
A World Summit is convened by the United Nations
to determine the progress made toward meeting the
Millennium Development Goals adopted in 2000.
2005
The Kuwaiti Parliament approves women’s right to
vote and allows them to run for political ofﬁce.
2005
The Pakistani government rejects a bill that would
have strengthened the law against honor killings.
2005
The Jordanian Parliament rejects a bill that would
have imposed a more stringent penalty on individ-
uals convicted of honor killings.
136
Chronology

2005
The World Health Organization issues the WHO
Multi-Country Study on Women’s Health and Domestic
Violence against Women: Initial Results on Prevalence,
Health Outcomes and Women’s Responses, the ﬁrst
global study on domestic violence.
2005
India amends the Hindu Succession Act of 1956, pro-
viding for equality in property rights. Females are
now able to inherit ancestral property on an equal
basis with men.
2006
The Nicaraguan National Assembly votes to ban all
therapeutic abortions, including those performed to
save a woman’s life and in cases of rape and incest.
2006
The Million Signatures Campaign is organized by
Iranian women in an attempt to end discriminatory
laws concerning divorce, custody rights, and
inheritance.
2007
The Global Campaign to Stop Violence against
Women in the name of culture is organized to prevent
the misuse of religion and culture as justiﬁcation for
killing women.
2008
Fourteen activists from the Women of Zimbabwe
Arise (WOZA) (see Chapter 7) are arrested in Harare
following a peaceful protest.
2008
In Somalia, Ausha Ibrahim Duhulow, a 13-year-old
girl, claims she was raped, but Islamic extremists
accuse her of adultery and stone her to death.
2008
The annual meeting of the Female Supreme Court
Justices of the Spanish-Speaking Americas and Spain
draws 74 female judges from Latin America to dis-
cuss state obligations required by CEDAW.
2008
Police raid the wedding of a 5-year-old girl and
7-year-old boy in Pakistan. Even though marriage
under the age of 18 is illegal in Pakistan, a Pakistani
court fails to censure the parents.
Chronology
137

2009
Musawah, a worldwide effort to encourage equality
and justice in the Muslim family, is launched in
Malaysia. Over 250 Muslim scholars and activists
representing 47 countries come together to share
research, experiences, and strategies for achieving
this goal.
2009
Wajeha al-Huwauder, a women’s rights activist, tries
to cross the border into Bahrain but is stopped by
Saudi border guards because she does not have her
guardian’s permission to leave the country.
2009
The UN General Assembly unanimously votes to cre-
ate a new UN agency for women.
2009
The Magna Carta of Women Act (the Republic Act
No. 9710) is enacted in the Philippines. A comprehen-
sive human rights law, it relies heavily on CEDAW to
provide a variety of protections for women.
2009
A well-known Egyptian cleric, Sheik Mohammed
Tantawi, claims he will issue a fatwa against any
Muslim woman who wears the niqab (a veil covering
her face) in school. Tantawi believes that Islam does
not require a woman to wear the niqab and that this
practice only encourages religious extremism.
2009
The Taliban assassinates Sitara Achekzai, well-known
human rights activist and a secretary in the Kandahar
Provincial Council.
2009
All of Mexico’s 32 states adopt the Mexican General
Law on Women’s Access to a Life Free from Violence.
2010
At a global summit on the Millennium Development
Goals, UN Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon announ-
ces the formation of the Global Strategy for Women’s
and Children’s Health, a concerted worldwide col-
laborative attempt to save the lives of 16 million
women and children. Over $40 million is pledged to
assist in this effort.
138
Chronology

2010
The National Action Plan on Women, Peace and
Security is launched in the Philippines.
2010
Dilma Rousseff is elected president of Brazil.
2010
In Iran, Sajjad Qaderzadeh, the son of Sakineh
Mohammadi Ashtiani, demands that his mother’s
death sentence (by stoning) for adultery be com-
muted. A ﬁnal decision concerning her fate has not
been made by the courts or the government.
2011
The new UN agency for women, UN Women, is cre-
ated. Michelle Bachelet, former president of Chile, is
named its ﬁrst executive director.
2011
France’s ban on the wearing of burqas and other
Islamic face coverings in public places goes into
effect.
References
Europa Publications. 2009. International Who’s Who of Women 2010.
New York: Routledge.
Europa Publications. 2010. Who’s Who in International Affairs 2011.
New York: Routledge.
Smith, Bonnie G., ed. 2005. Women’s History in Global Perspective, vol. 2.
Urbana: University of Illinois Press.
Chronology
139


5
Biographical Sketches
T
hroughout history, women have played major roles in politics,
social activism, health care, education, and other areas that
contribute to their local communities and nations, as well as
to the international community. Thousands of women have par-
ticipated in major UN conferences and have contributed to the
movement to improve women’s status and the ﬁght for equal
rights around the world. This chapter provides short biographical
sketches of individuals who are playing or have played a key role
in one or more of the above-mentioned areas. But the women
included here are only a few of the many who are actively
involved in working to improve women’s lives.
Aminah Al-Said (1914–1995)
Born in Cairo, Egypt, Aminah Al-Said was a writer and advocate
for women’s rights. Her father, a doctor, believed that girls should
be educated along with boys. Karimah Al-Said, her sister, was a
teacher who in 1965 became the ﬁrst female minister of education
in the Egyptian government. In 1935, Aminah Al-Said was among
the ﬁrst group of women to attend and graduate from Cairo
University.
She founded and was the editor of Hawaa-Eve, Egypt’s ﬁrst
women’s magazine, which developed the largest foreign circula-
tion of all Arabic papers. The ﬁrst woman elected to the Egyptian
Press Syndicate Executive Board, Al-Said was a member of the
Supreme Board of Journalism, president of Dar al Hilal Publishing
House, Secretary-General of the Pan-Arab League Women’s
141

Union, and a well-respected participant in international conferen-
ces. She spoke frequently on the status and lives of Arab women
and helped audiences throughout the world understand the differ-
ences between Arab women and Western women.
Aduke Alakija (b. 1921)
A well-known Nigerian lawyer, Aduke Alakija attended primary
and secondary school in Lagos, Nigeria, and continued her secon-
dary education in the United Kingdom. After studying medicine
at Glasgow University, she changed her major to social science
and attended the London School of Economics. While attending
Cambridge, she founded the West African Students’ Union. She
returned to Nigeria to work as a welfare ofﬁcer but when she real-
ized she needed to be better prepared to ﬁght for women’s rights,
she returned to England to study law. She joined the Nigerian del-
egation to the United Nations in 1961 and spent ﬁve years as a
delegate. She has been a trustee of the Federal Nigeria Society
for the Blind and the International Women’s Society; she was also
an adviser to the International Academy of Trial Lawyers, the ﬁrst
black African female director of Mobil Oil, and a president of the
International Federation of Women Lawyers. She received
an honorary Doctor of Laws degree from Columbia University
in 1964.
Corazon Aquino (1933–2009)
Corazon Aquino was president of the Philippines from 1986 to
1992. She was born in Luzon to one of the important landowning
families. Her family was active politically: her father was a
congressman and both of her grandfathers were senators. Aquino
was educated at Catholic schools in Manila and the United States.
She received her B.A. from Mount St. Vincent College in New
York City and then returned to the Philippines to attend law
school at Far Eastern University.
In 1954 she married Benigno Aquino, Jr. When Ferdinand
Marcos came to power in the Philippines in 1965 and declared
martial law in 1972, many politicians and activists were arrested,
including Benigno Aquino. During the seven years that her hus-
band spent in prison, Corazon became an activist.
142
Biographical Sketches

In 1984 Marcos allowed elections and Benigno returned to
the Philippines from the United States, where he and his family
had settled. Moments after his plane touched down he was assas-
sinated. Corazon ﬂew home, buried her husband, and began her
political career working for anti-Marcos candidates. By 1985,
many Filipinos had realized that Corazon was an effective leader.
She was asked to run for president and was elected in 1986.
Aquino believed she should continue her husband’s ﬁght for
democracy. She called for a new constitution that would set addi-
tional limits on presidential power. The military made many
attempts to gain control; seven of these attempts led to the deaths
of over 150 people. Aquino continued to ﬁght for what she
believed would most beneﬁt her country’s citizens: freedom and
democracy. She initiated military reform, appointed many
women to high government positions, and appointed three
women to the Philippine Supreme Court. She also focused atten-
tion on helping NGOs and cooperatives organize.
Aung San Suu Kyi (b. 1945)
Aung San Suu Kyi is known throughout the world for her work in
human rights and her ﬁght for democracy in Burma (now
referred to as Myanmar by its military leaders). Her father,
Bogyoke Aung San, was a legendary Burmese hero. Her educa-
tion focused on politics, philosophy, and economics at St. Hugh’s
College, Oxford University.
In 1972 she married Michael Aris, a scholar of Tibetan civili-
zation, and they moved to Bhutan. She worked in the foreign min-
istry as a researcher on UN affairs. In 1973, she and Aris returned
to England and for the next several years she cared for their two
sons while her husband taught at Oxford University. She became
increasingly interested in learning more about her father, whom
she never really knew because he was assassinated in 1947. Suu
Kyi went to Japan as Visiting Scholar at the Centre for Southeast
Asian Studies at the University of Kyoto and continued her
research on her father while there. She moved again in 1986, to
Simla, India, where she joined her husband and became a
researcher for the Indian Institute of Advanced Study.
Returning to Burma in 1988, she became involved in pro-
democracy demonstrations and entered politics, quickly becoming
the symbol of the ﬁght for democracy. The opposition hurried to
Biographical Sketches
143

silence her by disqualifying her candidacy, claiming that she could
not run because she had married a foreigner. The authorities
placed her under house arrest in 1989. Prior to her house arrest,
Suu Kyi traveled throughout the country, urging her people to be
courageous and support democratic reform. Despite the absence
of her name from the ballot her party, the National League for
Democracy, won in a landslide victory, but the ruling army council
refused to honor the election results.
In 1991 she won the Nobel Peace Prize for her work in human
rights and the European Parliament’s Andrei Sakharov Human
Rights Prize. The Nobel Prize committee recognized her as “the
leader of a democratic opposition that employs nonviolent means
to resist a regime characterized by brutality” (Schlessinger and
Schlessinger 1996, 173). She was released from house arrest in
1995 but continued to be harassed by government forces. In 2003
she was again placed under house arrest, and she spent seven
years conﬁned to her home until her release in 2010. Suu Kyi con-
tinues to be a symbol of freedom and democracy for her country.
Sirimavo Bandaranaike (1916–2000)
As president of the Sri Lanka Freedom Party since 1960 and prime
minister of Sri Lanka, Sirimavo Bandaranaike participated exten-
sively in politics. She was prime minister and minister of defense
and external affairs from 1965 through 1970; a member of the
Senate until 1965; leader of the opposition party from 1965
through 1970; and prime minister, minister of defense, and minis-
ter of foreign affairs, planning, economic affairs and plan imple-
mentation from 1970 to 1977. Her husband was prime minister
of Ceylon from 1956 through 1959.
She was born into a wealthy family that was actively involved
in politics. Sent to a Catholic school in Colombo, and after her
graduation she married Solomon Bandaranaike, an Oxford-
educated lawyer and politician. He was elected to the House of
Representatives, served as minister of health and local government,
and became prime minister in 1956. Following much unrest in the
country as a result of proposals to replace English with Sinhalese
as the national language and to make Buddhism the national reli-
gion, he was assassinated in 1959. When the Sri Lanka Freedom
Party asked Sirimavo to campaign on their behalf, the party won
75 out of 151 seats in the House of Representatives, and as party
144
Biographical Sketches

leader she was appointed prime minister, becoming the ﬁrst
woman in the world to become a prime minister. During her sec-
ond term, Ceylon became the Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka and
cut off all political ties to Great Britain. She ran an unsuccessful
campaign for president in 1988. In 1989 she won a seat in the
National Assembly and led the opposition party. In 1994 her
daughter Chandrika Bandaranaike Kumaratunga (see separate
entry) became the new prime minister of the country.
Ela Bhatt (b. 1933)
Ela Bhatt is a well-known politician and women’s organization
executive in India and a founding member and chairperson of the
executive committee and board of directors of Women’s World
Banking (see Chapter 7). She also founded the Self- Employed
Women’s Association (SEWA), one of the most successful organi-
zations for economic empowerment of self-employed women in
India. In 1989 she became the ﬁrst woman appointed to the Plan-
ning Commission in India. Prior to this Bhatt was a member of
the Indian Parliament, a member of the Union Planning Commit-
tee, chairwoman of the Global Video Network, and a member of
the National Committee on Self-Employed Women and the advi-
sory committee of the All-India Weavers’ Foundation. Bhatt’s
many awards include the Right Livelihood Award and the Ramon
Magsaysay Award for Community Leadership.
She understands the importance of helping women organize:
today SEWA has approximately 700,000 members. SEWA has
organized individual cooperatives, including groups of artisans,
dairy workers, traders, and vendors. A wide variety of support
services are provided by SEWA, including the SEWA Bank
(founded in 1974), health care, legal aid, housing assistance, child
care, and afﬁliations with international labor groups. She was
awarded the Niwano Peace Prize in 2010 for her work in uplifting
poor women in India.
Benazir Bhutto (1953–2007)
Born in Karachi, Pakistan, to her father’s second wife, Benazir
Bhutto was raised as a Sunni Muslim. Her parents were progressive
thinkers and allowed her more freedom than most girls in Pakistan.
Biographical Sketches
145

She graduated from Radcliffe College in 1973 and completed a
second B.A. in philosophy, politics, and economics at Oxford
University. Staying on another year to study international law
and diplomacy, she was elected president of the Oxford Union in
1976, becoming the ﬁrst Asian woman to serve as president.
Following her graduation in 1977, she returned to Pakistan to work
for her father, Zulﬁkar Ali Bhutto, the prime minister of Pakistan.
Her father was overthrown in a coup in July 1977 by General
Zia and kept under house arrest for several weeks. Later charged
with conspiracy to murder at least one of his political opponents,
her father was found guilty along with four codefendants and
sentenced to death by hanging; the sentence was carried out in
1979. Following the 1977 coup, Benazir traveled throughout the
country to encourage support for the Pakistan People’s Party.
She was arrested along with her mother several times while her
father was in prison.
Moving to London to escape the wrath of General Zia, Benazir
continued to lead the Pakistan People’s Party in opposition to Zia
and his policies. Over the next several years she traveled back to
Pakistan several times and was arrested, conﬁned to her home,
and otherwise harassed by the Zia government. When General
Zia was killed in a plane crash in August 1988, Pakistani president
Ishaw Khan asked Benazir to become prime minister and form
a new government. In 1988 she became the ﬁrst woman to lead a
modern Muslim nation as well as the youngest head of state in
the world.
She promised to deal with the serious drug problem through-
out the country, the growing ethnic violence, poverty, other social
problems, as well as conﬂict between India and Pakistan. She
established women-only police stations in response to widespread
rape and torture of women prisoners. She was, however, unable to
overturn the repressive Hudood Ordinance which speciﬁes pun-
ishment for adultery, rape, fornication, and prostitution; under this
law, rape may be considered as adultery or fornication if there are
not four male witnesses to testify that the woman was raped.
Women are not allowed to testify.
In 1993 Bhutto was re-elected prime minister and vowed to
ﬁght corruption and modernize Pakistan. Until her dismissal
from ofﬁce by Pakistan’s president in 1996, she was able to bring
electricity to many rural areas and made progress in ﬁghting
hunger, building housing, and providing health care to many
Pakistanis.
146
Biographical Sketches

She left Pakistan for London with her children in 1998 following
the imprisonment of her husband but continued to ﬁght for democ-
racy in her native country. In 2007 she returned to Pakistan to run for
prime minister but was assassinated before the January 2008
elections.
Ester Boserup (1910–1999)
Ester Boserup was a noted Danish rural economist. She received
her Ph.D. in economics from the University of Copenhagen and
in 1970 she published what is now considered a classic text, Women
and Economic Development, which caused most experts in the ﬁeld
of economic development to rethink their ideas concerning the
roles women play in development activities. For this book Boserup
gathered and analyzed data from ofﬁcial statistics and research.
She provided clear and concise evidence that women play a crucial
role in economic development, although their contributions had
usually gone uncounted by measurements of national economic
productivity. Boserup was one of the ﬁrst experts in the ﬁeld of
development to believe that women’s exclusion from capitalist
development activities and programs widened an already wide
gap between women’s and men’s economic power.
Boserup was a member of the UN Expert Committee for
Development Planning, the Scandinavian Institute of Asian Stud-
ies, and the International Research and Training Institute for the
Advancement of Women (INSTRAW). In 1972, Boserup prepared
the working document for and attended the Meeting of Experts
on the Integration of Women in Development, co-sponsored by
the Commission on the Status of Women and the Commission
on Social Development of the United Nations. This historic meet-
ing provided advice to the United Nations and its member states
concerning policy measures that should be followed in regard to
women’s role in economic and social development.
Elise Boulding (1920–2010)
Born in Oslo, Norway, Elise Boulding was a sociologist with a
global view of the world and the role that women play in it. She
received a B.A. in English from Douglass College, an M.S. in sociol-
ogy from Iowa State University, and a Ph.D. in sociology from the
Biographical Sketches
147

University of Michigan. She conducted numerous transnational
and comparative cross-national studies on conﬂict and peace,
development, and women in society. She committed herself to
working for peace and world order as an activist as well as a
scholar. She served as a member of the governing board of the
UN University from 1980 to 1985, a member of the International
Jury of the UN Educational, Scientiﬁc, and Cultural Organization
(UNESCO) Prize for Peace Education, and a member of the U.S.
Commission for UNESCO from 1981 to 1987.
Boulding taught in the Department of Sociology and Institute
of Behavioral Science at the University of Colorado at Boulder
from 1967 through 1977. She was a professor and chair of the
department of sociology at Dartmouth College from 1978 to 1985.
From 1988 to 1991 she was secretary general of the International
Peace Research Association.
She was a member of the Commission on Proposals for a
National Academy of Peace and Conﬂict Resolution, which recom-
mended that Congress establish a U.S. Institute of Peace. She served
as editor of the International Peace Research Newsletter from 1963 to
1968 and from 1983 to 1987. Her many books focus on women’s roles
in history and their social status, as well as on the peace movement.
Angie Brooks-Randolph (1928–2007)
Angie Brooks-Randolph was a well-known Liberian lawyer and
diplomat. She worked her way through high school as a typist
and stenographer in the justice department of the Liberian
government. She was the ﬁrst woman to become a legal apprentice
in Liberia; people laughed at her during her ﬁrst court appearance
because they had never before seen a woman in a position of
authority in court. Brooks-Randolph later received a grant to
attend school in North Carolina and received her degree from
the University of Wisconsin. She studied at University College,
London, and then returned to Liberia to practice law. Becoming
assistant attorney general in 1953, Brooks-Randolph also taught
law. From 1958 until 1978 she was assistant secretary of state, and
for three years (1964–1967) she was president of the International
Federation of Women Lawyers.
She became the second woman to preside over a session of
the UN General Assembly, serving from 1969 through 1970. She
represented Liberia at the UN Plenary Session from 1970 to 1973
148
Biographical Sketches

and was also the Liberian ambassador to Cuba. She was a strong
advocate for women’s rights, especially for professional opportu-
nities and broader educational opportunities. During her life she
provided care for 47 foster children. She participated in many
international conferences and committees, served on advisory
panels, was awarded many honors, and received 18 honorary
degrees from universities in the United States.
Charlotte Bunch (b. 1944)
As a well-known feminist author, teacher, organizer, and activist,
Charlotte Bunch has played a leading role in the women’s move-
ment for over 35 years. She was the ﬁrst female resident fellow at
the Institute for Policy Studies in Washington, D.C., and founded
DC Women’s Liberation and Quest: A Feminist Quarterly, which
she edited during the 1970s. She has edited several anthologies,
including Learning Our Way: Essays in Feminist Education, Women
Remembered: Biographies of Women in History, and International Femi-
nism: Networking against Female Sexual Slavery.
In 1979 she participated in an international workshop, “Femi-
nist Ideology and Structures in the First Half of the Decade for
Women,” which was sponsored by the UN Asian and Paciﬁc Center
for Women and Development in Bangkok, Thailand. Bunch helped
organize a worldwide conference on the topic of trafﬁc in women
and female sexual slavery that was held in Rotterdam, the Nether-
lands, in 1983. In a 1989 speech to Amnesty International she urged
the organization to recognize and address gender-speciﬁc issues in
the ﬁeld of human rights. She continued to urge organizations to
examine gender-speciﬁc issues in various forums, including
through presentations at the World Conference on Human Rights
in Vienna in 1993 and the 1995 UN Conference on Human Rights
in Beijing.
Currently she is the director of the Center for Global Issues
and Women’s Leadership at Rutgers University, where she contin-
ues to advocate for women’s rights.
Violeta Barrios de Chamorro (b. 1929)
Born in Rivas, Nicaragua, Violeta Chamorro was educated at
Catholic schools in the United States and Nicaragua, and for one
Biographical Sketches
149

year at Blackstone College in Virginia. In 1950 she married Pedro
Chamorro Cardenal, the publisher of the newspaper La Prensa,
which openly criticized the government of General Somoza.
Throughout the 1950s, her husband was repeatedly arrested and
jailed by the Somoza regime. He was banished in 1957 and he
and his family escaped to Costa Rica, where they remained for
several years. The family returned to Nicaragua during a period
of amnesty in 1960 and Pedro Chamorro continued his vocal
opposition to the government of Somoza’s sons, Luis Somoza
Debayle and Anastasio Somoza Debayle. Chamorro was assassi-
nated in 1978; most people believed his murder was ordered by
the government. His murder ignited the ﬁnal rebellion against
the Somoza regime.
When Violeta Chamorro took over the task of publishing La
Prensa after her husband’s death she endured bomb threats. She
contributed money to the Sandinista National Liberation Front,
which focused on overthrowing the corrupt Somoza regime. Fol-
lowing the downfall of General Somoza in 1979, she became a
member of the civilian junta that held the executive powers of the
Government of National Reconstruction. She resigned her member-
ship in 1980 after she became disillusioned with the Marxist lean-
ings and excessive militarism of the new Sandinista government.
Thereafter she often wrote articles denouncing the Sandinistas
and the newspaper was frequently closed down by the government;
a 1986 shutdown lasted for 15 months. Chamorro became a target of
the leftist regime, which continued to harass her even after the
paper reopened. She became leader of the opposition party, the
Unio´n Nacional Opositora (UNO), in September 1989 and was
elected president of Nicaragua in February 1990, becoming Central
America’s ﬁrst female president. Voters looked to her to bring peace
and outside aid to the country’s battered economy. During her
presidency she ended the draft and greatly reduced the size of the
Sandinista army, privatized many state-owned industries, and
worked to unite the various political factions. Barred from running
for a second term, Chamorro retired from politics in 1997.
Eugenia Charles (1919–2005)
Eugenia Charles was the prime minister of the Commonwealth of
Dominica from 1980 until 1995. She attended Catholic schools in
Dominica and Grenada and received a bachelor’s degree in law
150
Biographical Sketches

from the University College of the University of Toronto in 1946.
She was called to the English bar in 1947 and enrolled at the
London School of Economics for additional study. When she
returned to Dominica she became the only woman to practice
law on the island. As a co-founder and the ﬁrst leader of the Domi-
nica Freedom Party, she was a member of Parliament from 1975 to
1980. Dominica achieved independence from Great Britain in 1979
amid concerns that the country was not ready economically or
socially for independence. Charles was a strong anticommunist
leader and received millions of dollars from the United States
during the 1980s to strengthen the country’s weak infrastructure.
She focused on structural adjustment programs that encouraged
the development of infrastructure over social welfare programs.
Gaositwe Keagakwa Tibe Chiepe (b. 1926)
Born in Serowe, Botswana, Gaositwe Keagakwa Tibe Chiepe
attended Fort Hare University in South Africa from 1944 to 1947
and Bristol University from 1955 to 1957. Returning to Botswana,
she worked as an education ofﬁcer and became director of educa-
tion in 1968. By 1970 she had been appointed high commissioner
to the United Kingdom and to Nigeria and held ambassadorial
positions in Europe and Scandinavia. She became Botswana’s ﬁrst
female minister of commerce in 1974, minister of mineral re-
sources and water affairs in 1977, and minister of external affairs
in 1984. She played a major role in the development of the educa-
tional system and potable water systems in Botswana.
Jeanne Martin Cisse´ (b. 1926)
Jeanne Martin Cisse´ started her career as a teacher in 1945 and
became a well-known Guinean diplomat. She was director of a
school until she decided to move into politics in 1958. She became
a member of the Democratic Party in 1959 and worked in the
federal ofﬁce of the Kinda region of Guinea, focusing on activities
to improve the lives and status of women. She served on the
National and Regional Women’s Committees of the National
Assembly and eventually became secretary-general of the
Conference of African Women in 1962. She remained in this role
for ten years and at the same time was a member of the UN
Biographical Sketches
151

Committee on the Status of Women. As her country’s permanent
representative to the United Nations from 1972 to 1976, she was
the ﬁrst woman appointed as a delegate and the ﬁrst to preside over
the UN Security Council. She was awarded the Lenin Peace Prize in
1975. In 1976, she returned to Guinea to become minister of social
affairs and remained in that post until her retirement in 1984. More
recently, she has been the coordinator of an NGO that focuses on
the education of girls who would otherwise have little chance of
an education.
Shirin Ebadi (b. 1947)
Born in northern Iran, Shirin Ebadi attended law school at Tehran
University and became the ﬁrst Iranian woman to serve as a judge
in the Iranian judicial system. Following the Islamic Revolution in
Iran in 1979 she and other female judges were removed from their
positions and placed in clerical positions, based on the belief that
Islam forbids women to be judges. She ﬁled an application to prac-
tice law with the Justice Department but was denied, so she
“retired” from the law and spent her time writing books and
articles until 1992, when she was able to practice law again. She
takes many civil rights cases, often on a pro bono basis. Ebadi
was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize in 2003 for her work in defend-
ing women and children’s rights in Iran and for encouraging a
view of Islam compatible with democracy and human rights.
Dr. Ebadi joined other female Nobel Peace Prize winners,
including Jody Williams, Wangari Maathai, Rigoberta Menchu
Tum, Betty Williams, and Mairead Corrigan Maguire, to establish
the Nobel Women’s Institute. These women believe that by com-
bining their efforts, they can more effectively work toward peace,
justice, and equality for women by promoting and encouraging
the work of women’s rights activists, researchers, and organiza-
tions worldwide.
Nawal El Saadawi (b. 1931)
A well-known Egyptian doctor, novelist, and militant writer,
Nawal El Saadawi was born in a small village on the banks of the
Nile. She graduated from Cairo University in 1955. She refused to
accept the subservient role that Egyptian society offered women.
After studying medicine at Columbia University in New York she
152
Biographical Sketches

returned to Egypt and joined the staff of Cairo University Hospital
as a doctor practicing in rural areas. She later became a psychia-
trist; her book Women and Sex (1972) caused a great deal of contro-
versy because it openly discussed chastity and the taboos that
women faced in Arab society. She called for radical changes in the
position of women within the family and as wage earners. She
had been Egypt’s director of public health but lost this position
following the publication of her radical views when highly placed
political and religious authorities called for her dismissal.
To date she has written twenty-seven books, including The
Hidden Face of Eve: Women in the Arab World (1979), which
describes her horrifying personal experience with female genital
circumcision and examines the price that Arab women pay for
being second-class citizens and the property of their husbands.
In 1981 she was imprisoned at the notorious Qanatir prison with
several other women on the order of President Anwar Sadat
because she was publishing a feminist magazine (Confrontation)
and stirring up protest among women. She was released in 1982
but her life continued to be threatened by Islamic fundamentalists
and others who opposed her viewpoints. She founded the Arab
Women’s Solidarity Association in 1981 (see Chapter 7 for a
description of program activities). She continues to write, speak,
and advocate for women’s rights.
Ana Figuero (1908–1970)
Chilean feminist Ana Figuero was born in Santiago and graduated
from the University of Chile. She taught school until the start of
World War II when she traveled to the United States to study at
Columbia University and Colorado State College. An active advo-
cate for women, she was president of the committee to gain the
vote in Chile. She directed the national secondary school system
from 1947 to 1949 and then became the head of the Women’s
Bureau in the Ministry of Foreign Affairs in the Chilean
government. In 1951 she was her country’s special envoy to the
United Nations. As chair of the Social, Humanitarian, and Cultural
Committee, Figuero was the ﬁrst woman to head a UN committee
of the General Assembly. She became the ﬁrst woman on the
Security Committee in 1952 and the ﬁrst female assistant director
general of the International Labour Organization (ILO). In 1967,
she retired from the ILO.
Biographical Sketches
153

lndira Gandhi (1917–1984)
Indira Gandhi was the daughter of Jawaharlal Nehru, the ﬁrst
prime minister of India following independence from Great Britain,
and the granddaughter of Motilal Nehru, who played a prominent
role in India’s struggle against British colonial rule. She grew up
an only child; her father and grandfather were frequently absent,
having been arrested for their freedom activities. She attended
school in Switzerland and England and married journalist Feroze
Gandhi in 1942. Upon their return to India in 1942 Gandhi and her
husband were imprisoned for 13 months because they supported
the independence movement.
When India gained independence in 1947, Gandhi and her two
sons moved home to help her father during his years as prime min-
ister. Her marriage to Feroze effectively ended (although they were
never divorced) about the time she moved into her father’s home.
She became her father’s hostess and conﬁdant, meeting many
world leaders and traveling with her father to many foreign coun-
tries. Following his death in 1964 she was elected to ﬁll his seat in
Parliament. The same year she was appointed minister of informa-
tion and broadcasting by Lal Shastri, who had succeeded her father
as prime minister. After Shastri’s death in 1966, Gandhi was elected
leader of the Congress Party and became prime minister of India.
Her years as prime minister were often stormy. Congress
Party members split over opposition to her policies and Gandhi
called for a general election in 1971. She traveled throughout the
country campaigning for public support and won an overwhelm-
ing majority of votes. The country experienced economic difﬁcul-
ties in 1974 and she declared an emergency rule following
demonstrations throughout India. She imprisoned political
adversaries and censored the press, outraging many Indians.
Although she released many prisoners from jail and lifted the
press censorship before elections were held in 1977, voters
removed her from ofﬁce. By October 1977 she had been charged
with ofﬁcial corruption and jailed brieﬂy.
In 1978 she ran for ofﬁce in a rural district in South India after
forming her own party, Congress-I Party (I for Indira), and was
elected to Parliament. During national elections in 1980 she was
swept back into power, with her party gaining two-thirds of the
seats in Parliament. Many Indians forgave Gandhi for her excesses
while in ofﬁce, believing that she was the best the country had to
154
Biographical Sketches

offer. She became a forceful speaker and advocate for developing
countries though trouble again mounted at home. During 1983 and
1984 she sent troops to stop disturbances in the Punjab, and these
troops destroyed the large Sikh temple there. Two of her Sikh body-
guards assassinated her in New Delhi in June 1984 in retaliation for
the destruction of the temple. Her son Rajiv followed in her footsteps
and was sworn in as prime minister of India in October 1984.
Lydia Gueiler Tejada (b. 1921)
A well-known accountant, politician, and diplomat from Bolivia,
Lydia Gueiler Tejada played an active role in the Bolivian revolu-
tion of 1952. She received a B.A. in accounting from the Institute
Americano in Cochabamba, Bolivia. She was the Bolivian ambas-
sador to Colombia from 1983 to 1986 and spent some time in
charge of Bolivian business affairs in Germany. She was also
political director and secretary general of the Partido Revolucio-
nario de Izquierda. After serving as president of the National
Congress from August through November 1979, Gueiler Tejada
became president of Bolivia in November 1979. However, she
was overthrown in a coup in July 1980 and lived in exile in Paris
until the dictatorship ended in 1982.
Before being exiled, Gueiler Tejada was undersecretary of
farmers’ affairs in the Bolivian government, served six years as a
national deputy, and represented Bolivian women at the Comision
Interamerica de Mujeres. She authored several laws to help Boliv-
ian women gain their rights. The author of La Mujer y la Revolucio´n
(Women and Revolution) in 1959, she received Bolivia’s highest
decoration, Condor de los Andes Gran Cruz, in 1979. At the United
Nations in 1979, along with Margaret Thatcher and Indira Gandhi,
Gueiler Tejada received the UN Woman of the Year award. She
continued to serve as an ambassador to several countries, includ-
ing Colombia, West Germany, and Venezuela, until her retirement
in the mid-1990s.
Asha Hagi (b. 1962)
Born in Somalia, Hagi has worked tirelessly to bring peace to her
country. She received a B.A. in economics from Somalia National
University and an M.B.A. from the US International University in
Biographical Sketches
155

Africa. In 1992 she co-founded Save Somali Women and Children
(SSWC), an NGO promoting a safe and sustainable Somalia
through programs to help women overcome discrimination,
violence, and poverty.
In 2000, Hagi and several other women formed the Sixth
Clan, a women’s clan, to complement the traditional ﬁve Somali
Clans, which are all male-dominated. The Sixth Clan participated
in the Arta peace talks that year, the ﬁrst time that women were
included in the peace process.
In December 2006 Ethiopian forces overran Mogadishu and
within four months, over 350,000 people ﬂed from the city, includ-
ing Hagi. Because she had spoken out against the Ethiopian take-
over of the city, she moved to Nairobi, where she continues to
work toward peace in Somalia.
Asma Jahangir (b. 1952)
As a well-known Pakistani lawyer, Asma Jahangir has fought
legal inequities and human rights violations and continues to ﬁght
to end discrimination against women. Her father was a well-
known liberal politician and she was active in student politics
while in college. After graduation, she married a very successful
businessman. She moved in with her husband’s family, had chil-
dren, and acted “appropriately” for her position as a woman.
Finally, disgusted with herself, she asked her family to allow her
to study law. She studied at home, attending college only when
she was required to take exams. After graduation, her husband
would not allow her to work in a “man’s law ofﬁce”; therefore, in
1980, she and three other women started their own law ﬁrm, the
ﬁrst woman’s legal practice in Pakistan. Today, about 70 percent
of their cases are pro bono. In 1983 she was beaten, tear-gassed,
and arrested by police after protesting the Proposed Law of
Evidence, in which a woman’s testimony in court is valued at half
a man’s testimony.
Jahangir was the UN Special Rapporteur on Extrajudicial,
Arbitrary, and Summary Executions, and since 2004 has been the
UN Special Rapporteur on Freedom of Religion or Belief. When
Pakistani President Pervez Musharraf declared a state of emer-
gency in 2007, she was placed under house arrest for 90 days. She
has also served on the Human Rights Commission of Pakistan.
156
Biographical Sketches

Annie Ruth Baeta Jiagge (1918–1996)
Annie Ruth Baeta Jiagge, a prominent jurist and human rights
activist in Ghana, received a teacher’s certiﬁcate from Achimota
College in 1937 and an LL.B. from the London School of Econom-
ics and Political Science in 1949. She was a teacher and head-
mistress and operated her own legal practice from 1951 to 1956.
Jiagge had broad experience in the legal profession as a senior
magistrate, a circuit court judge, a high court judge, a judge in
the Court of Appeal, and president of the Court of Appeal. She
was chairperson of the Commission on Investigation of Assets of
Senior Public Servants and Named Political Leaders. She was
the author of the draft of the 1968 UN Declaration on Elimination
of Discrimination against Women and has written many articles
in various journals. She was president of the World Council of
Churches (1975–1983), moderator of the WCC Programme to
Combat Racism (1984–1991), a member of the UN Commission
on the Status of Women (1962–1974) and its president in 1968, as
well as chairperson of the Ghana National Council on Women
and Development (1975–1982). She also served as vice president
of the YWCA at the international level, Ghana YWCA president,
and chairperson of the Committee of the Churches Participation
in Development, Christian Council of Ghana.
Fatima Jinnah (1893–1967)
Born in Karachi, Pakistan, Fatima Jinnah was sent to live with her
brother in Bombay when she was eight years old, following the
death of her father. She attended a mission school and later stud-
ied dentistry. She and her brother attended a Round Table
Conference in London in 1929 and then remained in England for
four years. Returning to Pakistan in 1934, she joined the Muslim
League, which opposed the conservative orthodox attitudes of
Pakistani society toward women; this was the start of her active
participation in the ﬁght for the emancipation of women. She led
the All-India Muslim Women’s Committee in 1938. She traveled
throughout India, founding branches of the committee and stu-
dent federations and inspiring the establishment of industrial
schools, collectives, and other associations. She also founded the
Fatima Jinnah Women’s Medical College in Lahore.
Biographical Sketches
157

When her brother Ali Jinnah became the ﬁrst governor-
general of Pakistan in 1947, she lived with him and served as his
hostess; he died in 1948 and Fatima Jinnah retired from all public
activity. In 1954 she re-entered the public eye, campaigning for
the Muslim League and becoming an outspoken critic of the totali-
tarian government in East Pakistan. Persuaded to run against
Ayub Khan in presidential elections as the representative of the
combined opposition parties, she gained many staunch support-
ers. Although she lost the election, she continued to maintain a
strong base of support. Known as the “mother of the country,”
she was a popular public ﬁgure; riots broke out during her funeral
in Karachi in 1967 as an overwhelming number of her supporters
crowded into the site of her funeral to mourn her death.
Ellen Johnson-Sirleaf (b. 1938)
Ellen Johnson-Sirleaf, born in Monrovia, Liberia, was educated at
the College of West Africa in Liberia and at Harvard, where she
earned a master’s degree in public administration. She returned
to Liberia and served as Finance Minister in William Tolbert’s
government from 1972 to 1973. Following the 1980 coup d’e´tat,
Samuel Doe took over the government. Doe named Johnson-
Sirleaf president of the Liberian Bank for Development and Invest-
ment but she left that post after speaking out against many of Doe’s
advisers. She was brieﬂy arrested but was released and ﬂed the
country for the United States, where she worked for Citibank, the
World Bank, and the United Nations. Doe was assassinated in
1997 and Johnson-Sirleaf returned to Liberia to run for president,
coming in second to Charles Taylor. Following Taylor’s exile in
2005, she ran successfully for president.
Following her inauguration in January 2006, she set to work to
solve Liberia’s many problems; the country had little infrastruc-
ture, electricity and safe drinking water were in short supply, and
schools and hospitals had limited staff and very little equipment.
Her government identiﬁed four key development goals: peace
and security, economic revitalization, governance and the rule of
law, and basic infrastructure and services. She received the Presi-
dential Medal of Freedom in 2007 from George W. Bush and has
served on many advisory boards and commissions, including the
International Crisis Group, Women’s World Banking, Women
Waging Peace, and the Center for Africa’s International Relations.
158
Biographical Sketches

Begum Liaquat Ali Khan (1905–1990)
Born into an aristocratic Muslim family in India, Begum Liaquat
Ali Khan received her education at the universities of Lucknow
and Calcutta. At age 26 she moved to New Delhi, where she
taught economics at Indraprastha College for Women. In 1941
she submitted a carefully thought-out plan to develop a women’s
association as her master’s thesis. Eighteen years later she ﬁnally
founded such an organization, the All Pakistan Women’s Associ-
ation, which consisted of over two million women who were
nurses, teachers, and administrators. Her husband, Liaquat Ali
Khan, became prime minister of Pakistan in 1947; he was assassi-
nated four years later in Rawalpindi.
In 1952 the All Pakistan Women’s Association became a
major force in the Pakistani women’s movement, encouraging
women to become involved in politics and social causes. The
organization founded schools, hospitals, and craft industries.
Continuing her involvement in politics, Ali Khan became the ﬁrst
Muslim woman ambassador from Pakistan; she served as ambas-
sador to Belgium and the Netherlands in 1954 and later as ambas-
sador to Italy and Tunisia. She participated on committees of the
United Nations and in studies for the International Labour
Organization. She became the ﬁrst woman to become governor
of a province in Pakistan (Sind). She was also the chancellor of
the University of Karachi. In 1978, she was awarded the UN’s
Human Rights Award.
Gwendoline Konie (1938–2009)
Gwendoline Konie was born in Lusaka, Zambia, and received
her early education from local schools; she later attended the
University College in Cardiff, Wales, and American University
in Washington, D.C. Following her return to Zambia, she found
a job in the ministry of local government and social welfare. In
1963 Konie became a member of the Legislative Council and
joined the ministry of foreign affairs the following year.
In 1972 she joined the staff of the presidential ofﬁce and was
the Zambian ambassador to Sweden, Norway, Denmark, and
Finland from 1974 to 1877. In 1977 she represented Zambia at
the United Nations, leading the UN Council for Namibia. Since
Biographical Sketches
159

1979 she has been a permanent secretary in the Zambian Civil
Service, acted as an adviser and consultant to many organiza-
tions, and served as a member of executive boards of several
organizations that focus on adult education and family planning.
In 2001 she contested the results of the presidential election that
saw President Levy Mwanawasa elected.
Chandrika Bandaranaike Kumaratunga
(b. 1946)
Following in her mother’s footsteps, Chandrika Bandaranaike
Kumaratunga served as president of Sri Lanka from 1994 to
2005. Kumaratunga’s father, Solomon Bandaranaike, was the
nation’s prime minister until his assassination in 1959. Her
brother Sirimavo Bandaranaike served two terms, from 1960 to
1965 and from 1970 to 1977.
She received a degree in political science from the Sorbonne in
Paris in 1985. Although she has held teaching positions in England
and India, she has focused primarily on political activities. During
her mother’s second term, she headed the land reform ofﬁce. With
her husband, a politician and ﬁlm star, she formed the People’s
Alliance, a coalition to the right of her mother’s Freedom Party
and to the left of the United National Party. Following her hus-
band’s assassination in 1988, Kumaratunga assumed leadership
of the alliance. She was named prime minister in 1994 following
her party’s narrow win in Parliament.
During her time in ofﬁce, she has pledged to end the 12-year-
old civil war between the government and the Liberation Tigers
of Tamil Eelam. Women, especially in rural areas, have been vul-
nerable to rape, kidnapping, and torture, according to human
rights groups, and Kumaratunga has fought to protect these
women. She has advocated and won progressive revisions to the
country’s rape laws that increase penalties for this crime.
Bertha Lutz (1894–1976)
Bertha Lutz was a well-known Brazilian feminist who founded the
Brazil Federation for the Advancement of Women in 1922 and was
the federation’s president until her death in 1976. At the same time,
160
Biographical Sketches

she was a permanent delegate to the Inter-American Commission
of Women from Brazil. She studied biology at the Sorbonne in Paris
and returned to Rio de Janeiro to become the ﬁrst woman to enter
government service at the National Museum. She organized and
led the ﬁght for women’s suffrage, which was won in 1932. In
1936 she developed a government department to deal with the
speciﬁc problems that women face in society, and she represented
her country at many international conferences. She participated
in the campaign to organize the UN Commission on the Status of
Women. Lutz also taught zoology at the University of Rio de
Janeiro.
Wangari Maathai (b. 1940)
Known around the world for her environmental and human rights
activities, Wangari Maathai was born in Nyeri, Kenya, and raised
in a farming community. Her parents were subsistence farmers
from the Kikuyu tribe. After winning one of the many scholarships
awarded to Kenyans by the Kennedy administration, Maathai
attended Mount St. Scholastica College in Kansas, where she
received a B.A. in biology in 1964. She earned her M.S. from the
University of Pittsburgh, the ﬁrst woman in all of eastern and cen-
tral Africa to earn an advanced degree. In 1971 she earned a Ph.D.
in biology from the University of Nairobi. She later became the ﬁrst
woman to hold an associate professorship at the University of Nai-
robi and was the ﬁrst woman invited to chair a department there.
During her husband’s campaign for a seat in Parliament she
realized the problems that people in the lower economic class face
in ﬁnding a job and supporting their families. Following her hus-
band’s election she started an employment agency to help people
ﬁnd work either cleaning the homes of wealthy people or planting
trees and shrubs. She believed that planting trees would help stop
desertiﬁcation and soil erosion and support beautiﬁcation. Even
though her agency was not successful, she continually searched
for ways to involve Kenyans in preserving the environment.
In 1977 Maathai succeeded in persuading the National Coun-
cil of Women of Kenya to support her cause. First known as the
Save the Land Harambee, the group soon became known as the
Green Belt Movement (GBM). On World-Environment Day in
1977 her group planted seven trees in a small Nairobi park and
gained the public’s attention; it eventually grew into a large,
Biographical Sketches
161

inﬂuential organization. The group has the support of the United
Nations, several European governments, and hundreds of individ-
ual donors throughout the world. Maathai has written several
books about GBM, including The Green Belt Movement (1985) and
The Green Belt Movement: Sharing the Approach and the Experience
(1988). She and the GBM were awarded the Nobel Peace Prize in
2004.
Maathai continues to play an active role in politics. In 2002 she
was elected to the Kenyan Parliament. She is a member of the
Forum for the Restoration of Democracy and the founder of
the Tribal Clashes Resettlement Volunteer Service to encourage
the government to stop inciting tribal violence. She has won many
awards, including the Woman of the Year Award in 1983, the Right
Livelihood Award in 1984, the Better World Society Award for the
Protection of the Global Environment in 1986, the Windstar Award
for the Environment in 1988, the Woman of the World Award in
1989, the Africa Prize for Leadership for the Sustainable End to
Hunger in 1991, the Petra Kelly Prize for Environment in 2004,
the Conservation Scientist Award in 2004, and the Disney Conser-
vation Award in 2006. She continues to ﬁght for the environment
and for human rights.
Rigoberta Menchu Tum (b. 1959)
Rigoberta Menchu is an internationally known civil rights activist
who works for the rights of the Mayan and Aztec people of
Guatemala. Born in Chimel, Guatemala, she witnessed the brutality
of government forces toward her people, the Quiche Mayan
Indians. She has tirelessly traveled throughout the world to bring
attention to the plight of Guatemala’s indigenous people, who have
been persecuted by the landowning class and the military. Human
rights organizations estimate that the number of indigenous
people killed during the 33-year civil war has exceeded 15,000.
Menchu traveled the country with her father, activist Vincente
Menchu, a founding member of the Peasant Unity Committee
(CUC), until he was tortured and killed by the Guatemalan security
forces. Her mother and younger brother were also tortured
and killed. In 1981 she escaped to Mexico and then traveled to
France.
Menchu won the Nobel Peace Prize in 1992 for her work in
human rights. The Nobel Prize Committee cited Menchu as a
162
Biographical Sketches

“vivid symbol of peace and reconciliation across ethnic, cultural,
and social dividing lines.” The committee noted that “by main-
taining a disarming humanity in a brutal world, Rigoberta
Menchu appeals to the best in us. She stands as a uniquely potent
symbol of a just struggle” (Schlessinger and Schlessinger 1996,
174). She is the youngest person and the ﬁrst indigenous person
to win the Nobel Peace Prize. In a book about her life, I, Rigoberta
Menchu: An Indian Woman in Guatemala, she describes many of her
civil and human rights activities.
In 1999 several aspects of her autobiography were called into
question by David Stoll, an anthropologist, in his book Rigoberta
Menchu and the Story of All Poor Guatemalans. The reaction was
swift: some accused Stoll of being a tool of the right wing in
attacking Menchu while others attacked her, asking that the
Nobel Committee revoke her Peace Prize. Menchu did admit to
some inaccuracies but survived the controversy.
In 2007, she was one of 14 candidates running for president
of Guatemala; she received only three percent of the vote and
failed to qualify for the next round of elections. She was a member
of the UN International Indian Treaty Council and served as the
goodwill ambassador to the United Nations in 1993 for the Year
of the Indigenous Peoples.
Fatima Mernissi (b. 1940)
Fatima Mernissi is a well-known Moroccan sociologist and femi-
nist and the author of several publications; she is best known for
her classic Beyond the Veil: Male-Female Dynamic in Modern Muslim
Society (1975, revised edition 1987). This book vividly describes
the status and lives of women and their interaction with men in
Muslim society. Mernissi has also reinterpreted classical Islamic
texts from a feminist perspective and supervised the publication
of a series of books on the legal status of women in Morocco,
Algeria, and Tunisia.
In 1992 she wrote Islam and Democracy: Fear of the Modern
World, in which she argued that the Islamic faith has been used
and compromised by Arab leaders to control their countries and
prevent democratic reforms. According to Mernissi, these rulers
have distorted Islamic beliefs to ﬁt their needs and have abused
human rights by suppressing democratic reforms. In 1994 she
wrote Dreams of Trespass: Tales of a Harem Girlhood (published in
Biographical Sketches
163

England as The Harem Within: Tales of a Moroccan Girlhood), which
recounts her childhood growing up in a harem. Life was repres-
sive and boring; Mernissi and the other women and girls in the
harem were restricted in what they could do and where they
could go. Her latest publication is Dreams of Trespass (1994), a col-
lection of interviews she conducted during the mid-1970s. This
collection provides incredible insight into the lives of Moroccan
women. Formerly a professor of sociology at Mohammed V Uni-
versity in Rabat, Morocco, Mernissi is recognized around the
world for her analyses of sexual ideology, gender identity, and
the status of women in Islam.
Shushila Nayar (1914–2001)
Born in Gujarat, Pakistan, Dr. Shushila Nayar received her educa-
tion at Lahore College for Women, Lady Hardinge Medical College
in Delhi, and Johns Hopkins University in Baltimore, Maryland.
As medical attendant to Mahatma Gandhi, she supported the
Indian struggle for independence and was arrested and impris-
oned from 1942 to 1944. Following India’s independence from
Britain, she worked as senior medical ofﬁcer. She became minister
of health, rehabilitation, and transport in Delhi State and was
Speaker of the Delhi Legislative Assembly from 1952 to 1956. She
was elected to the Lok Sabha (lower house of Parliament) in 1957.
Appointed minister of health from 1962 through 1967, Nayar lost
her seat in Parliament in 1971 but remained a highly inﬂuential
ﬁgure. In 1969 she was named director of the Mahatma Gandhi
Institute of Medical Sciences, where she was professor of preven-
tive and social medicine. During this time she also served as secre-
tary of the Leprosy Board of the Mahatma Gandhi Memorial Trust.
Teurai Ropa Nhongo (b. 1955)
Born to peasant parents, Nhongo ran away from her family and vil-
lage to join the boys who were ﬁghting in the bush for the creation
of Zimbabwe. By the time she was 18 years old she was a member
of the Zimbabwe African National Liberation Army’s (ZANLA)
general staff, and she was only 21 years old when she was named
camp commander of Chimoio, the largest guerrilla and refugee
164
Biographical Sketches

camp in Mozambique. She married Rex Nhongo, deputy head of
the ZANLA forces. During her time ﬁghting with the guerrilla
forces, she became one of the most famous guerrillas in Robert
Mugabe’s forces. She was hunted by the Rhodesian security forces
but never captured. Following the creation of Zimbabwe, Nhongo
was named the minister of youth, sport, and recreation in 1980
and became minister of community development and women’s
affairs in 1981.
Isabel Peron (b. 1931)
Not as well known as Eva Peron, Juan Peron’s second wife, Isabel
Peron was the third wife of Juan Peron, president of Argentina,
and the ﬁrst woman to serve as president of a nation. She gave up
a career as a dancer to become Peron’s secretary and then his wife.
In 1955, they were exiled from Argentina during his second term as
president because of his suppression of free speech and the falter-
ing economy. Following many years of political ups and downs,
Juan and Isabel Peron were allowed back into the country in 1973.
Encouraged to run for the presidency, Juan Peron chose his wife
to be his running mate. They won in a landslide victory in Septem-
ber 1973. As vice president, Isabel championed the cause of wom-
en’s rights. With her husband’s health failing, Isabel assumed the
duties of head of state. She presided over the cabinet, traveled to
Paraguay, traveled to Geneva to address the International Labour
Organization, and went on to Madrid and Rome, where she met
with Pope Paul VI. The day following her return to Argentina, Juan
turned over full presidential power to her; he died on 1 July 1974.
She had a troublesome presidency, with many factions ﬁght-
ing for power, and was ousted in a coup in March 1976 by the
military junta. She was held under house arrest in a remote
government resort and later arrested and charged with corrup-
tion. She was released in 1981 and went into exile to Spain. In
1997 she was questioned about decrees she had issued in 1975
that allegedly allowed the military to eliminate subversive indi-
viduals. She denied allowing or encouraging any abuses during
her presidency. In 2007 she was again detained by Spanish police
but was released after a Spanish court rejected an Argentinian
court’s request to extradite her. Argentina continues to investigate
alleged crimes committed during her presidency.
Biographical Sketches
165

Fumilayo Ransome-Kuti (1900–1978)
An active feminist from Nigeria, Fumilayo Ransome-Kuti received
her education from Anglican primary and secondary schools and
then studied domestic science at Wincham Hall College in
England. She returned to Nigeria and took a teaching job; she also
became involved in advocating for women’s rights, including
women’s suffrage. In the 1940s the British instituted tax policies
that had serious negative effects on women and their economic
independence. Ransome-Kuti organized strikes, demonstrations,
and other acts of civil disobedience; these actions were instrumen-
tal in abolishing the heavy taxation of market women in Egbaland.
She fought against sexism and racism and participated in the ﬁght
for independence from Great Britain. She was honored with an
honorary law degree in 1968 from the University of Ibadan. She
was elected to the Native House of Chiefs, was a member of the
National Council of Nigeria and the Cameroons, was leader of
the Commoners People’s Party and the Nigeria Women’s Union,
and was a winner of the Lenin Peace Prize.
Aisha Ra´teb (b. 1928)
Aisha Ra´teb received her law degree from the Faculty of Law in
Cairo and rose to become the ﬁrst professor of international law
at Cairo University. She became the minister of social affairs in
the Egyptian government in 1971, the ﬁrst woman to hold a minis-
terial position. She remained in this position until 1977, when she
went on to become the minister of insurance. Ra´teb became chair
of the Legislative Affairs Committee in 1973 and the Egyptian min-
ister of foreign affairs in 1978. She was the Egyptian ambassador to
Denmark in 1979 and to Germany in 1981. Her efforts to reform the
judiciary led to the appointment of Tahani al-Gebali, the ﬁrst
woman to serve on the Supreme Constitutional Court.
Dhanvanthi Rama Rau (1893–1987)
Dhanvanthi Rama Rau was a well-known social worker from India
who was born into an aristocratic family and educated at the Uni-
versity of Madras in southern India. She was one of the ﬁrst Indian
women to attend college. She was a lecturer in English at Queen
166
Biographical Sketches

Mary’s College in Madras from 1917 to 1921 when she married Sir
Bengal Rama Rau, a leading Indian diplomat. Following her mar-
riage she began to work for social reform. She became the secretary
of the All-India Child Marriage Abolition League in 1927,
a member of the International Alliance for Suffrage and Equal
Citizenship in 1932, and president of the All-India Women’s
Conference in 1946. She became interested in family planning,
and from 1949 to 1963 she worked for the Family Planning Associ-
ation of India. In 1963 she became the president of the International
Planned Parenthood Association, a position she held until 1971.
Nibuya Sabalsajaray (1951–1974)
Nibuya Sabalsajaray, born into a poor family in Uruguay, was an
active unionist. She studied in local schools and qualiﬁed as a
teacher. She soon became a union organizer and leader, and in
1974 she participated in a major demonstration against the
Uruguayan dictatorship. She was arrested and tortured and died
two days after her arrest, at the age of 23 years. She is now revered
as one of the martyrs of the country’s repressive policy toward the
unions during the 1970s.
Gita Sen (b. 1948)
Gita Sen is a leading researcher on women’s issues as they relate
to development, health and population, and the environment.
She is a professor of Economics at the Indian Institute of Manage-
ment in Bangalore, India, and an adjunct professor in the Depart-
ment of Global Health and Population at Harvard University. A
founding member of DAWN (Development Alternatives with
Women for a New Era), Sen received her M.A. from the Delhi
School of Economics and her Ph.D. in economics from Stanford
University. She has taught at the New School for Social Research
in New York, Radcliffe College, Vassar College, and the Center
for Population and Development Studies at Harvard University.
Her publications include Women and the New World Economy:
Feminist Perspectives on Alternative Economic Frameworks; Develop-
ment, Crisis, and Alternative Visions: Third World Women’s Perspectives
(with Caren Grown); Population Policies Reconsidered: Health, Empow-
erment, and Rights (with Adrienne Germain and Lincoln C. Chen);
Biographical Sketches
167

and Power and Decision: The Social Control of Reproduction (with
Rachel Snow).
Huda Shaarawi (1879–1947)
A well-known Egyptian women’s rights advocate, Huda Shaarawi
was born into a wealthy family in Minia and educated in Turkish
and French, the language of the wealthy. She taught herself Arabic.
She started a school for girls in 1910, teaching general educational
courses instead of courses such as midwifery that women were
usually taught in vocational classes.
Shaarawi organized hundreds of women to demonstrate
against the British during the nationalist movement. She helped
organize and became head of the ﬁrst women’s association in
Egypt in 1920. Three years later she traveled to Rome as the Egyp-
tian representative to the International Conference of Women. In
1924 she organized the Women’s Feminist Union. She and Saiza
Nabarawi started the open feminist movement in Egypt by taking
off their veils at the Cairo train station as they returned from an
international feminist conference. Shaarawi and the union advo-
cated for women’s rights and the integration of urban women into
public life. They wanted changes in the personal status laws, equal
access to secondary and university education, expanded profes-
sional opportunities in business, and support systems for working
mothers to provide child care; they also advocated for an end to
legalized prostitution. Union members lobbied the government
for these and other changes.
Shaarawi founded Egyptian Women, a journal published in
both Arabic and French that described the goals of the Women’s
Union to its readers. In 1935 and 1939, Shaarawi attended the
international women’s conferences. In 1944, she helped organize
the All Arab Federation of Women. In 1945, she advocated for
the abolition of all atomic weapons.
Leticia Ramos Shahani (b. 1929)
Leticia Shahani has been involved in a variety of political and
advocacy activities. Born in Lingayen, Pangasinan, the Philippines,
she received a B.A. in English literature in 1951 from Wellesley
College, an M.A. in comparative literature in 1954 from Columbia
168
Biographical Sketches

University, and a Ph.D. in comparative literature and sociology in
1961 from the University of Paris (France). She has been on the
faculty at the University of the Philippines, the New School for
Social Research in New York, and the International Study and
Research Institute in New York. Other positions include dean of
the graduate school at the Lyceum of the Philippines and president
of the national YMCA of the Philippines.
She was a senator in the Congress of the Philippines and has
had a varied and active career in politics. At the international level,
she has participated in many UN activities, including repre-
sentative to the UN Commission on the Status of Women (1970–
1974), member of the Philippine delegation to the UN General
Assembly (1974–1979), member of the Philippine delegation to
the UN World Conference during International Women’s Year
(1975), Philippine representative to the Preparatory Committee
for the UN Conference on the Mid-Decade for Women (1978–
1980), chairwoman of the Philippine delegation to the World
Conference on the UN Mid-Decade for Women (1980), UN assis-
tant secretary general for Social Development and Humanitarian
Affairs (1981–1986), and secretary general of the World Conference
to Review and Appraise the Achievements of the UN Decade for
Women (1985).
Helvi Sipila¨ (1915–2009)
After receiving her education at the University of Helsinki, Helvi
Sipila¨ became an acting judge in the rural district courts in Finland.
Between 1941 and 1951 she held various legal posts on the Supreme
Court and the Supreme Administrative Court. She was a member
of various Finnish government committees on matrimonial legisla-
tion, protection of children, social beneﬁts for children, citizenship
education, and international development. She was a member of
the Council of the Human Rights Institute in Strasbourg, France,
beginning in 1969.
As an attorney, she founded and operated her own law ofﬁce
in Finland from 1943 to 1972; at the same time she was actively
involved in UN activities. Sipila¨ retired from her post of assistant
secretary general of the UN’s Centre for Social Development and
Humanitarian Affairs (CSDHA) in 1980. In this position she had
played a major role in planning the 1975 International Women’s
Year (IWY) Conference in Mexico City. CSDHA administered the
Biographical Sketches
169

IWY Trust Fund, and its Branch for the Advancement of Women
acted as the secretariat for the Commission on the Status of
Women. Before taking the post at CSDHA, Sipila¨ served as
international president of Zonta International (see Chapter 7).
During International Women’s Year, Sipila¨ appealed to gov-
ernments to set aside prejudices of race, sex, language, and religion
in order to confront problems affecting everyone. She traveled
extensively to government capitals around the world to build
understanding and interest in International Women’s Year. In
1981 she founded the Finnish National Committee on UNIFEM,
which consisted of 400 individual and 30 organizational members.
She also represented Finland as a delegate to the UN Commission
on the Status of Women (CSW). The Helvi Sipila¨ Seminar was
established at the 50th Session of the CSW to honor her contribu-
tions in the ﬁeld of human rights and the status of women.
Margaret Snyder (b. 1929)
Margaret Snyder has been involved in women’s development
activities for many years and is the founding director of the UN
Development Fund for Women. She received her Ph.D. from the
University of Dar es Salaam and was honored at Makerere Uni-
versity in 1993 for her valuable contributions to the advancement
of women in agriculture and education. She has been a Visiting
Fellow in International Studies at Princeton University.
Snyder has long been involved in development policies
and women’s issues in Africa. As a regional adviser for the UN
Economic Commission for Africa, she initiated their Women’s Pro-
gramme, led the Voluntary Agencies Bureau, and cofounded the
African Training and Research Centre for Women. She is also a
cofounder of Women’s World Banking, an organization that
provides loans and other business services to women through a
network of afﬁliate organizations (see Chapter 7). Her publications
include Farmers and Merchants: Some Observations on Women and the
State in Africa; Politics, Poverty and Participation: A History of Women’s
Leadership in Development; and Women: The Key to Ending Hunger.
She was the founder and ﬁrst director of the UN Development
Fund for Women (UNIFEM). In writing Transforming Development:
Women, Poverty and Politics, Snyder traveled to 15 countries to
examine projects that UNIFEM had supported and interviewed
women and men who were helped by these projects.
170
Biographical Sketches

Mu Sochua (b. 1954)
Mu Sochua ﬂed Phnom Penh in 1972 as the Vietnam War spread
into Cambodia. Her parents disappeared, victims of the Khmer
Rouge. Sochua spent 18 years in exile in France, the United States,
and Italy, during which time she earned a B.A. in psychology
from San Francisco State University and an M.S.W. from the Uni-
versity of California at Berkeley. She also worked in refugee
camps along the border between Thailand and Cambodia.
Sochua returned to Cambodia in 1989, becoming an activist
on women’s and children’s issues. She created Khemara, the ﬁrst
Cambodian organization to focus on women’s issues. In 1998
she won a national assembly seat and became the ﬁrst female
minister for women’s and veterans’ affairs. Her advocacy for
women’s rights led her to launch a national campaign for gender
equality. In 2004, however, she resigned her government position,
citing her frustration with governmental and outside corruption
that hindered her work. She received the Vital Voices Human
Rights Global Leadership Award from then-Senator Hillary
Clinton for her efforts to stop human trafﬁcking. She is currently
a member of parliament for the opposition party, ﬁghting for
women’s rights and participatory government.
Mary Tadesse (b. 1932)
As a former vice minister for education and culture as well as an as-
sistant minister of education in Addis Ababa, Ethiopia, Mary
Tadesse has worked extensively with policy development and
programs concerning women and development. These activities
include developing and advancing policies and strategies for the
advancement of women in developing countries on a regional as
well as a global level. She has worked with organizations such as
the Council of African Advisers to the World Bank, the Board of
Trustees of the International Research and Training Institute for the
Advancement of Women (INSTRAW), the Federation of African
Women Entrepreneurs, and the Africa Regional Coordinating Com-
mittee for the Integration of Women in Development. She has partici-
pated in many academic and governmental conferences. With
Margaret Snyder, Tadesse published African Women and Development:
A History in 1995. She is a board member of the Fistula Foundation.
Biographical Sketches
171

Sakena Yacoobi
Born in Herat, Afghanistan, Sakena Yacoobi traveled to the
United States for her education, earning a B.S. in biological sci-
ences from the University of the Paciﬁc and a M.P.H. from Loma
Linda University. She spent several years in the United States as
a health consultant and professor of biology, mathematics, and
psychology at D’Etre University in Michigan.
She began working with Afghan refugees in Pakistan in 1992,
joining the International Rescue Committee in Peshawar ﬁrst as
manager, then coordinator, of their Female Education and Teacher
Training Program; she expanded the number of Afghan girls
enrolled in school, and girls’ and women’s access to education.
In 1995, she formed the Afghan Institute of Learning (ALI) to pro-
vide teacher education to Afghan women, encourage education
for all children, and offer health education to women and chil-
dren. During Taliban control in the 1990s, ALI supported 80
underground schools for girls throughout the country. Yacoobi
and ALI received the 2004 Women’s Rights Prize from the Peter
Gruber Foundation, and the 2005 Democracy Award of the
National Endowment for Democracy.
Yacoobi is also a co-founder and vice president of Creating
Hope International, an NGO that works to improve the lives of
individuals dealing with natural disasters, world strife, and other
devastating conditions. She is on the board of directors of the
Global Fund for Women, and was a 2000 delegate to the United
Nations Millennium Forum for NGOs and a 2001 delegate to the
Roundtable on Women’s Leadership in Rebuilding Afghanistan.
Begum Khaleda Zia (b. 1945)
Begum Khaleda Zia was the prime minister of Bangladesh from
1991 to 1996 and from 2001 to 2006—She also served as the minister
for establishment, information, and mineral resources, and was a
leader of the Bangladesh Nationalist Party. She attended primary
and secondary school and then married Zia-ur Rahman when she
was 16 years old. He was the country’s president from 1977 until
1981, when he was assassinated. At that point Hossain Moham-
mad Ershad came to power and martial law was declared and
political parties ofﬁcially abolished. The Bangladesh Nationalist
172
Biographical Sketches

Party continued to exist unofﬁcially, however, and Khaleda Zia led
her party as chairwoman in 1984. Zia was at the center of the ﬁght
to end martial law and restore free elections, participating in
strikes, street protests, and mass demonstrations. During this
period she was placed under house arrest several times. Ershad
resigned his position in 1990, elections were held in 1991, and
Khaleda Zia became prime minister. She focused her attention on
population control, mass literacy, compulsory primary education,
ﬁghting poverty, and extending electricity to rural areas.
She won a second term as prime minister in elections held in
February 1996, but the other major parties refused to accept the
results. A caretaker government was appointed. Her party lost
in June 1996. Winning again in the 2001 elections, she was named
prime minister; she spent most of her ﬁve years in ofﬁce ﬁghting
religious militancy, continuing charges of corruption, and grow-
ing attacks on minority groups
Zia has been criticized by many women for her silence on
women’s issues, especially the conditions of women working in
the garment industry. Over two million women work in appalling
conditions in Bangladeshi sweatshops. She has also been criticized
for her unwillingness to ﬁght the growing Islamic fundamentalist
movement in her country. In January 2006, her Bangladesh
National Party was defeated in the general election, winning only
29 out of a possible 300 seats.
References
Europa Publications. 2009. International Who’s Who of Women 2010. New
York: Routledge.
Europa Publications. 2010. Who’s Who in International Affairs 2011. New
York: Routledge.
Schlessinger, Bernard S., and June S. Schlessinger, eds. 1996. The Who’s
Who of Nobel Prize Winners, 1901–1995. Third ed. Phoenix: Oryx Press.
Biographical Sketches
173


6
Facts and Data
T
he World Bank estimates that over 80 percent of the world’s
population live in developing countries and earn individual
incomes under $2.00 per day (World Bank 2008). Poverty is a
major concern for many residents of developing countries and
limited access to education, health services, and employment
opportunities mean that it is very difﬁcult to escape. While a
signiﬁcant number of developing countries have enacted laws to
protect women, discrimination and violence remain a daily fact
of life for many. Countries may have laws providing for compul-
sory education but access to education is limited, especially in
rural areas. Health care resources may be minimal or nonexistent.
Employment opportunities are often scarce, especially in rural
areas, and without adequate education these opportunities may
be out of reach for many women.
This chapter provides comparative statistics on the status of
women in developing countries, including access and enrollment
levels in primary and secondary school, maternal mortality rates
and access to health care, rates of female genital mutilation, labor
participation, political participation, domestic violence, and other
human rights issues. The chapter begins with a summary of the
major human rights instruments that were designed to promote
women’s rights and eliminate and prohibit discrimination against
women.
175

International Conventions and Protocols
The Charter of the United Nations and the International Bill of
Rights are two instruments that provide a forceful statement on
women’s rights in the international arena. The International Bill
of Rights includes the Universal Declaration of Human Rights,
the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, and the
International Covenant on Economic, Social, and Cultural Rights.
The UN Charter is the ﬁrst international document to speciﬁcally
mention equal rights of women and men.
The Charter of the United Nations
The UN Charter, adopted in 1945, established the United Nations
as an international body to encourage peace and tolerance, unite
the countries of the world in maintaining international peace and
security, ensure that armed forces would not be used except for
the common interest, and promote economic and social advance-
ment of all people. Article 1 describes the purposes of the United
Nations, including “to achieve international cooperation in solving
international problems of an economic, social, cultural, or humani-
tarian character, and in promoting and encouraging respect
for human rights and for fundamental freedoms for all without
distinction as to race, sex, language, or religion” (Art.1[3]).
Commission on the Status of Women
The Commission of the Status of Women was created in 1946 by
the UN General Assembly to ensure women’s equality and pro-
mote women’s rights. Close working relationships were built with
NGOs, human rights treaty bodies, the Commission on Human
Rights, and other UN agencies. Members assisted in drafting the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights and conducted in-depth
country-speciﬁc analyses of the legal status of women as well as
their access to education, work opportunities, and other measures
of their experiences. During the 1960s and 1970s the Commission
focused on the role of women in development and suggested that
the United Nations expand its technical assistance activities to
help women in developing countries. Members urged the United
Nations to declare 1975 the International Women’s Year; the
General Assembly agreed and included the recognition of women’s
176
Facts and Data

role in the peace process in its agenda. The First World Conference
on Women was part of the International Women’s Year and sub-
sequent conferences were organized. During the UN Decade for
Women, the Commission drafted the Convention on the Elimina-
tion of All Forms of Discrimination against Women (CEDAW),
which was adopted by the General Assembly in 1979. The Commis-
sion continues its work on behalf of women’s rights and advance-
ment, currently focusing its attention on implementing the Beijing
Platform for Action.
Universal Declaration of Human Rights
Recognizing that member states have “reafﬁrmed their faith in
fundamental human rights, in the dignity and worth of the human
person and in the equal rights of men and women,” the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights was adopted in 1948. It proclaims
that all persons are “born free and equal in dignity and rights”
(Art. 1), and that every person is “entitled to all the rights and free-
doms set forth in this Declaration, without distinction of any kind,
such as race, colour, sex, language, religion, political or other opin-
ion, national or social origin, property, birth or other status” (Art. 2),
and that all are entitled to equal protection under the law (Art. 7).
Article 16 states that all men and women have the right to
marry and create a family, and that they “are entitled to equal
rights as to marriage, during marriage and at its dissolution.” Both
spouses are to enter into the marriage with “free and full consent.”
Article 25 focuses on the right to a standard of living that includes
adequate food, clothing, housing, medical care, and social services,
as well as social security in the event of unemployment, sickness,
disability, widowhood, or old age. In addition, “[m]otherhood
and childhood are entitled to special care and assistance.” Article
26 proclaims the right of all individuals to education, stating that
elementary education should be compulsory and free and that
everyone should have equal access to higher education.
Convention on the Suppression of the Traffic
in Persons and of the Exploitation of the
Prostitution of Others
This convention, adopted in 1949 and entered into force in 1951,
was written in response to many previous attempts to suppress
International Conventions and Protocols
177

activities related to prostitution. The General Assembly believed
that prostitution and trafﬁcking in persons for the purpose of pros-
titution were not compatible with human worth and dignity and
endangered the welfare of individuals, families, and communities.
Each signatory agrees “to punish any person who, to gratify
the passions of another (1) procures, entices or leads away, for pur-
poses of prostitution, another person, even with the consent of that
person; [and] (2) exploits the prostitution of another person, even
with the consent of that person” (Art. 1). In addition, persons
who keep, manage, or ﬁnance a brothel or rent a building to be
used for the purpose of prostitution will be punished (Art. 2). If a
national commits one of the above offenses in another country
and returns to his or her home country, he or she can be extradited
to the country where the offense was committed; if his or her home
country does not permit extradition, then Article 9 provides that
the offender be tried for the offense in his or her home country.
Article 14 requires that each signatory establish and maintain
a service that coordinates results of the investigations into traf-
ﬁcking offenses and shares that information with other interested
parties. Immigrants are protected by Article 17, which requires
each party to adopt regulations to protect these individuals, to
warn the public of the dangers of trafﬁcking, to monitor public
places such as train and bus stations and airports in order to pre-
vent trafﬁcking, and to warn the appropriate authorities of the
arrival of persons who may be trafﬁckers or victims of trafﬁckers.
Equal Remuneration Convention
The Equal Remuneration Convention was adopted in 1951 and
entered into force in 1953 by the General Conference of the
International Labour Organization. Remuneration includes both
“ordinary, basic or minimum wage or salary” and indirect or in
kind payment. Recognizing the importance of equal pay for men
and women, it calls on each member state to “promote and, in
so far as is consistent with such methods, ensure the application
to all workers of the principle of equal remuneration for men
and women workers for work of equal value” (Art. 2[1]). This
goal can be accomplished through national laws, legally estab-
lished means for determining wages, collective agreements, or
any combination of these methods (Art. 2[2]).
178
Facts and Data

Convention on the Political Rights of Women
The Convention on the Political Rights of Women, adopted in
1952 and entered into force in 1954, provides a number of rights
to women regarding voting and running for elections. It provides
that women are “entitled to vote in all elections on equal terms
with men” (Art. 1), that they can be elected “to all publicly elected
bodies, established by national law, on equal terms with men”
(Art. 2), and that they can hold public ofﬁce, all without suffering
discrimination.
Convention on the Nationality of
Married Women
Adopted in 1957 and entered into force in 1958, the Convention
on the Nationality of Married Women provides protection for a
woman who marries someone outside of her country or national-
ity. The Contracting States agree that neither marriage nor the dis-
solution of marriage “between one of its nationals and an alien,
nor the change of nationality by the husband during marriage,
shall automatically affect the nationality of the wife” (Art. 1). It
allows women to adopt the nationality of their husbands, if they
so desire, but does not require it.
Discrimination (Employment and Occupation)
Convention
Adopted in 1958 and entered into force in 1960 by the governing
body of the International Labour Ofﬁce, the Discrimination
(Employment and Occupation) Convention follows the Declara-
tion of Philadelphia, which “afﬁrms that all human beings, irre-
spective of race, creed or sex, have the right to pursue both their
material well-being and their spiritual development in conditions
of freedom and dignity, of economic security and equal opportu-
nity.” It deﬁnes discrimination as “any distinction, exclusion or
preference made on the basis of race, colour, sex, religion, political
opinion, national extraction or social origin, which has the effect of
nullifying or impairing equality of opportunity or treatment in
employment or occupation” (Art. 1[a]).
International Conventions and Protocols
179

Convention against Discrimination
in Education
Adopted by the General Conference of the UN Educational,
Scientiﬁc and Cultural Organization in 1960 and entered into
force in 1962, the Convention against Discrimination in Education
prohibits all discrimination, including that based on race, color,
sex, language, religion, political or other opinion, national origin,
economic condition or birth, in the provision of education. The
term “education” includes “all types and levels of education,
and includes access to education, the standard and quality of edu-
cation, and the conditions under which it is given” (Art. 1). All
Parties to this Convention agree to develop a national policy to
promote equal opportunities to education, including free and
compulsory primary education, generally accessible secondary
and higher education, and equal standards in all public institu-
tions, as well as to provide teacher training without discrimina-
tion (Art. 4). Article 5 speciﬁes that education should strengthen
“respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms; it shall
promote understanding, tolerance and friendship among all
nations, racial or religious groups,” among other tenets.
International Covenant on Economic, Social,
and Cultural Rights
Adopted in 1966 and entered into force in 1976, the International
Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights recognizes that
the “inherent dignity and . . . the equal and inalienable rights of all
the members of the human family is the foundation of freedom,
justice and peace in the world.” It declares that “all peoples have
the right of self-determination .. . they freely determine their political
status and freely pursue their economic, social and cultural develop-
ment” and they cannot be deprived of their own means of subsis-
tence (Art. 1). Member states must work to “guarantee that the
rights enunciated in the present Covenant will be exercised without
discrimination of any kind as to race, colour, sex, language, religion,
political or other opinion, national or social origin, property, birth or
other status” (Art. 2). Member states are also required to “ensure the
equal right of men and women to the enjoyment of all economic,
social and cultural rights” set forth in this Covenant (Art. 3).
180
Facts and Data

The right to work is also recognized, and it “includes the
right of everyone to the opportunity to gain his living by work
which he freely chooses or accepts, and will take appropriate
steps to safeguard this right” (Art. 6[1]). Fair wages must also be
provided without any distinctions, “in particular women being
guaranteed conditions of work not inferior to those enjoyed by
men, with equal pay for equal work” (Art. 7[1]).
Families also are considered in this covenant. It calls for the
“widest possible protection and assistance” for the family, speciﬁ-
cally while it is responsible for caring for and educating children
(Art. 10). It also requires that marriage should be “entered into
with the free consent of the intending spouses” (Art. 10[1]). Moth-
ers must be protected before childbirth and once children are
born, and if they are employed they should be given paid leave
or leave with some type of adequate social security beneﬁts (Art.
10[2]). Child labor should be prohibited (Art. 10[3]).
Article 11 focuses on the right to an adequate standard of
living, including adequate food, clothing, and shelter. Article 12
recognizes the right to enjoyment of physical and mental health
and calls for reduction of infant mortality and the number of still-
births. The right of all persons to education is the focus of Article
13, including free primary education for all and accessible secon-
dary and higher education.
International Covenant on Civil
and Political Rights
The International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights recog-
nizes that conditions must be created in which every human is
able to enjoy his or her civil and political rights, and that member
states are obliged to provide these rights to their citizens.
Adopted in 1966 and entered into force in 1976, this convention
provides for a variety of rights for the individual, including the
right to life, liberty, and personal security, and freedom of thought
and association. Article 3 requires that member states work to
“ensure the equal right of men and women to the enjoyment of
all civil and political rights set forth” in the convention. Men
and women have the equal right to marry freely, with mutual con-
sent, and have equal rights and responsibilities during a marriage
and after its dissolution (Art. 23).
International Conventions and Protocols
181

Declaration on the Elimination of
Discrimination against Women
The UN General Assembly declared that although the Charter of
the United Nations, the Universal Declaration of Human Rights,
and other instruments of the United Nations afﬁrmed the impor-
tance of human rights for all individuals, including women,
women still faced a considerable amount of discrimination. As a
result, in 1967 they adopted this Declaration, which stated that
“discrimination against women, denying or limiting as it does
their equality of rights with men, is fundamentally unjust and con-
stitutes an offence against human dignity” (Art. 1). They called for
member states to abolish all existing laws and practices that dis-
criminate against women (Art. 2), provide legal protection for
women (Art. 2), and give women the right to vote and to hold pub-
lic ofﬁce (Art. 4) as well as the right to “acquire, administer, enjoy,
dispose of and inherit property, including property acquired
during marriage” (Art. 6). Child marriage is also to be prohibited
(Art. 6). Member governments agree to repeal discriminatory laws
(Art. 7); curb trafﬁcking and prostitution of women (Art. 8); and
ensure women equal rights in education (Art. 9), economics, social
life, and equal pay (Art. 10).
Declaration on the Protection of Women
and Children in Emergency and Armed
Conflict
The Declaration on the Protection of Women and Children in Emer-
gency and Armed Conﬂict was adopted and entered into force in
1974. The Economic and Social Council of the United Nations rec-
ognized the need to protect civilian women and children during
wars, civil unrest, and other emergency and armed conﬂicts
because they are “often the victims of inhuman acts and conse-
quently suffer serious harm.” Understanding that women and chil-
dren experience abuse as a result of “suppression, aggression,
colonialism, racism, alien domination and foreign subjugation,”
this Declaration is intended to protect them and future generations
from harm. Attacks on civilian populations and the use of chemical
and bacterial weapons in warfare are prohibited and condemned.
The Declaration further requires that all “necessary steps shall be
182
Facts and Data

taken to ensure the prohibition of measures such as persecution,
torture, punitive measures, degrading treatment and violence,”
especially against women and children. All types of repression
and cruel and inhuman treatment of women and children, includ-
ing “imprisonment, torture, shooting, mass arrests, collective pun-
ishment, destruction of dwellings and forcible eviction,” will be
considered criminal acts. Shelter, medical care, food, and other
inalienable rights must be provided to all women and children
caught in emergency and other conﬂicts.
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms
of Discrimination against Women (CEDAW)
Seen as an international bill of rights for women, CEDAW was
adopted by the UN General Assembly in 1979 and came into force
on 3 September 1981. Calling for a plan of action to eliminate sex-
based discrimination, it requires all signatories to include gender
equality in their domestic legislation; repeal all discriminatory
provisions in their country’s laws; enact new legislation to protect
women from discrimination; establish public institutions to
ensure protections for women against discrimination; and elimi-
nate all types of discrimination that are currently practiced by
individuals, organizations, and businesses. It has been ratiﬁed in
all UN member countries except for eight, including the United
States (see Chapter 3).
CEDAW was the ﬁrst international instrument to speciﬁcally
deﬁne discrimination against women as “any distinction, exclu-
sion or restriction made on the basis of sex which has the effect
or purpose of impairing or nullifying the recognition, enjoyment
or exercise by women, irrespective of their marital status, on a
basis of equality of men and women, of human rights and funda-
mental freedoms in the political, economic, social, cultural, civil
or any other ﬁeld” (Art. 1).
International Convention on the Protection
of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and
Members of Their Families
Adopted in 1990 and entered into force in 2003, this convention rec-
ognized the growing number of migrants and the importance of
International Conventions and Protocols
183

providing them with protection from discrimination, abuse, and
trafﬁcking. Protection is provided to all migrant workers regard-
less of their “sex, race, colour, language, religion or conviction,
political or other opinion, national, ethnic or social origin, national-
ity, age economic position, property, marital status, birth or other
status” (Art. 7). Member states are encouraged to prevent trafﬁck-
ing in migrant workers.
Fourth World Conference on Women
Beijing Declaration
At the Fourth World Conference on Women, participating gov-
ernments reafﬁrmed their commitment to equality, development,
and peace for all women with this declaration. They reafﬁrmed
their commitment to equal rights for women, the full implemen-
tation of the Nairobi Forward-Looking Strategies for the
Advancement of Women, and the “empowerment and advance-
ment of women.” Participants declared that “women’s rights are
human rights”; that women have the right to “control all aspects
of their health, in particular their own fertility”; that policies and
programs that are gender-sensitive are essential to the empower-
ment of women; and that participation by women’s groups,
NGOs, and other community-based organizations are important
factors in implementing the Platform for Action. Participants also
vowed to ensure that women and girls enjoy all human rights and
basic freedoms, eliminate all forms of discrimination against
women, encourage men to participate in the process, promote
the economic independence of women, prevent all violence
against women, protect women’s human rights, ensure women’s
equal access to education, respect international laws, promote
women’s access to economic resources, and ensure the success
of the Platform for Action.
Home Work Convention
Adopted in 1996 and entered into force in 2000, this convention
offers protections to individuals who work at home for pay,
including equal treatment concerning occupational safety and
health, remuneration, social security protection, access to train-
ing, minimum age of employment, and maternity protection.
184
Facts and Data

It calls on members to adopt and implement a national policy
regarding home work and calls for protection against discrimina-
tion in employment.
Protocol to Prevent, Suppress, and Punish
Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women and
Children, Supplementing the UN Convention
against Transnational Organized Crime
Adopted in 2000 and entered into force in 2003, the Protocol to
Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafﬁcking in Persons, Especially
Women and Children, supplements the Convention against
Transnational Organized Crime. The protocol’s purposes include
preventing and combating trafﬁcking in persons, especially
women and children; protecting and assisting victims of trafﬁck-
ing; and promoting cooperation within member states to meet
these purposes. It requires that signatories enact legislative and
other measures to establish trafﬁcking as a criminal offense (Art.
5); provide a wide range of assistance to victims, including the
provision of services to assist in the “physical, psychological and
social recovery of victims” (Art. 6); and establish comprehensive
policies and programs to prevent and combat trafﬁcking (Art. 9).
UN Security Council Resolution 1325 on
Women and Peace and Security
The Security Council observed that women and children often bear
the brunt of armed conﬂict as refugees and internally displaced
persons and are increasingly targets of combatants and other
armed elements. The Council believed that women and girls need
full protection using international humanitarian and human rights
laws and recognized the “urgent need to mainstream a gender per-
spective into peacekeeping operations.” Adopted in October 2000,
this resolution calls for increased numbers of women at all
decision-making levels of government and institutions and in con-
ﬂict resolution and peace processes; a gender perspective in peace-
keeping processes; additional support for gender-sensitive
training efforts; and the development of “training guidelines and
materials on the protection, rights and the particular needs of
women” (¶6). All actors involved in negotiating and implementing
International Conventions and Protocols
185

peace agreements are asked to adopt a gender perspective during
repatriation and resettlement activities; to support women’s peace
initiatives; to ensure human rights protection for women and girls;
and to protect women and children from armed conﬂicts and
gender-based violence, especially rape and other forms of sexual
abuse.
Regional Conventions: Inter-American
Conventions, Statutes, and Declarations
The Organization of American States (OAS) has adopted a number
of conventions and statutes to protect the human rights of women
and children and to prevent violence against them. Several of these
are summarized below.
American Convention on Human Rights
(“Pact of San Jose, Costa Rica”)
The American Convention on Human Rights was adopted by
member states of the OAS in 1969 and entered into force in 1978.
The signatories agree to “respect the rights and freedoms recog-
nized herein and to ensure to all persons subject to their jurisdic-
tion the free and full exercise of those rights and freedoms,
without any discrimination for reasons of race, color, sex, lan-
guage, religion, political or other opinion, national of social origin,
economic status, birth or any other social condition” (Art. 1).
Among the rights protected are the right to life, the right to
humane treatment, the right to freedom from slavery, the right to
personal liberty, the right to a fair trial, the right to privacy, the
right to freedom of conscience and religion, the right to freedom
of thought and expression, the right to nationality, the right to
property, the right to freedom of movement, the right to participate
in government, and the right to judicial protection. Rights espe-
cially relevant to women are the right to equal protection and
rights related to the family, including “the right of men and women
of marriageable age to marry and raise a family” and the provision
that “no marriage shall be entered into without the free and full
consent of the intending spouses” (Art. 17).
186
Facts and Data

Additional Protocol to the American
Convention on Human Rights in the Area of
Economic, Social, and Cultural Rights
(“Protocol of San Salvador”)
This protocol, adopted in 1988 and entered into force in 1999, pro-
vides for speciﬁc economic, social, and cultural rights for individ-
uals. Signatories are obligated to enact legislation related to these
rights and to provide them “without discrimination of any kind
for reasons related to color, sex, language, religion, political or
other opinions, national or social origin, economic status, birth
or any other social condition” (Art. 3). Individuals are to be pro-
vided with just, equitable, and satisfactory conditions of work,
including equal wages, adequate and fair pay for work, stability
of employment, a safe work environment, and reasonable limits
to daily and weekly hours of work (Art. 7). Workers are also to
be provided with the right to organize trade unions (Art. 8).
Article 10 provides for the “right to health, understood to mean
the enjoyment of the highest level of physical, mental and social
well-being,” including primary health care, immunizations, dis-
ease prevention, health education, and health services for high
risk groups and those living in poverty. Article 12 afﬁrms the
right to food. Education is also declared a right, including free
and accessible primary education and generally available secon-
dary education (Art. 13). Family rights encompass assistance to
mothers before and after childbirth, adequate nutrition, and pro-
grams for family training (Art. 15). Other rights include protec-
tion of children, the elderly, and the handicapped.
Statute of the Inter-American Commission
of Women
The statute creating the Inter-American Commission of Women
was approved in 1960 by the Assembly of Delegates of the OAS.
The Commission’s purpose is to “promote and protect women’s
rights, and to support the member states in their efforts to ensure
full exercise of civil, political, economic, social, and cultural rights
that will make possible equal participation by women and men in
all aspects of society” (Art. 2). The Commission is directed to
identify areas in which women’s participation must be increased;
Regional Conventions: Inter-American Conventions, Statutes
187

to develop strategies to recognize the roles of women and men as
having equal worth; to suggest means of removing barriers to
equal rights; to encourage women to fully participate in all civil,
political, economic, and cultural activities; to promote access to
education and training; and to persuade governments to comply
with the statute’s provisions.
Inter-American Convention on the Granting
of Civil Rights to Women
Adopted in 1948 and entered into force in 1949, the parties to this
convention noted that the majority of American countries have
granted civil rights to women and that Resolution XX of the
Eighth International Conference of American States declared that
women have the right to equality of civil status. They “agree to
grant to women the same civil rights that men enjoy.”
Inter-American Convention on the Granting
of Political Rights to Women
Recognizing that the majority of member states have granted
political rights to women, the Inter-American Convention on the
Granting of Political Rights to Women encourages member
nations to grant full voting rights to all women in addition to the
right to run for political ofﬁce. This convention was adopted in
1948 and entered into force in 1949.
Inter-American Convention on the
Prevention, Punishment, and Eradication of
Violence against Women (“Convention of
Belem do Para”)
Adopted in 1994 and entered into force in 1995, this convention
builds on the Declaration on the Elimination of Violence against
Women, adopted in 1993. Understanding that “violence against
women pervades every sector of society regardless of class, race
or ethnic group, income, culture, level of education, age or religion
and strikes at its very foundations,” this convention focuses on pro-
tecting the rights of women and eliminating violence perpetrated
against them. Violence is deﬁned as “any act or conduct, based on
188
Facts and Data

gender, which causes death or physical, sexual or psychological
harm or suffering to women, whether in the public or the private
sphere” (Art. 1).
Rights endowed by this convention include the right to
respect of a woman’s life; the integrity of her person and her physi-
cal, mental, and moral integrity; personal liberty; equal protection
under the law; access to a competent court for protection from all
violations of her rights; freedom of association and religion; and
equal access to public services (Art. 4). Included within the right
to freedom from violence are the rights to be free from all types of
discrimination, to be valued, to be educated free from stereotypes
of the roles of men and women, and to have access to services for
abused women and training programs. Public awareness pro-
grams should be developed to educate the public on the dangers
of and penalties for domestic violence and research should be con-
ducted to gather relevant statistics on domestic violence and to
implement effective preventive and treatment programs (Art. 8).
Inter-American Convention on Support
Obligations
In Montevideo, Uruguay, in July 1989, member states of the OAS
adopted the Inter-American Convention on Support Obligations to
establish a legal instrument enforcing the obligations that spouses
or former spouses have toward supporting their spouses and
children.
Convention on the Nationality of Women
Signed in Montevideo, Uruguay, in December 1933, this Conven-
tion protects the nationality of women. Member states agreed that
they would not make any distinction based on sex regarding the
nationality of their citizens. Women are free to adopt the national-
ity of the husband if different from their own, but are no longer
required to do so.
Regional Conventions: Africa
The Organization of African Unity and individual countries have
created and adopted several conventions and charters that
include rights of African women.
Regional Conventions: Africa
189

African (Banjul) Charter on Human and
Peoples’ Rights
This Charter was adopted by the members of the Organization of
African Unity in 1981 and entered into force in 1986. Its aim was
to promote human rights and freedoms in Africa. In addition to
providing basic rights for all people, including the right to liberty,
free association, assembly, freedom of movement, work, and edu-
cation, this charter speciﬁcally identiﬁes the family as the “natural
unit and basis of society” (Art. 18). The elimination of all discrimi-
nation against women and protection of their rights is to be
ensured by all members.
Protocol to the African Charter on Human
and Peoples’ Rights on the Rights of Women
in Africa
This protocol, adopted in 2003 and entered into force in 2005,
expands the human rights afforded to all people in the African
Charter on Human and Peoples’ Rights. Violence against women
is deﬁned as “all acts perpetrated against women which cause or
could cause them physical, sexual, psychological, and economic
harm, including the threat to take such acts; or to undertake the
imposition of arbitrary restrictions on or deprivation of funda-
mental freedoms in private or public life in peace time and during
situations of armed conﬂicts or of war” (Art. 1 [j]). All forms of
discrimination are to be eliminated through the national constitu-
tions and legislative initiatives of member states; through the
development of a gender perspective in all government policies
and programs; and through government support for all local,
national, regional, and international conventions and initiatives
(Art. 3).
Articles also promote every woman’s right to dignity, to
integrity, and security, and to to participation in the political and
decision-making process, as well as to peace, education and train-
ing, health and reproductive rights, food security, adequate hous-
ing, a positive cultural context, a healthy environment,
sustainable development, and inheritance. Female genital mutila-
tion is to be eliminated through public awareness campaigns,
legislative measures, and protection (Art. 5). Women and men
are to be “regarded as equal partners in marriage,” both partners
190
Facts and Data

must freely and fully consent to the marriage, women must be at
least 18 years old before entering into a marriage, both spouses
are to choose where they reside, the woman can choose to keep
her maiden name and nationality, and the woman has the right
to acquire and manage property (Art. 6). Women and men have
equal rights in seeking divorce or annulment, in the custody of
their children, and in sharing of property (Art. 7). International
law is to be followed to protect all civilians in armed conﬂicts
and States Parties are to “protect asylum seeking women, refu-
gees, returnees and internally displaced persons, against all forms
of violence, rape and other forms of sexual exploitation” (Art. 11).
Widows are to be protected and have full rights to guardianship
of their children as well as the right to remarry (Art. 20).
Condition of Women in Developing
Countries
This section presents statistics, legislation, and other information
regarding health, education, domestic violence and rape, prostitu-
tion and sex trafﬁcking, voting and elections, labor and employment,
and property rights as they relate to women in developing countries.
Health
Women in developing countries face many issues concerning
their health, including access to health care providers and other
services, availability of trained health care providers during preg-
nancy and delivery, high rates of maternal mortality, availability
of contraceptives and other family planning services, and avail-
ability of abortion.
Reducing maternal mortality is part of Goal 5 of the Millen-
nium Development Goals. The availability of effective reproduc-
tive health services is a critical component of meeting this goal.
Many countries have begun to offer improved health services to
women, but these improvements are not enough to meet the goal
of reducing maternal mortality by 5.5 percent by 2015. Despite
improvements, in 2008 over 350,000 women died because of com-
plications related to pregnancy and childbirth (Wilmoth et al.
2010). Rates by region vary from 14 deaths per 100,000 live births
in the industrialized nations to 640 in sub-Saharan Africa.
Condition of Women in Developing Countries
191

The presence of a trained health care professional with adequate
equipment during pregnancy and childbirth generally has a positive
effect on the lives of women and their babies. In 2008, 99 percent of
births in developed regions were attended by skilled healthcare per-
sonnel, while only 63 percent of births in developing regions had
skilled personnel in attendance. Rates ranged from 30 percent of
births in southern Asia to 46 percent in sub-Saharan Africa and
98 percent in Eastern Asia (United Nations 2010b).
Access to and use of contraceptives helps prevent unwanted
pregnancies and reduce the need for abortions. While the avail-
ability of contraceptives has increased from 52 percent of women
in developing regions in 1990 to 62 percent in 2007, many women
still do not have access to family planning. According to the
United Nations (2010b), providing access to effective family plan-
ning could reduce the number of unintended pregnancies each
year from 75 million to 22 million. Access to safe abortion services
is also critical to reducing unintended pregnancies and maternal
deaths. Table 6.1 provides information regarding maternal mor-
tality, availability of skilled health personnel and contraceptives,
and abortion policies by country (WHO 2010a, WHO 2010b). Data
were taken from the UN Interagency Estimates (WHO 2010b).
Female Genital Mutilation or Cutting
Although the Protocol to the African Charter on Human and
Peoples’ Rights on the Rights of Women in Africa calls for all sig-
natories to eliminate harmful practices, including female genital
mutilation, many girls and young women continue to undergo
this procedure in several African countries. The United Nations
estimates that between 100 and 140 million girls and women have
been victims of FGM and that an estimated 3 million girls are at
risk each year (United Nations 2010a). Table 6.2 presents informa-
tion concerning the existence and extent of FGM in Africa, the
Middle East, and Indonesia.
Education
Over the past decade education has become more accessible to
many children in developing nations. More girls have been pro-
vided with access to education and have enrolled in school.
Throughout the world, the ratio of girls to boys in primary school
has increased from 91 to 96, and it has increased from 88 to 95 in
192
Facts and Data

TABLE 6.1
Maternal Mortality, Health Care Personnel, Family Planning Availability, and Government
Abortion Policies
Country
Maternal Mor-
tality Rate (Rate
per 100,000
Live Births)
2008
Births
Attended by
Health Care
Personnel
(%)
Contracep-
tive Use (%)
(2000–
2008)
Government Abortion
Policies
Africa
Angola
610
47
6.2
Prohibited
Benin
410
78
17.0
To save the woman’s life,
to preserve physical health
Botswana
190
94
44.4
To save the woman’s life, to
preserve physical or mental
health
Burkina Faso
560
54
17.4
To save the woman’s life,
to preserve physical health
Burundi
970
34
19.7
To save the woman’s life, to
preserve physical health
Cameroon
600
63
29.2
To save the woman’s life,
to preserve physical health
Cape Verde
94
78
61.3
No restriction except for
gestational limits
Central African
Republic
850
54
19.0
Prohibited
Chad
1,200
14
2.8
To save the woman’s life, to
preserve physical health
Comoros
340
62
25.7
To save the woman’s life,
to preserve physical health
Congo,
Democratic
Republic of
670
74
20.6
Prohibited
Cote d’Ivoire
470
57
12.9
To save the woman’s life
Djibouti
300
93
17.8
To save the woman’s life, to
preserve physical health
Equatorial
Guinea
280
10.1
To save the woman’s life,
to preserve physical health
Eritrea
280
28
8.0
To save the woman’s life, to
preserve physical or mental
health
Ethiopia
470
6
14.7
To save the woman’s life,
to preserve physical health
Gabon
260
86
32.7
Prohibited
Gambia
400
57
17.5
To save the woman’s life, to
preserve physical or mental
health
(continued)

194
TABLE 6.1 (CONTINUED)
Country
Maternal Mor-
tality Rate (Rate
per 100,000
Live Births)
2008
Births
Attended by
Health Care
Personnel
(%)
Contracep-
tive Use (%)
(2000–
2008)
Government Abortion
Policies
Ghana
350
57
23.5
To save the woman’s life,
to preserve physical or mental
health
Guinea
680
38
9.1
To save the woman’s life, to
preserve physical health
Guinea-Bissau
1,000
39
10.3
To save the life of the woman
Kenya
530
42
39.3
To save the woman’s life
Lesotho
530
55
37.3
Prohibited
Liberia
990
46
11.4
To save the woman’s life,
to preserve physical or
mental health
Madagascar
440
51
27.1
Prohibited
Malawi
510
54
41.0
To save the woman’s life
Mali
830
49
8.2
To save the woman’s life
Mauritania
550
61
9.3
Prohibited
Mauritius
36
75.8
Prohibited
Mozambique
550
48
16.5
To save the woman’s life, to
preserve physical health
Namibia
180
81
55.1
To save the woman’s life,
to preserve physical or
mental health
Niger
820
18
11.2
To save the woman’s life, to
preserve physical health
Nigeria
840
39
14.7
To save the woman’s life
Rwanda
1,300
52
36.4
To save the woman’s life,
to preserve physical health
Sao Tome and
Principe
—
81
29.3
Prohibited
Senegal
410
52
11.8
Prohibited
Seychelles
—
—
—
To save the woman’s life, to
preserve physical or mental
health
Sierra Leone
970
42
8.2
To save the woman’s life,
to preserve physical or
mental health
Somalia
1,200
33
14.6
Prohibited
South Africa
410
60.3
To save the woman’s life, to
preserve physical or mental
health, socioeconomic grounds
Sudan
750
49
7.6
To save the woman’s life

195
Swaziland
420
74
50.6
To save the woman’s life, to
preserve physical or mental
health
Tanzania
790
46
26.4
To save the woman’s life
Togo
350
62
16.8
To save the woman’s life,
to preserve physical health
Uganda
430
42
23.7
To save the woman’s life
Zambia
470
47
40.8
To save the woman’s life, to
preserve physical or mental
health, socioeconomic grounds
Zimbabwe
790
69
60.2
To save the woman’s life,
to preserve physical health
East Asia and the Paciﬁc
Brunei
Darussalam
21
99
—
To save the woman’s life
Burma
240
57
17.4
To save the woman’s life
Cambodia
290
44
40.0 (2004)
No restriction except for
gestational limits
China
38
98
86.9
No restrictions
Fiji
26
99
43.1
To save the woman’s life, to
preserve physical or mental
health, socioeconomic grounds
Indonesia
240
73
61.4
To save the woman’s life
Kiribati
—
90
36.1
To save the woman’s life
Korea,
Democratic
People’s
Republic
250
97
68.6
No restrictions except for
gestational limits
Korea,
Republic of
18
99
84.5
To save the woman’s life,
to preserve physical health
Laos
580
21
38.4
Prohibited
Malaysia
31
99
—
To save the woman’s life, to
preserve physical or mental
health
Marshall
Islands
95
44.6
To save the woman’s life
Micronesia
88
23.0 (2004)
To save the woman’s life
Nauru
—
97
35.6
To save the woman’s life, to
preserve physical or mental
health
Palau
99
32.8
To save the woman’s life
Papua New
Guinea
250
39
32.4
To save the woman’s life
Philippines
94
62
50.6
Prohibited
Samoa
—
99
—
To save the woman’s life, to
preserve physical or mental
health
(continued)

196
TABLE 6.1 (CONTINUED)
Country
Maternal Mor-
tality Rate (Rate
per 100,000
Live Births)
2008
Births
Attended by
Health Care
Personnel
(%)
Contracep-
tive Use (%)
(2000–
2008)
Government Abortion
Policies
Singapore
9
99
—
No restrictions except for
gestational limits
Solomon
Islands
100
43
27.0
To save the woman’s life
Thailand
48
99
81.1
To save the woman’s life, to
preserve physical or mental
health
Timor-Leste
370
19
19.8
Prohibited
Tonga
—
99
23.9
Prohibited
Tuvalu
—
99
—
To save the woman’s life
Vanuatu
—
93
38.4
To save the woman’s life, to
preserve physical health
Vietnam
56
88
79.5
No restrictions except for
gestational limits
South and Central Asia
Afghanistan
1,400
14
18.6
To save the woman’s life
Bangladesh
340
18
55.8
To save the woman’s life
Bhutan
200
51
30.7
To save the woman’s life
India
230
47
56.3
To save the woman’s life, to
preserve physical or mental
health, socioeconomic grounds
Maldives
37
84
39.0
To save the woman’s life, to
preserve physical health
Nepal
380
19
48.0
No restrictions except for
gestational limits
Pakistan
260
39
29.6
To save the woman’s life, to
preserve physical health
Sri Lanka
39
99
68.0
To save the woman’s life
Near East and North Africa
Algeria
120
95
61.4
To save the woman’s life,
to preserve physical or
mental health
Bahrain
19
99
—
No restriction except for
gestational limits
Egypt
82
79
60.3
Prohibited
Iran
30
97
73.3
To save the woman’s life
Iraq
75
89
49.8
Prohibited
Jordan
59
99
57.1
To save the woman’s life, to
preserve physical health
Kuwait
9
99
—
To save the woman’s life, to
preserve physical health
Lebanon
26
98
58.0
To save the woman’s life

197
Libya
64
99
—
To save the woman’s life
Morocco
110
63
63.0
To save the woman’s life, to
preserve physical health
Oman
20
98
—
Prohibited
Qatar
8
99
—
To save the woman’s life, to
preserve physical health
Saudi Arabia
24
96
23.8
To save the woman’s life, to
preserve physical health
Syria
46
93
58.3
To save the woman’s life
Tunisia
60
90
60.2
No restrictions except for
gestational limits
United Arab
Emirates
10
99
—
To save the woman’s life
Yemen Arab
Republic
210
36
27.7
To save the woman’s life
Latin America and the Caribbean
Antigua and
Barbuda
—
99
—
To save the woman’s life
Argentina
70
99
65.3
To save the woman’s life, to
preserve physical health
Barbados
64
99
—
To save the woman’s life, to
preserve physical health,
socioeconomic grounds
Belize
94
96
34.3
To save the woman’s life, to
preserve physical or mental
health, socioeconomic grounds
Bolivia
180
66
60.6
To save the woman’s life, to
preserve physical health
Brazil
58
97
80.6
To save the woman’s life
Chile
26
99
64.2
Prohibited
Colombia
850
96
78.2 (2004)
To save the woman’s life, to
preserve physical or mental
health
Costa Rica
44
94
80.0
To save the woman’s life,
to preserve physical health
Dominica
—
94
—
To save the woman’s life
Dominican
Republic
100
98
72.9
Prohibited
Ecuador
140
99
72.7 (2004)
To save the woman’s life, to
preserve physical health
El Salvador
110
84
72.5
Prohibited
Grenada
—
99
54.0
To save the woman’s life,
to preserve physical health
Guatemala
110
41
54.1
To save the woman’s life
Guyana
270
83
42.5
No restriction except for
gestational limits
Haiti
300
26
32.0
Prohibited
(continued)

secondary schools. However, access to education is still limited
for children, especially girls, in many developing countries. In
northern Africa, for example, two-thirds of children not attending
school are female (United Nations 2010b). In countries that have
made education compulsory, parents may enroll their children
in school but not allow them to actually attend for a variety of
reasons, including prohibitive cost; the need for the children to
remain at home to help out with chores, farming, or care for youn-
ger children; and the lack of available schools or teachers, especially
in rural areas.
198
Facts and Data
TABLE 6.1 (CONTINUED)
Country
Maternal Mor-
tality Rate (Rate
per 100,000
Live Births)
2008
Births
Attended by
Health Care
Personnel
(%)
Contracep-
tive Use (%)
(2000–
2008)
Government Abortion
Policies
Honduras
110
67
65.2
Prohibited
Jamaica
89
97
69.0
To save the woman’s life, to
preserve physical or mental
health
Mexico
85
94
72.9
To save the woman’s life,
incest, fetal impairment
Nicaragua
100
74
72.4
Prohibited
Panama
71
91
—
To save the woman’s life
Paraguay
95
77
79.4
To save the woman’s life
Peru
98
73
73.2
To save the woman’s life, to
preserve physical health
St. Kitts and
Nevis
—
99
54.0
To save the woman’s life,
to preserve physical or
mental health
St. Lucia
—
98
—
To save the woman’s life, to
preserve physical or mental
health
St. Vincent and
the Grenadines
—
99
48.0
To save the woman’s life, to
preserve physical or mental
health, socioeconomic grounds
Suriname
100
90
42.1
Prohibited
Trinidad and
Tobago
55
98
42.5
To save the woman’s life,
to preserve physical or
mental health
Uruguay
27
99
78.0 (2004)
To save the woman’s life, to
preserve physical health
Venezuela
68
95
—
To save the woman’s life

TABLE 6.2
Extent of FGM and Statutes and Enforcement Status
Country
Percentage of
Girls and Women
Undergoing FGM
Statutes Addressing FGM and Enforcement
Benin
12.9
Prohibited by law; little law enforcement; difﬁcult to prevent; NGOs
run public awareness and education campaigns
Burkina Faso
72.5
Prohibited by law; widely practiced; some law enforcement (several
practitioners arrested, charged, and sentenced to prison); Burkina
Faso and Niger campaigned against taking children across borders
to a country where it is legal or authorities do not enforce the law
Cameroon
1.4
Not prohibited by law; no one has been prosecuted for practicing it;
the Minister of Women’s Empowerment and the Family and the
President have urged abandonment of the practice; several
practitioners have agreed to discontinue it and have been provided
equipment for new economic activity
Central African
Republic
25.7
Prohibited by law; occurs primarily in rural areas; appears practice
is declining
Chad
44.9
Prohibited by law; widespread
Congo,
Democratic
Republic of
Prohibited by law; occurs in some immigrant communities
Cote d’Ivoire
36.4
Prohibited by law; widespread
Djibouti
93.1
Serious problem; government-run campaigns against it
Egypt
91.1
Prohibited by law except for medical emergencies; public awareness
campaigns appear to be successful in lowering the rate
Eritrea
88.7
Prohibited by law; widespread; government-run campaigns against it
Ethiopia
74.3
Prohibited by law; National Committee for Traditional Practices in
Ethiopia working to discourage practice
Gabon
—
Prohibited by law; occurs among immigrant communities
Gambia
78.3
Not prohibited by law; widespread; less likely to be practiced among
educated and urban populations; campaigns to prohibit it
Ghana
3.8
Prohibited by law; remains serious problem; several intervention
programs
Guinea
95.6
Prohibited by law; widely practiced; increasing numbers of men and
women opposed to it; government runs educational campaigns
Guinea-Bissau
44.5
Not prohibited by law; no government campaigns to prevent it
Indonesia
—
Government decree prohibits medical personnel from performing it;
still practiced in many areas
Iraq
—
Not prohibited by law; commonly practiced
Kenya
27.1
Prohibited by law; practiced primarily in rural areas; public
awareness campaigns against it
Liberia
58.2
Not prohibited by law; practiced primarily in rural areas;
practitioners have been sentenced to life imprisonment after some
girls died after undergoing the procedure
Libya
—
Not prohibited by law; no reported instances
(continued)

Governments are becoming more aware of the importance of
education to their citizens and to their national development and
have begun to enact compulsory education requirements. In some
countries, such as Burundi, school fees have been abolished and
school enrollment has tripled since 1999. Table 6.3 provides infor-
mation regarding the literacy rate for young women, the ratio of
females to males in primary and secondary schools, and each
government’s requirements regarding education. The literacy rate
is the percentage of people who are able to read, write, and com-
prehend a short, simple statement regarding their everyday lives.
Data were taken from the UN Interagency Estimates (WHO
2010b) and the U.S. Department of State Country Reports.
200
Facts and Data
TABLE 6.2 (CONTINUED)
Country
Percentage of
Girls and Women
Undergoing FGM
Statutes Addressing FGM and Enforcement
Malawi
—
Not prohibited by law; public awareness campaigns against it
Mali
85.2
Not prohibited by law although government decree prohibits it in
government health centers; widespread, occurring in most ethnic
groups, not based on religious belief
Mauritania
72.2
Prohibited by law; practiced by all ethnic groups; active public
awareness campaigns to eliminate it
Niger
2.2
Prohibited by law; government works with NGOs to eliminate it
Nigeria
29.6
Prohibited by law; primarily practiced by the Yoruba and Igbo;
public awareness campaigns to educate public against it
Senegal
28.2
Prohibited by law; still widely practiced, although the Tostan
program appears to be successful in educating the public regarding
the practice (they report that 3,791 out of 5,000 communities have
abandoned the practice)
Sierra Leone
94.0
Not prohibited by law; widely practiced
Somalia
97.9
Prohibited by law; laws not enforced; widespread; public awareness
campaigns developed to educate the public
Sudan
90.0
Widespread, especially in northern Sudan
Tanzania
14.6
Prohibited by law; law enforcement not effective; continues to be
practiced in some areas; coalition of NGOs and the Anti-Female
Genital Mutilation Network are working to eliminate the practice
Togo
5.8
Prohibited by law; continues to be practiced, especially in rural
areas; public awareness campaigns work to educate the public
Uganda
0.8
Prohibited by law; still practiced in some areas; public awareness
campaigns to educate the public
Yemen
38.2
Prohibited by law; widely practiced, especially in coastal areas

TABLE 6.3
Literacy, School Enrollment, and Government Policies
Country
Literacy
Rate
(Wom-
en Ages
15–24)
Female
Children
Not
Enrolled in
Primary
School
Ratio of
Female to
Male
Primary
School
Enrollment
Ratio of
Female to
Male
Secondary
School
Enrollment
Government Education
Policy
Africa
Angola
65.0
—
81
Free and compulsory to 6th
grade
Benin
42
91,247
87
57
Free and compulsory for ages
6–11
Botswana
96
13,475
98
106
School fees can be waived, not
compulsory
Burkina Faso
33
473,232
88
74
Free and compulsory to age
16
Burundi
75
67,091
95
71
Free primary, compulsory to
age 12
Cameroon
84
254,582
86
80
Free primary, compulsory
to age 14
Cape Verde
99
5,988
94
—
Free ages 6–12, compulsory
to age 11
Central
African
Republic
56
148,184
71
57
Free tuition, compulsory
to age 15
Chad
37.0
—
70
45
Free and compulsory from
ages 6–12
Comoros
84
—
92
76
Compulsory to age 12, not free
Congo,
Democratic
Republic of
62.0
—
83
55
Neither free nor compulsory
Congo,
Republic of
78.0
101,526
94
—
Free and compulsory to age
16 (parents pay for fees,
books, and uniforms)
Cote d’Ivoire
60.0
—
79
—
Primary tuition free, not
compulsory
Djibouti
—
33,820
88
70
Primary free and compulsory
Equatorial
Guinea
980
—
95
—
Free and compulsory to age 13
Eritrea
84.0
186,710
82
71
Tuition free and compulsory to
grade 7
Ethiopia
39.0
1,551,929
89
72
Primary tuition free and
compulsory
Gabon
96.0
—
—
—
Compulsory to age 16
Gambia
58.0
33,174
106
94
Free and compulsory for ages
6–12 (primary)
(continued)

202
TABLE 6.3 (CONTINUED)
Country
Literacy
Rate
(Wom-
en Ages
15–24)
Female
Children
Not
Enrolled in
Primary
School
Ratio of
Female to
Male
Primary
School
Enrollment
Ratio of
Female to
Male
Secondary
School
Enrollment
Government Education
Policy
Ghana
78.0
377,761
99
89
Free tuition and compulsory
through junior secondary
Guinea
51.0
244,946
85
59
Free tuition and compulsory
primary
Guinea-Bissau
62.0
—
—
—
Free through high school,
compulsory through grade 6
Kenya
93.0
524,454
98
92
Tuition free primary and
secondary
Lesotho
98.0
46,969
99
132
Free tuition grades 1–7, not
compulsory
Liberia
80.0
—
90
75
Free and compulsory primary
Madagascar
68.0
2,971
97
94
Free tuition, primary
compulsory to age 14
Malawi
85.0
79,773
103
85
Free primary, not compulsory
Mali
31.0
315,748
83
64
Free and compulsory
Mauritania
63.0
47,588
107
89
Free through university,
compulsory primary
Mauritius
97.0
3,808
99
101
Free and compulsory primary
Mozambique
62.0
485,601
88
75
Free and compulsory through
age 12
Namibia
95.0
12,092
99
117
Free and compulsory to age
16 (grades 1–10), numerous
fees
Niger
23.0
636,080
80
60
Free and compulsory primary
Nigeria
65.0
4,626,218
88
77
Free and compulsory to age
12, numerous fees
Rwanda
77.0
21,679
101
90
Free and compulsory through
primary, parents required to
pay unofﬁcial fees
Sao Tome
and Principe
96.0
—
101
112
Free tuition and compulsory to
age 15 or grade 6
Senegal
45.0
232,611
102
81
Free and compulsory for ages
6–16
Seychelles
99.0
—
99
119
Compulsory through grade 10,
free to age 18
Sierra Leone
46.0
—
88
66
Primary tuition free,
secondary tuition free for girls
in the north
Somalia
—
—
55
46
Neither free nor compulsory,
few schools operating in 2009
(many were traditional
Koranic schools)

203
South Africa
98.0
219,409
96
105
Fee-based and compulsory
from ages 7–15
Sudan
82.0
—
90
88
Free tuition to grade 8, lack
of schools in the south, girls
denied equal access in the
south
Swaziland
95.0
17,509
93
90
Primary free tuition and
compulsory, many fees,
government required to pay
all fees and costs in grades 1–
2
Tanzania
76.0
178,786
99
—
Primary free and compulsory
through age 15
Togo
80.0
98,956
86
53
Compulsory to age 15, free
primary tuition
Uganda
86.0
49,053
101
85
Free and compulsory for
grades 1–7 and free high
school for disadvantaged
students
Zambia
68.0
31,806
98
83
Free through grade 7, not
compulsory
Zimbabwe
99.0
102,804
99
92
Neither free nor compulsory
East Asia and the Paciﬁc
Brunei
Darussalam
100
543
100
102
Free primary education
Burma
95.0
—
99
101
Free and compulsory through
4th standard (age 10)
Cambodia
86.0
131,368
94
82
Free, not compulsory through
grade 9
China
99.0
—
104
105
Compulsory for 9 years,
tuition free but many
miscellaneous fees
Fiji
—
5,730
99
107
Compulsory to age 15, many
fees limit attendance
Indonesia
96.0
—
97
99
Free and compulsory through
3 years of junior high school,
many additional fees limit
attendance
Kiribati
—
—
102
120
Free and compulsory to age
13
Korea,
Democratic
People’s
Republic of
100
—
—
—
11 years of free and
compulsory education
Korea,
Republic of
—
30,665
98
96
Free and compulsory
(continued)

204
TABLE 6.3 (CONTINUED)
Country
Literacy
Rate
(Wom-
en Ages
15–24)
Female
Children
Not
Enrolled in
Primary
School
Ratio of
Female to
Male
Primary
School
Enrollment
Ratio of
Female to
Male
Secondary
School
Enrollment
Government Education
Policy
Laos
79.0
76,419
91
81
Free and compulsory through
grade 5, high additional fees
limit attendance
Malaysia
99.0
62,722
100
107
Compulsory primary, lack of
enforcement
Marshall
Islands
—
1,446
97
102
Free tuition and compulsory to
age 18, high registration fees
and lack of schools in rural
areas limit attendance
Micronesia,
Federated
States of
—
—
101
107
Compulsory to age 14 or
grade 8, teacher shortage
Nauru
—
—
—
—
Free and compulsory to age
15, 4 years of secondary
school compulsory, ﬁnal two
optional
Palau
—
—
102
97
Well-funded public education
Papua New
Guinea
69.0
—
84
—
Neither free nor compulsory,
limited attendance
Philippines
96.0
406,556
98
109
Free and compulsory through
age 11, poor quality
Samoa
100
35
99
112
Not free, compulsory through
age 14, law not enforced
Singapore
100
—
—
—
Free and compulsory primary
Solomon
Islands
—
12,167
97
84
Not compulsory, high school
fees limit attendance
Thailand
98.0
329,688
98
109
Free and compulsory primary
Timor-Leste
—
22,445
94
100
Free and compulsory primary,
no system to ensure existence
of schools where needed
Tonga
100
—
97
103
Free and compulsory to age
14
Tuvalu
—
—
99
—
Free and compulsory primary
Vanuatu
94.0
483
96
—
Free, not compulsory, shortage
of schools and teachers after
grade 6
Vietnam
96.0
—
—
—
Free and compulsory through
age 14; law not enforced

205
South and Central Asia
Afghanistan
—
—
66
38
Free to college level,
compulsory to secondary level
Bangladesh
76.0
914,530
106
105
Free and compulsory primary;
high fees limit attendance
Bhutan
68.0
5,099
100
99
Free for 11 years, not
compulsory, some fees
India
74.0
3,781,495
97
86
Free and compulsory for ages
6–14
Maldives
99.0
1,012
94
105
Free primary, not compulsory
Nepal
75.0
—
—
89
Free primary to age 12, not
compulsory
Pakistan
59.0
4,201,000
83
76
Neither free nor compulsory;
secondary schools not widely
available in rural areas
Sri Lanka
99.0
1,371
100
—
Free through university;
compulsory to age 14
Near East and North Africa
Algeria
89.0
87,562
94
108
Free through high school,
compulsory to age 16
Bahrain
100
445
98
104
Free through grade 12,
compulsory through age 14
Egypt
82.0
323,950
95
—
Compulsory through grade 8
Iran
96.0
—
140
98
Free and compulsory to age 11
Iraq
80.0
409,534
84
67
Free for all levels, compulsory
for 6 years
Jordan
99.0
23,176
101
104
Free through age 18,
compulsory through age 16,
no legislation to enforce law
Kuwait
99.0
8,010
98
104
Free through university for
citizens, compulsory through
secondary
Lebanon
99.0
24,937
97
111
Free through secondary,
compulsory to age 11
Libya
100
—
95
117
Subsidized through university,
compulsory through grade 9
Morocco
68.0
217,386
91
86
Free and compulsory to
age 15
Oman
98.0
48,036
101
97
Free primary, not compulsory
Qatar
99.0
—
99
146
Free and compulsory through
age 18
Saudi Arabia
96.0
259,390
96
85
All levels free for citizens
Syria
93.0
—
96
98
Free through university for
citizens, compulsory to age 12
(continued)

TABLE 6.3 (CONTINUED)
Country
Literacy
Rate
(Wom-
en Ages
15–24)
Female
Children
Not
Enrolled in
Primary
School
Ratio of
Female to
Male
Primary
School
Enrollment
Ratio of
Female to
Male
Secondary
School
Enrollment
Government Education
Policy
Tunisia
96.0
251
98
108
Free through university,
compulsory to age 16
United Arab
Emirates
97.0
1,380
100
102
Free primary to citizens,
compulsory through grade 9,
law not enforced
Yemen
70.0
641,425
80
49
Free and compulsory to age
15, law not enforced
South and Central America
Antigua and
Barbuda
99.0
772
92
93
Free and compulsory to age 16
Argentina
99.0
—
99
113
Free to university, compulsory
to age 16
Barbados
—
—
—
—
Free to university, compulsory
to age 16
Belize
—
25
97
108
Free and compulsory to age
14, some school fees
Bolivia
99.0
31,822
100
97
Not free, compulsory through
age 14
Brazil
99.0
392,879
93
111
Free and compulsory to age 14
Chile
99.0
45,709
95
103
Free and compulsory through
secondary
Colombia
98.0
138,088
99
110
Free and compulsory primary,
rural areas lack teachers
Costa Rica
99.0
—
99
106
Free and compulsory through
grade 9
Dominica
—
969
106
93
Free and compulsory to age 15
Dominican
Republic
97.0
102,993
93
119
Free and compulsory through
grade 9
Ecuador
96.0
—
100
101
Compulsory to age 16,
shortage of schools
El Salvador
96.0
14,834
97
102
Free primary, compulsory
through grade 9
Grenada
—
65
95
92
Free and compulsory through
grade 9
Guatemala
84.0
55,105
94
93
Free and compulsory to grade 9,
low completion rates in rural
areas
Guyana
—
723
99
101
Free and compulsory to age 16

Domestic Violence and Rape
Laws vary from country to country regarding domestic violence
and rape, and cultural norms often prevent women from reporting
domestic abuse and rape even when laws prohibit this type of vio-
lence. Women also may fear reprisals from family members or may
be concerned that their husbands will abandon them if they report
the abuse, leaving them shunned by their families and unable to
support themselves and their children. Table 6.4 provides sum-
mary information regarding domestic violence and rape for devel-
oping countries by region. Data were taken from the U.S.
Department of State Country Reports.
Condition of Women in Developing Countries
207
Haiti
—
—
—
—
Free and compulsory through
primary
Honduras
95.0
9,390
100
127
Free and compulsory to age 13
Jamaica
98.0
34,842
97
104
Free and compulsory through
grade 6
Mexico
98.0
22,621
98
106
Free and compulsory through
age 15
Nicaragua
89.0
24,341
98
113
Free and compulsory through
grade 6
Panama
96.0
2,952
97
108
Free and compulsory through
secondary
Paraguay
99.0
38,289
97
104
Free and compulsory through
grade 9
Peru
97.0
43,272
100
99
Free primary and secondary,
fees and costs lead to low
attendance for low-income
families
Saint Kitts
and Nevis
—
54
106
98
Free and compulsory through
grade 12
Saint Lucia
—
725
97
104
Free and compulsory through
age 15
Saint Vincent
and the
Grenadines
—
231
92
111
Neither free nor compulsory
Suriname
95.0
3,141
95
128
Free and compulsory to
age 12
Trinidad and
Tobago
100
3,088
97
107
Free and compulsory to
age 16
Uruguay
99.0
3,285
97
99
Free and compulsory to
age 14
Venezuela
99.0
122,684
97
110
Free through university,
compulsory to age 15

208
TABLE 6.4
Domestic Violence and Rape Status and Extent
Country
Domestic Violence
Rape
Marital Rape
Africa
Angola
Not prohibited by law; common
Prohibited by law; few prosecutions
Prohibited by law
Benin
Prohibited by law; common
Prohibited by law; little enforcement
Not distinguished by law
Botswana
Not prohibited by law; serious problem
Prohibited by law; effective enforcement
Not recognized as a crime
Burkina Faso
Not prohibited by law; common
Prohibited by law; not enforced
Not speciﬁcally prohibited
Burundi
Prohibited by law; common
Prohibited by law; laws not enforced; victim sometimes
forced to marry rapist
Prohibited by law; laws not enforced
Cameroon
Not speciﬁcally prohibited by law; can be prosecuted
under assault statutes
Prohibited by law; little law enforcement or prosecution
Not prohibited by law
Cape Verde
Prohibited by law; widespread
Prohibited by law; laws not effectively enforced
Prohibited by law; laws not effectively
enforced
Central African Republic
Not speciﬁcally prohibited by law (violence against any
person prohibited); common
Prohibited by law; laws not effectively enforced
Not speciﬁcally prohibited by law; common
Chad
Prohibited but common
Prohibited; punished by hard labor
Not addressed by law
Congo, Democratic Republic
of
Assault considered a crime but law does not address
spousal abuse
Prohibited by law but laws not enforced
Unknown
Congo, Republic of
Assault illegal but law does not address spousal abuse
Prohibited by law; laws not enforced; widespread
Prohibited by law; laws not enforced
Cote d’Ivoire
Not speciﬁcally prohibited by law; widespread
Prohibited by law; laws not enforced; widespread
Not speciﬁcally prohibited by law
Djibouti
Law only prohibits “torture and barbaric acts” against
one’s spouse; police rarely involved
Prohibited by law with punishment up to 20 years’
imprisonment
Not speciﬁcally prohibited by law

209
Equatorial Guinea
Prohibited by law; laws not enforced
Prohibited by law
Not speciﬁcally prohibited by law
Eritrea
Prohibited by law; laws rarely enforced; no legal
penalties
Prohibited by law; punishment up to 10 years’
imprisonment
Unclear whether prohibited by law or not
Ethiopia
Prohibited by law; widespread
Prohibited by law; laws not enforced
Not speciﬁcally prohibited by law
Gabon
Prohibited by law; widespread
Prohibited by law; punishment 5–10 years’
imprisonment
Not speciﬁcally prohibited by law
Gambia
Not prohibited by law; can be prosecuted under rape
laws; widespread
Prohibited by law; laws effectively enforced;
punishment can be up to life in prison
Prohibited by law; widespread; underreported
Ghana
Prohibited by law; laws not effectively enforced
Prohibited by law
Not speciﬁcally prohibited by law
Guinea
Assault considered a crime but law does not address
spousal abuse
Prohibited by law; rarely prosecuted
Not regarded as criminal offense
Guinea-Bissau
Not prohibited by law; accepted as a means of settling
marital disputes
Prohibited by law; limited law enforcement
Prohibited by law
Kenya
Assault considered a crime but law does not address
spousal abuse; often considered a family matter
Prohibited by law; limited law enforcement
Not speciﬁcally prohibited by law
Lesotho
Assault considered a crime and domestic abuse is
prosecuted under assault laws
Prohibited by law; widespread
Prohibited by law
Liberia
Prohibited by law; widespread
Prohibited by law; laws not effectively enforced;
widespread
Not speciﬁcally prohibited by law
Madagascar
Prohibited by law; widespread
Prohibited by law; widespread
Not speciﬁcally prohibited by law
Malawi
Prohibited by law; maximum sentence is life in prison;
not often reported by women
Prohibited by law; laws effectively enforced
Not speciﬁcally prohibited by law but can be
prosecuted under rape laws
Mali
Not speciﬁcally prohibited by law, although spousal
abuse is prohibited by law; police reluctant to enforce
laws; women reluctant to report
Prohibited by law; laws not effectively enforced
Not speciﬁcally prohibited by law but can be
prosecuted under rape laws
(continued)

210
TABLE 6.4 (CONTINUED)
Country
Domestic Violence
Rape
Marital Rape
Mauritania
Prohibited by law; laws not effectively enforced; no
speciﬁc penalties
Prohibited by law; laws not effectively enforced;
widespread; victims can be held responsible for the
rape (based on belief that sexual relations outside of
marriage are sinful)
Prohibited by law
Mauritius
Prohibited by law; laws not effectively enforced
Prohibited by law; laws generally enforced; penalty can
be up to 20 years’ imprisonment; widespread but not
frequently reported
Prohibited by law
Mozambique
Prohibited by law; penalty can be up to 12 years’
imprisonment; widespread; cultural practices discourage
many women from reporting violence
Prohibited by law; laws not effectively enforced; no
prosecution of rape cases in 2009
Prohibited by law; laws not effectively
enforced
Namibia
Prohibited by law; widespread
Prohibited by law; laws generally enforced
Prohibited by law
Niger
Not speciﬁcally prohibited by law; widespread; women
often afraid to report based on customary practices and
fear of social stigma
Prohibited by law; punishable by up to 30 years’
imprisonment
Not speciﬁcally prohibited by law but
apparently rape laws cover spousal rape in
practice
Nigeria
Not prohibited by law; penal code permits a husband to
use physical force to “chastise” wife provided it does
not cause “grievous harm”
Prohibited by law; punishable by up to life
imprisonment; limited reporting and enforcement
Prohibited by law; laws not effectively
enforced; no cases prosecuted in 2009
Rwanda
Prohibited by law; widespread
Prohibited by law; punishable by 10 years’ to life
imprisonment; enforcement generally good
Prohibited by law; punishable by 6 months’ to
2 years’ imprisonment
Sao Tome and Principe
Prohibited by law; many women are reluctant to
complain or ﬁle charges
Prohibited by law; punishable by 2 to 12 years’
imprisonment; enforcement level unknown
Prohibited by law; punishable by 2 to
12 years’ imprisonment; enforcement level
unknown

211
Senegal
Prohibited by law; laws not enforced; punishable by 1
to 10 years’ imprisonment; widespread
Prohibited by law; laws rarely enforced; punishable by
5 to 10 years’ imprisonment
Not speciﬁcally prohibited by law
Seychelles
Prohibited by law; punishable by up to 20 years’
imprisonment; police rarely intervene
Prohibited by law; punishable by up to 20 years’
imprisonment; often unreported
Prohibited by law; punishable by up to
20 years’ imprisonment
Sierra Leone
Prohibited by law; widespread; not frequently reported
Prohibited by law; punishable by up to 14 years’
imprisonment; commonplace; not frequently reported
Not speciﬁcally prohibited by law
Somalia
Not prohibited by law; believed to be widespread
although statistics are unavailable; honor killings occur
Prohibited by law; laws not effectively enforced; no
reported rape cases prosecuted during 2009
Not speciﬁcally prohibited by law
South Africa
Prohibited by law; not frequently reported
Prohibited by law; widespread
Prohibited by law; widespread
Sudan
Not prohibited by law; widespread; police unlikely to
intervene in domestic disputes
Prohibited by law; laws not effectively enforced;
punishment ranges from 100 lashes to 10 years’
imprisonment; widespread
Not speciﬁcally prohibited by law
Swaziland
Not prohibited by law; assault considered a crime but
law does not address spousal abuse; often considered a
family matter; common
Prohibited by law; laws not always effectively enforced;
widespread
Prohibited by law; laws not always effectively
enforced
Tanzania
Not prohibited by law although domestic violence is
recognized by courts as grounds for divorce; remains
widespread; not frequently reported due to cultural
norms and family pressures
Prohibited by law; laws not effectively enforced; not
frequently reported; widespread
Prohibited by law; laws not effectively
enforced; not frequently reported; widespread
Togo
Not speciﬁcally prohibited by law; widespread; police
often reluctant to intervene in “family affairs”
Prohibited by law; punishable by 5 to 10 years’
imprisonment; widespread; victims reluctant to report
due to cultural norms and family pressures
Not speciﬁcally prohibited by law
Uganda
Widespread; most people regard it as a family matter
Prohibited by law; laws not consistently enforced;
widespread
Unknown
(continued)

212
TABLE 6.4 (CONTINUED)
Country
Domestic Violence
Rape
Marital Rape
Zambia
Not prohibited by law; assault considered a crime but
law does not address spousal abuse; widespread
Prohibited by law; laws not effectively enforced;
punishable by up to life in prison; widespread
Not speciﬁcally prohibited by law; laws for
rape not enforceable in these cases
Zimbabwe
Not prohibited by law; widespread; not frequently
reported due to cultural and family norms
Prohibited by law; widespread; not widely reported
Prohibited by law; many women unaware that
spousal rape is a crime; not widely reported
East Asia and the Paciﬁc
Brunei Darussalam
Not speciﬁcally prohibited by law; laws generally
enforced effectively; Islamic courts recognize assault as
grounds for divorce
Prohibited by law; laws not widely enforced; punishable
by up to 30 years’ imprisonment and caning
Laws provide that a man’s sexual intercourse
with his wife is not rape
Burma
Not speciﬁcally prohibited by law; victims can apply
laws against committing bodily harm; widespread
Prohibited by law; laws not effectively enforced
especially when the crimes are committed by soldiers
Not speciﬁcally prohibited by law unless the
wife is under the age of 14 years
Cambodia
Prohibited by law; penalties are not speciﬁed;
widespread
Prohibited by law; punishable by up to 5 years’
imprisonment; widespread
Not speciﬁcally prohibited by law; may be
included under domestic abuse laws
China
Not speciﬁcally prohibited by law (other laws stipulate
that domestic violence is prohibited, although they are
vague); domestic violence is a growing problem
Prohibited by law; convicted rapists may be executed;
occurrence is unknown
Not speciﬁcally recognized or prohibited by
law
Fiji
Not speciﬁcally prohibited by law; prosecuted under
statutes regarding assault
Prohibited by law; punishable by up to life
imprisonment thoughpunishment is uncommon;
widespread
Not speciﬁcally prohibited by law although
there have been some prosecutions under the
general rape law
Indonesia
Prohibited by law; believed to be widespread, but
reliable statistics are unavailable
Prohibited by law but deﬁnition is narrow; punishment
is light although it can range between 4 and 14 years’
imprisonment; reliable statistics are unavailable
Not prohibited by law

213
Kiribati
Not specially prohibited by law but prosecuted under
general assault statutes; widespread; not always
reported due to cultural and family norms
Prohibited by law; punishable by up to life
imprisonment but sentences usually much lighter;
widespread
Prohibited by law; widespread
Korea, Democratic People’s
Republic of
Statutes unknown; widespread
May be prohibited by law but details of statutes are
unavailable
Unknown
Korea, Republic of
Prohibited by law; punishable by up to 5 years’
imprisonment and ﬁnes; police are required to respond
immediately and generally are quick to do so
Prohibited by law; punishable by up to three years’
imprisonment; widespread
Not speciﬁcally prohibited by law but often
prosecuted under general rape statutes
Laos
Prohibited by law; apparently not widespread
Prohibited by law; punishable by 3 to 5 years’
imprisonment and can include capital punishment;
reportedly rare
Prohibited by law; apparently not widespread
Malaysia
The Domestic Violence Act prohibits domestic abuse;
frequent but not always reported; Muslim women
generally prohibited from disobeying their husbands
according to Shari’a law
Prohibited by law; laws effectively enforced; punishable
by up to 30 years’ imprisonment, caning and a ﬁne
Prohibited by law
Marshall Islands
Prohibited by law; laws enforced when incidents are
reported to ofﬁcials
Prohibited by law; laws effectively enforced although
not many cases prosecuted
Prohibited by law; laws effectively enforced
Micronesia, Federated
States of
Not prohibited by law but can be prosecuted under
assault charges; generally seen as a traditional family
unit issue
Prohibited by law; rarely reported or prosecuted
Not speciﬁcally prohibited by law
Nauru
No reliable statistics available; believed to be sporadic
Prohibited by law; punishable by up to life
imprisonment; no reliable statistics available
Not speciﬁcally prohibited by law; no reliable
statistics available
Palau
Not prohibited by law but can be prosecuted under
assault statutes; only 39 cases reported October 2008–
September 2009
Prohibited by law; punishable by up to 25 years’
imprisonment; no reported cases of rape in 2009
Prohibited by law; punishable by up to
25 years’ imprisonment
(continued)

214
TABLE 6.4 (CONTINUED)
Country
Domestic Violence
Rape
Marital Rape
Papua New Guinea
Prohibited by law although most frequently perceived
as private family matter
Prohibited by law; apprehension of rapists is limited;
rape, especially gang rape, is widespread
Prohibited by law
Philippines
Prohibited by law; widespread; women sometimes
required to pay fees to ﬁle complaint
Prohibited by law; law enforcement and prosecution are
ineffective
Prohibited by law; law enforcement and
prosecution are ineffective
Samoa
Prohibited by law; tolerated under traditional family
practices and cultural norms
Prohibited by law; often unreported as result of cultural
norms and social stigma
Not speciﬁcally prohibited by law
Singapore
Prohibited by law; punishable by mandatory caning and
at least 2 years’ imprisonment for any act that results
in the victim’s fear of injury or death
Prohibited by law; laws generally enforced effectively;
punishable by up to 20 years’ imprisonment and caning
Not prohibited by law unless husband and wife
are separated; a husband’s sexual relations with
his wife are not considered a crime
Solomon Islands
Not prohibited by law but can be prosecuted under
assault statutes; believed to be common
Prohibited by law; punishable by up to life
imprisonment; widespread; limited reporting due to
cultural norms and family pressures
Not speciﬁcally prohibited by law
Thailand
Prohibited by law; widespread; police frequently
reluctant to investigate and victims often afraid to
report it due to family pressures and cultural norms
Prohibited by law; laws not enforced effectively;
penalties can range from four years’ to life
imprisonment; believed to be serious problem
Prohibited by law
Timor-Leste
Authorities often reluctant to respond aggressively to
charges of domestic violence; some see this as a family
matter
Prohibited by law; police often reluctant to investigate
reports or prosecute perpetrators; sometimes dealt with
through traditional laws
Not speciﬁcally prohibited by law but rape
statute may be broad enough to include
spousal rape
Tonga
Not speciﬁcally prohibited by law but can be prosecuted
under assault statutes; “no drop” policy provides for
instances when women change their minds after
making a complaint (the case proceeds to prosecution
even if woman requests that the charges be dropped)
Prohibited by law; punishable by up to 15 years’
imprisonment; incidence appears low
Not speciﬁcally prohibited by law

215
Tuvalu
Not speciﬁcally prohibited by law but can be prosecuted
under assault statutes; police may deal with it through
traditional practices
Prohibited by law; punishable by a minimum of
5 years’ imprisonment
Not speciﬁcally prohibited by law
Vanuatu
Prohibited by law; most cases are believed to be
unreported; police have “no drop” policy
Prohibited by law; punishable by up to life
imprisonment
Not speciﬁcally prohibited by law; police
reluctant to investigate as many believe it is a
family matter
Vietnam
Prohibited by law; police and legal authorities not
equipped to handle domestic violence cases;
government is working to train all involved
Prohibited by law
Not speciﬁcally prohibited by law but may be
included in law prohibiting violence or tricking
someone into having sexual intercourse
without consent
South and Central Asia
Afghanistan
Not speciﬁcally prohibited by law but prosecuted under
the assault statutes; widespread; often not reported due
to family or cultural traditions or social stigma
Prohibited by law; punishable by 6 months’ to life
imprisonment
Not speciﬁcally prohibited by law
Bangladesh
Not prohibited by law; widespread; 2000 study by the
UN Population Fund found at least 50 percent of
female respondents had experienced domestic violence
Prohibited by law; prosecution inconsistent; not
frequently reported due to social stigma
Not speciﬁcally prohibited by law
Bhutan
Prohibited by law
Prohibited by law; punishable by up to life
imprisonment
Prohibited by law
India
Prohibited by law; widespread; underreporting likely
due to cultural practices or family pressure
Prohibited by law
Prohibited by law; punishable by up to one
year’s imprisonment
(continued)

216
TABLE 6.4 (CONTINUED)
Country
Domestic Violence
Rape
Marital Rape
Maldives
Not prohibited by law; most cases unreported due to
variety of reasons including social stigma, fear of
reprisals, or fear of losing economic support
Prohibited by law; very few convictions due to difﬁculty
of proving rape
Not speciﬁcally prohibited by law
Nepal
Prohibited by law; widespread
Prohibited by law; punishable by up to 20 years’
imprisonment; good police response; most rapes not
reported
Prohibited by law; punishable by 3 to
6 months’ imprisonment
Pakistan
Prohibited by law; widespread; violence against women
increased in 2009 from previous year; dowry disputes
often result in woman’s death
Prohibited by law; punishable by 10 to 25 years’
imprisonment; widespread; seriously underreported;
prosecution is rare
Not speciﬁcally prohibited by law
Sri Lanka
Prohibited by law; laws not enforced effectively
Prohibited by law; laws not enforced effectively; not
frequently reported; few services provided to victims
Prohibited by law only when husband and
wife are legally separated
Near East and North Africa
Algeria
Domestic violence more prevalent in rural areas where
social stigma and cultural traditions limit the victim’s
willingness to report it
Prohibited by law; reaction to reports by law
enforcement is improving; increasing number of reports
Not speciﬁcally prohibited by law
Bahrain
Not speciﬁcally prohibited by law; widespread; rarely
reported
Prohibited by law; does not appear to be a widespread
problem
Not speciﬁcally prohibited by law
Egypt
Not prohibited by law; can be prosecuted under assault
statutes although victim must produce multiple
eyewitnesses
Prohibited by law; punishable by 15 to 25 years’
imprisonment (life sentence if rape includes armed
abduction); not often reported
Not prohibited by law
Iran
Not prohibited by law; not widely reported because it is
usually seen as a private family matter; “One Million
Signatures for the Repeal of Discriminatory Laws” and
other programs are working to change the law
Prohibited by law but victim must provide 4 male or
3 male and 2 female witnesses in order to convict
perpetrator; widespread; not widely report due to
family pressures, social stigma, and fear of punishment
for being raped
Not prohibited by law

217
Iraq
Prohibited by the constitution; often unreported due to
social stigma and belief that it should be considered a
family matter
Prohibited by law; prevalence unknown
Not prohibited by law
Jordan
Prohibited by law but seen as private family matter;
considered grounds for divorce but religious authority
does allow husbands to strike their wives
Prohibited by law; punishable by at least 10 years’
imprisonment; widespread
Not prohibited by law
Kuwait
Not speciﬁcally prohibited by law but can be prosecuted
under assault statutes; perpetrators rarely arrested;
rarely reported; woman must provide 2 male or 1 male
and 2 female witnesses
Prohibited by law; laws not always enforced effectively;
can be punishable by death; widespread; underreported
Not prohibited by law
Lebanon
Not speciﬁcally prohibited by law; religious law may
require a victim to return to her husband; complaints
often ignored by the government
Prohibited by law; laws effectively enforced; punishable
by 5 or more years’ imprisonment; family of victim
allowed to offer the rapist marriage to the victim to
preserve family honor
Not prohibited by law
Libya
Prohibited by law; prevalence unknown
Prohibited by law; punishment can be up to 25 years’
imprisonment or marriage to the victim if she agrees
Rape and spousal rape not distinguished by
the law
Morocco
Not speciﬁcally prohibited by law; general provisions of
criminal code do address it; underreported
Prohibited by law; punishable by 5 to 10 years’
imprisonment; often unreported; victim’s family may
offer marriage to victim to preserve family honor
Not prohibited by law
Oman
Not speciﬁcally prohibited by law but can be prosecuted
under assault, battery, and aggravated assault statutes;
laws generally enforced when reported
Prohibited by law; laws generally enforced by
authorities; punishable by up to 15 years’
imprisonment; underreported due to family pressures,
social stigma, and cultural traditions
Not prohibited by law
(continued)

218
TABLE 6.4 (CONTINUED)
Country
Domestic Violence
Rape
Marital Rape
Qatar
Prohibited by law; underreported due to social stigma
and cultural tradition
Prohibited by law; punishable by 10 years’
imprisonment (14 if the victim is under 16 years old);
underreported due to social stigma and cultural
traditions
Not speciﬁcally prohibited by law
Saudi Arabia
Not prohibited by law; no clear deﬁnitions provided by
the government
Prohibited under Shari’a law; laws generally enforced;
punishment ranges from ﬂogging to execution; both
victim and perpetrator punished; underreported
Not prohibited by law
Syria
Not speciﬁcally prohibited by law; underreported due to
social stigma, cultural traditions, and family pressures
Prohibited by law; punishable by a minimum of
15 years’ imprisonment; if perpetrator agrees to marry
the victim he receives no punishment
Not prohibited by law
Tunisia
Prohibited by law; law enforcement rare; widespread
Prohibited by law; laws effectively enforced; punishable
by life imprisonment or execution if a weapon was
involved; underreported due to social stigma and
cultural tradition
Prohibited by law
United Arab Emirates
Statutes allow men to physically “control” their female
family members; occasionally cases may be ﬁled under
assault statutes; complaints may be ﬁled with police but
are generally ineffective; underreported due to family
pressures, social stigma, and cultural traditions
Prohibited under Shari’a law; high burden of proof
required results in few convictions; underreported
Not speciﬁcally prohibited by law
Yemen
Prohibited by law; laws rarely enforced; considered a
family matter
Prohibited by law; laws not enforced effectively;
punishable by up to 15 years’ imprisonment;
underreported due to fear of shaming the family and
retaliation; if perpetrator does not admit the crime the
victim must provide 2 male or 4 female witnesses
Not prohibited by law as a woman is not
allowed to refuse sexual relations with her
husband

219
South and Central America
Antigua and Barbuda
Prohibited by law; women often reluctant to testify
against abusers
Prohibited by law; punishable by 10 years’ to life
imprisonment
Prohibited by law
Argentina
Prohibited by law; punishable as a misdemeanor in civil
court; widespread
Prohibited by law; punishable by up to 20 years’
imprisonment
Prohibited by law
Barbados
Prohibited by law; widespread; reliable data unavailable
Prohibited by law
Prohibited by law
Belize
Prohibited by law; signiﬁcant problem
Prohibited by law; effectively enforced but few
convictions (possibly due to reluctance of victim to
testify in court)
Prohibited by law
Bolivia
Prohibited by law; laws not enforced effectively;
widespread
Prohibited by law; underreported
Not prohibited by law
Brazil
Prohibited by law; widespread; underreported
Prohibited by law; punishable by 8 to 10 years’
imprisonment; few convictions
Prohibited by law
Chile
Prohibited by law; widespread
Prohibited by law; laws effectively enforced; punishable
by 5 to 15 years’ imprisonment; underreported
Prohibited by law
Colombia
Prohibited by law; laws not effectively enforced;
widespread
Prohibited by law; punishable by 8 to 15 years’
imprisonment; underreported
Prohibited by law; punishable by 6 months’ to
2 years’ imprisonment
Costa Rica
Prohibited by law; protection measures are deﬁned by
law
Prohibited by law; laws effectively enforced; punishable
by 10 to 18 years’ imprisonment
Prohibited by law; few convictions due to
difﬁculty providing proof
Dominica
Not speciﬁcally prohibited by law but can be prosecuted
under assault and battery statutes; underreported
Prohibited by law; laws effectively enforced
Not speciﬁcally prohibited by law
Dominican Republic
Prohibited by law
Prohibited by law; punishable by 10 to 15 years’
imprisonment; widespread; underreported due to social
stigma
Unknown
Ecuador
Prohibited by law; widespread
Prohibited by law; punishable by up to 25 years’
imprisonment; widespread
Not prohibited by law although family law
treats marital rape as a type of violence
(continued)

220
TABLE 6.4 (CONTINUED)
Country
Domestic Violence
Rape
Marital Rape
El Salvador
Prohibited by law; widespread; underreported;
considered socially acceptable by many individuals
Prohibited by law; laws not enforced effectively;
punishable by 6 to 10 years’ imprisonment; widespread
Not speciﬁcally prohibited by law
Grenada
Prohibited by law; widespread
Prohibited by law; punishable by ﬂogging or up to
15 years’ imprisonment
Prohibited by law; punishable by ﬂogging or
up to 15 years’ imprisonment
Guatemala
Prohibited by law; authorities have little training;
widespread
Prohibited by law; punishable by 5 to 15 years’
imprisonment; authorities have little training;
widespread
Prohibited by law; punishable by 5 to
15 years’ imprisonment
Guyana
Prohibited by law; laws not frequently enforced;
widespread
Prohibited by law; not frequently prosecuted;
underreported
Not prohibited by law
Haiti
Prohibited by law; laws not enforced effectively;
underreported; widespread
Prohibited by law; widespread; underreported due to
social stigma, limited number of successful convictions,
cultural tradition
Not prohibited, not recognized as crime
Honduras
Prohibited by law; punishable by 2 to 4 years’
imprisonment;
Prohibited by law; perpetrator can be prosecuted even
if victim does not testify
Prohibited by law
Jamaica
Prohibited by law; not enforced effectively; widespread
Prohibited by law; punishable by up to 25 years’
imprisonment; underreported
Prohibited by law
Mexico
Prohibited by law; not enforced effectively; widespread;
underreported
Prohibited by law; punishable by up to 20 years’
imprisonment; underreported due to fear of publicity,
social stigma, or unlikely chance of prosecution
Prohibited by law
Nicaragua
Prohibited by law; punishable by up to 6 years’
imprisonment; widespread; underreported
Prohibited by law; underreported
Prohibited by law
Panama
Prohibited by law; widespread; underreported
Prohibited by law; punishable by 5 to 10 years’
imprisonment; in some cases perpetrator may avoid
prosecution by marrying the victim
Prohibited by law

221
Paraguay
Prohibited by law; widespread; underreported due to
family pressure or lack of prosecution
Prohibited by law; punishable by up to 10 years’
imprisonment; widespread; underreported
Prohibited by law
Peru
Prohibited by law; laws not enforced effectively;
widespread; underreported
Prohibited by law; laws not enforced effectively
Prohibited by law
Saint Kitts and Nevis
Prohibited by law; laws not enforced effectively;
underreported
Prohibited by law
Not speciﬁcally prohibited by law
Saint Lucia
Prohibited by law; effective law enforcement;
underreported due to victims’ reluctance to press
charges
Prohibited by law; underreported; limited prosecution
due to victims’ reluctance to press charges
Not speciﬁcally prohibited by law
Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines
Not speciﬁcally prohibited by law although victims are
protected; authorities may be reluctant to investigate
due to victims’ reluctance to press charges
Prohibited by law; effective enforcement
Prohibited by law
Suriname
Prohibited by law; widespread
Prohibited by law; laws enforced effectively
Prohibited by law
Trinidad and Tobago
Prohibited by law; reliable statistics unavailable
Prohibited by law; punishable by up to life
imprisonment; underreported due to social stigma and
perception that police will not investigate effectively
Prohibited by law
Uruguay
Prohibited by law
Prohibited by law
Prohibited by law; underreported due to social
stigma and ignorance of the law
Venezuela
Prohibited by law; widespread
Prohibited by law; underreported; perpetrator may
avoid punishment by marrying the victim; reliable data
unavailable
Prohibited by law

Prostitution and Sex Trafficking
Many countries have enacted laws prohibiting prostitution and
trafﬁcking; however, these laws are often ineffectively enforced.
Statistics on these activities are often difﬁcult to ﬁnd and unreli-
able in many cases. Table 6.5 provides general information
regarding individual country statutes and the existence of prosti-
tution and sex trafﬁcking in developing countries, by region.
Voting and Elections
Most countries have given women the right to vote, with the
exception of Brunei Darussalum, Saudi Arabia, and the United
Arab Emirates. Many countries have also enacted statutes that
require a certain percentage of women be elected each year to
their national congresses and parliaments. Table 6.6 provides
information on the year that women were granted the vote in
developing countries and the percentage of women elected to
national congresses and parliaments. Data were taken from the
Inter-Parliamentary Union (available at http://www.ipu.org/
wmn-e/classif.htm).
Labor and Employment
Throughout the world the rate of women in paid employment out-
side of agriculture has slowly increased, and according to the Mil-
lennium Development Goals Report for 2010, it reached 41 percent
in 2008. However, in certain regions the rate was lower; for exam-
ple, only 20 percent of women in Southern Asia, Northern Africa,
and Western Asia were employed in nonagricultural positions.
Table 6.7 presents regional rates of employment, by industry, for
2008. Data were taken from Global Employment Trends for Women
(2009). Table 6.8 presents rates of labor participation by females
compared with males; these include both agricultural and nonagri-
cultural employment. Data were taken from the UN Interagency
Estimates (WHO 2010b).
222
Facts and Data

TABLE 6.5
Status and Extent of Prostitution and Sex Trafficking
Country
Prostitution
Sex Trafﬁcking
Africa
Angola
Prohibited by law; law not enforced effectively
Slavery is prohibited but not trafﬁcking; source and destination country for forced labor and
sexual exploitation
Benin
Prostitution itself not prohibited by law but facilitating or proﬁting
from prostitution is prohibited
Trafﬁcking in children is prohibited by law but not adult trafﬁcking; source, transit, and
destination country for children only
Botswana
Prohibited by law; law enforcement not effective; widespread
Not prohibited by law although abduction, slave trafﬁcking, and procuring women and girls for
the purpose of prostitution is prohibited; source, transit, and destination country for forced
labor and sexual exploitation
Burkina Faso
Not prohibited by law although soliciting and pimping are illegal
Prohibited by law; source, transit, and destination country for women and children for forced
labor and sexual exploitation
Burundi
Prohibited by law; not signiﬁcant problem
Prohibited by law; no reliable data on prevalence
Cameroon
Prohibited by law; laws not enforced effectively
Slavery and child trafﬁcking are illegal; source, transit, and destination country; most
trafﬁcking in women is to other countries
Cape Verde
Legal for adults
Trafﬁcking in adults not prohibited, only trafﬁcking in children
Central African Republic
Not prohibited by law but facilitating or proﬁting from prostitution
is illegal
Prohibited by law; believed to not be widespread although reliable data unavailable
Chad
Prohibited but widespread in certain areas
Not speciﬁcally prohibited by law
Comoros
Prohibited by law; not openly practiced
No reports of trafﬁcking
Congo, Democratic Republic
of
Forced prostitution prohibited by law; evidence of women and girls
forced into prostitution by family members or security forces
Some forms prohibited by law including forced prostitution, sexual slavery, involuntary
servitude; source and destination country for forced labor and sexual exploitation
Congo, Republic of
Prohibited by law; laws not effectively enforced; common
Prohibited by law; no evidence of trafﬁcking of adults
(continued)

224
TABLE 6.5 (CONTINUED)
Country
Prostitution
Sex Trafﬁcking
Cote d’Ivoire
Legal between consenting adults; soliciting prohibited
Not prohibited; problem; source and destination country for trafﬁcking; internal trafﬁcking for
sexual exploitation and servitude
Djibouti
Prohibited by law; exists
Prohibited by law; reports of women and girls being trafﬁcked for prostitution and domestic
servitude
Equatorial Guinea
Prohibited by law; occurs in two major cities (Malabo and Bata)
Prohibited by law; some trafﬁcking suspected
Eritrea
Prohibited by law but a serious problem
Prohibited by law
Ethiopia
Legal for individuals over 18 years; common, often because of
poverty
Prohibited by law; source country for forced labor and some commercial sexual exploitation;
internal trafﬁcking of rural women
Gabon
Prohibited by law; not widespread
Prohibited by law; women and children trafﬁcked into the country
Gambia
Prohibited by law but widespread, especially in tourist areas
Prohibited by law but widespread; source, transit, and destination country
Ghana
Prohibited by law; widespread in urban areas
Prohibited by law; source, transit, and destination country for women and children trafﬁcked
for sexual exploitation and forced labor
Guinea
Prohibited by law; widespread
Prohibited by law; source, transit, and destination country; girls trafﬁcked for sexual
exploitation and forced labor; National Action Plan to Combat Trafﬁcking in Persons renewed
but no funds available to implement
Guinea-Bissau
Not prohibited by law; widespread
Not prohibited by law; source, transit, and destination country, primarily for children trafﬁcked
for forced labor and some sexual exploitation
Kenya
Prohibited by law although soliciting is not a crime; widespread,
especially in urban and tourist areas
Trafﬁcking in children prohibited by law; trafﬁcking of persons for sexual exploitation is
prohibited; source, transit, and destination country for trafﬁcking of women for forced labor
and sexual exploitation; increasing cooperation of the government and NGOs to combat
trafﬁcking

225
Lesotho
Not prohibited by law; prevalence unknown
Not prohibited by law but slavery and forced labor are prohibited; source, transit, and
destination country for women and children trafﬁcked for forced labor and sexual exploitation;
government working to draft anti-trafﬁcking laws
Liberia
Prohibited by law; widespread
Prohibited by law; source, transit, and destination country; public awareness campaign by
government and NGOs; National Anti-trafﬁcking Task Force has no budget
Madagascar
Not prohibited by law; widespread, especially in tourist areas
Prohibited by law; girls and young women most frequent victims, trafﬁcked for sexual
exploitation and forced labor; government database established to track trafﬁckers
Malawi
Not prohibited by law; law does prohibit owning a brothel, forcing
a person into prostitution, and living off income earned through
prostitution; widespread, especially in urban and tourist areas
Not prohibited by law; source, transit, and destination country for women and children
trafﬁcked for sexual exploitation, frequently to South Africa
Mali
Not prohibited by law; widespread, especially in urban areas
Trafﬁcking in children prohibited by law, but not adult trafﬁcking; trafﬁcking of children and
women for forced labor and sexual exploitation; government works with NGOs to repatriate
victims
Mauritania
Prohibited by law; increasingly prevalent, especially in tourist
areas
Prohibited by law; widespread; source, transit, and destination country; young girls trafﬁcked to
Gulf States for sexual exploitation or marriage
Mauritius
Prohibited by law; widespread; reports of school-age girls forced
into prostitution by family members
Prohibited by law; not widespread
Mozambique
Not prohibited by law but indecency and immoral behavior are
prohibited
Prohibited by law; source, transit, and destination country primarily for women and girls
trafﬁcked for forced labor and sexual exploitation
Namibia
Not prohibited by law; widespread
Prohibited by law; source, transit, and destination country
Niger
Prohibited by law; widespread, especially in urban areas
Not prohibited by law; source, transit, and destination country for women trafﬁcked for
domestic labor and sexual exploitation
Nigeria
Prohibited by law; widespread, especially in urban areas; women
hired as employees by corporations to attract clients through
prostitution
Prohibited by law; source, transit, and destination country; widespread; majority of victims are
female, trafﬁcked for domestic labor and sexual exploitation
(continued)

226
TABLE 6.5 (CONTINUED)
Country
Prostitution
Sex Trafﬁcking
Rwanda
Prohibited by law; widespread
Not speciﬁcally prohibited by law but trafﬁckers can be prosecuted using laws against slavery,
kidnapping, rape, and deﬁlement; source country, primarily for women and children trafﬁcked
for domestic labor and sexual exploitation
Sao Tome and Principe
Prohibited by law; increasingly prevalent
Prohibited by law; no reports of trafﬁcking
Senegal
Legal if individuals are 21 years old or older; they must register
with the police and test negative for any STDs
Prohibited by law; widespread; young girls trafﬁcked within the country for domestic labor and
sexual exploitation; source, transit, and destination country
Seychelles
Prohibited by law; widespread
Prohibited by law; no reports of trafﬁcking
Sierra Leone
Not prohibited by law; widespread
Prohibited by law; women trafﬁcked for domestic labor and sexual exploitation; source,
transfer, and destination country; government works with NGOs to combat trafﬁcking
Somalia
Prohibited by law; no reliable data
Not speciﬁcally prohibited by law; believed to be widespread but no reliable data; source,
transit, and destination country
South Africa
Prohibited by law; widespread
Not speciﬁcally prohibited by law; source, transit, and destination country for women and
children trafﬁcked for domestic labor and sexual exploitation
Sudan
Prohibited by law; widespread
Not speciﬁcally prohibited by law but abduction, luring, and forced labor are prohibited; no
reliable data regarding prevalence; women and girls trafﬁcked for domestic labor and sexual
exploitation
Swaziland
Prohibited by law; widespread
Prohibited by law; women and girls trafﬁcked for domestic labor, forced labor, and sexual
exploitation; source, transit, and destination country; anti-trafﬁcking task force created; public
awareness campaign by government
Tanzania
Prohibited by law; widespread
Prohibited by a law passed in 2009; women and girls trafﬁcked for forced labor and sexual
exploitation; girls considered to be burden on family and often trafﬁcked

227
Togo
Prohibited by law; widespread in urban areas
Child trafﬁcking prohibited by law; the law does not apply to adults; women and girls
trafﬁcked for domestic and other labor and sexual exploitation; source, transit, and destination
country; government works with NGOs and other governments to reduce trafﬁcking
Uganda
Prohibited by law; widespread
Prohibited by law; women and children trafﬁcked within the country for forced labor and
sexual exploitation; task force created to reduce trafﬁcking
Zambia
Not speciﬁcally prohibited by law; widespread in urban areas
Prohibited by law; children, often girls, trafﬁcked for domestic labor and sexual exploitation;
government works with NGOs to provide services and support to victims; source, transit, and
destination country
Zimbabwe
Prohibited by law; common in urban areas
Not prohibited by law; widespread; women and children trafﬁcked for domestic labor and
sexual exploitation; source, transit, and destination country
East Asia and Paciﬁc
Brunei Darussalam
Prohibited by law; not widespread
Prohibited by law but no prosecutions; destination country for women for forced labor and
sexual exploitation; limited attempts by government to curb
Burma
Prohibited by law; increasingly widespread in urban areas; limited
enforcement by police if bribes are paid
Prohibited by law; widespread; women and young girls trafﬁcked for domestic and forced labor
and sexual exploitation; government has established anti-trafﬁcking task forces in 22 locations
to curb trafﬁcking
Cambodia
Prohibited by the constitution; widespread
Prohibited by law; women and children trafﬁcked for forced labor and sexual exploitation;
source, transit, and destination country
China
Prohibited by law; an estimated 1.7 to 6 million women are
involved in prostitution
Prohibited by law; women and children trafﬁcked for forced labor, forced marriage, and sexual
exploitation; source, transit, and destination country
Fiji
Prohibited by law; prevalent in urban areas
Prohibited by law
Indonesia
Prohibited by law; widespread; generally tolerated by authorities
Prohibited by law; source and destination country; women and girls trafﬁcked for domestic
labor and sexual exploitation
Kiribati
Not prohibited by law although procuring sex and operating
brothels are illegal
Prohibited by law; no reports of trafﬁcking; some reports of young girls being trafﬁcked within
the country for sexual exploitation
(continued)

228
TABLE 6.5 (CONTINUED)
Country
Prostitution
Sex Trafﬁcking
Korea, Democratic People’s
Republic of
Prohibited by law; prevalence unknown
Trafﬁcking of women prohibited by law; trafﬁcking of women and girls into China is
widespread
Republic of Korea
Prohibited by law; widespread
Prohibited by law; women trafﬁcked to the country for sexual exploitation and marriage to
nationals; government works with international agencies and governments to curb trafﬁcking
Laos
Prohibited by law; little law enforcement; widespread
Prohibited by law; women and children frequently trafﬁcked for forced labor and prostitution;
source, transit, and destination country; government runs public awareness campaign
Malaysia
Not prohibited by law; solicitation is prohibited; an estimated
50,000 to 150,000 women are involved in prostitution; Muslims
involved in prostitution are punished under Shari’a law for sexual
relations outside of marriage
Prohibited by law; widespread; women and girls trafﬁcked for forced labor and sexual
exploitation; source, transit, and destination country
Marshall Islands
Prohibited by law; uncommon
Not speciﬁcally prohibited by law; no reports of trafﬁcking of any persons
Micronesia, Federated States
of
Prohibited by law; uncommon
Not speciﬁcally prohibited by law; no victims of trafﬁcking reported
Mongolia
Prohibited by law; prevalent in urban areas
Prohibited by law; source country for forced labor and sexual exploitation
Nauru
Prohibited by law; no reported incidences
Not speciﬁcally prohibited by law; no victims of trafﬁcking reported
Palau
Prohibited by law; widespread
Prohibited by law; women trafﬁcked to the country for domestic and forced labor and sexual
exploitation
Papua New Guinea
Prohibited by law; laws not enforced; widespread
Trafﬁcking of children for sexual exploitation or slavery; trafﬁcking of adults not prohibited;
women and girls trafﬁcked for forced labor and sexual exploitation; no government programs
to help victims
Philippines
Prohibited by law; laws not enforced; widespread
Prohibited by law; women and girls trafﬁcked for forced labor and sexual exploitation; source,
transit, and destination country
Samoa
Prohibited by law; not widespread
Not speciﬁcally prohibited by law; no victims of trafﬁcking reported

229
Singapore
Not prohibited by law although public solicitation, operating
brothels, and living on earnings from prostitution are prohibited;
tolerated by authorities
Prohibited by law; women and girls trafﬁcked for sexual exploitation
Solomon Islands
Prohibited by law; laws not enforced
Prohibited by law; no conﬁrmed reports of trafﬁcking
Taiwan
Prohibited by law; only prostitutes are prosecuted, not those
patronizing prostitutes
Prohibited by law as of 2009; most frequently a destination country for women for forced
labor and sexual exploitation
Thailand
Prohibited by law; little law enforcement; widespread
Prohibited by law as of 2008; trafﬁcking of women and children for forced labor and sexual
exploitation; source, transit, and destination country; several NGOs work with victims;
government runs public awareness campaign
Timor-Leste
Not prohibited by law
Trafﬁcking in persons for forced labor and sexual exploitation is prohibited; government works
with NGOs to assist victims
Tonga
Not prohibited by law; some reports of women and girls
participating in commercial sexual activities
Not speciﬁcally prohibited by law; no reports of trafﬁcking
Tuvalu
Prohibited by law; uncommon
Not prohibited by law; no reports of trafﬁcking
Vanuatu
Prohibited by law; not widespread although it appears to be
increasing
Not prohibited by law; no reports of trafﬁcking
Vietnam
Prohibited by law; not enforced; many women become prostitutes
for ﬁnancial reasons; occasionally parents force daughters into
prostitution
Prohibited by law; widespread; women and girls trafﬁcked for forced labor and sexual
exploitation
South and Central Asia
Afghanistan
Prohibited by law; exists, but is not widespread
Prohibited by law; women and girls trafﬁcked for forced labor and sexual exploitation; source,
transit, and destination country
Bangladesh
Male prostitution prohibited by law; female prostitution is legal
Prohibited by law; widespread; women and girls trafﬁcked for forced labor and sexual
exploitation
Bhutan
Limited, primarily occurs in border regions
Prohibited by law; little reliable data regarding prevalence but believed to be uncommon
(continued)

230
TABLE 6.5 (CONTINUED)
Country
Prostitution
Sex Trafﬁcking
India
Prostitution itself not prohibited by law but selling, procuring, or
exploiting a person for sex or proﬁt is illegal
Some forms prohibited by law; widespread; source, transit, and destination county for women
and children trafﬁcked for forced labor and sexual exploitation; government established 297
anti-trafﬁcking units around the country for training law enforcement ofﬁcials
Maldives
Prohibited by law; limited in practice
Trafﬁcking in persons not prohibited by law; few foreign women trafﬁcked to the country for
sexual exploitation; girls trafﬁcked for domestic labor and sexual exploitation
Nepal
Not prohibited by law
Prohibited by law; widespread trafﬁcking of women and children for sexual exploitation and
domestic labor
Pakistan
Prohibited by law; little law enforcement
Prohibited by law; widespread; source, transit, and destination country; women and girls
trafﬁcked for domestic labor and sexual exploitation
Sri Lanka
Prohibited by law; widespread
Prohibited by law; source and destination country; women and girls trafﬁcked for domestic
labor and sexual exploitation
Near East and North Africa
Algeria
Prohibited by law; increasingly prevalent
Prohibited by law as of 2009; transit and destination country
Bahrain
Prohibited by law; prostitutes and customers primarily non-
nationals
Prohibited; widespread; some trafﬁcking for sexual exploitation but primarily for construction
and domestic labor
Egypt
Prohibited by law; common in urban areas
Not speciﬁcally prohibited by law; women and girls trafﬁcked for domestic labor and sexual
exploitation; source, transit, and destination country
Iran
Prohibited by law; widespread
Prohibited by law; widespread; women and girls trafﬁcked for sexual exploitation and forced
labor; source, transit, and destination country
Iraq
Prohibited by law; increasingly prevalent
Prohibited by law; women trafﬁcked for forced labor and sexual exploitation
Jordan
Prohibited by law; exists in some urban areas
Prohibited by law as of 2009; source and destination country for women and girls for forced
labor and sexual exploitation

231
Kuwait
Prohibited by law; several prostitution rings exist
Not speciﬁcally prohibited by law; widespread; women trafﬁcked for domestic labor and sexual
exploitation
Lebanon
Not prohibited by law; brothels required to be licensed but very
few are
Not speciﬁcally prohibited by law; widespread; women trafﬁcked for domestic labor and sexual
exploitation
Libya
Prohibited by law; common in urban areas
Trafﬁcking of women prohibited by law; believed to be common
Morocco
Prohibited by law; little law enforcement; increasingly prevalent,
primarily in urban areas
Prohibited by law; women and girls primarily trafﬁcked for forced labor and sexual
exploitation
Oman
Prohibited by law; exists despite strict cultural norms
Prohibited by law; transit and destination country; government works effectively to curb
trafﬁcking
Qatar
Prohibited by law; increasingly prevalent
Not speciﬁcally prohibited by law; women trafﬁcked for forced labor; some women and girls
sexually exploited
Saudi Arabia
Prohibited by law; unknown prevalence
Prohibited by law as of 2009; widespread; women and children trafﬁcked for forced and
domestic labor and sexual exploitation
Syria
Prohibited by law; laws not strictly enforced
Trafﬁcking considered a form of incarcerating or holding persons against their will; women
trafﬁcked for domestic labor and sexual exploitation; unknown prevalence
Tunisia
Prohibited by law; government sanctions brothels
Not speciﬁcally prohibited by law but statutes prohibiting forced labor, forced prostitution, or
servitude can be applied; women and girls trafﬁcked for domestic labor and sexual exploitation
United Arab Emirates
Prohibited by law; increasingly prevalent
Prohibited by law; widespread; women and girls trafﬁcked for domestic labor and sexual
exploitation
Yemen
Prohibited by law; little law enforcement; widespread
Not speciﬁcally prohibited by law but can be prosecuted under other statutes; some women and
girls trafﬁcked for sexual exploitation
Latin America and the Caribbean
Antigua and Barbuda
Prohibited by law; common
Not speciﬁcally prohibited by law; destination country for women trafﬁcked for sexual
exploitation, also possibly domestic labor
Argentina
Prostitution itself is not prohibited by law but promoting, soliciting,
or exploiting is prohibited
Prohibited by law; women and children trafﬁcked primarily for sexual exploitation and forced
labor
(continued)

232
TABLE 6.5 (CONTINUED)
Country
Prostitution
Sex Trafﬁcking
Barbados
Prohibited by law; common, especially in urban and tourist areas
Not speciﬁcally prohibited by law but can be prosecuted using laws against forced labor and
slavery
Belize
Carnal knowledge of a girl under the age of 18 years is
prohibited by law
Prohibited by law; no reliable data regarding prevalence
Bolivia
Legal for persons 18 and older
Prohibited by law; women and girls trafﬁcked for forced labor and sexual exploitation; NGOs
run public awareness campaigns
Brazil
Legal, although operating a brothel is prohibited
Prohibited by law; widespread, primarily for sexual exploitation, also some forced labor;
limited access to services for victims
Chile
Legal for persons 18 and older; brothels are prohibited; women
can register with the National Health Services
All forms not speciﬁcally prohibited by law; many women trafﬁcked for sexual exploitation;
source and destination country; cross-border trafﬁcking prohibited; government runs public
awareness campaigns
Colombia
Legal for persons 18 and older but restricted to speciﬁed
“tolerance zones;” widespread
Prohibited by law; trafﬁcking for forced labor and sexual exploitation, primarily young women;
source, transit, and destination country; government operates reporting hotline
Costa Rica
Legal for persons 18 and older; practiced openly, especially in
urban and tourist areas
Transnational trafﬁcking is prohibited by law; trafﬁcking for forced labor and sexual
exploitation
Dominica
Prohibited by law; little law enforcement
Prohibited by law; no reports of trafﬁcking
Dominican Republic
Legal, although certain sexual relations with minors are prohibited;
little law enforcement
Prohibited by law; unknown prevalence; young women at greatest risk for trafﬁcking for
sexual exploitation
Ecuador
Legal for persons 18 and older but they must register with the
government
Prohibited by law; trafﬁcking of women and children for forced labor and sexual exploitation;
specialized anti-trafﬁcking police unit along with prevention campaigns and networks;
government assists victims
El Salvador
Legal for persons 18 and older; common
Prohibited by law; widespread, especially in urban and tourist areas and along the borders;
women and girls trafﬁcked for sexual exploitation; possible involvement by organized crime

233
Grenada
Prohibited by law; common
Not prohibited by law; no reports of trafﬁcking
Guatemala
Legal, although forcing a person into prostitution is prohibited
Prohibited by law; widespread; women and girls trafﬁcked for forced labor and sexual
exploitation; source, transit, and destination country
Guyana
Prohibited by law; exists
Prohibited by law; no convictions
Haiti
Prohibited by law; little law enforcement; widespread
Not speciﬁcally prohibited by law; women and children trafﬁcked for sexual exploitation;
source, transit, and destination country
Honduras
Legal for persons 18 and older but promoting or facilitating is
prohibited; widespread
Prohibited by law; women and girls trafﬁcked primarily for sexual exploitation
Jamaica
Prohibited by law; widespread, especially in tourist areas
Prohibited by law; women trafﬁcked for forced labor and sexual exploitation
Mexico
Legal for adults; widespread; sex tourism not prohibited by law
Prohibited by law; source, transit, and destination country
Nicaragua
Legal for persons 14 and older; common; sexual exploitation of
young girls widespread
Prohibited by law; widespread; majority of victims are women and children trafﬁcked for
sexual exploitation
Panama
Legal, as long as prostitutes register with government (not many
do)
Trafﬁcking for sexual exploitation prohibited by law; other forms not speciﬁcally prohibited but
prosecuted under other statutes; women and girls trafﬁcked primarily for sexual exploitation
Paraguay
Legal for persons 18 and older; widespread
Most forms prohibited by law; most women and girls trafﬁcked for sexual exploitation, also for
domestic and forced labor
Peru
Legal for women 18 and older but they must register with the
government and carry a health certiﬁcate
Prohibited by law; reliable data unavailable; primarily trafﬁcking within the country of women
and children for sexual exploitation and forced labor
Saint Kitts and Nevis
Prohibited by law; not common
Prohibited by law; no reports of trafﬁcking
Saint Lucia
Prohibited by law; limited enforcement; no arrests in 2009
All forms not speciﬁcally prohibited by law; no reports of trafﬁcking
Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines
Prohibited by law; uncommon
Not prohibited by law; no reports of trafﬁcking
Suriname
Prohibited by law; little law enforcement; common
Prohibited by law; source, transit, and destination country; extent unknown
Trinidad and Tobago
Prohibited by law; enforced by authorities
Not speciﬁcally prohibited by law but can be prosecuted under other statutes; not a major
problem
Uruguay
Legal for persons 18 and older; found primarily in urban and
tourist areas
Prohibited by law; women and girls trafﬁcked for forced labor and sexual exploitation
Venezuela
Legal; unknown prevalence, but common in urban and tourist
areas
Slavery, servitude, and transnational trafﬁcking prohibited by law; source, transit, and
destination country; women and children trafﬁcked for sexual exploitation and forced labor

234
TABLE 6.6
Women’s Suffrage and Elected Representatives
Country
Year Women Received
the Vote
Percent of Women in National
Parliaments (by Election Year)
Algeria
1962
7.7 Lower House (2007)
5.1 Upper House/Senate (2009)
Angola
1975
38.6 (2008)
Benin
1956
10.8 (2003)
Botswana
1965
7.9 (2009)
Burkina Faso
1958
15.3 (2007)
Burundi
1961
32.1 Lower House (2010)
46.3 Upper House (2010)
Cameroon
1946
13.9 (2007)
Cape Verde
1975
18.1 (2006)
Central African Republic
1986
9.6 (2005)
Chad
1958
5.2 (2002)
Comoros
1956
3.0 (2009)
Congo
1967
7.3 Lower House (2007)
12.9 Upper House/Senate (2008)
Congo, Dem. Republic of
1963
8.4 Lower House (2006)
4.6 Upper House/Senate (2007)
Cote d’Ivoire
1952
8.9 (2000)
Djibouti
1986
13.8 (2008)
Egypt
1956
1.8 Lower House (2005)
6.8 Upper House/Senate (2007)
Equatorial Guinea
1963
—
Eritrea
1955
22.0 (1994)
Ethiopia
1955
27.8 Lower House (2010)
16.3 Upper House/Senate (2010)
Gabon
1956
14.7 Lower House (2009)
17.6 Upper House/Senate (2009)
Gambia
1960
7.5 (2002)
Ghana
1954
8.3 (2008)
Guinea
1958
10.0 (2008)
Guinea-Bissau
1977
10.0 (2008)
Kenya
1963
9.8 (2007)
Lesotho
1965
24.2 Lower House (2007)
18.2 Upper House/Senate (2007)
Liberia
1946
12.5 Lower House (2005)
16.7 Upper House/Senate (2005)
Libya
1964
7.7 (2009)
Madagascar
1959
12.5 Lower House (2010)
11.1 Upper House/Senate (2010)
Malawi
1961
20.8 (2009)
Mali
1956
10.2 (2007)

235
Mauritania
1961
22.1 Lower House (2006)
14.3 Upper House/Senate (2009)
Mauritius
1956
18.6 (2008)
Morocco
1963
10.5 Lower House (2007)
2.2 Upper House/Senate (2009)
Mozambique
1975
39.2 (2009)
Namibia
1989
24.4 Lower House (2009)
? Upper House/Senate (2010)
Niger
1948
9.7
Nigeria
1958
7.0 Lower House (2007)
8.3 Upper House/Senate (2007)
Rwanda
1961
56.3% Lower House (2008)
34.6% Upper House/Senate (2003)
Sao Tome and Principe
1975
18.2 (2010)
Senegal
1945
22.7 Lower House (2007)
40.0 Upper House/Senate (2007)
Seychelles
1948
23.5 (2007)
Sierra Leone
1961
13.2 (2007)
Somalia
1956
6.8 (2004)
South Africa
1984 (Coloureds, Indians)
44.5 Lower House (2009)
1994 (blacks)
29.6 Upper House/Senate (2009)
Sudan
1964
25.6 Lower House (2010)
10.9 Upper House/Senate (2010)
Swaziland
1968
13.6 Lower House (2008)
40.0 Upper House/Senate (2008)
Tanzania
1959
30.7 (2005)
Togo
1945
11.1 (2007)
Tunisia
1959
27.6 Lower House (2009)
15.2 Upper House/Senate (2008)
Uganda
1962
31.5 (2006)
Zambia
1962
14.0 (2006)
Zimbabwe
1957
15.0 Lower House (2008)
24.2 Upper House/Senate (2008)
South and Central Asia
Afghanistan
1965
27.7 Lower House (2010)
15.2 Upper House/Senate (2010)
Bangladesh
1972
18.6 (2008)
Bhutan
1953
8.5 Lower House (2008)
24.0 Upper House/Senate (2007)
India
1950
10.8 Lower House (2009)
9.0 Upper House/Senate (2008)
Maldives
1932
6.5 (2009)
Nepal
1951
33.2 (2008)
Pakistan
1947
22.2 Lower House (2008)
17.0 Upper House/Senate (2009)
Sri Lanka
1931
5.3 (2010)
Timor-Leste
—
29.2 (2007)
(continued)

236
TABLE 6.6 (CONTINUED)
Country
Year Women Received
the Vote
Percent of Women in National
Parliaments (by Election Year)
East Asia and the Paciﬁc
Brunei Darussalum
Not permitted
—
Burma
1946
—
Cambodia
1955
21.1 Lower House (2008)
14.8 Upper House/Senate (2006)
China
1949
21.3 (2008)
Fiji
1963
—
Indonesia
1945
18.0 (2009)
Kiribati
1967
4.3 (2007)
Korea, Democratic
People’s Republic of
1946
15.6 (2009)
Korea, Republic of
1948
14.7 (2008)
Laos
1958
25.2 (2006)
Malaysia
1957
9.9 Lower House (2008)
28.1 Upper House/Senate (?)
Marshall Islands
1979
3.0 (2007)
Micronesia, Federated
States of
1979
0.0 (2009)
Nauru
1968
0.0 (2010)
Palau
1979
0.0 Lower House (2008)
15.4 Upper House/Senate (2008)
Papua New Guinea
1964
0.9 (2007)
Philippines
1937
21.4 Lower House (2010)
13.0 Upper House/Senate (2010)
Samoa
1990
8.2 (2006)
Singapore
1947
23.4 (2006)
Solomon Islands
1974
0.0 (2010)
Thailand
1932
13.3 Lower House (2007)
16.0 Upper House/Senate (2008)
Tonga
1960
0.0 (2010)
Tuvalu
1967
0.0 (2010)
Vanuatu
1975
3.8 (2008)
Vietnam
1946
25.8 (2007)
Near East and North Africa
Bahrain
1973
2.5 Lower House (2010)
27.5 Upper House/Senate (2010)
Iran
1963
2.8 (2008)
Iraq
1980
25.2 (2010)
Jordan
1974
10.8 Lower House (2010)
15.0 Upper House/Senate (2010)
Kuwait
2005
7.7 (2009)
Lebanon
1952
3.1 (2009)
Oman
2003
0.0 Lower House (2007)
19.4 Upper House/Senate (2007)

237
Qatar
1997
0.0 (2010)
Saudi Arabia
Not permitted
0.0 (2009)
Syria
1949
12.4 (2007)
United Arab Emirates
Not permitted
22.5 (2006)
Yemen
1970
0.3 Lower House (2003)
1.8 Upper House (2001)
South and Central America
Antigua and Barbuda
1951
10.5 Lower House 2009)
29.4 Upper House/Senate (2009)
Argentina
1947
38.5 Lower House (2009)
35.2 Upper House/Senate (2009)
Barbados
1950
10.0 Lower House (2008)
33.3 Upper House/Senate (2008)
Belize
1954
0.0 Lower House (2008)
38.5 Upper House/Senate (2008)
Bolivia
1952
25.4 Lower House (2009)
47.2 Upper House/Senate (2009)
Brazil
1932
8.6 Lower House (2010)
16.0 Upper House/Senate (2010)
Chile
1949
14.2 Lower House (2009)
13.2 Upper House/Senate (2009)
Colombia
1954
8.4 Lower House (2006)
11.8 Upper House/Senate (2006)
Costa Rica
1949
38.6 (2010)
Dominica
1951
19.2 (2009)
Dominican Republic
1942
20.8 Lower House (2010)
9.4 Upper House/Senate (2010)
Ecuador
1967
32.3 (2009)
El Salvador
1939
19.0 (2009)
Grenada
1951
13.3 Lower House (2008)
30.8 Upper House/Senate (2008)
Guatemala
1946
12.0 (2007)
Guyana
1953
30.0 (2006)
Haiti
1950
4.1 Lower House (2006)
6.9 Upper House/Senate (2009)
Honduras
1955
18.0 (2009)
Jamaica
1944
13.3 Lower House (2007)
14.3 (2007)
Mexico
1947
26.2 Lower House (2009)
19.5 Upper House/Senate (2006)
Nicaragua
1955
20.7 (2006)
Panama
1946
8.5 (2009)
(continued)

238
TABLE 6.6 (CONTINUED)
Country
Year Women Received
the Vote
Percent of Women in National
Parliaments (by Election Year)
Paraguay
1961
12.5 Lower House (2008)
15.6 Upper House/Senate
(2008)
Peru
1955
27.5 (2006)
Saint Lucia
1924
11.1 Lower House (2006)
36.4 Upper House/Senate
(2007)
St. Kitts and Nevis
1951
6.7 (2010)
Saint Vincent and
Grenadines
1951
21.7 (2005)
Suriname
1948
9.8 (2010)
Trinidad and Tobago
1946
28.6 Lower House (2010)
25.8 Upper House/Senate
(2010)
Uruguay
1932
15.2 Lower House (2009)
12.9 Upper House/Senate (2009)
Venezuela
1946
17.5 (2005)
TABLE 6.7
Regional Share in Employment, by Sector
Agriculture
Industry
Services
Region
Males
Females
Males
Females
Males
Females
East Asia
34.7
38.9
28.5
27.9
36.9
33.2
Southeast Asia and the
Paciﬁc
45.2
43.0
21.0
16.8
33.8
40.2
South Asia
39.9
64.5
24.8
17.3
35.3
18.2
Latin America and the
Caribbean
21.1
9.2
28.9
14.1
50.0
76.7
Middle East
12.4
32.0
26.9
17.6
60.7
50.4
North Africa
30.3
38.1
25.8
16.6
43.6
45.3
Sub-Saharan Africa
59.5
64.3
13.2
6.6
27.3
29.0

239
TABLE 6.8
Labor Participation Rates
Country
Labor Participation Rate,
Female (%)
Labor Participation Rate,
Male (%)
Africa
Angola
74
89
Benin
67
79
Botswana
72
81
Burkina Faso
78
91
Burundi
91
88
Cameroon
53
81
Central African Republic
71
87
Chad
63
79
Comoros
73
86
Congo, Democratic Republic of
56
85
Congo, Republic of
63
83
Cote d’Ivoire
51
82
Djibouti
61
79
Equatorial Guinea
38
92
Eritrea
60
83
Ethiopia
78
90
Gabon
69
81
Gambia
71
85
Ghana
74
75
Guinea
79
89
Guinea-Bissau
60
84
Kenya
76
88
Lesotho
70
78
Liberia
67
76
Madagascar
84
89
Malawi
75
79
Mali
37
68
Mauritania
59
81
Mauritius
42
76
Mozambique
85
87
Namibia
52
62
Niger
38
88
Nigeria
39
74
Rwanda
86
85
Sao Tome and Principe
44
76
Senegal
65
89
Seychelles
—
—
Sierra Leone
66
68
Somalia
57
85
South Africa
47
64
Sudan
31
74
(continued)

240
TABLE 6.8 (CONTINUED)
Country
Labor Participation Rate,
Female (%)
Labor Participation Rate,
Male (%)
Swaziland
53
75
Tanzania
86
91
Togo
63
86
Uganda
78
91
Zambia
60
79
Zimbabwe
60
74
East Asia and the Paciﬁc
Brunei Darussalam
60
75
Burma
64
85
Cambodia
73
84
China
68
80
Fiji
39
79
Indonesia
52
85
Kiribati
—
—
Korea, Democratic People’s Republic of
55
77
Korea, Republic of
50
72
Laos
78
79
Malaysia
44
80
Marshall Islands
—
—
Micronesia, Federated States of
—
—
Mongolia
67
78
Nauru
—
—
Palau
—
—
Papua New Guinea
71
74
Philippines
49
79
Samoa
38
76
Singapore
54
76
Solomon Islands
24
49
Thailand
66
81
Timor-Leste
59
83
Tonga
53
75
Tuvalu
—
—
Vanuatu
79
88
Vietnam
68
76
South and Central Asia
Afghanistan
33
85
Bangladesh
58
83
Bhutan
51
69
India
33
81
Maldives
56
75
Nepal
63
80
Pakistan
21
84
Sri Lanka
35
75
Near East and North Africa

241
Algeria
37
80
Bahrain
32
85
Egypt
23
73
Iran
31
70
Iraq
13
69
Jordan
23
75
Kuwait
44
83
Lebanon
22
70
Libya
24
78
Morocco
27
80
Oman
25
77
Qatar
48
93
Saudi Arabia
21
80
Syria
21
80
Tunisia
26
71
United Arab Emirates
42
92
Yemen
20
73
South and Central America
Antigua and Barbuda
—
—
Argentina
51
78
Barbados
66
78
Belize
46
81
Bolivia
62
82
Brazil
60
82
Chile
44
76
Colombia
41
78
Costa Rica
45
81
Dominica
—
—
Dominican Republic
51
80
Ecuador
47
78
El Salvador
47
77
Grenada
—
—
Guatemala
48
88
Guyana
46
82
Haiti
58
83
Honduras
42
83
Jamaica
57
75
Mexico
43
82
Nicaragua
46
80
Panama
49
84
Paraguay
56
88
Peru
57
76
Saint Kitts and Nevis
—
—
Saint Lucia
50
76
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
56
79
Suriname
38
66
Trinidad and Tobago
54
77
Uruguay
53
76
Venezuela
51
80

References
United Nations. 2010a. Facts & Figures on Women Worldwide. New York:
United Nations.
United Nations. 2010b. The Millennium Development Goals Report 2010.
New York: United Nations.
U.S. Department of State. 2009. Country Reports. Available at http://
www.state.gov/g/drl/rls/hrrpt/.
Wilmoth, John, Colin Mathers, Lale Say, and Samuel Mills. 2010.
“Maternal Deaths Drop by One-third from 1990 to 2008: A United
Nations Analysis,” Bull World Health Organ 88: 718–718A.
World Health Organization. 2010a. Trends in Maternal Mortality: 1990 to
2008: Estimates Developed by WHO, UNICEF, UNFPA and The World Bank.
Geneva: WHO.
World Health Organization. 2010b. World Health Statistics 2010. Geneva:
WHO.
242
Facts and Data

7
Directory of Organizations
T
his chapter describes government entities and private organi-
zations that work with or provide services to women in devel-
oping countries. Government entities include UN agencies and
councils. Private organizations, often referred to as nongovern-
mental organizations (NGOs), are independent agencies not afﬁli-
ated with any government entity. They are typically focused on
designing and implementing development-related projects that
beneﬁt women, on advocacy activities, or on providing direct
services. In recent years, an increasing number of NGOs combine
project design and implementation with advocacy activities and
the provision of direct services. Some of these groups operate at
the international or regional level and some are national in scope,
while others provide services in local communities. Several gov-
ernments have established women’s bureaus to serve the particu-
lar needs of women in their countries. The organizations
described here make up but a small part of the total number of
organizations working on behalf of women in developing
countries.
The information contained in this chapter focuses on
international organizations, although it also includes several
organizations that operate at the regional, national, and local lev-
els. These organizations provide services in the areas of health,
welfare, domestic violence, reproductive rights, AIDS, divorce,
education, human rights, microﬁnance, and training. Many of
these NGOs have been granted consultative status with the UN
Economic and Social Council (ECOSOC), which means that they
have met certain UN standards for participation and have
243

received certain rights and privileges to work with ECOSOC and
other UN entities.
Nongovernmental Organizations
Afghan Institute of Learning
Dearborn, MI, USA
Website: http://www.creatinghope.org/ail
Sakena Yacoobi founded the Afghan Institute of Learning in 1995
to provide education for poor Afghan women and children after
the Taliban took control of the country and banned the education
of girls. Since then the Institute has expanded its activities to
include teacher training, preschool education, advanced classes,
home school, women’s learning activities, post-secondary educa-
tion, and grassroots support programs. It offers human rights
and leadership workshops that train women and men in ways to
empower women through education, employment, and economic
opportunities.
Africa Women’s Development and Communications Network
(FEMNET)
Nairobi, Kenya
Website: http://www.femnet.or.ke
A multinational organization founded in 1988, FEMNET shares
information and strategies among NGOs focused on African
women. The network works to strengthen the contributions made
by NGOs in the areas of development, equality, and other human
rights by serving as a conduit for information among the NGOs.
The program focuses on advocacy, communications, and capacity
building. It works with the UN Commission on the Status of
Women to review progress on the implementation of the Beijing
Declaration and Platform of Action.
Apne Aap
Bihar, India
Website: http://www.apneaap.org
Apne Aap (Hindi for “self help”) focuses on empowering women
and children from India’s red light districts to help them escape
sex trafﬁcking. The program offers education, health care, and job
skills training to women and children as a means of overcoming
244
Directory of Organizations

discrimination against them and improving their lives. Among its
objectives are the support of community-based initiatives to help
women and children escape the sex-slave industry, mitigate the
circumstances that forced them into prostitution in the ﬁrst place,
develop leadership skills, prevent future generations from getting
caught up in prostitution, develop connections between grassroots
organizers and policy makers to work to eliminate prostitution
and sex slavery, and create public awareness of discrimination
against women.
Arab Women’s Solidarity Association
Giza, Egypt
Website: http://www.awsa.net
Founded in 1982 by Egypt’s Dr. Nawal el Saadawi, the Arab
Women’s Solidarity Association (AWSA) is a multinational
organization that focuses on improving conditions for women in
Arab countries. The association promotes the interests of Arab
women and helps to empower them, coordinates activities, and
disseminates information. AWSA organizes conferences that
examine the status and needs of women throughout the Arab
world. It organizes research and educational programs and pro-
duces materials by and for women in the ﬁelds of science, culture,
art, and literature. AWSA also works to increase literacy rates
throughout the region.
Asia Paciﬁc Forum on Women, Law, and Development
Chiang, Thailand
Website: http://www.apwld.org
As a multinational network of organizations throughout the Asia
Paciﬁc region, the Asia Paciﬁc Forum on Women, Law, and Devel-
opment (APWLD) is composed of women’s rights activists, law-
yers, human rights activists, and other interested individuals
and organizations. APWLD’s major emphasis is on enabling
women in the Asia Paciﬁc region to use the law effectively in their
struggles for justice and equality. Programs and activities include
policy advocacy, education, and training on women’s issues. The
network has developed partnerships among women’s groups,
human rights groups, and development NGOs in the region to
encourage the exchange of information. It also advocates for basic
human rights and lobbies Asian-Paciﬁc governments to ratify the
UN Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination
against Women.
Nongovernmental Organizations
245

Asian-Paciﬁc Resource and Research Centre for Women
Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia
Website: http://www.arrow.org.my
The Asian-Paciﬁc Resource and Research Centre for Women
(ARROW) researches and analyzes women’s issues and provides
advice to governmental and legislative organizations. The organi-
zation researches and evaluates media coverage of women’s
health issues and conducts programs to increase public aware-
ness of population growth and reproductive health. It also pro-
vides counseling services on women’s development. Staff
members work to encourage and promote networking activities
among women and women’s organizations. They operate a data-
base on women and health, conduct bibliographic searches, and
provide other information and online services.
Asian Women’s Human Rights Council
Manila, Philippines
Website: http://www.awhrc.org
Members of the Asian Women’s Human Rights Council, a multina-
tional organization, are female lawyers and feminist activists who
are actively involved in promoting and defending basic human
rights and women’s rights. The council encourages the study of
human rights and cooperation and solidarity between women’s
groups and individuals advocating human rights recognition. The
staff compiles information on national policies throughout Asia that
inﬂuence the provision of human rights for all citizens. The Council
has a regional secretariat located in Bangalore, India.
Associated Country Women of the World
London, England
Website: http://www.acww.org.uk
As an organization with afﬁliates in over 70 countries throughout
the world, the Associated Country Women of the World (ACWW)
focuses its activities on rural areas and the problems that rural
women face worldwide. Major objectives include raising the stan-
dard of living of rural women and their families, providing practical
support to members including help in developing income-
generating activities, and providing a voice for rural women in
international forums. Staff members work to promote friendly rela-
tions among member organizations and provide assistance in the
246
Directory of Organizations

economic, social, and cultural development of the organization’s
members and their countries.
Association of African Women for Research and Development
Dakar, Senegal
Website: http://www.afard.org
The Association of African Women for Research and Develop-
ment (AAWORD) was founded in 1977 as a multinational associ-
ation to encourage the study of women and women’s issues
throughout Africa. AAWORD has 16 chapters, including 14 in
Africa, one in Europe, and one for African women living in the
Americas. Members work in the ﬁelds of sociology, anthropology,
history, and natural sciences, and as advocates for including
women in the ﬁelds of economics, education, political science,
and communication. The association’s goals are to transform gen-
der relations in Africa, encourage women’s participation in sustain-
able development and democracy, promote the ability of African
women to conduct research, assist decision makers in the develop-
ment of policies with a gender perspective, encourage the develop-
ment of national organizations that focus on gender research at the
local level, and create networks that allow African women research-
ers and organizations to exchange information on development
issues. Several networks focusing on African women and develop-
ment, including the Forum of African Women Educationalists
(FAWE), have been created as a result of AAWORD’s activities.
Averting Maternal Death and Disability Program
New York, NY, USA
Website: http://www.amddprogram.org
The Averting Maternal Death and Disability (AMDD) program con-
ducts research, analyzes policies, and advocates for the reduction of
maternal mortality in developing countries. Founded in 1999, the
program works with developing countries and international agen-
cies to increase the availability of quality emergency obstetric care
for pregnant women and girls. Program partners collaborate to
encourage the wider availability of mid-level health workers to
women in developing countries in need of emergency obstetric care.
Bangladesh Women’s Health Coalition
Dhaka, Bangladesh
Website: http://www.bwhc.org.bd
Nongovernmental Organizations
247

The Bangladesh Women’s Health Coalition (BWHC) began in
1980 as a single-purpose clinic that offered a variety of health
services to women and children. It currently provides reproduc-
tive health services and community education to underprivileged
and marginalized women and children in Bangladesh. Major pro-
gram areas include comprehensive reproductive and sexual
health; integrated childhood disease management; adolescent
health and reproductive health education; management and pre-
vention of RTI, STI, and AIDS; community mobilization; and
menstrual regulation training. Staff members collaborate with
government and other relevant organizations to educate the local
community about the importance of empowering women to par-
ticipate in all sectors of society.
Bina Swadaya
Jakarta Pusat, Indonesia
Website: http://www.binaswadaya.org
A well-known NGO, Bina Swadaya was founded in 1967 to
encourage communities to become self-reliant. The program
helps microentrepreneurs gain access to available resources in
order to build community self-reliance. Working in rural indus-
tries such as agriculture, forestry, and area development, Bina
Swadaya focuses on integrated area development, education
and training, capital development, book publication, agribusiness
development, poverty alleviation, and alternative tourism. The
organization promotes small enterprise development by provid-
ing training for female staff members of area NGOs, linking com-
mercial banks and women’s self-help groups to provide credit
without collateral, promoting female leaders to operate microﬁ-
nance institutions, and promoting social protection plans for
women who are home-based workers.
BRAC Centre
Dhaka, Bangladesh
Website: http://www.brac.net
BRAC was initially formed in 1972 to assist refugees returning to
Bangladesh following its liberation from Pakistan. It is one of the
largest southern NGOs, employing over 100,000 people, most of
whom are women, and has expanded its coverage to include Asia
and Africa. Employing a holistic approach to alleviating poverty,
the program provides economic and social development, health,
education, and human rights and legal services to the people it
248
Directory of Organizations

serves. The core of BRAC’s approach is village organizations
composed of 30 to 40 women, which are established to distribute
loans; collect repayments and contributions to savings; and raise
awareness of the social, economic, legal, and personal issues
affecting women in their everyday lives.
Campaign for Female Education
San Francisco, CA, USA
Website: http://www.camfed.org
The Campaign for Female Education (CAMFED) believes that one
of the best ways to ﬁght poverty and HIV/AIDS in Africa is to
educate girls and empower women to become agents of change.
It operates community-based programs throughout Africa that
focus on helping girls and boys attend school by providing schol-
arships and working with the community to alleviate poverty. Its
microﬁnance program helps women start small businesses; it also
offers training programs for community health activists who
advocate for better health care in rural areas.
CARE International
Chatelaine, Switzerland
Website: http://www.care.org
One of the leading organizations ﬁghting poverty worldwide,
CARE focuses on working with poor women in developing coun-
tries because research has shown that, given the proper resources,
women are the ones most able to help entire families and com-
munities. Its programs strengthen the ability of individuals and
communities to become self-sufﬁcient, provide economic oppor-
tunities, deliver emergency relief, work to inﬂuence policy at all
levels of government, and address all forms of discrimination.
CARE’s program areas include agriculture and resources, cross-
cutting initiatives, economic development, education, emergency
relief, health, HIV/AIDS, nutrition, and water.
Center for Reproductive Rights
New York, NY, USA
Website: http://www.reproductiverights.org
The Center for Reproductive Rights is a legal advocacy organiza-
tion that applies the law to advance reproductive freedom in
countries around the world, believing that reproductive freedom
is a fundamental human right. It partners with local lawyers and
advocates to ensure that the strategies they use to advance
Nongovernmental Organizations
249

reproductive rights in other countries are sensitive to the local
cultural, economic, and political environment. They have brought
cases before national courts, UN committees, and regional human
rights bodies, resulting in expanded access to reproductive health
care for many women. Staff members also work to document
abuses, work with policy makers to create responsive legislation
and policies, and encourage legal scholarship and teaching on
reproductive health and human rights.
Center for Women’s Global Leadership
New Brunswick, NJ, USA
Website: http://www.cwgl.rutgers.edu
The Center for Women’s Global Leadership, part of a consortium
of seven women’s programs at Rutgers University, examines the
ways in which gender affects leadership and power as well as
the conduct of public policy throughout the world. The Center’s
two broad areas of focus are policy and advocacy and leadership
development and education regarding women’s human rights.
Its programs encourage women to take leadership roles and pro-
mote a feminist approach to policy development at local, national,
and international levels. Working with local organizations and
governments, the Center holds governments accountable for
ensuring the protection of women and their rights. It conducts
two-week intensive leadership institutes each year for women at
the grassroots and national levels to share experiences and work
toward common goals. The Center also sponsors programs that
bring women together to plan and coordinate speciﬁc strategies
concerning women’s rights. An annual global campaign, “16
Days of Activism against Gender Violence,” highlights gender-
based violence. It also holds global tribunals, hearings, and con-
ferences on women’s human rights.
Center for Women’s Resources
Quezon City, Philippines
Website: http://cwr25.blogspot.com
Founded in 1982, the Center for Women’s Resources is a research
and training institute focused on encouraging Filipino women to
become full participants in transforming Filipino society. In col-
laboration with institutions and community and volunteer
groups, the center responds to the speciﬁc needs of women from
different sectors of society. The Center coordinates the activities
of a training school for women who work at the grassroots level,
250
Directory of Organizations

provides education modules and manuals, and conducts semi-
nars on women’s issues. It also maintains a library with a variety
of resource materials on women’s issues.
Central Asia Institute
Bozeman, MT, USA
Website: http://www.ikat.org
Founded in 1996 by Greg Mortenson, the Central Asia Institute
focuses primarily on building schools and providing educational
opportunities, especially for girls, in rural areas of Pakistan and
Afghanistan. Each school built contains a large room used as a
women’s center, where women can gather to learn new skills,
support their families, and work out problems. The Institute
establishes teacher training programs, builds libraries, and pro-
vides scholarships to students who must travel out of their local
villages to obtain higher education. It recently expanded its focus
to encourage public health and environmental sustainability
projects.
Centre for Development and Population Activities
Washington, D.C., USA
Website: http://www.cedpa.org
As an international nonproﬁt organization, the Centre for Devel-
opment and Population Activities (CEDPA) works to improve
the lives of women and girls, believing that women’s participa-
tion in global development activities is critical to their success.
Founded in 1975, CEDPA encourages positive change through
partnership projects with local institutions as well as through
training and advocacy. Its Global Women in Management training
program, conducted in Mexico, Nigeria, and the United States, in
multiple languages, strengthens participants’ capabilities in
project and ﬁnancial management, leadership, fundraising stra-
tegic communication, and advocacy. Its website includes free
downloads of a variety of publications concerning training, advo-
cacy, capacity building, democracy, education, faith-based organ-
izations, reproductive health, gender-based violence, HIV/AIDS,
leadership development, male involvement, social mobilization,
women’s rights, and youth.
Committee for Asian Women
Bangkok, Thailand
Website: http://www.cawinfo.org
Nongovernmental Organizations
251

Through a regional network of 46 member groups in 14 Asian
countries, the Committee for Asian Women (CAW) works to pro-
mote the interests of women workers throughout Asia and to pro-
tect the rights of women. It provides ﬁnancial support to needy
local women’s organizations; it also organizes education, train-
ing, and workshops. It conducts research on the impact of indus-
trial restructuring on women workers, and its publications
include Rising from the Waste: Organising Wastepickers in India,
Thailand, and the Philippines and Domestic Workers are Workers:
Decent Work for All.
Development Alternatives with Women for a New Era
Loyola Heights, Philippines
Website: http://www.dawnnet.org
Development Alternatives with Women for a New Era (DAWN)
is a network of researchers and activists from several developing
nations that focuses on promoting economic and gender justice
and sustainable development. The program works to reduce the
negative impact of development activities on women and the envi-
ronment; conducts research, training, and advocacy programs to
eliminate inequalities of gender, class, and race; and encourages
and promotes communication and networking among women’s
movements. Researchers focus on four areas: the political economy
of globalization, sexual and reproductive health and rights, political
restructuring and social transformation, and political ecology and
sustainability.
Eastern African Sub-Regional Support Initiative
for the Advancement of Women
Kampala, Uganda
Website: http://www.eassi.org
The mission of the Eastern African Sub-regional Support Initiative
for the Advancement of Women (EASSI) is to enhance the advance-
ment of women and social justice following the Beijing and African
Platforms for Action in 1995. EASSI has prioritized 12 critical areas
of concern in the Beijing and African Platforms and advocates for
improvements in these areas. It advocates for effective sub-regional
mechanisms for advancing gender equity, promotes transparency
in the government’s budgetary process for reproductive health and
sexual rights, and works to increase the participation of women in
challenges to the systemic causes of conﬂict and discrimination.
252
Directory of Organizations

Engender Health
New York, NY, USA
Website: http://www.engenderhealth.org
Engender Health is an international organization focusing on
improving the quality of health care in poor communities around
the world. Partnering with governments, institutions, local com-
munities, and health care professionals in 25 countries, the pro-
gram helps people make informed choices about contraception,
improves maternal health care, promotes gender equity, and
advocates for improved policy development regarding reproduc-
tive health. Speciﬁc focus areas include family planning; maternal
health; HIV, AIDS and sexually transmitted diseases; gender
equity; youth; clinical quality; and advocacy.
Equality Now
New York, NY, USA
Website: http://www.equalitynow.org
Equality Now is an international human rights group founded in
1992 to protect and promote women’s rights worldwide. By
adapting the research, organizational, and action techniques of
the mainstream international human rights community, Equality
Now addresses human rights issues of rape, trafﬁcking in women,
domestic violence, female infanticide, genital mutilation, reproduc-
tive rights, gender discrimination, political representation, sexual
harassment, and pornography. A network of activists gathers
information concerning speciﬁc abuses and ongoing violations
throughout the world; appropriate actions and strategies are estab-
lished in collaboration with local experts and rapidly publicized
and implemented through the network. Regional ofﬁces are located
in Nairobi and London.
Family Care International
New York, NY, USA
Website: http://familycareintl.org
Family Care International (FCI) is a private, nonproﬁt organiza-
tion dedicated to improving women’s sexual and reproductive
health in developing countries. Field ofﬁces are located in Kenya,
Burkina Faso, Mali, Niger, Tanzania, Bolivia, and Ecuador. Work-
ing with governments and NGOs, FCI explores the many factors
that lead to poor reproductive health and develops collaborative
programs to improve health options. FCI provides assistance to
Nongovernmental Organizations
253

local agencies in designing community-level programs based on
women’s needs and realities with an emphasis on comprehensive
care, high-quality services and counseling, education to help
women take action on improving their health, and women’s par-
ticipation in program development and implementation. FCI has
worked directly with governments and local organizations in
many countries to develop national plans, model programs, and
essential tools to address reproductive health needs.
FINCA International
Washington, D.C., USA
Website: http://www.villagebanking.org
Founded in 1985, FINCA International is a nonproﬁt organization
with a network of afﬁliated agencies in 21 countries. The program
provides ﬁnancial services to low-income entrepreneurs in order
to create jobs, save money, and improve their standard of living.
As of April 2009, program afﬁliates have provided services to
over 740,000 clients. The organization’s programs have become
models for outreach and sound ﬁnancial management. Its
recently launched Village Banking Campaign uses microﬁnance
to provide loans, microinsurance, and savings to 1,000,000 low-
income families.
Fistula Foundation
Santa Clara, CA, USA
Website: http://www.ﬁstulafoundation.org
Originally formed to support the work of the Fistula Hospital in
Ethiopia in 2000, the Fistula Foundation has broadened its mission
to work toward the prevention and treatment of ﬁstula throughout
the world and to advocate for ﬁstula repair. Working with the UN
Population Fund (UNFPA) in its Campaign to End Fistula, it aims
to equip hospitals with surgical equipment and to assist women,
once they are healed, in returning to their communities.
Global Fund for Women
San Francisco, CA, USA
Website: http://www.globalfundforwomen.org
The Global Fund for Women, founded in 1987, is a nonproﬁt
grant-making foundation focusing on advancing women’s rights
worldwide. They provide grants and seed money to female-
headed organizations that encourage and promote the economic,
health, safety, education, and leadership of girls and women.
254
Directory of Organizations

Speciﬁc focus areas include ending gender-based violence, ensur-
ing economic and environmental justice, ensuring women’s
access to health, advancing sexual and reproductive rights,
expanding civic and political participation, increasing access to
education, and encouraging social change philanthropy.
Global Grassroots
Hanover, NH, USA
Website: http://www.globalgrassroots.org
Global Grassroots, founded in 2004, focuses on conscious social
change to effect improvement in the lives of vulnerable women in
post-conﬂict societies. The program helps women who have been
victimized by civil strife and war to reclaim their lives through edu-
cation, seed grants, and project development. Many of these women
have been raped, widowed, or both, and have contracted HIV/
AIDS. Educational programs help them re-adjust to society, help
them learn how to take care of themselves and their children on
their own, and provide seed grants to launch their own businesses.
Grameen Bank
Dhaka, Bangladesh
Website: http://grameen-info.org
Founded in 1976, the Grameen Bank provides access to credit to the
landless poor in rural Bangladesh. One of the best-known banks pro-
viding small loans to women entrepreneurs, the bank has distrib-
uted $9.19 billion in loans to over 8 million borrowers since it
began in 1983. Using peer support and an incremental loan structure
as incentives for repayment, Grameen Bank has proven that the poor
can be good credit risks and that collateral is not needed to secure
loans. The bank has over 2,500 branch ofﬁces that serve more than
81,000 villages; 97 percent of its customers are women. The bank also
provides scholarships and loans to children of its borrowers.
The Hunger Project
New York, NY, USA
Website: http://www.thp.org
The Hunger Project was founded in 1977 following concerns over
world hunger at the ﬁrst Rome World Food Conference. With a pres-
ence in 13 countries in Africa, Asia, and Latin America, THP works
with individuals and groups at the grassroots level, as well as local
governments, to empower women and men to develop strategies
to end hunger in their communities. The project recognizes the
Nongovernmental Organizations
255

importance of women’s role in ending hunger and promotes women
as key ﬁgures in eliminating hunger from their communities.
Institute for Women’s Studies in the Arab World
Beirut, Lebanon
Website: http://www.lau.edu.lb/centers-institutes/iwsaw/
Organized in 1973, the Institute for Women’s Studies in the Arab
World encourages and evaluates research on the history, status,
and rights of women in this region. The institute was created the
same year as the American Junior College for Women, the ﬁrst
women’s college in the Middle East. It conducts research on
women in the Arab world; integrates women’s studies into the
curriculum of the Lebanese American University; develops pro-
grams and education to empower women in the Arab world;
encourages and facilitates networking among individuals,
groups, and institutions; and acts as a catalyst to encourage policy
changes that aid in the granting and expansion of women’s rights.
Inter-African Committee on Traditional Practices
Addis Ababa, Ethiopia
Website: http://www.iac-ciaf.net
The Inter-African Committee on Traditional Practices Affecting
the Health of Women and Children (IAC), a multinational organi-
zation, focuses on eliminating female genital mutilation and other
harmful traditional practices, including child marriage abduction,
widow inheritance, wife-sharing, and skin cutting. IAC offers
educational programs and informational seminars, lobbies
government agencies to prohibit these practices, conducts
research, and makes public service announcements.
International Alliance of Women
(AIF) (Alliance Internationale des Femmes)
Markham, Ontario
Website: http://www.womenalliance.org
Members of the International Alliance of Women include women’s
organizations and individuals in more than 85 countries. The pro-
gram advocates for reforms that are necessary to establish real
equality between men and women and urges women to use their
rights and inﬂuence in public life to ensure that the status of every
individual is based on respect for human beings and not on sex,
race, or creed. Its current focus is on monitoring the fulﬁllment of
256
Directory of Organizations

the commitments made in the 1995 Beijing Platform for Action, as
expanded in 2000 and 2005.
International Center for Research on Women
Washington, D.C., USA
Website: http://www.icrw.org
The International Center for Research on Women (ICRW) is a pri-
vate, nonproﬁt organization focused on promoting social and eco-
nomic development in developing countries with the full
participation of women. Working with policymakers, practitioners,
and researchers throughout Africa, Asia, and Latin America, ICRW
conducts research; helps formulate policy and action concerning the
economic, social, and health status of women; and advocates for
gender equity based on its research results. It emphasizes women’s
critical contributions to development, including their dual produc-
tive and reproductive roles. The program focuses on economic pol-
icies, family and household structure, health and nutrition,
agriculture, and the environment.
International Confederation of Midwives
The Hague, the Netherlands
Website: http://www.internationalmidwives.org
The membership of the International Confederation of Midwives
consists of national midwives’ associations in 87 countries. The pro-
gram advocates for the availability of midwives before, during, and
after childbirth. It works with various agencies, including the
United Nations, to reduce the number of women and children
who die during childbirth and to improve the standard of care pro-
vided to mothers, babies, and the family. Advocacy activities pro-
mote midwifery education and the dissemination of information
about the art and science of midwifery.
International Planned Parenthood Federation
London, England
Website: http://www.ippf.org
The International Planned Parenthood Federation (IPPF) helps
initiate and support family planning services and increase
government and public awareness of the population problems of
local communities throughout the world. Planned Parenthood
promotes effective family planning services and is concerned
about the efﬁcacy and safety of various methods of contraception.
Program goals include the creation of strong volunteer
Nongovernmental Organizations
257

participation, the promotion of family planning as a basic human
right; the improvement of family planning services; addressing
the needs of young people; the improvement of the status of
women; increased male involvement in family planning; the
development of human, ﬁnancial, and material resources; stimu-
lation of research on subjects related to human fertility and
dissemination of the ﬁndings of such research; and the develop-
ment of training programs for the federation’s professional
workers.
International Women’s Development Agency
Melbourne, Australia
Website: http://www.iwda.org.au
The International Women’s Development Agency (IWDA) is a
multinational organization that focuses on actively involving
women in development projects by partnering with local organi-
zations in 11 countries throughout Asia and the Paciﬁc. Believing
that many traditional development projects fail because they
neglect to seek and consider women’s input, the IWDA provides
skill training programs, encourages communication among
development workers, organizes informational forums, and con-
ducts educational courses. Its current programs focus on wom-
en’s economic empowerment, safety, and security, as well as
their health, well-being, and social inclusion. Programs also
address access to education and information, sustainable use
and protection of the environment and natural resources, and
leadership and meaningful participation in decision making.
International Women’s Health Coalition
New York, NY, USA
Website: http://www.iwhc.org
Founded in 1980, the International Women’s Health Coalition
(IWHC) is a nonproﬁt organization that works with women and
men in Asia, Africa, and Latin America to secure women’s repro-
ductive and sexual health and rights. The coalition works to build
national and international women’s health movements to create
conditions necessary for more caring, respectful, and responsible
sexual relationships. IWHC also acts directly to inﬂuence the
work of population and health professionals, national govern-
ments, and international agencies. The coalition’s goals are to en-
able women to manage their own fertility safely and effectively; to
experience a healthy sexual life that is free of disease, violence,
258
Directory of Organizations

disability, fear, pain, and death; and to bear and raise healthy chil-
dren as and when they desire to do so. The coalition supports
innovative reproductive health programs and services; fosters
leadership and alliances among women worldwide; promotes
dialogues between women’s health advocates and health and
population policymakers and researchers; educates decision mak-
ers; and advocates policies that will secure sexual and reproduc-
tive health and rights for women, girls, and men everywhere.
International Women’s Rights Action Watch
Minneapolis, MN, USA
Website: http://www1.umn.edu/humanrts/iwraw
The International Women’s Rights Action Watch (IWRAW) consists
of an international network of activists, scholars, and organizations
that focuses on the advancement of women’s human rights. Organ-
ized in 1985 at the World Conference on Women in Nairobi,
IWRAW monitors implementation of the Convention on the Elimi-
nation of All Forms of Discrimination against Women. NGOs are
supported by IWRAW, especially in efforts to change law, culture,
and society to help women fully participate in their communities.
The program provides training programs, conferences, and global
events, including the Fourth World Conference of Women, that
focus on advancing women’s rights. It also publishes a newsletter,
various country reports on CEDAW implementation, and a variety
of other publications related to women’s rights.
International Women’s Tribune Centre
New York, NY, USA
Website: http://www.iwtc.org
The International Women’s Tribune Centre was established in 1976
as a result of the United Nations’ ﬁrst world conference on women
in Mexico City. The organization believes that access to information
and the ability to communicate are critical in empowering women.
It facilitates the exchange of skills, experiences, and ideas among
all groups that promote an active and equitable role for women,
especially low-income women in Africa, Asia, the Paciﬁc, Latin
America, the Caribbean, and Eastern Europe. Major activities focus
on information dissemination, education, communication, and
organizing activities. Its four areas of emphasis are human rights,
information access and capacity-building, networking and organi-
zational support, and a knowledge-brokering service (Women,
Ink).
Nongovernmental Organizations
259

IPAS
Chapel Hill, NC, USA
Website: http://www.ipas.org
Founded in 1973, IPAS is a nonproﬁt NGO dedicated to improv-
ing women’s health through a focus on reproductive health care.
Speciﬁcally, IPAS concentrates on preventing unsafe abortions,
treating complications from abortion, reducing the consequences
of abortion, and increasing women’s access to a broad range of
reproductive health services. Staff members work with govern-
mental ofﬁcials, health care providers and administrators, and
NGO representatives worldwide to develop and implement
high-quality, sustainable programs in reproductive health and
abortion-related care.
ISIS Women’s International Cross-Cultural Exchange
Kampala, Uganda
Website: http://www.isis.or.ug
ISIS Women’s International Cross-Cultural Exchange (ISIS–
WICCE) is a global women’s organization that focuses on pro-
moting justice, equality, and mutually beneﬁcial relationships
between women and men. Founded in 1974, its headquarters
moved to Uganda in 1993 to incorporate African women’s con-
cerns and issues into its program. Over 1,300 female leaders from
more than 29 countries have participated in its exchange pro-
gram, which offers participants the opportunity to learn from
one another, exchange ideas, and work on cross-cultural strate-
gies for addressing critical women’s issues. The organization has
documented human rights violations related to women in armed
conﬂict. It also publishes a variety of research and training
reports, professional papers, and audiovisual materials.
Latin American and Caribbean Women’s Health Network
Santiago, Chile
Website: http://www.reddesalud.org
The Latin American and Caribbean Women’s Health Network is a
regional network linking individuals and organizations that work
directly or indirectly in ﬁelds related to women’s health and
women’s rights. The program works to establish contacts among
women and organizations active in women’s health issues at the
local, regional, and national levels; to encourage the sharing of
information, experiences, and ideas through the development of
260
Directory of Organizations

communication networks; to coordinate activities that focus on
women’s health; and to encourage public awareness campaigns
on these subjects.
Latin American Committee for the Defense of the Rights
of the Woman
(Comite´ de Ame´rica Latina y El Caribe para la Defensa de los
Derechos de la Mujer)
Lima, Peru
Website: http://www.cladem.org
The Latin American Committee for the Defense of the Rights of the
Woman (CLADEM) is a regional network that works for the protec-
tion of gender rights, the promotion of women’s political participa-
tion, the availability of legal education, and the elimination of
discriminatory legislation. Advocacy efforts have produced major
legislative reform in Peru and several other countries. CLADEM
also works locally with community legal educators and participates
in regional and international campaigns concerning issues of
importance to women.
Pathﬁnder International
Watertown, MA, USA
Website: http://www.pathﬁnd.org
Pathﬁnder International works with organizations and govern-
ments in developing countries to improve the accessibility and
quality of family planning and related reproductive health serv-
ices for women and men. The organization focuses on overcom-
ing barriers to the availability of wide-ranging reproductive
health care for women and families. Since its inception in 1957,
Pathﬁnder has provided reproductive health care to millions of
people in over 120 countries in Latin America, Africa, Asia, the
Near East, and Europe. Current areas of involvement include
reproductive health and family planning, HIV/AIDS, safe moth-
erhood, adolescents, advocacy, abortion and post-abortion care,
community-based work, partner support, and social change.
Population Action International
Washington, D.C., USA
Website: http://www.populationaction.org
Population Action International (PAI) is a private, nonproﬁt
organization that attempts to enhance the long-term well-being
Nongovernmental Organizations
261

of individuals, families, and nations by promoting stabilization of
the world’s population. PAI advocates for family planning and
related health services, for the education of girls, and for eco-
nomic opportunities for women. The program works with other
development, reproductive health, and environmental organiza-
tions in support of effective population policies.
Population Communications International
New York, NY, USA
Website: http://www.population.org
Population Communications International’s Media Impact pro-
gram (PCI–Media Impact) focuses on the need for information
dissemination and motivation to mobilize individuals and com-
munities to communicate information about and advocate for
sexual and reproductive health, prevention and treatment of
HIV/AIDS, environmental conservation and sustainable devel-
opment, and human rights. PCI works with the news media
worldwide to promote effective coverage of population and
related environmental issues. PCI–Media Impact has expanded
the scope of its educational programming to include topics of
importance to achieving the UN Millennium Development
Goals.
Population Council
New York, NY, USA
Website: http://www.popcouncil.org
The Population Council is a nonproﬁt NGO devoted to improv-
ing the reproductive health and well-being of women and men
throughout the world. It studies population issues and trends
and conducts research around the world on HIV/AIDS; poverty,
gender, and youth; and reproductive health. The Council works
with government and private organizations to improve family
planning and related health services, helps governments imple-
ment effective population policies, reports research results to a
wide audience, and helps strengthen professional resources in
developing countries. Ofﬁces are located in 18 countries and
programs exist in over 50 countries around the world.
Population Institute
Washington, D.C., USA
Website: http://www.populationinstitute.org
262
Directory of Organizations

As a population advocacy organization, the Population Institute
provides leadership in creating national and international aware-
ness of the social, economic, and environmental implications of
rapid population growth. It provides international support for
voluntary family planning programs. Dedicated to bringing
about global population stabilization, the Institute educates
industrialized countries about the effects of rapid population
growth on global resources.
Population Reference Bureau
Washington, D.C., USA
Website: http://www.prb.org
The Population Reference Bureau (PRB) was founded in 1929
and is a nonproﬁt educational organization providing informa-
tion on population, health, and the environment. Staff members
ensure that policymakers throughout the world have reliable
data on which to base population, health, and environmental
policies. Its programs focus on four main themes: reproductive
health and fertility, children and families, population and the
environment, and population futures. PRB hosts several web-
sites that provide valuable information to global audiences. It
publishes policy briefs on a variety of topics, including popula-
tion, health, and environment trends; its bulletins cover issues
ranging from immigration to world health to gender. PRB also
provides data sheets on world population, women, youth, and
the environment; webcasts on family planning, HIV/AIDS, and
female genital mutilation; a blog; online discussions; and policy
seminars.
Pro Mujer
New York, NY, USA
Website: http://www.promujer.org
An international women’s development and microﬁnance organi-
zation, Pro Mujer offers ﬁnancial services, training, and health care
to economically and socially disadvantaged women in Argentina,
Bolivia, Mexico, Nicaragua, and Peru. It creates communal banks
that serve 18 to 28 women; the women hold regular meetings to
repay their loans and deposit money in savings accounts. They also
receive training in business skills, good health practices, and busi-
ness development training, which includes the creation of business
plans and use of credit. Pro Mujer believes that good health is key to
women’s success in their homes, businesses, and communities, and
Nongovernmental Organizations
263

provides its clients with basic health care at neighborhood centers.
It also educates them about domestic violence and women’s rights.
Program for Appropriate Technology in Health
Seattle, WA, USA
Website: http://www.path.org
The Program for Appropriate Technology in Health (PATH) is a
nonproﬁt NGO focusing on improving health, especially the health
of women and children throughout the world. Staff members seek
solutions to public health problems, speciﬁcally in the areas of
reproductive health and widespread communicable diseases. They
use advanced technologies to search for solutions for emerging
and epidemic diseases, ﬁnd and employ health technologies
designed by local communities, advocate for safer childbirth and
health for children, promote health equity for women among the
world’s most vulnerable populations, and promote the use of vac-
cines to protect women and children from basic diseases.
Revolutionary Association of the Women of Afghanistan
(RAWA)
Quetta, Pakistan
Website: http://www.rawa.org
Started in 1977 as an independent political organization focusing
on ﬁghting for human rights in Afghanistan, the Revolutionary
Association of the Women of Afghanistan (RAWA) became
actively involved in the resistance following the Soviet occupa-
tion in 1979. More recently, it has worked to combat the religious
fundamentalism advocated by the Taliban and warlords. In
Afghanistan, RAWA supports female victims of war, reports
human rights violations against women to international human
rights organizations, runs home-based schools and literacy
courses for women and girls, provides mobile health teams in
eight provinces primarily to treat women who are unable to see
doctors because of ﬁnancial constraints, and assists in the devel-
opment and operation of small businesses. In Pakistan, RAWA
runs primary and secondary schools for refugee girls and boys
and literacy courses for women, supports mobile health teams,
reports the inhumane acts of fundamentalists to international
human rights organizations, organizes protests against funda-
mentalists, assists widows and families of prisoners, and assists
in business activities.
264
Directory of Organizations

Self-Employed Women’s Association
Ahmedabad, India
Website: http://www.sewa.org
Founded in 1972, the Self-Employed Women’s Association (SEWA)
organizes women who are self-employed, increases their access to
credit and assets, improves their status, and advocates for working
women. Its constituency is composed of women who are poor,
self-employed, and without access to the welfare and health bene-
ﬁts offered to salaried employees. It organizes women to help them
obtain full employment. SEWA’s bank provides credit and other
ﬁnancial services to poor women who want to start their own busi-
nesses or expand existing services or products. Services include
training courses, technical information, health care, child care, legal
aid, maternity beneﬁts, insurance, and communications. SEWA also
encourages the development of income-generating opportunities in
rural areas. Staff members advocate for women through a variety of
campaigns, lobbying efforts, and capacity building.
Shared Hope International
Vancouver, WA, USA
Website: http://www.sharedhope.org
Founded in 1998 by U.S. Congresswoman Linda Smith after she
traveled to India and encountered the hopeless faces of women
and children forced into prostitution in Bombay, Shared Hope
International focuses its attention on the prevention and elimina-
tion of sex trafﬁcking and slavery around the world. SHI partners
with local organizations to provide shelter, health care, education,
and vocational training opportunities to women and children
enslaved in the sex trade. Its strategy has three parts: prevent
the demand for women and children through public awareness
activities, rescue women and children from sex trafﬁcking, and
restore women and child victims by building communities to help
heal and empower them.
Third World Movement against the Exploitation of Women
Quezon City, Philippines
Website: http://www.tw-mae-w.org/twmaew
Members of the Third World Movement against the Exploitation of
Women (TW-MAE-W) include women’s groups and individuals in
45 countries who want to combat female sexual abuse and exploita-
tion. The program encourages a transnational approach to women’s
Nongovernmental Organizations
265

issues as an effective means for women to liberate themselves. Serv-
ing as a networking organization, TW-MAE-W provides a variety of
services including education and training in literacy; value forma-
tion; basic ofﬁce, nursing, cosmetology, and other skills; health
seminars; alternative health care; advocacy and campaigns; recrea-
tional activities; economic assistance; retreats; residential care; edu-
cational assistance; counseling; and economic assistance.
Tostan
Dakar-Yoff, Senegal
Website: http://www.tostan.org
Founded in 1991, Tostan (which means “breakthrough” in Wolof,
a West African language) encourages African communities to
work toward sustainable development through local community
efforts. It offers human rights education through its Community
Empowerment Program, which provides training in the skills
and knowledge communities need to improve their standard of
living and become self-sufﬁcient. A video on its website, Tostan:
Empowering Communities to Abandon Female Genital Cutting (FGC),
describes how its community empowerment program promotes
health and human rights and how this unique approach has led
to the abandonment of female genital cutting in thousands of
African villages.
Vital Voices Global Partnership
Washington, D.C., USA
Website: http://www.vitalvoices.org
Vital Voices Global Partnership was created as a result of the Vital
Voices Democracy Initiative started in 1997 by Hillary Rodham
Clinton and Madeleine Albright following the UN Fourth World
Conference on Women, which focused on promoting the empow-
erment and advancement of women. Vital Voices works with
international coalitions to end human trafﬁcking and other types
of violence against women and girls; empowers women as
change agents in their local communities and governments; advo-
cates for social justice; and provides women with management,
business, marketing, and communications skills so that they can
create economic opportunities for themselves and their families.
White Ribbon Alliance for Safe Motherhood
Washington, D.C., USA
Website: http://www.whiteribbonalliance.org
266
Directory of Organizations

As an international coalition of individuals and groups, the White
Ribbon Alliance promotes safe pregnancy and childbirth and cam-
paigns against maternal mortality around the world. The alliance
has members in 148 countries who work together to improve wom-
en’s health and women’s rights. It works with members to develop
educational materials and seminars adapted to their local environ-
ments in order to raise awareness and promote safe pregnancy
and childbirth in their communities. It also encourages policy
changes to increase funding for efforts to promote safe motherhood.
Womankind Worldwide
London, England
Website: http://www.womankind.org.uk
Womankind Worldwide helps women in developing countries
improve their lives by encouraging them to challenge the status
quo, become organized, and secure their rights. It works with 37
partner community groups in 15 countries to tackle issues speciﬁc
to individual communities. It recognizes that the basic causes of
gender inequality and discrimination against women cannot be cor-
rected only by providing services to women. Program partners
work to change local laws and inﬂuence public policy through
research and analysis, training and education, lobbying decision-
makers, exchanging information with decision makers, and hosting
conferences.
Women and Development
(KULU) (Kvindernes U-landsudvalg)
Copenhagen, Denmark
Website: http://www.kulu.dk
Members of Women and Development include regional organiza-
tions, women’s groups, and individuals. This international organi-
zation supports the rights of women in developing countries and
attempts to inﬂuence national and international policies to this
end. The organization monitors legislation dealing with feminist
issues, disseminates information, and encourages and helps to fund
the creation of women’s groups in developing countries.
Women and Men of Zimbabwe Arise
Famona, Bulawayo, Zimbabwe
Website: http://wozazimbabwe.org
Women and Men of Zimbabwe (WOZA) was formed in 2003 to
provide a united voice to women throughout the country on
Nongovernmental Organizations
267

issues of importance to them, to empower and encourage women
to ﬁght for their rights, to encourage female leadership in local
communities, and to advocate on issues important to women. To-
day, men are included in its membership and participate with
women in various nonviolent protests demanding social justice
for all Zimbabweans.
Women for Women International
Washington, D.C., USA
Website: http://www.womenforwomen.org
Women for Women International provides support and services
to women survivors of war and other conﬂicts so that they may
become self-sufﬁcient. Its one-year program transforms women
from victims to survivors to active citizens by giving them basic
skills training, rights awareness, leadership education, and voca-
tional and technical skills training. Participants form support
groups to discuss the importance of education, voting rights,
avoiding domestic violence, and health care. Programs are
adapted to the local cultural, economic, political, and religious
characteristics of each country. A microcredit lending program
provides business development opportunities.
Women in Law and Development in Africa
Accra, Ghana
Website: http://wildaf.org
The Women in Law and Development in Africa (WILDAF)
organization is an international program that focuses on empow-
ering women through legal education, law reform, and legal serv-
ices. WILDAF promotes training and educational programs in
legal literacy, conducts research and disseminates information
on legal issues affecting women, and coordinates activities with
other organizations concerned with women and the law.
Women Living under Muslim Laws
London, England
Website: http://new.wluml.org
Established in 1986 with the goal of ending the isolation that
women experience in Muslim countries, the Women Living under
Muslim Laws (WLUML) program provides information, solidarity,
and support to women in over 70 countries throughout the world. It
creates connections among women living in countries where Islam
is the state religion, secular states with Muslim majorities, and
268
Directory of Organizations

Muslim communities. These connections provide a means of shar-
ing information regarding men’s control over women’s lives and
ways of challenging that control. The program currently focuses
on fundamentalism, militarization, and sexuality and their effects
on women’s lives. WLUML provides solidarity and alerts, network-
ing and information services, and capacity building. It also pub-
lishes a quarterly newsletter, a biannual newsletter, an occasional
journal, and occasional and other papers.
Women Thrive Worldwide
Washington, D.C., USA
Website: http://www.womenthrive.org
Women Thrive Worldwide is an international advocacy coalition
consisting of 50 organizations and 40,000 individuals that devel-
ops and advocates for economic opportunity policies to help
women in developing countries. It believes that women are key
change agents in the ﬁght to end global poverty and works to
ensure that U.S. foreign policy, international assistance, and trade
programs focus on eliminating the social and economic barriers
that prevent women from supporting their families and ending
poverty.
Women’s Environment and Development Organization
New York, NY, USA
Website: http://www.wedo.org
Organized in 1990 by former U.S. Congresswoman Bella Abzug
and Mim Kelber with the goal of developing international conferen-
ces and actions for women, the Women’s Environment and Devel-
opment Organization (WEDO) continues to advance women’s
rights through political action, research, and advocacy. WEDO
works to encourage the United Nations and other government
forums to incorporate women’s perspectives into their work. Staff
members collaborate with NGOs and individuals in developing
countries to advocate for women’s economic, social, and gender
rights.
Women’s Feature Service
Delhi, India
Website: http://www.wfsnews.org
The Women’s Feature Service is an international organization
that promotes the interests of women on international, national,
and local levels. The group disseminates information on
Nongovernmental Organizations
269

women’s development and works to eliminate discrimination
from the media’s portrayal of women. The organization has a
network of over 100 female journalists who produce approxi-
mately 500 articles each year, written from a women’s perspec-
tive and with a special focus on developing countries. Stories
focus on the political, social, economic, and cultural issues
and trends that shape women’s lives throughout the world.
Topics include the environment, health, politics, economic
development, traditional customs, human rights, women’s
movements, children, and immigration. Regional ofﬁces are
located in the Philippines, Zimbabwe, Costa Rica, and the
United States.
Women’s Global Network for Reproductive Rights
Amsterdam, the Netherlands
Website: http://www.wgnrr.org
The Women’s Global Network for Reproductive Rights is an
international network of women’s health groups, reproductive
rights campaigns, clinics, health workers, and interested individuals
who focus on achieving and supporting reproductive and sexual
health rights for women around the world. The network focuses
on encouraging grassroots support for a woman’s right to control
her body, including having a safe and fulﬁlling sex life, the power
to decide when and if to have children, and the right to access safe,
legal abortion.
Women’s International League for Peace, and Freedom
Geneva, Switzerland
Website: http://www.wilpﬁnternational.org
Founded in 1915, the Women’s International League for Peace
and Freedom (WILPF) works through peaceful means to achieve
political, economic, social, and psychological conditions through-
out the world that will assure peace, freedom, and justice for
all people. WILPF works for political solutions to international
conﬂicts, disarmament, the promotion of women to full and
equal participation in all of society’s activities, economic justice
within and among states, the elimination of racism and all forms
of discrimination and exploitation, respect for fundamental
human rights, and the right to development in a sustainable envi-
ronment.
270
Directory of Organizations

Women’s Learning Partnership
Bethesda, MD, USA
Website: http://www.learningpartnership.org
Women’s Learning Partnership (WLP) focuses on women’s lead-
ership and empowerment through partnerships with 18 inde-
pendent organizations in developing countries, primarily in
countries with Muslim majorities. Program goals include
increasing the number of women in leadership and decision-
making roles in families, communities, and governments and
increasing the effectiveness of feminist movements in Muslim
countries. It works to accomplish these goals through leadership
training curricula, leadership and empowerment programs,
organizational capacity building, human rights campaigns,
dialogues among developing countries, dialogues with the
Global North countries, advocacy, networking, events, and pub-
lications.
Women’s Refugee Commission
New York, NY, USA
Website: http://www.womensrefugeecommission.org
The Women’s Refugee Commission is afﬁliated with the
InternationalRescueCommitteeandadvocatesfortheestablishment
of laws, policies, and programs to protect women and their families
who have been displaced from their homes as refugees and asylum-
seekers. Its programs focus on reproductive health, fuel and
ﬁrewood, livelihood, youth, disability, detention and asylum, and
gender issues, including gender-based violence. As of 2010, it has
chosen a Focus on Five approach to assisting refugees; that is, it
has chosen ﬁve areas on which to focus—northern Uganda, the
Thai–Burma border, south Sudan and Darfur, Liberia, and Jordan—
believing that this approach will accelerate change and prove effec-
tive in ameliorating the lives of female refugees and their families.
The organization will also continue its work in other countries.
Women’s World Banking
New York, NY, USA
Website: http://www.swwb.org
Women’s World Banking (WWB) is a global nonproﬁt ﬁnancial insti-
tution that advances and promotes the full participation of women
Nongovernmental Organizations
271

in society. Established in 1979, WWB currently has over 50 afﬁliates
in more than 40 countries. WWB supports, advises, trains, and
provides information to its global network of 40 microﬁnance
banks that provide credit to low-income individuals and families
in 28 countries around the world. WWB encourages women to
play an active economic and social role in their communities to
decide the right mix of credit, savings, training, and commercial
connections that will provide economic development. As of 2010,
WWB and its afﬁliates have served over 20 million clients, 74 per-
cent of whom are women, and it has an outstanding loan portfolio
of $4.3 billion.
Worldwide Fistula Fund
St. Louis, MO, USA
Website: http://www.worldwideﬁstulafund.org
The Worldwide Fistula Fund in a nonproﬁt organization that sup-
ports international medical education and research on obstetric
ﬁstulas. It encourages ethical and comprehensive care for women
with obstetric ﬁstulas. It also supports clinical care, training of
surgeons, and scientiﬁcally valid research in ﬁstula treatment
and prevention, as well as advocating for the medical and other
needs experienced by women with ﬁstulas.
Zonta International
Oak Brook, IL, USA
Website: http://www.zonta.org
Zonta is a worldwide service organization composed of execu-
tives in business and the professions who work together to
advance the status of women throughout the world. It has
approximately 35,000 members in over 1,100 clubs in more than
65 countries. Members volunteer their time, talents, and energy
to local and international service projects designed to advance
the status of women. The organization ﬁghts gender inequality
through supporting global and local efforts to provide women
with equal education, health care, legal rights, credit, and
employment opportunities. Members advocate for laws that can
positively inﬂuence women’s lives.
272
Directory of Organizations

Government and Government-Affiliated
Organizations
Inter-American Commission of Women
Organization of American States
Washington, D.C., USA
Website: http://www.oas.org/cim
Established in 1928, the Inter-American Commission of Women
(CIM) is a specialized agency of the Organization of American States
(OAS). CIM was the ﬁrst ofﬁcial intergovernmental agency created
speciﬁcally to ensure the civil and political rights of women in the
Americas. The commission is composed of 34 delegates from each
of its member states. Its mission is the promotion and protection of
women’s rights and support for member states to ensure the equal
participation of women in all aspects of society: political, economic,
social, cultural, and legal. It identiﬁes areas to improve women’s
participation, develops strategies to transform and improve rela-
tionships between women and men, encourages governments to
take all appropriate measures to remove barriers to women, pro-
motes education of women and girls, and promotes adoption of
legal means to eliminate all forms of discrimination against women.
Ofﬁce of Women in Development
U.S. Department of State, Agency for International Development
Washington, D.C., USA
Website: http://www.usaid.gov/our_work/cross-cutting_pro
grams/wid
The Ofﬁce of Women in Development, a U.S. government pro-
gram, focuses on ways to include women in the development
activities in their countries. Staff members conduct research,
organize conferences and community projects, and offer training
programs in development skills. They also provide technical lead-
ership on gender-related issues as well as identifying emerging
issues and developing multidisciplinary approaches to deal with
them. Major program areas include gender integration, economic
growth, education, legal rights, and trafﬁcking in persons.
Government and Government-Affiliated Organizations
273

UN Entities
Commission on the Status of Women
United Nations
New York, NY, USA
Website: http://www.unwomen.org
The Commission on the Status of Women (CSW) has 45 member
states and was established by the Economic and Social Council
of the United Nations in 1946. Members are representatives
from UN member countries. The commission promotes wom-
en’s rights in political, economic, civil, social, and educational
ﬁelds; encourages cooperation between organizations seeking
to advance the status of women; and advises the United
Nations and its member states on situations requiring immedi-
ate attention. It also monitors the implementation and progress
of measures to advance women’s status and reviews critical
areas identiﬁed during the 1995 Fourth World Conference on
Women.
Division for Social Policy and Development
UN Department of Economic and Social Affairs (UNDESA)
New York, NY, USA
Website: http://www.un.org/esa/socdev
The Division for Social Policy and Development monitors and
evaluates advances in women’s struggles for equality throughout
the world. In an effort to eliminate all types of discrimination
against women, the center conducts research on women’s eco-
nomic, social, and educational status; prepares reports; and rec-
ommends action that groups can take on women’s issues. It
provides bibliographic search services in French, Spanish, and
English. Its publications include Women 2000 (a magazine in
French, Spanish, and English), World Survey on the Role of Women
in Development, and National Machinery for the Advancement of
Women: United Nations and UN Organizations Focal Points for the
Advancement of Women.
Inter-Agency Network on Women and Gender Equality
United Nations
Website: http://www.un.org/womenwatch/ianwge
The Inter-Agency Network on Women and Gender Equality
(IANWGE) is composed of about 60 members who represent
274
Directory of Organizations

25 UN entities, and it focuses on promoting gender equality
throughout the United Nations by monitoring and encouraging
the mainstreaming of gender perspectives into the work of the UN
entities.
International Research and Training Institute for the
Advancement of Women
Santo Domingo, Dominican Republic
Website: http://www.un-instraw.org
The International Research and Training Institute for the
Advancement of Women (INSTRAW) is an autonomous institute
within the framework of the United Nations. INSTRAW is the
leading UN institute focusing on research, training, and knowl-
edge management while working toward gender equality and
women’s empowerment. As part of its capacity-building activ-
ities, the Institute has set up a Gender Training Community of
Practice for individuals, NGOs and governments around the
world to examine and strengthen approaches to gender training
and has also created a Gender Training Wiki to facilitate commu-
nication among these groups. INSTRAW also encourages changes
based on its research in government policies and programs. It
encourages women to become local and government leaders and
assists those already in those positions in placing gender issues
on the local agenda. Local and distance learning programs pro-
vide resources for mainstreaming gender issues.
UN Development Fund for Women
New York, NY, USA
Website: http://www.unwomen.org
The UN Development Fund for Women (UNIFEM) seeks to pro-
mote the economic and political empowerment of women in devel-
oping countries by providing direct technical and ﬁnancial support
to women’s programs. Encouraging the participation of women at
all levels of development planning, UNIFEM acts as a catalyst
within the UN system to link the needs and concerns of women to
all issues on global agendas. Created in 1976 as the Voluntary Fund
for the UN Decade for Women, UNIFEM became an autonomous
organization in association with the UN Development Programme
(UNDP) in 1985. UNIFEM helps women in developing countries
by strengthening local, national, and international organizations as
well as encouraging connections and partnerships at every level.
Government and Government-Affiliated Organizations
275

The organization’s economic empowerment program ensures that
women have access to and control over economic resources, assets,
and opportunities. The political empowerment program works to
strengthen the role of women in government and decision making
at all levels, ensuring that women have control over their lives both
within and outside the household.
UN Development Programme
New York, NY, USA
Website: http://www.undp.org
One of the purposes of the UN Development Programme (UNDP)
is to assist countries in alleviating poverty and reaching the Mil-
lennium Development Goals. It accomplishes its mission through
implementing programs, providing advocacy, serving as a source
of advice on policies and technical support, and building partner-
ships. One of its major focus areas is gender and poverty, and it
works with national partners to promote women’s economic
rights and opportunities; ensure that essential public services are
provided to everyone, regardless of gender; include women in
planning and policy development processes; address the gender
implications of HIV/AIDS; and strengthen the collection, reliabil-
ity, and interpretation of gender-disaggregated data.
UN Women
United Nations
Website: http://www.unwomen.org
UN Women was created in July 2010 by the UN General
Assembly to address the challenges it has faced in promoting gen-
der equality throughout the world. Chief among the challenges
have been inadequate funding and the lack of a single recognized
organization to direct and coordinate UN activities concerning
gender equality issues. It has three major purposes: (1) to support
inter-governmental entities, including the Commission on the
Status of Women, as they develop policies and standards; (2) to
assist Member States in implementing these policies and stan-
dards through the provision of technical and ﬁnancial support;
and (3) to ensure the UN meets its commitments on gender equal-
ity, through regular monitoring of progress in meeting these com-
mitments. It offers grants to innovative programs and assists
276
Directory of Organizations

individual governments and NGOs in developing policies, laws,
and resources to help women achieve equality.
Several other UN organizations also work with women in
developing countries, including:
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations
(http://www.fao.org)
UN-HABITAT (Human Settlements) (http://
www.unhabitat.org)
UN Human Rights Council (http://www2.ohchr.org/
english/bodies/hrcouncil)
UN Population Fund (http://www.unfpa.org)
World Health Organization (http://www.who.int)
Government and Government-Affiliated Organizations
277


8
Selected Print and Nonprint
Resources
T
his chapter contains descriptions of books, agency reports, vid-
eos, and websites that focus on all major aspects of women in
developing countries. The materials vary from popular
accounts and case studies to primary research.
Books
Abirafeh, Lina. 2009. Gender and International Aid in Afghanistan:
The Politics and Effects of Intervention. Jefferson, NC: McFarland &
Co. 232 pages. Bibliography, index.
Abirafeh’s experience on the ground in Afghanistan running an
international NGO working with women gives her a unique perspec-
tive on women’s lives in Afghanistan since the 2001 reconstruction.
The book describes and analyzes the process of formulating and
implementing social policies, especially as it relates to Afghan
women.
Afzal-Khan, Fawzia, ed. 2005. Shattering the Stereotypes: Muslim
Women Speak Out. Northampton, MA: Olive Branch Press. 338
pages. References.
Afzal-Khan has gathered an inspiring collection of essays, poems,
plays, and short stories that vividly describe the experiences of
women who happen to be Muslim. Afzal-Khan herself notes that
she never thought of herself as a “Muslim woman” since religion
279

was only “one spoke in the wheel of our lives” growing up in
Pakistan (1). Since the events of 9/11, however, people all over
the world have become interested in Islam, its basis tenets, what
life is like for Muslim women, and other aspects of this religion
and culture. Each contributor to this volume provides an illumi-
nating look at her life and experiences as a Muslim woman.
Agrawal, Anuja. 2008. Chaste Wives and Prostitute Sisters:
Patriarchy and Prostitution among the Bedias of India. New
York: Routledge. 251 pages. Bibliography, index.
The Bedia are a small caste found in Madhya Pradesh, Uttar Pradesh,
and Rajasthan in northern India. Unmarried women in many of
these families earn income through prostitution and their fami-
lies’ survival is dependent upon it. Though wives of Bedia men
do not engage in prostitution, they are responsible for all the
domestic work in the family. Agrawal examines the social pro-
cesses and powers that ensure that a Bedia woman will engage
in prostitution to support the family and the reaction of male fam-
ily members and the community at large to this enterprise. He
also discusses how the business of prostitution affects and deﬁnes
family and community structures, stratiﬁcation, and ideologies,
and considers whether these women are primarily viewed as
victims or willing agents.
Aikman, Sheila, and Elaine Unterhalter, eds. 2007. Practising
Gender Equality in Education. Oxford: Oxfam GB. 130 pages.
Bibliography, index.
The editors have provided a practical, informative guide for nongov-
ernmental organizations, teachers, researchers, and government ofﬁ-
cials who are concerned about achieving gender equality in
education. The book revolves around ﬁve main themes: partnerships
among practitioners, policy makers, and researchers; a multipronged
approach to reaching gender equality; advocacy actions to encourage
changes in policies; government responsibility for basic education;
and adequate and ongoing funding.
Antonopoulous, Rania, and Indira Hirway, eds. Unpaid Work
and the Economy: Gender, Time Use and Poverty in Developing
Countries. New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2010. 336 pages.
References, index.
280
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

Unpaid work in developing countries includes family work, sub-
sistence production, wood and water collection, sanitation and
household maintenance, food production and processing, and
family care work. Measurement of unpaid work is difﬁcult and
ﬁndings are inconsistent and often unreliable. This book explores
unpaid work in developing countries through a variety of meth-
odological, theoretical, and policy-oriented discussions. It
presents and analyzes empirical data on poverty, gender, and
unpaid work from India, Bolivia, and South Africa. Topics
include gender inequalities in the distribution of unpaid work;
policy issues, including the need for investment in social and
physical infrastructure; unemployment; challenges to and
achievements in the collection of reliable data; national economic
data and the invisibility of unpaid work in these data; and the use
of time-use surveys in developing countries.
Bahun-Radunovic, Sanja, and V.G. Julie Rajan, eds. Violence
and Gender in the Globalized World. Burlington, VT: Ashgate
Publishing, 2008. 226 pages. References, index.
The contributors to this volume include academics and activists
from around the world who are engaged in examinations of gen-
der and violence. The book focuses on the global variability of
expressions of gender violence and the relationship between gen-
der violence and development activities. Individual chapters pro-
vide insights into microcredit and violence in India, trafﬁcking in
women in South Korea, the impact of the ongoing violence in
Palestine on women, and religious rights and feminist activities
in Malaysia, among other topics. The intersection of academia
and activists makes for a lively presentation of some of the major
issues surrounding gender and violence.
Bond, Johanna. 2005. Voices of African Women: Women’s Rights
in Ghana, Uganda, and Tanzania. Durham, NC: Carolina Aca-
demic Press. 421 pages. References, index.
Prominent female attorneys from Ghana, Uganda, and Tanzania
describe the challenges facing them in their ﬁght for human
rights. Chapters explore topics including women’s right to par-
ticipate in public life, violence against women, women’s rights
within the family, reproductive health, and economic empower-
ment. The book also examines controversies such as whether
Books
281

female genital cutting is tradition or torture, marital rape as
domestic violence, and the beneﬁts of and problems with afﬁrma-
tive action.
Bradley, Tamsin, Emma Tomalin, and Mangala Subramanian,
eds. 2009. Dowry: Bridging the Gap between Theory and Practice.
New York: Zed Books. 245 pages. References.
The practice of dowry in Southeast Asia continues to make head-
lines, even though the Indian government banned the practice in
1961. This book provides a comprehensive analysis of dowry
practice from its history through the current debates around it,
which were a result of the Indian women’s movement beginning
in the 1960s. It also discusses the role that patriarchy plays in the
continuing practice of demanding dowry and ways to limit or
extinguish the practice through the inclusion of men’s views and
experiences. It analyzes changing patterns and practices of dowry
through detailed case studies from Bangladesh and India and
considers the relationship between dowry and the preference for
male children. The amount of dowry demanded has increased
over the years at a greater rate than inﬂation and continues to do
so; the book explores theories explaining this increase, including
the role of microcredit availability. The role of expanded public
advocacy campaigns by NGOs against the practice is examined.
Britton, Hannah, Jennifer Fish, and Sheila Meintjes, eds. 2009.
Women’s Activism in South Africa: Working across Divides.
Scottsville, South Africa: University of KwaZulu-Natal Press.
294 pages. References, index.
The 1994 transition to democracy in South Africa provided women
with many opportunities for gain in social and political arenas. This
book explores ways in which women have been able to reconstitute
South African society through social change and democratization.
The contributors—scholars, academics, and activists—explore
women’s participation in competitive sports, domestic violence
programs and services, national unions, rights-based activism, and
political organizations, and consider the challenges and successes
of the struggle for gender rights in South Africa.
Cabezas, Amalia L., Ellen Reese, and Marguerite Waller, eds.
2007. The Wages of Empire: Neoliberal Policies, Repression and
282
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

Women’s Poverty. Boulder: Paradigm Publishers. 248 pages.
Bibliography, index.
Contributors to this volume examine the negative consequences
of neoliberal economic policies and the repressive policies that
support them on low-income women in developing countries.
Many of these macroeconomic and structural adjustment pro-
grams have increased the burdens on poor women. Part one ana-
lyzes the basic ideologies of neoliberalism and its effects on
women. Part two discusses recent shifts in government policies,
including trade liberalization and structural adjustment, and the
negative impact of these shifts on women’s lives. Part three exam-
ines the negative effects of these policies through case studies
from Mexico, Colombia, and El Salvador. Part four looks at war
and military repression and the ways that neoliberal policies
affect poor women in ways similar to military occupation.
Chamberlin, Ann. 2006. A History of Women’s Seclusion in the
Middle East: The Veil in the Looking Glass. New York: Haworth
Press. 298 pages. Bibliography, index.
This book offers an interdisciplinary approach to understanding the
practice of the seclusion of women in the Middle East. Chamberlin
draws on her extensive knowledge of Middle Eastern culture to chal-
lenge the common Western assumption that seclusion is an oppres-
sive practice that harms women. She demonstrates that seclusion
may in fact be an empowering force for women. Topics examined
include ancient veiling, domestic architecture, sacred architecture,
evolution, biology, the clan, environment for seclusion, trade, capital
and land, individual liberation, slavery, and honor.
Cloutier, Luce. 2006. Income Differentials and Gender Inequality:
Wives Earning More than Husbands in Dar es Salaam, Tanzania.
Dar es Salaam: Mkuki na Nyota Publishers. 300 pages. References.
Following the imposition of structural adjustment programs in
Tanzania in the 1980s, women’s roles changed to focus on domes-
tic work and community activities in order to replace the loss of
government-provided services under these programs. This book
examines ways in which urbanization has shaped gender rela-
tions and how women are creating opportunities for equality
within patriarchal and capitalist systems. Like many other coun-
tries, Tanzania has seen a growing gap between rich and poor,
Books
283

especially in urban areas, which has led to growing conﬂicts
between social classes as well as between men and women. This
book provides a fascinating look at how some families have
coped with these issues.
Cornwall, Andrea, Sonia Correa, and Susie Jolly, eds. 2008.
Development with a Body: Sexuality, Human Rights and Devel-
opment. New York: Zed Books. 257 pages. References, index.
Even though three of the Millennium Development Goals are related
to sexual and reproductive health, none of them speciﬁcally refer to
sexual and reproductive rights. The editors of this book believe that
the critical role sexual and reproductive health plays in development
should be explicitly recognized. The international community is
beginning to understand the relationship between human rights,
development, and sexuality. Contributors to this volume explore this
relationship, encouraging readers to understand that promoting the
health and well-being of individuals is fundamental to successful
development and that sexuality is an important aspect of develop-
ment. Individual chapters examine sexual rights as human rights;
sex trafﬁcking and HIV; children’s sexual rights; discrimination
against lesbians in the workplace; ruling masculinities in South
Africa; gender, identity, and travesti in Peru; reproductive and sexual
rights in Bangladesh; sexuality education as a human right; and the
integration of sexuality into gender and human rights frameworks.
Cuklanz, Lisa M., and Sujata Moorti, eds. 2009. Local Violence,
Global Media: Feminist Analyses of Gendered Representations.
New York: Peter Lang. 276 pages. References, index.
This collection of essays offers a global perspective on the various
ways that gender and sexual violence are understood around the
world, examining how these acts of violence are treated and
described by the media. With advances in technology, the media
have become one of the primary means of distributing informa-
tion and news concerning gender-based violence. This book
examines how the media have depicted a variety of news reports
concerning women and violence, including serial prostitute hom-
icide in the Chinese media, battered women in Peru, and the 1995
rape of a 12-year old girl in Okinawa, among other cases. It
deﬁnes gender-based violence, outlines the legal and policy
changes regarding how that violence can be depicted, and
284
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

explores the variety of activities that communities have under-
taken to combat it.
Ebadi, Shirin. 2007. Iran Awakening: One Woman’s Journey to
Reclaim Her Life and Country. New York: Random House. 236
pages. Index.
Shirin Ebadi is a lawyer, former judge in Iran’s Ministry of Justice,
and winner of the Nobel Peace Prize in 2003. In this biography,
she describes growing up in Tehran and attending law school;
she also discusses her experiences as the most distinguished
female judge in the Tehran court until she was demoted in the
1979 Islamic Revolution. Ebadi details the impact of the Revolu-
tion on her life and the lives of other women in Iran, the harass-
ment she faced, her imprisonment, and the attempts on her life.
She describes her return to law as an attorney in the 1990s han-
dling many human rights cases pro bono, and the compromises
she has been forced to make in order to prevent the most egre-
gious human rights abuses.
Elliott, Carolyn M., ed. 2008. Global Empowerment of Women:
Responses to Globalization and Politicized Religions. New
York: Routledge. 399 pages. References, index.
This volume grew out of the meetings of the Fulbright New Cen-
tury Scholars Program on Global Empowerment of Women,
which included 31 researchers and experts from 22 countries.
These meetings examined a wide variety of issues concerning
women, including sexual autonomy, the effects of the changing
global order on women’s empowerment, the use of gender in con-
structing national and ethnic identities, and gender violence. Part
one of this volume considers globalization and neoliberal gover-
nance, including the experiences of women in Nepal; female
migrant workers in China and Saudi Arabia; and women and
microcredit. Part two discusses politicized religions and citizen-
ship, including the marriage acts in Trinidad and Tobago; law as
it relates to female Muslims; and Shari’a activism in Nigeria. Part
three analyzes gender violence and the use of truth commissions
in many countries. Part four examines sexual autonomy and
global politics, looking at women and HIV/AIDS in sub-Saharan
Africa, youth sexual relationships in Uganda, and family plan-
ning in Peru.
Books
285

Farmer, Paul. 2005. Pathologies of Power: Health, Human Rights,
and the New War on the Poor. Berkeley: University of California
Press. 402 pages. Bibliography, index.
Farmer, a physician who has spent a great deal of time providing
medical care to the poor under some of the worst circumstances
around the world, has seen the devastation that the lack of social
and economic rights can wreak on poor families. This book
describes the struggles women and men face in gaining the right
to health care, housing, clean water, and education, especially in
developing countries. Farmer examines the differences among
varying approaches to development, including charity and social
justice approaches. He believes that medicine and allied health
sciences have not been sufﬁciently involved in human rights
work and need to become more involved in the ﬁght for social
and economic rights for all.
Gebremedhin, Tesfa G. 2002. Women, Tradition and Develop-
ment: A Case Study of Eritrea. Lawrenceville, NJ: The Red Sea
Press, Inc. 261 pages. Bibliography, index.
Although it focuses on women and development in Eritrea,
Dr. Gebremedhin’s analysis can be applied to women in other
developing countries as well. He discusses institutional barriers
to gender equality, the importance of men and women being
equal under the law, the importance of equal access to resources
and opportunities, and common beliefs and cultural practices
surrounding gender roles. Individual chapters examine women
and tradition, education, health, politics, employment, agricul-
ture, poverty as well as contemporary structural changes and
prospects for change and development.
Grown, Caren, Geeta Rao Gupta, and Aslinhan Kes. 2005. Tak-
ing Action: Achieving Gender Equality and Empowering Women.
Sterling, VA: Earthscan. 257 pages. Bibliography.
Sponsored by the UN Development Programme, this book
describes the priorities set by the UN Millennium Project Task
Force on Education and Gender Equality to achieve equal access
to education. The authors discuss the important role education
for girls and women plays in promoting health for women and
their families, increasing women’s income earning potential, pre-
venting domestic violence, and increasing the age of women at
286
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

marriage. They also discuss strategies for achieving gender
equality.
Halperin, Helena. 2005. I Laugh So I Won’t Cry: Kenya’s Women
Tell the Stories of Their Lives. Trenton, NJ: Africa World Press.
350 pages. Index.
Using illustrations from the lives of Kenyan women, Halperin
examines the struggles facing these women in their everyday
lives. An American, she spent 14 months teaching at Shamoni
Secondary School in Western Kabras, Kenya. She was enthralled
by the stories of women she met and traveled back to Kenya sev-
eral times, interviewing over 250 women of all ages, ethnic
groups, and lifestyles in an attempt to capture the essence of their
lives. Halperin covers a variety of topics that inﬂuence these
women’s lives. Chapters examine arranged marriage, multiple
wives, raising children, education, women’s work, genital cut-
ting, ethnic tensions, and women’s self-help groups. Numerous
details from individual women’s lives enhance the discussion of
these serious challenges that Kenyan women face on a daily basis.
Handy, Femida, Meenaz Kassam, Suzanne Feeney, and Bha-
gyashree Ranade. 2006. Grassroots NGOs by Women for Women:
The Driving Force of Development in India. Thousand Oaks:
SAGE Publications, 236 pages. References, index.
Based on ﬁve years of research into small NGOs in Pune, India,
the authors analyze the organizational structure and social impact
of twenty successful NGOs. Part one proﬁles the founding mem-
bers of the NGOs. Part two describes the progression of the
organizational structures from the beginning of the programs to
their current incarnations. Part three analyzes the social impact
of these NGOs and the growth of some as they have modiﬁed
their programs to meet changing needs.
Husseini, Rana. 2009. Murder in the Name of Honor: The True
Story of One Woman’s Heroic Fight against an Unbelievable Crime.
Oxford: Oneworld Publications. 250 pages. Bibliography, index.
Husseini was a journalist in Jordan when she came face to face
with the existence of honor killings. Kifaya, a young woman in
Jordan, was killed by her family because she was raped by her
brother and thereby dishonored the family. Husseini was
Books
287

appalled by the murder of Kifaya and began researching the depth
and breadth of honor killings. In this book, she discusses the varied
reasons that families murder one of their own, including rape, adul-
tery, engaging in sex before marriage, or adopting Western ways.
She also considers the growing number of honor killings in Europe
and the United States. Husseini describes her efforts to change Jorda-
nian attitudes toward and laws addressing these murders.
Inglehart, Ronald, and Pippa Norris. 2003. Rising Tide: Gender
Equality and Cultural Change Around the World. New York:
Cambridge University Press. 226 pages. Bibliography, index.
Traditional sex roles have evolved over the course of the twentieth
century, with major variations between rich and poor countries and
between younger and older generations. This “rising tide” of change
is explored in this book, which analyzes the causes of change in cul-
tural attitudes toward gender equality. Generational attitudes vary
between industrial and agrarian societies and these attitudes
are explored, as well as variations in support for gender equality in
the political arena, at home,and at work.It also looks at the important
role religion plays in inﬂuencing attitudes toward gender equality.
Finally, it discusses the political consequences of these changing
attitudes.
Iwanaga, Kazuki, ed. 2008. Women’s Political Participation and
Representation in Asia: Obstacles and Challenges. Copenhagen:
Nordic Institute of Asian Studies. 315 pages. References, index.
In many Asian countries, as in other countries around the world,
women are often marginalized from the political process for a
variety of reasons. Religious and cultural expectations and limita-
tions on women’s public roles, which vary from country to coun-
try, are a primary reason for the limited participation of women in
politics. This book examines women’s opportunities for participa-
tion in China, Taiwan, Japan, South Korea, Cambodia, Thailand,
the Philippines, Sri Lanka, and Bangladesh.
Jaquette, Jane S., ed. 2009. Feminist Agendas and Democracy in
Latin America. Durham: Duke University Press. 258 pages. Bib-
liography, index.
Following a trip to Chile, Brazil, Argentina, and Peru in 2006,
Jaquette realized that the nature of women’s movements in Latin
288
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

America was changing. This book examines the major shifts in
strategy now taking place in women’s movements in Latin
America. In Part one, contributors reﬂect on feminism and the
state, including feminist politics in Chile, gender quotas for legis-
lative candidates in Argentina and Brazil, and feminist activism
in Venezuela. Part two focuses on legal strategies and democratic
institutions and discusses legal strategies in Argentina, violence
against women in Brazil, and gender and human rights in Peru.
Part three analyzes international and cross-border activism, the
progress (or lack thereof) of Latin American governments toward
gender equity, and the daily obstacles faced by female migrant
workers in Mexico.
Jaquette, Jane S., and Gale Summerﬁeld, eds. 2006. Women and
Gender Equity in Development Theory and Practice: Institutions,
Resources, and Mobilization. Durham: Duke University. 364
pages. Bibliography, index.
The shift in policies and actions as a result of the September 11,
2001, attack on the United States has changed development work
around the world. Amid growing concerns that the movement
concerning women and gender in development was losing its
momentum as a result of the growing complexities in the ﬁeld,
the editors brought together a wide range of experts—among
them academics, activists, policy makers, and researchers—to
provide thoughtful examinations of the major issues related to
this topic. The book is divided into three major sections, which
examine institutional opportunities and barriers to gender equity,
control of resources and livelihood, and women’s mobilization
and power.
Kabeer, Naila. 2008. Mainstreaming Gender in Social Protection
for the Informal Economy. London: Commonwealth Secretariat.
411 pages. Bibliography, index.
The risks faced by women from low-income households around
the world are the focus of this book. The term “social protection”
as it is used here is deﬁned as “particular policy approaches and
instruments that deal with the problems of risk and vulnerability”
(4–5). Kabeer examines approaches to social protection advocated
by the World Bank and the International Labour Organization,
the global labor force, institutional protection, employment,
Books
289

ﬁnancial services, protection as women age, and development
policy.
Kara, Siddharth. 2009. Sex Trafﬁcking: Inside the Business of
Modern Slavery. New York: Columbia University Press. 298
pages. References, index.
Pursuing an interest in sex trafﬁcking that had started in college,
Kara traveled to refugee camps in Slovenia and brothels, shelters,
and villages in India, Nepal, Burma, Thailand, Vietnam, Italy,
Moldova, Albania, the Netherlands, the United Kingdom,
Mexico, and the United States. This book is based on the knowl-
edge and experience Kara gained during these trips and focuses
on an analysis of the sex trafﬁcking industry and its operations
throughout the world. The book also suggests means of eradicat-
ing this practice, including increasing the penalties for getting
caught as a trafﬁcker or intermediary.
Leckie, Jacqueline, ed. 2009. Development in an Insecure and
Gendered World: The Relevance of the Millennium Goals. Bur-
lington, VT: Ashgate. 246 pages. Bibliography, index.
The UN General Assembly adopted the Millennium Declaration
and the eight Millennium Development Goals in 2000 as part of
an ambitious program to cut the world poverty rate in half by
the year 2015. This book examines those goals and the major crit-
icisms of them, speciﬁcally in the areas of development, security,
and gender. Topics include the absence of a human rights frame-
work in the MDGs, the MDG’s limitations relative to the global
economy, the failure to identify gender equality as a condition of
fulﬁllment of the MDGs, the omission of universal access to qual-
ity sexual and reproductive health care, and the absence of a call
for a reduction in human conﬂicts and wars.
Lichter, Ida. 2009. Muslim Women Reformers: Inspiring Voices
against Oppression. Amherst, NY: Prometheus Books. 513 pages.
References.
Lichter proﬁles Muslim women who have fought or are working
to eliminate gender discrimination by challenging discriminatory
laws and ideology. Included are veteran reformers such as Nawal
El-Saadawi, Fatima Mernissi, and Shirin Ebadi as well as others who
have recently joined the crusade. Lichter also includes several men
290
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

who have supported the ﬁght. The book takes an in-depth look at
reforms taking place in Afghanistan, Iran, and Saudi Arabia, but also
reviews reforms in othercountries including Canada, France, and the
United States. It also provides a list of websites that advocate for
reform of discriminatory laws and ideology.
Lindio-McGovern, Ligaya, and Isidor Walliman, eds. 2009.
Globalization and Third World Women: Exploitation, Coping
and Resistance. Burlington, VT: Ashgate Publishing. 214 pages.
References, index.
The contributors to this volume describe the ways in which mar-
ginalized women are coping in a world where distances between
and across cultures have shrunk and political and economic poli-
cies promote private ownership of the means of production, free
markets, and free trade. They examine migrant domestic workers
in Johannesburg, Filipino migrant workers, the impact on women
of the Mau Mau resurgence in Kenya, and Mexican women who
have been left behind following the passage of NAFTA, as well
as structural adjustment programs in Africa, and the experiences
of women in Nigeria, Costa Rica, and Ecuador who are ﬁghting
corporations that want to extract oil from the ground.
Masquelier, Adeline. 2009. Women and Islamic Revival in a
West African Town. Bloomington: Indiana University Press.
343 pages. Bibliography, index.
Masquelier met Malam Awal on a trip to Niger; Awal was a Suﬁ
“preacher” who had been asked by the local orthodox elite in
Dogondoutchi, Niger, to encourage the local residents to return
to the “true” form of Islam. The book explores this Islamist reform
movement and its effects on the women in Dogondoutchi. It
examines women’s reactions to this reform from an anthropologi-
cal perspective. It also considers the history of Islamic religious
practices. Using the lens of individual experiences, Masquelier
looks at Malam Awal’s effects on the community’s religious
beliefs and behavior, on shifting dynamics in relationships, on
marriage practices, and on public dress.
Moghadam, Valentine M., ed. 2007. From Patriarchy to Empow-
erment: Women’s Participation, Movements, and Rights in the
Middle East, North Africa, and South Asia.Syracuse: Syracuse
University Press. 414 pages. Bibliography, index.
Books
291

Women in the Middle East, North Africa, and South Asia, as well
as in other regions around the world, have historically been sub-
jected to patriarchal striuctures that have prohibited them from
fully participating in society. Today, many patriarchal practices
have been overcome, at least to some degree, as development
agencies work to bring women into the mainstream of develop-
ment. Contributors to this book examine patriarchy and gender
relations in light of globalization, describing and analyzing a vari-
ety of economic, political, and cultural processes that have been
impacted by the incorporation of women into these processes.
Individual chapters offer historical and contemporary perspec-
tives on women’s participation in nationalist movements and
political processes; their recasting of cultural practices through
ﬁlmmaking, literature, and use of current computer technologies;
their ﬁght for basic human rights; and their responses to war and
other human conﬂicts.
Mukhopadhyay, Maitrayee, and Shamim Meer, eds. 2008. Gen-
der, Rights and Development: A Global Sourcebook. Amsterdam:
Royal Tropical Institute. 160 pages. Annotated bibliography,
index.
The editors of this volume believe that promoting women’s
empowerment as a means to alleviate poverty is more acceptable
to individuals, communities, and governments than promoting
empowerment as a human right. Contributors examine the ability
of development programs and activities to view women as enti-
ties in and of themselves rather than solely in a gender role as
subservient and secondary to men. Chapters address the margin-
alization of women’s reproductive rights in the case of health care
for HIV-positive pregnant women in South Africa; sexual, repro-
ductive, and abortion rights in Nicaragua; women’s struggle for
their rights after the Bhopal gas disaster in India; rights of women
in the Arab world; and feminism and development.
Murray, Ann Firth. 2008. From Outrage to Courage: Women Tak-
ing Action for Health and Justice. Monroe, ME: Common Cour-
age Press. 311 pages. Bibliography, index.
Murray, the founder of the Global Fund for Women (see Chapter 7),
sees women’s health as an issue of social justice, rather than pri-
marily in medical terms. Through facts and personal stories of
courageous women around the world, this book illustrates the
292
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

struggles that women face in gaining access to health care.
Murray examines women and poverty; the preference for male
children that results in sex-selective abortion of female fetuses or
female infanticide; unequal access to education, nutrition, and
health care; female genital mutilation; early marriage of girls;
and lack of access to reproductive health care. She also looks at
various forms of violence against women, including domestic
violence, honor killing, and dowry death, and examines the dev-
astating effects of war and conﬂicts on women, including wom-
en’s experiences as refugees. The book discusses sex trafﬁcking,
aging, and women’s unrecognized contributions to the labor
force. It also explores the global women’s movement and feminist
activism. Resources are provided, including journals on
international health and lists relevant international governmental
organizations and NGOs.
Murthy, Padmini, and Clyde Lanford Smith, eds. 2010. Women’s
Global Health and Human Rights. Sudbury, MA: Jones and Bart-
lett Publishers. 556 pages. References, index.
In many areas of the world, women’s health and human rights
have not improved over the last several years. Murthy and Smith
have brought together a wide range of contributors to explore
women’s health as a human right through comparisons of the
challenges women experience around the world regarding their
health. Section one discusses women’s health as a human right.
Section two examines the impact of gender-based violence on
women and girls, including violence, war, terrorism, trafﬁcking,
and the Global Gag Rule. The relationship among women, eco-
nomics, and human rights is reviewed in Section three. The fourth
section analyzes the problems and challenges faced by women
regarding their health. Section ﬁve reviews the effects of migra-
tion, the environment, and cultural practices such as FGM on
women and girls. Section six examines challenges to women’s
well-being and the progress currently being made to meet these
challenges. The ﬁnal section offers recommendations regarding
the promotion of a human rights-based approach to improving
women’s health.
Nazir, Sameena, and Leigh Tomppert, eds. 2005. Women’s Rights
in the Middle East and North Africa: Citizenship and Justice.
New York: Freedom House. 367 pages. References.
Books
293

In an effort to examine the status of women’s rights in several
countries, Nazir and Tomppert have put together a collection of
essays that provides information and analysis on the legal status
and experiences of women in 16 countries and one territory.
Countries examined include Algeria, Bahrain, Egypt, Iraq,
Jordan, Kuwait, Lebanon, Libya, Morocco, Oman, Palestine,
Qatar, Saudi Arabia, Syria, Tunisia, United Arab Emirates, and
Yemen. Contributors describe the contrast between legislation
granting women equal rights and the actual day-to-day discrimi-
nation they face in an effort to assist local and global efforts to
expand women’s legal rights.
Ng, Cecilia, and Swasti Mitter, eds. 2005. Gender and the Digital
Economy: Perspectives from the Developing World. Thousand
Oaks, CA: SAGE Publications. 262 pages. Bibliography, index.
Rapid development and the spread of new information and com-
munication technologies (ICT) have marked societies around the
world since the 1970s. This book explores the growth of ICTs; rela-
tionships among gender, development, and ICTs; gender posi-
tions within the digital economy; and the politics and policies of
gender and ICTs. It examines the ability of ICTs to empower
women and how the gains women make can be sustained. It dis-
cusses the importance of examining the beneﬁts of e-commerce
in different cultures and of designing ICT initiatives that include
issues of importance to women in developing countries. In addi-
tion, it describes the advantages to women of building virtual
communities for networking purposes.
Onubogu,Elsie,LindaEtchart,Rawwida Baksh,andTinaJohnson.
2005. Gender Mainstreaming in Conﬂict Transformation: Building
Sustainable Peace. London: Commonwealth Secretariat. 232 pages.
Bibliography.
This book examines the importance of incorporating women into
processes of peace and conﬂict-resolution, from peace-building
activities to post-conﬂict reconstruction. A UN Security Resolu-
tion (UNSCR 1235) emphasizes this need by calling for women’s
“equal participation and full involvement” in maintaining and
promoting peace and security. In support of their points, the
authors provide examples from women’s experiences in Bangla-
desh, Cyprus, India, Jamaica, Papua New Guinea, Sierra Leone,
and Sri Lanka.
294
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

Oyewumi, Oyeronke, ed. 2003. African Women and Feminism:
Reﬂecting on the Politics of Sisterhood. Trenton, NJ: Africa World
Press, Inc. 273 pages. Bibliography, index.
The contributors to this book focus on the often-contentious rela-
tionship that African women have with feminism. Although a
variety of views on feminism exist, including those that have
emerged from white, black, Western, and African contexts, most
of the emphasis in development is on Western feminism. The con-
tributors to this volume, all born and raised in Africa and, at the
time of writing, teaching in the United States, examine the effect
of Western feminism on development and human rights issues
in Africa, including the choice of sisterhood as the basis of femi-
nist alliances and approaches to female genital cutting or
mutilation.
Parker, Lyn, ed. 2005. The Agency of Women in Asia. New York:
Marshall Cavendish Academic. 235 pages. References, index.
In this collection of essays, Parker attempts to provide an alterna-
tive to images of Asian women as sex slaves, mail-order brides,
and child prostitutes—in other words, as oppressed victims. Chap-
ters examine female healers in Lombok, an island in Indonesia;
rural women giving birth in Bali (hospital vs. in-home deliveries);
female performers in Indonesian theater; unmarried women
in Japan; South Korean and Filipino women who have married
Japanese men; and Indonesian women working in Singapore
as domestic workers. Contributors illustrate women’s everyday
self-expression and resistance to oppression.
Petchesky, Rosalind Pollack. 2003. Global Prescriptions: Gen-
dering Health and Human Rights. New York: Zed Books. 306
pages. Bibliography, index.
Petchesky provides a comprehensive review of women’s partici-
pation in a variety of international venues, including UN confer-
ences, international and regional networks, and national
advocacy campaigns, with an emphasis on sexual and reproduc-
tive health. She explores the growth of transnational women’s
health movements as well as their characteristics; their successes
and failures; and their contributions to the development of gen-
der, health, and human rights. She also provides an assessment
of the global impact of UN conferences on women, and analyzes
Books
295

the relationship of HIV/AIDS and the human right to health to
global capitalism. Petchesky examines the evolution of health
issues under global capitalist policies, including the increased
burden on women to cope with health care as governments cut
budgets for social services and health care. She also analyzes the
roles of NGOs in the women’s health arena as advocates, providers,
monitors, and implementers of programs and policies.
Peterson, V. Spike, and Anne Sisson Runyan. 2010. Global Gen-
der Issues in the New Millennium. Third edition. Boulder: West-
view Press. 300 pages. Bibliography, index.
Peterson and Runyan provide an overview of gender in
international relations and policymaking through an examination
of the re-positioning of men and women in global governance,
security, and politics. Individual chapters offer discussions of
gender and global issues, gendered lenses on world politics, gen-
der and global government, gender and global security, gender
and global political economy, and gendered resistances.
Rai, Shirin M. 2008. The Gender Politics of Development: Essays
in Hope and Despair. New York: Zed Books. 216 pages. Bibliog-
raphy, index.
Rai examines the emergence and development of gender politics
in postcolonial states, addressing the role of women’s movements
in the development of state policies with regard to key issues of
concern to women. Chapters describe the struggles of female
street vendors in New Delhi for recognition and protection; the
use of quotas in local governments; and the development of a
research network of gender, law, and governance. They explore
the relationships among gender, knowledge, innovation, and
property rights. They discuss the costs versus the beneﬁts of
empowering women; when individuals and organizations
develop programs that empower women, they must examine the
dangers the women may face by participating.
Robinson-Pant, Anna, ed. 2004. Women, Literacy and Develop-
ment: Alternative Perspectives. New York: Routledge. 259 pages.
Bibliography, index.
A great deal of the recent literature on women and development
emphasizes the major role that education plays in the success of
296
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

development programs involving women. The popular theory is
that an educated woman will understand the importance of edu-
cation for all her children and will be more aware of the role that
nutrition and hygiene play in ensuring a healthy family, thus
becoming better capable of providing for her family. Robinson-
Pant has brought together researchers, policy makers, and practi-
tioners who offer a different approach to women’s literacy. Part
one looks at new research approaches to women and literacy, Part
two identiﬁes the major issues on literacy policy and program-
ming, and Part three describes and analyzes attempts to provide
literacy programs for women in developing countries.
Saliba, Therese, Carolyn Allen, and Judith A. Howard, eds.
2005. Gender, Politics, and Islam. New Delhi: Orient Longman
Private Ltd. 354 pages. Index.
This collection of essays by Muslim women illustrates the wide
variety and range of their experiences. Not all women who are
Muslim are similar, nor are they passive victims of their religion
and environment. The book explores the experiences of women
from Bangladesh, Canada, Egypt, Iran, Israel and Palestine,
Pakistan, and Yemen as they ﬁght for their political, economic,
and legal rights.
Samarasinghe, Vidyamali. 2008. Female Sex Trafﬁcking in Asia: The
Resilience of PatriarchyinaChangingWorld. NewYork:Routledge.
234 pages. Bibliography, index.
Samarasinghe examines attempts to deﬁne sex trafﬁcking and
considers the major issues of smuggling and migration as well
as the issue of women’s willing participation versus coercion
and force. The book also explores issues of female vulnerability
and subordination, patriarchy, militarism, and globalization, and
considers their inﬂuence on the practice of sex trafﬁcking. It
describes and analyzes major female sex trafﬁcking issues in
Nepal, Cambodia, and the Philippines. It also examines the
male-dominant demand side of the equation, including the cli-
ents, the intermediaries, and the institutions that support or at
the very least ignore the problems of sex trafﬁcking.
Segrave, Marie, Sanja Milivojevic, and Sharon Pickering. 2009.
Sex Trafﬁcking: International Context and Response. Portland,
OR: Willan Publishers. 226 pages. References, index.
Books
297

National and international attention on sex trafﬁcking, especially
the trafﬁcking of women into sex slavery or servitude, has grown
in recent years. This book examines this issue and the policies
developed to respond to it based on the experiences of policy-
makers, NGOs, and trafﬁcked women themselves. Case studies
from Australia, Serbia, and Thailand provide rich details of the per-
spectives of police, immigration authorities, social workers, law-
yers, and activists. The authors are concerned that assumptions
are made based on gender regarding anti-trafﬁcking efforts, that
opinions and experiences of the women being trafﬁcked are often
ignored in policy development, and that the relationship between
criminal justice efforts and the growth of human trafﬁcking and
vulnerability of individuals is being ignored.
Skaine, Rosemarie. 2005. Female Genital Mutilation: Legal, Cul-
tural and Medical Issues. Jefferson, NC: McFarland & Co. 321
pages. References, index.
Female genital mutilation (FGM) or female genital cutting (FGC) is
practiced in many parts of the world, but primarily in Africa. Efforts
to eliminate it probably started as early as the 17th century, and to-
day emotions surrounding the issue still run high. Skaine begins
by describing the deﬁnitions and types of FGM, the justiﬁcation
for its existence, and reasons for its prevalence. She discusses legal
attempts to ban it, not only in Africa but in countries around the
world. She examines the ethical, political, and legal aspects of this
practice. Skaine conducted research on FGM as practiced among
the Maasai in Tanzania, and she presents information drawn from
her interviews on the subject of both male and female circumcision.
Cultural norms play an important role in any discussion of FGM
and Skaine offers an analysis of culture as it relates to this practice.
Appendices provide information on legislation and outreach
attempts to curb or ban the practice in countries where it has tradi-
tionally been practiced as well as information about the practice in
industrialized countries.
Skaine, Rosemarie. 2008. Women Political Leaders in Africa.
Jefferson, NC: McFarland & Co. 206 pages. Bibliography, index.
Women hold leadership positions throughout Africa, although
some countries are more progressive than others. Skaine discusses
the history and current status of female African leaders, their chang-
ing roles, and regional and international laws regarding human
298
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

rights of women, as well as providing proﬁles of female leaders
including Ellen Johnson-Sirleaf, Wangari Maathai, and Luisa Diogo.
In Part two of the book she summarizes each country’s economic
program, its government policies and practices, and the status and
progress of its women.
Tembon, Mercy, and Lucia Fort, eds. 2008, Girls’ Education in
the 21st Century: Gender Equality, Empowerment, and Economic
Growth. Washington, D.C.: The World Bank. 313 pages. Refer-
ences, index.
Based on the background papers presented at an international,
multidisciplinary symposium on gender, education, and develop-
ment, this book explores the challenges facing educational devel-
opment and the struggle for gender equality as well as the need to
continue the progress being made in many countries in providing
education for girls. Part one examines the relationships among
education quality, skills development, and economic growth,
with the understanding that the quality of education must be
improved in many areas. Part two discusses gender equity in
education and the issues and factors that prevent countries from
achieving it. Part three offers examples of approaches to improve
the rate of enrollment of girls in schools, examining the ways that
individual countries have addressed the varying sociocultural
and economic issues that keep girls out of school.
Terry, Geraldine, ed. 2007. Gender-Based Violence. Oxford:
Oxfam. 195 pages. References and index.
This collection provides a broad understanding of the many man-
ifestations of gender-based violence, including femicide; domes-
tic and sexual violence; female genital mutilation; sexual abuse
of girls in schools; and sex trafﬁcking in locations around the
world, including South and East Asia, sub-Saharan Africa, and
Central America. It discusses various approaches to reducing vio-
lence against women and girls. An extensive section on resources
lists relevant publications, websites, and programs. This book is
intended for development and humanitarian practitioners, policy
makers, and academics.
Thiara, Ravi K., and Aisha K. Gill, eds. 2010. Violence against
Women in South Asian Communities. Philadelphia: Jessica
Kingsley Publishers. 255 pages. References, index.
Books
299

Thiara and Gill have gathered together researchers and practi-
tioners to explore current research, policy, and practice on the topic
of violence against women in South Asian communities
throughout the United Kingdom (as of 2010, there were approx-
imately 2.5 million South Asians living in Britain). Chapters
address these women’s struggles against gendered violence,
the impact of governmental multicultural policies on the rights
of minorities, the dichotomy of tradition and modern practices,
forced marriage, the extent to which the law should accommo-
date religious and cultural diversity, domestic violence occur-
ring after divorce, and suggested approaches to eliminating
gender-based violence.
Welchman, Lynn, and Sara Hossain, eds. 2005. Honour: Crimes,
Paradigms and Violence against Women. New York: Zed Books.
384 pages. References, index.
Contributors from diverse backgrounds offer a wide variety of
experiences and insights into the problem of honor killings. They
offer strategies to respond to these crimes, whether they occur in
Europe, the Middle East, Asia, or elsewhere. The book offers an
international perspective focusing on violence against women as
well as on the human rights aspects of honor killings. Chapters
include discussions of UN approaches to honor crimes; Western
experience with and inﬂuences in honor crimes; and how nations
such as Italy, Latin America, the United Kingdom, and the Nordic
countries have dealt with the issue of honor killings.
Agency Reports
International Labour Organization. 2009. Global Employment
Trends for Women. Geneva: ILO. 78 pages.
The impact of the world ﬁnancial crisis and the effects of the
resulting slowdown in economic growth on women are explored
in this report. It analyzes recent market developments and exam-
ines the relationship among economic growth, the labor market,
and gender inequality. It also explores the effects of gender
inequality in sectoral employment and vulnerable employment,
in African agriculture, in wages, and in poverty. It discusses the
outlook for the labor market and policy recommendations regard-
ing women’s roles in economic recovery, investment in physical
300
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

and social infrastructure, social security issues, legal frameworks
and gender equality, the Millennium Development Goals, and glob-
alization and the gender gap. Annexes contain tables displaying a
wide range of statistical information regarding women and work.
PATH, Intercambios, MRC, and WHO. 2008. Strengthening
Understanding of Femicide: Using Research to Galvanize Action
and Accountability. Washington, D.C.: PATH, Intercambios,
MRC, and WHO.
Four organizations, the Program for Appropriate Technology in
Health (PATH), the Inter-American Alliance for the Prevention
of Gender-based Violence (InterCambios), the Medical Research
Council of South Africa (MRC), and the World Health Organiza-
tion (WHO), convened a conference on femicide, meaning the
act of murdering a female based solely on the fact that she is
female. This report presents an overview of the conference, cover-
ing current research ﬁndings on the prevalence of femicide, the
risk factors of victimization, and tactics to close gaps and hold
those involved in femicide accountable for their actions.
Social Watch. 2008. Social Watch Report 2008: Rights Is the
Answer. Montevideo, Uruguay: Third World Institute. 225 pages.
Created in 1995, the Social Watch network has members in more
than 60 countries who focus on social development and gender
discrimination around the world. This annual report provides
an analysis of progress made toward eliminating gender discrimi-
nation and problems that continue to slow the progress of the
struggle to achieve gender equality and reduce poverty. Topics
include food security, education, information science and technol-
ogy, public expenditure, development assistance, water and sani-
tation, health, reproductive health, and gender equity.
UN Department of Economic and Social Affairs (ECOSOC). 2009.
2009 World Survey on the Role of Women in Development:
Women’s Control over Economic Resources and Access to Financial
Resources, including Microﬁnance. New York: United Nations. 114
pages.
Women’s access to economic and ﬁnancial resources is critical to
alleviating poverty and supporting the well-being of families
and communities; access empowers women and enhances
Agency Reports
301

opportunities for sustainable economic development. Even
though progress has been made in providing women with greater
opportunities, discriminatory practices and cultural norms have
made progress difﬁcult in many countries. This report explores
global policies and legal frameworks that hinder women’s
empowerment, including the ﬁnancial crisis that has impacted
much of the world since its beginnings in 2008. Individual chap-
ters and sections focus on access to full employment and decent
work; to land, housing, and other productive resources; to ﬁnan-
cial services; and to social protection. The ﬁnal section offers rec-
ommendations on how to expand women’s access to these
valuable resources.
UNESCO. 2010. Reaching the Marginalized. Paris: UNESCO.
While some progress has been made in reaching the Millennium
Development Goals and the Education for All (EFA) goals, the
world ﬁnancial crisis has impacted that progress. This report
assesses how far UN nations have come to date in achieving
universal primary education and increased secondary school
enrollment. The ﬁrst chapter examines the impact that the ﬁnan-
cial crisis has had on development projects and describes
international action that is needed to avert further slowing in goal
attainment. The second chapter reviews the progress that has
been made in reaching the EFA goals. The third chapter looks at
marginalization in education and the social inequalities that lead
to groups of people becoming marginalized, and suggests ways
to reach the marginalized. The fourth chapter examines how the
international donor community can assist in meeting the MDGs
and EFA goals.
UN High Commissioner for Refugees. 2008. UNHCR Handbook
for the Protection of Women and Girls. Geneva: UNHCR. 394
pages.
This handbook is designed to provide guidelines for protecting
women and girls who are under the purview of the UNHCR,
including asylum seekers and refugees, the internally displaced,
returnees, the stateless, and those who have integrated into new
communities. It sets standards for working with women and girls
and suggests strategies for cooperating with local partners to pro-
tect their interests. Chapters provide information on the ways
women and girls are affected by displacement, ways to employ
302
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

to achieve gender equality, and ways to identify and respond to
risks. The book also explains the importance of partnerships,
examines women’s primary rights and how they are violated,
and discusses the international legal framework in place to pro-
tect women and girls.
UNICEF. 2008. The State of the World’s Children 2009. New York:
UNICEF. 160 pages.
Each year UNICEF publishes a report on the state of the world’s
children, focusing on a speciﬁc topic. This report examines mater-
nal and newborn health, reviewing the reasons so many women
are still dying during pregnancy and childbirth and suggesting
steps to be taken to save the lives of more women and newborns.
Some of the interventions discussed are adequate nutrition, better
hygiene, prenatal and postnatal care, skilled birth attendants, and
available emergency care.
World Health Organization. 2008. Eliminating Female Genital
Mutilation: An Interagency Statement, OHCHR, UNAIDS,
UNDP, UNECA, UNESCO, UNFPA, UNHCR, UNICEF, UNIFEM,
WHO. Geneva: WHO. 41 pages.
According to this collaborative report, approximately three mil-
lion girls are at risk of undergoing FGM every year. This state-
ment calls on all governments, international and national NGOs,
and local communities to protect women and girls and uphold
their rights by eliminating this practice. It encourages all UN
agencies and others to support activities and programs that per-
suade local communities to cease female genital mutilation or cut-
ting. The authors describe the legal and human rights aspects of
this problem, offer statistics on the prevalence of FGM, and
present ﬁndings that explain the reasons for its persistence. They
also describe the steps that are needed to put a stop to this prac-
tice as well as those necessary to support women and girls who
have endured it.
World Health Organization. 2009. Women and Health: Today’s
Evidence, Tomorrow’s Agenda. Geneva: WHO. 91 pages.
Understanding that gathering reliable data on the status of
women and health throughout the world is difﬁcult, this report
provides an analysis of what is currently available and identiﬁes
Agency Reports
303

those areas in which additional research must be conducted to ﬁll
the many gaps in our knowledge of the health of women around the
world. The report covers the health of girls and women from child-
hood through old age. It found that there are widespread disparities
between the accessibility of health services to men and women; that
reproductive health is central to women’s overall health; that other
health challenges to women include chronic diseases, injury, and
mental health issues; that many of the health problems women face
have their origin in childhood; and that, overall, health systems
around the world are failing women.
Journals and Journal Articles
The journals listed below often contain articles that focus on sub-
jects of concern to women in developing countries and may lead
the reader to additional resources on this topic.
African Population Studies (http://www.uaps-uepa.org or http://
www.bioline.org.br/ep). Journal articles are available in English
and French; many are available for free download.
Asia-Paciﬁc Population Journal (http://www.unescap.org/esid/
psis/population/journal/index.asp). Published by the UNES-
CAP secretariat and distributed at no charge to policymakers,
NGOs, and other qualiﬁed groups. Online subscriptions are also
available at no cost.
Comparative Education Review (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/
toc/cer/current).
Demography (http://muse.jhu.edu/journals/dem/). Abstracts
available online.
Development (http://www.palgrave-journals.com/development/
index.html). Some articles available for free download.
Development and Change (http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/journal/
10.1111/%28ISSN%291467-7660).
Economic Development and Cultural Change (http://www.journals
.uchicago.edu/EDCC/home.html). Abstracts available online.
Feminist Studies (http://www.feministstudies.org/home.html).
304
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

Food and Nutrition Bulletin (http://www.foodandnutrition
bulletin.org/fnbhome.php).
Global Public Health (http://www.tandf.co.uk/journals/titles/
17441692.asp).
Health Policy and Planning (http://www.heapol.oxfordjournals
.org).
Human Organization (http://www.sfaa.net/ho).
Human Rights Quarterly (http://muse.jhu.edu/journals/hrq/).
Abstracts available online.
International Journal of Health Services (http://www.baywood.com
/journals/previewjournals.asp?id=0020-7314). Abstracts available
online.
International Journal of Middle East Studies (http://journals
.cambridge.org/action/displayJournal?jid=MES). Abstracts
available online.
International Perspectives on Sexual and Reproductive Health (http://
www.guttmacher.org/journals/aboutper.html).
Jenda: A Journal of Culture and African Women Studies (www
.jendajournal.com). Copies of 2006 and earlier journals are avai-
lable free online.
Journal of Biosocial Science (http://journals.cambridge.org/action/
displayJournal?jid=JBS). Abstracts available online.
Journal of Comparative Family Studies (http://soci.ucalgary.ca/jcfs/).
Journal of Developing Areas (http://muse.jhu.edu/journals/jda/).
Abstracts available online.
Journal of Population and Social Studies (http://www.ipsr.mahidol
.ac.th/IPSR/Journal/Content.htm). Abstracts and articles avai-
lable for free download.
The Lancet (http://www.thelancet.com). Selected articles available
for free download with registration.
Medical Anthropology Quarterly (http://medanthro.net/maq/
index.html).
Population and Development Review (http://www.wiley.com/bw/
journal.asp?ref=0098-7921&site=1).
Journals and Journal Articles
305

Population Studies (http://www.tandf.co.uk/journals/titles/
00324728.html).
Signs: Journal of Women in Culture and Society (http://
www.journals.uchicago.edu/toc/signs/current). Abstracts avai-
lable online.
Social Science and Medicine (http://www.elsevier.com/wps/ﬁnd/
journaldescription.cws_home/315/description#description).
Studies in Family Planning (http://www.wiley.com/bw/journal
.asp?ref=0039-3665).
Women’sStudiesInternationalForum(http://www.elsevier.com/wps/
ﬁnd/journaldescription.cws_home/361/description#description).
Abstracts available online.
World
Development
(http://www.elsevier.com/wps/ﬁnd/
journaldescription.cws_home/386/description#description).
Abstracts available online.
World Health Forum (http://www.ajtmh.org/cgi/content/
abstract/30/6/1344-a).
World Views: Global Religions, Culture, and Ecology (http://
www.brill.nl/m_catalogue_sub6_id9007.htm).
Videos and Electronic Resources
This section provides annotated descriptions of videos and ﬁlms
that focus on women in developing countries.
Africa Rising: The Grassroots Movement to End Female Genital
Mutilation.
Paula Heredia, color, 62 minutes, DVD, 2009. $295, institutions;
$89, K-12 and public libraries.
Available from Women Make Movies, 462 Broadway, Suite
500WS, New York, NY 10013, http://www.wmm.com.
Produced by Equality Now, this ﬁlm provides a poignant exami-
nation of female genital mutilation in several African countries
including Burkina Faso, Kenya, Mali, Somalia, and Tanzania. It
tells the stories of girls who have experienced FGM and describes
306
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

the actions that African women and men are undertaking to end
this violation of human rights. The activists portrayed in the ﬁlm
work with circumcisers, encouraging them to stop FGM, and urge
the police to implement current laws outlawing FGM in many
jurisdictions; they also provide leadership, encouragement, and
training for girls and young women.
After the Rape: The Muktar Mai Story.
Catherine Ulmer, color, 58 minutes, DVD, 2008. $295, institutions;
$89, K-12 and public libraries.
Available from Women Make Movies, 462 Broadway, Suite
500WS, New York, NY 10013, http://www.wmm.com.
In 2002 in a small remote village in rural Pakistan, a young
woman, Muktar Mai, came to the defense of her brother Shakur
after he was gang-raped by men from a local clan. In an attempt
to deﬂect the accusations, these men accused Shakur of raping a
girl in their clan. To compensate for the alleged rage of the young
girl, the tribal council decreed that they would punish Shakur by
having Muktar gang-raped. Following the rape, most locals
expected Muktar to commit suicide as a result of the humiliation.
Instead she fought back, reported the rape, and received $8,300 in
compensation. She used the money to build two schools for girls
in her village and establish a crisis center for abused women. This
ﬁlm documents her inspiring story and demonstrates the resil-
ience and strength of Pakistani women.
The Al-Hadji and His Wives.
Jie Li, color, 50 minutes, 2006. $39.95, individuals; $195, institutions.
Available from Documentary Educational Resources, 101 Morse
St., Watertown, MA 02472.
This documentary offers a brief glimpse into the lives of an Mbor-
oro Fulani patriarch and his wives and his daughters, including
his 16-year-old daughter Amina. It examines challenges faced by
Al-Hadji Isa and his wives as they try to raise their daughters
according to local tradition; it also explores their religious and
political beliefs. A marriage is arranged for Amina and the video
describes the process and reasoning behind her parents’ decision
to force her into this marriage.
Videos and Electronic Resources
307

Anna from Benin.
Monique Mbeka Phoba, color, 45 minutes, VHS, 2000. $295, insti-
tutions; $89, K-12 and public libraries.
Available from Women Make Movies, 462 Broadway, Suite
500WS, New York, NY 10013, http://www.wmm.com.
One of 31 children from her father’s ﬁve wives, Anna received an
extraordinary opportunity to study in France. This ﬁlm documents
her experiences living with her domineering father in Benin and
later as a 17-year-old alone in France without the protection of her
many family members. Viewers are provided with a unique look
at the struggles of a young woman from a country in which girls
are not expected or encouraged to receive an education.
Enemies of Happiness (Vores Lykkes Fjender).
Color, 59 minutes, VHS/DVD, 2006. $295, institutions; $89, K-12
and public libraries.
Available from Women Make Movies, 462 Broadway, Suite
500WS, New York, NY 10013, http://www.wmm.com.
This ﬁlm, in Farsi and Pasthu with subtitles, portrays the life of
MalalaiJoya,a27-year-oldAfghan womanwhodecriedtheactivities
of corrupt warlords at the Grand Council of tribal elders in 2003. In
2005, she was a candidate for an assembly seat when Afghanistan
held its ﬁrst parliamentary elections in 35 years. The ﬁlm examines
the ﬁnal weeks of her campaign, including the death threats she
receivedandtheresultingrestrictionsonhercampaigning.Itdemon-
strates the obstacles faced by women in Afghanistan today as well as
the strength and power of women ﬁghting for change.
Mammy Water: In Search of the Water Spirits of Nigeria.
Sabine Jell-Bahlsen, color, 60 minutes, 1989. $49.95.
Available from Documentary Educational Resources, 101 Morse
St., Watertown, MA 02472.
Many members of the Ibibio, Ijaw, and Igbo groups of southeastern
Nigeria worship Mammy Water, a goddess believed to provide
wealth and children and comfort in difﬁcult times. This video offers
an inside look into the worship of Mammy Water through an exami-
nation of the rituals and ceremonies performed by priestesses; it
308
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

demonstrates the power of traditional religion in the lives of its
female followers.
New Dimensions.
Joanne Burke, color, 30 minutes each. $295 for all four videos in
the set.
Available from Women Make Movies, 462 Broadway, Suite
500WS, New York, NY 10013, http://www.wmm.com.
Burke has created a series of four 30-minute videos describing the
lives of women in four developing countries. The video entitled
Women of Zimbabwe (1997) examines ﬁve women who changed
their circumstances for the better by becoming carpenters. Women
of Thailand (1997) proﬁles a woman who created a foundation to
work with women in Bangkok’s largest slum. Women of Guatemala
(2000) proﬁles two Mayan women who lead a group of 75 women
providing health education and education about other social
problems that Mayan women face in Guatemala. Speaking Out:
Women, AIDS and Hope in Mali (2002) proﬁles an HIV/AIDS sup-
port project in Bamako and three women who have devoted their
lives to helping those infected in HIV/AIDS.
Poto Mitan: Haitian Women, Pillars of the Global Economy.
Renee Bergan and Mark Schuller, color, 50 minutes, 2009. $29.95,
retail; $79.95, organizations; $195, public performance or educa-
tional use.
Available from Documentary Educational Resources, 101 Morse
St., Watertown, MA 02472.
This documentary depicts the experiences of ﬁve Haitian women
and the effects of neoliberal globalization on their lives. Marie-
Jeanne describes the horriﬁc working conditions she endures to
provide education for her children; Solange details the violence
that has resulted from the economic crisis; Frisline examines Hai-
ti’s current situation; many issues, including public health issues,
facing women in Haiti are illustrated by Therese’s experience and
analysis; and Helene organizes a grassroots effort against vio-
lence after being forced off her land. Interviews with individuals
from various NGOs, government representatives, and educators
provide additional analysis of Haitian women’s daily experiences
and potential solutions to their problems.
Videos and Electronic Resources
309

Through the Negev.
Ya-Hsuan Huang, color, 18 minutes, 2007. $39.95, individuals;
$145, institutions.
Available from Documentary Educational Resources, 101 Morse
St., Watertown, MA 02472.
This short documentary tells the stories of several female refugees
who have escaped from Sudan and traveled through Egypt to
Israel. Naka, a 10-year-old girl, and her mother escaped religious
persecution. An Arab Muslim student was tortured for attempt-
ing to organize a student union and ﬂed Sudan following this hor-
rifying experience. A woman from Darfur describes her life
without her husband. Ida explains simply and powerfully how
having a home is a basic human right.
(Un)veiled: Muslim Women Talk about Hijab.
Ines Hofmann Kanna, color, 36 minutes, 2008. $39.95, individuals;
$145, institutions.
Available from Documentary Educational Resources, 101 Morse
St., Watertown, MA 02472.
Ten Muslim women, now living in Dubai but from a variety of
backgrounds, engage in a lively discussion of their views on the
hijab, the headscarf, and the incorrect assumptions that many out-
siders make about their lives. They talk about their thoughts on
feminism, freedom, human rights, and modern beliefs.
Unveiled Views: Muslim Women Artists Speak Out.
Alba Sotorra, color, DVD, 52 minutes, 2009. $295, institutions; $89,
K-12 and public libraries.
Available from Women Make Movies, 462 Broadway, Suite
500WS, New York, NY 10013, http://www.wmm.com.
This ﬁlm presents the stories of ﬁve Muslim women, describing
their work and aspirations as well as discussing the overall status
of women and human rights in their countries. Alma Suljevic,
from Bosnia, clears landmines near Sarajevo and then sells the
earth from the mineﬁeld in European art galleries. In Turkey Eren
Keskin, a human rights lawyer and activist, works to change laws
that perpetuate domestic violence. Iranian Rashan Bani-Ehmad, a
310
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

ﬁlmmaker, often pushes her country’s censorship policies to the
limit. Moshagan Saadat is an Afghani poet. Nahid Siddiqui, a
Pakistani dancer, continues to teach others even after her work
was banned by her government.
Yindabad.
Mariano Agudo and Rol Guitian, color, 55 minutes, 2007. $49.95,
individuals; $195, institutions.
Available from Documentary Educational Resources, 101 Morse
St., Watertown, MA 02472.
The Narmada Valley Development Project in India was begun in the
1960s to construct over 3,000 dams of varying sizes along the Nar-
mada River. In the process over 2.5 million people, primarily Adiva-
sis or indigenous people, have been forced to relocate. They have
fought for over 20 years for fair compensation for their losses, and
Adivasi women have been particularly vocal in the struggle. This
documentary describes these events from the women’s point of
view, in the process examining the problems associated with focus-
ing on global rather than local development and self-management.
Websites and Blogs
African Women on the Internet
http://www-sul.stanford.edu/depts/ssrg/africa/women.html
This site offers links to sub-Saharan websites that focus on
women in Africa.
Amnesty International
http://www.amnesty.org
This site provides information on Amnesty International and its
human rights activities throughout the world.
Arab Women’s Home Page
http://www.arabinfo.org/arabwomen/main.html
This site provides Arab women worldwide with an open forum in
which to share their experiences. It creates connections among
Websites and Blogs
311

Arab women as well as women from other cultures. Links are
provided to related pages.
Choike
http://blog.choike.org
This portal provides a forum for NGOs working on women’s issues
as well as other important issues in the Global South. It provides a
searchable directory of NGOs as well as in-depth reports on a variety
of women’s issues. It also disseminates information about various
campaigns run by associated NGOs. It is operated by the Instituto
del Tercer Mundo, an NGO in Montevideo, Uruguay.
Eldis Gender Violence Resources
http://www.eldis.org/gender/gender_based_violence.htm
Eldis provides access to a wide variety of resources concerning
development policies, practices, and research. This website offers
free downloads of a wide variety of full-text documents, resource
guides, country proﬁles, email newsletters, and newsfeeds, as well
as breaking news, upcoming events, and job openings.
Honor Killings
http://www.stophonourkillings.com
This website posts information on recent honor killings and pro-
vides forums on various topics regarding honor killings and
related blogs. Individuals and organizations can also post infor-
mation concerning this issue.
Human Rights Country Reports
http://state.gov/g/drl/rls/hrrpt
Country reports on human rights conditions in many countries can
be found at this site hosted by the U.S. Department of State.
One World
http://oneworldgroup.org
A community of over 120 leading global justice organizations is con-
tained at this site, which provides news services and links to related
sourcesofinformation.Itprovidescurrentnews,organizedbycountry
312
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

andbytheme,onissuesrangingfromagriculture,civilrights,andfree-
dom of expression to human rights, women’s rights, poverty.
Population Reference Bureau
http://www.prb.org
The Population Reference Bureau offers a wealth of information
on this website to assist in research activities, from articles and
reports, data and analysis, and webcasts to blogs, online discus-
sions, and other materials.
Siyanda
http://www.siyanda.org
Siyanda is an online database containing resources on a variety of
development and gender-related topics, from education and
employment to gender-based violence and femicide. It provides
short summaries of online resources; many resources are avail-
able for free download. The site also offers an interactive compo-
nent so that those interested in gender issues can communicate
with each other.
Special Rapporteur on Violence against Women
http://www2.ohchr.org/English/issues/women/rapporteur/
This website includes descriptions of the Special Rapporteur’s
mandate as well as annual reports, publications, links to
international standards, and complaint forms for reporting
alleged cases of violence against women.
UN Department of Public Information
http://www.un.org
This site provides information on the United Nations and its pro-
grams, activities, and publications.
UN Development Fund for Women
http://www.unwomen.org
This site offers information about the UN Development Fund for
Women (UNIFEM) and its programs and publications; it also pro-
vides links to other sites related to women in development.
Websites and Blogs
313

UN Millennium Project
http://www.unmillenniumproject.org/index.htm
This site contains extensive information on the Millennium Devel-
opment Goals, including progress reports and related documents.
UN Research Institute for Social Development
http://www.unrisd.org
This agency within the United Nations conducts research on the
social aspects of development. The website provides information
regarding its areas of research and publications as well as up-to-
date news, relevant events, and links to related sites.
UNICEF
http://www.unicef.org/
The UN Children’s Fund (UNICEF) advocates for the rights of
children. This site contains a wide variety of information concern-
ing the rights of children and families and the struggles facing
many women, children, and families in developing countries.
U.S. Department of State
http://www.state.gov/g/drl/rls/hrrpt/
This website provides reports on every country regarding the sta-
tus of its human rights, including women’s rights in education,
medical care, employment, trafﬁcking, and other areas.
Women Watch
http://www.un.org/womenwatch/
This website provides a directory of UN resources on gender and
women’s issues; it is the main gateway to all UN information and
materials on gender equality and the empowerment of women.
World Health Organization
http://www.who.int
The World Health Organization (WHO) focuses on global health
matters. Resources addressing the progress that nations have made
on many health issues of interest to women can be found at this site.
314
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

Glossary
Bride Price
The payment to the bride’s family from the groom’s family,
generally in the form of livestock, goods, or money.
Burqa
An outer garment worn by many Islamic women that almost
completely covers their bodies when they are in public. Their eyes and
hands remain uncovered. Also burka, burkha, or burqua.
Dowry
The money and/or goods that a bride’s family brings to her
husband and his family upon their marriage. Dowry demands can con-
tinue throughout the marriage. Occasionally referred to as “groom
price.”
Fatwa
An Islamic religious ruling including an opinion on a matter of
law issued by an Islamic scholar or other religious authority.
Female Genital Mutilation
All procedures involving partial or com-
plete removal of female genitalia for non-therapeutic reasons. Also
referred to as female genital cutting, female cutting, or female circumcision.
Femicide
The murder of a female simply because she is female.
Hijab
The traditional head covering for Muslim women. Also refers to
the modest dress style of Muslim women.
Infanticide
The intentional killing of infants, most often female infants.
Microenterprise
A small business created using a small amount of
capital and generally employing fewer than 10 people. A popular business
model in developing countries.
Midwife
A person who is trained to assist a woman in childbirth. A
midwife also may provide prenatal care for the mother and postnatal
care for the mother and newborn.
Obstetric Fistula
A serious medical condition in which a hole develops
between the rectum and vagina or the bladder and vagina. Caused by
severe problems during childbirth and lack of adequate medical care.
Often easily repaired when medical care and personnel are available.
Most frequently occurs in rural areas of developing countries. Can also
result for rape or other sexual abuses of women during war.
315

Polygamy
The practice of taking more than one spouse in marriage at
the same time. Polygyny refers to a man taking more than one wife at a
time; polyandry refers to a woman taking more than one husband at a
time.
Purdah
The seclusion of women from the public practiced by Muslims
and some Hindus. It can include exclusion from public observation
through the wearing of clothing that reaches from head to toe or segrega-
tion from the public through the use of enclosures, screens, or curtains.
Sati
Also known as suttee, the practice of Hindu widows (in India)
throwing themselves on the funeral pyres of their husbands. The women
were believed to have failed in using their traditional female powers to
ensure the long life of their husbands.
Shari’a Law
The code of law based on the Koran. The Koran does not
distinguish between religion and other aspects of life; therefore, Shari’a
law governs all of these. Also sharia.
Trafﬁcking, human
The illegal trade of persons for commercial sexual
exploitation or forced labor.
316
Glossary

Index
Abay, Yayeshwork, 84–85
Abay vs. Ashcroft (2004), 84–85
Abdel-Elhameid, Huda, 133
Abgo, Joan, 132
Abortion policies, 69
Abortions, 22, 48, 68–69, 191–98
access to, 47
complications from, 50
controversies, 98
developed countries, 22, 68–69
developing countries, 22, 69
female children, 41
illegal, 22
incest or rape, 100
induced, 22
Roe vs. Wade, 98
statutory laws, 69
taxpayer funds not used for, 99–100
unsafe, 48, 69
Abzug, Bella, 269
Achekzai, Sitara, assassination of
(2009), 138
Achieving education for all (EFA), 38
ACHR. See American Convention on
Human Rights (ACHR)
Additional Protocol to the American
Convention on Human Rights in
the Area of Economic, Social and
Cultural Rights (“Protocol of San
Salvador”) (1988), 187
Adharsa Mahila Sangh (Model
Women’s Organization)
(1947), 109
Afﬁrmative asylum, 80
Afghan Institute of Learning (ALI),
172, 244
Afghanistan:
examination of women by male
physicians (1996), 135
girls going to school, 38
women rejecting veil (1958), 111
AFL-CIO, 116
Africa, 47, xvii
abortions, 69
agricultural activities, 28
AIDS, 24
child marriage, 14
female genital mutilation (FGM),
23, 66, 192
health care workers, 47
land ownership, 58–59
maternal mortality, 50
microloans, 57
regional conventions, 189–91
statutory laws, 59
structural adjustment programs, 12
African-American Labor Center, 116
African (Banjul) Charter on Human
and Peoples’ Rights (1981),
58–60, 190
African Charter on the Rights and
Welfare of the Child, 66
African Training and Research Centre
for Women, 170
African Women and Development: A
History (Tadesse and Snyder), 171
African Women and Feminism: Reﬂecting
on the Politics of Sisterhood
(Oyewumi, ed), 295
Africa Regional Coordinating
Committee for the Integration of
Women in Development, 171
317

Africa Women’s Development and
Communications Network
(FEMNET), 244
Age:
health, 20
patriarchy, 5
Agency for International
Development, 77
The Agency of Women in Asia
(Parker, ed), 295
Agency reports, 300–4
Agricultural:
activities, 28, 57–58
training, 112
Agricultural workers, 93
AIDS, 24–25. See also HIV/AIDS;
prevention, 125–26
al-Ahmad al-Sabah, Jaber, 135
Alakija, Aduke (b. 1921), 142
Albright, Madeleine, 266
al-Gebali, Tahani, 166
Algeria, forcing women to follow
Islamic practices (1990), 127
al-Haq, Zia, 116
al-Huwauder, Wajeha, 138
ALI. See Afghan Institute of Learning
(ALI)
Ali Jinnah, Mohammad, 116
All Arab Federation of Women, 168
All-India Child Marriage Abolition
League, 167
All-India Muslim Women’s
Committee, 157
All-India Weavers’ Foundation, 145
All-India Women’s Conference (1927),
108, 167
All Latin American Women’s
Conference (1981), 120
All Pakistan Women’s Association, 159
Al-Said, Aminah (1914–1995), 141–42
Al-Said, Karimah, 141
Alvarado, Rodi, 86–87
Amare, Burhan, 84–85
Amartieﬁo, Evelyn, 109
American Convention on Human
Rights (“Pact of San Jose, Costa
Rica”) (1960), 186
American Junior College for Women, 256
Aminata, Sangare, 133
Amnesty International, 149
Andrei Sakharov Human Rights
Prize, 144
Angola, and abortions, 69
Antiterrorism and Effective Death
Penalty Act (1996), 91
Apne Aap, 244–45
Aquino, Benigno, Jr., 142–43
Aquino, Corazon (1933–2009), 142–43
Arab Charter on Human Rights, 60
Arab Lawyers Federation, 123
Arab Women’s Solidarity Association
(AWSA), 152, 245
Arbour, Louise, 136
Argentina:
Housewives’ Trade Union
(1984), 123
legalizing divorce (1954), 110
Mothers and Grandmothers of the
Plaza de Mayo (1977), 116–17
reform of civil code, 108
Argentine Union of Women (1936), 108
Aris, Michael, 143
Arranged marriages, 14
Ashcroft, John, 87
Ashtiani, Sakineh Mohammadi, 139
Asia:
farming activities, 28
female genital mutilation (FGM),
23, 66
HIV/AIDS, 53
property rights and natural
resources, 60
statutory laws, 59
Asian-Paciﬁc Resource and Research
Centre for Women (ARROW), 246
Asian Women’s Human Rights
Council, 246
Asian Women’s Resource Exchange
(AWORC), 63
Asia Paciﬁc Forum on Women, Law,
and Development (APWLD), 245
Assets, lack of access to, 27
Associated Country Women of the
World (ACWW), 246–47
Association for the Development of
Research on Women in the Arab
World (1982), 120
Association of African Women for
Research and Development
(AAWORD), 247
318
Index

Asylum, 79–80
Carmen Gomez, 87–88
defensive, 80–81
Department of Homeland Security
(DHS), 91
derivative, 83
detention while waiting
determination, 90–93
determination of, 80–81
difﬁculties, 78–79, 90
domestic abuse, 86–88
fears of persecution, 93
female genital mutilation (FGM),
82–86
forced marriage, 89–90
gender, 81
mandatory detention, 91–92
Mohammed vs. Gonzales (2005), 85
Oforji vs. Ashcroft, 83
Olowo vs. Ashcroft, 83–84
persecution, 81
protection for families, 81
rape, 86–88
reasons for, 81–90
In re Fauziya Kasinga, 82
religion, 89
returning to native countries, 91–92
Aung San Suu Kyi (b. 1945), 143–44
Australia, and femicide, 45
Austria, UN World Conference on
Human Rights (1993), 129–30
Averting Maternal Death and
Disability (AMDD)program, 247
AWORC. See Asian Women’s Resource
Exchange (AWORC)
Babiker Bedri Foundation for Women’s
Studies and Research (Sudan),
119
Bachelet, Michelle, 139
Banco Solidario (Bolivia), 28, 57
Bandaranaike, Sirimavo (1916–2000),
111–12, 144–45, 160
Bandaranaike, Solomon, 112, 144, 160
Bangladesh:
cell phone network, 63
export-oriented industries, 28
farming activities, 28
femicide, 45
land ownership, 60
maternal and child mortality
levels, 19
microloans, 56
midwives, 19
murder of wives by husbands, 25
prime minister of, 172
secondary school for girls, 44
Bangladesh Nationalist Party, 172–73
Bangladesh Women’s Health Coalition
(BWHC), 247–48
Barrios, Domitila, 132
Beijing Declaration and Platform for
Action, 9
Beijing Platform for Action (2000), 135
Ben Avi, Mina, 114
Bernardino, Minerva, 109
Beyond the Veil: Male-Female Dynamic
in Modern Muslim Society
(Mernissi), 163
Bhatt, Ela (b.1933), 145
Bhutto, Benazir (1953–2007), 145–47
Bhutto, Zulﬁkar Ali, 146
BIA. See Board of Immigration Appeals
(BIA)
Bina Swadaya, 248
Biographical sketches:
Aduke Alakija (b. 1921), 142
Aisha Ra´teb (b. 1928), 166
Aminah Al-Said (1914–1995), 141–42
Ana Figuero (1908–1970), 153
Angie Brooks-Randolph
(1928–2007), 148–49
Annie Ruth Baeta Jiagge
(1918–1996), 157
Asha Hagi (b. 1962), 155–56
Asma Jahangir (b. 1952), 156
Aung San Suu Kyi (b. 1945), 143–44
Begum Khaleda Zia (b. 1945), 172–73
Begum Liaquat Ali Khan
(1905–1990), 159
Benazir Bhutto (1953–2007), 145–47
Bertha Lutz (1894–1976), 160–61
Chandrika Bandaranaike
Kumaratunga (b. 1946), 160
Charlotte Bunch (b. 1944), 149
Corazon Aquino (1933–2009), 142–43
Dhanvanthi Rama Rau (1893–1987),
166–67
Ela Bhatt (b. 1933), 145
Elise Boulding (1920–2010), 147–48
Index
319

Ellen Johnson-Sirleaf (b. 1938), 158
Ester Boserup (1910–1999), 147
Eugenia Charles (1919–2005),
150–51
Fatima Jinnah (1893–1967), 157–58
Fatima Mernissi (b. 1940), 163–64
Fumilayo Ransome-Kuti
(1900–1978), 166
Gaositwe Keagakwa Tibe Chiepe
(b. 1926), 151
Gita Sen (b. 1948), 167
Gwendoline Konie (1938–2009),
159–60
Helvi Sipila¨ (1915–2009), 169–70
Huda Shaarawi (1879–1947), 168
Indira Gandhi (1917–1984), 154–55
Isabel Peron (b. 1931), 165
Jeanne Martin Cisse´ (b. 1926), 151–52
Leticia Ramos Shahani (b. 1929),
168–69
Lydia Gueiler Tejada (b. 1921), 155
Margaret Snyder (b. 1929), 170
Mary Tadesse (b. 1932), 171
Mu Sochua (b. 1954), 171
Nawal El Saadawi (b. 1931), 152
Nibuya Sabalsajaray (1951–1974), 167
Rigoberta Menchu Tum (b. 1959),
162–63
Sakena Yacoobi, 172
Shirin Ebadi (b. 1947), 152
Shushila Nayar (1914–2001), 164
Sirimavo Bandaranaike (1916–2000),
144–45
Teurai Ropa Nhongo (b. 1955),
164–65
Violeta Barrios de Chamorro
(b. 1929), 149–50
Wangari Maathai (b. 1940), 161
Blogs, 311–14
Board of Immigration Appeals (BIA),
81, 83
Board of Trustees of the International
Research and Training Institute
for the Advancement of Women
(INSTRAW), 171
Bogyoke Aung San, 143
Boserup, Ester (1910–1999), 10, 147
Botswana:
Expert Group Meeting on
Population and Women (1992), 128
ﬁrst female minister of commerce,
151
Boulding, Elise (1920–2010), 147–48
Boys:
morality rates, 15
nutrition, 20
BRAC Centre, 248–49
Branch for the Promotion of Equality
for Men and Women, 7
Brazil:
Center for the Defense of the Rights
of Women (1980), 120
land ownership, 59
law considering women adults
(1962), 112
Moviemento dos Trabalhadores
Sem Terra, 59
property rights, 59
protesting against military rule
(1977), 117
UN Conference on Environment
and Development (1992), 129
woman president (2010), 139
women committing murder
(1983), 122–23
Brazil Federation for the Advancement
of Women, 160
Bride-burning, 26
Bride price, 6, 315
Brooks-Randolph, Angie (1928–2007),
148–49
Brunei Darussalum, and right
to vote, 222
Bunch, Charlotte (b. 1944), 149
Burqa, 315
Burundi, and education, 200
Bush, George W., 100, 102, 158
Business training, 112
Cameroon:
Islamic married women, 20
women as farmers, 28
Campaign for Female Education
(CAMFED), 39, 249
Campaign to End Fistula, 254
Canada:
femicide, 45
refugees and gender-related
persecution (1993), 130
Cardenal, Pedro Chamorro, 150
320
Index

CARE International, 249
Caribbean, xix
health care workers, 47
major issues of concern (1987), 125
maternal mortality, 50
microloans, 57
relevant women’s issues (1990), 127
Carter, Jimmy, 101–2
Casanova, Aura Celina, 113
CEDAW. See Convention on the
Elimination of All Forms of
Discrimination against Women
(CEDAW)
Center for Africa’s International
Relations, 158
Center for Reproductive Rights, 249–50
Center for the Defense of the Rights of
Women (1980), 120
Center for Women’s Global
Leadership, 250
Center for Women’s Resources, 250–51
Central America, and land
ownership, 59–60
Central Asia, xviii, 60
Central Asia Institute, 251
Centre for Development and
Population Activities
(CEDPA), 251
Centre for Social Development and
Humanitarian Affairs (CSDHA),
169–70
Centre for Southeast Asian Studies, 143
Ceylon, female prime minister, 111–12
Chamorro, Violeta Barrios de (b. 1929),
149–50
Charles, Eugenia (1919–2005), 150–51
Charter of the United Nations, 176, 182
Chaste Wives and Prostitute Sisters:
Patriarchy and Prostitution among
the Bedias of India (Agrawal), 280
Chiepe, Gaositwe Keagakwa Tibe
(b. 1926), 151
Childbirth, 192
child marriage, 43
dangers of, 49
maternal mortality, 23
Child marriage, 6, 14, 42–44
ﬁghting against, 109
sexually transmitted diseases
(STDs), 24
Children:
health and well-being of, 103–4
reductions in spending on, 12
Chile:
abortions, 69
Movement of Women Slum
Dwellers (MOMUPO) (1982), 120
National Women’s Service
(SERNAM) (1990), 127
Women’s Bureau, 153
women’s organizations protesting
Pinochet regime (1983), 122
Chimoio, 164
China:
female infanticide, 41
forced marriages, 90
NGO Forum on Women (1995), 134
one-child policy, 41
Circumcision, 23–24
Cisse´, Jeanne Martin (b. 1926), 151–52
Citibank, 158
Class, 4–5
Clinton, Bill, 100, 102
Clinton, Hillary Rodham, 171, 266
Clitoridectomy, 23
Colombia:
All Latin American Women’s
Conference (1981), 120
Asociacio´n Nacional de Mujeres
Campesinas e Indigenas, 59
Bolivian ambassador to, 155
National Women’s Congress
(1979), 118
Regional Meeting on Women and
Health in Latin America
(1984), 123
Commission on Human Rights, 176
Commission on Investigation of Assets
of Senior Public Servants and
Named Political Leaders, 157
Commission on Proposals for a
National Academy of Peace and
Conﬂict Resolution, 148
Commission on the Status of
Women (CSW), 7, 9, 109,
111, 115, 147, 157, 161, 169–70,
176–77, 274
Declaration on the Elimination of
All Forms of Discrimination
against Women (1967), 112
Index
321

Committee for Asian Women (CAW),
251–52
Committee of the Churches
Participation in Development,
Christian Council of Ghana, 157
Committee on the Conditions of
Women (1984), 123
Committee on the Status of Women in
India (1975), 115
Commoners People’s Party, 166
Communities, and traditions, 36
Condition of women:
developing countries, 191–242
domestic violence, 207–21
education, 192, 198, 200
elections, 222
employment, 222
female genital mutilation (FGM),
192
health, 191–92
labor, 222
prostitution, 222
rape, 207–21
sex trafﬁcking, 222
voting, 222
Conference for the International
Women’s Decade (1980),
119–20
Conference of African Women
(1962), 151
Conference on American States (1928),
108
Conference on International Women’s
Year, 115
Conference on Population
(1994), 100
Confrontation, 152
Congress-I Party, 154
Contraceptives, 18, 21–22, 49, 191–92
access to, 47
child marriage, 43
developed countries, 69
developing countries, 22
Controversies:
abortion, 68–69
female genital mutilation (FGM),
66–68
honor killings, 70
Convention against Discrimination in
Education (1960), 180
Convention on Eliminating
Discrimination in Education
(1960), 111
Convention on the Elimination of All
Forms of Discrimination against
Women (CEDAW), 8, 42, 58, 77,
101–103, 177, 183, 259
Convention on the Nationality of
Married Women (1957), 111, 179
Convention on the Nationality of
Women (1933), 189
Convention on the Political Rights of
Women (1952), 179
Convention on the Rights of the Child
(CRC), 42, 66, 86, 103–4
Convention on the Suppression of the
Trafﬁc in Persons and of the
Exploitation of the Prostitution of
Others (1949), 177–78
Coordinating Bureau for Women’s
Groups, 133
Costa Rica, Women and Health
Conference (1987), 125
Council of African Advisers to the
World Bank, 171
Council of the Human Rights
Institute, 169
Countries:
gender inequality, 53
HIV/AIDS, 53
socio-economic classes, 3
CRC. See Convention on the Rights of
the Child (CRC)
Creating Hope International, 172
CSDHA. See Centre for Social
Development and Humanitarian
Affairs (CSDHA)
CSW. See Commission on the Status of
Women (CSW)
CUC. See Peasant Unity Committee
(CUC)
Cultural context and practices, 6
Cultural relativism, 5–6, 36–37
Cultural traditions, 36
Cultures:
beliefs and practices, 37
characteristics of, 6
circumcision, 23–24
domestic violence, 44
gender inequality, 53
322
Index

gender roles, 3
HIV/AIDS, 53
modesty and virginity, 48
patriarchy, 4–5
socio-economic classes, 3
women not allowed to work outside
home, 55
Dakar Framework for Action, 38
Dar al Hilal Publishing House, 141
DAWN. See Development Alternatives
with Women for a New Era
(DAWN)
DC Women’s Liberation, 149
Debayle, Anastasio Somoza, 150
Debayle, Luis Somoza, 150
Decade for Women (1976–1985), 119
Declaration of Philadelphia, 179
Declaration on the Elimination of All
Forms of Discrimination against
Women (1967), 112
Declaration on the Elimination of
Discrimination against Women,
7, 182
Declaration on the Protection of
Women and Children in
Emergency and Armed Conﬂict
(1974), 182–83
Defensive asylum, 80–81
Democracy Award of the National
Endowment for Democracy, 172
Department of Homeland Security
(DHS), 81, 87–88, 91
Derivative asylum, 83
Detention while waiting asylum
determination, 90–93
Developed countries:
abortions, 22, 68–69
boys versus girls, birth of, 41
contraception, 69
marriages, 14
maternal mortality rates, 18
population growth, 99
preference for males, 15–16
Developing countries:
abortions, 22, 69
access to health care, 18–19
arranged marriages, 14
child marriage, 14
condition of women, 191–242
contraceptives, 22
cultural relativism, 5–6
deﬁning, 1–2
digital divide, 62–63
education, 16
extended family, 15
family planning services, 99
ﬁres, 21
illegal abortions, 22
industry, 28–29
marriage partners, 36
maternal mortality rates, 18
occupational health, 21
prostitution, 25
rape, 26
women as property, 13
women obeying husbands, 25
Development, Crisis, and Alternative
Visions: Third World Women’s
Perspectives (Sen and Grown), 167
Development activities, 9–11
Development agencies approaches,
9–11
Development Alternatives with
Women for a New Era (DAWN),
167, 252
Development in an Insecure and Gendered
World: The Relevance of the
Millennium Goals (Leckie, ed), 290
Development process, history of
women in, 6–13
Development programs, 10–11
Development with a Body: Sexuality,
Human Rights and Development
(Cornwall, Correa, and Jolly,
eds), 284
de Vincenti, Julia Rivera, 113
DHS. See Department of Homeland
Security (DHS)
Digital divide, 62–63
Directory of organizations, 243–77
Discrimination:
employment, 27
women, 71
Discrimination (Employment and
Occupation) Convention
(1958), 179
Dishonor and rape, 26
Division for Social Policy and
Development, 274
Index
323

Doe, Samuel, 158
Domestic violence, 44–45, 65,
137, 207–21
asylum, 86–88
families, 44–45
femicide, 45
honor killings, 70
immigration, 86–88
Matter of R-A-, 86–87
public awareness campaigns, 45
reasons for and causes of, 44
Domestic Workers are Workers: Decent
Work for All, 252
Dominica Freedom Party, 151
Dorkenoo, Efua, 130
Dowry, 6, 45–47, 315
illegality, 112
Dowry: Bridging the Gap between Theory
and Practice (Bradley, Tomalin,
and Subramanian, eds), 282
Dowry demands, 46
Dowry murders, 26, 46–47, 112
demonstrations against (1979), 118
Dowry Prohibition Act (1961),
45–46, 112
Dowry Prohibition (Amendment) Act
of 1984, 123
Dowry-related violence, 134
Dowry requests, 47
Dreams of Trespass: Tales of a Harem
Girlhood (Mernissi), 163–64
Dreams of Trespass (Mernissi), 164
Duhulow, Ausha Ibrahim, 137
East Asia, xviii
maternal mortality, 50
Eastern African-Sub-regional Support
Initiative for the Advancement of
Women (EASSI), 252
Ebadi, Shirin (b. 1947), 152
Economic and Social Council
(ECOSOC) (1958), 7, 67, 111,
125, 243–44
Economic Commission of Africa
Women’s Programme (1972), 114
Economies:
rebuilding, 11–12
women’s contribution to, 54
ECOSOC. See Economic and Social
Council (ECOSOC)
Ecuador:
ﬁrst female senator (1969), 113
microloans, 57
sterilizing peasant women (1969),
113
Education, 16–18, 37–40, 192, 200
access to, 111, 198
All-India Women’s Conference
(1927), 108
as basic right, 38–39
beneﬁts of, 17–18
child marriage, 43
contraceptives, 21
costs of, 16
cultural or religious beliefs, 16
ﬁnancial resources to support, 38–39
gender-based discrimination, 39
government policies, 201–7
importance of, 126, 200
literacy, 201–7
males, preference for, 15
measuring successes and failures,
39–40
positive female role models, 18
pregnancy, 17
rural areas, 17, 38
safety of daughters, 16
school enrollment, 201–7
universal primary, 38
urban areas, 17
women as adults, 40
EEOC. See Equal Employment
Opportunity Commission
(EEOC)
EFA. See achieving education for
all (EFA)
Egypt:
abortions, 69
arrest of feminists (1981), 120
Committee on the Conditions
of Women (1984), 123
honor killings, 70
International Conference on
Population and Development
(1994), 131
niqab (2009), 138
protesting oppressive policies of
British protectorate (1919), 107
reversing women’s gains
(1976), 116
324
Index

Supreme Council of Family
Planning (1956), 110
Egyptian Press Syndicate Executive
Board, 141
Egyptian Women, 168
Elected representatives, 234–38
Elections, 222
Electronic resources, 306–11
Eliminating Female Genital Mutilation:
An Interagency Statement,
OHCHR, UNAIDS, UNDP,
UNECA, UNESCO, UNFPA,
UNHCR, UNICEF, UNIFEM,
WHO (World Health
Organization), 303
Ellis Island, 90
El Saadawi, Nawal (b. 1931), 64, 117,
120, 152, 245
El-Sadat, Jihan, 119
El Sherbini Fadi, Gawaher Saad, 132
Employment, 27–29, 222
ability to work outside home, 54–55
agricultural activities, 28
beneﬁts of organizing, 29
discrimination, 27
export-oriented industries, 28
gender gap in pay and positions, 56
hazardous working conditions, 54
informal sector of economy, 29, 55
labor participation rates, 239–41
microcredit programs, 54
microenterprise, 56–57
problems, 54–57
rural areas, 55
service sectors, 29
sexual stratiﬁcation, 28–29
urban areas, 55
wages, 27
Empowering women, 12, 30, 131, 133
Engender Health, 253
EOIR. See Executive Ofﬁce for
Immigration Review (EOIR)
Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission (EEOC), 94
Equality Now, 253
Equal Opportunities in Education for
Women and Girls (1983), 122
Equal Remuneration Convention
(1951), 178
Ershad, Hossain Mohammad, 172–76
Ethiopia and Female genital mutilation
(FGM), 85
Excision, 23
Executive Ofﬁce for Immigration
Review (EOIR), 80
Expert Group Meeting on Population
and Women (1992), 128
Expert Group Meeting on Women and
Economic Decision-Making
(1994), 132
Expert Meeting on Multidisciplinary
Research on Women in the Arab
World (1982), 120
Extended family, 15
Families:
cultural traditions, 68
domestic violence, 44–45
dowry, 46
educating daughters, 40
female children, 41
male children, preference for, 15–16,
40–42
marriage, 13–15
patriarchal, 5
problems, 40–47
women’s responsibilities, 14
Family Care International (FCI), 253–54
Family planning, 48–49, 109, 112,
193–98
maternal mortality, 50–51
Family Planning Association of
India, 167
Family planning policy, 98–101
Family planning services, 99, 191
Family Responsibilities Convention
(No. 156) (1981), 120
Farmers and Merchants: Some
Observations on Women and the
State in Africa (Snyder), 170
Fatima Jinnah Women’s Medical
College, 157
Fatwa, 315
Federal Nigeria Society for the
Blind, 142
Federal Prohibition of Female Genital
Mutilation Act, 95
Federation of African Women
Entrepreneurs, 171
Federation of Ghana Women (1953), 109
Index
325

Female children, 41, 46
Female circumcision, 117
Female Education and Teacher
Training Program, 172
Female Genital Mutilation: Legal,
Cultural and Medical Issues
(Skaine), 298
Female genital mutilation (FGM), 18,
23–24, 192, 315
Abay vs. Ashcroft (2004), 84–85
asylum, 82–86
immigrants, 95–98
Oforji vs. Ashcroft, 83
Olowo vs. Ashcroft, 83–84
prevention, 66, 119
prohibiting, 79
reasons for practicing, 67–68
In re Fauziya Kasinga, 82
state statutes, 96–97
statutes and enforcement status,
199–200
women who have, 84
Female infanticide, 41
Female mortality, and unsafe
abortions, 69
Female refugees, 64–66
Females, as sex trafﬁcking victims, 52
Female Sex Trafﬁcking in Asia: The
Resilience of Patriarchy in a
Changing World
(Samarasinghe), 297
Female Supreme Court Justices of the
Spanish-Speaking Americas and
Spain (2008), 137
Femicide, 45, 315
Feminist Agendas and Democracy in Latin
America (Jaquette, ed), 288–89
FGM. See female genital mutilation
(FGM)
Figuero, Ana (1908–1970), 153
FINCA International, 57, 254
Finnish National Committee on
UNIFEM, 170
First global feminist meeting
(1979), 118
First International Conference on
Dowry and Bride-Burning
(1995), 134
First World Conference on Women,
7–8, 177
First World countries, 1
Fistula Foundation, 171, 254
Food and Agriculture Organization of
the United Nations, 277
Forced marriage and asylum, 89–90
Foreign Assistance Act (1961), 99
Foreign Assistance Act, Percy
Amendment, 114
Forum for the Restoration of
Democracy, 162
Forward-Looking Strategies for the
Advancement of Women (1985),
8, 61
Fourth World Conference on Women
(1995), 9, 62, 133–34, 259, 266, 274
Expert Group Meeting on Women
and Economic Decision-Making
(1994), 132
Fourth World Conference on Women
Beijing Declaration, 184
France:
ban on burqas and other Islamic
face coverings (2011), 139
International Conference on the
Implications of AIDS for Mothers
and Children (1989), 126
Muslim women wearing burqas, 68
Freedom Party, 160
Friends of WWB/India, 57
From Outrage to Courage: Women Taking
Action for Health and Justice
(Murray), 292–93
From Patriarchy to Empowerment:
Women’s Participation, Movements,
and Rights in the Middle East,
North Africa, and South Asia
(Moghadam, ed), 291–92
Fujimori, Alberto, 133
Gaidinliu, Rani, 109
Gandhi, Feroze, 154
Gandhi, Indira (1917–1984), 154–55
Gandhi, Mahatma, 164
Gandhi, Rajiv, 155
Gao, Hong Ying, 89
Gao vs. Gonzales, 70, 89
GBM. See Green Belt Movement (GBM)
Gender, 3–4
asylum, 81
inequality, entrenched nature of, 68
326
Index

Gender, Politics, and Islam (Saliba, Allen,
and Howard, eds), 297
Gender, Rights and Development:
A Global Sourcebook
(Mukhopadhyay and Meer,
eds), 292
Gender and International Aid in
Afghanistan: The Politics and
Effects of Intervention (Abirafeh),
279
Gender and the Digital Economy:
Perspectives from the Developing
World (Ng and Mitter, eds), 294
Gender-Based Violence (Terry, ed), 299
Gender discrimination resources,
22–23
Gender equality, 12–13
information and communications
technologies (ICTs), 62
Gender gap, 56
Gender Mainstreaming in Conﬂict
Transformation: Building
Sustainable Peace (Onubogu,
Etchart, Baksh, and Johnson), 294
The Gender Politics of Development:
Essays in Hope and Despair
(Rai), 296
Gender roles:
development activities, 11
versus sex roles, 2–4
General Conference of the
International Labour
Organization, 178
General Conference of the UN
Educational, Scientiﬁc and
Cultural Organization, 180
Ghana:
Accra destroyed by government
(1979), 117–18
midwives, 19
Ghana National Council on Women
and Development, 157
Ghana YWCA, 157
Gindy, Aida, 113
Girls:
education, 17, 38–39
employment, 17
illiteracy, 37
morality rates, 15
nutrition, 20
schools safe for, 39
sexual assault on, 53
universal equal rights law, 41
Girls’ Education in the 21st Century:
Gender Equality, Empowerment,
and Economic Growth (Tembon
and Fort, eds), 299
Global Campaign to Stop Violence
against Women (2007), 137
Global Employment Trends for Women
(2009), 222, 300–301
Global Empowerment of Women:
Responses to Globalization and
Politicized Religions (Elliott,
ed), 285
Global Fund for Women, 172, 254–55
Global Gag Rule, 77, 98, 100–101
Global Gender Issues in the New
Millennium (Peterson and
Runyan), 296
Global Grassroots, 255
Globalization and Third World Women:
Exploitation, Coping and Resistance
(Lindio-McGovern and
Walliman, eds), 291
Global North, 2
development activities, 8
equality for women, 7–8
Global Prescriptions: Gendering Health
and Human Rights (Petchesky),
295–96
Global South, 2
development activities, 8
Global Strategy for Women’s and
Children’s Health (2010), 138
Global Video Network, 145
Gomez, Carmen, 87–88
Gonorrhea, 24–25
Government of National
Reconstruction, 150
Governments:
citizens, 36–37
educational policies, 201–7
enforcing enacted laws, 71
importance of education, 16, 200
Grameen Bank (Bangladesh), 27, 40,
56, 63, 255
Grameen Phones, 63
Grassroots NGOs by Women for Women:
The Driving Force of Development
Index
327

in India (Handy, Kassam, Feeney,
and Ranade), 287
The Green Belt Movement: Sharing the
Approach and the Experience
(Maathai), 162
Green Belt Movement (GBM), 161–62
The Green Belt Movement (Maathai), 162
Gueiler Tejada, Lydia (b. 1921), 155
Guestworker programs, 93–94
H-2 program, 93
H-2A program, 93–94
H-2B program, 93–94
Hagi, Asha (b. 1962), 155–56
The Hague workshop on national
liberation and development
(1980), 119
The Harem Within: Tales of a Moroccan
Girlhood (Mernissi), 164
Harvard University, Department of
Global Health and Population,
167
Hawaa-Eve, 141
Health, 191–92
age, 20
improving, 128–29
Health care, 18–20
access to, 18–19, 50
availability of, 47–48
contraceptives, 18
cultural and religious practices,
47–48
family planning, 48–49
female genital mutilation (FGM), 18
health care providers, 19–20
maternal mortality, 18–19, 49–51
midwives, 19
pregnancy, 18
problems, 47–51
reproductive health issues, 47
sexually transmitted diseases, 18
Health care providers, 191–92, 193–98
urban areas and, 47–48
Helms, Jesse, 99, 102
Helvi Sipila¨ Seminar, 170
The Hidden Face of Eve: Women in
the Arab World (El Saadawi),
117, 153
Hijab, 315
Hiring illegal aliens, 78
History of women in development
process, 6–13
A History of Women’s Seclusion in the
Middle East: The Veil in the Looking
Glass (Chamberlin), 283
HIV/AIDS, 24, 53–54
male circumcision, 67
Hlass, Laurice, 113
Home, ability to work outside, 54–55
Home Work Convention (1996),
184–85
Honduras:
abortions, 69
Federacio´n Honduren˜a de Mujeres
Campesinas, 59
Honor killings, 70, 136
Housewives’ Trade Union
(1984), 123
Hudood Ordinances (1979),
118, 146
Human rights, 30
Human Rights Commission of
Pakistan, 156
Human Rights First report (2009), 92
Human trafﬁcking, 316
The Hunger Project, 255–56
Hussein, Aziza, 114
I, Rigoberta Menchu, An Indian Woman
in Guatemala (Menchu), 163
Ibrahim, Gigi, 64
ICE. See Immigration and Customs
Enforcement (ICE)
ICTs. See Information and
communications technologies
(ICTs)
IDB. See Inter-American Development
Bank (IDB)
IICD. See International Institute for
Communication and
Development (IICD)
IIRIRA. See Illegal Immigration
Reform and Immigrant
Responsibility Act of 1996
(Public Law 104–208)
(IIRIRA)
I Laugh So I Won’t Cry: Kenya’s Women
Tell the Stories of Their Lives
(Halperin), 287
Illegal abortions, 22
328
Index

Illegal immigrants, 78
Illegal Immigration Reform and
Immigrant Responsibility
Act of 1996 (Public Law
104–208) (IIRIRA), 78–79,
91, 96
ILO. See International Labour
Organization (ILO)
IMF. See International Monetary
Fund (IMF)
Immigrants:
cultural and language barriers, 95
cultural beliefs, 95
detention, history of, 90–93
female genital mutilation (FGM),
95–98
illegal, 78
life in United States, 95–98
trafﬁcking, 94–95
Immigration and Customs
Enforcement (ICE), 91–92
Immigration and Nationality Act
(INA) (1952), 90
Immigration and Nationality Act
(INA) (1965), 78
H-2 program, 93
Immigration and Naturalization
Service (INS), 91, 96
Immigration in United States: Abay vs.
Ashcroft (2004), 84–85
afﬁrmative asylum, 80
asylum, 79–80
Carmen Gomez, 87–88
country-speciﬁc quotas, 78
defensive asylum, 80–81
Department of Homeland Security
(DHS), 91
detention while waiting asylum
determination, 90–93
determination of asylum, 80–81
difﬁculties for asylum, 78–79
domestic abuse, 86–88
guestworker programs, 93–94
mail order brides, 79
Mohammed vs. Gonzales (2005), 85
political asylum, 79
rape, 86–88
reasons for asylum, 81–90
refugee status, 79–80
trafﬁcking, 94–95
Immigration Judges, 80–81, 83
Immigration Reform and Control Act
(1986), 78
INA. See Immigration and Nationality
Act (INA)
Incest and abortions, 100
Income Differentials and Gender
Inequality: Wives Earning More
than Husbands in Dar es Salaam,
Tanzania (Cloutier), 283–84
India:
amending Hindu Succession Act of
1956, 137
bride-burning, 26
divorce (1954), 110
dowry, 46–47
dowry murder demonstrations
(1979), 118
dowry murders, 26, 46–47
Dowry Prohibition Act (1961),
45–46, 112, 134
Dowry Prohibition (Amendment)
Act (1984), 123
family planning, 109
female children, 46
female infanticide, 41
girls as property, 14–15
honor killings, 70
Indian Penal Code, 46
land succession, 60
marital rape, 26–27
microloans, 56
outlawing polygamylegislation,
110
outlawing sati (widow-burning)
legislation (1956), 110
pro-contraceptive campaign
(1982), 122
property rights (2005), 137
protests against British occupation
and rule of (1947), 109
right to have abortion (1971), 113
women’s organizations and women
who have died from burns
(1983), 122
Indian Institute of Advanced
Study, 143
Indian Institute of Management, 167
Indian Penal Code, 46
Indigenous women, 136
Index
329

Indonesia:
female genital mutilation (FGM),
66, 192
ﬁrst women’s bank (1933), 108
Indraprastha College for Women, 159
Industrial nations, and digital divide,
62–63
Industries, 28–29
Infanticide, 315
Inﬁbulation, 23
Information and communications
technologies (ICTs), 61–64
In re Alvarado, 8, 87
INS. See Immigration and
Naturalization Service (INS)
Institute for Women’s Studies in the
Arab World (1973), 114, 256
INSTRAW. See International Research
and Training Institute for the
Advancement of Women
(INSTRAW)
Inter-African Committee on
Traditional Practices (1984), 123
Inter-African Committee on
Traditional Practices Affecting
the Health of Women and
Children (IAC), 256
Inter-Agency Network on Women and
Gender Equality (IANWGE), 276
Inter-American Commission of
Women (CIM) (1933), 108, 273
Inter-American Commission of
Women from Brazil, 161
Inter-American Committee on
Traditional Practices Affecting
the Health of Women and
Children, 66
Inter-American Convention on
Support Obligations (1989), 189
Inter-American Convention on the
Granting of Civil Rights to
Women (1949), 188
Inter-American Convention on the
Granting of Political Rights to
Women (1948), 188
Inter-American Convention on the
Prevention, Punishment, and
Eradication of Violence against
Women (“Convention of Belem
do Para”) (1994), 188–89
Inter-American conventions, statutes,
and declarations, 186–89
Inter-American Development Bank
(IDB): Task Force on Women
(1994), 131
women in development (WID)
activities (1991), 127–28
International Academy of Trial
Lawyers, 142
International AIDS Conference
(1986), 125
International Alliance for Suffrage and
Equal Citizenship, 167
International Alliance of Women, 256–57
International Center for Research on
Women (ICRW), 257
International Confederation of
Midwives, 257
International Conference of Women, 168
International Conference on
Population (1974), 99
International Conference on
Population (1984), 99
International Conference on
Population and Development
(1994), 131
International Conference on the
Implications of AIDS for Mothers
and Children (1989), 126
International Convention on the
Protection of the Rights of All
Migrant Workers and Members
of Their Families (1990), 183–84
International conventions and
protocols:
Charter of the United Nations, 176
Commission of the Status of Women
(1946), 176–77
Convention against Discrimination
in Education (1960), 180
Convention on the Elimination of
All Forms of Discrimination
against Women (CEDAW)
(1979), 183
Convention on the Nationality of
Married Women (1957), 179
Convention on the Political Rights
of Women (1952), 179
Convention on the Suppression of
the Trafﬁc in Persons and of the
330
Index

Exploitation of the Prostitution of
Others (1949), 177–78
Declaration on the Elimination of
Discrimination against Women
(1967), 182
Declaration on the Protection of
Women and Children in
Emergency and Armed Conﬂict
(1974), 182–83
Discrimination (Employment and
Occupation) Convention (1958), 179
Equal Remuneration Convention
(1951), 178
Fourth World Conference on
Women Beijing Declaration, 184
Home Work Convention (1996),
184–85
International Convention on the
Protection of the Rights of All
Migrant Workers and Members
of Their Families (1990), 183–84
International Covenant on Civil and
Political Rights (1966), 181
International Covenant on
Economic, Social, and Cultural
Rights (1966), 180–81
Protocol to Prevent, Suppress, and
Punish Trafﬁcking in Persons,
Especially Women and Children,
Supplementing the UN
Convention against Transnational
Organized Crime (2000), 185
Universal Declaration of Human
Rights (1948), 177
UN Security Council Resolution
1325 on Women and Peace and
Security (2000), 185–86
International Covenant on Civil and
Political Rights (1966), 181
International Covenant on Economic,
Social, and Cultural Rights
(1966), 16, 58, 180–81
International Crisis Group, 158
International Federation of Women
Lawyers, 142
International Feminism: Networking
against Female Sexual Slavery, 149
International Institute for
Communication and
Development (IICD), 63
International Jury of the UN
Educational, Scientiﬁc, and
Cultural Organization
(UNESCO) Prize for Peace
Education, 148
International Labor Conference:
Family Responsibilities Convention
(No. 156) (1981), 120
Workers with Family
Responsibilities
Recommendation (No. 165), 120
International Labour Organization
(ILO), 153, 159, 165
International Literacy Year (1990), 126
International Monetary Fund (IMF),
7, 11–12
International Peace Research Newsletter,
148
International Planned Parenthood
Association, 167
International Planned Parenthood
Federation (IPPF), 257–58
International Rescue Committee,
172, 271
International Research and Training
Institute for the Advancement of
Women (INSTRAW), 147, 274–75
International Study and Research
Institute, 169
International Symposium on Women
and the Media:
Access to Expression and Decision-
Making (1995), 134
International Tribunal on Crimes
against Women (1976), 115
International Women’s Development
Agency (IWDA), 258
International Women’s Health
Coalition (IWHC), 258–59
International Women’s Rights Action
Watch (IWRAW), 259
International Women’s Society, 142
International Women’s Tribune
Centre, 259
International Women’s Year (IWY)
(1975), 7, 115, 169–70, 176–77
International Women’s Year tribune
NGO forum, 7–9
International Year of the Family
(1994), 131
Index
331

Intrauterine devices (IUDs), 21
IPAS, 260
Iran:
commuting death sentence for
adultery (2010), 139
female cabinet member executed
(1979), 118
honor killings, 70
Million Signatures Campaign
(2006), 137
protesting loss of rights (1979), 117
violating Islamic dress codes
(1993), 130
Iran Awakening: One Woman’s Journey to
Reclaim Her Life and Country
(Ebadi), 285
Iraq and honor killings, 70
ISIS Women’s International
Cross-Cultural Exchange
(ISIS-WICCE), 260
Islam and Democracy: Fear of the Modern
World (Mernissi), 163
Islamic countries:
behavior restricted in, 15
women’s rights, 113
Islamic fundamentalist movement, 173
Islamic Ideology Council of Pakistan,
Law of Evidence (1982), 121–22
Islamic Revolution, 152, 285
Israel:
Mount Carmel International
Center for Community Training
(1961), 112
IUDs. See Intrauterine devices (IUDs)
IUN Women, 276–77
IWY. See International Women’s Year
(IWY) Conference
Jahangir, Asma (b. 1952), 156
Java farming activities, 28
Jiagge, Annie Ruth Baeta (1918–1996),
114, 157
Jimmy, Ida, 119
Jinnah, Ali, 158
Jinnah, Fatima (1893–1967),
157–58
Johnson-Sirleaf, Ellen (b. 1938), 158
Jordan:
ﬁrst female ambassador (1969), 113
honor killings, 70, 136
Journals and journal articles, 304–6
Junqiao, Lia, 132
Kandanga, Gertrude, 119
Kassindja, Fauziya, 82–83
Kelber, Mim, 269
Kenya:
femicide, 45
ﬁnal conference of the UN Decade
for Women, 1975–1985, 124
maternal and child mortality
levels, 19
NGO Forum ’85, 124
outlawing genital mutilation
(1982), 122
release of political prisoners
(1992), 129
schoolboys attack girls’ dormitory
(1991), 128
women as farmers, 28
Key international conventions:
Convention on the Elimination of
All Forms of Discrimination
against Women (CEDAW),
101–3
Convention on the Rights of the
Child (CRC), 103–4
lack of ratiﬁcation by United States,
101–4
Khan, Ayub, 158
Khan, Begum Liaquat Ali (1905–1990),
159
Khan, Ishaw, 146
Khan, Liaquat Ali, 159
Khemara, 171
Khmer Rouge, 171
Khomeini, Ayatollah Ruhollah, 117
Ki-moon, Ban, 138
Konie, Gwendoline (1938–2009),
159–60
Koontz, Elizabeth, 114
Korean Legal Aid Center for Family
Relations (1957), 111
Korean Women’s Association United
(1988), 125–26
Kumaratunga, Chandrika
Bandaranaike (b. 1946), 145, 160
Kuwait:
honor killings, 70
right to vote (1996), 135
332
Index

right to vote (2005), 136
Women’s Cultural and Social
Society (1984), 123
Kuwaiti Women’s Social and Cultural
Society regional conference on
Gulf women (1975), 114
Kyrgyz Republic land succession, 60
Labor, 222
Labor market, and sexual stratiﬁcation,
28–29
Labor participation rates, 239–41
Labor trafﬁcking, 94
La Mujer y la Revolucio´n (Women and
Revolution) (Tejada), 155
Land acquisition, customary laws and
practices, 59
Land ownership, 57–61
La Prensa, 150
Latin America, xix
biannual encuentro (encounter)
(1993), 131
health care workers, 47
major issues of concern (1987), 125
maternal mortality, 50
microloans, 57
relevant women’s issues (1990), 127
statutory laws, 59
Latin American and Caribbean
Feminist Meeting (1983), 122
Latin American and Caribbean
Women’s Health Network, 260–61
Latin American Committee for the
Defense of the Rights of the
Woman (CLADEM), 261
League of Nations:
Committee of Experts on the Legal
Status of Women (1937), 108
nominating women to positions of
inﬂuence (1919), 107
Learning Our Way: Essays in Feminist
Education, 149
Lebanese American University, 256
Lebanon, and honor killings, 70
Legal status of women, 108
Legislative Affairs Committee, 166
Le Mouvement Femmes et Socie´te´
(Senegal), 119
Leprosy Board of the Mahatma Gandhi
Memorial Trust, 164
Lewis, Arthur, 113–14
Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam, 160
Liberia, and ownership rights for
women, 57
Liberian Bank for Development and
Investment, 158
Libya, and equal pay for equal work
(1970), 113
Literacy, 201–7
Local economies, including women
in, 10
Local Violence, Global Media: Feminist
Analyses of Gendered
Representations (Cuklanz and
Moorti, eds), 284–85
Lok Sabha (lower house of [Indian]
Parliament), 164
London School of Economics, 142
Lutz, Bertha (1894–1976), 160–61
Lyceum of the Philippines, 169
Maathai, Wangari (b. 1940), 129, 152, 161
Magna Carta of Women Act (the
Republic Act No. 9710) (2009),
138
Maguire, Mairead Corrigan, 152
Mahatma Gandhi Institute of Medical
Sciences, 164
Mail-order brides, 79
Mainstreaming Gender in Social
Protection for the Informal Economy
(Kabeer), 289–90
Malaysia:
equality and justice in Muslim
family (2009), 138
female genital mutilation (FGM), 66
Male children, preference for, 15–16,
40–42
Males, circumcision beneﬁts, 67
Mali:
ownership rights for women, 57
property rights, 59
Manifesto of the Feminist Movement
(1983), 122
Marcos, Ferdinand, 142–43
Marital rape, 26–27
Marriage partners, 36
Marriages, 13–15
arranged, 14
child marriage, 14, 42–44
Index
333

cultural norms, 14
developed countries, 14
dowry, 45–47
HIV/AIDS, 54
median age, 43
problems, 40–47
property transferred to another
family, 14–15
sexually transmitted infections
(STIs), 54
Maternal deaths, 125
Maternal health, improving, 12–13
Maternal mortality, 22–23, 49–51, 191,
193–98
childbirth, 23, 49
family planning, 50–51
major causes, 20, 50
pregnancy, 49
rates, 18, 50
statistics on, 49
Matter of Fauziya Kasinga, 87
Matter of R-A-, 86–87
McKenzie, Jeane, 109
MCP. See Paraguayan Peasants’
Movement (MCP) (1985)
MDG. See Millennium Development
Goals (MDG)
Medical facilities, 19
Meir, Golda, 112
Men:
as bread winners, 17
controlling ﬁnancial part of
enterprise, 3–4
development activities, 9–10
differences from women, 2–4
equality for women, 11
sex outside of marriage, 24
Menchu, Vincente, 162
Menchu Tum, Rigoberta (b. 1959),
152, 162–63
Mernissi, Fatima (b. 1940), 163–64
Mexican General Law on Women’s
Access to a Life Free from
Violence (2009), 138
Mexico:
land ownership, 59–60
Mexican General Law on Women’s
Access to a Life Free from
Violence (2009), 138
Mexico City Policy, 77, 98, 100
Microcredit programs, 54
Microenterprise, 56–57, 315
Microloans, 56–57
Middle East:
child marriage, 14
female genital mutilation (FGM), 23,
66, 192
honor killings, 70
informal sector jobs, 55
information and communications
technologies (ICTs), 63–64
land ownership, 60
Midwives, 19, 315
Mill, John Stuart, 30
Millennium Declaration, 12, 37
Millennium Development Goals
(MDG), 9, 12–13, 38, 136, 191
Eight Millennium Development
Goals (2000), 135
Millennium Development
Goal No. 5, 49
Millennium Development Goals
Report (2010), 222
Millennium Summit, 12, 37
Mobile phone technology, 61
Mobil Oil, 142
Mohammed vs. Gonzales (2005), 85
MOMUPO. See Movement of Women
Slum Dwellers (MOMUPO)
(1982)
Mortenson, Greg, 251
Mothers and Grandmothers of the
Plaza de Mayo (1977), 116–17
Mount Carmel International Center
for Community Training
(1961), 112
Movement of Women Slum Dwellers
(MOMUPO) (1982), 120
Mozambique, National Conference of
the Mozambican Women’s
Organization (1976), 116
Mugabe, Robert, 165
Mukasey, Michal, 87
Murder in the Name of Honor: The True
Story of One Woman’s Heroic Fight
against an Unbelievable Crime
(Husseini), 287–88
Musharraf, Pervez, 156
Muslim governments withdrawing
support for Universal
334
Index

Declaration of Human Rights
(1993), 129–30
Muslim League, 157–58
Muslim Women Reformers: Inspiring
Voices against Oppression
(Lichter), 290–91
Mwanawasa, Levy, 160
Nabarawi, Saiza, 168
Nairobi Forward-Looking Strategies
for the Advancement of Women,
124, 184
National Action Plan on Women, Peace
and Security (2010), 139
National Assembly, National and
Regional Women’s Committees,
151
National Committee on Self-Employed
Women, 145
National Conference of the
Mozambican Women’s
Organization (1976), 116
National Conference on Perspectives
for Women’s Liberation
(1985), 124
National Council of Nigeria and the
Cameroons, 166
National Council of Women of
Kenya, 161
National Federation of Indian Women
(1954), 110
Nationality and women, 111
National League for Democracy, 144
National Machinery for the Advancement
of Women: United Nations and UN
Organizations Focal Points for the
Advancement of Women, 274
National Women’s Congress
(1979), 118
National Women’s Service (SERNAM)
(1990), 127
Native House of Chiefs, 166
Nawal El Saadawi (b. 1931), 152
Nayar, Shushila (1914–2001), 164
Nazani Yadegar-Sargis vs. INS, 89
Near East, xviii
Neethling, Leonora, 113
Nehru, Jawaharlal, 154
Nehru, Motilal, 154
Nekani, Samake, 132–33
Nepal:
Adharsa Mahila Sangh (Model
Women’s Organization) (1947), 109
protesting over lack of women in
King’s Advisory Assembly
(1954), 110
Nepal Family Planning Association
(1958), 111
The Netherlands, International
Tribunal and Meeting on
Reproductive Rights (1984), 124
Network technologies, 61
New Guinea, murder of wives by
husbands, 26
New School for Social Research, 169
NGO Forum ’85, 124
NGO Forum on Women (1995), 134
NGOs. See Nongovernmental
organizations (NGOs), 36
NGO Working Group on Refugee
Women and refugee women’s
issues (1988), 126
Nhongo, Rex, 165
Nhongo, Teurai Ropa (b. 1955), 164–65
Nicaragua:
abortions, 69
female president, 150
National Assembly banning
therapeutic abortions (2006), 137
property rights, 59
Nigeria:
birth control clinics (1958), 111
blaming drought on indecent
women (1992), 129
women as farmers, 28
Nigeria Women’s Union, 166
Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals, 85
Nonagricultural workers, 93–94
Nongovernmental organizations
(NGOs), 36, 243–72
Afghan Institute of Learning, 244
Africa Women’s Development and
Communications Network
(FEMNET), 244
Apne Aap, 244–45
Arab Women’s Solidarity
Association (AWSA), 245
Asian-Paciﬁc Resource and
Research Centre for Women
(ARROW), 246
Index
335

Asian Women’s Human Rights
Council, 246
Asia Paciﬁc Forum on Women,
Law, and Development
(APWLD), 245
Associated Country Women of the
World (ACWW), 246–47
Association of African Women for
Research and Development
(AAWORD), 247
Averting Maternal Death and
Disability (AMDD) program, 247
Bangladesh Women’s Health
Coalition (BWHC), 247–48
Bina Swadaya, 248
BRAC Centre, 248–49
Campaign for Female Education
(CAMFED), 249
CARE International, 249
Center for Reproductive Rights,
249–50
Center for Women’s Global
Leadership, 250
Center for Women’s Resources,
250–51
Central Asia Institute, 251
Centre for Development and
Population Activities
(CEDPA), 251
Committee for Asian Women
(CAW), 251–52
developing programs to provide
ICTs to women, 63
Development Alternatives with
Women for a New Era
(DAWN), 252
Eastern African-Sub-regional
Support Initiative for the
Advancement of Women
(EASSI), 252
Engender Health, 253
Equality Now, 253
Family Care International (FCI),
253–54
FINCA International, 254
Fistula Foundation, 254
Global Fund for Women, 254–55
Global Grassroots, 255
Grameen Bank, 255
The Hunger Project, 255–56
Institute for Women’s Studies in the
Arab World, 256
Inter-African Committee on
Traditional Practices Affecting
the Health of Women and
Children (IAC), 256
International Alliance of Women,
256–57
International Center for Research on
Women (ICRW), 257
International Confederation of
Midwives, 257
International Planned Parenthood
Federation (IPPF), 257–58
International Women’s
Development Agency
(IWDA), 258
International Women’s Health
Coalition (IWHC), 258–59
International Women’s Rights
Action Watch (IWRAW), 259
International Women’s Tribune
Centre, 259
IPAS, 260
ISIS Women’s International
Cross-Cultural Exchange
(ISIS-WICCE), 260
Latin American and Caribbean
Women’s Health Network, 260–61
Latin American Committee for the
Defense of the Rights of the
Woman (CLADEM), 261
Pathﬁnder International, 261
Population Action International
(PAI), 261–62
Population Communications
International, 262
Population Council, 262
Population Institute, 262–63
Population Reference Bureau
(PRB), 263
Program for Appropriate
Technology in Health (PATH),
264
Pro Mujer, 263–64
Revolutionary Association of the
Women of Afghanistan (RAWA),
264
Self-Employed Women’s
Association (SEWA), 265
336
Index

Shared Hope International (SHI),
265
Third World Movement against
the Exploitation of Women
(TW-MAE-W), 265–66
Tostan, 266
UN Economic and Social Council
(ECOSOC), 243–44
Vital Voices Global Partnership, 266
White Ribbon Alliance for Safe
Motherhood, 266–67
Womankind Worldwide, 267
Women and Development, 267
Women and Men of Zimbabwe
Arise (WOZA), 267
Women for Women International,
267–68
Women in Law and Development in
Africa (WILDAF), 268
Women Living under Muslim Laws
(WLUML), 268
Women’s Environment and
Development Organization
(WEDO), 269
Women’s Feature Service, 269–70
Women’s Global Network for
Reproductive Rights, 270
Women’s International League for
Peace and Freedom (WILPF), 270
Women’s Learning Partnership
(WLP), 271
Women’s Refugee Commission, 271
Women’s World Banking (WWB),
271–72
Women Thrive Worldwide, 268–69
Worldwide Fistula Fund, 272
Zonta International, 272
North Africa, xviii
informal sector jobs, 55
information and communications
technologies (ICTs), 63–64
land ownership, 60
North American health care
workers, 47
Nutrition, 20
OAS. See Organization of American
States (OAS)
Obama, Barack, 100, 103
Obstetric ﬁstula, 272, 315
Ocampo, Victoria, 108
Occupational health, 21
O’Connor, Sandra Day, 120
Ofﬁce of Special Advisor to the
Secretary-General on Gender
Issues and Advancement of
Women (1997), 135
Ofﬁce of the UN High Commissioner
for Refugees (UNHCR) (1990),
65, 127
Ofﬁce of Women in Development,
10, 273
Oforji vs. Ashcroft, 84
Olowo vs. Ashcroft, 83–84
Omnibus Appropriations Spending
Bill (1997), 98
Organization of African Unity, 189
African (Banjul) Charter on Human
and Peoples’ Rights (1981), 190
Protocol to the African Charter on
Human and Peoples’ Rights on
the Rights of Women in Africa
(2003), 190–91
Organization of American States
(OAS): Additional Protocol to the
American Convention on Human
Rights in the Area of Economic,
Social and Cultural Rights
(“Protocol of San Salvador”)
(1988), 187
American Convention on Human
Rights (“Pact of San Jose, Costa
Rica”) (1960), 186
Convention on the Nationality of
Women (1933), 189
Inter-American Commission of
Women (CIM), 273
Inter-American Convention on
Support Obligations (1989), 189
Inter-American Convention on the
Granting of Civil Rights to
Women (1949), 188
Inter-American Convention on the
Granting of Political Rights to
Women (1948), 188
Inter-American Convention on the
Prevention, Punishment, and
Eradication of Violence against
Women (“Convention of Belem
do Para”) (1994), 188–89
Index
337

regional conventions, 186–89
Statute of the Inter-American
Commission of Women (1960),
187–88
Organizations:
directory of, 243–77
government and government-
afﬁliated organizations, 273–77
nongovernmental organizations
(NGOs), 244–72
private, 243
Organized crime syndicates and sex
trafﬁcking, 52
Oxford Union, 146
Paciﬁc, developing countries, xviii;
maternal mortality, 50
Pakistan:
child marriage (2008), 137
honor killings, 70, 136
Hudood Ordinances (1979), 118
Islamic (Shari’a) law (1991), 128
land ownership, 60
Proposed Law of Evidence, 156
rolling back gains made by women
(1977), 116
Pakistan People’s Party, 146
Pan-African Conference on the Role of
Trade Women (1977), 116
Pan-Arab League Women’s Union,
141–42
Pandit, Vijaya, 109
Paraguayan Peasants’ Movement
(MCP) (1985), 124–25
Paris Peace Conference (1919), 107
Parsa, Farrokhrou, 112, 118
Partido Revolucionario de Izquierda,
155
Pathﬁnder International, 261
Pathologies of Power: Health, Human
Rights, and the New War on the
Poor (Farmer), 286
Patriarchal families, 5
Patriarchal societies:
abortions, 69
health care, 48
Patriarchy, 4–5
Pay, and gender gap, 56
Peasant Unity Committee (CUC), 162
People’s Alliance, 160
Percy Amendment to the U.S. Foreign
Assistance Act of 1973, 10
Permanent Forum on Indigenous
Issues (2004), 136
Peron, Isabel (b. 1931), 165
Peru:
family planning services
(1995), 133
health care plan (2002), 136
Latin American and Caribbean
Feminist Meeting (1983), 122
pornography and violence against
women (1981), 120
property rights, 59
Peter Gruber Foundation, 172
Philippines:
Magna Carta of Women Act (the
Republic Act No. 9710) (2009),
138
National Action Plan on Women,
Peace and Security (2010), 139
Planned Parenthood International
(1950), 109
Political asylum, 79
Politics, Poverty and Participation: A
History of Women’s Leadership in
Development (Snyder), 170
Polygamy, 6, 316
Population Action International
(PAI), 261–2
Population Communications
International, 262
Population Council, 262
Population Institute, 262–63
Population Policies Reconsidered: Health,
Empowerment, and Rights (Sen,
Germain, and Chen), 167
Population Reference Bureau (PRB),
263
Postnatal visits, 51
Poverty:
ﬁnancial incentives to, 43–44
microloans, 56–57
nutrition, 20
reducing, 12–13
World Bank, 175
Power and Decision: The Social
Control of Reproduction (Sen
and Snow), 168
Practices, cultural context of, 6
338
Index

Practising Gender Equality in Education
(Aikman and Unterhalter, eds),
280
Pregnancy, 18, 191–92
abortion, 22
child marriage, 43
dangers of, 49
education, 17
nutrition, 20
postnatal visits, 51
prenatal care, 18, 20, 51
Prenatal care, 18, 20, 51
Private organizations, 243
Prize for Women’s Creativity in Rural
Life (1995), 132–33
Problems:
education, 37–40
employment, 54–57
female refugees, 64–66
health care, 47–51
HIV/AIDS, 53–54
information and communications
technologies (ICTs), 61–64
land ownership, 57–61
marriage and family, 40–47
property rights, 57–61
prostitution, 52
sex trafﬁcking, 52
sexually transmitted diseases
(STDs), 53–54
tradition, 35–37
victims of war, 64–66
Program for Appropriate Technology
in Health (PATH), 264
Programme of Action of the
International Conference on
Population and Development, 66
Pro Mujer, 263–64
Property rights, 57–61, 137
not allowing ownership, 27
statutory laws, 59
Proposed Law of Evidence, 156
Prostitution, 25, 52, 222–33
Protocol on the Rights of Women in
Africa, 58
Protocol to Prevent, Suppress, and
Punish Trafﬁcking in Persons,
Especially Women and Children,
Supplementing the UN
Convention against
Transnational Organized Crime
(2000), 52, 185
Protocol to the African Charter on
Human and Peoples’ Rights on
the Rights of Women in Africa
(2003), 190–92
Puerto Rico, ﬁrst female cabinet
member (1969), 113
Purdah, 6, 316
Qaderzadeh, Sajjad, 139
Queen Iffat, 111
Quest: A Feminist Quarterly, 149
Quiche Mayan Indians, 162
Race, 4–5
Rahman, Zia-ur, 172
Ransome-Kuti, Fumilayo
(1900–1978), 166
Rape, 26, 207–21
abortions, 100
asylum, 86–88
dishonor, 26
immigration, 86–88
war, 64
Ra´teb, Aisha (b. 1928), 166
Rau, Dhanvanthi Rama (1893–1987),
109, 166–67
Rau, Sir Bengal Rama, 167
Rauma, Ranbai Jemalji, 132
Reaching the Marginalized
(UNESCO), 302
Reagan, Ronald, 99
Refugee Act of 1980, 78, 90
Refugees:
female, 64–66
status, 79–80
Regional conventions:
Additional Protocol to the American
Convention on Human Rights in
the Area of Economic, Social and
Cultural Rights (“Protocol of San
Salvador”) (1988), 187
Africa, 189–91
African (Banjul) Charter on
Human and Peoples’ Rights
(1981), 190
American Convention on Human
Rights (“Pact of San Jose, Costa
Rica”) (1960), 186
Index
339

Convention on the Nationality of
Women (1933), 189
Inter-American Convention
on Support Obligations
(1989), 189
Inter-American Convention on the
Granting of Civil Rights to
Women (1949), 188
Inter-American Convention on the
Granting of Political Rights to
Women (1948), 188
Inter-American Convention on the
Prevention, Punishment, and
Eradication of Violence against
Women (“Convention of Belem
do Para”) (1994), 188–89
inter-American conventions,
statutes, and declarations,
186–89
Organization of American States
(OAS), 186–89
Protocol to the African Charter on
Human and Peoples’ Rights on
the Rights of Women in Africa
(2003), 190–91
Statute of the Inter-American
Commission of Women (1960),
187–88
Regional Meeting on Women and
Health in Latin America (1984),
123
Religion:
abortions, 69
asylum, 89
beliefs and practices, 37
traditions, 36
women not allowed to work outside
home, 55
Reno, Janet, 87
Reproductive health issues, 47
Resources:
agency reports, 300–304
blogs, 311–14
books, 279–300
electronic resources, 306–11
gender discrimination, 22–23
journals and journal articles,
304–6
videos, 306–11
Websites, 311–14
Revolutionary Association of the
Women of Afghanistan (RAWA),
264
Rights, history of, 107–39
Right to vote, 234–38
Rigoberta Menchu and the Story of All
Poor Guatemalans (Stoll), 163
Rio Declaration, 58
Rising from the Waste: Organising
Wastepickers in India, Thailand, and
the Philippines, 252
Rising Tide: Gender Equality and Cultural
Change Around the World
(Inglehart and Norris), 288
Robalino, Isabel, 113
Roe vs. Wade, 98
Rome World Food Conference, 255
Roosevelt, Eleanor, 109
Roundtable on Women’s Leadership in
Rebuilding Afghanistan, 172
Rousseff, Dilma, 139
Rural areas:
agricultural activities, 57–58
education, 17
employment, 17, 55
Russell, Diane, 45
Rwanda:
population in, 129
sexual violence (1994), 131–32
Sabalsajaray, Nibuya (1951–1974), 167
Sadat, Anwar, 119, 153
Safe Motherhood Initiative (1987), 125
Sandinista National Liberation
Front, 150
Sati, 316
Saudi Arabia:
brides and groom meeting before
wedding (1980), 118
government school for girls
(1956), 111
inability to leave country
(2009), 138
law against women driving
(1990), 127
right to vote, 222
Save Somali Women and Children
(SSWC), 156
Scandinavian Institute of Asian
Studies, 147
340
Index

Schools:
enrollment, 201–7
gender-based discrimination, 39
sexual assault on girls, 53
Second Circuit Court of Appeals, 90
Second World Conference on Women
(1980), 8
Second World countries, 1
Self-Employed Women’s Association
(SEWA), 29, 56, 145, 265
Cooperative Bank (India), 28, 56
Sen, Gita (b. 1948), 167
Senate Foreign Relations
Committee, 102
Senegal, and abortions, 69
SERNAM. See National Women’s
Service (SERNAM) (1990)
Seventh Circuit Court of
Appeals, 83, 89
SEWA. See Self-Employed Women’s
Association (SEWA)
Sex roles, versus gender roles, 2–4
Sex trafﬁcking, 25, 52, 94, 222
status and extent, 223–33
Sex Trafﬁcking: Inside the Business of
Modern Slavery (Kara), 290
Sex Trafﬁcking: International Context and
Response (Segrave, Milivojevic,
and Pickering), 297–98
Sexually transmitted diseases (STDs),
18, 24–25, 44, 47
Sexually transmitted infections (STIs),
53–54
Sexual stratiﬁcation, 28–29
Shaarawi, Huda (1879–1947), 168
Shahani, Laticia, 114
Shahani, Leticia Ramos (b. 1929),
168–69
Shared Hope International (SHI), 265
Shari’a law, 60, 316
Shastri, Lal, 154
Shattering the Stereotypes: Muslim
Women Speak Out (Afzal-Khan,
ed.), 279–80
Sipila¨, Helvi (1915–2009), 7, 109,
169–70
Sixth Clan, 156
Smith, Linda, 265
Snyder, Margaret (b.1929), 114, 170–71
Sochua, Mu (b. 1954), 171
Social, Humanitarian, and Cultural
Committee, 153
Social reproduction, 3
Social stratiﬁcation, 4
Social Watch Report 2008: Rights Is the
Answer (Social Watch), 301
Social welfare programs, 12
Societies:
advanced, 6
contributions to, 114
males in, 15–16, 36
primitive, 6
social stratiﬁcation, 4
traditions, 36
women’s and men’s roles, 2–3
Somalia:
abortions, 69
adultery and stoning to death
(2008), 137
women as farmers, 28
Somali Democratic Women’s
Organization, 119
Somoza, General, 150
South Africa:
female judge (1969), 113
sexual assaults on girls, 53
South American land ownership,
59–60
South Asia, xviii
child marriage, 42
education, 16
honor killings, 70
maternal mortality, 50
prenatal care, 50
South Asian Association for Regional
Co-operation (1990), 126–27
Southeast Asian countries, and
prostitution, 25
Southern Poverty Law Center
(SPLC), 93
South Korea, Korean Women’s
Association United (1988),
125–26
South West African People’s
Organization (SWAPO)
(1980), 119
Sri Lanka:
child marriage (1951), 109
maternal mortality, 51
president of, 160
Index
341

Sri Lanka Freedom Party, 144
SSWC. See Save Somali Women and
Children (SSWC)
The State of the World’s Children 2009
(UNICEF), 302
Status:
history of, 107–39
international public policy to
improve (1975), 115
Status and experiences today:
abortion, 22
contraceptives, 21
education, 16–18
employment, 27–29
family relations, 13–16
femalegenitalmutilation(FGM),23–24
health care, 18–20
maternal mortality, 22–23
nutrition, 20
occupational health, 21
prostitution, 25
sex trafﬁcking, 25
sexually transmitted diseases
(STDs), 24
violence against women, 25–27
Statute of the Inter-American
Commission of Women (1960),
187–88
Statutory laws and property rights, 59
STDs. See sexually transmitted diseases
(STDs)
Stoll, David, 163
Strengthening Understanding of Femicide:
Using Research to Galvanize Action
and Accountability (PATH,
Intercambios, MRC, and
WHO), 301
Structural adjustment policies, 11–12
Sub-Commission on the Promotion
and Protection of Human
Rights, 58
The Subjugation of Women (Mills), 30
Sub-Saharan Africa:
child marriage, 42
education, 16
employment, 54–55
HIV/AIDS, 53
land ownership, 60
maternal mortality, 50
prenatal care, 50
Sudan:
legislation outlawing inﬁbulation
(1945), 108
separation of sexes in public
(1996), 134–35
Sudanese Women’s Union
(1971), 113
Sudanese Women’s League (1946), 108
Supreme Administrative Court, 169
Supreme Board of Journalism, 141
Supreme Court, 169
SWAPO. See South West African
People’s Organization (SWAPO)
Switzerland, Women and Health
conference (1981), 120
Syphilis, 24–25
Tadesse, Mary (b. 1932), 171
Taking Action: Achieving Gender Equality
and Empowering Women (Grown,
Gupta, and Kes), 286–87
Tantawi, Mohammed, 138
Tanzania and property rights, 59
Task Force on Women (1994), 131
Taylor, Charles, 158
Teachers, and value of educating girls,
16–17
Technology, 61–62
Telecommunications technologies, 61
Teurai Ropa Nhongo (b. 1955), 164–65
Thailand:
battered women’s shelter (1981), 120
femicide, 45
ﬁrst global feminist meeting
(1979), 118
outlawing prostitution (1962), 112
Thakore, Samuben Ujabhai, 132
Thatcher, Margaret, 155
Third World Conference on Women
(1985), 8
Third World countries, 1
Third World Movement against the
Exploitation of Women (TW-
MAE-W), 265–66
Thorssen, Inga, 114
Tida, Segou, 133
Togo:
Coordinating Bureau for Women’s
Groups, 133
female genital mutilation (FGM), 82
342
Index

Tolbert, William, 158
Tomsic, Vida, 114
Tostan, 266
Towards Equality (1975), 115
Traditions, 35–37
Trafﬁcking, 94–95
Trafﬁcking Victims Protection Act of
2000, 94
Trafﬁcking Victims Protection
Reauthorization Act of 2003, 95
Transforming Development: Women,
Poverty and Politics (Snyder), 170
Trevino, Maria Elena Lopez, 94
Tribal Clashes Resettlement Volunteer
Service, 162
Tunis, Expert Meeting on
Multidisciplinary Research on
Women in the Arab World
(1982), 121
Tunisia, and land ownership, 60
Tunisian Human Rights Organization,
committee to defend rights of
women (1985), 124
UN Asian and Paciﬁc Center for
Women and Development, 149
UN Children’s Emergency Fund
(UNICEF), 119
maternal mortality, 49
UN Children’s Fund, and forced
marriages (2001), 136
UN Committee on the Status of
Women, 151–52
UN Conference on Environment and
Development (1992), 129
UN Conference on Human Rights
(1995), 149
UN Convention against Transnational
Organized Crime, 52
UN Council for Namibia, 159
UN Decade for Women, 177
UN Declaration on Elimination of
Discrimination against Women
(1968), 157
UN Development Fund for Women
(UNIFEM), 170, 275
UN Development Programme
(UNDP), 275–76
UN Economic Commission for
Africa, 170
UN Educational, Scientiﬁc and
Cultural Organization
(UNESCO), 120
International Symposium on
Women and the Media: Access to
Expression and Decision-Making
(1995), 134
literacy programs among women in
developing countries (1983), 122
UN entities:
Commission of the Status of Women
(CSW), 274
Division for Social Policy and
Development, 274
Food and Agriculture Organization
of the United Nations, 277
Inter-Agency Network on
Women and Gender Equality
(IANWGE), 276
International Research and Training
Institute for the Advancement of
Women (INSTRAW), 274–75
UN Development Fund for Women
(UNIFEM), 275
UN Development Programme
(UNDP), 276
UN-HABITAT (Human
Settlements), 277
UN Human Rights Council, 277
UN Population Fund, 277
UN Women, 276–77
World Health Organization, 277
UNESCO. See UN Educational,
Scientiﬁc and Cultural
Organization (UNESCO)
UN Expert Committee for
Development Planning, 147
UN Expert Group on Women and
Finance (1994), 132
UNFPA. See UN Population Fund
(UNFPA)
UN General Assembly, 9, 148
Charter of the United Nations, 182
Convention on the Elimination of
All Forms of Discrimination
against Women (CEDAW)
(1979), 183
Convention on the Nationality
of Married Women
(1957), 111
Index
343

Declaration on the Elimination of
Violence against Women (1993),
130
Eight Millennium Development
Goals (2000), 135
ﬁrst female president (1953), 109
23rd Special Session, Women 2000:
Gender Equality, Development
and Peace for the 21st Century
(2000), 135
UN agency for women (2009), 138
Universal Declaration of Human
Rights, 182
women delegates to (1946), 108–9
UN-HABITAT (Human Settlements),
277
UNHCR. See Ofﬁce of the UN High
Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR)
UNHCR Handbook for the Protection of
Women and Girls (UN High
Commissioner for Refugees), 302
UN High Commissioner for Human
Rights (2004), 136
UN High Commissioner for Refugees,
80, 90
UN Human Rights Council, 277
UNICEF. See UN Children’s
Emergency Fund (UNICEF)
UNIFEM. See UN Development Fund
for Women (UNIFEM)
UN International Conference on
Human Rights (1968), 112
UN International Indian Treaty
Council, 163
Unio´n Nacional Opositora
(UNO), 150
Union Planning Committee, 145
United Arab Emirates, and right to
vote, 222
United National Party, 160
United Nations, 115, 158
Centre for Social Development and
Humanitarian Affairs (CSDHA),
169–70
Commission on Social
Development, 147
Commission on the Status of
Women (1946), 147, 109
Convention on Eliminating
Discrimination in Education
(1960), 111
development projects, 7–9
Economic and Social Council (1958),
111, 182
economic crisis following World
War II (1946), 108
General Assembly, 7
Human Rights Award, 159
International Covenant on
Economic, Social, and Culture
Rights, 16
International Literacy Year
(1990), 126
International Women’s Year
(1975), 115
International Year of the Family
(1994), 131
mainstreaming human rights
into programs and activities
(1997), 135
Millennium Development Goals
(2005), 136
Millennium Summit, 37
Ofﬁce of Special Advisor to the
Secretary-General on Gender
Issues and Advancement of
Women (1997), 135
preventing future wars (1946), 108
rural women living in poverty
(1991), 128
Second Development Decade, 8
Social Development Division, 113
Sub-Commission on the Promotion
and Protection of Human
Rights, 58
Un Charter, 176
UN Decade for Women: Equality,
Development and Peace
(1976–1985), 8
Universal Declaration of Human
Rights, 16
World Plan of Action (1976), 116
World Summit on the Information
Society (WSIS), 62
Year of the Indigenous Peoples, 163
United Nations Millennium Forum for
NGOs, 172
United States:
abortions, 68
344
Index

asylum law, 85
country-speciﬁc quotas, 78
discrimination and violence against
women, 102
family planning policy, 98–101
femicide, 45
funding for foreign countries, 98
guestworker programs, 93–94
human rights, 86
immigration, 78–95
issues and controversies, 77
key international conventions and,
101–4
marriage partners, 36
political asylum, 79
refugees, 79, 91
trafﬁcking, 94–95
UN Refugee Convention (1951), 90
United States Congress, and Percy
Amendment, 114
Universal Declaration of Human
Rights (1948), 16, 42, 58, 176–77
University of Karachi, 159
University of the Philippines, 169
UNO. See Unio´n Nacional Opositora
(UNO)
Unpaid Work and the Economy: Gender,
Time Use and Poverty in Developing
Countries (Antonopoulous and
Hirway, eds), 280
UN Plenary Session (1970–1973), 148
UN Population Fund (UNFPA),
254, 277
maternal mortality, 49
UN Protocol to Prevent, Suppress, and
Punish Trafﬁcking in Persons
(2000), 136
Unsafe abortions, 48, 69
UN Security Council, 152
Resolution 1325 on Women and
Peace and Security (2000), 185–86
women in war and conﬂict
(2000), 136
UN Special Rapporteur on
Extrajudicial, Arbitrary, and
Summary Executions, 156
UN Special Rapporteur on Freedom of
Religion or Belief, 156
UN University, 148
UN Women (2011), 139
UN Working Group on Slavery
(1981), 120
UN World Conference on Human
Rights (1993), 129–30
UN World Conference on Women
(Nairobi 1985), 61
Uralova, Evdokia I., 109
Urban areas:
education, 17
employment, 55
Uruguay, Women’s Institute (1987), 125
U.S. Agency for International
Development (USAID), 10
U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals, 81
U.S. Citizenship and Immigration
Services (USCIS), 80, 91
U.S. Commission for UNESCO, 148
U.S. Commission on International
Religious Freedom (USCIRF), 92
U.S. Constitution, Supremacy
Clause, 103
U.S. Second Circuit Court of Appeals, 89
U.S. Department of Justice, 87
U.S. Department of Labor, 94
U.S. Department of State, 77
Agency for International
Development (USAID), 98
U.S. government:
development activities in Global
South, 9–11
Ofﬁce of Women in Development,
273
WID programs, 10
U.S. Refugee Program, 80
U.S. Sixth Circuit Court of Appeals, 85
U.S. Supreme Court, 104
ﬁrst woman on (1981), 120
USAID. See U.S. Agency for
International Development
(USAID)
USCIRF. See U.S. Commission on
International Religious Freedom
(USCIRF)
USCIS. See U.S. Citizenship and
Immigration Services (USCIS)
Uzbekistan, and land succession, 60
Veijjabu, Pierra Hoon, 112
Venezuela:
female cabinet minister (1969), 113
Index
345

Movimiento de Liberacion de la
Mujer (Women’s Liberation
Movement) (1969), 113
Victims of war, 64–66
Videos, 306–11
Village Banking Campaign, 254
Vindication of the Rights of Women
(Wollstonecraft), 30
Violence against women, 25–27,
115, 130
Violence against Women Act, 102
Violence against Women in South Asian
Communities (Thiara and Gill,
eds), 299–300
Violence and Gender in the Globalized
World (Bahun-Radunovic and
Rajan, eds), 281
Vital Voices Democracy Initiative, 266
Vital Voices Global Partnership, 266
Voices of African Women: Women’s Rights
in Ghana, Uganda, and Tanzania
(Bond), 281–82
Voluntary Agencies Bureau, 170
Voluntary Fund for the UN Decade for
Women, 275
Voting, 222
The Wages of Empire: Neoliberal Policies,
Repression and Women’s Poverty
(Cabezas, Reese, and Waller, eds),
282–83
War, 64–66
WCC Programme to Combat
Racism, 157
Websites, 311–14
West African Students’ Union, 142
Western society, resenting inﬂuence
of, 37
White Ribbon Alliance for Safe
Motherhood, 266–67
WHO Multi-Country Study on Women’s
Health and Domestic Violence
against Women: Initial Results on
Prevalence, Health Outcomes and
Women’s Responses (2005), 137
Wichiencharoen, Kanitha, 120
WID. See Women in development (WID)
Widows, right to remarry, 109
Wife, duties of, 13–14
Wilkinson, Ellen, 109
Williams, Betty, 152
Williams, Jody, 152
Wollstonecraft, Mary, 30
Womankind Worldwide, 267
Women:
age and, 3
agricultural activities, 57–58
contribution to economy, 54
credit risks, 27–28
differences from men, 2–4
discrimination, 71
domestic violence, 44–45
economic development role, 113–14
education as adults, 40
empowerment of, 12, 30
equality for, 7–8, 11, 71
health, 126
health issues, 18–20
history in development process,
6–13
history of status and rights of,
107–39
HIV/AIDS, 53–54
illiteracy, 37
income-generating activities,
3–4
legal status of, 108
lives, improvement of, 6–7
monitoring and promoting
causes, 116
past and current treatment of, 37
problems obtaining credit, 27
productive role, 3
as property, 13
responsibilities, 14
rights, 30
sexually transmitted diseases
(STDs), 44
status and experiences today, 3,
13–29, 36
universal equal rights law, 41
value to society, 3
violence against, 25–27
well educated, 16
Women 2000, 274
Women, Literacy and Development:
Alternative Perspectives
(Robinson-Pant), 296–97
Women: The Key to Ending Hunger
(Snyder), 170
346
Index

Women, Tradition and Development:
A Case Study of Eritrea
(Gebremedhin), 286
Women 2000: Gender Equality,
Development and Peace in the
21st Century, 9
Women and Development (KULU)
(Kvindernes U-landsudvalg), 267
Women and Economic Development, 147
Women and Gender Equality in
Development Theory and Practice:
Institutions, Resources, and
Mobilization (Jaquette and
Summerﬁeld, eds), 289
Women and Health: Today’s Evidence,
Tomorrow’s Agenda (World Health
Organization), 303–4
Women and Health Conference
(1987), 125
Women and Islamic Revival in a West
African Town (Masquelier), 291
Women and Men of Zimbabwe Arise
(WOZA), 267
Women and Sex (El Saadawi), 153
Women and the New World Economy:
Feminist Perspectives on Alternative
Economic Frameworks (Sen), 167
Women for Women International,
267–68
Women in Development (WID), 10
Women in Law and Development in
Africa (WILDAF), 268
Women Living under Muslim Laws
(WLUML), 268
Women of Zimbabwe Arise (WOZA)
(2008), 137
Women Political Leaders in Africa
(Skaine), 298–99
Women Remembered: Biographies of
Women in History, 149
Women’s Activism in South Africa:
Working across Divides (Britton,
Fish, and Meintjes, eds), 282
Women’s Commission of the MCP
(1985), 125
Women’s Cultural and Social Society
(1984), 123
Women’s Environment and
Development Organization
(WEDO), 269
Women’s Feature Service, 269–70
Women’s Feminist Union, 168
Women’s Global Health and Human
Rights (Murthy and Smith, eds),
293
Women’s Global Network for
Reproductive Rights, 270
Women’s Group against Sexual
Mutilation (France), 119
Women’s International League for
Peace and Freedom (WILPF), 270
Women’s Learning Partnership
(WLP), 271
Women’s Political Participation and
Representation in Asia: Obstacles
and Challenges (Iwanaga, ed), 288
Women’s Programme, 170
Women’s Refugee Commission, 271
Women’s Rights in the Middle East and
North Africa: Citizenship and
Justice (Nazir and Tomppert,
eds), 293–94
Women’s Rights Prize, 172
Women’s World Banking (WWB), 57,
145, 158, 170, 271–72
UN Expert Group on Women and
Finance (1994), 132
Women’s World Summit Foundation
Prize for Women’s Creativity in
Rural Life (1995), 132–33
Women Thrive Worldwide, 268–69
Women Waging Peace, 158
Women Watch website, 62
Workers with Family Responsibilities
Recommendation (No. 165), 120
Workshop on national liberation and
development (1980), 119
World Bank, 7, 158
development activities in Global
South, 9–11
post of Adviser on Women (1977), 116
poverty, 175
structural adjustment programs,
11–12
World Conference on Human Rights
(1993), 149
World Conference on Women in
Nairobi, 259
World Congress for International
Women’s Year (1975), 115
Index
347

World Council of Churches, 157
World Council of Credit Unions, 57
World Education Forum, 38
World-Environment Day, 161
World Health Assembly (1985), 124
World Health Assembly (1992),
128–29
World Health Organization (WHO), 47,
124, 137, 277
female genital mutilation (FGM), 23,
67, 111, 130
maternal deaths, 23, 49
practices affecting health of women
(1979), 117
World Plan of Action (1975), 115
World Plan of Action (1976), 116
World Summit for Social Development
(1995), 133
World Summit on the Information
Society (WSIS), 62
World Survey on the Role of Women in
Development, 274
World Survey on the Role of Women in
Development: Women’s Control
over Economic Resources and Access
to Financial Resources, including
Microﬁnance (2009) (UN
Department of Economic and
Social Affairs [ECOSOC]),
301–2
Worldwide Fistula Fund, 272
WOZA. See Women of Zimbabwe
Arise (WOZA) (2008)
WSIS. See World Summit on the
Information Society (WSIS)
WWB. See Women’s World Banking
(WWB), 57
Xiao, Lai, 132
Yacoobi, Sakena, 172, 244
Yadegar-Sargis, 89
Year of the Girl Child (1990), 126–27
YMCA of the Philippines, 168
Young, Lee Tai, 111
YWCA, 157
Zambian Civil Service, 160
ZANLA. See Zimbabwe African
National Liberation Army
(ZANLA)
Zhi, Chen, 89
Zia, Begum Khaleda (b. 1945), 172–73
Zia, General, 146
Zimbabwe:
human rights (2000), 135–36
women as farmers, 28
Women of Zimbabwe Arise
(WOZA) (2008), 137
Zimbabwe African National Liberation
Army (ZANLA), 164–65
Zonta International, 170, 272
348
Index

About the Author
Karen L. Kinnear holds an M.A. in Sociology from Case Western
Reserve University and is a professional researcher, editor, and
writer with more than 25 years of experience in sociological, eco-
nomic, statistical, and ﬁnancial analysis. She is also a paralegal
and frequent traveler to developing nations. Among her previous
publications are Violent Children: A Reference Handbook, Childhood
Sexual Abuse: A Reference Handbook, Gangs: A Reference Handbook,
Women in the Third World: A Reference Handbook, and Single Parents:
A Reference Handbook, all part of ABC-CLIO’s Contemporary
World Issues series.

