Wooden Interior 
doors  
standard sizes - panel doors - 
hollow doors - glazed doors  
imperial/ metric equivalents
Two basic features define 
internal doors:  
• 
Height, 
width 
and 
thickness  
• 
Method 
of 
construction  
Doors 
come in a number of 
standard 
sizes:  
• 
Width - 24, 28, 30, 32, 34, 36 inches (each designed to fit openings between 1/4 inch 
less to 5/8 inch greater)  
• 
Height - 78, 80, 82 inch  
• 
Thickness 
- 
1 
3/8, 
1 
3/4 
and 
2 
inch  
For a replacement door, the correct thickness should be chosen to avoid the need to 
reposition the door stop strips.  
Method of door construction:  
Panel door 
These are made from pieces of solid timber, the stiles and rails being fixed together either by 
mortise and tenor joints (with wedges) or by dowels. The number of panels may vary, but the 
general construction is similar with full height stiles on each side with top, middle and bottom 
rails.  
The bottom rail is wider than the top rail, and the middle is normally below the mid point - so it 
is easy to tell which way is up.  
With the solid timber stiles and rails, these doors can be trimmed fairly easily to fit an existing 
door frame They must not be excessively trimmed as there is a risk that the sides of the 
mortise may be exposed in the top/bottom rails or the wedges holding the joints in the stiles 
becoming 
weakened.  
 
 
Hollow Doors  
These are made using a hidden frame covered with a thin cladding on each face and, 
normally, solid timber strips down the two edges to give a decorative finish. The cladding may 
be ordinary hardboard, which can be painted after the door has been hung, or a decorative 
plywood that can be varnished to give a natural timber appearance.  
A number of different types of 'in-fill' within the door are available to give the faces some 
strength and rigidity. The simplest form of in fill, is a cardboard honeycomb, other specialist 
in-fills are used to make the door fire resistant.  

Within the door, a solid timber area is provided for fixing the lock and handle; this solid timber 
is normally restricted to one side of the door and set at a suitable height for the lock/handle. 
So when hanging a door, it must be hung the correct way up and with the correct side to the 
hinge - failure to do this will mean that there will be nothing solid within the door where the 
lock/handles will need to be fitted.  
Hollow doors cannot really be trimmed (either in height or width) to fit an undersized door 
frame; this generally means that these doors can only be hung in modern houses where 
'standard' 
door 
frames 
are 
fitted.  
 
Glazed Doors  
Glazed doors are ideal where it is desirable to 'borrow' light into a dark area such as a 
passage.  
These doors are made with solid timber surround and may be half glazed, full glazed or 2 half 
glazed.  
The frame is normally made from solid timber in the same way as for panel doors with the 
inner edges of the stiles and rails machined to take the glazing. The stiles and upper/lower 
rails can be trimmed as for a panel door.  
The important aspect is the type of glass used to glazed the door. UK regulations require that 
Safety glass is used in full glazed and lower glazed panels; it is always wise to use Safety 
glass for all glazing in a glazed door. Safety glass cannot be purchased off the shelf, it is in 
fact ordinary float glass which has been subjected to a special heat treatment - the glass must 
be cut to size before it is treated.  
 
Imperial/metric door equivalents.  
imperial 
(inches)  
   
metric 
(mm)  
78 x 24  
   
1981 x 610  
78 x 27  
   
1981 x 686  
78 x 30  
   
1981 x 762  
78 x 33  
   
1981 x 838  
80 x 32  
   
2032 x 813  
82 x 34  
   
2083 x 863  
84 x 36  
   
2134 x 914  
 
 

