www.allitebooks.com

WordPress 3  
for Business Bloggers
Promote and grow your WordPress blog with advanced 
marketing techniques, plugins, advertising, and SEO
Paul Thewlis
   BIRMINGHAM - MUMBAI
www.allitebooks.com

WordPress 3 for Business Bloggers
Copyright © 2011 Packt Publishing
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval 
system, or transmitted in any form or by any means, without the prior written 
permission of the publisher, except in the case of brief quotations embedded in 
critical articles or reviews.
Every effort has been made in the preparation of this book to ensure the accuracy 
of the information presented. However, the information contained in this book is 
sold without warranty, either express or implied. Neither the author, nor Packt 
Publishing, and its dealers and distributors will be held liable for any damages 
caused or alleged to be caused directly or indirectly by this book.
Packt Publishing has endeavored to provide trademark information about all of the 
companies and products mentioned in this book by the appropriate use of capitals. 
However, Packt Publishing cannot guarantee the accuracy of this information.
First published: December 2011
Production Reference: 1021211
Published by Packt Publishing Ltd. 
Livery Place 
35 Livery Street 
Birmingham B3 2PB, UK.
ISBN 978-1-84951-132-2
www.packtpub.com
Cover Image by Vinayak Chittar (vinayak.chittar@gmail.com)
www.allitebooks.com

Credits
Author
Paul Thewlis
Reviewers
Srikanth AD
John Eckman
Lee Jordan
Acquisition Editor
Usha Iyer
Development Editor
Swapna Verlekar
Technical Editor
Arun Nadar
Project Coordinator
Leena Purkait
Proofreaders
Karen Estrada
Lydia May Morris
Indexer
Tejal Daruwale
Graphics
Manu Joseph
Conidon Miranda
Production Coordinator 
Aparna Bhagat
Cover Work
Aparna Bhagat
www.allitebooks.com

About the Author
Paul Thewlis has worked as a web marketing professional in the public 
and private sectors. He is currently Online Marketing Director for HeadRed 
(http://headred.net), a leading digital agency in the UK. He began his web 
career as a Technical Editor, working on web design books for a well-known 
publisher. He has extensive experience of many content management systems and 
blogging platforms. He is an expert in SEO, online marketing, and the use of social 
media within corporate communications. He blogs about those subjects, as well as 
WordPress and the web in general, at http://blog.paulthewlis.com. Paul lives 
in Birmingham, England, with his wife, Zöe.
I would like to thank Matt Mullenweg and the WordPress 
development team, as well as all the hard-working members of the 
wider WordPress community, who created the plugins featured in 
this book. I would also like to thank my parents, Jack and Margaret, 
for their unending support, and my wonderful wife, Zöe, for putting 
up with so many late nights and lonely weekends during the writing 
of this book.
www.allitebooks.com

About the Reviewers
Srikanth AD is a web developer and SEO consultant. He is passionate about web 
development and optimizing websites for better search engine visibility and ranking.
His portfolio is available at http://www.srikanth.me.
John Eckman has more than a decade of experience designing and building web 
applications for organizations ranging from small non-proit organizations to Fortune 
500 enterprises. Currently a Digital Strategist at ISITE Design, John works with clients 
to develop sustainable, strategic approaches to managing their presence on the web. 
Prior to ISITE Design, he was Director of Ecommerce Strategy at Optaros, leading 
the development of applications focused on the intersection of community, content, 
and commerce. Previously he was the director of development at PixelMEDIA and a 
principal consultant in software engineering with Molecular, Inc.
He received a Bachelor of Arts from Boston University, a Masters in Information 
Systems from Northeastern University, and a Ph.D. from the University of 
Washington, Seattle. John is an active contributor to a number of open source 
communities, a founding organizer of WordCamp Boston (2010 and 2011), and the 
lead developer of the WPBook plugin for WordPress. Online, he can be found at 
johneckman.com, blogging at www.openparenthesis.org, and tweeting as @jeckman. 
He also served as a technical reviewer for WordPress 3 Ultimate Security. 
I'd like to thank the broader WordPress community—users and 
developers—without whom none of this would be possible. 
www.allitebooks.com

Lee Jordan is a designer and new media developer. She brings a strong design 
background and concern for the visual and emotional impact of media to web-based 
projects. Experienced in multiple CMS platforms including Expression Engine, 
Plone, WordPress, PostNuke, and Google's Blogger, she has maintained, explored, 
and used most of them on a day-to-day basis. She spends her spare time as the 
leader of a local scout troop, taking long hikes with her family in the beautiful North 
Georgia woods, trying to taste test every variety of chocolate that exists, and playing 
with code and pixels. Design topics or whatever she can think of at the time are 
posted on her blog at http://leejordan.net.
Lee has written and co-authored several previous books with Packt Publishing: 
Project Management with dotProject, WordPress Themes 2.8, Blogger: Beyond the Basics, 
and HTML5 Rich Media Applications.
Business blogging is simple to start but dificult to master. A big 
thanks to all the professional bloggers out there who let me learn  
by example.
www.allitebooks.com

www.PacktPub.com
Support iles, eBooks, discount offers and more
You might want to visit www.PacktPub.com for support iles and downloads related 
to your book. 
Did you know that Packt offers eBook versions of every book published, with PDF 
and ePub iles available? You can upgrade to the eBook version at www.PacktPub.com 
and as a print book customer, you are entitled to a discount on the eBook copy. Get in 
touch with us at service@packtpub.com for more details.
At www.PacktPub.com, you can also read a collection of free technical articles, sign 
up for a range of free newsletters and receive exclusive discounts and offers on  
Packt books and eBooks.
http://PacktLib.PacktPub.com
Do you need instant solutions to your IT questions? PacktLib is Packt's online  
digital book library. Here, you can access, read and search across Packt's entire 
library of books. 
Why Subscribe?
• 
Fully searchable across every book published by Packt
• 
Copy and paste, print and bookmark content
• 
On demand and accessible via web browser
Free Access for Packt account holders
If you have an account with Packt at www.PacktPub.com, you can use this to access 
PacktLib today and view nine entirely free books. Simply use your login credentials 
for immediate access.
www.allitebooks.com

www.allitebooks.com

Table of Contents
Preface 
1
Chapter 1: A Blog Less Ordinary—What Makes a Great Blog? 
7
You can stand out from the crowd 
8
Where do you it in? 
8
Not all business blogs are the same 
10
Increasing sales 
11
Adding value 
12
A dialog with your customers 
13
Raising awareness 
13
Showing expertise 
14
Providing customer service 
15
Public relations 
16
Driving trafic 
17
Add some personality 
18
Categorizing business blogs 
19
Product blogs 
20
Corporate or company blogs 
20
News blogs 
21
Expert blogs 
22
The WordPress arsenal 
24
Good design 
24
Maximizing usability 
24
Promoting your blog 
24
Analyzing the statistics 
25
Managing content 
25
Monetizing your blog 
25
www.allitebooks.com

Table of Contents
[ ii ]
Measuring success 
25
Google PageRank 
26
Alexa ranking 
26
Summary 
27
Chapter 2: Introducing our Case Study—WPBizGuru 
29
WPBizGuru—the man behind the blog 
30
Before and after 
30
Goals and planning 
31
Business situation 
32
Strategic goals 
32
The blog plan 
33
Tactical goals 
36
Implementation 
36
An overview of the WPBizGuru makeover 
37
Design 
37
Content 
38
Promotion and analysis 
39
Generating revenue 
40
Enabling growth 
41
Summary 
41
Chapter 3: Designing your Blog 
43
Blog design principles 
43
Layout 
44
Color 
49
Web color theory 
50
Typography 
51
Font replacement 
52
Usability and accessibility 
53
Implementing your blog design 
54
A brief introduction to CSS 
55
The early days of the web 
55
Content and style 
56
Looking at the code 
58
The stylesheet 
61
Applying the stylesheet 
63
Tweaking the styles 
68
Setting up a local development environment 
70
Installing XAMPP 
71
Setting the 'root' password for MySQL 
73
Installing WordPress locally 
74

Table of Contents
[ iii ]
Case study—WPBizGuru design 
76
Setting up a child theme 
77
Dummy content 
77
Installing a new text editor 
79
Creating your child theme 
79
A closer look at style.css 
81
The page layout 
82
The default stylesheet 
83
The header 
84
The menu 
85
Colors and fonts 
87
The main content area 
89
The sidebars 
94
The footer 
96
The inished theme 
97
Summary 
98
Chapter 4: Images and Videos 
99
Image theory basics 
99
Optimization 
100
Images in WordPress posts 
101
Thumbnail creation 
101
Thumbnail size 
106
Attachment size 
107
Styling images 
109
Setting up an image gallery 
110
NextGEN Gallery 
111
Creating an image gallery page 
117
Using video 
119
Embedding a YouTube video 
120
Adding a favicon 
121
Summary 
123
Chapter 5: Content is King 
125
Blog writing tips 
126
Killer headlines 
126
Length of posts 
126
Post frequency 
127
Links to other blogs 
128
Establishing your tone and voice 
128
The structure of a post 
129
Ending with a question 
130
A quick checklist 
130

Table of Contents
[ iv ]
Categories and tags 
131
The difference between categories and tags 
131
Using categories 
131
Using tags 
132
Applying tags and categories to WPBizGuru 
133
The About page 
138
About you 
138
About your blog 
139
Anything to declare 
139
The WPBizGuru About page 
139
Other static content 
140
Backing up 
141
Backing up wp-content 
141
Backing up the database using phpMyAdmin 
142
Restoring the database from a backup ile 
145
Summary 
146
Chapter 6: Search Engine Optimization 
147
The principles of SEO 
148
How search engines ind stuff 
148
Keywords 
149
Choosing your keywords 
149
Using your keywords 
152
Permalinks 
153
Title tags 
155
Sitemaps 
159
Adding a Google Sitemap 
160
Inbound links 
161
Robots.txt optimization 
164
Using excerpts on the home page 
165
Search engine submissions 
167
The big four 
167
DMOZ.org 
168
Minor search engines and directories 
168
SEO software and tools 
169
Web CEO 
169
Google webmaster tools 
170
Firefox SEO extensions 
173
Seeing results 
173
Summary 
174

Table of Contents
[ v ]
Chapter 7: Supercharged Promotion 
175
Syndication 
175
WordPress feeds 
176
Excerpts or full posts? 
177
FeedBurner 
178
Setting up FeedBurner 
179
Using FeedBurner 
183
Blog indexes and search engines 
190
Ping-O-Matic 
190
FeedBurner's Pingshot 
191
Technorati 
191
Minor blog indexes 
193
Using social networks 
193
Facebook 
194
LinkedIn 
196
Using Twitter 
198
Setting up Twitter in WordPress 
199
Social bookmarking 
205
Adding links 
205
Bookmarking tips 
208
Summary 
209
Chapter 8: Connecting with the Blogosphere 
211
Deining the blogosphere 
211
Why it's so important to be connected 
212
How to engage with the blogosphere 
212
The blogroll 
214
Managing your blogroll 
214
Adding categories and links 
214
Feeding off the blogosphere 
217
The importance of comments 
220
Fishing for comments 
220
Managing the conversation 
221
Moderation 
221
Dealing with negative comments 
223
Trackbacks 
225
Comment and trackback spam 
226
Installing a contact form 
229
Using the Contact Form 7 plugin 
229
Preventing contact form spam 
232
Summary 
235

Table of Contents
[ vi ]
Chapter 9: Analyzing your Blog Stats 
237
Key performance indicators 
237
Trafic 
238
Hits 
238
Unique visitors 
238
Visits 
239
Page views 
240
Subscribers 
240
RSS subscriptions 
240
E-mail subscriptions 
241
Comments and feedback 
241
Search engine results 
241
Inbound links 
242
Web analytics tools 
243
WordPress.com Stats 
243
Google Analytics 
247
Using Google Analytics 
250
Getting started 
250
Visitors 
253
Trafic sources 
257
Google AdWords 
258
Content 
259
Not an exact science 
260
FeedBurner Stats 
261
Subscribers 
261
Item use 
262
Uncommon uses 
262
Alexa rankings 
262
Summary 
263
Chapter 10: Monetizing your Blog 
265
Google AdSense 
266
Getting started with AdSense 
266
Creating AdSense ad units 
267
Using the AdSense code in WordPress 
268
Afiliate programs 
271
Amazon Associates 
271
Creating an Amazon Associates widget 
273
Using your Amazon widget in WordPress 
274
Afiliate networks 
276
Direct ad sales 
276
Banner sizes 
276
Where to place banner ads 
278

Table of Contents
[ vii ]
How much to charge 
278
Your media pack and rate card 
279
Rotating banner ads 
280
Paid reviews 
289
Case study review 
289
Summary 
290
Chapter 11: Managing Growth 
291
Keeping up with the workload 
291
Going mobile 
292
Managing increased trafic 
294
Installing WP Super Cache 
295
Outgrowing your web host 
297
Virtual Private Servers and Cloud Servers 
298
Moving WordPress to a new server 
299
Bringing in other writers 
303
How to ind guest writers 
303
Introducing WordPress Multisite 
304
Getting started with WordPress Multisite 
304
Installing a network 
305
Managing your network 
307
Developing a blog network 
309
Summary 
313
Index 
315


Preface
WordPress for Business Bloggers provides advanced strategies and techniques which 
will help you to take your WordPress business blog from average to extraordinary. 
Regardless of whether you already have a blog, or are still in the planning stages, 
this book will show you how to use WordPress to create a highly successful blog  
for your business.
This is a practical, hands-on book based around a ictitious case study blog, which 
you will build using a development server on your own computer. The vast majority 
of tutorials and examples will be applied to the case study blog. The case study 
grows chapter-by-chapter, from the installation of your local development server, 
right up to the inished blog. You will be installing and coniguring a selection of 
WordPress plugins to improve the functionality of the case study blog.
You are provided with clear instructions and detailed screenshots, so you can see 
exactly what to do at each step of the build. When you have completed the case 
study, you will have the knowledge and conidence to apply all the techniques  
you have learned to your own WordPress business blog.
The author assumes you have basic experience with WordPress, already know how 
to set up a self-hosted WordPress blog, and are familiar with the basics: creating 
posts and pages, coniguring blog settings, and so on. By the time you have inished 
the book you will have moved forward from WordPress novice to an advanced user 
of the software in a business context.
What this book covers
Chapter 1, A Blog Less Ordinary—What Makes a Great Blog?; will allow you to examine 
many different types of business blog. You will be shown a selection of great 
business blogs and see what you can learn from them.

Preface
[ 2 ]
Chapter 2, Introducing our Case Study—WPBizGuru introduces you to the case study 
blog, and takes you through the process of developing strategic goals and your 
blog plan. You will learn that the planning process is important, even if your blog is 
already up and running.
Chapter 3, Designing your Blog will teach you the basics of blog design. You will work 
through a brief introduction to HTML and CSS, and see how easy it is to create your 
own custom design using the Thematic theme framework.
Chapter 4, Images and Videos teaches you some advanced image and video handling 
techniques, including setting up an image gallery and using video from third-party 
sources, such as YouTube and Google Video.
Chapter 5, Content is King focuses on the different techniques and methods required 
for creating the best possible content for your business blog.
Chapter 6, Search Engine Optimization covers some of the most important SEO strategies 
and how to apply them, as well as how to submit your blog to the search engines.
Chapter 7, Supercharged Promotion will teach you some advanced blog promotion 
techniques, including: advanced RSS with FeedBurner; submission to blog search 
engines, such as Technorati; using social networks, such as Facebook and Twitter; 
and using social bookmarks, such as Digg and Delicious.
Chapter 8, Connecting with the Blogosphere talks about the importance of connecting 
with other bloggers and playing an active role in the blogosphere to promote your 
business blog.
Chapter 9, Analyzing your Blog Stats will teach you how to analyze your blog's 
performance using tools such as Google Analytics and WordPress.com Stats.
Chapter 10, Monetizing your Blog introduces you to a variety of strategies to help you 
generate revenue from your blog, like using advertising and afiliate programs.
Chapter 11, Managing Growth will show you how to manage the growth of your blog 
by optimizing it for high trafic, and introducing multiple authors by setting up a 
network using WordPress Multisite.
What you need for this book
The main thing you need for this book is a self-hosted WordPress blog. We will be 
using some other open source software and a local development environment for 
WordPress. Full details of where to get this software and how to set it up will be 
covered in the relevant chapters. All the open source software used in the book is 
free to download and use.

Preface
[ 3 ]
Who this book is for
This book is for anybody running or starting a business blog using WordPress, 
whether you plan to use your blog for PR and marketing, or want to proit directly 
from blogging.
The book mainly focuses on a self-hosted WordPress installation, but some of the 
advice could also be applied to blogs on WordPress.com.
Conventions
In this book, you will ind a number of styles of text that distinguish between 
different kinds of information. Here are some examples of these styles, and an 
explanation of their meaning.
Code words in text are shown as follows: "We can include other contexts through  
the use of the include directive."
A block of code is set as follows:
#footer {
  border-top:0px;
  margin-top:22px;
}
#siteinfo {
  color:#b7c4cf;
  font-size:11px;
  line-height:18px;
  padding:22px 0 44px 0;
}
When we wish to draw your attention to a particular part of a code block, the 
relevant lines or items are set in bold:
#primary {
  border:0px;
  padding:18px 0 0 0;
  margin-bottom:22px;
}
www.allitebooks.com

Preface
[ 4 ]
New terms and important words are shown in bold. Words that you see on the 
screen, in menus or dialog boxes for example, appear in the text like this: "Click  
Save the Replace Posts option and view your home page".
Warnings or important notes appear in a box like this.
Tips and tricks appear like this.
Reader feedback
Feedback from our readers is always welcome. Let us know what you think about 
this book—what you liked or may have disliked. Reader feedback is important  
for us to develop titles that you really get the most out of.
To send us general feedback, simply send an e-mail to feedback@packtpub.com, 
and mention the book title via the subject of your message.
If there is a book that you need and would like to see us publish, please send  
us a note in the SUGGEST A TITLE form on www.packtpub.com or e-mail 
suggest@packtpub.com.
If there is a topic that you have expertise in and you are interested in either writing 
or contributing to a book, see our author guide on www.packtpub.com/authors.
Customer support
Now that you are the proud owner of a Packt book, we have a number of things  
to help you to get the most from your purchase.
Downloading the example code
You can download the example code iles for all Packt books you have purchased 
from your account at http://www.PacktPub.com. If you purchased this book 
elsewhere, you can visit http://www.PacktPub.com/support and register to have 
the iles e-mailed directly to you.

Preface
[ 5 ]
Errata
Although we have taken every care to ensure the accuracy of our content, mistakes 
do happen. If you ind a mistake in one of our books—maybe a mistake in the text or 
the code—we would be grateful if you would report this to us. By doing so, you can 
save other readers from frustration and help us improve subsequent versions of this 
book. If you ind any errata, please report them by visiting http://www.packtpub.
com/support, selecting your book, clicking on the errata submission form link, and 
entering the details of your errata. Once your errata are veriied, your submission 
will be accepted and the errata will be uploaded on our website, or added to any list 
of existing errata, under the Errata section of that title. Any existing errata can be 
viewed by selecting your title from http://www.packtpub.com/support.
Piracy
Piracy of copyright material on the Internet is an ongoing problem across all media. 
At Packt, we take the protection of our copyright and licenses very seriously. If you 
come across any illegal copies of our works, in any form, on the Internet, please 
provide us with the location address or website name immediately so that we can 
pursue a remedy.
Please contact us at copyright@packtpub.com with a link to the suspected 
pirated material.
We appreciate your help in protecting our authors, and our ability to bring you 
valuable content.
Questions
You can contact us at questions@packtpub.com if you are having a problem with 
any aspect of the book, and we will do our best to address it.


A Blog Less Ordinary—What 
Makes a Great Blog?
Blogging has been a part of the web landscape for over a decade now. From 
personal journals to big corporate marketing, the medium has matured to become a 
ubiquitous mode of live communication. The power of blogging has been recognized 
by the business community, and canny marketers view it as a powerful weapon in 
their digital arsenal.
If blogging is done well, it can bring myriad beneits to businesses of any size and if 
done badly, it can cause more harm than good. Central to the success of any business 
blogger is a thorough understanding of the technology he or she is using. This will 
give you a competitive advantage by being able to create a more engaging blog. 
You have wisely chosen WordPress as your blogging platform and this book will 
give you the in-depth knowledge of the software you need to take your blog from 
ordinary to exceptional.
This is not an introduction to WordPress; that is, we will not be covering the basics 
such as installation or how to post. Most readers will already have an established 
WordPress blog or will at least be in the advanced stages of planning one.
In this chapter, we will consider the essence of great blogs and the groundwork that 
is required to produce one. What separates the mediocre from the marvelous? What 
should you do to blast through the blogosphere and take your blog to the next level? 
We will look at some examples of the best blogs out there and see what we can learn 
from them. The principles outlined here are a jumping-off point for the techniques 
and methods that we will cover through the rest of the book. In this chapter, we cover:
• 
Where you it into the business blogosphere
• 
How to identify your blog's strategic goals

A Blog Less Ordinary—What Makes a Great Blog?
[ 8 ]
• 
Some of the major categories of business blogs
• 
The tools and features in WordPress that help you to achieve your  
blog's goals
You can stand out from the crowd
Let's begin with a quick pep talk.
Making a success of your blog can seem like an uphill struggle. It's easy to be 
disheartened in the early days because success rarely happens overnight. One of the 
irst psychological stumbling blocks for many bloggers is the overwhelming size of 
the blogosphere. It's easy to feel like a small ish in a very big pond. However, that's 
not necessarily the case.
It's true; the blogosphere is a crowded place, with millions of blogs out there all 
clambering for attention.
At irst this seems a little daunting. You may be wondering how you can stand out 
in such a crowded arena. With so much live information being constantly updated, 
is there room for any more? Does the world need another blog? Is the web-suring 
public in danger of reaching blog-saturation or information-overload? I believe the 
answers to these questions are yes, yes, and no, respectively.
There are many out there, but there are also a lot of web users hungry for information.
As well as being big, the blogosphere is also diverse. There are millions of 
blogs, which cover an enormous spectrum of subjects and genres. However, the 
blogosphere can be almost endlessly segmented, which gives meaning to your 
activities as a business blogger. You're not competing for audience share against the 
blogosphere as a whole. Like most bloggers, you'll ind your niche and realize 
success is within your grasp.
Where do you it in?
Blogging began very much as an exercise in personal publishing. It was an evolution 
of the personal home pages that have been with us since the early days of the Web. 
It's still true that the majority of blogs take the form of a personal journal, with no 
implicit business agenda. (However, many 'personal' bloggers have found ways to 
monetize their activity; there is now a growing breed of 'professional bloggers', who 
derive much, if not all of their income from blogging.)

Chapter 1
[ 9 ]
It's widely believed that John Barger irst used the term weblog 
in December 1997. Peter Merholz shortened it to blog in 1999, 
saying, "I've decided to pronounce the word 'Weblog' as 'wee-
blog'. Or 'blog' for short."
It was politics and journalism that brought blogging into the mainstream, 
particularly in the wake of the 9/11 attacks of 2001. The 2004 US presidential 
elections marked a watershed as blogging became an increasingly normal part of the 
media landscape. Journalist, Andrew Sullivan, was a pioneer of the political blog, 
starting The Daily Dish in 2001. The following screenshot is of Andrew Sullivan's 
blog from September 30, 2001.
With politicians and inluential journalists playing an active role in the blogosphere, 
it wasn't long until the business community recognized the potential beneits of 
blogging. Today, business blogging is commonplace with more and more web 
users expecting to see a 'Blog' link on company home pages.
In this very brief history of blogging we can already see three of the biggest blog 
genres: Personal Blogs, Political Blogs, and Business Blogs (there are, of course, 
many others). Most readers of this book will fall into the 'Business' genre.

A Blog Less Ordinary—What Makes a Great Blog?
[ 10 ]
Not all business blogs are the same
So, you're a business blogger. However, that doesn't say very much about your 
speciic goals and aspirations. All blogs are different. Their reasons for existence vary 
depending on what the publisher is trying to achieve. The key to the success of your 
blog is having a clear vision of what you want it to do for you. This is your blogging 
strategy. Once it's clear in your mind, you can start to set concrete tactical goals for 
your blog, which we'll cover in Chapter 2, Introducing our Case Study—WPBizGuru.
For now, consider the 'raison d'être' of your blog. Why are you putting your time, 
energy, and resources into it? What do you hope to achieve?
One of the key drivers for many business bloggers is the fact that 
blogs can be a very inexpensive form of marketing—you can get a 
lot of value for a relatively small investment.
Obviously, not all business bloggers are trying to achieve the same things with their 
blogs, but here are a few of the more common strategic goals of business blogging:
• 
To increase sales 
• 
To add value to your products and services
• 
To open a dialog with your customers
• 
To raise awareness of your company, products, and services
• 
To demonstrate your knowledge and expertise
• 
To provide customer service and support
• 
To improve public relations (for example, media relations, reputation 
management, crisis management, and so on)
• 
To drive trafic to your other website(s)
• 
To give some personality to your corporate image
You may well have several of these strategic goals in mind for your blog. There is no 
reason why your blog can't achieve a combination of these. Let's take a look at each 
of the goals in more detail with some examples of blogs that have them. (Not all of 
the example blogs here are created in WordPress; they're included as they are good 
illustrations of these strategic goals.)

Chapter 1
[ 11 ]
Increasing sales
A blog can be a great way of expanding and updating your online and ofline sales 
literature. Posting about the beneits and features of your products or services can be 
a great way of converting leads into sales. This usually involves a simpler approach 
rather than a full-on hard sell. Your regular sales brochure, whether online or 
ofline, will probably list your selling points with brief explanations, which for many 
customers, can seem rather over-hyped. A blog allows you to expand on your selling 
points and, in doing so, demonstrate that there is more to your products than just 
sales hype.
A great example of a 'sales' blog is that of GPS manufacturer, Garmin 
(http://garmin.blogs.com). Their blog not only gives background information 
about the products, it also shows innovative ways in which customers are using their 
GPS units, going beyond the scope of their regular sales literature. There are also 
plenty of customer testimonials and images of the products actually being used.

A Blog Less Ordinary—What Makes a Great Blog?
[ 12 ]
Adding value
Your blog is a great place to tell customers about extra features and added beneits 
of your products and services. This is related to the idea of increasing sales, already 
mentioned, so your blog can probably kill two birds with one stone. Customers 
who use your products and services can learn ways of getting more out of them. For 
example, software developers might blog about hidden features that regular users 
might not otherwise know about.
A good example of this type of blog is the 37signals Product Blog (http://
productblog.37signals.com/). The company uses it to educate its customers 
about features in its range of online productivity software. The following screenshot 
illustrates this approach—who knew how to change time zones in Basecamp? As 
well as adding value for its existing customers, this kind of information is also sales 
material for prospective buyers.

Chapter 1
[ 13 ]
A dialog with your customers
Blogs provide the perfect environment for a genuine conversation with your 
customers. A key feature of any blog is the ability of readers to write comments 
about posts. Businesses can use this in-built technology to engage in a live 
conversation with their customers. It can be a great way of receiving feedback and 
testing opinions about new products and services, as well as inding out what your 
customers really want.
Obviously, opening up public communication channels with your customers 
can involve some risk—you may receive damaging comments. How to deal with 
negative feedback is a delicate issue that we'll look at in more detail in Chapter 8, 
Connecting with the Blogosphere. For this reason, many large businesses do not use 
comments on their blogs. A notable exception is Boeing, which does allow comments 
on its blog (http://boeingblogs.com/randy/).
Raising awareness
Blogs are a great way to raise awareness for your company and products. The nature 
of the blogosphere is that bloggers link to each other. This provides a great platform 
for spreading your message virally. Having your blog linked to and commented on 
by bloggers across the globe can spread the word quickly. It's a great form of buzz 
marketing, and many start-ups use a blog to create an air of anticipation about their 
forthcoming launch.
www.allitebooks.com

A Blog Less Ordinary—What Makes a Great Blog?
[ 14 ]
Joost, the web TV Company, used a blog in the lead-up to its launch, using the code 
name 'The Venice Project'. It helped to create a buzz and raised awareness for the 
company before it launched (http://joost.com/).
Showing expertise
Demonstrating your professional knowledge and positioning yourself as an expert in 
your ield is a great way of raising your business proile. This is particularly true for 
consultants and others who are hired because of their knowledge and experience. Web 
designers, academics, authors, life coaches, and software developers are just a few 
examples of the kinds of business people who may wish to demonstrate their expertise. 
Using a blog is a great way to achieve this because it provides a regularly updated 
outlet to showcase your professional activities and write about your achievements.

Chapter 1
[ 15 ]
A great WordPress blog that demonstrates this is that of web designer, Jeffrey 
Zeldman (http://www.zeldman.com). He uses his blog to discuss issues in the web 
design arena and give his comment about what's happening in the industry.
Providing customer service
Providing eficient customer service is the cornerstone of most successful businesses. 
Using a blog as part of your customer service provision can be a great help to both 
you and your customers. You can use your blog to provide answers to frequently 
asked customer service questions. Blogs are also great for quickly alerting your 
customers to product issues as they arise.

A Blog Less Ordinary—What Makes a Great Blog?
[ 16 ]
A great example of a customer services blog is Dell's Direct2Dell 
(http://direct2dell.com/).
Public relations
Your blog can provide a great window on your business. It can put a human face on 
the organization and provide a great way for both the public and media to get an 
understanding of what you're about. Blogs can also provide a means to transmit your 
company news, which can complement or maybe even replace the traditional press 
release. They also provide a forum to discuss and respond to any media coverage you 
receive, be it good or bad. A blog is also an invaluable tool for crisis management, as 
it enables you to provide instant updates about any negative situation you may ind 
yourself in. Blogs allow you to control your corporate reputation.
Digg's blog has a strong public relations focus. It provides plenty of good-news 
stories, such as awards the company has picked up and enhancements to its 
service. It also uses it to respond quickly to any potentially damaging feedback  
it has received about its service. The blog also gives a good sense of the company's 
ethos and outlook, which is useful in managing its brand and reputation. All in  
all, the Digg blog is a great example of a WordPress blog with a PR-focus 
(http://blog.digg.com/):

Chapter 1
[ 17 ]
Driving trafic
Search engines love blogs. A continuous supply of frequently updated content is the 
key to improving search engine rankings. However, many company websites are 
updated infrequently, particularly if they are brochure style sites. A blog is a great 
way of bringing dynamic and fresh content into the mix. If you have a relatively 
lightweight company website that isn't updated too often, you'll ind you get far 
better search engine success from a blog. It's basically down to the fact that search 
engines like fresh content to index.
This strategy would work particularly well if you keep your blog within your site's 
domain. So, rather than having www.mycompany.com and www.mycompanyblog.com 
as separate domains, consider placing your blog at http://blog.mycompany.com. 
This is becoming the standard approach for more and more company websites, who 
understand the importance of driving trafic from their blog to their main website  
(or vice versa—it works both ways).

A Blog Less Ordinary—What Makes a Great Blog?
[ 18 ]
An example of this approach is the blog set up by Articulate, an e-learning tools 
company (http://blog.articulate.com/). Not only are the blog pages within the 
main site's domain, they are also well integrated into the design and navigation of 
the main site. The blog and the main website have similar headers and menu bars.
Add some personality
Blogging's evolution with its roots in personal journals means many blogs often take 
on a very conversational style. This lends itself very well to injecting a personal touch 
or a human face to corporate communications. Many companies use blogs to reveal 
some of the personalities behind the business. These days, many CEOs and senior 
executives blog on behalf of their companies. The topics discussed aren't necessarily 
related to company activities. These bloggers have the opportunity to write about 
their extra-curricular interests or anything else that takes their fancy.
This approach can be very useful in building a relationship with your customers. 
People are now far more used to informal communications with the organizations 
with which they do business. They like to get to know the people behind the 
corporate façade. Nevertheless, it's still important to gauge the tone correctly.  
If things get too informal or inappropriate content begins to creep in, you may  
end up upsetting or alienating some of your customers.

Chapter 1
[ 19 ]
Bill Marriott, Chairman and CEO of Marriott International, maintains a blog at 
http://www.blogs.marriott.com/. The blog contains a mix of his personal 
musings as well as company news, and remains irmly under the Marriott brand. 
It's an excellent opportunity for a huge multi-national corporation to give a personal 
touch to its web communications.
Categorizing business blogs
So these are a few of the strategic goals that successful business blogs aspire to. They 
provide you with one method of analyzing your blog (and the blogs of others).
But we can also look at blogs in terms of their type. Looking around the blogosphere, 
we see many types or styles of blog. Each of these types of blog is likely to have its 
own set of strategic goals. By understanding what your strategic goals are, you can 
probably determine what type of blog you should have. We can measure the success 
of a blog by looking at its type and deciding whether it achieves the strategic goals 
for that particular blog type.

A Blog Less Ordinary—What Makes a Great Blog?
[ 20 ]
Product blogs
These tend to simply focus on a company's product(s). They provide information 
on research and development, product features, user guides, where to buy, and 
anything else directly related to the product or service. They are usually regarded as 
a straightforward sales channel—their purpose is to close sales. The strategic goals 
that these blogs are trying to achieve are usually to increase sales and add value.
A great example of a product blog is the Amazon Web Services Blog, which the 
company uses to tell its customers about newly developed products and services 
(http://aws.typepad.com/aws/).
Corporate or company blogs
This is probably the most diverse type of blog as it can fulill many, if not all, of the 
strategic goals we highlighted previously. The corporate blog can take many forms 
and has many purposes.
These are at once the easiest kind of business blog to get started and the easiest to 
get wrong because remaining focused can be a challenge. They provide almost a 
completely blank canvas, so it's important to identify the strategic goals and stick  
to them.

Chapter 1
[ 21 ]
General corporate blogs are probably the most common type of business blogs to be 
found on the web. They provide a great deal of lexibility and can cover a diverse 
range of subject matters.
If you have several strategic goals in mind for your blog, you will most likely end 
up with a general corporate blog. A great example of this type of blog, built using 
WordPress, is Flickr (http://blog.flickr.com/en).
News blogs
These are a slightly different type of blog as they can be a business in their own right.
They usually provide news coverage for a speciic niche and may be run by an expert 
in that ield or a team of experts. Many of the most popular blogs on the web take 
this form. A lot of these focus on internet and digital technologies. They are almost 
like online magazines or newspapers.
Because of the high trafic that these types of blogs can attract, many have become 
successful independent media businesses by raising revenue from advertising sales 
and corporate sponsorships.

A Blog Less Ordinary—What Makes a Great Blog?
[ 22 ]
In terms of the strategic goals behind this type of blog, it tends to show expertise and 
adding personality. However, as many of these are businesses in their own right, 
they also have the goal of increasing sales, that is, advertising sales.
Some notable blogs in this category are TechCrunch (http://www.techcrunch.com/), 
GigaOM (http://gigaom.com/), and Mashable (http://mashable.com/), all of 
which use WordPress.
Expert blogs
These are written by pundits or experts in their ield. They are usually aimed at 
promoting the business activity of the author. The experts behind these blogs may  
be freelance consultants, professional speakers, authors, or they may run their  
own companies.
Again, many of the most popular blogs on the web are of this type. Some expert 
bloggers derive a good income simply from running their blogs—they can monetize 
the high trafic they receive by selling advertising space.
The strategic goals behind these blogs are usually raising awareness of the expert's 
business activities, demonstrating knowledge and expertise, and driving trafic  
to the expert's other websites.

Chapter 1
[ 23 ]
Expert blogs can also come under the auspices of large corporations who use the 
reputation of some of their senior employees to improve their company proile.
Some expert blogs have a long history coming directly from the tradition of the 
'personal home page', which was instrumental in the development of blogging. 
Famous expert bloggers include Seth Godin (http://sethgodin.typepad.com/), 
Robert Scoble (http://www.scobleizer.com/), and Guy Kawasaki (http://blog.
guykawasaki.com/ — shown in the following screenshot).
These are just four, rather broad categories. It's easy to see that many blogs will it 
into one or another of these types, but some blogs cross over and there are certainly 
other types of blogs that we haven't covered. The main point to understand is that 
having a clear idea of the type of blog you want to achieve, based on your strategic 
goals, is an important irst step in making your blog a success.
www.allitebooks.com

A Blog Less Ordinary—What Makes a Great Blog?
[ 24 ]
The WordPress arsenal
We've seen that successful blogs need clearly deined strategic goals and these goals 
will often determine the type of blog that will work best.
WordPress is one of the most powerful blogging platforms available, and it 
makes possible a number of techniques and methods that will help you put your 
strategic goals into practice. The tools, techniques, and methods you pull out of the 
WordPress arsenal will depend on your blog's strategic goals.
We'll be covering these techniques in detail throughout the rest of the book, but here 
are a few of them to give you a taste of what's to come.
Good design
Whatever your strategic goals may be, design is going to be an important 
consideration—you must come up with a design that facilitates your strategic goals.
Luckily, WordPress gives you almost unlimited control over the look and feel of 
your blog. You may have already experimented with ready-made themes, of which 
there are thousands available from various sources. However, we'll be looking at 
how to modify WordPress themes so that you can develop a unique design that its 
your purpose perfectly.
Maximizing usability
This will be closely linked to the design of your blog. Ensuring that your blog is 
usable and accessible to everyone is a key to its success. Your readers must be able  
to navigate your blog and ind the content easily.
WordPress has many built-in features that help to maximize usability. There are  
also several plugins that can be used to improve this. Throughout the book, we'll  
be looking at a selection of the best plugins, so that you can choose the ones you 
really need.
Promoting your blog
Again, whichever strategic goals you are aiming for, a key factor to your blog's 
success will be getting it out to as big an audience as possible.
Promoting blogs is a wide-ranging skill that involves many techniques. For example, 
Search Engine Optimization (SEO) is central to any promotion strategy. There are 
many ways that you can use WordPress to improve the indability of your site and 
we will be covering these in detail.

Chapter 1
[ 25 ]
WordPress also enables you to take advantage of social networking and social 
bookmarking. We will also be looking at syndication and submitting your blog to  
the various indices, such as Technorati. Chapter 6, Search Engine Optimization and 
Chapter 7, Supercharged Promotion will give you all the details on promoting your 
blog to the search engines and beyond.
Analyzing the statistics
It is essential to monitor the progress of your blog, and WordPress offers many 
tools that enable you to do this. We will also look Google Analytics, a third-party 
statistics tool.
We will be looking at the various statistics that are available to you and examining 
how you can use the data to push your blog forward.
Managing content
WordPress is a powerful content management system and we will be looking at the 
ways you can manage all types of content within your blog. Depending on your 
strategic goals, there may be many different types of content that you need to create. 
From static pages to image galleries and multimedia content, WordPress gives you 
the control you need.
We will also be developing the skills you need to create engaging and relevant 
content, including copywriting techniques, and how to manage categories.
Monetizing your blog
WordPress provides you with a variety of options to develop revenue streams from 
your blog. There are several plugins and widgets that help you to do this.
In Chapter 10, Monetizing your Blog, we will be looking at creative methods of 
generating cash via your blog, which could go a long way towards covering its 
running costs or even develop into a signiicant revenue stream for your business.
Measuring success
To ensure that your blog is a worthwhile use of your resources and is providing 
beneit to your business, you need to measure its success. It's also useful to be able  
to assess other blogs against yours, and against others within your market sector.
There are several tools that can be used to measure the success of blogs.

A Blog Less Ordinary—What Makes a Great Blog?
[ 26 ]
Google PageRank
This is an algorithm that Google uses to rank web pages in its index. In very rough 
terms, the PageRank of a web page is assessed by the number of other pages that 
link to it. Google gives a numeric weighting from 0-10 for each web page on the 
Internet. The higher the PageRank, the higher up it appears in Google's search 
results. So, having a high PageRank helps you to achieve a better ranking in Google.
Taken on its own, it is a matter of some debate how important PageRank actually is. But 
as a general rule of thumb, PageRank is a good indicator of how well a page is 
doing. You can see the PageRank of any web page by installing the Google Toolbar 
(http://toolbar.google.com/).
Alexa ranking
Alexa (http://www.alexa.com/) is a company that measures websites based on the 
trafic they receive. You can look up any website in Alexa to see how well it ranks. 
The higher up the list a website appears the more trafic it receives.

Chapter 1
[ 27 ]
Summary
In this chapter, we have considered what makes a great blog. We have looked at 
how the success of a blog depends on its strategic goals and how well it fulils them. 
We outlined a number of strategic goals that are relevant to business blogs and saw 
examples of blogs that aspire to those goals.
We have also seen a number of blog types that are derived from the various strategic 
goals, and introduced some of the tools and features of WordPress that allow 
bloggers to realize them.
In the next chapter, you'll be introduced to the case study blog we'll be using 
throughout the book. You'll learn how to identify your own strategic goals and  
draw up your blog plan, by using the case study as an example.


Introducing our Case  
Study—WPBizGuru
Throughout the book, we'll be using a case study based on a ictitious blog to 
demonstrate the concepts you'll be learning. It will be the basis for most of the 
tutorials in the rest of the book. In this chapter, we'll outline what we'll be doing  
to transform WPBizGuru from a mediocre blog into an all-singing, all-dancing 
trafic magnet.
As we discussed in Chapter 1, A Blog Less Ordinary—What Makes a Great Blog?, a 
successful business blog is achieved by identifying strategic goals and applying 
these to the type of blog you are publishing. We will work through this process for 
WPBizGuru to give us a detailed plan of how the blog should be developed. You  
will then be in a position to apply the planning process to your own blog and 
identify what needs to be done to improve it.
Even though you may already have a live blog, you should still work through the 
goal-setting process so that you have a clear road map of where your blog is going. 
This will be your blog plan. Think of it in the same way as you would treat your 
business plan. All businesses should regularly revisit and update their business 
plans. The same is true for blog plans. No matter how established your blog is, it 
needs a plan that is updated regularly and responds to your changing demands  
and business. In this chapter, we will cover:
• 
An introduction to our case study blog
• 
How to develop a detailed blog plan
• 
How to identify the speciic goals that will enable us to achieve our blog plan
• 
An overview of how the case study blog will be implemented through the 
rest of the book

Introducing our Case Study—WPBizGuru
[ 30 ]
WPBizGuru—the man behind the blog
Our (ictitious) eponymous hero is an expert in using WordPress to set up business 
blogs. Hence the name: 'WP' = WordPress, 'Biz' = Business, 'Guru' = Expert. So,  
WP + Biz + Guru = WPBizGuru.
He has spent several years applying his knowledge to help his clients use  
WordPress in their businesses. Now he is rebranding himself as the 'WPBizGuru';  
the case study will follow him throughout the process of planning and building his 
new business blog.
If you want to ind out a little more about him, take a look at the About page on the 
blog (http://blog.wpbizguru.com).
Using a subdomain in your blog URL
Many bloggers use a subdomain in the URL for their blog. This is 
particularly useful if you have a regular website running alongside your 
blog. You can have www.yourdomain.com pointing to your main home 
page and http://blog.yourdomain.com pointing to your blog.
If you set up a subdomain in your hosting control panel to point to your 
WordPress directory, remember that you also need to update WordPress 
address (URL) and Blog address (URL) on the General Settings page in 
your WordPress admin area:
Before and after
If you take a look at the blog now (http://blog.wpbizguru.com), you'll see the 
inished version, which is the result of all the work we'll be doing in the chapters  
that follow.
But WPBizGuru didn't always look like this. Like most new WordPress blogs, 
WPBizGuru was using the default theme and had very few enhancements, such as 
plugins and widgets. What you now see came about by applying the methods and 
techniques you'll be learning through the rest of the book. The following screenshot 
shows the 'plain vanilla' version of WPBizGuru before it received its makeover:

Chapter 2
[ 31 ]
Goals and planning
Let's now look at WPBizGuru in more detail and see what business objectives he 
wants to achieve with his blog. We can apply a simple process here that should work 
with any business blog:
• 
Consider our business situation
• 
Decide on our strategic goals
• 
Come up with ideas based on those goals to give us a blog plan
• 
Decide how to implement the blog plan
Business Situation
Strategic Goals
Blog Plan
Implementation

Introducing our Case Study—WPBizGuru
[ 32 ]
Business situation
The irst step is to stand back and analyze your business situation. WPBizGuru earns 
his living by setting up WordPress blogs for his clients, writing, speaking at events 
and shows, appearing on web TV, and selling a range of WordPress products. He is 
an expert in the WordPress community and has amassed a great deal of knowledge 
through his experience as a consultant, writer, and speaker.
Thinking back to the blog categories that we outlined in Chapter 1, A Blog Less 
Ordinary—What Makes a Great Blog?, it seems fairly obvious that WPBizGuru 
should be an 'Expert Blog'. He checks most of the boxes for that category (that is, 
demonstrating professional knowledge and positioning himself as an expert).
Strategic goals
We can now think about the strategic goals that apply to this business situation. 
What does WPBizGuru want to achieve with his blog? This will probably begin with 
a brainstorming exercise. Make a list of all the strategic goals you can think of for 
your blog. For WPBizGuru, this will include the following:
• 
Finding new clients for his consultancy services
• 
Selling more books
• 
Announcing speaking events
• 
Getting more speaking engagements
• 
Selling WordPress products (for example, training videos, plugins,  
and themes)
• 
Building a brand
• 
Getting freelance writing work
And the list continues…

Chapter 2
[ 33 ]
The following diagram is a 'Mind Map' showing all the strategic goals that 
WPBizGuru would like to achieve:
Get new clients
Get freelance writing work
Make professional contacts
Develop a network of related blogs
Promote web TV appearances
Get more speaking engagements
Professional development -
increase skills/knowledge
Create joint ventures
Market Research. Test opinion
on new plugins / themes / WP
Products
Research new markets / get more
people interested in WordPress
Build a subscriber (fan) base
Earn cash ‘on the side’
Position himself as an expert
Sell his range of WP products
Drive traffic to his other website
Reduce marketing/
communications costs
Promote events
Build reputation
Sell more books
Public relations
Measure popularity
Build a brand
WPBizGuru Goals
The blog plan
Now that we have our strategic goals, it's time to think about how they can be 
realized. Some of these will be simpler than others. For example, for WPBizGuru 
to achieve his strategic goal of selling more books he may decide to simply set up a 
page on his blog that lists the books he has published. However, there may be better 
solutions that involve a bit more creative thinking. He may decide to add a 'book 
widget' in his blog sidebar. This will showcase his books right on the main blog  
page and link directly to Amazon.com.
www.allitebooks.com

Introducing our Case Study—WPBizGuru
[ 34 ]
At this point, it's worth formatting your blog plan into some 
kind of tabular structure. The blog plan for WPBizGuru is 
shown below. It has been broken down into three columns, 
showing each strategic goal, how these goals can be realized, 
and inally the speciic implementation requirements.
Right now you may ind it dificult to complete the third column for your own blog 
as your knowledge of WordPress may not be suficient. However, as you work 
through the book and your WordPress skills improve, you will ind solutions to your 
own implementation requirements and add them to your blog plan. Likewise, some 
of the details you see in the following WPBizGuru plan may not make a lot of sense 
right now. Don't worry—most items in the WPBizGuru plan will be covered in the 
rest of the book.
Strategic goal
How to realize the goal
Speciic implementation 
requirements
Get more clients
Set up a 'Services' page
Create a static services page
Make it easy to contact
Add a contact form
Showcase previous work
Build a portfolio page
Sell books
Set up a 'Books' page
Create a static books page
Amazon links in sidebar
Book widget
Promote video 
appearances
Have a 'video' category 
and announce upcoming 
appearances on the blog
Create a category called 
'Video Appearances'
Announce speaking events
Integrate with some kind of 
calendar
Post announcements in the 
blog
Events calendar plugin
Get more speaking 
engagements
Make it easy to be contacted
Add a contact form
Building buzz to draw in 
new trafic
Get trafic from social news 
and bookmarking sites
AddThis plugin
Build a subscriber base
Encourage readers to 
subscribe with their e-mail 
address
'Subscribe to comments' 
plugin
Set up FeedBurner e-mail 
subscriptions
Sell WordPress products
Make it easy for readers to 
buy WordPress products
WP e-Commerce plugin

Chapter 2
[ 35 ]
Strategic goal
How to realize the goal
Speciic implementation 
requirements
Build a brand
Make an attractive design
Customize the theme with 
brand colors and images
Use a logo / favicon
Install a favicon
Use brand language
Apply a writing style guide
Get freelance writing work
Make it easy to contact
Add a contact form
Have a portfolio of 
published work
Build a writing portfolio 
page
Earn cash on the side
Implement AdSense
AdSense manager plugin
Sell banner ads
Implement a banner 
rotation script
Afiliate marketing
Sign up with an afiliate 
network (for example, 
Amazon Associates)
Public relations
Integrate with ofline and 
traditional PR methods
Create a 'Press' page or link 
to press page on his other 
website
Build on reputation
Build relationships with the 
movers and shakers in the 
WordPress community
Trackbacks to their blogs
Guest posts from other WP 
experts
Market research (test 
opinion on WordPress 
products)
Find out what readers think 
about new products
WP-Polls plugin
Ask for comments
Position oneself as an 
expert
Demonstrate good 
knowledge of WordPress
Provide original and top-
quality content
Maintain a short blogroll of 
other experts
Apply copywriting best 
practice and quality 
assurance
Make professional 
contacts
Build relationships with the 
movers and shakers in the 
WordPress community
Trackbacks to their blogs
Guest posts from other WP 
experts
Measure popularity
Find out visitor numbers
Implement Google 
Analytics or WordPress.
com stats

Introducing our Case Study—WPBizGuru
[ 36 ]
Tactical goal
How to realize the goal
Speciic implementation 
requirements
Increase trafic
Use promotion techniques 
to drive trafic
Use RSS and FeedBurner
Maintain posting 
frequency
Plan content ahead
Get into a routine of posting
Improve search engine 
rankings
Use good permalinks
Employ SEO techniques
Maximize usability and 
accessibility
Maintain best practice in 
usability and accessibility
Use image alt tags properly
Have a good category list
Use tags correctly, 
(Conigurable Tag Cloud 
widget)
Use an accessible color 
scheme
Don't break WP's valid code 
with poor quality plugins
Tactical goals
You will see a section headed Tactical goals at the bottom of the blog plan. These 
are generic goals that are not linked to any speciic business goals. They are things 
that all blogs should be trying to do no matter what their strategic goals may be. For 
example, all blogs aim to increase trafic irrespective of what they may be trying to 
achieve from a business point of view. Even though they aren't speciically related to 
business objectives, these goals should feature in any good blog plan.
Implementation
Once you have drawn up your blog plan, it's time to begin with the implementation. 
That's not to say you're done with the plan. You're likely to revisit it frequently as 
your blog takes shape, and make alterations and additions to it. The beauty of any 
kind of web publishing is that nothing is set in stone. If you ind that some aspect 
of the original plan doesn't look right or doesn't work when you actually place it on 
your blog, you can always change your mind. 
Implementation is the stage where we get our hands dirty and begin the real work of 
transforming your blog.

Chapter 2
[ 37 ]
An overview of the WPBizGuru makeover
Throughout the rest of the book, we will be seeing how the WPBizGuru blog plan 
is put into action. This will give you the practical skills you need to implement your 
own blog plan using WordPress.
Design
The irst stage of the makeover will be to implement an appropriate design. To 
achieve this, we will look at some of the principles of good design and how they 
should be applied to WPBizGuru. We will look at issues related to color schemes, 
layout, and typography. We will also be paying careful attention to usability  
and accessibility.
You will be introduced to advanced techniques for editing WordPress themes that 
will involve manipulating the source code. The following screenshot shows the 
inished design for WPBizGuru:

Introducing our Case Study—WPBizGuru
[ 38 ]
Content
Chapter 4, Images and Videos and Chapter 5, Content is King, deal with all aspects of 
creating content and content management. Images and videos will be an important 
feature in the WPBizGuru blog and we will also be looking at a range of tools and 
techniques available in WordPress, which help us to manage this type of content.
We will learn how to present content, easily and eficiently, from a third-party 
website, such as YouTube. WPBizGuru will also feature a photo gallery, as you  
can see in the following screenshot. This will be achieved by the use of a powerful 
third-party plugin that makes managing an image gallery a breeze.
General content issues such as copywriting techniques and how to manage tags and 
categories will also be examined in detail. We will discuss the use of static pages 
within WordPress and the kinds of static content that might be required in the 
WPBizGuru blog. The importance of safeguarding content with appropriate  
back-up procedures will also be demonstrated.

Chapter 2
[ 39 ]
Promotion and analysis
A key element in the success of WPBizGuru, and indeed any blog, will be effective 
promotion. This subject will be looked at in detail in Chapter 6, Search Engine 
Optimization and Chapter 7, Supercharged Promotion. There is a wide range of 
techniques and tools to be employed to ensure WPBizGuru's promotional  
activity is as effective as possible.
We will examine the principles of effective SEO, including how to submit 
WPBizGuru to the search engines and directories. Understanding keywords and 
how they relate to SEO will be a fundamental lesson, as will the use of sitemaps  
and implementing a good permalink structure.
The importance of social networks and other social media will also be examined. 
We will see how the AddThis plugin can be used to promote the blog via social 
bookmaking sites.

Introducing our Case Study—WPBizGuru
[ 40 ]
One of the goals laid out in the blog plan is to effectively measure the popularity of 
WPBizGuru. We will be looking at the tools that enable us to achieve this, including 
a comparison between WordPress.com Stats and Google Analytics, in Chapter 9, 
Analyzing your Blog Stats.
Generating revenue
Another goal in the WPBizGuru blog plan is to earn some revenue directly from the 
blog. We will be looking at some methods to achieve this. These include introducing 
a banner rotation system so that WPBizGuru can sell advertising and sponsorship 
banners directly. Revenue will also be generated by using advertising networks, such 
as Google AdSense.

Chapter 2
[ 41 ]
Enabling growth
We will be looking at how to effectively manage the growth of the WPBizGuru 
blog. This includes practical considerations such as how to ensure smooth server 
operation when faced with high trafic. We will also examine options for expanding 
WPBizGuru's blogging activities. For example, we will see how the WordPress 
Multisite feature can be used as a tool for developing a network of linked blogs.
Summary
In this chapter, we have introduced our case study blog—WPBizGuru. We have also 
seen how to develop a detailed blog plan. This began by analyzing our business 
situation and deciding what we want to achieve from our blog. We then identiied 
the speciic goals that will enable us to achieve this and how they might be realized 
by using WordPress. We also saw an overview of how the WPBizGuru blog will be 
implemented through the rest of the book.
Now is the time to sit down and work on your detailed blog plan before the practical 
work begins. In the next chapter, you will learn how to redesign the theme of a 
WordPress blog.


Designing your Blog
In this chapter, we'll look at one of the most important aspects of your blog—design. 
We'll begin by considering some of the principles of good blog design. We'll then 
move on to apply some of those design principles to our WPBizGuru case study, 
based on the strategic goals we outlined in the previous chapters. Even if your blog 
is already up and running, this chapter will allow you to critically evaluate its design 
and replace your current theme with a custom-designed one. This chapter includes:
• 
The principles of blog design
• 
How to implement your blog design using CSS and HTML
• 
Setting up a local development environment
• 
Building a theme for our case study blog
Blog design principles
Blogs tend to have a fairly simple, minimalist layout and design. This has always 
been one of their key characteristics. Blogs are all about frequently updated content, 
so the main purpose of their design is to present that content as eficiently and 
conveniently as possible. The vast majority of blogs present their most recent content 
on the page that visitors arrive at; hence, the front page contains the latest posts. 
There's no home page with a verbose welcome message and a long navigation menu 
to click through to the important stuff. The visitor gets straight into the meat of the 
blog. By default, this is the structure that WordPress provides. It is possible to set 
a static page as your blog's front page, but, in the vast majority of cases, I wouldn't 
recommend it.
www.allitebooks.com

Designing your Blog
[ 44 ]
So when considering the architecture of a blog, unlike other types of website, we 
don't have to worry too much about a complex navigation structure. There is a 
convention that we can follow. Yes, we may want to add some extra static pages, 
but probably only a few of these. What we are most concerned with in blog design is 
not a complicated navigation structure and how all the pages link together, but how 
the actual blog page should look and feel. This can be broken down into four key 
components, which we will examine, one by one: 
• 
Layout
• 
Color
• 
Typography
• 
Usability and accessibility
Layout
Good design is all about making something easy for people to use. Designers achieve 
this by employing standards and conventions. For example, cars have a standard 
design: four wheels, a chassis, a steering wheel, gas pedal, brake, gear shift, and 
so on. Car designers have stuck to this convention for many years. First, because it 
works well and second, because it enables us to drive any car we choose. When you 
sit down in any standard road car, you know how it works. You turn the key in the 
ignition, select a gear, hit the gas, and off you go. It's certainly not beyond the ken 
of car designers to come up with new ways for getting a car in motion (a joystick 
maybe, or a hand-operated brake) but this would make it more dificult for people 
to drive. Cars work reasonably safely and eficiently because we are all familiar with 
these conventions.
The layout of blog pages also tends to follow certain conventions. As with cars, this 
helps people to use blogs eficiently. They know how they work, because they're 
familiar with the conventions. Most blogs have a header and a footer with the main 
content arranged into columns. This columnar layout works very well for the type of 
chronological content presented in blogs. 
Because of these conventions, the decisions about our blog layout are fairly simple. 
It's basically a case of deciding where we want to place all our page elements and 
content within this standard columnar layout. The set of page elements we have to 
choose from is also based on fairly well entrenched blogging conventions. The list of 
things we may want on our page includes:
• 
Header
• 
Posts
• 
Comments

Chapter 3
[ 45 ]
• 
Static content (for example, the About page)
• 
Links to static pages (simple navigation)
• 
RSS feeds 
• 
Search
• 
Categories
• 
Archives 
• 
Blogroll
• 
Widgets and plugins
• 
Footer
There will be other elements to add to the page as we work through later chapters, 
but for now these should be enough for us to come up with a page layout. If we look 
at this list in more detail, we can see that these page elements can be grouped in a 
sensible way. For example:
• 
Group 1
 °
Header
 °
Links to static pages
• 
Group 2
 °
Posts
 °
Comments
 °
Static content
• 
Group 3
 °
RSS Feeds
 °
Search 
 °
Categories
• 
Group 4
 °
Archives
 °
Blogroll
 °
Widgets and plugins
• 
Group 5
 °
Footer

Designing your Blog
[ 46 ]
This isn't the only possible grouping scheme we might come up with. For example, 
we may place the items in Groups 3 and 4 into a single larger group, or we may 
have widgets and plugins in a group on their own. From this grouping, we can see 
that the type of items in Group 2 are likely to be the main content on our page, with 
Groups 3 and 4 being placed in sidebars.
Sidebars are areas on the page where we place ancillary content.
Having considered the elements we want on the page and how they might be 
grouped, we can think about possible layouts. Within the conventional columnar 
structure of blogs there are quite a few possible layout variations. We'll look at four 
of the most common. The irst is a three-column layout.
Header
Sidebar
Main content
Sidebar
Footer
Here, we have two sidebars, one on either side of the main content. Using this type 
of layout, we would probably place the items in Groups 3 and 4 in the sidebars and 
Group 2 in the main content area. 
A variation on the three-column layout is to have the two sidebars next to each 
other on one side of the page (usually the right), as shown in the following diagram. 
This is a popular layout for blogs, not just for aesthetics, but because the search 
engine spiders encounter the post column irst as that content is at the top of the 
template. (You'll ind out all about search engine spiders in Chapter 6, Search Engine 
Optimization, so if you don't know what they are right now, don't worry.)

Chapter 3
[ 47 ]
Header
Sidebar
Footer
Sidebar
Main content
Using two sidebars is useful if you anticipate having a lot of ancillary content on 
your blog. The list of page elements given earlier is really the bare minimum you 
would want on your page. However, if you decide to use lots of widgets or have 
a long blogroll, it's a good idea to spread them across two sidebars (for more on 
blogrolls, see Chapter 8, Connecting with the Blogosphere). This means that more of 
your content can be placed above the fold.
The concept of above the fold in web design applies to content in a 
web page which is visible without having to scroll down, that is, 
the stuff in the top part of the page. It's a good idea to place the 
most important content above the fold so that readers can see it 
immediately. This is particularly true if you plan to monetize your 
blog by displaying adverts. Adverts that appear above the fold 
get the most exposure, and therefore, generate the most revenue 
(more on this in Chapter 10, Monetizing your Blog).
Another popular layout amongst bloggers has just two columns. In this layout, we 
would place the items in Groups 3 and 4 together in the one sidebar. It doesn't really 
matter which side of the page the sidebar is placed, but it seems more common 
to have it on the right. Studies have shown that a web user's eyes are most often 
focused on the top-left region of a web page, when they irst open any page. So it 
makes sense to place your main content there, with your sidebar on the right. 

Designing your Blog
[ 48 ]
Also, remember that the search engine spiders will ind the leftmost content irst. 
You want them to ind your main content quickly, which is a good reason for  
placing your sidebar on the right, out of their way.
Header
Sidebar
Footer
Main content
An important beneit of a two-column layout is that it allows more room for your 
main content area. This may be important, if you intend to use a lot of video or 
images within your blog posts. The extra room allows you to display this visual 
content bigger.
Many blogs place some of their ancillary content just above the footer, below the 
main content. This also has the advantage of leaving more space for the main 
content, as with the two-column layout. The following diagram shows this type of 
layout. Here, the content just above the footer isn't strictly speaking a sidebar, but 
I've labeled it this way because it's the terminology most often applied to this type  
of ancillary content.
Header
Sidebar
Sidebar
Footer
Main content

Chapter 3
[ 49 ]
Wireframing
The layout diagrams we've just seen are referred to as 
wireframes by web designers. They give a simple overview 
of where the elements of a page should be placed. It would 
be a good idea for you to create your own wireframe for 
your blog design. This can be done using most graphic 
software packages or something like Microsoft Visio, or a 
simple pen and paper does the job equally well!
Color
This is the next design principle we need to consider. It may be that you already 
have a corporate color scheme based on your company logo, stationery, or existing 
website. In this case, you'll probably want to continue that theme through your blog 
design. Even if you already have your corporate color scheme, this section may still 
be useful in case you decide to change your blog colors in the future.
The subject of color in design is a large one. Design students spend a great deal 
of time learning about the psychology and science of colors and techniques for 
achieving the best color schemes. Obviously, we don't have enough space to go  
into that kind of detail, but I will try to give you a few pointers.
The irst thing to think about is the psychology of color, in particular, color 
associations. This is the idea that different colors evoke different feelings and 
emotions in the eye of the beholder. To a certain extent this can be rather subjective 
and it can also depend on cultural inluences, but there are some generalities that 
can be applied. For example, red is often perceived as being exciting, passionate, 
or dramatic. Yellow is an active and highly visible color, which is why it is used in 
warning signs. It is also associated with energy and happiness. Blue is sometimes 
thought of as being cold. It can also be a calming color and may sometimes be seen 
as corporate or conservative. White, for many people, gives the idea of cleanliness, 
purity, and perfection. Black can be seen as strong, elegant, and chic. Obviously, 
these color associations can vary from person to person, so designers don't rely on 
them solely in their color decisions, but they are certainly worth bearing in mind.

Designing your Blog
[ 50 ]
There are more practical considerations regarding color that are probably more 
relevant than color psychology. For example, we all know that some color 
combinations don't work well together. There is a great deal of design theory aimed 
at devising good color combinations, but unless you're a professional designer, it's 
not really worth going into. Probably the best method for working out good color 
combinations is trial and error. If you're trying to igure out a background color and 
text color for your blog, simply test a few out. You could use a graphics package 
such as Photoshop or Microsoft Paint, or one of the many online color tools such as, 
http://colorschemedesigner.com/ or Adobe's Kuler at http://kuler.adobe.com.
When choosing background and text colors you need to think about contrast. For 
example, yellow text on a white background can be very dificult to read. Some 
people also ind light text on a black background a strain on their eyes.
It's also important not to use too many colors in your design. Try to limit your palette 
to a maximum of three or four. Sometimes you may only need two colors to make an 
attractive design.
One method for devising color combinations is to look for examples all around you, 
particularly in nature. Maybe look at a photograph of a landscape and pick out color 
combinations you like. Also consider the work of professional designers. Think 
about websites and blogs you like, and examine the color schemes they have used. 
You will also ind good examples in ofline design—pick up a book and see how 
colors have been used in the cover design.
If you would like to base your blog's color scheme on your 
company logo, you could use lighter and darker versions of 
one color from the logo. Use the most vivid color in the logo 
for emphasis or headings.
Web color theory
At this point, it's worth looking at the technical theory behind colors on the Web. 
Web browsers use the Hexadecimal RGB color system to render colors in web 
pages. This is because computer monitors use an RGB color model, which means 
every pixel is colored using a combination of red, green, and blue light (hence RGB). 
There are 256 different levels of red light, 256 different levels of green light, and 256 
different levels of blue light. These can be combined to create 16,277,216 different 
colors, which are all available for your web browser.

Chapter 3
[ 51 ]
The hexadecimal system gives us a way of counting from 0 to 255 using numbers 
and letters, which covers all 256 levels of RGB light. In the hexadecimal scale, 0 is 
00 and 255 is FF. A six-character hexadecimal color code speciies the levels of red, 
green and blue, which form a particular color. For example, the color white combines 
red, green, and blue at their highest possible levels, that is 255. Remember that in 
hexadecimal 255 is FF, so the color code for white is FFFFFF (Red: FF, Green: FF, and 
Blue: FF). The color code for black is 000000 as the levels of red, green, and blue are 
set to their lowest, or 00 (in hexadecimal). The code for red is FF0000, blue is 0000FF, 
and yellow is FFFF00, and so on.
We can use six-character Hexadecimal RGB codes to deine all of the 16,277,216 web colors.
So how do we know the hexadecimal code for a particular color? Well, there 
are many tools available that deine the Hexadecimal RGB codes for the colors  
you choose. Some are standalone applications for PC or Mac, and others are  
online. Take a look at www.colorpicker.com or do a quick search in Google 
on color picker. For more information on web colors, read the article at 
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Web_colors.
Typography
Another important consideration for your blog design is the fonts you use. Your 
choice of font will have a big impact on the readability of your blog. It's important 
to bear in mind that although there are literally thousands of fonts to choose from, 
only a small number of them are practical for web design. This is because a web 
browser can only display fonts that are already installed on the user's computer. If 
you choose an obscure font for your blog, the chances are that most users won't have 
it installed on their computer. If this is the case the web browser will automatically 
select a substitute font. This may be smaller or far less readable than the font you had 
in mind. It's always safest to stick to the fonts that are commonly used in web design, 
which are known as web safe fonts. These include the following:
• 
Arial
• 
Verdana
• 
Times New Roman
• 
Georgia
There are two types of font, serif and sans-serif. Serif fonts have 
little lourishes at the end of the strokes whereas sans-serif fonts 
don't have this extra decoration. Arial and Verdana are sans-serif 
fonts, whereas Times New Roman and Georgia are serif fonts.

Designing your Blog
[ 52 ]
As you'll see later in the chapter, when we look at CSS, fonts are usually speciied 
in groups or families. They are listed in the order of the designer's preference. For 
example, a designer may specify font-family:"Georgia, Times New Roman, 
serif". This means when the browser renders the page it will irst look for the 
Georgia font; if it isn't installed, it will look for the Times New Roman font and if that 
isn't installed, it will look for the computer's default serif font. This method gives the 
designer more control over the font choices the browser will make.
The size of your font is also an important factor. Generally speaking, the bigger it is, 
the easier it is to read. Computer displays are getting bigger and bigger but the default 
screen resolutions are tending to get smaller. In other words, the individual pixels on 
users' screens are getting smaller. This is a good reason for web designers to choose 
larger font sizes. This trend can be seen on many Web 2.0 sites, which tend to use large 
and clear fonts as part of their design, for example http://www.37signals.com. But 
be careful not to go too big as this can make your design look messy and a little childish.
Remember that you're not limited to using just one font in your blog design. For 
example, you may decide to use a different font for your headings. This can be an 
effective design feature but don't go crazy by using too many fonts, as this will make 
your design look messy. Probably two, or at most three, fonts on a page are plenty.
Font replacement
Font replacement refers to a relatively new group of technologies that are pushing 
the envelope of web typography. In theory, they allow designers to use any font 
in their web page designs. In practice, things are a little more complicated. Issues 
around browser compatibility and font licensing make font replacement technologies 
a bit of a mineield for anyone who is new to web design. It's true that, thanks to font 
replacement technologies, professional designers are no longer constrained by the 
notion of web safe fonts. But, if you are a web design novice, I recommend you stick 
to web safe fonts until your skills improve and you are ready to learn a whole  
new technology. 
A full discussion on font replacement is way beyond the scope of this chapter; I 
mention it only to give you a better overview of the current state of web typography. 
But if you are interested in knowing more, three popular font replacement 
technologies are Cufón (http://cufon.shoqolate.com), Font Squirrel (http://
www.fontsquirrel.com), and Google Fonts API (http://code.google.com/apis/
webfonts/). 

Chapter 3
[ 53 ]
There is also something known as @font-face, which is part of CSS3, the latest 
speciication of CSS. Again, it offers the tantalizing possibility of giving designers 
free rein in their choice of fonts. Sadly, @font-face is also hindered by browser 
compatibility and font licensing issues. The Font Squirrel technology, mentioned 
previously, resolves these issues to a certain extent, so this is something to be aware 
of as your web design skills develop. But for the time being, I recommend you 
concentrate on the basics of web typography and don't worry about @font-face  
until you feel ready.
Usability and accessibility
This is another very important area to consider when designing your blog. Many 
people, who live with various disabilities, use a range of 'assistive' software to access 
the Web. For example, people with visual impairments use screen readers, which 
translate the text in a web browser into audible speech. There are also people who 
are unable to use a mouse, and instead rely on their keyboard to access web pages. 
It's the responsibility of web designers to ensure that their websites are accessible for 
these different methods of browsing. There's no sense in alienating this group of web 
surfers just because your blog is inaccessible to them.
There are also many other circumstances when your blog might be accessed by 
means other than a standard web browser, for example, via mobile phones, PDAs, or 
tablets. Again, a good designer will ensure that these modes of browsing are catered 
for. The web design industry has been well aware of these accessibility issues for 
many years and has come up with guidelines and technologies to help conscientious 
designers build websites that are standards compliant. These web standards help 
ensure best practice and maximize accessibility and usability.
Luckily, WordPress takes care of a lot of the accessibility issues simply by the way 
it's been developed and built. The code behind WordPress is valid XHTML and 
CSS, which means that it complies with web standards and is easily accessible. It's 
important, then, that you don't break the system by allowing bad practice to creep in.
Some of the things to bear in mind relate to a couple of design principles we've 
already discussed, for example, using a color scheme and font size that makes your 
text easy to read. Other issues include keeping the number of navigation links on 
your page to a minimum—a whole load of useless links can be annoying for people 
who have to tab through them to get to your main content.
www.allitebooks.com

Designing your Blog
[ 54 ]
You should also ensure that any third-party plugins you install are standards-
compliant and don't throw up any accessibility problems. The same is true if you 
decide to use a ready-made theme for your blog design. Just make sure it's accessible 
and satisies web standards. For more background reading on web standards, 
you could take a look at http://www.alistapart.com or the World Wide Web 
Consortium (W3C) website at http://www.w3.org.
Implementing your blog design
We've now considered the principles involved in designing our blog. The next thing 
to decide is how we actually carry out the design work. There are three main options 
available, each of which involves varying degrees of work. However, they all require 
knowledge of the design principles we just covered.
The irst approach is probably the easiest; it simply involves inding a readymade 
theme and installing it in WordPress. By working through the earlier design 
principles, you should have an idea of what you want your blog to look like and 
then you simply need to ind a theme that matches your vision as closely as possible. 
A good place to start looking is the oficial WordPress Free Themes Directory at 
http://wordpress.org/extend/themes/. You'll also ind many more theme 
resources by running a search through Google.
There are hundreds of very attractive WordPress themes available for free and many 
others which you can pay for. However, if you adopt this approach to your blog 
design, you won't have a unique or original blog. The chances are the theme you 
choose will also be seen on many other blogs.
At the other end of the scale, in terms of workload, is designing your own theme 
from scratch. This is a fairly complicated and technical process, and is well beyond 
the scope of this chapter. In fact, it's a subject that requires its own book. If you 
intend to build your own theme, I recommend WordPress 2.8 Theme Design by Tessa 
Blakeley Silver ISBN 978-1-849510-08-0 published by Packt Publishing.
The third approach is to modify a readymade theme. You could do this with any 
theme you choose, even the default Twenty Ten theme that ships with WordPress. 
However, if you edit a fully developed theme, you spend a lot of time unpicking 
someone else's design work and you may still be left with elements that are not 
completely your own. A better method is to start with a theme framework, which 
has been specially designed to be a blank canvas for your own design. This is the 
approach we'll use in the case study later in the chapter.

Chapter 3
[ 55 ]
Over the last few years many WordPress theme frameworks have 
appeared, some free, some paid-for. Two of the most popular paid-
for theme frameworks are Thesis (http://diythemes.com/) and 
Genesis (http://www.studiopress.com/themes/genesis), 
while popular free frameworks include Hybrid (http://
themehybrid.com/), Carrington (http://carringtontheme.
com/), and Thematic (see below).
In the case study later in this chapter, we will be using the Thematic theme 
framework built by Ian Stewart, who works for Automattic, the company that makes 
WordPress. The beauty of Thematic is that you can customize it just by modifying 
the CSS or stylesheets. You don't need to touch the other iles that make up the 
theme, if you don't want to. However, you will need some understanding of CSS to 
achieve this, so before we begin with the case study, here's a crash course in CSS.
A brief introduction to CSS
I would recommend anyone who is involved in web publishing, including all 
you business bloggers, to learn at least the basics of HTML and CSS. A full CSS 
tutorial is way beyond the scope of this chapter; in fact, there are many books that 
are exclusively devoted to the subject. However, I will attempt to give you a very 
rudimentary grounding in the principles of web design using HTML and CSS. For 
a more thorough tutorial, you can ind many excellent online resources, such as 
http://www.w3schools.com.
The early days of the web
The worldwide web was invented by academics in the early 1990's, who mainly used 
it to publish research papers via the Internet. Their layout requirements were fairly 
simple and early web pages usually contained nothing more than text arranged into 
headings and paragraphs.
The technology that makes the Web work is HyperText 
Markup Language (HTML), which tells web browsers, 
such as Internet Explorer and Mozilla Firefox, how to display 
content in a web page.

Designing your Blog
[ 56 ]
As the web grew in popularity, with more and more individuals and businesses 
using it to publish different types of content, web designers arrived on the scene 
and began to experiment with HTML to create more complex web pages. They 
wanted to create pages with images, lots of different colors, multiple columns, and 
more interesting layouts. It was possible to achieve this with HTML but it went way 
beyond what the language was originally intended for.
The main problem was that designers were forced to use the HTML <table> tag to 
create their complex page layouts. The <table> tag was only intended to present 
data in a tabular format. But by creating tables with hundreds of columns and rows, 
merging cells together, and nesting tables within tables, the designers could build the 
fancy-looking pages their clients demanded.
This was bad for a number of reasons. These huge complicated tables were slow to 
download. They were extremely dificult to maintain—making just one small change 
to a page could break the entire layout table. And, most importantly, they caused 
accessibility issues.
There was also a deeper philosophical dissatisfaction with using HTML for 
complicated web design—it simply isn't meant for it. HTML is the wrong tool for  
the job. The purpose of HTML is just to display content in a web browser, and not  
to format or style that content.
The W3C decided that something else was needed to handle the formatting and 
styling of web pages. So, in December 1996 it published the irst speciication for 
Cascading Style Sheets (CSS).
Content and style
The arrival of CSS meant that a web page's content could be separated from its style. 
HTML handles the content and CSS takes care of the style. The content of a web page 
includes things such as text, images, and links. The style of the page refers to things 
such as the colors, the typeface (font), the positioning, and the layout.

Chapter 3
[ 57 ]
The following screenshot shows the content of a web page. No styling has been  
done—it just uses HTML to mark up the content into headings, links, and paragraphs.
After making this simple page, we could add the following styling:
• 
Make the page heading white text on a dark gray background.
• 
Line up the links in a navigation bar under the header and make them bold.
• 
Give the body of the page a light gray background.
• 
Change the font to Arial.

Designing your Blog
[ 58 ]
In the bad old days, before CSS, all this styling would have been done by using 
HTML tags and tables. Nowadays, the correct way is to use CSS. The following 
screenshot shows the page after the CSS was added. The changes you see have been 
achieved by just adding CSS to the web page—the HTML hasn't changed at all.
Looking at the code
OK, let's look at the HTML and CSS used to make these simple web pages. You can 
download the example iles from the Packt website: http://www.packtpub.com/
support?nid=8878/1322_Code.zip.
First, let's look at the HTML iles. Once you've downloaded the code bundle,  
unzip it, and open the CSS Example folder. In it you will see three iles: page.html, 
page_styled.html, and style.css:

Chapter 3
[ 59 ]
Double-click on page.html and it should open up in your default web browser. It 
looks like the irst screenshot you saw below the Content and style section.
To view the HTML code that makes this page, go back to the CSS Example folder, 
right-click on page.html and select Open With | Notepad.
You will now see the following code in your Notepad window:
<html>
<head>
<title>A Simple Web Page</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>A Simple Web Page</h1>
<ul>
  <li><a href="http://www.packtpub.com">Link 1</a></li>
  <li><a href="http://www.packtpub.com">Link 2</a></li>
  <li><a href="http://www.packtpub.com">Link 3</a></li>
  <li><a href="http://www.packtpub.com">Link 4</a></li>
</ul>
<h2>Heading </h2>
<p>Lorem ipsum dolor sit amet, consectetuer adipiscing elit. Nullam  
  commodo augue et lacus. Aenean tortor. Proin dolor. Cras convallis  
  metus. Vivamus volutpat metus non felis. Ut pharetra iaculis lorem.  
  Duis consequat, metus convallis rutrum porttitor, ligula risus  
  egestas neque, vel lacinia massa arcu non libero. In faucibus  
  vehicula nulla. In hac habitasse platea dictumst. </p>
<h3>Sub-heading</h3>
<p>Lorem ipsum dolor sit amet, consectetuer adipiscing elit. Nullam  
  commodo augue et lacus. Aenean tortor. Proin dolor. Cras convallis  
  metus. Vivamus volutpat metus non felis. Ut pharetra iaculis lorem. 
</p>
</body>
</html>
Downloading the example code
You can download the example code iles for all Packt books you have 
purchased from your account at http://www.PacktPub.com. If you 
purchased this book elsewhere, you can visit http://www.PacktPub.
com/support and register to have the iles e-mailed directly to you.
If you've never seen HTML before, this might look rather confusing. Don't worry, 
we'll go through it bit-by-bit.

Designing your Blog
[ 60 ]
The irst thing you'll notice is lots of angle brackets: < >. These contain the HTML tags. 
Each HTML tag appears as a pair, with an opening tag < > and a closing tag </ >.
The very irst tag you see is the <html> tag. This tag encloses the entire HTML 
document—you'll see the closing </html> tag is right at the bottom. The <html></
html> tag simply tells the browser where the HTML document begins and ends.
All HTML documents are made up of two main parts, the head and the body. The 
head, also called the header, is contained in the <head></head> tag. The header 
gives information about the HTML document—this is known as Metadata. In our 
simple document the only information included in the header is the page title, which 
you can see in the <title></title> tag. The document title is shown in the title bar 
of your web browser as in the following screenshot:
Everything in the <body></body> tag is the main content of the page, which actually 
appears in the browser window. Our page begins with an <h1></h1> tag, which is a 
level 1 heading—it contains our main page heading. Next comes a <ul></ul> tag, 
which is an unordered list or bulleted list. Each item in the unordered list is placed 
in <li></li> tags. These are the four links at the top of the page.
Next you'll notice the <a href></a> tags. These are special tags for hyperlinks. Let's 
look at one of these in more detail:
<a href="http://www.packtpub.com">Link 1</a>
It begins with <a href=, which tells the browser that this is a hyperlink. 
Next, between double quote marks we have the URL to which the link points 
"http://www.packtpub.com". Then comes an angle bracket > which closes the 
irst part of the tag. Now we have the link text that actually appears in the browser 
window. In this case, it is Link 1. And inally, there is the closing tag </a>, which 
tells the browser it's the end of the hyperlink.
We then have another heading tag, <h2></h2>—this time it's a level 2 heading, 
which appears in the browser slightly smaller than a level 1 heading. Next comes 
a <p></p> tag—these hold paragraph text. Then we see another heading, this time 
level 3 <h3></h3>, and then another paragraph.

Chapter 3
[ 61 ]
Next, we have the closing body tag—</body>, as we have come to the end of 
our page's content. Finally, there's the closing </html> tag, as it's the end of the 
HTML document.
The stylesheet
Now, let's look at the CSS, which gives the web page its style; that is the color 
and size of elements on the page and the layout, or placement of the elements  
on the page. In the CSS Example folder that you downloaded, right-click on the 
style.css ile and select Open With | Notepad.
What you are now looking at is a Cascading Style Sheet. It actually comprises a 
number of rules, which tell web browsers how to display speciic types of content 
structures. Our style sheet contains six rules.
Let's examine one of those rules in more detail:
#header
{background-color : #333333 ;}
Selector
Declaration
Property
Value
A CSS rule has two parts. The irst part is the selector, which deines the HTML 
element to which the rule applies. There are various types of selectors, but we won't 
go into each type in detail as that would be the subject of a full CSS tutorial. Sufice 
to say that the selector in the preceding diagram is known as an ID selector—a # 
is used to identify this type of selector. I have deined this ID selector as #header; I 
could have chosen any ID which is appropriate and makes sense to me or anyone 
else who reads the stylesheet. Any word can be used to deine an ID selector, there is 
no set vocabulary. #goofy or #sandwich would both work as ID selectors, but they 
may not make a lot of sense to someone else reading the stylesheet. Another common 
type of selector is called an element selector—these are based on standard HTML 
elements like body, h1, or p. In our stylesheet, the very irst rule uses an element 
selector: body. All the other selectors here are ID selectors.
The second part of a CSS rule is known as the declaration, which is made up of a 
property and a value. The declaration describes the appearance of all the elements 
that match the selector.

Designing your Blog
[ 62 ]
There are hundreds of CSS properties available to web 
designers for use in their stylesheets. You can see a complete 
reference guide deining each and every available CSS property 
at: http://www.w3.org/TR/CSS2/propidx.html.
In this example, the declaration uses the background-color property, giving it 
a value of #333333. In CSS, the background-color property, fairly obviously, 
deines the background color of the selector. Colors can be deined using the RGB 
hexadecimal system. In this case, the hexadecimal value is #333333, which is a dark 
gray color.
So, in this example, the CSS rule states that any HTML elements deined as #header will 
have a dark gray background.
Let's examine another one of our CSS rules:
body {
  font-family: Arial, Helvetica, sans-serif;
  margin: 0;
  padding: 0;
  background-color: #CCCCCC;
  color: #000000;
}
This rule deines the body selector. As we've already seen, the HTML <body> 
element contains all the content for the web page. So, the styles deined here will 
apply to all the content in our HTML document. The irst declaration in this rule 
refers to the font-family property, to which we have given the value, Arial, 
Helvetica, sans-serif. This means that all the text on our web page will 
appear in the Arial font.
The next two declarations deal with margin and padding. These affect the 
positioning of text (or other content) on the web page. Basically, by giving these two 
properties a 0 value, there is no space between the edge of the browser window and 
the content. Later on in this chapter, we'll adjust these values and see what happens.
To fully understand about positioning in CSS, you need to know 
about something called the CSS Box Model. Again, it's beyond 
the scope of this chapter, but you can ind excellent discussions 
on the CSS Box Model at http://www.brainjar.com/css/
positioning/default.asp and http://www.w3schools.
com/css/css_boxmodel.asp.

Chapter 3
[ 63 ]
The next declaration uses the background-color property. We've seen this property 
before and here, it sets the background color for the whole page to light gray 
(#CCCCCC). The inal declaration gives the color property a value of #000000. 
The color property applies to all the text on the page, making it black.
As you become more experienced with CSS, you'll notice that 
different browsers display some CSS declarations in slightly 
different ways. This is why you should always test your web 
pages in as many different browsers as possible.
Applying the stylesheet
So, we've seen the style sheet. Now you're probably wondering how these styles are 
applied to our HTML document, page.html.
There are three ways of adding CSS to an HTML document. The irst is known as 
Inline Declarations. This method simply involves adding CSS styles throughout the 
HTML document as and when they are required. For example, each time we have an 
<h2> heading in our HTML document, we could add a CSS style direct to the <h2> 
tag, as follows:
<h2 style="color: #FF0000; font-size: 16px;">Level 2 Heading</h2>
This would give us a red heading with a size of 16 pixels. The problem with this 
method is that we would have to add the styling to each and every <h2> heading in 
our document. If we decided at a later date that we wanted our <h2> headings to be 
blue, we would have to go through the document and edit each and every <h2> style.
The next method of adding CSS to our HTML is known as Embedded CSS. This 
involves placing the CSS in the header of our HTML document, for example:
<html>
<head>
<title>A Simple Web Page</title>
<style type="text/css">
h2 {
  color: #FF0000;
  font-size: 16px;
}
</style>
</head>

Designing your Blog
[ 64 ]
This would also make all <h2> headings in our HTML document red with a size 
of 16 pixels. This is a slightly better approach because we only have to deine our 
<h2> heading style once and it is automatically applied to every <h2> heading in the 
document. The downside with this approach is that the CSS has to be added to every 
page in our website—there might be dozens or hundreds of pages that need the CSS 
added to their headers. Once again, if we wanted to make our <h2> headings blue 
throughout the website, we would have to edit the Embedded CSS on every page.
The third approach is widely regarded as the best. It is called External CSS. This 
involves keeping your CSS in a completely separate ile from your web page, for 
example, style.css. You then add a link to your CSS ile in the header of each web 
page that requires those styles. The beneit here is that you just need to maintain 
one CSS ile. If you want to change your <h2> headings to blue, you just make one 
change to the style.css ile and the new style is automatically applied to every 
page in your website. 
This is the approach we'll use in our simple web page example. So, let's work 
through the steps that will apply the stylesheet to our HTML document.
Go back to the page.html ile and open it in Notepad. The irst step is to link our 
style sheet to the HTML document. To do this, add the following line to the header 
just after the <title>A Simple Web Page</title> line:
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
Your header should now look like this:
<html>
<head>
<title>A Simple Web Page - Styled</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
</head>
The link tag tells the browser that it needs to use an external stylesheet for this web 
page. The location of the stylesheet is speciied by href="style.css". In this case, 
style.css is in the same directory as our HTML document, so we just need the 
ilename for the link to work. However, you can link to any .css ile, which may be 
in another directory or on another web server. So, you could have a link like this: 
href="http://www.anotherwebsite.com/style/style.css".
At this point let's take a look at the page. Save the ile in Notepad, using File | Save. 
If you already have the page open in your browser, refresh or reload it. If it's not 
already open, go back to the CSS Example folder and double-click on page.html.

Chapter 3
[ 65 ]
You'll see that the background color and font have already changed.
The web browser has already applied the irst CSS rule in our stylesheet, because it's 
based on an element selector. Remember, these types of selectors apply to standard 
HTML elements and as we already have a <body></body> element in our document, 
the style for body has been applied.
The other rules in our stylesheet use ID selectors, so we need to tell the web browser 
which elements of our HTML we want these selectors to apply to. We do this by 
using <div> tags.
<div> tags enable us to deine divisions or regions of 
an HTML document.
Let's begin by deining the #header element and, in so doing, tell the browser where 
we want the header style to be applied.
Back in page.html in Notepad, add the following line immediately after the opening 
<body> tag:
<div id="header">

Designing your Blog
[ 66 ]
Now add a closing </div> tag after the <h1>A Simple Web Page</h1> heading. This 
section of code should now look like this:
<body>
<div id="header">
<h1>A Simple Web Page</h1>
</div>
What we've done is told the browser that everything within the 
<div id="header"></div> tag should be styled using the #header rule. 
Save the ile again, go back to the page in your browser and refresh it. You'll see that 
the header styles have now been applied:
There are actually two rules from our stylesheet being applied here:
#header {
  background-color: #333333;
}
and:
#header h1 {
  padding: 5px;
  margin: 0;
  color: #FFFFFF;
}
We have already looked at the irst rule—it simply applies the dark gray 
background. The other rule uses a special kind of ID selector, known as a descendent 
selector. This speciies a rule for all <h1> elements that come within the #header ID. 
In this case, all <h1> elements within #header are white (#FFFFFF), with a padding 
of 5 pixels and a margin of 0.
Just to demonstrate that this only affects <h1> tags within #header, add this line 
immediately after the closing </div> tag:
<h1>Another H1 Heading</h1>

Chapter 3
[ 67 ]
Now save page.html and refresh your browser. You will see another <h1> heading 
but it isn't styled the same as the heading in #header:
You can delete the line we just added—it was only for 
demonstration.
Now we'll style the links to create the navigation bar. Once again, we need to create a 
<div> to tell the browser where to apply our nav styling. Add the following line just 
after the closing </div> tag for the #header element:
<div id="nav">
And then add a closing </div> tag straight after the closing </ul> tag. This section 
of code should now look like this:
<body>
<div id="header">
<h1>A Simple Web Page</h1>
</div>
<div id="nav">
<ul>
  <li><a href="http://www.packtpub.com">Link 1</a></li>
  <li><a href="http://www.packtpub.com">Link 2</a></li>
  <li><a href="http://www.packtpub.com">Link 3</a></li>
  <li><a href="http://www.packtpub.com">Link 4</a></li>
</ul>
</div>
Save page.html and refresh your browser. You should see the navigation bar 
just below the header. The browser has applied these three CSS rules to the  
#nav element:
#nav {
  font-weight: bold;
  background-color: #999999;
  padding: 5px;

Designing your Blog
[ 68 ]
}
#nav ul{
  margin: 0;
  padding: 0;
}
#nav li{
  display: inline;
  margin: 0;
  padding: 10;
}
Hopefully, these CSS rules are starting to make a bit more sense now. You should 
be able to see what's going on in the irst #nav rule. You may also have noticed 
that the other two contain more examples of descendent selectors. This time we're 
specifying styles that only apply to <ul> and <li> elements within #nav. If you 
added another unordered list (<ul>) elsewhere on the page, it would appear as a 
regular bulleted list.
In the #nav li rule, it's interesting to note the display: inline; declaration. 
This is what tells the browser to display the list items horizontally rather than  
in a vertical list.
That's our simple web page. I've included the inished HTML document  
(page-styled.html) in the CSS Example folder.
Tweaking the styles
The last stage in this very brief introduction to CSS is to see what happens if we 
make some changes to the stylesheet. Go back to style.css in Notepad. First, let's 
see what happens if we change the values for margin and padding in the body rule. 
Change it to this:
body {
  font-family: Arial, Helvetica, sans-serif;
  margin: 10px;
  padding: 10px;
  background-color: #CCCCCC;
  color: #000000;
}
Save style.css and refresh your browser. You should see some extra space around 
the edge of the browser window. This is the 10 pixels margin and padding we 
just added. 

Chapter 3
[ 69 ]
Now let's add a rule to change the styling of our <h2> heading. Add the following at 
the end of the stylesheet:
h2 {
  font-family: Courier New, Courier, mono;
  color: #0000FF;
}
After you've saved style.css and refreshed your browser, you'll see that our <h2> 
heading is now in Courier font and colored blue. This style will also apply to any 
other <h2> headings we add to the document.
That was a very brief introduction to HTML and CSS and you'll probably want to 
supplement it with some further reading. It's a large subject and there is no way you 
could become an expert after such a short introduction. The aim of this brief tutorial 
was to teach you what HTML and CSS code looks like and how the two technologies 
work together to create web pages. Admittedly, much of the detail has been glossed 
over. However, this overview should enable you to follow the work we'll be doing 
in the case study as it involves editing the stylesheets for the Thematic theme 
framework (I will provide all the CSS; to see it working, you just need to paste it into 
the case study stylesheets). But before we move on to that, you may want to set up 
an environment on your own computer that allows you to run WordPress locally.

Designing your Blog
[ 70 ]
Setting up a local development 
environment
If you are considering making big changes to your blog, particularly ones that 
require editing the WordPress source iles, it's worth considering setting up a 
development environment on your local computer. This has a number of beneits. 
First, if you mess up and cause irreparable damage to the WordPress iles, you 
haven't broken your live blog. Second, you don't have to take your blog ofline while 
you're playing around under the hood. Third, you don't have to keep FTPing iles to 
your remote server to view the changes.
Admittedly, most of the editing we'll be doing in the rest of this chapter could be 
done using the Theme Editor in the WordPress administration area. If you follow 
through the case study example at the end of this chapter, it will probably only take 
half an hour or so. However, if you do decide to design your own theme the chances 
are it could take several hours or even days. Much of the work will involve trial and 
error—saving your changes and then previewing them. 
Since WordPress 2.6, tweaking a theme became a lot easier, thanks to the Theme 
Previewer, which allows you to view a theme as it would actually appear with your 
content, before you install it. However, using the WordPress Theme Editor to do a lot 
of editing work is not ideal. The editor is not as user-friendly as a desktop text editor 
(it's really only meant for minor changes) and using the Theme Previewer repeatedly 
during the design process is not as easy as just refreshing your browser window. 
This is why it's well worth using a local development environment. You may also 
ind your development environment useful in future web projects.
To run WordPress you need a web server, PHP, and MySQL. For the web server I 
recommend Apache as it's widely regarded as one of the best. It's also open source 
(as are PHP and MySQL), so it's free to download and use. These are the components 
we will install to set up our development environment.
It is possible to download Apache, PHP, and MySQL as separate components and 
then install and conigure them one by one. However, this can be quite a complicated 
process that requires a fair amount of technical knowledge. Luckily there are a 
number of open source Apache distributions that come bundled with PHP and 
MySQL pre-conigured. They also include an installer, which makes setting up your 
server a breeze. One of the best is XAMPP, from Apache Friends, and it's the one 
we'll be using for our development environment. XAMPP is available for the most 
popular desktop operating systems including Windows, MAC OS X, Linux,  
and Solaris.

Chapter 3
[ 71 ]
XAMPP stands for: X (any of the four operating systems 
supported), A (Apache), M (MySQL), P (PHP), and P (Perl).
Installing XAMPP
We will now run through the process of installing XAMPP on your computer.
1. Go to http://www.apachefriends.org/en/xampp.html and click on the 
link for your operating system. We'll be working through the installation 
for Windows, but there are installation instructions for the other operating 
systems on the Apache Friends website.
2. On the XAMPP for Windows page, choose to download the latest stable 
release of the XAMPP Installer and save it to your desktop. The ile is 
about 66 MB, so this may take some time depending on the speed of  
your connection.
3. Click on the XAMPP Installer icon on your desktop and, when prompted, 
choose your preferred language. The XAMPP Setup Wizard will now begin.
4. Click Next and then choose the location for your XAMPP installation. I 
recommend using C:\xampp. Click Next.
5. On the next screen, I recommend you stick with the defaults. Do not install 
the components as services. (If they are installed as services, they will start 
automatically every time you turn on your computer.) Click Install and 
wait for the various packages to be extracted and installed. If the Command 
Prompt window opens, don't touch it, just let it run.
6. Click Finish and select Yes to start the XAMPP Control Panel.

Designing your Blog
[ 72 ]
7. Start the servers by clicking the Start buttons next to Apache and MySQL 
in the Control Panel. (If prompted by Windows Firewall, allow access to 
the Apache server.)
 
8. Open your web browser and enter the address http://localhost/. If your 
installation has worked properly, XAMPP should now be visible in your 
browser. If you can't see XAMPP, refer to the FAQs and help on the Apache 
Friends website.
Congratulations you now have an Apache / MySQL / PHP web server running on 
your computer!

Chapter 3
[ 73 ]
Setting the 'root' password for MySQL
By default, when you install XAMPP there is no password set for the root MySQL 
user. This isn't a major security problem when you're only running a local server,  
but we'll ix it anyway.
1. Open your web browser and go to http://localhost/. On the XAMPP 
welcome page, select Security under Welcome in the left-hand menu.
2. You will see a table showing various security settings for XAMPP. 
Underneath the table, click on the link to ix security problems:
3. Enter a password and click the Password changing button:
4. You've now set a password for the root MySQL user. 
We're now ready to install WordPress.

Designing your Blog
[ 74 ]
Installing WordPress locally
You've probably installed WordPress at least once on a remote server and the 
principle is exactly the same for installing it on your local server.
1. First, let's create a MySQL database for your WordPress installation. Open 
your web browser and go to http://localhost/. From the XAMPP 
welcome page, select phpMyAdmin under Tools in the left-hand menu. 
You'll now see the phpMyAdmin home page, where you will be prompted 
to login. Enter the username root and the password you chose for the root 
MySQL user (shown previously).
phpMyAdmin is a browser-based administration tool 
for MySQL. It allows you to create and drop (delete) 
tables and databases, and run SQL statements right 
from your browser.
2. Once you're logged in, locate Create new database and enter a name for your 
database in the input box. Click Create.
3. Download the latest stable release of WordPress from http://wordpress.
org/download/ and unzip it to the htdocs folder in your xampp directory. 
This should be at C:\xampp\htdocs.

Chapter 3
[ 75 ]
The htdocs folder in XAMPP is the same as the www, 
httpdocs, or htdocs directory on your remote web 
server. It's where you must place all the iles you want 
to publish so that you can view them as web pages in 
your browser.
4. In the wordpress folder, open the wp-config-sample.php ile using 
Windows Notepad or any other text editor. Edit the coniguration details  
for the MySQL database we created earlier. These should be:
 °
DB_NAME = 'wordpress'
 °
DB_USER = 'root'
 °
DB_PASSWORD = 'yourpassword' (This is the MySQL password we 
set for the 'root' user earlier).
5. You can leave the other coniguration settings as they are.
6. Save the ile as wp-config.php. If you're using Notepad, in the Save As 
dialog box, remember to set Save as type to All Files.

Designing your Blog
[ 76 ]
7. Point your web browser to http://localhost/wordpress/ and you will 
see the familiar WordPress installation screen. Enter your blog title (call it 
WPBizGuru), admin username, password, e-mail address, and click 
Install WordPress.
You now have a fully functional copy of WordPress on your own computer. 
Note that the e-mail functions in WordPress won't work with your 
local server. This is because we haven't conigured a mail server 
and we would need one for PHP to handle outgoing mail. Setting 
up an outgoing mail server is complicated and for many people 
it's impossible because their ISP won't allow them to run an SMTP 
server over their standard internet connection.
Not having the mail function in WordPress shouldn't be too much 
of a problem for the majority of things you're likely to be doing 
locally. However, do ensure that you don't lose or forget your 
password as WordPress won't be able to email a reminder to you!
Case study—WPBizGuru design
As I mentioned earlier, we'll be using the Thematic theme framework to apply 
a custom design to the WPBizGuru blog. All the design work we'll be doing  
will only require changes to the stylesheets.
Child themes
In version 2.7, WordPress introduced the concept of child themes. 
This means you can create a new theme that uses an existing theme 
as its base, or parent. The beauty of this is that you don't have to 
edit the parent theme. All you need to do is create a new stylesheet 
(style.css) for your child theme, which will override the 
stylesheet of the parent. In effect, WordPress is using the templates 
and functionality from the parent theme and applying the styles 
from the child theme. 
This means that if the developers of your parent theme make an 
update, you can just update the parent and the changes will be 
automatically applied to the child theme. We will be creating a child 
theme, with the Thematic framework as its parent. We will then 
edit the stylesheets of the child theme to create our new design (see 
the WordPress Codex for more on child themes: http://codex.
wordpress.org/Child_Themes).

Chapter 3
[ 77 ]
Setting up a child theme
To begin, we'll install the Thematic theme framework in your local copy 
of WordPress. 
Log in to the dashboard of your local WordPress installation (http://localhost/
wordpress/wp-admin/). Select Themes, under Appearance in the left-hand menu, 
and click the Install Themes tab. Enter thematic in the search box and click the 
Search button (you must be connected to the internet for WordPress to search for 
themes remotely). You should see the Thematic theme in the search results. Just 
click Install, followed by Install Now in the pop-up window. The theme will be 
downloaded and installed in your local copy of WordPress; click Activate. If you 
view your blog, you'll see the Thematic theme in action.
If you wish, you can read some background information about the 
Thematic theme at the oficial website (http://themeshaper.
com/thematic/) or by viewing the ReadMe ile included with 
the theme (http://localhost/wordpress/wp-content/
themes/thematic/readme.html). 
Dummy content
Your default installation of WordPress contains very little content; just a 'Hello 
World!' post, a comment, and a short 'Sample Page'. When you're working on a 
theme design, it's useful to have plenty of content to see how your stylesheet affects 
the many different elements available in WordPress.

Designing your Blog
[ 78 ]
WordPress.org provides some test content for theme developers. This is how to 
install it:
1. Go to http://codex.wordpress.org/Theme_Unit_Test. Near the top of the 
page, locate the link to download the test data and save it to your desktop.
2. In your WordPress admin area, in the left-hand menu, select Tools | Import.
3. You will see a list of systems to import from. Click on WordPress.
4. A pop-up window will appear for you to install the WordPress Importer. 
Click Install Now.
5. When the plugin has downloaded, click Activate Plugin & Run Importer.
6. Choose the test data ile you saved to your desktop and click Upload ile 
and import.
7. On the next screen, under Assign Authors, leave the default settings. This 
will create new users for each of the authors in the test data. Under Import 
Attachments, select the Download and import ile attachments checkbox. 
Click Submit.
8. It will take a few seconds for WordPress to install the test data.
9. Once the installation is complete, view your blog to see how the test 
data looks.
I have deleted the original Sample Page, so that the pages it nicely on one line in the 
top menu:

Chapter 3
[ 79 ]
Installing a new text editor
Now we'll download and install a decent text editor. A good text editor makes it 
far easier to work with code iles such as style.css, which we'll be editing shortly. 
In our brief introduction to CSS we used Notepad to edit the CSS documents. That 
was ine with such small iles, but now that we'll be working on more complex CSS, 
Notepad is not ideal. You may already have another text editor or a fully-blown 
HTML editor such as the Dreamweaver; if so, use that. Otherwise, for Windows, I 
recommend Notepad++, which is a good free option (http://notepad-plus-plus.
org/download/). Once downloaded, install it on your PC. For Mac OS X or Linux, 
try Emacs (http://www.gnu.org/software/emacs/). 
Creating your child theme
Thematic provides us with a quick head start for creating a child theme. Take a look 
inside the Thematic theme folder (C:\xampp\htdocs\wordpress\wp-content\
themes\thematic). Don't worry about all the theme iles right now, just look for 
the folder called thematicsamplechildtheme. To set up our new child theme, copy 
thematicsamplechildtheme and paste it into the WordPress themes folder (C:\
xampp\htdocs\wordpress\wp-content\themes). Rename it wpbizguru, which will 
be the name of our new child theme. 
In WordPress themes, the stylesheet has a header, which gives WordPress some 
meta-information about the theme. This includes things like the theme's author, 
version number, and most importantly for child themes, the name of the theme 
template. This is the irst part of the stylesheet we'll edit.
Fire up your new text editor (Notepad++) and open the style.css ile in 
the wpbizguru child theme folder (C:\xampp\htdocs\wordpress\wp-content\
themes\wpbizguru).
You'll notice that Notepad++ shows the line numbers down the left-hand 
margin of the text editor window, for easy reference. Editing is also made 
easier with Word Wrap switched on. This breaks long lines of code so you 
don't have to scroll horizontally to read them; select View | Word Wrap.
Lines 1-13 in style.css provide the meta-information for our new WPBizGuru 
theme. Each line is fairly self-explanatory. Edit the section similar to the following 
code (if you like, you can replace my name and website with your own):
/*   
Theme Name: WPBizGuru
Theme URI: http://blog.wpbizguru.com
Description: A custom theme for the WpBizGuru blog.

Designing your Blog
[ 80 ]
Author: Paul Thewlis
Author URI: http://blog.paulthewlis.com
Template: thematic
Version: 1.0
Tags: Thematic, WPBizGuru,  
.
WPBizGuru theme is © Paul Thewlis http://blog.paulthewlis.com/
.
*/
The information in this section of code appears next to each theme in the 
Appearance | Themes section of the WordPress dashboard, with the exception of 
two sections. The Template: line tells WordPress to use Thematic as the parent 
theme. The line with the copyright information is somewhere you can put comments 
or instructions—this area can contain any information you like. Save style.css.
We can now activate our new theme. Go to your admin area and select  
Appearance | Themes (if you were already in Themes, you'll need to refresh your 
browser). You should now see WPBizGuru listed under Available Themes:

Chapter 3
[ 81 ]
Click the Activate link so we can start using our new theme. 
Now that we have the theme activated, we can view the progress of 
our design as we continue to work on the stylesheets.
A closer look at style.css
At this point, it's worth having a look at the rest of the code in style.css:
/* Reset browser defaults */
@import url('../thematic/library/styles/reset.css');
/* Apply basic typography styles */
@import url('../thematic/library/styles/typography.css');
/* Apply a basic layout */
@import url('../thematic/library/layouts/2c-r-fixed.css');
/* Apply basic image styles */
@import url('../thematic/library/styles/images.css');
/* Apply default theme styles and colors */
/* It's better to actually copy over default.css into this file (or 
link to a copy in your child theme) if you're going to do anything 
outrageous */
@import url('../thematic/library/styles/default.css');
/* Prepare theme for plugins */
@import url('../thematic/library/styles/plugins.css');
What's going on here—where are all the CSS rules that give the theme its style? 
Well, instead of placing all the CSS rules in a single ile, the Thematic developers 
have decided to split them up into a number of stylesheets. This prevents style.
css from becoming a very long ile. It also makes it easier to ind the CSS rules you 
need. For example, the CSS rules that style images in the theme have been placed in 
a stylesheet called images.css. The images stylesheet is imported into style.css. 
That's what all the @import rules in style.css are for. You'll get a better idea of 
how this works as we start editing the individual stylesheets for the theme.

Designing your Blog
[ 82 ]
The page layout
We're now getting into the meat of the CSS and the code will begin to get a little 
more complicated. Once again, a detailed explanation of the code would be in the 
realm of a more complete CSS tutorial, but I will give a summary explanation of the 
various sections of the stylesheets we are editing. As you edit the stylesheets, you 
should see how the chunks of code affect the design of the blog, even if you don't 
fully understand the intricacies of the CSS.
All the CSS selectors we'll be using are already coded into the template iles for the 
Thematic theme—open up index.php in your text editor and you will see some of 
the elements that the selectors refer to.
The next stage is to give some structure to the blog page by designing the layout. 
Having considered WPBizGuru and its strategic goals, I think there may be quite a 
lot of content to go in the sidebar. This is largely because it's a case study blog and 
we'll be adding lots of functionality throughout the rest of the book. Because of the 
quantity of sidebar content, I think we need two sidebars and they should go on the 
right-hand side of the page, for the reasons we discussed earlier in the chapter (that 
is, it's best to have the main content on the left, because that's where people's eyes are 
likely to be drawn when they irst open the page, and the search engine spiders will 
ind it irst). Out of the four wireframes we looked at earlier, the one that we'll apply 
to WPBizGuru is this:
Header
Sidebar
Footer
Main content
Thematic provides a number of readymade layouts. To apply the three-column 
layout we want for WPBizGuru, it's simply a matter of using one of the readymade 
Thematic layouts. Find this section of code on lines 21 and 22 of style.css:
/* Apply a basic layout */
@import url('../thematic/library/layouts/2c-r-fixed.css');
Then simply change the layout stylesheet to 3c-r-fixed.css:
@import url('../thematic/library/layouts/3c-r-fixed.css');

Chapter 3
[ 83 ]
Now if you view your blog, you will see the layout changes.
Comments
Line 21 is a comment. Comments are enclosed within an opening 
comment tag /* and a closing comment tag */. They are ignored by 
web browsers and can only be read by humans. They are most often 
used to notate CSS code so that other people reading it can follow 
the original author's thoughts. You can type anything you like within 
comment tags; it won't affect the way the web browser displays the 
CSS. In this case, the comment tells us that the proceeding line applies 
our layout.
The default stylesheet
For the rest of the theme design, we will be editing the CSS rules contained in 
Thematic's default.css stylesheet. In style.css you can see that default.css 
is imported from the Thematic library—see lines 27-29 of style.css:
/* Apply default theme styles and colors */
/* It's better to actually copy over default.css into this file (or 
link to a copy in your child theme) if you're going to do anything 
outrageous */
@import url('../thematic/library/styles/default.css');
We'll follow the very sensible advice from the Thematic developers and, instead 
of editing default.css in the parent theme, we will copy the ile over to our child 
theme. This means the original styles in the parent theme remain unchanged. So, 
copy default.css from C:\xampp\htdocs\wordpress\wp-content\themes\
thematic\library\styles and paste it into our child theme folder at C:\xampp\
htdocs\wordpress\wp-content\themes\wpbizguru. Then change the import URL 
on line 29 of style.css (in the WPBizGuru theme), so that our new default.css 
is imported:
/* Apply default theme styles and colors */
/* It's better to actually copy over default.css into this file (or 
link to a copy in your child theme) if you're going to do anything 
outrageous */
@import url('default.css');
Now open up your new default.css stylesheet in Notepad++ and we can begin 
editing it, safe in the knowledge that the parent theme styles will remain unchanged.

Designing your Blog
[ 84 ]
The header
The next part of the theme design we'll work on is the header. We'll add a 
background image and apply some new styles to the blog title and blog description. 
The background image is included in the code ile for this chapter—it's called 
wpbadges.jpg. Copy it into the wpbizguru theme folder (C:\xampp\htdocs\
wordpress\wp-content\themes\wpbizguru). In the default.css stylesheet for the 
WPBizGuru child theme, locate the section that begins /* =Header (it should be on 
or around line 56). You'll notice that the Thematic developers have used comments 
to divide default.css into logical sections, which makes it easier to ind the CSS 
you're looking for. Now replace all the code in the header section with the following:
#header {
  z-index:2;
  height: 200px;
  background: transparent url('wpbadges.jpg') center top no-repeat;
/* This image is derived from an image licensed under creative  
  commons by Flickr user "whiteafrican" -  
  http://www.flickr.com/photos/whiteafrican/2570514012/  
  http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0/ */
  position: relative;
  width: 960px;
  margin: 0 auto;
}
#blog-title {
  font-family:Arial, Helvetica, sans-serif;
  position: absolute;
  top: 20px;
  left: 0px;
  width: 140px;
  text-align: right;
  font-size:30px;
  font-weight:bold;
  line-height: 35px;
  padding: 35px 30px 15px 30px;
  background: #3d4245;
}
#blog-title a {
  color:#b7c4cf;
  text-decoration:none;
}
#blog-title a:active,
#blog-title a:hover {
  color: #fff;
}

Chapter 3
[ 85 ]
#blog-description {
  font-family:Arial, Helvetica, sans-serif;
  color:#3d4245;
  display: inline;
  position: absolute;
  top: 95px;
  left: 0px;
  width: 200px;
  text-align: left;
  font-size: 12px;
  padding: 15px 10px;
}
Save default.css and view the WPBizGuru blog in your browser (remember 
to refresh the page, if it's already open). You should be able to see the header's 
background image and the new styles for the blog title and blog description.  
Don't worry if the menu looks a bit weird, we'll ix that next.
The menu
We'll add some background color and text color to the menu and make sure it's 
positioned correctly just below the header.
Locate the section of code for the menu styles—it begins at the /* =Menu comment. 
Replace this rule:
#access {
  border-bottom:1px solid #ccc;
  height:32px;
  font-size:13px;
  overflow:visible;
  z-index:100;
}
with the following:
#access {
  height:32px;
  font-size:13px;
  overflow:visible;
  z-index:100;
  position: absolute;
  bottom: 0px;
  left: 0px;
  right: 0px;

Designing your Blog
[ 86 ]
  padding-left: 30px;
  background: #3d4245; 
}
Now skip down to the section of code that begins /*** THEMATIC SKIN ***/ 
and ends a couple of lines above /* =Content. Replace the whole section with 
the following:
/*** THEMATIC SKIN ***/
.sf-menu {
 
float:left;
}
.sf-menu a {
  padding:9px 13px;
  text-decoration:none;
  color: #b7c4cf;
  font-weight: bold;
}
.sf-menu .current_page_item a,
.sf-menu .current_page_ancestor a,
.sf-menu .current_page_parent a {
  font-weight: bold;
}
.sf-menu a, .sf-menu a:visited  {
  color: #b7c4cf;
  border-bottom:none;
}
.sf-menu li:hover, .sf-menu li.sfHover,
.sf-menu a:focus, .sf-menu a:hover, .sf-menu a:active {
  background: #557792;
  color: #fff;
  outline: 0;
  text-decoration: underline;
}
.sf-menu li:hover ul,
.sf-menu li.sfHover ul {
  top:32px; /* overriding essential styles */
  background: #557792;
}
.sf-menu li li:hover a,
.sf-menu li li.sfHover a {
  background: #557792;
  color: #fff;
}

Chapter 3
[ 87 ]
Once again, save default.css and view the blog in your browser, remembering to 
refresh if necessary. You should see the menu is now positioned below the header 
and its background colors have been applied.
Colors and fonts
Based on the subject matter of WPBizGuru, I decided on a color scheme that 
uses gray and blue tones. This gives the blog a business-like feel, which makes 
sense considering it's aimed at a business audience. The blues and grays are also 
reminiscent of the WordPress corporate color scheme. I also decided to add a colored 
background to the blog, to make the main content area stand out. I chose a simple 
Arial font because it is readable and gives the design a clean, contemporary look.
We'll begin applying the fonts, colors, and background color by editing the global 
elements section right at the top of default.css. So, scroll back to the top of the 
stylesheet and locate the block of code that begins with /* =Global Elements and 
ends a couple of lines above /* =Header. Replace the whole section of code with 
the following:
/* =Global Elements
----------------------------------------------------------- */
#container {
  padding: 0;
}
body, input, textarea {
  font: 15px Arial, Helvetica, sans-serif;
  line-height:22px;
}
body {
  background: #555555;
  color: #020659;
}
p, ul, ol, dd, pre {
  margin-bottom:22px;
}
pre, code {
  font:14px Monaco, monospace;
  line-height:22px;
}
blockquote {
  color:#666;
  font-style:italic;
}

Designing your Blog
[ 88 ]
table {
  border:1px solid #ccc;
  border-width:1px 1px 0 1px;
  font-size:13px;
  line-height:18px;
  margin:0 0 22px 0;
  text-align:left;
}
caption {
  text-align:left;
}
tr {
  border-bottom:1px solid #ccc;
}
th, td {
  padding: .7em 1.25em;
}
hr {
  background-color:#ccc;
  border:0;
  color:#ccc;
  height:1px;
  margin-bottom:22px;
}
a:link {
  color:#004B91;
}
a:visited {
  color:#743399;
}
a:active,
a:hover {
  color: #b7c4cf;
}
Once again, save default.css and review the changes in your browser. You'll notice 
that the background color has been applied and the fonts have changed. Now we 
need to turn our attention to the main content area.

Chapter 3
[ 89 ]
The main content area
We're going to make the background color of the main content area white and add 
a background gradient behind the sidebars, to differentiate them from the rest 
of the content. We'll also apply a few styles to the text. First, you'll need to place 
the gradient image in the WPBizGuru theme folder. In the code download, locate 
gradient.png and paste a copy of it in C:\xampp\htdocs\wordpress\wp-content\
themes\wpbizguru.
Now ind the section of code that begins at the /* =Content comment and ends a 
couple of lines above /* =Attachments. As you can see, this is a pretty long section 
of code, so you might want to cut and paste it from the inished default.css ile 
that's included with the code download for this chapter. You need to replace the 
whole section with the following:
/* =Content
----------------------------------------------------------- */
#main {
  clear:both;
  padding:30px 0;
  background: #fff url('gradient.png') top right no-repeat;
  color: #222;
}
#content {
  padding: 0px 30px;
}
.attachment .page-title {
  font-style:italic;
}
.page-title a {
  color:#666;
  text-decoration:none;
}
.page-title a:active,
.page-title a:hover {
  color: #b7c4cf;
}
.page-title span {
  font-style:italic;
}
.page-title .meta-nav {
  font-style:normal;
}

Designing your Blog
[ 90 ]
.hentry {
  padding:0 0 22px 0;
}
.single .hentry {
  padding:0;
}
.home #content .sticky {
  border:1px solid #ccc;
  margin:0 0 66px 0;
  padding:22px 20px 0 20px;
}
.entry-title {
  font-family:Arial,sans-serif;
  font-size:26px;
  font-weight:bold;
  line-height:26px;
  padding:0 0 7px 0;
  color:#020659;
}
.entry-title a {
  color:#020659;
  text-decoration:none;
}
.entry-title a:active,
.entry-title a:hover {
  color: #b7c4cf;
}
.entry-meta {
  color:#666;
  font-size:13px;
  font-style:normal;
  line-height:18px;
}
.entry-meta .author {
}
.entry-meta .n {
  font-size:13px;
  font-style:normal;
  letter-spacing:0.05em;
  text-transform:none;
  font-weight:bold;
}
.entry-meta a {
  color:#bf5b04;

Chapter 3
[ 91 ]
  text-decoration:none;
  font-weight:bold;
}
.entry-meta a:active,
.entry-meta a:hover {
  color: #b7c4cf;
  font-weight:bold;
}
.entry-meta abbr {
  border:none;
  cursor:text;
  font-size:13px;
  font-style:normal;
  font-weight:bold;
  letter-spacing:0.05em;
  text-transform:none;
  color:#000;
}
.entry-content {
  padding:22px 0 0 0;
}
.entry-content h1,
.entry-content h2 {
  font-family:Arial,sans-serif;
  font-size:19px;
  font-weight:bold;
  padding:28px 0 14px 0;
}
.entry-content h3 {
  font-size:17px;
  font-style:italic;
  padding:28px 0 14px 0;
}
.entry-content h4 {
  font-size:11px;
  font-family:Arial,sans-serif;
  font-weight:bold;
  text-transform:uppercase;
  letter-spacing:0.05em;
}
.entry-content table {
  margin-left:1px;
}
.entry-content embed {

Designing your Blog
[ 92 ]
  margin:0 0 22px 0;
}
.entry-utility {
  clear:both;
  color:#666;
  font-size:13px;
  line-height:18px;
  margin:0 0 44px 0;
}
.entry-utility a {
  color:#666;
  font-style:italic;
  text-decoration:none;
}
.entry-utility a:active,
.entry-utility a:hover {
  color: #b7c4cf;
}
.edit-link {
  clear:both;
  display:block;
}
.page-link {
  font-size:13px;
  font-weight:bold;
  line-height:18px;
  margin:0 0 22px 0;
  padding:22px 0 0 0;
  word-spacing:0.5em;
}
.page-link a {
  border:1px solid #ccc;
  color:#666;
  font-weight:normal;
  padding:0.5em 0.75em;
  text-decoration:none;
}
.page-link a:active,
.page-link a:hover {
  color: #b7c4cf;
}
ul#links-page,
ul#archives-page {
  list-style:none;

Chapter 3
[ 93 ]
  margin-left:0;
  overflow:hidden;
}
li.content-column {
  float:left;
  margin-right:20px;
  width:45%;
}
.gallery {
  display: block;
  clear: both;
  overflow: hidden;
  margin: 0 auto;
  padding:0 0 22px 0;
  }
.gallery .gallery-row {
  display: block;
  clear: both;
  overflow: hidden;
  margin: 0;
  }
.gallery .gallery-item {
  overflow: hidden;
  float: left;
  margin: 0;
  text-align: center;
  list-style: none;
  padding: 0;
  }
.gallery .gallery-item img, .gallery .gallery-item img.thumbnail {
  max-width: 89%;
  height: auto;
  padding: 1%;
  margin: 0 auto;
  border: none !important;
  }
.gallery-caption {
  margin-left: 0;
  }
.wp-caption-text,
.gallery-caption {
  color:#666;
  font-size:13px;
  line-height:18px;

Designing your Blog
[ 94 ]
}
#author-info {
  margin:0 0 44px 0;
  overflow:hidden;
}
#author-info .avatar {
  float:left;
  margin:.3em 1em 0 0;
}
Phew! That was a lot of code. Save your work and check the results in your browser. 
You'll see that the main content area has been styled. Notice how the gradient image 
is being used as the background for the sidebars.
The sidebars
We'll tidy up the sidebars by removing the border around the right-hand sidebar and 
applying some text styles. Locate the section of code that begins at the /* =Asides, 
Sidebars & Widget-Ready Areas (it should be on or around line 697). We're only 
making a couple of minor changes here, so I'll just run through the rules we need to 
change rather than giving the whole section of code. 
First locate the following rules:
.aside .current_page_item a {
  color: #FF4B33;
}
.aside .current_page_item .page_item a {
  color:#666;
}
.aside .current_page_item .page_item a:hover,
.aside .current_page_item .page_item a:active {
  color: #FF4B33;
}
.aside {
  color:#666;
}
.aside a {
  color:#666;
}
.aside a:active,
.aside a:hover {
  color: #FF4B33;
}

Chapter 3
[ 95 ]
.aside h3 {
  font-size:15px;
  font-style:italic;
  line-height:22px;
}
And replace with the following:
.aside .current_page_item a {
  color: #020659;
}
.aside .current_page_item .page_item a {
  color:#666;
}
.aside .current_page_item .page_item a:hover,
.aside .current_page_item .page_item a:active {
  color: #020659;
}
.aside {
  color:#666;
}
.aside a {
  color:#666;
}
.aside a:active,
.aside a:hover {
  color: #020659;
}
.aside h3 {
  font-size:15px;
  font-style:none;
  font-weight:bold;
  line-height:22px;
}
Now ind the following rule, which should be on or around line 808:
#primary {
  border:1px solid #ccc;
  padding:18px 0 0 0;
  margin-bottom:22px;
}

Designing your Blog
[ 96 ]
And change it to the following:
#primary {
  border:0px;
  padding:18px 0 0 0;
  margin-bottom:22px;
}
Save your work and take a look at the changes in your browser.
You may notice that the search box is a bit too large for the sidebar. Unfortunately, 
this is something we can't change in the stylesheets. To ix this, use Notepad++ to 
open up functions.php , which you'll ind in the wpbizguru theme folder. Scroll 
down to line 36, just before the closing PHP tag ?>. Add a line break (by hitting 
Enter on your keyboard) and then insert the following code:
// change search input size
function child_search_widget($search_form) {
  $search_form = str_replace('size="32"', 'size="25"' ,  
  $search_form);
  return $search_form;
}
add_filter('thematic_search_form', 'child_search_widget');
Save functions.php and take a look at the blog—the search box now its the sidebar 
much better.
The footer
OK, we're nearly inished. There are just a few styles to be applied to the footer. 
Locate the section of code that begins at the /* =Footer comment (which should be 
on or around line 843) and ends a couple of lines above /* =PageNavi. Replace the 
whole section with this:
#footer {
  border-top:0px;
  margin-top:22px;
}
#siteinfo {
  color:#b7c4cf;   font-size:11px;
  line-height:18px;
  padding:22px 0 44px 0;
}
#siteinfo a {

Chapter 3
[ 97 ]
  color:#b7c4cf;
}
#siteinfo a:active,
#siteinfo a:hover {
  color: #fff;
}
Save your work and view the blog in your browser to see the new styling in  
the footer. 
You can change the footer text by going to Appearance | Thematic Options in the 
WordPress Dashboard. I changed the footer text to this:
The inished theme
You should now have something that resembles this:

Designing your Blog
[ 98 ]
I admit, the WPBizGuru theme is unlikely to win any design awards, but that wasn't 
the point of the exercise. The point was to show you how easy it is to create a new 
child theme using the Thematic framework and come up with a unique, custom-
made design just by editing the stylesheets. I had to keep things fairly simple to 
avoid the CSS code becoming too complicated and unwieldy. You could carry on 
tweaking the theme and see what you can come up with.
There's one inal task to complete our new theme and that's to include a screenshot 
in the theme folder so that it appears in the Manage Themes tab in the WordPress 
dashboard. I've included a screenshot in the code bundle for this chapter, just copy it 
into your wpbizguru theme folder and you should see it in the Manage Themes tab:
Summary
We've covered a lot of ground in this chapter. You should now know about some of 
the design principles to consider when working on your blog theme. These should 
give you the conidence to critically evaluate your existing blog design and maybe 
make some improvements.
We also went through a very brief introduction to HTML and CSS before setting 
up a local development environment. Finally, we worked through the process of 
applying a completely new design for our case study blog by using the Thematic 
theme framework. We saw how an attractive design can be achieved by just editing 
the child theme's stylesheets. The inished theme is included in the code bundle for 
this chapter.
In the next chapter, we will be looking at a variety of options for adding images and 
videos to our WordPress blog.

Images and Videos
In this chapter, we are going to look at some advanced image handling techniques  
to ensure the images you use in your blog are displayed consistently and are easy  
to manage. We'll cover:
• 
Image theory basics
• 
Image editing
• 
How to alter the size and styling of thumbnails and images within posts
• 
How to create an image gallery in WordPress
• 
How to incorporate videos from third-party sites such as YouTube and 
Google Video
• 
How to add a favicon to our blog
Image theory basics
The most common formats for web images are JPEG, GIF, and PNG. These are the 
three formats you're most likely to come across. JPEG and GIF have been around for 
a long time, while PNG is a relative newcomer. PNG is a far more versatile format 
than GIF and JPEG but you should be aware that some browsers (such as Internet 
Explorer 6 and older) have problems rendering PNG images correctly, particularly 
ones with transparent backgrounds.

Images and Videos
[ 100 ]
Whichever ile format you use, there are three important image measurements you 
need to be aware of. They are dimensions, resolution, and ile size.
• 
Dimensions: This is simply the width and height of an image. Most image 
editing software allows you to express the dimensions of an image in 
a variety of units (for example centimeters, inches, or pixels). The most 
common and most useful unit in web design is pixels. The largest monitor 
screen size (or resolution) in common use at the moment is about 1280 by 
1024 pixels, so there is little point in setting the dimensions of an image 
any higher than this, unless you want people to be able to print them at a 
reasonably high quality. Images intended for print should be placed in a 
separate folder for downloading.
• 
Resolution: The resolution of an image is measured in pixels per inch 
(ppi). This is how much data is contained in each square inch of an image. 
The higher the ppi, the sharper the image will appear. However, computer 
monitors can only display around 72-100 pixels per inch so there's little point 
in having a resolution of more than 72 ppi for images on the Web. The only 
time when a higher resolution is necessary is when an image is intended to 
be printed, in which case, around 300 ppi is recommended.
• 
File size: The ile size of an image is the amount of space it takes up on a 
hard disk and is measured in kilobytes (KB), megabytes (MB), or gigabytes 
(GB). Crucially, the larger the dimensions and resolution of an image are, 
the bigger the ile size. Large images take longer to download for your end 
user (which makes a web page slow to load), and they eat up the bandwidth 
allowance allocated by your web host. It's important to keep the dimensions 
and resolution of your images to the absolute minimum so that the ile size is 
as small as possible. This is known as optimization.
Optimization
To maximize usability and eficiency in terms of bandwidth, images for the Web 
need to be optimized. This simply means setting the resolution to 72 ppi and making 
sure that the dimensions are not larger than the area of the screen you want the 
images to occupy. Optimization is done using image editing software; there are 
many products available. The industry standard for design and web professionals 
is Adobe Photoshop (http://www.adobe.com/photoshop), however, it's very 
expensive and if you're only using it to optimize images for the Web, it's probably 
not worth the expense. There are cheaper alternatives but they don't come close to 
Photoshop in terms of features and performance. Luckily, there is an open source 
product, which does provide a viable alternative to Photoshop. It's called The 
GIMP (The GNU Image Manipulation Program) and many designers prefer it 
to Photoshop, not just for the economic advantage it offers (The GIMP is free, of 
course), but because of its impressive feature set.

Chapter 4
[ 101 ]
We'll be using The GIMP to optimize our images later in this chapter, so let's 
download and install it now.
Installing 'The GIMP'
Go to http://www.gimp.org/downloads/ and 
download the GIMP installer for Windows XP SP2 or later 
(there are also versions available for Linux and Mac OS X). 
Run the installer and when it is inished, launch The GIMP.
Images in WordPress posts
WordPress does a pretty good job of handling images that you upload via the Posts 
Editor in the admin area. For example, when you upload an image, WordPress 
automatically creates a thumbnail of the image. To get the best results from this 
feature, there are a few things to bear in mind.
Thumbnail creation
First, you should note that even though WordPress creates a thumbnail of the 
image, the original full-size image will still be stored on your server. If the original 
image is particularly large (for example, wider than 1280 pixels), you need to decide 
whether you want your readers to be able to view it. If you do allow your readers 
to click the thumbnail and see the full-size image, it could be costly for you in terms 
of bandwidth and disk space. We will see how to prevent your readers from being 
able to open the full-size image shortly. But irst, let's assume that you do want your 
readers to be able to see larger versions of the thumbnails.
Remember that the largest viewable size for computer monitors is about 1280 x 1024 
pixels (admittedly, monitors are getting bigger all the time, but at the moment this is 
about the biggest size you need to worry about). Therefore, I recommend optimizing 
your images before you upload them to WordPress, so they are no bigger than this 
maximum monitor size. Let's try this out on the WPBizGuru case study.
In the code bundle for this chapter, you'll ind an image called dried_chillies.jpg. 
Unzip it somewhere locally.

Images and Videos
[ 102 ]
Now open up The GIMP and use File | Open to open dried_chillies.jpg. You'll 
notice that the image opens in a separate window. In the image window, select 
Image | Scale Image. In the Scale Image dialog, you'll see that the image 
dimensions (Image Size) are 3072 x 2304 pixels:
We need to make the width 1280 so that it its nicely into our presumed maximum 
monitor size. Place your cursor in the Width box, delete 3072 and type 1280.You 
can see that the resolution is already set to 72 ppi, which is perfect for web images. 
Click the Scale button and save the image (File | Save). In the Save as JPEG 
dialog box, move the Quality slider towards the left so that the number in the box 
is 75 then click Save. Having resized the image, the ile size has reduced to about 
103KB, from the original 1.19 MB—a nice improvement for download speeds and 
bandwidth economy.

Chapter 4
[ 103 ]
The Quality slider is a useful optimization tool in The GIMP. 
If you have a very large JPEG image with a high resolution, as 
with our example, you can reduce the quality to maybe 60 or 75. 
This helps to reduce the ile size. This is a feature you should 
experiment with and see how different quality settings affect the 
sharpness and ile size of JPEG images. You're always looking 
for a trade-off between quality and ile size.
Now let's upload the image to our test blog. You should already have the 
WPBizGuru blog we created in Chapter 3, Designing your Blog on your local 
test server. 
1. Open the XAMPP control panel and start the servers (Apache and MySQL). 
2. In your web browser, go to http://localhost/wordpress/wp-login.php 
and log in.
3. Create a new post and add a few paragraphs of 'Lorem ipsum' dummy text 
(you can get it for free at http://www.lipsum.com/). Place the cursor on a 
new line and click the Add an Image icon:

Images and Videos
[ 104 ]
4. The Add an Image window will open. Click the Select Files button:
5. Locate the dried_chillies.jpg image on your computer and upload it. Give 
the image a suitable Title, Alternate Text, Caption, and Description:

Chapter 4
[ 105 ]
6. For Link URL select Post URL, for Alignment select None, and for Size 
select Thumbnail. Then click the Insert into Post button:
If you want to prevent your readers from being able to 
view the original full-size image ile, you have to select 
None for Link URL.
7. Now publish the post. Notice that the caption is displayed below the image.
So, that's how we ensure that our images are optimized for WordPress. Use 
image editing software to scale the image width to 1280 pixels before uploading  
it to WordPress.

Images and Videos
[ 106 ]
Thumbnail size
As you can see from the previous exercise, the thumbnail image is rather small. By 
default WordPress creates thumbnails that are 150 x 150 pixels. That may be ine 
for your blog design. Some people align their images so that paragraph text wraps 
around them, in which case, 150 pixels is quite a good size. However, I prefer to 
place images between paragraphs and for this, I think larger images look better. We 
can achieve this by changing a couple of settings in WordPress.
In the WordPress admin area, select Settings | Media. In the Image sizes section, 
change the dimensions for Medium size to 450 and then click Save Changes:
The change we just made won't affect the images that we have already uploaded, 
as WordPress has already resized the images using the old setting of 150 pixels. So, 
open up the post we created earlier and delete the image we placed there (to avoid 
confusion, you could also go to Media | Library and delete the original Dried 
Chillies image).
Once again, position your cursor between the two paragraphs of dummy text and 
click the Add an Image icon. Repeat the process of uploading the dried_chillies.jpg 
image, but this time, for Size, select Medium instead of Thumbnail:

Chapter 4
[ 107 ]
Even in the post editor, you'll notice that the image appears larger. When you view 
the blog, see how the medium thumbnail now its nicely between the two paragraphs:
Attachment size
You may recall that when we uploaded the image we chose Post URL for the 
Link URL menu. In WordPress, the page that this URL links to is known as an 
Attachment Page and the image is an Attachment. Click on the thumbnail in the 
blog and you will be taken to the Attachment Page. You'll notice something's wrong 
here. The image is way too big. It extends past the main content area and into the 
sidebars. We can ix this problem via the stylesheet.

Images and Videos
[ 108 ]
Also notice on the attachment page that the image description appears below 
the image and there is a comment form. Readers can leave comments that relate 
speciically to the image. If you click on the image, the actual image ile will open  
in your browser.
We only need to make a small change to the stylesheet, so we can use the Theme 
Editor within the WordPress admin area. Go back to the admin area and select 
Appearance | Editor, then select default.css from the list of stylesheets to the 
right of the editor area. Scroll down to the very bottom of the stylesheet, and add  
the following comment and CSS rule:
/* =Attachment Images
----------------------------------------------------------- */
div.entry-attachment img {
    max-width:450px;
}
Click Update File and view the attachment page in the blog (you may need to refresh 
your browser to see the changes). We've used CSS to set the maximum width for 
Attachment images to 450 pixels.

Chapter 4
[ 109 ]
Styling images
We just changed the size by adding a rule to the stylesheet. So you've probably 
igured out that we can apply a whole load of other styles to our images. We'll run 
through a couple of simple examples to show how we can style images to enhance 
our blog design.
It's worth noting that all we've done is change the display size of the 
image. The browser is still downloading the full size image and resizing it 
on the ly. In this case it's not too much of a problem because we already 
reduced the image ile size using The GIMP, but if you were applying 
this resizing on the ly to a large image ile, it could have implications 
for bandwidth and download size. It's best practice to always optimize 
the image as much as possible (using The GIMP) before you upload it to 
WordPress, and only use resizing on the ly for minor tweaks.
Let's begin by changing the border around images on Attachment Pages. Go back to 
the Theme Editor and locate the new CSS rule we just added. Change it to this:
div.entry-attachment img {
  max-width:450px;
  border:solid #bf5b04 2px;
}
Update the ile, and view the attachment page and you'll see that the image now has 
a border color to match the text color of the entry meta text.
We can apply a different border style to the image within the post. Try adding the 
following rule:
div.entry-content img {
  border:solid black 1px;
  padding:5px;
}

Images and Videos
[ 110 ]
Update the ile and view the post we created and you'll see the new border:
Setting up an image gallery
We've looked at some advanced techniques for managing images within posts. 
However, if you would like to use a lot of images in your blog, you should consider 
using a standalone image gallery. Placing lots of images in a single post is not ideal. 
They can take up lots of space and the reader will be forced to do a lot of vertical 
scrolling to view the entire post. A better approach is to add a link within your post 
to a dedicated gallery page. A standalone gallery also allows you to categorize and 
group your images more eficiently.
Since version 2.5, WordPress includes a simple gallery feature. 
However, the functionality is very basic and you can achieve far better 
results using a gallery plugin, which is the approach we will use here. 
If you are interested in the gallery feature in WordPress, take a look at 
http://codex.wordpress.org/Gallery_Shortcode.

Chapter 4
[ 111 ]
NextGEN Gallery
One of the best third-party plugins for WordPress is NextGEN Gallery. It offers 
an easy-to-use gallery with lots of features. We'll install NextGEN Gallery for our 
WPBizGuru case study and take a look at some of the basic features. 
Begin by installing the plugin in the usual way. Go to Plugins | Add New, search for 
nextgen gallery and click the Install Now link for NextGEN Gallery (make sure you 
install the correct plugin as there are several plugins with similar names).
We're now ready to start using the gallery but you'll need some images. For this 
demonstration, we'll set up two galleries and place them within an album (the 
difference between gallery and album will make sense shortly). For convenience, 
I've included two ZIP iles in the code bundle (gallery_imgs_1.zip and 
gallery_imgs_2.zip) that contain some copyright-free images that you can use. 
Of course, any images you have will do just as well.
Images sources
There are now dozens of great stock image libraries on the Web. 
Some provide images completely free of charge, others charge a fee. 
A couple of good ones are stock.xchng (http://www.sxc.hu/), 
which offers free and paid-for images and Fotolia (http://www.
fotolia.com), which has paid-for images starting from just $1. 
These sites are great if you're looking for images to illustrate your 
blog posts. However, always be sure to check the license conditions 
for each image you download—the use of some is restricted.
Once you have activated the plugin, you will see a Gallery option in the admin area 
left-hand menu. Click on it and select Add Gallery / Images.

Images and Videos
[ 112 ]
A Gallery is simply a collection of images. You can use just one gallery and place all 
of your images in it, but if you want to keep your images in some kind of order, it 
makes sense to set up several galleries, each containing related images. Groups of 
galleries such as this make up an Album.
Type Dried Chillies in the New Gallery box and click Add gallery. You should see 
the following message:
Now we can import some images to the Dried Chillies gallery. There are several 
options available here. The irst is to upload an entire ZIP ile of images. The second 
is to use your FTP client to upload a folder of images to the gallery. And the third 
is to upload images one by one. We will use the irst option, which should be the 
quickest. Click on the Upload a Zip-File tab. Use the Choose File button to locate 
gallery_imgs_1.zip, which you downloaded with the code for this chapter. From the 
in to drop-down box, select the 1 - Dried Chillies gallery. Click on Start upload.

Chapter 4
[ 113 ]
Once again, you should see a success message:
Now click Manage Gallery (in the Gallery menu in the left-hand navigation area). 
You should see our Dried Chillies gallery in the Galleries list. Click on it.
The page you are now looking at allows you to change the settings for the gallery. 
If you scroll down, you will also see the images we just uploaded into this gallery. 
There are several enhancements we can make to our gallery. The irst thing we need 
to do is link the gallery to a page in our blog. 
We need to add a description and assign a preview image for the gallery (you'll see 
the preview image in use when we place the gallery into an album). First click the 
Add Page button. Now type a suitable description in the Description box and in the 
Preview image drop-down box, select any one of the images. Click Save Changes.
In the bottom half of the page we can change the settings for each image. For the 
time being, we'll just give the images some more meaningful titles. The title for  
each image appears in its Alt tag.

Images and Videos
[ 114 ]
It's important to have sensible Alt tags for images to ensure 
maximum usability and accessibility for our readers. People 
who use screen readers and can't see the images rely on the 
Alt tags to make sense and understand the context of a web 
page. This is a basic principle of good usability and you 
should be sure to apply it in all your websites. Alt tags are 
also good for search engine optimization.
In the Alt & Title Text / Description column, enter a meaningful title for each image 
and then click Save Changes.
You could also add a description for each image, but for now we're done editing this 
gallery. We'll create our second gallery.
Click Add Gallery / Images and then the Add new gallery tab. Enter a name for 
the gallery—call it Colorful Shapes. Click the Add Gallery button. Use the Upload 
a Zip-File feature to upload the images in the gallery_imgs_2.zip archive, which 
came with this chapter's code. (Remember to select 2 - Colorful Shapes in the in to 
drop-down box.)

Chapter 4
[ 115 ]
Click Manage Gallery and choose our new gallery. Under Gallery settings, irst 
click the Add Page button. Now give the gallery a description and choose a preview 
image, then click Save Changes.
Give each image a new title. Save all your changes.
If you preview the blog now you'll see two new links in the main menu. These 
are the two pages that NextGEN gallery created for us to which we can link our 
galleries. (For the screenshot shown next, I sent a couple of other pages in the blog  
to Draft so that the menu its on one line.)

Images and Videos
[ 116 ]
Go ahead and click on one of these links and you'll see a gallery page:
If you click on the thumbnails the full-size image will appear as an overlay in your 
browser window. You can also view the images as a slideshow.

Chapter 4
[ 117 ]
Pretty cool! But we don't want links to each gallery to appear in the main menu of 
our blog. A better option would be to have an Image Gallery link that takes us to a 
page that lists all of our galleries. We can set this up easily.
Creating an image gallery page
Go back to WordPress admin. Click Pages. You should see the two gallery pages in 
the list. Click on the page title to edit one of them. In the Publish box on the right-
hand side, choose to edit the Visibility settings, select Private, click OK, and then 
Update the page. Do the same for the other gallery page.
By setting both pages to Private, we have removed them from the blog's main menu.
Go to Gallery | Album. In the Add new album box type Image Gallery and click 
Add. You just created a new Album called Image Gallery.
Now choose 1 - Image Gallery from the Select album drop-down box (if it isn't 
selected already). We want to place our Dried Chillies and Colorful Shapes galleries 
into the Image Gallery album we just created. You can see the two galleries listed in 
the Select gallery box (notice the preview images you selected earlier). If you place 
your cursor over one of the galleries, the cursor will become a cross-hair and you can 
drag the gallery into the Album box on the left-hand side. 

Images and Videos
[ 118 ]
Drag both galleries over and click Update.
Now we need to create a page for our album and have it appear in the main menu 
for the blog. Make a note of the Album Page ID (in this case '1'). Go to Pages | Add 
New in the main WordPress admin area. Enter Image Gallery as the page title and 
type this tag in the page content area:
[album id=1 template=extend]

Chapter 4
[ 119 ]
Publish the new page. Now view the blog and you'll see the Image Gallery link in 
the main menu. Follow this link and you will see our two albums:
I think you'll agree that NextGEN Gallery is a pretty powerful plugin that allows you 
to easily create a gallery page. We've really only scratched the surface in terms of its 
functionality. Now you have the basics, it's up to you to experiment and see what 
it can do. There are support forums available at http://wordpress.org/tags/
nextgen-gallery?forum_id=10 and a full list of the NextGEN Gallery tags here: 
http://wordpress.org/extend/plugins/nextgen-gallery/faq/.
NextGEN Gallery also has its own stylesheet (see the Style option in the Gallery 
menu), so you can use CSS to change things such as the border colors and spacing 
between thumbnails.
Just one last exercise before we move on. Go to Gallery | Options and click the 
Gallery tab. In the Number of images per page box, type 4 and uncheck the 
Integrate slideshow box. Save your changes and view one of the gallery pages in the 
blog. You'll notice there are now a maximum of four thumbnails per page and the 
Show as slideshow option has gone. This is just one example of the many ways you 
can customize your new image galleries.
Using video
In addition to images, video is also a great way to make your blog more engaging. 
You may want to shoot your own videos or use ones made by other people. If you 
have your own videos, it's possible to host them on your own web space and embed a 
media player in your blog posts to show them. However, this could be quite costly in 
terms of the bandwidth allowance from your web hosts as video iles can be very large.

Images and Videos
[ 120 ]
It's probably better (and easier) to upload your videos to a video sharing service such 
as YouTube or Google Video and use WordPress Embeds to display them. 
Since WordPress 2.9, it's now far easier to embed videos, 
images, and other content into your WordPress blogs. 
See http://codex.wordpress.org/Embeds for 
more information.
This has a couple of beneits over hosting videos on your own web space. First, it 
saves your bandwidth. Second, it makes your videos available to a wider audience. 
Not only will your blog readers have access to them, but they will also be available to 
YouTube users. This could turn out to be a useful promotional tool for your blog as it 
may bring in new trafic from YouTube.
Embedding a YouTube video
Create a new post; you can add some dummy Lorem ipsum text if you want. Now go 
over to YouTube and ind a video you want to use (maybe your own).
All you need to do to embed the video is add the video's URL to your content area. 
The URL must be on its own line and not hyperlinked:

Chapter 4
[ 121 ]
Now publish the new post and view your blog:
Adding a favicon
The inal image technique we'll look at will give your blog a really professional 
touch. It involves a special kind of image known as a favicon. This is the icon that 
you see in your browser address bar on many websites you visit. If a website is  
using a favicon, it will also be displayed in your browser's favorites folder next  
to the website link (hence the name, favicon).
We'll go through the procedure for adding a favicon to your live blog, as there is 
little point in having one on your local development server (you may have noticed 
that XAMPP comes with its own favicon, anyway).

Images and Videos
[ 122 ]
A favicon must be a square image of 16 pixels (that is, 16 x 16). You may be able 
to use your website logo or create a special square version of it. Another option is 
to make a completely new image—maybe using the initial letters of your blog. For 
WPBizGuru, I created a simple 'W' favicon. (I've included the WPBizGuru favicon in 
this chapter's code bundle.)
You may wish to use a free favicon generator tool. There is a good 
one at http://tools.dynamicdrive.com/favicon/.
Once I had scaled the 'W' image down to 16 x 16 using The GIMP, I saved it as 
favicon.ico (note the special ile extension). Next I used my FTP client to upload it 
into the root directory of my website (the root will be something like /public-html, 
/www, or /htdocs). 
The favicon.ico image must be in the root, which is not necessarily 
the directory where you'll have WordPress installed. 
I then used my FTP client to download the functions.php ile from the WPBizGuru 
child theme folder within /wp-content/themes/. I then edited the ile locally, 
adding the following lines just before the closing </?> tag:
function childtheme_favicon() { ?>
  <link rel="shortcut icon" href="http://www.wpbizguru.com/favicon. 
    ico">
<?php }
add_action('wp_head', 'childtheme_favicon');
Having saved the functions.php ile, I FTPed it back to the WPBizGuru theme 
folder by overwriting the old version. And that's it—the favicon is now visible.

Chapter 4
[ 123 ]
Summary
In this chapter, we've looked at some advanced multimedia techniques. You now 
know how to prepare images for upload to your blog using an image editor such 
as The GIMP. You also know how to ensure that a thumbnail will be generated for 
every image you upload. We learned how to resize thumbnails so they it our post 
area and how to add styles to images in WordPress using CSS.
We also installed a third-party gallery plugin—NextGEN Gallery—which we can use 
to create great-looking galleries containing multiple categories of images. We saw 
how easy it is to use WordPress Embeds to display video in posts. Finally, we looked 
at the process of adding a favicon to our blog to give it that professional look.
Although the majority of the work in this chapter was done in our local development 
environment, the techniques can be applied in exactly the same way to a live blog.
In the next chapter, we will focus on the content of your blog. We will discuss some 
copywriting tips to ensure that your content is engaging and keeps your readers 
coming back for more. We will also look at creating static pages and how to keep a 
backup of your content.


Content is King
The title may seem like rather an old cliché now, but it still rings true—content is 
king. In this chapter, we will look at issues surrounding content creation, and discuss 
some techniques and methods to help you produce the best content you can. We've 
already looked at visual content, in the form of images and videos, but for many  
web users, blogging is still all about text—that's what we'll be focusing on here.
We will begin with some general writing tips for bloggers. Although you may be 
familiar with some of these already, it's as well to re-focus your attention on them 
and ensure that you are applying them as a part of your blogging routine. We then 
look at ways of organizing your content in a user-friendly way by using categories 
and tags. We will examine the apparently subtle differences between the two and 
ensure that you're using them correctly. We move on to apply categories and tags  
to the WPBizGuru case study.
Next, we will look at one of the most important pieces of static content on your 
blog—the About page. It's vital to get this right as it is so often the irst port of call 
for new visitors to your blog. We will add an About page to WPBizGuru. Finally, 
we underline the importance of protecting your precious content by carrying out 
regular backups. You will learn how to back up both your WordPress site iles and 
the all-important MySQL database, which drives your blog. This chapter includes:
• 
Blog writing tips
• 
How to use categories and tags correctly
• 
The importance of your About page
• 
Other types of static content

Content is King
[ 126 ]
Blog writing tips
The irst thing to look at regarding content is the quality of your writing itself. Good 
writing takes practice. The best way to learn is to study the work of other good 
writers and bloggers, and by doing so, develop an ear for a good sentence. However, 
there are guidelines to bear in mind that apply speciically to blogs, and we'll look at 
some of these here.
Killer headlines
Ask any newspaper sub-editor and he or she will tell you that writing good 
headlines is an art to be mastered. This is equally true for blogs. Your headlines  
are the post titles and it's very important to get them right.
Your headlines should be concise and to the point. You should try to convey the 
essence of the post in its title. Remember that blogs are often consumed quickly, and 
readers will use your post titles to decide if they want to carry on reading. People 
tend to scan through blogs, so the titles play a big part in helping them pick which 
posts they might be interested in.
Your post titles also have a part to play in search engine optimization (SEO will be 
covered in detail in the next chapter). Many search engines will use them to index 
your posts.
As more and more people are using RSS feeds to subscribe to blogs it becomes even 
more important to make your post titles as descriptive and informative as possible. 
Many RSS readers and aggregators only display the post title, so it's essential that 
you convey as much information as possible while keeping it short and snappy. For 
example, Backing Up WordPress: A Tutorial is a better post title than, A new tutorial.
Length of posts
Try to keep your posts manageable in terms of their word count. It's dificult to be 
prescriptive about post lengths. There's no one-size-its-all rule in blogging. You 
need to gauge the length of your posts based on your subject matter and target 
audience. There may be an element of experimentation to see how posts of different 
lengths are received by your readership. As with headlines, bear in mind that most 
people tend to read blogs fairly quickly and they may be put off by an overly long 
post. On the other hand, if you are blogging to demonstrate your expertise in speciic 
matters, longer posts may be necessary to get your complex points across.

Chapter 5
[ 127 ]
WordPress includes a useful word count feature at the bottom 
of the post editor.
An important factor in controlling the length of your posts is your writing skills. 
You will ind that as you improve as a writer, you will be able to get your points 
across using fewer words. Good writing is all about making your point as quickly 
and concisely as possible. Inexperienced writers often feel the urge to embellish their 
sentences and use long, complicated phrases. This is usually unnecessary and when 
you read back that long sentence, you might see a few words that can be cut.
Editing your posts is an important process. At the very least you should always 
proofread them before clicking the Publish button. Better still; try to get into the 
habit of actively editing everything you write. If you know someone who is willing 
to act as an editor for you, that's great. It's always useful to get some feedback on 
your writing.
If, after re-reading and editing your post, it still seems very 
long, it might be an idea to split the post in two and publish 
the second part a few days later.
Post frequency
Again, there are no rules set in stone about how frequently you should post. You 
will probably know from your own experience of other blogs that this varies 
tremendously from blogger to blogger. Some bloggers post several times a day  
and others just once a week or less.
Figuring out the correct frequency of your posts is likely to take some trial and error. 
It will depend on your subject matter and how much you have to say about it. The 
length of your posts may also have a bearing on this. If you like to write short posts 
that make just one main point, you may ind yourself posting quite regularly. Or, 
you may prefer to save up your thoughts and get them down in one longer post.
As a general rule of thumb, try to post at least once per week. Any less than this and 
there is a danger your readers will lose interest in your blog. However, it's extremely 
important not to post just for the sake of it. This is likely to annoy readers and they 
may very well delete your feed from their news reader. As with many issues in 
blogging, post frequency is a personal thing. You should aim to strike a balance 
between posting once in a blue moon and subjecting your readers to verbal diarrhea.

Content is King
[ 128 ]
Almost as important as getting the post frequency right is ine-tuning the timing  
of your posts, that is, the time you publish them. Once again, you can achieve this  
by knowing your target audience. Who are they, and when are they most likely to  
sit down in front of their computers and read your blog? If most of your readers  
are ofice workers, then it makes sense to have your new posts ready for them when 
they switch on their workstations in the morning. Maybe your blog is aimed at 
stay-at-home moms, in which case a good time to post might be mid-morning when 
the kids have been dropped off at school, the supermarket run is over, and the irst 
round of chores are done. If you blog about gigs, bars, and nightclubs in your local 
area, the readers may well include twenty-something professionals who access your 
blog on their iPhones while riding the subway home—a good time to post for them 
might be late afternoon.
Links to other blogs
We'll examine this in more detail in Chapter 8, Connecting with the Blogosphere, but it's 
worth lagging up here, also. Links to other bloggers and websites are an important 
part of your content; they help to establish your place in the blogosphere. Blogging is 
all about linking to others and the resulting conversations.
Try to avoid over-using popular links that appear all over the Web, and instead 
introduce your readers to new websites and blogs that they may not have heard 
of. Admittedly, this is dificult nowadays with so many bloggers linking to each 
other's posts, but the more original you can be, the better. This may take quite a bit of 
research and trawling through the lower-ranked pages on search engines and indices, 
but it could be time well spent if your readers come to appreciate you as a source of 
new content beyond your own blog. Try to focus on inding blogs in your niche or 
key topic areas. However, don't just link to other blogs for the sake of it—make sure 
they are of real use to your readers.
Establishing your tone and voice
Tone and voice are two concepts that professional writers are constantly aware 
of and are attempting to improve. An in-depth discussion isn't necessary here, but 
it's worth being aware of them. The concept of tone can seem rather esoteric to the 
non-professional writer but as you write more and more, it's something you will 
become increasingly aware of.

Chapter 5
[ 129 ]
For our purposes, we could say the tone of a blog post is all about the way it feels 
or the way the blogger has pitched it. Some posts may seem very informal; others 
may be straight-laced, or appear overly complex and technical. Some may seem 
quite simplistic, while others come across as advanced material. These are all 
matters of tone. It can be quite subtle, but as far as most bloggers are concerned, 
it's usually a matter of formal or informal. How you pitch your writing boils down 
to understanding your target audience. Will they appreciate informal, irst-person 
prose or should you keep it strictly third person, with no slang or casual language? 
On blogs, a conversational tone is often the most appropriate.
With regards to voice, this is what makes your writing distinctly yours. Writers who 
develop a distinct voice become instantly recognizable to readers who know them. It 
takes a lot of practice to develop and is not something you can consciously aim for; it 
just happens as you gain more experience. The only thing you can do to help it along 
is step back from your writing and ask yourself if any of your habits stand in the way 
of clarity.
While you read back your blog posts imagine yourself as one of your target readers 
and consider whether they would appreciate the language and style you've used. 
Employing the tone and voice well is all about getting inside their heads and 
producing content they can relate to.
Developing a distinctive voice can also be an important aspect 
of your company's brand identity. Your marketing department 
may already have brand guidelines, which allude to the 
tone and voice that should be used while producing written 
communications. Or you may wish to develop guidelines 
yourself as a way of focusing your use of tone and voice.
The structure of a post
This may not apply to very short posts that don't go further than a couple of brief 
paragraphs, but for anything longer, it's worth thinking about a structure. The classic 
form is beginning, middle, and end. Consider what your main point or argument is and 
get it down in the irst paragraph. In the middle section, expand on it and back it up 
with secondary arguments. At the end reinforce it, and leave no doubt in the reader's 
mind what it is you've been trying to say.
As we've already mentioned, blogs are often read quickly or even just scanned 
through. Using this kind of structure, which most people are sub-consciously aware 
of, can help them extract your main points quickly and easily.

Content is King
[ 130 ]
Ending with a question
You may have already applied the beginning, middle, and end structure, but that's not 
necessarily the best place to end a post. Many bloggers inish with a question. This 
is a great way of soliciting comments. If it's an interesting or provocative question, it 
may persuade those readers who only scanned quickly through your post to go back 
and digest it in more detail, so that they can give an answer to your question and join 
the debate.
A quick checklist
Based on the writing tips we've looked at, there are a few common themes that keep 
popping up. This checklist will help you to keep them in mind:
• 
Know your target audience and try to get inside their heads.
• 
Ask yourself if each post is truly relevant to your audience.
• 
Are you posting frequently enough (or too frequently)?
• 
Are your posts too long or too short?
• 
Make sure you include some links to other blogs and websites.
• 
Consider whether your tone and voice are appropriate for your target 
audience and how they could apply to your brand identity.
• 
Have you applied a structure to your post?
• 
Could you add a question at the end of your post?
Remember that the art of blog writing requires plenty of practice, but the points we 
have covered should help to get you on your way. The key is to constantly analyze 
your writing and ask yourself how it can be improved.
A note about keywords
We'll discuss the whole topic of SEO in the next chapter, but 
it's worth noting here that your writing has a big impact on 
search engine indability. This is what adds an extra dimension 
to writing for the Web. As well as all the usual considerations 
of style, tone, content, and so on, you also need to optimize 
your content for the search engines. This largely comes down to 
identifying your keywords and ensuring they're used with the 
right frequency—we'll discuss this in detail in Chapter 6, Search 
Engine Optimization. In the meantime, hold this thought.

Chapter 5
[ 131 ]
Categories and tags
It's very important to organize your content in a usable and logical way. Your 
readers will be frustrated if they cannot ind what they're looking for. Their overall 
experience of your blog is greatly enhanced if you use clear signposts to your 
content. Luckily, WordPress makes this easy with the use of Categories and Tags.
The difference between categories and tags
There can be some confusion about the differences between categories and tags, 
which can lead to them being used incorrectly. This is partly due to the fact that 
different bloggers use them in different ways. There is some debate about how they 
should be used, and some may argue that there are no hard and fast rules. However, 
I think it's important to establish in your mind some distinction between categories 
and tags. What follows is my method for using them.
Categories should be thought of as being part of the hierarchy of your blog's 
navigation. In a way, they are a bit like a iling system for your blog. Each post is iled 
in a category, giving your blog a hierarchical structure. Some people also think of 
categories as being the table of contents for a blog.
Tags supplement categories but they should not really be thought of as part of your 
blog's navigation. They are rather like an index in a book. You use an index to look 
up a keyword and it gives you a list of page references for that word. Similarly, when 
a reader clicks on one of your tags, they are given a list of references for that tag. 
Tags can also be thought of as keywords or search terms that readers (or potential 
readers) might associate with your posts.
Categories are a high-level way of organizing content, while tags are more 
granular or low-level. A category will contain many posts, whereas a tag may  
point to far fewer.
Using categories
Bearing in mind that categories are a high-level method for organizing your content, 
you should keep the number of categories to a minimum. I would recommend not 
going above 12 categories, and in fact, for many blogs far fewer will be suficient.
Remember that we are also using categories as part of our blog's navigation; they  
are not just a way of labeling posts. Your category list should be clearly displayed  
on each page of your blog so that it can be used as a navigation menu.

Content is King
[ 132 ]
Each post should be placed in just one category. This is a controversial point, and 
you will see some bloggers place their posts in more than one category. However, 
this detracts from the idea of using categories as a navigational aid on your site or as 
a table of contents. A section in a book only appears under one chapter heading; it 
only occurs once within the book, so it is only listed once in the table of contents.
You can set up your permalinks so that the category is part 
of the URL. For example: http://blog.wpbizguru.com/
tutorials/2011/05/29/a-tutorial-on-backing-
up-wordPress/. It's rather like the directory structure used 
in static HTML sites, where content is organized by placing 
each page in the relevant folder. This is an important reason for 
placing your posts in just one category. We will apply this to the 
WPBizGuru case study later in the chapter.
Avoid the use of sub-categories. If you keep the number of categories small, you 
shouldn't need any sub-categories. You must also constantly monitor your categories 
and how you are using them. If it turns out that one of your categories is only getting 
a few posts while all the others have dozens, you should consider merging the 
underused category into one (or more) of the others. A category with just one or two 
posts relects badly on you, and many of your readers may doubt your expertise  
or enthusiasm.
Using tags
We've mentioned that tags are a more granular way of organizing your content. 
You may only have a few categories, but you should use lots of tags. However, just 
because there are lots of them, you shouldn't be cavalier in the way you use them. 
Always use meaningful tags but try to keep them as short as possible. The best tags 
are just one word, although sometimes you will have to use more.
The whole point of tags is to use the same ones over and over. Do not create more 
than one tag with the same meaning. For example, if you were frequently writing 
about architecture you could have tags such as, building, construction, development, or 
a whole host of variations. The problem is that they are all too similar. It would be far 
better to use just one of these tags for posts on that subject. You should also be aware 
of any ambiguities in your tags, for example, building can mean a structure of bricks 
and mortar or the act of constructing. If you were to use it as a tag, you would need 
to be consistent and use it in just one meaning.
You can give more than one tag for a post; in fact, you will usually ind you have to. 
The whole point of tagging is that readers can use it to ind related posts, and this 
may be best achieved by using several tags per post.

Chapter 5
[ 133 ]
Applying tags and categories to WPBizGuru
Now, let's look at how we can apply this to our case-study blog. First, we'll 
consider the categories that are needed for the blog. Based on the subject matter of 
WPBizGuru, we can come up with a few broad topics that will be our categories:
• 
Tutorials
• 
Plugins
• 
Themes
• 
WordPress SEO
• 
Speaking and Events
• 
Web TV Appearances
This looks like a good list of categories to begin with—we can always add more, 
later. Now, start up your local development server and log in to the admin area  
of the WPBizGuru blog (http://localhost/wordpress/wp-admin). Select 
Posts | Categories. Begin by deleting all the old categories and then add the 
new ones.
Some of the category names contain several words, but you may wish to use just one 
word for the category slug. The slugs will be used by our permalinks, once we've  
re-conigured them.

Content is King
[ 134 ]
For the time being, leave the Uncategorized category—you can set one of the new 
ones as Default later.
Next, you need to go through each of the posts and assign them to a new 
category—remember, only one category per post. At the same time add a few tags 
for each post. Tags are placed in the Post Tags box, which is to the right of the main 
post editor. Since we're only using dummy content, it doesn't really matter which 
categories and tags you use for each post. As you add more tags, you'll notice that 
WordPress allows you to choose from the most used tags:

Chapter 5
[ 135 ]
By default, the Thematic child theme we created for WPBizGuru displays tags within 
the meta information at the end of each post:
However, it's also useful to display your tags in a tag cloud within your sidebar. 
WordPress comes with its own tag cloud widget, but it's not very lexible. So, we'll 
use a third-party plugin, called Ultimate Tag Cloud Widget developed by Rickard 
Andersson of http://www.0x539.se/.
In your WordPress admin area, go to Plugins | Add New. Search for ultimate tag 
cloud widget, install the plugin in the usual way and activate it.
Go to Appearance | Widgets. Drag the Ultimate Tag Cloud widget into the Primary 
Aside between Categories and Archive. 
The coniguration options for the new widget should open automatically; if they 
don't, click the drop-down arrow.

Content is King
[ 136 ]
Here we can change a few settings for the tag cloud. Under Data, I changed the order 
to Random:
Under Basic Appearance, I changed the Title to Blog Tags and the Coloring to 
Spanning between values From #B1B5B8 to #3D4245 (these are hexadecimal 
color values which I chose to match the theme colors):

Chapter 5
[ 137 ]
Finally, under Link CSS Styles | Normal Styles | Underline, I selected No:
There are lots of other settings you can experiment with later, but we're done for 
now, so click Save and view the blog. You should see the tag cloud in the right-hand 
sidebar. Notice that the most-used tags appear larger, in the #3D4245 color; there is 
a sliding scale of font sizes down to the least used tags, which are colored #B1B5B8. 
Also notice that we have removed the default underlining for hyperlinks. Clicking 
on one of the tags will show a list of all the posts that have been tagged with it. 

Content is King
[ 138 ]
You will see that there is a tutorial tag as well as a Tutorials 
category. This is because WPBizGuru knows that many 
of his readers visit the blog primarily to read his tutorials. 
This makes it as easy as possible to locate all his tutorials. 
Readers can either select the tag or the category. 
Finally, we will update the permalinks so that the relevant category appears in the 
URL for each post. Whether you decide to implement this on your own blog is up to 
you. It has advantages and drawbacks. The advantage is that your category structure 
is reinforced in your post URLs and the drawback is that the URLs are slightly longer.
Select Settings | Permalinks. Under Common settings, select the Custom Structure 
radio button, and enter /%category%/%year%/%monthnum%/%day%/%postname%/.
Click Save Changes. Your permalinks will now be structured as the following: 
http://blog.wpbizguru.com/tutorials/2011/05/08/ultimate-tag-cloud-
widget-tutorial.
Now we've dealt with categories and tags, we'll look at some of the static content you 
may wish to include in your blog.
The About page
Your About page will be one of the very irst points of contact with most new readers 
of your blog, so it's important to get it right. It's your chance to explain who you are 
and what you're doing with your blog. There are no hard and fast rules for writing 
the About page. A cursory visit to a random selection of blogs will reveal that there 
is no standard, as About pages come in all shapes and formats. However, there are a 
few similarities between most of them, and you would be well advised to include the 
following as a bare minimum.
About you
This is the place for your potted résumé. Keep it brief and to the point, outlining 
the skills and experience that make you qualiied to write your blog. Readers are 
more likely to trust what you write and come back for more if they know it's the 
words of someone 'in the know'. This might not necessarily include degrees and 
diplomas. Depending on your blog's subject matter and your own life experiences, 
you might not hold any relevant paper qualiications, but simply be a knowledgeable 
and committed amateur. As long as you can demonstrate that knowledge and 
commitment (both on your About page and in your posts), it should be enough to 
convince readers of your credentials.

Chapter 5
[ 139 ]
It's also fairly common to include a photograph of yourself. If you do, try to pick a 
good one or even spend some money on getting your portrait taken professionally. 
Sometimes bloggers use an alternative image to represent themselves; maybe 
something like a gaming avatar, a caricature, or a graphic portrait. 
If you have multiple authors on your blog, you should ensure that there is some 
information for all of them on your About page.
About your blog
You should also give some information as to what your blog is about. Of course, this 
would be apparent from reading a few of your posts, but for new readers who may 
be in a hurry, it's worth including something on your About page. Think of this as 
being like the cover blurb on the back of a book. In effect, you're trying to sell your 
blog in a few short paragraphs. Try to stay focused on the blog's aims and think 
about how to get them across in as concise a way as possible.
This would also be a good place to include any complimentary reviews or quotes 
from other experts in your ield, who have praised your blog. Maybe you could  
place a couple of these in block quotes on your About page.
Anything to declare
Your About page is also a good place to declare any interests you have that might be 
viewed by some readers as compromising the objectivity of your blog. There's nothing 
wrong with using your blog to relentlessly promote your products or services, as 
long as you don't present it in a way that might mislead readers into thinking it's an 
independent, non-biased recommendation. If you blog about any professional or 
business interests make sure that your readers are clear that you have a stake in them. 
The same is true if you regularly blog about potentially partisan subjects such as 
politics or religion. Make sure your readers know where you're coming from and never 
pose as an impartial commentator if you have a vested interest in your subject matter.
The WPBizGuru About page
Now, let's work through building the About page for WPBizGuru. Log in to the 
admin area of the WPBizGuru blog on your development server.
Select Pages | Add New. Give the page the title, About, and add some text (I've 
included the WPBizGuru about text in the about.txt ile in the code bundle for this 
chapter; if you want to use that, you may). Tidy up the formatting by inserting 
the bullets and making the headings Level 3 (see http://blog.wpbizguru.com/
about/). You can also upload an image, if you like.

Content is King
[ 140 ]
To place the two quotes inside block quotes, highlight the text that belongs in the 
block quote, and click the Blockquote button in the toolbar:
Enter a line break before the name of the quote speaker and make it bold:
Most bloggers don't allow comments on their About page. You 
can turn comments off by choosing to Quick Edit the page and 
unchecking the box.
Other static content
Besides the About page there may be other static content that you should add to your 
blog. If you have another website as well as your blog, ask yourself whether you 
could bring that content into WordPress, so that all your web content is together in 
one place.

Chapter 5
[ 141 ]
There are many other static pages that you may wish to add. For example, designers, 
photographers, and artists often have a portfolio page to display their work. Or 
you may wish to set up a page to showcase a handful of your bestselling products. 
If you've written a book you could add a book page with some blurb and a link to 
Amazon. As you know, WordPress is more than capable of handling static content 
alongside your dynamic blog posts.
Backing up
Now you've put so much time and effort into creating great content, you need to 
make sure it's protected. To ensure your content is safe, you must back up your blog 
on a regular basis.
The frequency of your backups will depend on how often you post to your blog, 
but as a general rule of thumb it's a good idea to back up at least once a week. You 
never know when something might go wrong and when it does, it's usually beyond 
your control.
When considering your backup routine, remember there are two groups of data that 
make up your blog: the site iles and the database. Both of these need to be backed 
up, but it may be that the site iles don't need to be backed up as frequently as the 
database. The site iles are basically everything from your original WordPress core 
installation. Much of this you won't have changed, so as long as you keep a copy of 
your version of WordPress somewhere on your PC, you should be able to use that as 
your backup site (just remember to back up your PC regularly, too!).
For most WordPress users, the only site iles that change on a regular basis are the 
theme, plugins, and uploads, all of which are contained in the wp-content directory. 
The only ile outside of this directory that you need to back up is wp-config.php. 
The wp-config.php ile is unlikely to change after your blog has been installed, so 
it is probably only necessary to back up this ile once, shortly after you irst install 
your blog. So, regarding your site iles, all you need to back up regularly is the  
wp-content directory.
Backing up wp-content
Your web host will probably back up all the iles on its servers on a daily basis. 
But you shouldn't rely on them. It's always quicker and easier to access your own 
backups than having to ask your web host for them. The safest way of backing up 
your site iles is to use your FTP program to download the wp-content directory 
to a safe location on your computer. 

Content is King
[ 142 ]
The following screenshot shows the backup process for the WPBizGuru wp-content 
iles using CuteFTP:
Backing up the database using phpMyAdmin
While it's important to back up your site iles, you'll only need that backup if you 
suffer a complete loss of data on your server. Thankfully, a complete data loss is 
fairly rare. If you should experience a data loss, it's far more common that it will 
involve the MySQL database that drives your blog. Remember, the database contains 
all the posts, pages, comments, and links from your blog.
Probably the easiest way of backing up your database is to use phpMyAdmin, so 
we'll run through this process here. This example uses version 3.3.9 of phpMyAdmin 
(other versions may vary).
1. Connect to phpMyAdmin on your server (if you're not sure how to do this, 
your web host will be able to give you instructions).
2. Select the database for your WordPress installation from the list on the  
left-hand side of the main phpMyAdmin page.
3. You will now see a page that lists all the tables in your WordPress installation.

Chapter 5
[ 143 ]
4. Click on the Export tab at the top of this page.
5. On the next screen, select all the WordPress tables in the database. If 
WordPress is the only application using this database, you can just click 
Select All. If WordPress is sharing the database with other applications, you 
will need to go through the list and just select the WordPress tables. These 
will be the tables beginning with wp_ (or whatever table preixes you chose 
when you installed WordPress). 
6. Ensure the SQL radio button (below the table list) is selected.

Content is King
[ 144 ]
7. In the Options section, select the following:
8. Choose to save the iles as "gzipped":
9. Click the Go button and choose to save the compressed ile to disk. Save it 
using the default ilename given by phpMyAdmin. The download and save 
procedure will vary depending on which browser you are using but it's the 
same process as downloading any ile from a web page.
You now have a backed up copy of your database stored on your local computer.

Chapter 5
[ 145 ]
Restoring the database from a backup ile
The circumstances that might surround a real-life data loss are many and varied. 
However, there are a couple of scenarios that are most common. First, the entire 
database is lost. In this case, when you log in to phpMyAdmin, your WordPress 
database will no longer appear in the list of databases. Second, one or more of the 
tables in your WordPress database has been lost or corrupted. In this case, the 
database will still appear in the database list within phpMyAdmin.
If you suspect the second scenario is the reason for your trouble and you cannot 
repair the tables or even identify which table is lost or corrupted, it's probably a good 
idea to remove the entire database and start again using your backup ile. To remove 
the database, select it from the list in phpMyAdmin and then click the Drop tab.
At this point, whichever data loss scenario may have occurred, we're in the same 
situation. Your WordPress database no longer exists. The good news is you have a 
copy of all these tables.
The irst step to restoring those tables is to create a new database to hold them. From 
the phpMyAdmin home page, create a new database, with exactly the same name as 
your old one.
Once you've clicked Create, you'll be taken to your new database's phpMyAdmin 
home page. Click on the Import tab.

Content is King
[ 146 ]
On the import page, click the Browse button and locate your database backup ile 
on your computer. Leave all the other settings as they are and click the Go button at 
the bottom of the page. Depending on the size of your backup ile, it may take a few 
minutes to upload. You should then see a success message.
You have now restored your database as it was when you made the backup ile, and 
your blog should be working again.
As you can see the process of backing up your WordPress database is fairly 
straightforward. However, to ensure you don't leave anything to chance, you might 
want to run through the procedure using the WPBizGuru blog on your local test server 
so you'll be completely comfortable, should the worst happen to your live blog.
Back-up plugins
As well as using phpMyAdmin to back up your blog, you could 
try a plugin that automates the process for you. There are several 
back-up plugins available; try searching at http://wordpress.
org/extend/plugins. If you have a lot of content on your 
blog, phpMyAdmin may timeout while exporting your database 
(although this is very rare), in which case, a plugin may handle the 
export better. However, you should note that most back-up plugins 
have their own limitations and technical issues, so you should also 
know how to back up using phpMyAdmin.
Summary
In this chapter, we've looked at all kinds of written content. We began with some 
general tips for writing your blog posts. We then looked at how to organize your 
content in a logical and usable way using categories and tags. We went through 
the process of setting up the categories and tags for WPBizGuru. We considered 
the importance of having a good About page. Finally, we saw how to protect your 
content by performing regular backups.
In the next chapter, we will look at the related subject of search engine optimization. 
You will see how content plays an important part in making your blog more visible 
to the search engines.

Search Engine Optimization
Having put so much time and effort into making your blog look pretty and creating 
fabulous content, you would want people to ind it. The most common way for this 
to happen is via search engines. For many people, a typical web browsing session 
begins with a visit to their favorite search engine, so you want to be sure your blog 
appears high up in the rankings. Unfortunately, having a great-looking blog with 
lots of interesting posts isn't enough. To get a good place in the rankings takes time, 
perseverance, and no small amount of knowledge.
The good news is that search engines love blogs. This fact, coupled with the 
techniques covered in this chapter, will go a long way to making your blog as 
indable as possible. Search engine optimization (SEO) is the art and science of 
getting your blog noticed by the search engines and ranked as high as possible.  
This chapter will cover the following:
• 
The principles of SEO and how search engines work
• 
How to choose and use your keywords
• 
The best permalink structures for SEO
• 
How to optimize your Title Tags and Meta Descriptions
• 
The importance of sitemaps; how to generate them and submit them
• 
The importance of inbound links and some ways of acquiring them
• 
A look at some of the most useful SEO tools

Search Engine Optimization
[ 148 ]
The principles of SEO
SEO is a huge subject. There are thousands of professionals all over the world 
who earn their living by providing SEO services to website owners. The good SEO 
pros spend huge amounts of time and resources learning the skills of effective 
optimization. This goes to show that you could easily spend your entire life boning 
up on SEO—there's so much to learn. Obviously, you won't have anything like this 
amount of time to spend on your own SEO education. However, you can still do a 
lot to improve your blog's performance with the major search engines. The option to 
bring in a professional to really rocket through the rankings exists if your marketing 
budget allows. If you do decide to hire a professional, make sure you choose a 
reputable one who does not use unscrupulous tactics, which could harm you more 
than help you.
The good news is that WordPress has been made with SEO in mind. The software 
comes with many built-in SEO features. For example, you don't need to worry too 
much about the validity of the HTML on your blog. The WordPress developers have 
ensured their code is valid. This is a big help as search engines will rank sites with 
valid code higher than those that have been poorly put together. There is plenty of 
other stuff going on behind the scenes in your WordPress installation that will aid 
your search engine indability—WordPress developers have been very thoughtful. 
We'll be considering the aspects of SEO that are your responsibility. But irst, a quick 
'101' on how search engines work.
How search engines ind stuff
Search engines use special programs called robots that automatically crawl the Web 
and send back information about the web pages to the search engines' servers. They 
navigate the Web by following all the links they ind. This is how a search engine 
collects the data for its index. The index is a huge database of entries cross-referenced 
between keywords and relevant website pages. The search engines use special 
algorithms to determine the rank of the web pages held in their index. When a web 
user enters a search query, the engine returns a list of results. The order of the search 
results depends on the rank of the pages, as determined by the algorithm.
These algorithms are closely guarded secrets and the search engine companies are 
constantly updating them. The aim of the updates is to improve the relevancy of the 
search results. Because of the secrecy of the algorithms and the constant changes, 
it is very dificult for website owners to igure out the exact criteria used to rank 
pages. This prevents website owners from unfairly inluencing the search rankings. 
However, by subscribing to the blogs or feeds of the major search engines, and using 
tools such as Google's Webmaster Tools (more on this later), you can keep abreast of 
major changes.

Chapter 6
[ 149 ]
SEO professionals spend their lives trying to second-guess the search algorithms, but 
the search engine companies usually remain one step ahead. It's a game of cat and 
mouse, with the odds strongly skewed in favor of the search engines—they make  
the rules and can change them whenever they want.
Despite the ever-changing algorithms, there are certain principles of SEO that stay 
constant. These are what we will look at in this chapter.
For the purposes of this chapter, we will be concentrating on 
techniques for the traditional search engines such as Google, 
Bing, Yahoo, and Ask. We will look at some of the blog-speciic 
search engines, such as Technorati, in the next chapter.
Keywords
Keywords are the search terms that people type into a search engine when they are 
looking for something on the Web. They can be single words or several words that 
make up a phrase. It's essential to know the keywords being used by people who 
are looking for the type of content on your blog. You then need to ensure that you're 
using those keywords correctly. Let's look at a few strategies for inding and using 
keywords effectively.
Choosing your keywords
You should spend some time building up a list of your blog's keywords. The irst 
step is to be clear in your mind about what your blog's content is about. What are the 
main themes you are writing about? If you worked through the planning exercises in 
Chapter 2, Introducing our Case Study—WPBizGuru, you should already have a fairly 
good idea of this.
Once you are clear about the main theme(s) of your blog, try a quick brainstorming 
exercise. You can do this alone or enlist the help of colleagues and friends. Put 
yourself in the shoes of someone looking for the kind of information you publish on 
your blog. What words or phrases are they likely to type into a search engine? We 
could run this exercise for WPBizGuru.com. People looking for the kind of content 
on WPBizGuru, may use the following keywords:
• 
WordPress expert
• 
WordPress tutorials
• 
WordPress advice
• 
WordPress tips

Search Engine Optimization
[ 150 ]
• 
Learn WordPress
• 
WordPress consultant
• 
WordPress help
• 
Install WordPress
• 
WordPress training
• 
Using WordPress
• 
WordPress book
• 
WordPress how to
OK, that's just a small handful of the more obvious keywords that took me about 
60 seconds to come up with. If I spent longer, I'm sure I could come up with a list 
of 50 or more words and phrases. The more people you enlist into your keyword 
brainstorming, the more you are likely to come up with.
Once you have a fairly good list, you can use keyword software to help you ind 
even more. There are literally hundreds of keyword tools out there. Some are free, 
some are paid for, and they have a range of features. You can start with some of the 
tools provided by the search engines themselves. For example, Google provides a 
keyword selector tool for its advertising (AdWords) customers, but you can all use it 
to research your keywords for SEO. Go to https://adwords.google.com/select/
KeywordToolExternal and enter a keyword or phrase into the search box.

Chapter 6
[ 151 ]
Enter the security code and click Search and you will be presented with a list of 
related keywords:
OK, so it's a pretty long list; not all of the keywords will be relevant to your blog. 
The preceding screenshot shows just the irst few suggestions for one keyword, 
wordpress tips (the whole list runs into dozens). So you can see that if you were 
to use this tool for all the keywords in your original brainstorming list, you could 
easily end up with a very long list. This might seem like a good idea, but when 
we discuss using your keywords, shortly, you'll see that you don't actually want 
too many. When you're working on your list, try to be selective and keep the list 
manageable. Use your judgment to pick the important keywords and also look at the 
Global Monthly Searches and Local Monthly Searches columns in the Google list. 
These tell you how often each keyword is actually being used by people searching 
in Google worldwide (Global) and in your own country (Local). Focus on the most 
popular ones.
There's no point in my giving you a recommended number of keywords for your list, 
as this will depend on the type of content in your blog. If your blog covers a fairly 
narrow subject area, you won't need as many keywords as you would if it covered 
a broader subject, or even a range of subjects. Once you've read the next section on 
using keywords, you'll also have a better idea of how many you need.

Search Engine Optimization
[ 152 ]
Using your keywords
Once you've drawn up your list of keywords you need to make sure you're using 
them correctly. This basically boils down to the number of times you place keywords 
in each post. This is known as keyword density. As with many other aspects of SEO 
they are no deinitive rules. You will see lots of varied advice from different web 
experts. The fact of the matter is, no one can be certain about the optimum keyword 
density, because the search algorithms are kept secret. Many SEO experts have 
used trial and error in an attempt to gauge the best keyword density. Some have 
arrived at what are probably fairly arbitrary igures. It would be pointless for me to 
recommend a speciic keyword density. Instead, here are a few general tips for using 
your keywords:
1. Be selective with your keywords. You'll never be able to include your 
entire keyword list in each and every post you publish. Try to focus on two 
or three keywords or keyword phrases, which seem most relevant for each 
post you write.
2. Whenever possible, try to include at least one keyword in the post title.
3. Try to repeat a couple of the most relevant keywords twice in the irst two 
paragraphs of the post. From then on, aim at using a keyword at least once  
in every paragraph.
5. Keywords aren't just for your posts. Try to use a selection of your most 
relevant keywords in your About pages and any other static pages in your 
blog. You should also use keywords in your tags and categories.
6. If you can, use keywords in your image Alt Tags. The Alt Tag is the title of 
your image. Search engines index these Alt Tags; this gives you another way 
to provide them with more keyword-rich content. The following screenshot 
shows an example of keywords in an Alt Tag on the WPBizGuru blog:

Chapter 6
[ 153 ]
Keyword stufing
When writing content for your blog, be aware of keyword stufing. 
Always write for humans irst and search engines second. If your 
content reads clumsily, because you have tried to shoe-horn in too 
many keywords, you're putting the search engines before your human 
readers and that's a bad thing. You need to use your judgment to 
avoid keyword stufing and to keep your writing natural.
Permalinks
We looked at permalinks briely in the last chapter with regards to structuring 
your URLs to relect your blog's categories. Permalinks are also very important for 
SEO. The default permalink structure in WordPress is http://blog.wpbizguru.
com/?p=123. This format isn't very search engine friendly. It's far better to have the 
post title appear in the permalink URL. Again, this is another way of getting more of 
your keywords into the search engine's index. 

Search Engine Optimization
[ 154 ]
In Chapter 5, Content is King, we discussed changing the permalink structure 
to something like http://blog.wpbizguru.com/tutorials/2011/05/29/a-
tutorial-on-backing-up-wordPress/. This is better as it includes the post title. 
However, the optimal permalink structure, in terms of SEO, has the post title as close 
to your blog's domain name as possible, for example, http://blog.wpbizguru.
com/a-tutorial-on-backing-up-wordPress/.
This structure is the very best for SEO, but it can sometimes cause problems when 
you try to access some of the WordPress admin pages. If you're really keen on 
SEO, and are happy to work around any problems accessing admin pages, then go 
with this structure. However, I would prefer to use a second-best SEO structure, 
which includes the post's category: http://blog.wpbizguru.com/tutorials/a-
tutorial-on-backing-up-wordPress/. This is still a good permalink structure for 
SEO and avoids any possible pitfalls in accessing your admin pages. This structure 
will be even more beneicial if your categories are also keywords.
When you change your permalink structure, WordPress will automatically redirect 
all the old URLs to the new ones. This is important because if you have a well-
established blog, the search engines will already have indexed your pages using 
your old permalink URLs. These URLs will remain in the search engine's index for 
quite some time, so until the index is updated, all your links on search engine results 
pages will be broken. This will also be true for any of your links that appear on other 
websites or as browser bookmarks.
WordPress's automatic redirection will work for most common server conigurations, 
but some web hosting companies may have server settings that prevent WordPress 
from doing the job automatically. When you change your permalinks, you should 
check that the old ones are redirecting properly (simply type one of your old 
permalinks into your browser address bar). If you are getting 404 errors from your 
old permalinks, something is wrong. In these cases I recommend you install a plugin 
to take control of the redirects—there are several available, for example, Redirection 
(http://wordpress.org/extend/plugins/redirection/).
To switch to the new SEO-friendly permalinks on your own blog and the 
WPBizGuru case study, select Settings | Permalinks and enter the new permalink 
structure (/%category%/%postname%/) in the Custom structure box, then click 
Save Changes.

Chapter 6
[ 155 ]
Title tags
Many experts claim that <Title> tags are one of the most important aspects of SEO. 
The <Title> tag is displayed in the browser title bar, but it is also one of the irst 
things a search engine sees when it indexes your blog. The <Title> tag on your 
home page is particularly important for SEO.
It's worth spending some time considering your <Title> tags and ensuring they 
are as search engine friendly as possible (while remaining readable and useful to 
humans). Here are a few guidelines to bear in mind about <Title> tags:
1. Ensure they include keywords that are relevant to the post.
2. Ensure the keyword or keyword phrase is as close to the start of the tag  
as possible.
3. Try to keep your home page <Title> tag at around 50-60 characters 
in length.

Search Engine Optimization
[ 156 ]
4. Capitalize the irst letter in each word of the tag.
5. Don't use the keyword phrase more than once in your title.
6. Include the blog title in the <Title> tag on each page.
As you may have noticed, the default <Title> tags in WordPress are not perfect for 
SEO—the preceding screenshot shows that the default WPBizGuru title is not using 
all the guidelines I just outlined. However, there is an excellent plugin we can use 
to customize our titles (so they are working as hard as possible for SEO). The plugin 
is All in One SEO Pack (http://wordpress.org/extend/plugins/all-in-one-
seo-pack/). We'll work through coniguring the plugin for our WPBizGuru case 
study. Login to your case study blog then install and activate the plugin in the  
usual way.
We'll begin by optimizing the home page title. As you can see, by default, WordPress 
uses the blog title followed by the blog description in the home page <Title> tag. 
The blog title and description are great for our blog's branding. WordPress for Business 
Bloggers is a good tagline for the blog and it looks nice in the blog header. You may 
have a company slogan or tagline that you want to keep in your header, which is 
great for your branding but not necessarily so great for SEO. We can ix this using 
our new plugin.
Under Settings, select All in One SEO. Here, we can make the necessary changes 
to our page titles. First, we need to come up with a good home page title using the 
guidelines I outlined earlier. How about:
WordPress Advice, Tips And Tutorials | WPBizGuru.com
This seems to follow our guidelines: It's the right length (52 characters); each word 
begins with a capital letter; the keywords are close to the start. So, we can insert 
this in the Home Title box. I've also added a brief site description (keep it short; 
I recommend no more than two lines as they appear in the box) and some of my 
main generic keywords (again, be brief here, no more than 10 of your most popular 
keywords). Select Enabled for Plugin Status and click the Update Options button 
when you're done.

Chapter 6
[ 157 ]
A note about Meta Tags
The Home Description and Home Keywords will be added to your 
blog's Meta Tags. These appear within the <header></header> tags 
on the home page of your blog (view the source of the page in your 
browser and you will see them). They are not visible on the page but they 
can be read by the search engines. Ten years ago, these were extremely 
important to search engines and getting your Meta Tags right was the 
key to a good search engine ranking. Nowadays, it's widely accepted 
that search engines place very little importance on Meta Tags for ranking 
purposes. However, Google does use the Meta Description as the snippet 
in the search results pages, which gives you the opportunity to provide a 
relevant and concise description of your blog to potential visitors as they 
view the search results. A good description may encourage people to click 
on your blog rather than another website.
We now have a search engine friendly home page title…
…while keeping the blog title and blog tagline in our header, for branding purposes:

Search Engine Optimization
[ 158 ]
As for the other pages on your blog, the default settings for All In One SEO Pack do 
a pretty good job of making them search engine friendly. For example, you should 
already be using keywords in your post title, so it's ine to carry on using post titles 
for the <Title> tags, as per the default settings. It may not always be possible to 
keep within the 50-60 characters length with your post titles, but as long as you are 
using your keywords wisely, it should be ine. One thing to remember is to use a 
capital letter at the start of each word in your post title:
So, for the remaining page titles, you could stick with the defaults. However, 
I decided to make a couple of small changes. The irst is to replace %blog_ti-
tle% 
with WPBizGuru.com. This is more for branding than SEO; it means your 
blog's  
web address (including the .com) appears in the clickable link in the search 
engine results pages.
The second change is to update the Page Title Format so that it's now WordPress 
Advice, Tips And Tutorials | %page_title% | WPBizGuru.com (once again, 
remember to click the Update Options button):

Chapter 6
[ 159 ]
So, the title for our About page now looks like this (notice that it contains the 
keywords from the home page title, instead of just saying About):
So, with the help of the All in One SEO Pack plugin, you now have search engine 
friendly titles for all the pages in your blog. We'll now look at another important 
element of SEO, which is Sitemaps.
Sitemaps
A sitemap is an overview of all the posts and pages in your blog laid out on a single 
page. Not only is it great for improving your blog's usability, it is also good for SEO. 
When the search engine robots are crawling through your site they will use the 
sitemap to ind all your pages. By providing a sitemap you are making it easier for 
them to crawl your blog because there will always be a link pointing to each of your 
posts. Again, we will use a third-party plugin to create a sitemap for WPBizGuru.
The plugin is called Simple Sitemap (http://wordpress.org/extend/plugins/
simple-sitemap/). Go ahead and install it in the usual way in your case study blog, 
then activate it.
Now create a new page (Pages | Add New). Give it the title Sitemap. Click on the 
HTML tab and add [simple-sitemap]. Publish the page.

Search Engine Optimization
[ 160 ]
Now view the site. The Sitemap page will have been added to the menu and it 
should look like this:
Adding a Google Sitemap
A Google Sitemap is a sitemap in a special XML format that helps Google to crawl 
your site more eficiently. It is also recognized by other search engines such as 
Yahoo, Bing, and Ask.
Again, there's a great plugin that we can use. It's called Google XML Sitemaps by 
Arne Brachhold (http://wordpress.org/extend/plugins/google-sitemap-
generator/).

Chapter 6
[ 161 ]
Once you've installed and activated it, select XML-Sitemap under Settings in 
your admin area. At the top of the page, click the link to generate the sitemap 
for the irst time (you don't need to change any of the settings). You should see a 
success message. You can view the sitemap you just created at http://localhost/
wordpress/sitemap.xml.
Inbound links
Having plenty of good quality inbound links to your blog will improve your ranking 
in the search engines. Google started life as a student project to rank the importance 
of websites based on the number of incoming links; link popularity is still at the heart 
of Google's ranking process.
But for many people, link building seems like a daunting task. How do you get other 
people to link to you? It's actually not as dificult as it irst seems—once you get into 
it, you'll see there are plenty of strategies to use. The point is to stick at it and treat 
link building as an integral part of your blogging routine.

Search Engine Optimization
[ 162 ]
You can check how many inbound links Google has 
found for your blog by using the link: command. Enter 
link:http://www.packtpub.com into the Google search 
box to see all the inbound links for the Packt website. 
You can do the same for your blog.
Many of the techniques for building links, such as using social bookmarking, social 
networking, and getting listed in the blog search engines, will be covered in the 
next chapter. There will be some more discussed in Chapter 8, Connecting with the 
Blogosphere. But there is a more organic technique that we'll discuss here.
It's often referred to by SEO pros as link baiting. It's basically creating content that 
other bloggers and webmasters just can't resist linking to. Obviously, you should 
always be trying to create interesting and exciting content, but every now and then 
it pays to come up with a killer post that is intended purely to attract links. There are 
several methods to achieve this. Here are a few suggestions to get you thinking:
1. Write something controversial that other people will just have to disagree 
with. Be careful not to upset anyone and don't be offensive, but come up with 
something that goes against the grain and makes your opinion on an issue 
stand out.

Chapter 6
[ 163 ]
2. Disagree with a renowned expert. A post title such as, Seth Godin Is Plain 
Wrong About XYZ, backed up with a reasoned argument, could attract plenty 
of attention and encourage backlinks to the post.
3. Provide a really useful resource. This could be something like a Top 10 list or 
a how-to guide.
4. Run a contest, competition, or some other event that is likely to  
attract attention.
5. Give away a useful freebie. For example, a PDF e-book, a piece of software 
(that you own the rights to), or a free sample of one of your products.
6. Create and give away an infographic. Infographics have become popular 
over the last few years. As their name suggests, they present some kind  
of statistical data or other factual information in a fun, eye-catching way.  
For an example of great infographic about SEO take a look at  
http://searchengineland.com/seotable.
These are the kind of posts that are likely to attract attention and links back to your 
blog. Try brainstorming a few ideas along these lines and you'll be surprised how 
many you come up with.
As well as link baiting you can also simply ask other people to link to you. This is 
a fairly straightforward approach, but you need to be careful not to come across 
as a spammer. It may be worth restricting this to people you know or people who 
regularly leave comments on your blog. Some people may be annoyed about 
receiving an e-mail out of the blue requesting a backlink, so exercise some discretion 
here. Deinitely don't send out a broadcast e-mail to lots of addresses requesting links. 
Warning
Don't be tempted to buy inbound links. There are many 
unscrupulous dealers on the Web who will sell you quantities 
of inbound links. Google and the other search engines regard 
this practice as cheating and severely frown upon anyone 
involved. If you buy links, you stand a very good chance of being 
banned from the search engines.

Search Engine Optimization
[ 164 ]
Robots.txt optimization
A robots.txt ile is read by search engine robots when they crawl your blog. You 
can use it to tell them which pages should be indexed. There are a couple of reasons 
why using a robots.txt ile is good for SEO. First, Google and other search engines 
recommend you use one and it's generally a good idea to do what they say. Second, 
it can help you to cut down on duplicated content.
Search engines do not like duplicated content (that is, the same content appearing 
at two different URLs within a website) because they suspect it might be spam. One 
minor drawback with WordPress is that it can create a lot of duplicate content. For 
example, http://blog.wpbizguru.com/category/tutorials points to exactly the 
same content as http://blog.wpbizguru.com/tutorials. Also, the same content 
is repeated on different pages. For example, most of the posts listed at http://blog.
wpbizguru.com/category/tutorials are also listed on http://blog.wpbizguru.
com/tag/tutorial. We can tell the search engines to ignore any duplicate content by 
giving instructions in the robots.txt ile. Here is the robots.txt ile for WPBizGuru:
Sitemap: http://blog.wpbizguru.com/sitemap.xml
User-agent: *
Disallow: /cgi-bin
Disallow: /wp-admin
Disallow: /wp-includes
Disallow: /wp-content/plugins
Disallow: /wp-content/cache
Disallow: /wp-content/themes
Disallow: /trackback
Disallow: /feed
Disallow: /comments
Disallow: /category/*
Allow: /wp-content/uploads/
The irst line is a big signpost to your Google Sitemap. User-agent: * means that the 
ile is intended for all robots to read. It is possible to target the different search engine 
robots with speciic instructions, for example, User-agent: Googlebot would just 
apply to the Google robot; however, you don't need to do this with your blog.
The lines that begin with Disallow: tell the robots not to visit those iles and folders. 
This is how you tell them to ignore certain parts of your site. For example, we don't 
need any of the content in the wp- directories to be indexed because it's mainly just 
PHP code. The one exception is /wp-content/uploads/, so we have used Allow: /
wp-content/uploads/ to tell the robots they should visit that directory because there 
may be images in there that should be indexed. Disallow: /category/* should cure 
the duplicate content problem we outlined previously.

Chapter 6
[ 165 ]
You can use a simple text editor (for example, Notepad) to create your robots.txt 
ile (you can go to http://blog.wpbizguru.com/robots.txt and use that ile as a 
starting point). Then it's simply a matter of using your FTP client to upload it to the 
root directory of your blog.
Using excerpts on the home page
Another way to cut down on duplicated content is to display just excerpts of the 
posts on your home page instead of showing them in full. Obviously, each post is 
displayed in full on its own single post page, so having them in full on the home 
page may be regarded as duplicate content by the search engines. In fact, it's not 
just the home page, as the posts slip down to pages 2, 3, 4, and so on; they are still 
displayed in full to the search engine spiders.
Using excerpts is not only a great SEO strategy; it is also becoming popular amongst 
bloggers in its own right. Some people prefer it as it makes the home page more 
concise and there is less vertical scrolling required to get an overview of all the 
posts. It makes it easier for readers to scan the posts and pick the ones they are really 
interested in. Also, forcing readers to click through to the single post page means 
they see the comments in full for each post and so may be more inclined to make a 
contribution to the discussion.
It should still be OK to display the most recent post in full as it can take up to a week 
for a new post to be indexed by the search engines. By then, the post will have moved 
down the list and become excerpted, thus removing the risk of duplicate content.
I'm noticing home page excerpts more and more. I did a very quick (and un-scientiic) 
survey of the current top-10 blogs on technorati.com and seven of them used 
excerpts on their home page (these are big names like Gizmodo, Gawker, TechCrunch, 
and so on).
However, there will always be some traditionalists who prefer to see the full posts 
on the home page. You need to balance the SEO and usability beneits against the 
possibility of alienating some of your readers. Personally, I think the beneits of using 
excerpts outweigh any drawbacks, so we'll go ahead and set them up on WPBizGuru.
You could go through and edit each post adding a <!--more--> tag where 
appropriate. However, there is a plugin we can use that will do this automatically. 
It's called Excerpt Editor (http://wordpress.org/extend/plugins/excerpt-
editor/). Install, and activate it in the usual way on your local development server.

Search Engine Optimization
[ 166 ]
Select the plugin (Tools | Excerpt Editor). First, select Auto-Generate from the menu 
and enter the following settings:
Click Save Auto-Generate Options. Now select Replace Posts from the menu and 
enter the following settings:

Chapter 6
[ 167 ]
Click Save the Replace Posts options and view your home page. You will see that 
the latest post is shown in full but all the others have been excerpted and now have 
a Continue reading link. The same thing has been applied on all the Archive pages 
(Category, Author, Day, Month, and Year).
The default settings in the plugin mean that the irst 70 words are used in the 
excerpts. On the Auto-Generate page of the plugin, you can change the number of 
words included in the excerpts. Or, if you don't like having the post cut-off in the 
middle of a sentence, you can use the Editor to select each post and then manually 
set the content you want to appear in the excerpt.
Having set the Auto-Generate options, every new post you publish will be excerpted 
accordingly. Simply deactivate the plugin if you ever want to revert to full posts.
Search engine submissions
We've now highlighted some of the most important SEO strategies. Once you've 
spent some time implementing these on your blog, it's time to submit it to the  
search engines.
The big four
If your blog has been around for some time, then most likely it has already been 
crawled and indexed by the big four search engines (Google, Yahoo!, Bing, and Ask). 
You can check if they already have it indexed by searching for your home page URL 
in each of the big four. If you get results in return, they already have it and there is 
no need to submit it.

Search Engine Optimization
[ 168 ]
If there are no results returned for your URL, it means the search engines have not 
found it yet. In which case, you can submit it to Google, Yahoo, and Bing (Ask does 
not have a facility for submitting your URL). If your blog is new, make sure there is 
a fair amount of content to be indexed—I suggest you wait until you have at least 
ten posts before submitting. At the time of writing, the submission pages for Google, 
Yahoo, and Bing are as follows (the URLs for these pages have changed in the past, 
so you may have to search for them):
• 
Google: http://www.google.com/addurl/
• 
Yahoo: https://siteexplorer.search.yahoo.com/submit
• 
Bing: http://www.bing.com/webmaster/SubmitSitePage.aspx
For Google and Bing, it's simply a case of entering your home page URL. At Yahoo 
you can also add the URL for your main RSS feed. Yahoo also offers a range of  
paid-for submission services that guarantee quicker indexing, which you might  
like to consider.
DMOZ.org
DMOZ, or the Open Directory Project, is the most important directory on the Web. 
Its content is licensed in a similar fashion to open source software, so it is widely 
syndicated. In fact, almost all of the major search engines use its directory in some way 
or another. Many experts argue that DMOZ is no longer very important, but there is 
still evidence that having your site accepted by DMOZ can have a positive impact on 
your search engine rankings. Therefore, I would recommend that you submit your blog 
to DMOZ. Go to http://www.dmoz.org/add.html for full details about submitting.
Minor search engines and directories
Along with the big four search engines and DMOZ, there are thousands of other 
minor search engines and directories out there. Some of these are general, while 
others operate within a speciic niche. For an idea of the sheer quantity take a look  
at the list at http://www.searchengineguide.com/searchengines.html.
Not all of these are worth bothering with as they don't attract very much trafic. 
However, it's worth doing some research into the ones that serve your particular 
niche. By looking around a bit, you will identify those that appear to be well used 
and popular. Ways of spotting decent directories are to look at the number of 
websites they have listed and check out their ranking at Alexa.com (http://www.
alexa.com/site/ds/top_500). If they have plenty of websites listed and a decent 
Alexa ranking, they are probably worth submitting your URL to. Remember, the 
more good-quality inbound links you can get, the better your ranking will be on 
Google and the other majors.

Chapter 6
[ 169 ]
If you intend to submit to the smaller search engines and directories, it will be more 
productive if you log what you're doing. Set aside some time each month to research 
and submit to the minor search engines. Use a spreadsheet to log which ones you are 
submitting to and follow up by seeing how much trafic (if any) you are receiving 
from them. You'll ind out how to monitor your trafic sources in Chapter 9, Analyzing 
Your Blog Stats.
SEO software and tools
There are many tools and applications that claim to help you optimize your site 
and/or submit it to the search engines. These vary greatly in their usefulness and 
value for money. If you decide you need some automated help with your SEO  
(and there's no denying, some of these tools can save hours) I recommend you 
research the market carefully before you part with any of your marketing budget. 
SEO products and services are big business and there are plenty of charlatans out 
there who have jumped on the bandwagon just to make a quick buck. Having  
said that, there are some excellent tools from reputable vendors. We will look at 
some of the better ones in the following pages (I also regularly review SEO tools  
on my blog at http://blog.paulthewlis.com/seo-tools).
Web CEO
This is one I strongly suggest you take a look at. Web CEO (http://www.
webceo.com) is probably the most complete tool of its kind, and it comes highly 
recommended by many online marketers and SEO pros. It can help you with  
several aspects of SEO, including:
• 
Keyword research
• 
Optimizing your content
• 
Submitting to the minor search engines and directories
• 
Building inbound links 

Search Engine Optimization
[ 170 ]
Although it's a paid-for product, there is a free version with plenty of useful features. 
I suggest you download it, if only to submit your blog to the dozens of minor search 
engines it supports. The free version allows you to automatically submit your URL to 
over 100 search engines. It's also very useful for doing keyword research (similar to 
the Google tool we discussed earlier in this chapter).
Google webmaster tools
This collection of tools is indispensable for SEO. It provides you with the information 
you need to ine-tune your blog to make it more Google-friendly. It gives you  
some insight into how Google views and ranks your pages, which is a great way  
of learning about SEO in more detail. Google Webmaster Tools is completely  
free to use.

Chapter 6
[ 171 ]
It's easy to get started. You just need to sign up for a Google account (if you don't 
already have one). Then go to http://www.google.com/webmasters/tools/, login, 
and submit your blog's URL. Before you can access any detailed information about 
your blog, you need to verify that you are the site owner. One of the veriication 
methods is to add a Meta Tag to your home page (you'll ind it under the Alternate 
methods tab on the Verify ownership page).
We can use our All in One SEO plugin to do this. In your WordPress admin area, go 
to the plugin page, and copy and paste the Meta Tag that Google gives you into the 
Additional Home Headers box, then click Update Options:

Search Engine Optimization
[ 172 ]
Now go back to Google Webmaster Tools and click the Verify button. If veriication 
is successful, you will be taken to the Dashboard:
Google Webmaster Tools is very intuitive with good help iles and documentation, 
so I won't go into detailed instructions here. Use the menu to see what tools are on 
offer, and read the recommendations Google gives you. For example, under Your 
site on the web you can see the top search queries in which your blog appears—this 
is very useful for your keyword research. You can also use the Links to your site 
option to see which websites are linking to you.
If your blog is new, some of the data may not be available yet. Keep checking over 
the coming days and weeks—the data will appear as Google re-indexes your blog. 
You can see in Crawl stats the last time Googlebot visited you.
The irst recommendation for WPBizGuru is to add a sitemap. Since we've already 
created a Google Sitemap, it's simply a matter of telling Google the URL:

Chapter 6
[ 173 ]
Firefox SEO extensions
There are several extensions for the Firefox browser that have been developed to 
help with SEO. My favorite is SEOQuake (https://addons.mozilla.org/en-
US/firefox/addon/seoquake-seo-extension/). Its main beneit is to help you 
evaluate your SEO efforts and track your blog's progress in the major search engines. 
At a glance you can see a variety of useful SEO parameters such as Google Page 
Rank, Alexa Ranking, Yahoo, and Google links data, Del.icio.us and Digg links, and 
more. Keeping track of this kind of data is really useful to determine how successful 
your SEO work has been.
The following is a screenshot from the Google results page showing SEOQuake data 
for http://www.packtpub.com:
Seeing results
SEO should always be seen as an ongoing process. If you've just applied the 
strategies from this chapter to your blog, don't expect to see big improvements 
in your search engine rankings overnight. The search engine bots crawl the Web 
relatively infrequently, so it will take time for your SEO work to have a visible 
impact. It will also take time to build links and tweak your keyword list until it is 
just right. SEO is not a one-off activity; it's something you should do on a regular 
basis. Adopt an organized approach and keep records of the SEO work you do and 
carefully monitor your progress through the rankings. If you put in the effort, you 
will see results over time.

Search Engine Optimization
[ 174 ]
Summary
In this chapter, we have examined some of the most important SEO strategies and 
how to apply them. We also looked at submitting your blog to the search engines, 
and introduced some tools and software to make life easier. If you've followed these 
guidelines, your blog should already be on its way up the search engine rankings.
Next, we'll look at a whole host of other promotion techniques to boost your blog's 
popularity and send your trafic igures even higher.

Supercharged Promotion
You can't rely solely on search engines to spread the word about your blog. In order 
to supercharge your promotion campaign, you need to get creative.
Promoting your blog and steadily growing your trafic volume is a long, hard job. In 
fact, it's never ending. A large part of your time should be spent on your promotional 
work. Indeed, you'll probably need to spend much more time on this than actually 
writing posts. The key to success is getting to know how the blogosphere works and 
learning about the tools, websites, and social networks that can help you along  
the way.
In this chapter, we will examine some of the options available to build up your 
promotional arsenal. It's by no means an exhaustive reference, but it should get you 
going. Hopefully, the tips and tricks here will get you thinking more creatively about 
your promotion work. This chapter includes:
• 
RSS syndication and WordPress feeds
• 
How FeedBurner can enhance your RSS feeds
• 
Using specialist blog indexes and search engines
• 
Promoting your blog via social networks, such as Facebook, Twitter,  
and LinkedIn
• 
Making the most of social bookmarking
Syndication
One of the most powerful promotional tools available to bloggers is RSS. It's a 
speciication that allows your visitors to subscribe to your content using feed-reading 
software and then receive your latest posts and comments without having to visit 
your blog. Your new content automatically appears in their feed reader.

Supercharged Promotion
[ 176 ]
RSS and blogging have always been intimately related. RSS has been available for 
many years, but no one really found a mass application for it until blogging arrived 
on the scene. The two are a perfect match. RSS is just what bloggers need to keep 
their readers updated with the latest content from their blogs. Pretty much all 
blogging software (including WordPress) has native support for RSS syndication.
Some may argue that the uptake of RSS by the Web suring masses has been 
a relatively slow burn. It's true that it's taken several years for RSS to become 
mainstream, and there are still many Web surfers who are yet to appreciate its 
beneits, but take-up remains steady. It will continue to grow as the world's most 
popular web browsers now ship with integrated feed readers, while more and more 
high proile websites (for example Yahoo!, Facebook, BBC, and so on) promote RSS 
to their users. The following screenshots show the built-in feed readers in Firefox 4 
(left) and Internet Explorer 9 (right).
WordPress feeds
There are several different formats of RSS feeds, such as RSS 0.91, RSS 1.0, RSS 2.0, 
and Atom. The differences between these are in the XML code that makes them 
work. WordPress supports all of these different formats, which means anyone can 
subscribe to your feed. 
WordPress has an excellent built-in feed generator, which makes your main posts 
feed auto-discoverable. So, virtually all RSS feed readers and the most popular web 
browsers will automatically detect your main feed just from your blog's URL. For 
example, Google Reader will ind the WPBizGuru feed just from the main URL:

Chapter 7
[ 177 ]
There are speciic URLs for accessing each of the different feed formats:
• 
http://blog.wpbizguru.com/wp-rss.php – RDF/RSS1.0 feed
• 
http://blog.wpbizguru.com/wp-rss2.php – RSS 2.0 feed
• 
http://blog.wpbizguru.com/wp-atom.php – Atom feed
However, because WPBizGuru is using custom permalinks, the URLs are 
much simpler:
• 
http://blog.wpbizguru.com/feed – The main posts feed
• 
http://blog.wpbizguru.com/comments/feed – The comments feed
• 
http://blog.wpbizguru.com/category/tutorials/feed – The Tutorials 
category feed (this uses the tutorials slug, but you can substitute it with the 
slug for any category)
• 
http://blog.wpbizguru.com/tag/tutorial/feed – The tutorial tag feed 
(again, you can substitute tutorial for any tag)
In fact, if you add /feed to the end of any URL on the blog, you will see the feed for 
that page.
Excerpts or full posts?
WordPress provides you with an option either to display an excerpt or the entire 
post in your RSS feed. There are advantages and disadvantages to both and, as with 
the debate in Chapter 6, Search Engine Optimization over full posts or excerpts on the 
home page, it's largely a matter of personal choice.
Full posts may be more useful for your subscribers as they won't have to leave their 
feed readers to see your content in full. It can be annoying having to click through 
from the feed reader in order to see the whole post. The downside for you is that it 
may lose trafic to your blog (if people are reading your posts in their feed readers, 
they won't be visiting your pages). This is really only a problem if you rely on 
adverts for revenue (more on this in Chapter 10, Monetizing your Blog). A decrease in 
trafic will probably mean less ad revenues. However, the small amount of revenue 
you lose may be a price worth paying. At the end of the day, the whole point of your 
blog is to have it read by as many people as possible. Whether they do that at your 
blog's URL or in their feed readers doesn't really matter.

Supercharged Promotion
[ 178 ]
I prefer to display full posts in the RSS feed because of the extra convenience it 
offers to subscribers. However, you can change the settings for this under Settings | 
Reading in the WordPress admin area. You can also change the number of posts to 
be shown in the feed.
FeedBurner
As we've just seen, WordPress does a pretty good job of handling RSS syndication. 
However, there's a third-party service that offers better functionality.
FeedBurner (http://feedburner.google.com) provides a great range of feed 
management tools, and since it was acquired by Google, it's completely free to  
use. It works particularly well with the FeedBurner FeedSmith Extended plugin 
(http://wordpress.org/extend/plugins/feedburner-setting/). FeedBurner 
gives the following advantages to your RSS feeds:
• 
The PingShot tool automatically updates (or pings) a wide range of search 
engines, indices, and aggregators as soon as it detects new content in  
your feed.
• 
There is a sophisticated e-mail subscription system which allows people to 
receive your RSS feed by e-mail. This system is great for people who are still 
slow to adopt RSS, or just prefer receiving their subscription by e-mail.
• 
You have the ability to add interactive links into your feed. For example, at 
the end of each post you can add links that allow users to e-mail the content 
direct to their friends or add it to social bookmarking sites such as Delicious. 
• 
FeedBurner automatically serves the correct format of your feed (RSS 1.0, 
Atom, RDF, or whatever) to the reader.
• 
There is a whole host of analytical tools so that you can tell how many  
people are subscribing to your feed (more on this in Chapter 9, Analyzing 
Your Blog Stats).
• 
The FeedBurner FeedSmith Extended plugin ensures that all the analytic 
and feed forwarding features offered by FeedBurner work in WordPress 
without you having to conigure them.

Chapter 7
[ 179 ]
There is an oficial FeedBurner plugin maintained by Google, 
called FeedSmith. However, I'm recommending the 
FeedBurner FeedSmith Extended plugin, which takes 
the oficial plugin and adds some useful functionality such 
as the ability to redirect category and tag feeds.
Setting up FeedBurner
We'll run through the process of setting up FeedBurner and take a look at some of its 
most useful features by applying it to the WPBizGuru blog. As FeedBurner requires 
a publicly accessible URL in order to work properly, we can't set it up for our local 
development server, but you can work through the following example on your own 
live blog.
Begin by installing and activating the FeedBurner FeedSmith Extended plugin in the 
usual way.
You need a Google account to use FeedBurner so if you don't already have one, you 
can create one at https://www.google.com/accounts/NewAccount. Now go to 
http://feedburner.google.com and log in using your Google account details. 
Enter the URL for your blog in the Burn a feed right this instant box and click Next:

Supercharged Promotion
[ 180 ]
Select the Posts feed for your blog (we'll do the Comments feed shortly) and click 
on Next.
On the next screen, you can change the Feed Title and Feed Address, but the 
defaults should be ine. Click Next.
On the next page, you should see a success message. Before we return to WordPress, 
we'll activate the FeedBurner Stats tools. At the bottom of the success page, click on 
Next. On the next page, check all the boxes and click on Next.

Chapter 7
[ 181 ]
The sign-up process is now complete and you will be taken to your FeedBurner 
dashboard page.
Now, return to the FeedBurner FeedSmith Extended plugin page in your WordPress 
admin area and enter your FeedBurner feed URL into the appropriate box (the URL 
will be something like http://feeds.feedburner.com/wpbizguru) and click Save:

Supercharged Promotion
[ 182 ]
Now, we'll set up our Comments feed. Back in FeedBurner, click on My Feeds and, 
once again, enter your blog's URL in the Burn a feed right this instant box and click 
Next. This time, on the next screen select the comments feed and click Next.
Work through the remaining steps as we did for the Posts feed.
Return to the FeedBurner FeedSmith Extended plugin and enter your FeedBurner 
comments feed URL:
Click on Save.

Chapter 7
[ 183 ]
On the plugin page, you will have noticed that you can also set up FeedBurner 
feeds for all your categories and tags. This isn't essential, but if you would like to 
do so, it's a similar process that we used for the main feed and the comments feed. 
In FeedBurner, go to My Feeds to set up a new feed and enter the full URL to the 
category feed, for example, http://blog.wpbizguru.com/category/tutorials/
feed/ (instead of just the URL for your blog home page). Go through the set-up 
process as before and enter the URL of the FeedBurner feed next to the relevant 
category on the plugin page. Click Save.
We have now set up our FeedBurner feeds and conigured the FeedBurner 
FeedSmith Extended plugin. Next we'll take a quick look at some of FeedBurner's 
most important features.
Using FeedBurner
First, you need to check that your new FeedBurner feed is working. Enter the 
WordPress URL for your blog's main feed, for example, http://blog.wpbizguru.
com/feed. The FeedBurner FeedSmith Extended plugin will work its magic and you 
should now be forwarded to your new FeedBurner feed:
If you're not forwarded to FeedBurner, you may need to regenerate your feed—simply 
choose any post to edit and click Update (you don't need to make any changes to the 
post). The feed will now be regenerated and the plugin will forward the feed URL  
to FeedBurner.

Supercharged Promotion
[ 184 ]
Now, let's take a look at the FeedBurner admin area. You probably still have it open 
in a browser window, but if not, you can log in at http://feedburner.google.com 
using your Google account.
You'll notice ive tabs near the top of the dashboard (Analyze, Optimize, Publicize, 
Monetize, and Troubleshootize), which enable you to access all of FeedBurner's 
features. You need to irst activate SmartFeed so that your feed has maximum 
compatibility with the widest range of feed readers and browsers. Click on the 
Optimize tab and then choose SmartFeed from the left-hand menu. It's then simply a 
matter of clicking the Activate button to set up this feature.
Another cool feature is FeedFlare. This allows you to add some interactive links to 
the bottom of each post in your feed. Click on FeedFlare in the left-hand menu to set 
it up. You're presented with a list of services to add to your feed and there are many 
more available by clicking the Browse the Catalog link.
I wouldn't go overboard by selecting too many as they will clutter up your feed 
(maybe choose three or four to begin with). Remember to click the Activate button 
at the bottom of the page once you have selected your services. For WPBizGuru, I've 
chosen Email This, Add to del.icio.us, Digg This!, and Share on Facebook.

Chapter 7
[ 185 ]
This is how they look in the feed:
You can take your time to examine most of the other features under the Optimize tab 
as they are mostly self-explanatory. The only other one I will lag up here is the  
Title/Description Burner, which enables you to turn your feed's title and description 
into something more interesting, and that matches the branding of your blog:
As we move on to the Publicize tab, we will see the FeedBurner features that will 
really help supercharge your blog promotion.
Email Subscriptions is easy to set up. It allows you to provide an alternative method 
for your readers to subscribe to your RSS feed. Once you have activated the service, 
you add a small subscription form to your blog where readers can sign up. Your 
subscribers will receive an e-mail containing your new posts once a day. Obviously, 
they will only receive an e-mail if you add new posts every day. No e-mails are sent 
on days that you don't post.

Supercharged Promotion
[ 186 ]
You have full access to the e-mail addresses of all the subscribers and you can export 
them for use in other applications. We'll run through the process of setting this up 
using the WPBizGuru blog on our local development server.
Under the Publicize tab, choose Email Subscriptions from the left-hand menu and 
click the Activate button. You will then be taken to a page that contains the HTML 
code for the sign-up form.
Open up Notepad++ (or a text editor of your choice), then copy and paste the 
Subscription Form Code from FeedBurner into a new Notepad++ document. 
Select View | Word Wrap. 
The code is rather messy so we'll tidy it up before inserting it into our WordPress 
sidebar. Add a few line breaks so that the code is laid out as it appears in the 
following screenshot:
We'll use a feature in WordPress called Text Widgets to insert 
the subscription form. Text Widgets allow you to add your 
own code into an empty widget.
In your local WordPress admin area, go to Appearance | Widgets. We'll place the 
e-mail subscription form in the Secondary Aside and move the RSS Links above it. 
Drag a Text widget from the Available Widgets panel to the top of the Secondary 
Aside then drag the RSS Links widget to the slot above it:

Chapter 7
[ 187 ]
Open up the Text widget, go back to Notepad++ and copy all of the subscription 
form code, then paste it into the widget textbox. Click Save to save and close 
the textbox.
I also changed the title in the RSS Links widget to RSS Feeds:
Click the Save button.

Supercharged Promotion
[ 188 ]
If you preview the blog, you will see that the sign-up form appears in the RSS section 
of the sidebar:
The form doesn't look too bad, but the sign-up instructions aren't very informative 
and it could use a bit of tidying up. We need to edit the code to achieve this. Here  
is the subscription form code after it's been edited (this is included in the code 
bundle for this chapter (email_form.txt), which you can download from the 
Packt website):
<form style="border:0px;"  
  action="http://feedburner.google.com/fb/a/mailverify" method="post"  
  target="popupwindow"  
  onsubmit="window.open('http://feedburner.google.com/fb/a 
    /mailverify?uri=wpbizguru', 'popupwindow',  
    'scrollbars=yes,width=550,height=520');return true">
  <p>To receive our main feed by email, type your email address and  
    hit enter:</p>
  <input type="text" style="width:100px" name="email"/>
  <input type="hidden" value="wpbizguru" name="uri"/>
  <input type="hidden" name="loc" value="en_US"/>
</form>

Chapter 7
[ 189 ]
Go back to the Text widget and replace the original subscription form code with the 
improved, edited version. Save your changes. The form looks a bit better now:
When a user enters their e-mail address, a FeedBurner pop-up will open for them 
to complete the sign-up process. They will then receive an e-mail containing a 
conirmation link, which they must click to start their subscription. This protects you 
from any unwanted sign-ups and prevents spammers from hijacking your form.

Supercharged Promotion
[ 190 ]
Once you have added the sign-up form to your blog, you can change some of the 
other settings for e-mail subscriptions from the FeedBurner dashboard. For example, 
if you select Email Branding in the left-hand menu, you can change the subject line 
for your e-mails and also add a logo:
You should now have a pretty good idea of what FeedBurner can do for your blog. 
Spend some time exploring all the services on offer. We will be discussing the 
PingShot feature in the next section on blog indexes and search engines.
Blog indexes and search engines
In Chapter 6, Search Engine Optimization, we discussed methods of optimizing your 
blog for the major search engines. However, there's a whole host of other search 
engines and indexes that are speciically for blogs. One of the most popular of these 
is Technorati (http://www.technorati.com). These search engines represent 
another great way of promoting your blog by getting it in front of another group  
of web searchers.
Ping-O-Matic
Luckily, WordPress makes it easy to get listed on the most popular blog indexes and 
search engines. These search engines compile their indexes from blogs pinging them.
Ping is a mechanism by which blogs notify external 
servers (in this case, the search engines) that their 
content has been updated.

Chapter 7
[ 191 ]
By default, WordPress is automatically set up to ping your new content to the most 
popular blog search engines via a service called Ping-O-Matic. You can see the 
settings for this under Settings | Writing:
FeedBurner's Pingshot
Ping-O-Matic covers most of the blog search engines, but we can also use 
FeedBurner's pinging service, Pingshot, to add even more. Log in to your 
FeedBurner account. Choose to manage your main content feed (as opposed to the 
comments feed), click the Publicize tab in the dashboard and then Pingshot from 
the left-hand menu.
On the Pingshot page, it's simply a matter of clicking the Activate button.
Technorati
WordPress will automatically ping your blog updates to Technorati via Ping-O-
Matic. However, you should also sign up to Technorati to claim your blog and set 
up a proile. You can sign up using the Join link on the Technorati home page. Once 
you've signed up, you can edit your proile and claim your blogs.
From the My Proile page you can upload a photo, add a bio, and claim your blog:

Supercharged Promotion
[ 192 ]
In order to claim your blog, you need to enter some details about it and then go 
through a process to verify that you are the rightful owner. Technorati will e-mail 
you a claim token which you then need to place in a new blog post (Technorati  
gives full instructions and guides you through the process):
When you have set up your proile, people who ind your blog on Technorati will 
get a little bit more information about you (see the WPBizGuru proile page at 
http://technorati.com/blogs/blog.wpbizguru.com): 

Chapter 7
[ 193 ]
Minor blog indexes
We've covered most of the major blog search engines by setting up our automatic 
pings. However, there are plenty of minor blog indexes that don't use the pinging 
system. These have less trafic, but it may still be worth submitting your URL to 
them. I won't give a list of these here as many of them cover speciic niches. You 
can ind them by searching on Google. A couple of examples are: http://www.
poweredbywp.com/, which lists blogs that run on WordPress, and http://www.
britblog.com/, which covers British bloggers.
Using social networks
In recent years, the social networking phenomenon has swept the Web. Sites such as 
Facebook, Twitter, and LinkedIn now have millions of users worldwide. Businesses 
have been hard at work iguring out how to leverage the power of social networks in 
their marketing activities. Social networks can be useful to you as a business blogger, 
but it will very much depend on your type of business and you need to know what 
you are getting into.
Social networks will probably be more useful to you if your business is quite 
personal in nature. For example, if you are a sole trader, consultant, or freelancer, 
your personal proile page on Facebook can be a useful place to help build your 
brand and ind new prospects. If, however, you run a larger company and have a 
more corporate identity, social networking can be more dificult to harness. However, 
there are more and more social networks that are aimed speciically at business 
users, the best known being LinkedIn.
The main thing to bear in mind with social networks is that most people tend to 
use them in a social context, rather than a business context. People use Facebook to 
stay connected with their friends, see photos of last weekend's parties, talk about 
vacations, weddings, sports, and so on. This means the content tends to be very 
informal. This is why social networks are not necessarily a great place to do business. 
If you frequently post risqué images of your wild weekend escapades, it's probably  
a good idea to keep your business totally separate. 

Supercharged Promotion
[ 194 ]
However, if you're a little more restrained about what you post on Facebook and the 
tone of your proile page is a good match with the tone of your blog, there may be 
an opportunity for some cross-promotion. But remember that many Facebook users 
don't like business encroaching onto the network. If you use a hard sell approach, 
you're likely to lose a lot of friends.
Facebook
If you use Facebook, you could try publishing your blog posts to your Facebook 
proile. This could be a useful technique for driving some trafic to your blog  
posts. Remember, however, not to overload your Facebook proile with too much 
business-related content (keep things informal and bear in mind that the majority  
of people on Facebook are there for fun).
If you have a slightly larger business or feel that your 
personal proile isn't an appropriate place for content from 
your business blog, you can set up a Facebook Page. To 
set one up, click on the Create a Page link in the Facebook 
footer. The set up process is straightforward—just follow the 
on-screen prompts.
Probably the easiest way to publish your blog posts to your Facebook account is to 
use a Facebook app called RSS Grafiti. As you've probably guessed from its name, 
RSS Grafiti periodically checks the RSS feeds you specify and posts any new entries 
it inds to your Facebook wall. So, if you specify the posts feed for your blog, the app 
will publish your blog posts on your wall.
To set this up, login to your Facebook account, go to the app page  
(http://apps.facebook.com/rssgraffiti/) and authorize access for the app:

Chapter 7
[ 195 ]
Next, click on the Add Feed button. Enter the URL of your blog's posts feed into the 
Feed URL box and click the link to preview it:

Supercharged Promotion
[ 196 ]
When you add a new feed, by default the app will only publish posts it inds after 
the time you added the feed. If you want historic posts to be published, you need 
to click on the Filter tab and change the Time Filtering Options. Your blog posts 
should now be published on your Facebook Wall:
LinkedIn
For many business bloggers, LinkedIn (http://www.linkedin.com/) may be a 
more useful social network than Facebook. It's targeted more towards commercial 
users and is all about business networking. If you don't already have one, I suggest 
you create a LinkedIn account and a company page. 
When you create a LinkedIn proile, you can add the URLs of up to three  
websites—you should make one of these your blog. You can also display your  
blog posts in your LinkedIn updates by installing the WordPress LinkedIn App 
(http://learn.linkedin.com/apps/wordpress/). Installing and coniguring 
the WordPress app is very simple. Log in to your LinkedIn account and choose 
Proile | Edit Proile. Find the Applications section and click Add an application. On 
the apps page, click on the WordPress app and then choose to add the application:

Chapter 7
[ 197 ]
You then just need to enter the URL of your blog and the app will start displaying 
your blog posts in your LinkedIn updates (the following screenshot shows the 
WordPress app in my personal LinkedIn account):

Supercharged Promotion
[ 198 ]
Using Twitter
Twitter (http://www.twitter.com) is a micro-blogging platform available via the 
Web, IM, and mobile devices. It allows you to publish short, quick-ire messages 
called Tweets, up to 140 characters in length, aimed at answering a simple question: 
What's happening? You can invite people to follow your Tweets and in turn, you 
follow theirs. It's a very social medium, which is one of its major attractions  
to bloggers.
So, what can it do for your blog? Well, as with many Web 2.0 applications, people are 
still iguring out exactly how they can use it to best effect. At its simplest level, it's 
just a way of keeping in touch with your friends, family, and colleagues. But it could 
be used as another channel to publicize your blog.
The most obvious way of putting it to work on your blog is to supplement your RSS 
feed. Each time you publish a new post, you can announce it via Twitter:
All your followers on Twitter will be instantly notiied when a new post is published 
on your blog.
Likewise, you can display your latest Tweets on your blog, either as posts or in a 
sidebar widget (we'll do this later with the aid of a couple of plugins).

Chapter 7
[ 199 ]
Twitter is great for breaking news fast. If you're unable to write a full blog post, you 
can tweet it and follow-up with a full post later. You could also tweet previews or 
teasers for your posts. If you are attending a conference or event, you can use Twitter 
to update your blog with the latest news from the event in real time using your cell 
phone or PDA.
Twitter is a great way to get instant feedback, which makes it a useful research tool. 
The following screenshot shows that WPBizGuru tweeted the question, What's your 
favorite WordPress Plugin?. His followers have started tweeting their replies:
Once you have signed up to Twitter, you will ind that you attract new followers 
relatively quickly, which makes it a great networking tool. Having a presence on 
Twitter adds to your online brand and could bring your blog and your business to 
the attention of a whole new audience.
Setting up Twitter in WordPress
It's easy to integrate Twitter into your WordPress blog thanks to a couple of cool 
plugins. The irst one we'll look at automatically tweets your new blog posts. It's 
called WP to Twitter (http://wordpress.org/extend/plugins/wp-to-twitter/), 
and we'll run through the process of setting it up for the WPBizGuru case study. The 
plugin needs to be installed on a publicly accessible web server, so won't work on 
our local development server. You can follow along with these instructions on your 
own live blog.

Supercharged Promotion
[ 200 ]
The plugin can use your favorite URL shortening service to shorten 
the URLs of your blog posts. If you don't have an account with a 
URL shortening service, I recommend you sign up to one of those 
supported by the plugin, so you can follow along with the tutorial. 
I'll be using bit.ly (http://bit.ly). You will, of course, also need a 
Twitter account for the plugin to work.
Install and activate the plugin in the usual way and then go to the settings page: 
Settings | WP -> Twitter. To begin, you need to register your blog as an application 
with Twitter. To do this, click the link on the plugin's settings page and follow  
the instructions:
To help you with registering an application with Twitter, the following screenshot 
shows the settings I entered for WPBizGuru:

Chapter 7
[ 201 ]
Once you've inished registering, you'll be taken to your application's settings page 
at Twitter. Under the OAuth 1.0a Settings section, you'll ind your consumer key 
and consumer secret. Copy these and paste them into the relevant boxes on the 
plugin settings page:
On the right-hand side of your new application page at Twitter, click on My Access 
Token, and paste the Access Token and Access Token Secret into the boxes on the 
plugin settings page and click Connect to Twitter:
You should see a success message telling you that WP to Twitter is now connected to 
Twitter. Now we'll run through some of the other settings for the plugin.

Supercharged Promotion
[ 202 ]
Under Basic Settings, I changed the Text for new post updates to New blog post: 
#title# #url# and I unchecked Update when post is edited. I selected Bit.ly as the 
short URL service. When you're happy with the basic settings, click Save WP -> 
Twitter Options.
Finally, you need to enter the API key for your URL shortening service. For 
Bit.ly, you can ind the API key on the account settings page (https://bitly.
com/a/account). Copy and paste the API key into the appropriate box in the 
plugin settings and click the Save Bit.ly API Key button:

Chapter 7
[ 203 ]
Your blog should now be set up to update your Twitter account every time a new 
post is published:
Now we'll look at another plugin for Twitter. It's called Twitter Goodies 
(http://wordpress.org/extend/plugins/twitter-goodies/) and it allows you 
to place a widget on your blog which displays your latest tweets. Again, we'll run 
through the set up process for WPBizGuru.
First, install and activate the plugin, then go to the settings page: Settings | Twitter 
Goodies. Scroll down to the Twitter Goodies Proile Widget Options. Enter a 
Widget Title, your Twitter Username, and set the Widget Height and Widget 
Width (to it the WPBizGuru theme, I've set the height to 300 and the width to 190). 
Click Update Options.

Supercharged Promotion
[ 204 ]
Now go to Appearance | Widgets and drag the Twitter Goodies – Proile Widget 
into your sidebar of choice (for the WPBizGuru blog I used the Primary Aside):
Refresh your blog and you will see the widget is displaying your latest tweets:

Chapter 7
[ 205 ]
If you don't like the widget's color scheme, you can go back to the plugin's settings 
page and adjust it.
Social bookmarking
Websites such as Digg, Delicious, StumbleUpon, and Reddit list URLs or bookmarks 
that have been submitted by Web users all over the world. The idea is that if 
somebody comes across an article or blog post they like, they can submit it as a 
bookmark and, in doing so, recommend it to other people. The more people who 
bookmark a particular blog post or article, the higher up the listing pages it will 
appear. Having one of your posts appear on the front page of Digg or one of the 
other social bookmarking sites, could send an avalanche of trafic to your blog.
Google has recently launched a bookmarking service called Google +1. By clicking 
on the Google +1 button, which may appear on a web page or in Google search 
results, you are giving that web page your seal of approval or recommendation. Your 
+1's are shown to your social connections in your Google proile and the aggregated 
+1's for a particular web page or website may also be shown in Google search results. 
Google +1's may even help to improve a website's search rankings. At the time of 
writing, Google +1 is fairly new, but already it's showing the potential of being a 
very important bookmarking service, not least because of the possible SEO beneits 
of receiving lots of +1's.
Adding links
Before we discuss some tips and tricks to improve your chances of getting your 
posts bookmarked, we need to make it as easy as possible for your readers to do 
so. Luckily there is a service called AddThis, which makes it easy to add all the 
major social bookmarking links at the end of each of your posts. Readers just click 
on these links to bookmark your post or e-mail it to their friends. AddThis includes 
the Google +1 button and provides a WordPress plugin (http://wordpress.org/
extend/plugins/addthis/), which makes integration with your blog a cinch. 
AddThis also provides excellent analytics features, which help you to see how often 
your blog's content is being bookmarked. We'll install the plugin on the WPBizGuru 
case study blog.

Supercharged Promotion
[ 206 ]
First you need to register for a free account with AddThis at https://www.addthis.
com/register. On the registration conirmation screen, click the link to get a Proile 
ID and make a note of it—you'll need this to make the analytics features work in  
the plugin:
Next, install and activate the AddThis plugin in the usual way and go to the settings 
page at Settings | AddThis. Enter your proile ID, username, and password, and 
then click Save Changes:
To display the Google +1 button above each post in your blog, click additional style 
options, select the Google +1 option, and click Save Changes.

Chapter 7
[ 207 ]
We've now added the AddThis buttons at the beginning and end of each of our posts:
When a user clicks on one of the buttons, they are presented with a neat widget that 
lets them share via their social bookmarking accounts:

Supercharged Promotion
[ 208 ]
Bookmarking tips
Simply adding the bookmarking links to your blog posts isn't quite enough to get 
a good placement in the bookmark listings. In fact, getting anywhere near the front 
page of the big bookmarking sites such as Digg and Delicious is quite a challenge. If 
you're serious about social bookmarking as a promotion tool, be warned that it takes 
time and perseverance to crack it.
The good news is that the big bookmarking sites are just the tip of the iceberg. There 
are hundreds of smaller sites, many aimed towards a speciic niche, which may be 
much easier to break into. The volume of trafic on these smaller sites may not be as 
great, but it is likely to be better quality if the niche its your blog.
You should start by researching these websites. Monitor them for several days  
and see what kind of posts regularly appear on their front pages. You will soon 
realize that different sites appeal to different users and this is relected in the  
content that gets bookmarked. There is a good list of social bookmarking sites at 
http://traffikd.com/social-media-websites/. Research a selection of these 
and see which are likely to work well with your content. Choose no more than  
half a dozen upon which to target your efforts.
You should also focus your efforts on selected posts. There is no point trying to get 
each and every post you publish into a good position on the bookmarking sites.  
Wait until you have a really special post that you think will do well on the sites  
you are targeting.
You should register with the bookmarking sites you are targeting and start 
bookmarking other people's content. This grows your proile and enables you to 
build up a group of friends. Networking with other users is the key element of social 
media. If possible, try to befriend high-proile users on the sites and bookmark their 
content. Eventually they may notice you and bookmark one of your posts. On some 
networks (for example, Digg), these power users carry more weight than regular 
users. It's a real boost to have them bookmark your content as they have so many 
friends who follow their bookmarks and vote them up (it's a snowball effect).
When you have written a good post that you think has a chance on the bookmarking 
sites, ask your friends and colleagues to bookmark it. On the larger sites you need at 
least 15 votes before an article even gets noticed. Take some time to come up with a 
really catchy title for the post.
Examples of the types of posts that might do well include:
• 
Top-10 lists
• 
How-to's and Ultimate guides

Chapter 7
[ 209 ]
• 
Posts offering free resources and gifts
• 
Controversial or funny articles about famous personalities
• 
Interesting or amusing videos
As you can see, these are similar to some of the link-baiting ideas we discussed in 
Chapter 6, Search Engine Optimization.
On the big bookmarking sites, you are not only competing with other bloggers but 
with some of the biggest media organizations in the world. Therefore, high quality 
content is a must. If you combine that with diligent research into the networks you're 
targeting and take time to build up your proile, you could have some great success 
with social bookmarking.
Beware the 'Digg Effect'
It's fantastic to have a big success on Digg or Delicious and get one 
of your posts at the top of the list. However, the tidal wave of trafic 
it could bring may totally overload your blog's server and bring it 
to a complete stop. This is known as the 'Digg Effect'. If you're lucky 
enough to do well on the social bookmarking networks, make sure 
your blog can cope with the strain (we look at ways of managing high 
trafic in Chapter 11, Managing Growth).
Summary
In this chapter, we've looked at some of the more advanced techniques for promoting 
your blog and growing trafic. We began by examining the RSS capabilities of 
WordPress and how they can be enhanced with FeedBurner. We discussed how 
to use blog search engines such as Technorati, as well as a variety of social media 
such as Facebook, LinkedIn, and Twitter. We also examined the beneits of social 
bookmarking, using services such as Digg, Delicious, and Google +1.
In the next chapter, we stay on the theme of promotion and trafic-building  
by examining how your interaction in the blogosphere can create a mutually 
beneicial relationship with other bloggers.


Connecting with the 
Blogosphere
Blogging should never be regarded as a solitary activity. As a blogger, you are 
part of the social web. You should always regard your blog as a piece of something 
bigger—the blogosphere. Interaction with other blogs will be a linchpin in your 
success. In this chapter we will cover:
• 
Deining the blogosphere
• 
Why it's so important to be connected
• 
Methods you can employ to connect with the blogosphere, including using 
your blogroll, RSS feeds, comments, and contact forms
Deining the blogosphere
Wikipedia gives this deinition (http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Blogosphere):
The blogosphere is made up of all blogs and their interconnections. The term 
implies that blogs exist together as a connected community (or as a collection of 
connected communities) or as a social network in which everyday authors can 
publish their opinions.
The key idea is connectivity. The Wikipedia deinition is concerned with the 
connectivity between blogs, which is something we will be exploring here. However, 
I would also widen this deinition to include the connectivity between blogs and 
their readers. They are as much a part of the blogosphere as the bloggers themselves. 
The readers are the glue that holds together all the connections in the blogosphere. 
This is particularly true of the avid blog readers, who probably subscribe to, and 
regularly read, dozens of different blogs. Readers often discover new blogs thanks 
to the links that bloggers make to each other. So, as well as connecting with other 
bloggers, we'll also be looking at ways of connecting with your regular readers.

Connecting with the Blogosphere
[ 212 ]
Why it's so important to be connected
The social element of blogs and the connectedness of the blogosphere is a deining 
characteristic of blogging as a communication platform. It is how blogging began and 
how it has evolved into what it is today. Blogs feed off each other and are dependent 
on each other for their existence. Readers are tuned into this sense of connectedness 
and have come to expect it from the blogs they follow. The relationships between 
blogs are an intrinsic part of the reader experience (this is how they link to new 
content and become habitual consumers of the blogging medium).
You need to be part of this in order to truly call yourself a blogger. A blog isn't a blog 
unless it's a fully connected part of the blogosphere. No blog is an island.
How to engage with the blogosphere
You shouldn't view other bloggers as a threat or competition—in fact, they are your 
friends. Blogging is about mutually beneicial relationships.
Having said that, bloggers are notoriously distrustful and skeptical about any 
approaches they receive from traditional PR or marketing professionals. If you're 
going to make friends in the blogosphere you need to engage bloggers on their own 
terms. Most successful bloggers become a target for PR pros. To them, a blog is just 
another media outlet to pitch their message to. However, too many people in the PR 
industry don't understand how to connect with the blogosphere. Bloggers will take a 
very dim view of approaches made via press releases or unsolicited e-mails from PR 
irms. They will (rightly) regard this kind of communication as spam. One blogger 
has become so annoyed by the constant barrage of PR spam that he has set up a 
wiki, which lists the PR companies who have spammed him (http://prspammers.
pbwiki.com/).
If you're involved with business blogging, you may well be a PR pro and may have 
experienced this kind of response from angry bloggers. However, the majority of 
people reading this are not PR pros—so what has this got to do with you, the average 
business blogger? Well, the fact that you're blogging for a business, particularly if 
it's a corporate entity, places you in a group alongside PR and marketing pros in the 
eyes of many bloggers. They're almost as distrustful of corporate blogging as they are 
of PR spammers. These are the people you need to befriend, so how do you get them 
on your side?

Chapter 8
[ 213 ]
Well, we've already established that press releases and unsolicited e-mails are out. 
The best way to engage with other bloggers is on their blogs. You need to take the 
time to read their posts, leave comments, and write posts that link back to them. 
Here is an outline strategy for becoming a more connected blogger:
• 
Research the blogs in your market niche or speciic arena. Take time to 
identify the key players. Analyze their content and try to igure out what 
their readers like.
• 
Come up with a list of bloggers you intend to target for relationship-
building. You can start small, just ive would be enough to get you going 
(you can always expand your list as time goes by).
• 
Begin leaving comments at your target blogs. Try to make them as relevant 
and on topic as possible. You need to genuinely engage with the issues they 
raise. It's very important that you don't come across as a comment spammer.
• 
Write posts on your own blog that expand on the topics raised by those on 
your target list. Link back to their posts.
• 
Continue doing this consistently and regularly; soon some of the bloggers 
you are targeting will notice you. They will begin to comment on your blog 
and write posts about the issues you are raising.
• 
Keep expanding your list of target blogs and keep working on this  
strategy for building new relationships. Sites such as Technorati 
(http://technorati.com) and Google Blog Search (http://www.google.
com/blogsearch) are great places to ind relevant blogs.
In the rest of this chapter, we will examine some of the practical steps you need to take 
to make this strategy work and improve your connectedness with the blogosphere.
Link building
We touched on the idea of link building in Chapter 6, Search Engine 
Optimization, where I gave you a fairly organic method of encouraging 
other people to link to you. Hopefully, you can understand how your 
blossoming relationships with other bloggers will be a great help 
in your link-building efforts. This is a more proactive approach to 
building links, but it is just as useful for search engine optimization.

Connecting with the Blogosphere
[ 214 ]
The blogroll
A blogroll is a list of links to other blogs that you read and wish to recommend to 
your readers. It's a great way to declare that you belong to the blogosphere. It can 
also be great for generating trafic. How can that be the case when it's you sending 
trafic to other blogs? Well, the beneit comes to you from something called  
link reciprocity.
Bloggers are pretty keen when it comes to checking their stats and tracking their 
referrals (more details on this in the next chapter). When they notice a blog (that is, 
yours) sending trafic their way, they will most likely check it out. If they like what 
they see, there's a very good chance they will add you to their own blogroll, and you 
get the chance of receiving trafic from them. Even if you don't make it onto their 
blogroll, you will certainly be on their radar, and they may link to you in one of 
their posts.
Managing your blogroll
Some bloggers adopt the policy to blogroll anyone who blogrolls them. This may be 
a useful approach, particularly when your blog is in its infancy. However, you may 
have to be a little more selective as your popularity grows. Excessively long blogrolls 
can look messy and may be detrimental to SEO. Having a fairly indiscriminate list of 
blogs also defeats the object of the blogroll. The idea is to recommend blogs that you 
like and think will be of use to your readers. The closer they are to your own topic 
or area of interest, the more relevant the links will be to your readers. Having a load 
of dull or dormant blogs in your blogroll may relect badly on you. As your blogroll 
grows, you need to be selective. You may also ind it useful to organize the links in 
your blogroll under categories. Not only will this make it easier for you to manage 
the blogroll, it will also be much more usable for your readers.
Adding categories and links
Adding categories is straightforward—we'll run through the process for WPBizGuru. 
Log into the admin area and go to Links | Link Categories and enter the details of 
your new category, then click the Add New Link Category button:

Chapter 8
[ 215 ]
Now you have added new categories, you can add and remove links. Click on Links 
in the admin area left-hand menu:

Connecting with the Blogosphere
[ 216 ]
Let's begin by deleting the links that were included in the default installation of 
WordPress. Simply check the boxes next to the links you want to delete, choose 
Delete from the Bulk Actions drop-down, and click the Apply button.
To add links, click on Add New. Enter the name of the link in the Name box and the 
URL in the Web Address box. The text you enter in the Description box will be shown 
when someone hovers the cursor over the link in the blogroll. You can also select 
whether the link should be visible or not (invisible links remain in the database,  
but don't appear in the blogroll—they are like your own private bookmarks):
On the second half of the page, choose the category you want the link to appear in. 
You should also select a target for your link, which tells the user's browser how the 
link should be opened:
• 
_blank opens the link in a new window.
• 
_top opens the link in the top frame, if your blog is using frames.
• 
_none opens the link in the same browser window.
I always select _none and leave the user to decide whether they want to open the 
link in a new window (by right-clicking it).
The other options on the Add Links page are not as important, and you don't have to 
use them. The Link Relationship (XFN) option allows you to deine your relationship 
to the person you are linking to. It is used by some web applications such as RSS feed 
readers and search engines. The options under Advanced allow you to: 
• 
Add an image to the link (this is displayed next to the link in some themes)
• 
Include the RSS feed for the blog you are linking to (again, used by  
some themes)

Chapter 8
[ 217 ]
• 
Add notes (these are not displayed in your blog, they are just for your  
own reference)
• 
Give a rating for the link (some themes display the highest rated links irst)
Once you have inished, click the Add Link button and view the blog to see your 
new blogroll. In the following screenshot, you can see the new categories and  
links I have added to WPBizGuru:
Blogroll SEO issues
There is some evidence that Google and other search engines take 
a dim view of lists of text links published site-wide (that is, the 
same list of links on every page). Their reasoning is that these text 
links could have been purchased for the purpose of link-building. 
If you're worried about this, you can use a plugin to add the 
'nofollow' attribute to your blogroll. An example of such a plugin is 
Nofollow Blogroll SEO (http://wordpress.org/extend/
plugins/nofollow-blogroll-seo/).
Feeding off the blogosphere
Blogrolls have been around for a long time. Many people regard them as a standard 
feature on any blog. I tend to agree with that point of view. Generally, I ind blogrolls 
useful and they give me an extra insight into the mind of the blogger by showing me 
his or her favorite links. However, more and more blogs are choosing not to display 
a blogroll. Probably the main reason for this decision is the dificulty in maintaining 
a long list of links and the politics that may arise as decisions have to be made about 
which to add and which to remove. There is also the SEO issue I mentioned previously.

Connecting with the Blogosphere
[ 218 ]
As an alternative (or even in addition) to a blogroll, some bloggers now include 
headlines from other blogs using the RSS feeds from those blogs. Usually they only 
do this for a handful of their most favorite blogs, maybe no more than ive—far 
fewer than the number of links that normally appears in a blogroll. This is easier 
to manage as the number of links is smaller, but it still demonstrates the blogger's 
connectedness to the blogosphere.
If you run more than one blog, you can use this method 
to display the latest headlines from your other blog(s).
There is a widget in WordPress that makes it easy to set this up—we'll run through 
it for WPBizGuru. In the admin area, go to Appearance | Widgets. We'll set up two 
RSS widgets. From the Available Widgets list, drag two instances of the RSS widget 
into the Primary Aside sidebar:

Chapter 8
[ 219 ]
Open up the irst RSS widget for editing and enter the RSS feed URL for the blog 
you want to link to, a title for the feed, and the number of posts you wish to display. 
Leave the checkboxes empty, as we just want to display the headlines for the items in 
the feed. Click the Save button:
Repeat the coniguration process for the second RSS widget by entering the details 
for the second blog you would like to link to.
If you view the blog, you will see the latest posts being pulled from the blogs you 
linked to:

Connecting with the Blogosphere
[ 220 ]
The importance of comments
Comments are probably one of the most important elements of blogging. They allow 
a high level of interactivity and really connect the blogger to his or her readership. 
It's all about being part of a conversation; a principle that forms the bedrock of the 
live Web.
The conversational dimension of comments allows the business blogger to open a 
dialog with their customers, stakeholders, investors, or whomever their blog is aimed 
at. Comments also provide a great connection with the rest of the blogosphere. A 
good blogger should also be an active commenter on other people's blogs. Again, it 
demonstrates being part of an ongoing and far-reaching conversation. Commenting 
on other people's blogs also offers an opportunity for you to present yourself to their 
readership, which may entice new readers to your own blog.
Fishing for comments
There are several strategies that can be employed to increase the chances of people 
leaving comments for your posts. The irst is simply to ensure that your content is 
engaging, interesting, and raises some tangible issues or opinions. A dull post that 
doesn't really say anything of interest is not going to inspire commenters.
The second is a technique we mentioned in Chapter 5, Content is King—ask questions. 
There's no more direct and straightforward approach for soliciting some kind of 
response than asking a question. Make the questions quite direct and focused so that 
they are easy to answer in a fairly short comment. If the question is too complicated 
or ethereal, it will be unlikely to inspire readers to hit the comment button.
Another approach is to set tasks or assignments for your readers. Of course, this 
should not be anything too dificult or time consuming, but something fun or 
interesting. It may not be appropriate for all types of blogs. However, many bloggers 
who are experts or gurus in their ield use their blogs to impart knowledge to their 
readers; they're teachers. For example, WPBizGuru may write a post about a new 
theme framework for WordPress. He could then ask his readers to send links to 
examples of child themes they have created using the new framework. This approach 
could spark a lively thread of comments as readers submit links and critique each 
others' themes. Another example could be asking your readers to come up with the 
slogan for your next advertising campaign. You could even run this type of thing as 
a contest, rewarding the best suggestion with a prize.

Chapter 8
[ 221 ]
Another approach to encourage comments and feedback is to involve your readers 
in the research and development of new products and services. Get them involved 
in the early days of Research and Development (R&D). Not only does this encourage 
interactivity on your blog, it's a great form of market research. Your readers are likely 
to be potential customers for your product or service, so if they have been involved 
in the development of your products they may well feel a sense of ownership for 
them, which is likely to relect positively in your sales igures.
Managing the conversation
You should assume the role of facilitator or moderator in any discussions that arise 
in the comments section of your blog. This means being active in the comment 
threads. Don't think that just because you did all the work in writing the original 
post, you can hand it over to your readers and let them run with it. You should 
always try to steer the debate in the direction you would like it to go.
This involves responding to comments as much as possible. By doing so, you 
demonstrate that you are listening to the people who take the time to leave comments, 
which will encourage them and others, to respond some more. Obviously, your time 
restraints may make it dificult to give in-depth responses to every comment, but do 
ensure you set aside some time to get involved. At the very least try to engage with 
new commenters, those who are frequent contributors, and those who leave negative 
comments (more on this later). Remember, it's a conversation.
Moderation
Some staunch old-school bloggers may balk at the notion of moderating or censoring 
comments. They may argue that it stiles the debate and erodes the free-speech ethos of 
social media. These may be worthy values for a personal blogger, but for any business, 
reputation management is extremely important. No proit-making organization can 
allow complete openness on what is, essentially, its own communication channel.

Connecting with the Blogosphere
[ 222 ]
WordPress gives you the tools to moderate comments on your blog. I suggest  
you use these and ensure you have a system in place that allows you to control 
what's published. You can set this up in the WordPress admin area by going to 
Settings | Discussion. I recommend that you approve every comment. This can 
be done by checking the appropriate boxes in the top half of the page:
With the settings shown previously, you will receive an e-mail every time someone 
leaves a comment and the comment will not be published until you have approved 
it. Approving every comment will obviously take more time, but it does give you 
complete control over what appears on your blog. As your blog becomes more 
popular and more comments are being left, you may consider reducing your 
workload by lowering the moderation level for comments. For example, remove the 
requirement for an administrator to always approve each comment, but keep the 
requirement that the comment author must have a previously approved comment. 
Continue monitoring your comments and see if this level of moderation works for 
you. However, unless you really can't ind the time to moderate every comment, I 
would recommend keeping the moderation levels at their highest setting.

Chapter 8
[ 223 ]
I also recommend displaying a comments policy on your blog. This clearly lays out 
the rules of engagement for commenters. It may also help readers who are staunchly 
anti-moderation to understand why, as a business, you need to moderate comments. 
Remember, you may be held legally responsible for any content that appears on your 
blog. This means there is a certain amount of risk, which any business must seek to 
mitigate. Making this clear in your comments policy may help readers understand 
why you moderate all comments. I have placed a sample comments policy on 
WPBizGuru. It's a static page under the About section: http://blog.wpbizguru.
com/about/comments-policy/.
Dealing with negative comments
At some point you're going to come across a certain amount of negativity from 
commenters. This may take the form of constructive criticism and reasoned argument 
against your post, or it may be random insults and seemingly off-topic laming.

Connecting with the Blogosphere
[ 224 ]
If you're not familiar with the term, this is how Wikipedia deines laming:
Flaming, also known as bashing, is hostile and insulting interaction between 
Internet users. [...] It is frequently the result of the discussion of heated real-world 
issues such as politics, sports, religion, and philosophy, or of issues that polarize 
subpopulations, but can also be provoked by seemingly trivial differences.
Deliberate laming, as opposed to laming as a result of emotional discussions, is 
carried out by individuals known as lamers, who are speciically motivated to 
incite laming. These users specialize in laming and target speciic aspects of a 
controversial conversation, and are usually more subtle than their counterparts. 
Their counterparts are known as trolls who are less "professional" and write 
obvious and blunt remarks to incite a lame war, as opposed to the more subtle, yet 
precise lamers.
Dealing with lame comments is simple—hit Delete; don't give them the time of day. 
You should also block persistent offenders by using the Comment Blacklist at the 
bottom of the Discussion Settings page:
Dealing with constructive criticism is a slightly more delicate issue. The fact is that 
this kind of negativity could actually be a good thing. Not only does it bring your 
shortcomings to your attention, but the fact that it's happening on your territory  
(that is, your blog) and on your terms makes it easier for you to deal with.
Resist the temptation to delete comments that contain this kind of constructive 
criticism, instead adopt a cool, calm, and honest approach to answer the issues 
straightforwardly. Reassure your readers that you have taken the comments on 
board and either present your argument to show that the comments are not true,  
or if they are true, explain how you are going to put things right. It's important not  
to be combative or aloof as this may make matters worse.

Chapter 8
[ 225 ]
The beauty of blogging is that it provides you with a platform to turn these 
potentially negative opinions into something positive. You have the ability 
to demonstrate to your readers and customers that you are listening to their 
constructive criticism and you are constantly working to put things right.
If you have successfully built up and nurtured a loyal community of readers on your 
blog, you may ind that they do some of the work of answering constructive criticism 
for you. If this is the case, it may not always be necessary for you to immediately 
jump in on a negative comment. See if any commenter comes to your defense. If  
they do, there is probably no need to get involved.
Trackbacks
Trackbacks provide a simple way for bloggers to comment on each others' posts via 
their own blogs. In WordPress, you can leave a trackback to another blogger's post 
simply by including the permalink for their post in your own post. We have already 
set up the automatic pinging feature that makes this happen, on the Discussion 
Settings page (highlighted in the following screenshot):
So let's imagine WPBizGuru wants to comment on another blogger's post by using 
a trackback. The permalink for the post he wants to comment on is: http://blog.
paulthewlis.com/seo/official-google-twitter-accounts/.
So, WPBizGuru writes a new post and includes the permalink:

Connecting with the Blogosphere
[ 226 ]
A trackback will be sent to the blog he or she is linking to, which will appear in the 
comments for the post:
Likewise, if someone links to a WPBizGuru post from their blog, the trackback will 
appear in the comments (of course, because of the moderation settings, WPBizGuru 
has to approve the comment irst):
Readers can view the post by clicking on the link that appears in the trackback.
Comment and trackback spam
Sadly, we live in a world plagued by spam. Blogs are now a target for spammers, as 
the comment and trackback facilities that feature on most blogs provide spammers 
with a mechanism to get their message published.
The developers of WordPress have worked hard to free their users from the 
frustration and inconvenience of spam by providing a service called Akismet. The 
Akismet plugin is provided by default in all WordPress installations. If you haven't 
done so already, you should activate Akismet now.
In the WordPress admin area, go to Plugins and activate Akismet. WordPress will tell 
you that the plugin has been activated, but you need to enter your Akismet API key:

Chapter 8
[ 227 ]
To get an API key, go to http://akismet.com and sign up for an account. Akismet 
is free for personal blogs (although you are invited to make a donation, if you wish); 
for commercial blogs, choose the appropriate plan. Once you have signed up, you 
will receive an e-mail containing your API key.
Now copy the API key and go back to your blog's admin area.
Click on the enter your Akismet API key link. You will be taken to the Akismet 
Coniguration page, where you need to enter your API key:
Akismet is now activated; it will automatically intercept comments it believes to be 
spam and they will be placed in the Spam section on the Comments page in 
your dashboard.
If any genuine comments have been intercepted, you can release them by clicking 
the Not Spam link below each comment. Likewise, if a spam comment gets through, 
mark it as spam by clicking the Spam link.
Akismet learns from its users, so by de-spamming genuine comments (and vice versa), 
you're helping it to get smarter and doing the whole WordPress community a favor.
By moderating all comments and using Akismet, you shouldn't have the problem 
of spam comments appearing on your blog. However, if you get to the enviable 
position of receiving hundreds of comments per day, you may not be able to 
moderate them all and decide to loosen your moderation settings. If this is the 
case, you will ind that Akismet does a pretty good job. But if you do notice a large 
amount of spam comments slipping through the net, there are some even tougher 
anti-spam precautions you can take.

Connecting with the Blogosphere
[ 228 ]
For example, you may decide to add a Captcha to your comments form. Captcha 
is an anti-spam technology that requires a random code, or the answer to a math 
question, to be entered before a form can be submitted. If a code is used, it is 
displayed as an image, so it cannot be read by non-human users. This prevents 
spam bots from using the form. Captcha is an effective anti-spam technology, but 
it does have drawbacks. It can cause accessibility issues for users who have vision 
impairment, and users who choose to browse with images turned off in their 
browser will not be able to see the code image. If a math question is used, it solves 
some of the accessibility issues (because it can be read by a screen reader), but 
because it can be read by non-humans, it may be slightly less effective. Because of 
these issues, you should consider carefully whether or not to use Captcha. It should 
be a last resort only to be used if spam is a real problem for you.
If you feel that you really must use Captcha on your comment form, there is a plugin 
called SI CAPTCHA Anti-Spam (http://wordpress.org/extend/plugins/si-
captcha-for-wordpress/). To set it up, install and activate the plugin in the usual 
way. You will now have a Captcha image at the end of your comment form:
On the SI CAPTCHA Anti-Spam settings page, you can choose which forms you 
want Captcha to be used on. For example, you may not want Captcha on the 
WordPress login form or the lost password form; just uncheck these on the  
settings page to remove them.

Chapter 8
[ 229 ]
Installing a contact form
Comments provide a great platform for a public discussion on your blog. However, 
some readers may prefer to contact you privately. You could simply provide an 
e-mail address on your About page or on a dedicated Contact page, but you can 
present a far more professional image for your blog by providing a contact form. 
It also provides an easy and obvious way of making yourself contactable by other 
bloggers and the wider blogosphere, enforcing your image as a connected blogger 
who is open to feedback and discussion.
Using the Contact Form 7 plugin
We'll set up a contact form for WPBizGuru. To do this we'll use an excellent plugin 
called Contact Form 7 (http://wordpress.org/extend/plugins/contact-
form-7/). First, install and activate the plugin in the usual way.
There is a default form already set up, which we can use as the basis to create our 
own. Select Contact | Edit in the left-hand menu of the WordPress admin area to 
view the default form. You will see the default form, Contact form 1:

Connecting with the Blogosphere
[ 230 ]
The plugin uses custom tags to generate the contact form. You can see the tags in the 
square brackets in the Form area. There are several other tags available. We won't 
be using them all here, but you can learn about them in the documentation at the 
plugin's website (http://contactform7.com/docs/).
The default form settings should be ine for your irst simple contact form. You just 
need to check that the e-mail address in the Mail section is correct; this is the e-mail 
address where the completed forms will be sent to. By default the plugin uses the 
WordPress admin e-mail address, but you can use any e-mail address you like:
Remember, that we do not have e-mail set up on our local 
development server, so the form will not actually work on our 
local case study blog. However, this step is important when you 
install Contact Form 7 on your live blog.
Our basic contact form is now ready for us to embed in a new page. Click on 
Pages | Add New to create a new WordPress page. I've called the new page Contact. 
In the irst part of the page I've put a selection of contact methods. Directly below 
that I've added the embed tag for our contact form – [contact-form 1 "Contact 
form 1"]. I've chosen About as the parent of the Contact page:

Chapter 8
[ 231 ]
It's important to include bricks and mortar contact details whenever 
possible. This gives your blog a higher level of legitimacy. Research 
has shown that web users are far more trusting of websites that 
display real-world contact details. Displaying a physical address 
will also allow you to leverage the mapping tools on search engines 
such as Yahoo!, Bing, and Google. 
If you are uncomfortable sharing real-world contact details, you 
could consider using a Google Voice number (http://www.
google.com/voice) and/or setting up a PO Box for mail.

Connecting with the Blogosphere
[ 232 ]
Now click the Publish button and view the blog:
Preventing contact form spam
We saw earlier in the chapter that comment forms can cause a spam problem. 
Unfortunately, the same is true for contact forms. Spam bots trawl the web looking 
for unprotected forms and then use them to send spam. There's a chance they could 
ind the contact form on your blog. 

Chapter 8
[ 233 ]
Luckily, Contact Form 7 provides a couple of features to help prevent spamming via 
your contact form. You can use a Captcha image (this requires another plugin) or a 
veriication question. As we discussed earlier, Captcha images can cause accessibility 
and usability issues. However, the veriication question approach is less prone to 
accessibility problems. The person using the contact form is asked a very simple 
question; they cannot submit the form unless they answer it correctly. The questions 
are so easy that no human user is likely to get them wrong, but a spam bot is unlikely 
to get the answer right as it's not smart enough to understand the question.
No anti-spam protection can be guaranteed 100% effective. The 
veriication question method is fairly sound, but spammers are 
constantly improving their techniques and re-programming their 
evil bots. Some people suggest that it may be possible to program a 
spam bot and increase its chances of answering veriication questions 
correctly. So far this doesn't seem to have caused any major problems, 
but it's always a possibility that your spam guards could be breached. 
Sadly, that's the world we live in.
If your contact form begins to generate large amounts of spam, you can add one of 
the security measures provided by Contact Form 7. We'll run through the process  
of setting up the veriication questions.
Go back to the coniguration page for Contact form 1 in your WordPress admin area. 
We will use the Generate Tag feature to create the tag for the veriication question. 
Choose Quiz from the Generate Tag drop-down. 

Connecting with the Blogosphere
[ 234 ]
In the Quizzes text area, enter some simple math questions, with each one on a 
new line—you can add as many as you like. The syntax to use is 12+48=?|60—that 
is, the question, followed by a pipe |, followed by the answer. When you're done 
entering questions, click anywhere outside the Quizzes text area and the tag will 
be generated:
Copy the generated code and paste it into the form, along with some explanatory 
text for the form user. I've highlighted the code in the following screenshot:

Chapter 8
[ 235 ]
Click the Save button. Now when anyone uses the contact form, they must answer 
the veriication question before they can submit it:
Summary
In this chapter, we discussed the importance of connecting with the blogosphere. We 
began by deining what the blogosphere is and why you need to be an active part 
of it. We then discussed a simple strategy for engaging with other bloggers. We also 
looked at the practical steps you need to take in becoming a well-connected blogger, 
including managing your blogroll, using RSS feeds to display content from other 
blogs, how to manage comments, and how to make yourself as approachable as 
possible by using a contact form.
In the next chapter, we will look at the important subject of web analytics. You will 
learn how to measure the success of your blog by analyzing the visitor data.


Analyzing your Blog Stats
How do you know if anyone's reading your blog? Is the time and effort you put 
in showing any results? These are some questions you should be able to answer. 
The whole point of blogging is to help your business, so you need to be sure you're 
reaching your target audience. In this chapter, we will look at statistics that are 
essential for measuring your success and the tools that can help you gather them. 
We'll cover:
• 
The key performance indicators (KPIs) you should be monitoring
• 
How to use WordPress.com Stats
• 
An overview of Google Analytics
• 
Using FeedBurner stats
• 
Checking your Alexa rankings
Key performance indicators
As with any other aspect of business, measuring the performance of your blog is the 
key to understanding its value and success. There are many different metrics that can 
inform you about the progress of your blog. Some bloggers look at many indicators 
and aggregate them to give a very detailed analysis of their blog. Others prefer  
to focus on a smaller set of metrics.
The information you choose to measure the success of your blog will be largely 
dependent on your blogging goals, which you decided in Chapter 2, Introducing Our 
Case Study—WPBizGuru. For example, if you see your blog as a vehicle for building 
your company brand, then the number of unique visitors may be relevant. If the 
main aim of your blog is to improve communications and open a dialog with your 
existing customer base, then the number of comments may be more important  
to you.

Analyzing your Blog Stats
[ 238 ]
Broadly speaking, there are ive groups of KPIs (key performance indicators) that 
can be applied to a blog:
• 
Trafic
• 
Subscribers
• 
Number (and quality) of comments and feedback
• 
Search engine results
• 
Inbound links
In this section, we'll take a look at each of these in turn before moving on to examine 
the tools we can use to measure them.
Trafic
Raw trafic is probably one of the simplest metrics for measuring the success of any 
website, including your blog. However, even this seemingly simple indicator has 
several facets, as there are different ways of measuring it. Different people will  
prefer different methods.
Hits
These days, hits are pretty much obsolete as a method of measuring trafic. A 
hit is a request sent to a web server for a ile. In the early days of the Web, hits 
were regarded as an important statistic. However, as web analytics became more 
sophisticated, people began to realize that server hits are a fairly meaningless way of 
measuring trafic. This is because a web page can contain several links to iles on the 
server. For example, if a page has six images, there will be seven hits on the server 
when the page is requested (one for the page itself, and then one for each of the 
images). So you could increase your hits simply by adding more images to the page!
The term hits has slipped into common usage over the years; people use it (wrongly) 
when they are talking about trafic in general.
Unique visitors
The number of unique visitors is one of the most important metrics for measuring a 
blog's trafic. It is particularly favored by potential advertisers, so if you ever decide 
to sell advertising on your blog, you will need to have this statistic available. It's 
basically the number of different people who visit a website.

Chapter 9
[ 239 ]
It can be dificult to measure unique visitors. The only way any website owner 
could be certain about the number of unique visitors would be to have every visitor 
register for a user account and log in each time they use the site. Obviously, this isn't 
practical! Unfortunately, each of the two main ways of measuring unique visitors  
has pitfalls.
The irst approach is to log the IP address of each visitor. Every device that 
connects to the internet has an IP address, but the accuracy of this approach can't be 
guaranteed. This is because some ISPs and company networks issue their users with 
dynamic IP addresses. This means that each time a user connects to the internet they 
have a different IP address. In this situation, the same person visiting a website at 
different times would be counted as a different unique visitor each time. A second 
problem arises because users on some large networks are all connected to the 
internet via the same IP address. So, if there were 20 people on such a network, 
all accessing the same website independently, it would only be counted as one 
unique visitor.
The second approach for measuring unique visitors is to use cookies. A cookie is a 
snippet of text, usually containing a unique reference code, which is saved by the 
user's browser when they visit a website. Each web page that uses this approach 
also contains a small piece of JavaScript (usually in the page footer), which detects 
the cookie (or installs it, if it's the user's irst visit) and sends information back to 
the analytics software. This avoids the problems that may arise with the IP address 
logging approach, but has its own limitations. The problem is that some people 
delete cookies or choose not to accept them, as they believe they pose a security  
and/or privacy threat. They may also disable JavaScript in their browsers for  
similar reasons.
Visits
Hopefully, each unique visitor will visit your blog more than once. This is measured 
simply as visits. It is a more reliable statistic than unique visitors because it is easier 
to measure. However, most analytics software packages add a little more depth to 
the measurement of visits than simply the headline number. For example, it's also 
useful to know how long each visit lasted. This gives you a good indication of how 
well your readers are engaging with your content, and whether or not they ind it 
interesting. Obviously, if a visit only lasts a few seconds, you know the visitor was 
not impressed and clicked away from your blog very quickly.
Different analytics software has different ways of deining what a visit is. A visit is 
usually classed as a continuous series of page views, uninterrupted by any period  
of inactivity.

Analyzing your Blog Stats
[ 240 ]
Page views
Page views are the total number of pages read by all your visitors. Basically, this 
statistic tells you how many of your blog's pages have been opened on a daily, 
weekly, or monthly basis. It's also useful to know the average page views per visit. 
This tells you how many pages, on average, a visitor looks at each time they visit 
your blog. It gives a good indication of how engaged users are and how sticky your 
content is. Low average page views show that visitors soon get bored of your content 
and are not motivated to read another post.
You should also pay attention to the number of views for individual pages. From 
this data, you can identify which of your posts are popular with your readership. 
This helps you to create content that your readers are more likely to enjoy.
Subscribers
Blogging adds another dimension to web analytics—it's not just about trafic 
to web pages. As most of the blog content is syndicated via RSS feeds, bloggers  
need to measure how many subscribers they have.
Subscriber data seems particularly important when you consider who your 
subscribers are. Quite simply, they're your biggest fans, your loyal supporters (the 
people who are waiting for your next post). They have taken the effort to subscribe 
to your blog and in doing so, are making it clear they are interested in what you're 
saying on a long-term basis. These people are far more valuable than the casual 
readers who just stop by your blog now and again, or those who may only ever visit 
once. As we discussed in Chapter 7, Supercharged Promotion, subscription is extremely 
important in blogging. Therefore, it's essential you know the levels of subscription for 
your blog. As you already know, there are two types of subscription: RSS and email.
RSS subscriptions
RSS feeds are notoriously dificult to track and measure. However, FeedBurner 
provides statistics about how many people are subscribed to your feed. This is one 
of the main attractions of FeedBurner and has made it very popular with bloggers. 
The problem is that counting the number of feed readers is not an exact science. This 
means you are likely to see anomalies and inconsistencies in your FeedBurner stats. 
Even so, the stats are better than nothing and will at least give you a good indication 
of the progress of your feed subscriptions, even if the numbers are not exact.

Chapter 9
[ 241 ]
E-mail subscriptions
Measuring the number of people who are subscribing to your feed by e-mail can be 
done much more accurately than for RSS readers. It's simply a matter of counting 
up the e-mail addresses in your subscription list. Again, FeedBurner is a useful tool 
for providing e-mail subscription options to your readers (as we saw in Chapter 7, 
Supercharged Promotion). We will be looking at FeedBurner stats in more detail later 
in this chapter.
Comments and feedback
The number of comments that your blog receives is another statistic that helps you 
measure your success. Watching the number of commenters increase as your blog 
gains popularity is not only satisfying, but should be regarded as a key indicator  
of your performance.
However, along with the simple number of comments, it's also important to consider 
the quality of the comments that people are leaving. Carefully considered, on-
topic comments that, in themselves, are good content for your blog are far more 
valuable than short one-liners that don't really say very much. You will receive many 
comments that simply say, 'Great post! ☺'. They're nice to have, but they have most 
likely been left so that the commenter gets a link back to his or her own blog.
Along with the comments, you should also take note and count the amount of 
feedback you receive by e-mail or through your contact form. Again, as these 
increase in volume, it will give a fairly good indication that your blog is becoming 
more widely read and is making an impact in the blogosphere. As with comments, 
you should also take note of the quality of the feedback you receive and whether it  
is negative or positive.
Search engine results
Another important performance indicator is how well you rank in the search engines 
for certain keywords. Along with your regular web analytics, this is something  
that you should constantly monitor. We touched on this topic in Chapter 6, Search 
Engine Optimization, but I raise it again here to remind you that monitoring your 
SEO performance should be a routine part of your blog analysis.

Analyzing your Blog Stats
[ 242 ]
Inbound links
Again, we mentioned this in Chapter 6, Search Engine Optimization, but as with search 
engine results, it's something you need to constantly monitor and treat as part of 
your web stats analysis. Having plenty of inbound links is not only good for your 
search engine rankings, but it also demonstrates how well you are connecting with 
the blogosphere. There are several ways you can measure how many inbound links 
there are to your blog.
The irst is simply to count the number of trackbacks coming into your blog. 
Remember, a trackback is a link from another blogger when they refer to one  
of your posts.
You can also use search engines to check your incoming links. By typing 
links:blog.wpbizguru.com into Google, you will see a list of all the incoming 
links that Google has indexed for WPBizGuru. You can do this for any domain.  
Your Google Page Rank is also largely based on incoming links, so periodically 
checking it can give a good indication of your blog's performance. To check the Page 
Rank for any web page, you can use the SEOQuake Firefox plugin that we installed 
in Chapter 6, Search Engine Optimization or download the Google Toolbar from 
http://toolbar.google.com. The following screenshot shows the Google Page 
Rank for http://www.packtpub.com using the Google Toolbar:
Technorati provides another way of monitoring your incoming links. Each blog 
listed on Technorati has something they call authority. The authority of a blog is 
based on the number of incoming links to that blog—the more incoming links the 
blog has, the higher the authority. The following screenshot shows the authority  
for http://scobleizer.com:

Chapter 9
[ 243 ]
Web analytics tools
Now you know the kind of things you need to be monitoring, let's take a look at 
some of the tools that can help you do this.
There are dozens of web analytics tools available. They have varying degrees of 
complexity and widely varying costs—some of the high-end solutions require 
expensive licenses. However, the good news for bloggers is that there are some great 
solutions that don't cost a penny. Here, we'll take a look at two: WordPress.com Stats 
and Google Analytics.
WordPress.com Stats
The hosted version of WordPress includes a great stats system. Many self-hosted 
WordPress users were green with envy when they saw what WordPress.com 
bloggers got to play with. So the WordPress.org community (speciically, Andy 
Skelton) came up with a plugin that makes WordPress.com Stats available to  
anyone with a self-hosted blog. The plugin is now available as part of Jetpack 
(http://jetpack.me).

Analyzing your Blog Stats
[ 244 ]
To get started, install and activate the Jetpack plugin in the usual way 
(http://wordpress.org/extend/plugins/jetpack/). Note that there's no point 
installing this on your WPBizGuru local development server as no one else can visit 
that blog except you.
You need to connect Jetpack to WordPress.com in order to make the plugin work. 
To do this click on the Connect to WordPress.com button and follow the 
instructions—you'll need to create a free account at WordPress.com.
Once you've connected to WordPress.com, you'll be forwarded to the Jetpack admin 
page on your blog. Click the Conigure button for WordPress.com Stats and then 
Save coniguration, leaving the default options as they are. You should now see Site 
Stats under Jetpack in the main WordPress left-hand admin menu—click on it to 
view your stats page. 
When you irst install the plugin, it will take a while for any stats 
to come through, so for the time being your stats page probably 
has a message telling you to wait patiently.
The beauty of the WordPress.com Stats system is its simplicity. It doesn't  
over-complicate things by providing too much information. In fact, for many 
bloggers WordPress.com Stats provides all the information they need (or want)  
to know. I'll run through a few of the major features. 
At the time of writing, WPBizGuru was still in development 
and had not been released as a live blog. This means that visitor 
numbers you see in the following screenshots are very small, 
but they still illustrate how WordPress.com Stats work. 

Chapter 9
[ 245 ]
At the top of the stats page you will notice a large bar chart, which gives you an 
overview of page visits by Days, Weeks, or Months:
The bars on the chart are clickable. When you click on one, you will be shown more 
details for that particular day:

Analyzing your Blog Stats
[ 246 ]
Back on the main Stats page, below the bar chart, you will see more information 
about your blog. One of the good things about WordPress.com Stats is that 
everything appears on one page.
The irst stat you can see is Referrers. This tells you where your visitors are coming 
from. It's extremely important to know who your best referrers are as this tells you 
which of your relationships with other bloggers and websites are most important. As 
we discussed in Chapter 8, Connecting with the Blogosphere, building relationships with 
the rest of the blogosphere is the key to your success, so being able to monitor your 
progress in this respect is very useful.
The dashboard gives you an overview of your most recent stats. You can get more 
historical information for each statistic by clicking on the This week link:
As you can see from the preceding screenshot, you are able to view data for different 
periods by clicking on the time period links (7 Days, 30 Days, Quarter, Year, and 
All time). Back on the main Stats page, next to the Referrers data, is another very 
important piece of information for bloggers. Top Posts & Pages informs you of the 
most popular content on your blog. This will really help you to tailor your posts 
for your readers. You can easily see which posts work well and which don't, and 
therefore give them more of the kind of content they really like.
Along with the Referrers data, Top Posts & Pages can also help you monitor the 
effect of other bloggers linking to one of your posts. For example, if a well-known 
blogger decides to link to one of your posts, there is a good chance you will see an 
increase in the number of people viewing that post on the day he or she links to you.
Search Engine Terms tell you what people are searching for in order to ind your 
blog via the search engines. This is very useful for your keyword research, which we 
discussed in Chapter 6, Search Engine Optimization. Hopefully, as time goes by, you 
will see patterns emerging in the search-engine terms people are using. This will tell 
you the best keywords to use in your posts and post titles.

Chapter 9
[ 247 ]
Clicks tell you which links to external blogs and websites are most popular on your 
blog. This is useful information for building up a proile of your readers. It helps you 
to understand what they ind interesting, and the types of blogs and websites they 
want to visit. This will help you to create content your readers are likely to enjoy and 
engage with. It also allows you to monitor the blogs and websites they are visiting. 
By doing so, you may be able to identify opportunities for cross-promotion. You're 
sending trafic to them, so it may be that they could send trafic to you.
Google Analytics
For many bloggers WordPress.com Stats provide all the information they need. 
However, if you want to analyze your blog in more detail then you might want  
to use Google Analytics.
Google Analytics works perfectly well alongside WordPress.com 
Stats, so you can have both installed at the same time.
Google Analytics is a free service, which provides some pretty powerful features. To 
get started with Google Analytics you need a Google account. If you don't already 
have a Google account, click the Sign in link in the top right-hand corner of the 
Google home page, then follow the Create an account now link. Once you have 
a Google account, go to http://www.google.com/analytics/, click the Access 
Analytics button and sign in with your Google account details.
On the next page, click the Sign Up button:

Analyzing your Blog Stats
[ 248 ]
On the following page, enter the details for your blog and click Continue:
On the next page, enter your contact information, and then on the inal page, accept 
the terms and conditions and click Create New Account.
You will then be taken to a page that contains your Google Analytics tracking code:

Chapter 9
[ 249 ]
You could copy-and-paste the code into the header of your blog's theme in order to 
set up Google Analytics tracking. However, we'll use a plugin that uses the Google 
Analytics API to automatically install the tracking code in your blog. The plugin is 
called Google Analytics for WordPress (http://wordpress.org/extend/plugins/
google-analytics-for-wordpress/). Open a new tab or browser window to go 
to your blog's admin area, then install and activate the plugin in the usual way. You 
will see a message that invites you to select which Analytics proile to track. Go 
ahead and click on the link:
Click on the button to authenticate with Google:
You will be forwarded to the Google website where you need to grant permission for 
your blog to access your Analytics account:

Analyzing your Blog Stats
[ 250 ]
You will then be taken back to the plugin page where you need to select the Account 
and Proile for your Google Analytics, and then click the Update Google Analytics 
Settings button:
You now have Google Analytics installed on your WordPress blog. Unfortunately, 
it will take up to 24 hours before any data is available in your Google Analytics 
account. You may want to return to the next section tomorrow, when you have  
some data to look at.
Using Google Analytics
You can log in to Google Analytics at http://www.google.com/analytics. The irst 
page you see shows a list of all the websites you are tracking.
You can track several websites using the same Google Analytics 
account. So if you have other websites besides your blog, you can 
add them too.
At the time of writing, Google was rolling out a new version of 
Analytics, which can be accessed by clicking the link in the top 
right-hand corner of the page. All the following screenshots and 
menu references are taken from the new version.
Getting started
Click on the proile you would like to view and you will be taken to the My 
Site page. 

Chapter 9
[ 251 ]
From here you can access all the data for your blog. By default, you will see a general 
overview of the headline numbers, while the menu on the left-hand side gives you 
options to drill down deeper. As you can see, there are quite a lot more features than 
in WordPress.com Stats; we'll run through some of the more useful ones for bloggers.
The top half of the page shows a graph and some of the most important statistics:

Analyzing your Blog Stats
[ 252 ]
By default, the graph shows visits but you can have it display different metrics by 
clicking the drop-down arrow next to Visits:
You can then choose which data you want to view:
And then compare with another metric, if you like, by clicking the Compare Metric 
drop-down:

Chapter 9
[ 253 ]
You can also select the date range you want to display by clicking on the date:
Most of the stats displayed under the graph are self-explanatory, with one exception: 
Bounce Rate. The bounce rate is the percentage of total visits whereby visitors left your 
blog from the same page they entered—that is to say, it was the only page they visited. 
A high bounce rate means that visitors are not clicking around your blog; they're 
leaving virtually straight away. You can lower the bounce rate by making sure that 
your content (particularly on the home page) is engaging and tailored to the readers 
you are targeting.
Visitors
The Visitors menu gives you more detailed information about who is visiting your 
site. Click on Visitors to expand the menu and you will see the categories of data 
that are available, for example, Demographics, Behavior, and Technology.

Analyzing your Blog Stats
[ 254 ]
Click on Demographics in the left-hand menu and then Location. You will now see a 
map which shows the locations of your visitors:
You can hover over individual countries to see the number of visitors from there.
This is an interesting feature that gives you geographic data about the visitors 
to your site. It could be very useful in helping you to tailor your content for the 
countries from which you receive the most visitors. For example, you may be a 
blogger-based in the UK and notice that the majority of your readers are from the US. 
Maybe you should consider adapting your writing so that you are using US spelling. 
Or consider including cultural references that an American audience is more likely 
to appreciate. Of course, you need to monitor this carefully. Maybe your US readers 
like your blog precisely because of the quirky British spellings and its UK cultural 
bias—changing things might drive them away.
Below the map there is a tabulated break down of the map data. If you click on a 
country name you are presented with a larger scale map of that country. In the table 
below the country map, you are presented with data by state, province, or city. 
Again, clicking on one of the place names will drill down more inely until you come 
to the most precise location available. The following screenshot shows there was one 
visitor from San Antonio, TX:

Chapter 9
[ 255 ]
Clicking around on the map is not only useful for your blog stats, but it can also 
be good fun seeing where in the world your visitors are coming from. You may be 
surprised by the far-lung destinations!
Languages is also an interesting statistic. If you are receiving a high proportion of 
visitors who are non-English speakers, maybe you should consider providing some 
of your posts translated into their own languages. However, as we saw with the 
idea of making content country-speciic, monitor things carefully—maybe they are 
reading your blog to improve their English skills and don't want content in their  
own language!
Under the Behavior menu is the rather self-explanatory New vs. Returning. It's 
good to have a high percentage of returning visitors, particularly for a blog. It shows 
you are providing interesting content that people want to come back for time and 
time again.

Analyzing your Blog Stats
[ 256 ]
Also under Behavior, you will ind Frequency & Recency and Engagement. This 
data provides further indications of how sticky your blog's content is. The more 
interesting your posts, the more frequently your visitors will come back and the 
more engaged they will be.
You can also view technical data about your visitors, such as which browsers and 
operating systems are most used by your readers. Browser type, in particular, is 
important. It can give an indication of how tech-aware your readers are. For example, 
older versions of Internet Explorer are likely to be used by less technically-aware 
visitors as opposed to the latest version of Firefox.
It's important to know browser types if you are re-designing your blog or adding 
new features. You should try to test your blog in the most common browsers used by 
your visitors as different browsers render some CSS features differently. You need 
to be sure that your blog looks right in the browsers used by the majority of your 
readers. Click on Technology | Browser & OS to see browser data:

Chapter 9
[ 257 ]
Trafic sources
Click on Trafic Sources in the left-hand menu, then Overview. You are now 
viewing the Trafic Sources Overview. It tells you where your visitors came from 
and is broken down into three main sources: Search Trafic, Referral Trafic, and 
Direct Trafic.
If you select Incoming Sources | Direct, you will be shown how many visitors 
arrived at your blog directly. This means they came to you either by using a 
bookmark in their browser or by typing your URL into their browser address bar. 
This can be a useful statistic if you have recently done any ofline promotion. For 
example, people who saw your blog's URL in a newspaper article, on your company 
letterhead, or in an advert will be direct visitors.

Analyzing your Blog Stats
[ 258 ]
The data under Referrals is the same as the information we saw for Referrers in 
WordPress.com Stats. Again, it's useful for analyzing your connectedness with other 
bloggers and websites.
The data under Search | Organic is useful for monitoring your search engine 
optimization work. Combined with the similar data you receive in WordPress.com 
Stats, it should help you to hone your list of keywords and ine-tune how you are 
using them in your posts.
The AdWords menu allows you to monitor any AdWords campaigns you may 
have running.
Google AdWords
Google AdWords is the search giant's advertising platform—it's how they 
generate the vast majority of their revenue. I didn't include AdWords in Chapter 7, 
Supercharged Promotion because, frankly, it's rather beyond the scope of this book. But 
it does deserve a quick mention here as it is closely integrated with Google Analytics.
As you may be aware, the principle of AdWords is that advertisers bid against each 
other for certain keywords. The advertisers who place the highest bids get their 
adverts to appear above all the others. AdWords ads are the sponsored links  
you see down the right-hand side and at the top of Google search results pages:

Chapter 9
[ 259 ]
It's not a promotion technique that's particularly popular with bloggers, for a 
couple of reasons. First, it can require a fairly substantial budget in order to see any 
consistent results. Second, bloggers prefer the more organic promotion methods such 
as the ones we covered in Chapter 7, Supercharged Promotion. However, if you have 
a fairly healthy marketing budget for your blog, it might be something you want 
to try. It's likely to be particularly useful when you irst launch your blog as it may 
provide an early boost in your efforts to build an audience. You can ind out more  
at http://www.google.com/adwords.
Content
Much of the data you ind here is similar to what's available in WordPress.com Stats. 
However, there are a couple of interesting extra features. The information under  
Site Content | Exit Pages tells you from which pages your readers are leaving your 
blog. If a pattern emerges with a few pages having a particularly high exit rate, 
it may mean that the posts on those pages are not relevant or interesting to your 
readers. However, it may just be the case that there is a particularly interesting 
external link within those posts.

Analyzing your Blog Stats
[ 260 ]
In-Page Analytics is a very interesting feature that gives you a visual representation 
of which links on your blog are most popular. For example, you can see at a glance 
which links people are clicking on your home page. Again, this helps you to build a 
picture of the kind of content your readers want. The following screenshot shows the 
site overlay for a post on my own blog—the bars show the percentage of visitors who 
clicked on each link:
That concludes our very quick introduction to Google Analytics. As you can see, 
there are a few other features you may wish to explore in more depth. There 
is detailed documentation about Google Analytics at http://www.google.
com/support/googleanalytics/ and http://www.google.com/support/
conversionuniversity/.
Not an exact science
As you use WordPress.com Stats and Google Analytics, you will probably notice 
some discrepancies between what you think ought to be identical data in both tools. 
This is largely due to the technical dificulties associated with tracking visitors, some 
of which were mentioned earlier in the chapter (for example, people deleting cookies 
or switching off JavaScript in their browsers). It's also down to the fact that they are 
two different pieces of software developed by different programmers, so each will 
have its own idiosyncrasies.

Chapter 9
[ 261 ]
The point to bear in mind is that no web analytics software is ever going to be 100% 
accurate, so it's important not to get too hung up on the exact numbers of visits, page 
views, unique visitors, or whatever. Instead, use tools such as Google Analytics and 
WordPress.com Stats to identify trends and monitor your progress over time as your 
blog grows. Are the graphs heading North or South?
FeedBurner Stats
As I mentioned earlier in the chapter, counting your subscribers is very important 
for measuring the success of your blog. FeedBurner provides you with the means to 
do this. You should be aware that the data it provides is unlikely to be completely 
accurate because it's very dificult to track RSS subscriptions, but it will give you an 
idea as to how your feed is performing.
When you log in to FeedBurner you can view your stats under the Analyze tab. The 
Feed Stats Dashboard gives you an overview; you can then drill down for more 
detail using the left-hand menu. There is a drop-down menu on the right that allows 
you to specify a time period for analysis.
Subscribers
This section gives you two main statistics: subscribers and reach. The subscriber 
count is based on an approximation of how many times your feed has been requested 
in a 24-hour period. It is the approximate number of people who are currently 
subscribed to your feed. The reach measurement assumes that a certain percentage of 
your subscribers will be actively engaging in your feed content. It also assumes that 
there are people engaging with your feed content beyond your known subscriber 
base (for example, on a feed search engine or news ilter site). The reach measurement 
aggregates these two groups to provide an indication of your true audience.

Analyzing your Blog Stats
[ 262 ]
Item use
This simply tells you how many items in your feed have been viewed and how many 
clicks back to your blog there have been.
Uncommon uses
This measurement tells you about any other uses your feed is being put to, in 
addition to normal views and subscriptions in web browsers, feed readers, and the 
like. FeedBurner says that uses like these could be …a neat little news ilter somebody 
wrote, a blog somebody assembled from feeds, or even blog spam. Obviously, it's useful to 
know who is using your feed in this way. You should monitor this and if you feel 
any of these uses are inappropriate, contact the owner of the domain that's listed.
Alexa rankings
As well as monitoring your blog stats you may also want to keep an eye on 
your Alexa ranking. Don't get too hung up on the exact ranking, but use it as a way 
to track your progress. Maybe check your Alexa ranking once a month and make 
sure it's heading in the right direction. To see your ranking, go to http://www.
alexa.com/topsites and enter your full URL into the search box. As you can see 
from the following screenshot, a new blog such as WPBizGuru that has virtually 
no trafic at present will have a seemingly abysmal ranking—it's way down at 
22,794,407. However, you'll soon notice vast improvements even with fairly modest 
trafic growth.

Chapter 9
[ 263 ]
Summary
In this chapter, we examined the data needed to analyze your blog and the tools you 
can use to collect it. We identiied ive categories or groups of data that comprise 
your blog statistics: Trafic, Subscribers, Comments, Search Engine Results, and 
Inbound Links. We looked at WordPress.com Stats, Google Analytics, FeedBurner 
Stats, and how these tools can be used to measure your statistics.
In the next chapter, we will examine a variety of ways to monetize your blog, 
including advertising revenue and afiliate programs.


Monetizing your Blog
As your blog's trafic levels grow, you may see some potential for revenue 
generation. Don't expect loods of money—very few bloggers make a fortune  
from their efforts. But you could reasonably expect to cover your monthly web 
hosting costs and perhaps a few other expenses, which may at least make your  
blog self-inancing.
Monetization will not be an appropriate option for all business bloggers. This is 
particularly true for the more corporate blogs. Most cash generating strategies, 
especially the ones covered in this chapter, involve showing adverts or promoting 
afiliate programs of some kind. Displaying ads may be completely inappropriate 
for many corporate blogs; in fact, your company may well have policies that forbid 
it. However, for smaller, independent operators, selling advertising may be an 
attractive additional feature for your blog.
You are probably already monetizing your blog, but in indirect ways. Hopefully, 
you're already seeing the beneits in your business's bottom line. Remember the 
strategic goals you set for your blog? These may have included things such as, 
'building a brand', 'reputation management', and 'improving customer relations'. 
These are all fairly intangible, but they will certainly add value to your business. 
If you're achieving those goals, then your blog is already paying you, even if the 
precise cash amount is hard to quantify.
This chapter is concerned with the direct monetization strategies you can employ. 
Selling advertising is the most straightforward way of directly monetizing your blog. 
Advertising, in one form or another, is what this chapter is all about. We'll cover:
• 
Using Google AdSense to display ads
• 
Afiliate programs, such as Amazon Associates
• 
Selling advertising directly
• 
Using paid reviews for monetization

Monetizing your Blog
[ 266 ]
Google AdSense
This is one of the largest advertising programs available to web publishers. In 
Google's own words:
Google AdSense matches ads to your site's content and you earn money whenever 
your visitors click on them.
It really is as simple as that. AdSense is a straightforward way of introducing 
advertising to your blog. It may not be the most proitable form of advertising,  
but it can generate a steady income stream.
As with most Google applications, AdSense has plenty of advanced features. Most 
of these are beyond the scope of this chapter, but we will run through a quick-start 
guide for getting AdSense on your blog. Once you have it set up, you can explore  
the more advanced features with the help of Google's excellent documentation 
(http://www.google.com/adsense/support/).
Getting started with AdSense
First, you need to sign up for an AdSense account. Go to http://www.google.com/
adsense, click on the Sign up now link, and ill out the registration form. Google 
will then review your application and contact you within a couple of days to let you 
know if it has been successful. Your application should be approved. The reasons 
why Google may reject it could be if your blog content breaches their terms of service 
(for example spam, pornography, and so on), or if they have reason to believe the 
account may be used for fraudulent activity.
Once you have your account approved, go to the AdSense home page and log in.
At the time of writing, there is a new AdSense interface 
in beta testing. We will be using this new interface for the 
tutorials in this chapter.
The irst page you see is the Overview page. It gives a snapshot of your account. 
Obviously, there's nothing there yet, but when you start using AdSense, you will see 
information about the number of times your ads are viewed, how many clicks they 
have attracted, and how much you have earned. The following screenshot shows the 
new AdSense interface:

Chapter 10
[ 267 ]
Creating AdSense ad units
To set up an ad, click on the My ads tab and then the New ad unit button. Begin by 
giving the new ad unit a name—this can be anything you like, and is just to help you 
identify all the different ads in your account (call it Ad1).
Next you can choose the size of your ads. We'll be placing our AdSense unit in the 
sidebar, so we need a vertical format. I think it's also a good idea to begin with a 
relatively small AdSense unit, so as not to clutter your sidebar too much. If you feel 
that a small size isn't getting good enough results, you can always experiment with 
larger formats later. Select 120 x 240 Vertical Banner from the drop-down menu.
Depending on the ad size you have selected, you can choose the ad type. These can 
be image ads, text ads, or a combination of both, but some ad sizes will only allow 
text ads. As you can see, the size we have chosen is for text ads only.
You can click the View examples of ad types and sizes link to see all the different 
ads that are available.

Monetizing your Blog
[ 268 ]
The next section allows you to select channels to track your ads. We'll skip this 
feature for now; it's something you may want to explore later, when you're more 
used to the basic functionality of AdSense. For the time being, we'll leave all the Ad 
style options at their default settings.
Click on Save and get code. The code for the AdSense unit appears in a pop-up.
Using the AdSense code in WordPress
Now, we need to get this code into WordPress. Copy all the code to your computer's 
clipboard. Log in to your WPBizGuru case study blog and go to Appearance | 
Widgets. We'll begin by placing our AdSense ads in the sidebar, so drag a Text 
widget to the bottom of the Secondary Aside widget area. Open up the new text 
widget for editing. Give it the title Sponsored links, paste the AdSense code into 
the text area and click Save.

Chapter 10
[ 269 ]
Now view the blog and you will see the AdSense ads being displayed in the sidebar:

Monetizing your Blog
[ 270 ]
You may want to place some AdSense ads in a more prominent place on the page. 
Google allows you to display up to three AdSense units on one web page. We will 
use a plugin called Awesome Google Adsense (http://wordpress.org/extend/
plugins/awesome-google-adsense/), which allows you to place AdSense ads at 
random positions within a post. Install and activate the plugin in the usual way.
Go to Settings | Awesome Google Adsense and begin by entering your AdSense ID.
Your AdSense ID begins with pub- and you can ind it in the top right-
hand corner of the AdSense admin area.
In the Display Coniguration section you can set the colors for your AdSense units, 
if you wish, but we'll leave the default Google color scheme. For Ad size choose 
468x60; for Number of ads per Page choose 0; and for Number of ads per Post 
choose 1. You can leave the other settings as they are and then click Save Changes.

Chapter 10
[ 271 ]
Now when you view the blog you will see that ads are being displayed in random 
positions within the body of posts:
You will have realized by now that there are many more features in Google AdSense. 
Now you understand the basics, take some time to explore the other features and 
experiment with AdSense to see what works best on your own blog.
Afiliate programs
Afiliate programs allow web publishers, such as bloggers, to earn commission when 
they refer customers to other businesses' websites. Afiliate marketing offers you 
the opportunity to earn revenue by generating sales for some of the Web's biggest 
e-commerce sites.
Amazon Associates
One of the oldest and biggest afiliate programs is Amazon Associates, which has 
been running since 1996. Once you have signed up to be an Amazon Associate  
(or afiliate), you can place links to Amazon on your blog. These links contain your 
own unique tracking ID. If one of your referrals makes a purchase, Amazon pays you 
a percentage of the sale. Your tracking ID tells Amazon that you were the afiliate 
who generated the sale.

Monetizing your Blog
[ 272 ]
The program offers many features that enable you to target Amazon products 
that are likely to be of interest to your readers. Think about the massive inventory 
that Amazon carries across diverse departments such as books, electronics, and 
kitchenware. There is bound to be at least one product on Amazon that your readers 
might consider buying and, therefore, potentially generate some commission for you.
At the time of writing Amazon is embroiled in sales tax disputes 
with several US states, most notably California. Because of this 
the company has withdrawn its Associates program in California 
and a handful of other states, so depending on where you are in 
the US, Amazon Associates may not be a monetization option.
There are several ways you can use your Amazon Afiliate links. For example, you 
may write a review of a new book or product. You could place an afiliate link within 
the text that points straight to the product page on Amazon. Some of your readers, 
who may be interested in the product, may click the link, and hopefully buy it. You 
can also showcase products on your blog—the sidebar is a good place for this. You 
can choose a speciic product, or use a widget that randomly displays products from 
a particular department or category. There are many ways to get your Amazon links 
in front of your readers. You should take time to look around the Amazon Associates 
members' area to see what's available—the following screenshot shows some of  
the options:

Chapter 10
[ 273 ]
Creating an Amazon Associates widget
Let's imagine that WPBizGuru has written a book about WordPress. He could 
place an Amazon advert for this book in his sidebar. We'll work through how to  
do this, but irst you need to sign up for an Amazon Associates account. Go to 
http://affiliate-program.amazon.com/join/, click on the Join Now for FREE! 
button, and ill out the registration form.
Log in to the Amazon Associates members' area and click on the Links & Banners 
tab. You can search for the product you want to display by keyword, the ISBN,  
or the ASIN (Amazon Standard Identiication Number). Of course, WPBizGuru 
hasn't really written a book (because he doesn't exist!). So, you can use any book  
(or product) you like. Enter your search terms and click Go!.
You'll be presented with a list of results for your search. Click the Get Link button 
next to the book you want.

Monetizing your Blog
[ 274 ]
The next page allows you to customize the widget. If you look at the Live Preview of 
the link, you'll see it's a fairly simple design. Try selecting different options and see 
how they look in the preview (I recommend you stick with the Text and Image link 
type; I've also removed the border). Once you're happy with your option choices, we 
can change the color scheme to match WPBizGuru a little better. Enter the following 
values in the color ields: Background Color: FFFFFF; Text Color: 666666; Link 
Color: 004B91:
Copy the HTML code, which appears in the box below the link editor.
Using your Amazon widget in WordPress
Now we'll paste the HTML code into a text widget in WordPress. Log in to your 
WPBizGuru blog and go to Appearance | Widgets.
Add a Text widget at the bottom of the Secondary Aside widget area:

Chapter 10
[ 275 ]
Open up the new Text widget for editing and paste the Amazon HTML code into the 
text area. Give the widget a title: My Book. Click the Save button.
When you view the blog, you'll see the link in the sidebar. Go ahead and click on the 
image or one of the other links, and you'll be taken to the product page on Amazon. 
Your tracking ID is embedded into the link, so if anyone clicks through and buys the 
book, you earn commission. This is how the widget looks in the sidebar:

Monetizing your Blog
[ 276 ]
Afiliate networks
Along with Amazon Associates, there are many other afiliate programs and 
networks that you may wish to join. Some companies (for example, Amazon) 
manage their own afiliate programs; others use afiliate networks, such as 
Commission Junction, Share Results, or ClickBank to take care of their afiliates 
for them. These networks manage afiliate programs on behalf of hundreds of 
companies from household names to small independents. 
If there is a particular company for which your readers may be potential customers, 
check to see if they have an afiliate program. You should also consider signing up to 
a couple of afiliate networks and see if they are promoting programs that might earn 
revenue on your blog. For example, WPBizGuru might ind afiliate relationships 
with WordPress theme and plugin providers beneicial because his readers are likely 
to buy these products and, in doing so, earn him some commission.
Direct ad sales
AdSense and afiliate programs provide an easy-to-manage, quick-start advertising 
option for your blog. However, if you're prepared to do some extra work, you 
may ind it more proitable to sell ads directly. This will involve inding your own 
advertising clients, in other words, sales. If you don't have the time or inclination to 
take on yet another role for your blog, then stick with AdSense and let Google do the 
selling for you—they seem to be quite good at it!
Don't even think about direct ad sales until your trafic hits a respectable level. 
There's no point me recommending any precise trafic volumes—it will vary from 
blog to blog, depending on your industry, and who your readers and potential 
advertisers are. However, sufice to say that your daily page views will probably 
need to be in the thousands, or even tens of thousands, before you'll have anything 
like an attractive proposition to take to potential advertisers.
Banner sizes
The web advertising industry uses a range of standard banner sizes. This helps 
advertisers save money on their design costs. They know that once they've had 
advertising artwork created to industry-standard sizes, it will be acceptable to a 
wide range of publishers. So, when you're deciding how much room you need 
for advertising, you should think in units of space that match the standard sizes. 
The Interactive Advertising Bureau (IAB), a trade body for the online advertising 
industry, maintains guidelines for the standard ad sizes (see http://www.iab.net/
Ad_Unit for details).

Chapter 10
[ 277 ]
When it comes to choosing which banner sizes you want to display, there are a few 
standard sizes that seem to be popular with bloggers. One of the most common sizes 
on blogs at the moment is the 125 x 125 square button. The following screenshot 
shows this type of ad on ReadWriteWeb (http://www.readwriteweb.com/):
As with most things blog-related, it's dificult to generalize. Yes, 125 x 125 is a 
popular size, but it's by no means the only one in common usage. Many blogs, 
particularly the big players, use ads of all sizes. Personally, I think that smaller ads 
look better and are more appropriate on small business blogs. I recommend you 
start your banner advertising venture with fairly small banners. If your advertisers 
suddenly start demanding 160 x 600 skyscrapers, and are prepared to pay for them, 
you can consider up-sizing then.
Interestingly, the IAB now lists 125x125 as a delisted standard ad unit; 
however, it is still widely used by bloggers and is also still available as 
an AdSense ad unit size.

Monetizing your Blog
[ 278 ]
Where to place banner ads
There's always a trade-off when it comes to advertising. You can charge more for the 
most prominent positions on your blog, but then these will be unavailable for your 
own content. Placing your ads in less prominent positions means they don't get in 
the way of your content, but they are worthless to advertisers. In fact, you will ind  
it dificult to sell ads that are tucked away below the fold, right at the bottom of  
the sidebars.
To stand a chance of making any money from banner advertising, you have to be 
prepared to let go of some of your best screen real estate. This probably means at 
the top of your sidebars. You don't need to sacriice a whole load of space to begin 
with—I suggest you start with maybe two 125 x 125 banners. If your ad sales really 
start to take off, you can consider devoting more space. Luckily, the widgetized 
sidebars in WordPress make it fairly easy to move stuff around.
How much to charge
The simple answer to this is: Whatever you can get! It's going to be tough to get 
advertisers on board in the early days of your sales efforts. Making your prices 
attractive will be a big help in closing those crucial initial deals. You may even 
consider giving advertisers a free trial as an incentive to sign up.
There are various pricing models used in web advertising. Probably the most 
attractive to advertisers is Cost Per Click (CPC), for example, you charge, say, 
20 cents each time someone clicks on your advertiser's banner. Advertisers like this 
model as they are paying for objectiied, clearly visible results. Another pricing 
model is Cost Per Thousand, or Cost Per Mille (CPM), where the advertiser pays an 
agreed amount for every 1,000 times their banner is viewed. Finally there is a simple 
time-based pricing model, known as Tenancy, where advertisers pay an agreed 
price for their banners to be displayed for a certain period; a month, three months,  
or whatever. 
Your prices will also vary depending on the position of the banner. As I already 
mentioned, the most valuable (and easiest to sell) position is at the top of your sidebar. 
However, if you were to offer ad positions below the fold at the bottom of the sidebar, 
your price would have to be adjusted downwards in order to be attractive.
As to the exact dollar amount you should be charging, it really depends on your 
sales skills and the abundance (or lack) of advertisers in your niche or industry. 
In working out your prices, do some research—see if you can ind out what other 
bloggers are charging. If your sales drive is not going too well, it could mean your 
price point is a little high.

Chapter 10
[ 279 ]
Your media pack and rate card
A media pack gives prospective advertisers all the data they need before deciding 
whether to buy advertising in a publication. If you're intent on selling adverts on 
your blog, you will be taken far more seriously if you have a detailed proposition for 
your advertising customers. In the world of ofline publications, the media pack is 
usually a glossy brochure. On the web, publishers often present it as a well-designed 
PDF or fancy online presentation. You don't necessarily need to go to these lengths. 
Your media pack can be in the form of a static page on your blog. The important 
thing is to include all the pertinent information. Remember, prospective advertisers 
want to know the beneits they will receive from advertising on your blog—what's 
in it for them? Your media pack might include:
• 
Page views and visitors per month (these are essential stats for advertisers)
• 
Number of subscribers by RSS and e-mail
• 
Google Page Rank, Technorati Authority Ranking, Alexa Ranking (only 
include these if they are reasonably good; if your Alexa rank is way down in 
the millions, omit it)
• 
The number of links in to your blog
• 
Average number of comments per month
• 
A description of your target audience
• 
Any demographic data you may have about your readers (for example, 
gender, age, income, and so on)
• 
Any awards your blog may have picked up
• 
Any testimonials and reviews you can get
• 
Details about the type and size of adverts you will accept
• 
Where the ads will appear (use screenshots, if possible)
A rate card is a price list for all the advertising options you're selling. While a rate 
card can help enhance your professional image, it might not be such a good idea 
to publish your rates in the early days of your sales efforts. You might ind a rate 
card useful for your reference, but hang ire on publishing it until you've spoken 
to a few prospective clients. Gauge their reaction to your prices and see if you're 
in the ballpark. Another reason for not publishing your rates up front is that you 
may be able to negotiate higher prices for some clients than others. On your media 
pack page, provide contact details for requesting more information about rates. 
You might consider setting up a special e-mail address (for example, advertising@
yourcompany.com) or a dedicated contact form for advertising enquiries.

Monetizing your Blog
[ 280 ]
Rotating banner ads
Once you have more than two or three advertising clients, you may decide to rotate 
their adverts. This means you can display several ads in a much smaller space. Each 
time the page is reloaded, one of the adverts will be displayed at random.
We'll set this up for WPBizGuru so that there are two advertising spots in the 
sidebar. One will rotate three 125 x 125 ads and the other will rotate three 120 x 240 
ads. I've supplied six JPG images in the code bundle for this chapter, which you can 
use as dummy adverts for testing. They're in a folder called ads.
Unfortunately, there are no reliable plugins that handle banner ad rotation in 
WordPress, so we will be using a third-party ad server called OpenX. It's free to use 
if you are serving fewer than 100,000 ad impressions per month, and if you go over 
that amount you can pay for the extra impressions you need. There is also a self-
hosted version of OpenX, which is completely free and has no limits on the number 
of ad impressions you can serve. However, it requires you to install the software on 
your own web server, which is beyond the scope of this chapter. We will be using the 
community version of OpenX hosted on their servers. It's called OpenX OnRamp.
OpenX also offers a marketplace where publishers can sell their 
advertising inventory to a wider audience of advertisers. It's 
completely optional, but signing up to the marketplace could give 
a nice boost to your ad sales.
To get started, go to http://openx.org/sign-openx-onramp and sign up for an 
account. During the sign-up process you will need to supply the address of your live 
blog, but we can test the ad serving capabilities of OpenX on our local development 
server. Once you have conirmed your account by clicking the veriication link in the 
sign-up e-mail they send you, log in to your account.
From the home page of the OpenX admin area, click on the Inventory tab. First, we 
need to set up a website where the ads will appear. Click on Websites in the left-
hand menu and then Add new website. You'll need to enter the details of your live 
blog, but we can still run the rest of this tutorial on your local development server for 
WPBizGuru. You can leave the Category and Country / Language blank for now, if 
you wish. Once you're done, click Save changes:

Chapter 10
[ 281 ]
Now, you need to set up the zones for your ads. This is the area of the page 
where the ads will be displayed. Remember, we want one 125 x 125 button and one 
120 x 240 banner in our blog's sidebar, so we'll set up a zone for each of these ad 
sizes. Select Zones from the left-hand menu and then Add new zone. Enter a name 
for the irst zone—I've called it Sidebar 125x125 button. Choose IAB Square Button 
(125 x 125) from the Size drop-down. Uncheck the box for Serve ads from OpenX 
Market and click Save Changes:

Monetizing your Blog
[ 282 ]
Create another new zone. This time call it Sidebar 120x240 banner and select IAB 
Vertical Banner (120 x 240) for the size.
Now you have set up your website and ad zones, you need some advertisers. For the 
purposes of this demonstration, we'll set up a couple of ictitious advertisers. Select 
Advertisers from the left-hand menu, then click Add new advertiser. Enter a name 
and contact for the advertiser, but make sure to use a real e-mail address in case you 
want to test the e-mail functions later. Leave all the other ields as they are, and click 
Save Changes:
Repeat the process for a second ictitious advertiser:
So, let's imagine that Advertiser One wants to place three 125 x 125 buttons on your 
blog. You've closed the sale and agreed the CPC (cost per click) for all three buttons. 
He has supplied the buttons, so you now need to set up his campaigns and upload 
the images. We'll run through that now.
Select Advertisers from the left-hand menu and click on Add new campaign next 
to Advertiser One:

Chapter 10
[ 283 ]
Under Basic information, give the campaign a name and choose Remnant for 
Campaign type:
Leave the settings under Date at the defaults. Under Pricing model select CPC and 
enter 600 in the Clicks box:
Under Priority in relation to other campaigns, enter 1000 in the per day box:
You can leave all the other settings at the defaults and click Save Changes. On the 
next page, click on the Add new banner link:

Monetizing your Blog
[ 284 ]
Choose to Upload a local banner to the webserver. For Name, enter Ad1. Click on 
the button to upload a ile and choose ad1.jpg from your computer (it's one of the ad 
images in the code bundle for this chapter). Enter a destination URL—I've entered 
the Google home page for test purposes, but in a real situation this would be the 
URL that the advertiser wants visitors to reach when they click on his ad. You can 
leave all the other settings at the defaults and click Save Changes.
Repeat the upload process to add two more banners for Advertiser One's 1st 
Campaign—you can use ad2.jpg and ad3.jpg from the code bundle for this chapter.

Chapter 10
[ 285 ]
Now select Advertisers from the left-hand menu. This time click Add new campaign 
for Advertiser Two. Set up a campaign for this advertiser and upload three 
banners—you can use ad4.jpg, ad5.jpg, and ad6.jpg from the code bundle. 
Note that these are the 120 x 240 banners.
Now we need to link the banners to the appropriate zones. Select Zones from the 
left-hand menu and click Linked Banners for the Sidebar 125 x 125 banner zone:

Monetizing your Blog
[ 286 ]
From the drop-downs, select Advertiser One and Advertiser One – 1st Campaign 
(3 banner(s)) and click the 'arrow' icon:
You'll see the banners are linked to the campaign:
Select Zones from the left-hand menu and link the banners for Advertiser Two to the 
Sidebar 120x240 banner zone.
We're now ready to display the rotating ads on our blog. There is a plugin that 
makes this a simple process—it's called OpenX WordPress Widget (http://
wordpress.org/extend/plugins/openx-wordpress-widget/). Install and activate 
it in the usual way.
Go to Settings | OpenX-WP to view the settings page. Enter the Url to 
OpenX-AdServer—because we are using the hosted version of OpenX, this is 
d1.openx.org. Click Save.

Chapter 10
[ 287 ]
The plugin includes a widget that we can use in our sidebar, but before we can use it, 
we need to get the ZoneID for each of the zones we created in OpenX. To do this, go 
back to OpenX and select Websites from the left-hand menu. Click on the website we 
created earlier—WPBizGuru. Click on the Invocation Code tab. Leave all the settings 
as they are and click the Generate button. On the next screen you will see a list of tags 
for all the zones we set up. These tags include the ZoneID—to ind it, scroll down to 
the Ad script section and look for the id in square brackets. Copy the ID for both of 
the zones we created earlier. I've highlighted it in the following screenshot:
Now go back to WordPress and select Appearance | Widgets. We will place the ads 
at the top of the Secondary Aside sidebar. Drag an instance of the OpenX Widget to 
the top of the Secondary Aside sidebar. Enter Our Sponsors for the title and select 
2 from the Number of banners drop-down. Enter the ZoneIDs you just copied from 
OpenX, omitting the letters 'id' (so just the numbers). Click the checkboxes to append 
a <br/> tag, which will insert a line break after the ads. Click Save:

Monetizing your Blog
[ 288 ]
Now view the blog. You will see that the OpenX Widget has been added to 
the sidebar. Go ahead and reload the page a few times and you will see the ads 
rotating at random. Click on the ads and you will be taken to the corresponding 
destination URL.
OK, so the dummy images look a bit weird, but you get the idea! Hopefully your 
advertisers' banners will be a little more attractive. You might also think that the  
125 x 125 + 120 x 240 banner coniguration takes up too much space. If so, consider 
just one or two 125 x 125 banners. It's really up to you.
You've probably realized that OpenX has lots of features I haven't even mentioned. 
It's a powerful ad serving platform that offers you plenty of lexibility. If you'd like 
to ind out more, there's a useful book published by Packt called OpenX Ad Server: 
Beginner's Guide (ISBN 1849510202) by Murat Yilmaz.

Chapter 10
[ 289 ]
Paid reviews
Paid reviews are a contentious issue in the blogosphere. As the name suggests, the 
practice involves bloggers receiving a payment from a company in exchange for 
reviewing that company's product or service. Many bloggers have ethical objections 
because they believe paid reviews can mislead readers, and distort the spirit of 
blogging, which, in its early days, was not about making money. I mention paid 
reviews here because they can be a useful source of revenue. But think carefully 
before using them as you could upset a sizeable proportion of your readers (and 
other bloggers).
Disclosure
If you do use paid reviews, I strongly recommend that you disclose 
this to your readers. Having a disclosure statement on your About 
page, outlining how you make money from your blog, is a best practice 
you should implement. If you're in the USA, you should also be aware 
of the FTC guidelines about commercial endorsements (http://ftc.
gov/os/2009/10/091005endorsementguidesfnnotice.pdf).
You're the best person to judge the likely reaction of your readers and whether they 
would appreciate paid reviews. If you're not certain, ask them. Write a post about 
it to canvass opinion and/or conduct a poll. There are paid review networks that 
can help match you up with companies who want their products reviewed and are 
willing to pay—a couple of the biggest are Pay Per Post (http://payperpost.com/) 
and ReviewMe (http://www.reviewme.com/).
WP-Polls plugin
On the subject of polls, you may be interested in the WP-Polls plugin, 
by Lester Chan. It's a little off-topic for this chapter, so we won't go 
through a full installation here. However, it's a very simple plugin to 
install and use. You can have reader polls up and running in no time. 
Go to http://wordpress.org/extend/plugins/wp-polls/ for 
full details.
Case study review
We've now completed all the work on the WPBizGuru blog. I've made one inal 
change and that's to hide the extra pages that were included in the dummy content 
we imported.

Monetizing your Blog
[ 290 ]
I hope the work we've done on the case study has shown you how straightforward it 
can be to create a feature-rich, professional-looking business blog using WordPress. 
You should also now realize how easy it is to extend WordPress, thanks to the large 
and active community of developers who have created so many cool plugins.
Just because the case study is over for the book, that's not to say it's inished. 
Likewise, you'll discover that your blog is never inished. You will be constantly 
tweaking it and adding functionality. The beauty of web publishing is that things 
will always evolve.
I will be adding updates and additional tutorials to my own blog at http://blog.
paulthewlis.com. WordPress is constantly developing with new versions and 
plugins. I'll try to cover as many of these as possible on my blog, and show you  
how they can be applied to the WPBizGuru case study.
Summary
In this chapter, we looked at how you can place advertisements on your blog to 
generate revenue. We began with an introduction to Google AdSense and the 
Awesome Google AdSense plugin, which allows you to place AdSense ads in a 
variety of locations on your blog. Next, you learned about afiliate programs, in 
particular, Amazon Associates. We set up an Amazon book widget and placed it in 
the sidebar. Finally, we looked at display advertising and how you can set up ad 
rotation using OpenX.
In the next chapter, we will look at strategies to help you cope as your blog grows 
and the number of visitors increases.

Managing Growth
If you've applied the tips, techniques, and methods you have learned throughout this 
book, you should be well on your way to having a successful blog that's attracting 
lots of visitors. Hopefully, it won't be long until your blog grows into something big. 
Of course, that's great—it's what every blogger wants. But success can bring with it a 
whole host of issues you need to deal with. In this chapter, we will explore some  
of these and discuss how you can address them, including:
• 
How to manage your workload
• 
Ensuring your blog is available to mobile browsers
• 
Managing increased trafic
• 
Moving your blog to a better web server
• 
Bringing in other writers
• 
An introduction to WordPress Multisite
Keeping up with the workload
As the number of visitors to your blog increases, so will your workload. You'll 
notice your inbox illing up with e-mails from your readers and you'll spend 
more and more of your time moderating and replying to comments. If your trafic 
volume really starts to take off, you could soon ind yourself snowed under with 
correspondence from your blog.
If you ind yourself in this situation, it may well be worthwhile bringing in some 
help. Many of the e-mails and comments you receive will be of relatively low-level 
importance. You will inevitably receive a high volume of Great Post!! comments that 
require no response from you and just need to be moderated. You may also receive a 
lot of e-mails all asking the same or similar questions. You could easily make a list of 
stock replies to these FAQs. You may well ind that only a small proportion of your 
correspondence requires your personal attention, in which case, get someone to ilter 
it so you only see the stuff that matters.

Managing Growth
[ 292 ]
You may already have a PA or admin assistant who is good at vetting your e-mails. 
You could set them to work moderating simple comments and responding to FAQ 
e-mails using your list of stock replies, while only passing on the correspondence 
which needs your attention. It may be dificult to let go this amount of control of 
your blog, but it will certainly free up a great deal of your time for more important 
tasks, like writing new posts.
Going mobile
As your visitor base grows, there's a good chance that more and more of your 
readers will want to access your blog on mobile devices such as PDAs and cell 
phones. Mobile computing is a growth sector, and savvy web publishers are doing 
all they can to ensure their content is compatible with as many devices as possible. 
You can provide a great service to your expanding readership by giving them a 
version of your blog that is optimized for mobile viewing. Granted, most modern 
smart phones have web browsers that are capable of displaying full websites very 
accurately. However, not everyone has a smart phone and even those who do may 
wish to access the web when they are away from a Wi-Fi hotspot and have no 3G/4G 
reception. It's in these circumstances that a mobile-optimized version of your blog 
will be useful to your readers. 
There is a plug-in called WordPress Mobile Pack (http://wordpress.org/extend/
plugins/wordpress-mobile-pack/), which makes mobile optimization a cinch 
to set up.
Log in to your admin area, and install and activate the plugin in the usual way. 
Depending on your server setup, you may get an error message telling you that some 
directories are not writeable. If so, change permissions on the server then deactivate 
and reactivate the plugin to remove the error. 

Chapter 11
[ 293 ]
Go to Appearance | Mobile Switcher, and enter the following settings, then click 
Save Changes:
These settings tell the Mobile Switcher part of the plugin to activate the WordPress 
Mobile (base) theme, if it detects that the visitor is using a mobile phone browser. 
The theme we have selected came with the plugin, but the Mobile Switcher can 
use any one of your installed themes, so you may want to use a different mobile-
optimized theme. A quick Google search will show you plenty of existing mobile 
themes, or you could create your own using the Thematic framework.

Managing Growth
[ 294 ]
As you can see from the following screenshot, the theme we have selected strips out 
most of the styling and delivers a very simple page that is quick to load and easy to 
navigate on a mobile device.
The plugin has some other features that you may want to experiment with. 
For example, if you go to Appearance | Mobile Widgets you can select which 
widgets are available in your mobile theme.
Managing increased trafic
As your trafic increases, there is a chance you could run into technical issues related 
to your web server. You may well notice your blog running slow. This is a particular 
risk if your blog is getting spikes of high trafic that place a sudden strain on the 
server. These spikes can occur for a number of reasons, for example, one of your 
posts making it onto the front page of Digg, or a couple of major bloggers linking  
to you. Of course, this is all good, but only if your server can handle it.

Chapter 11
[ 295 ]
If you work in a corporate environment and your blog is hosted on your company's 
web server, then these performance issues are a problem for your IT department—
submit a support ticket.
However, if you're an independent operator or a small company, you may not  
have the luxury of a dedicated IT team. If you notice your blog slowing down or 
even crashing completely, and you suspect it may be caused by high trafic volumes, 
the irst remedy to try is installing a great little plugin called WP Super Cache 
(we'll go over what to do when you've outgrown your web host in the next section of 
this chapter).
Installing WP Super Cache
This plugin is designed to reduce the server load for high-trafic blogs. It could 
be the solution to your slow performance problems. It works by converting your 
blog's pages into static HTML iles and serving them to your visitors instead of the 
dynamic pages from the database. Static iles are quicker and easier for your web 
server to handle, so it will be able to deal with far greater volumes of trafic before  
it slows down.
We'll run through the installation process, which is slightly different from most of 
the other plugins we've used. Go to http://wordpress.org/extend/plugins/
wp-super-cache/ and download the plugin. Unzip the package and use your FTP 
software to upload the entire wp-super-cache folder to your blog's plugins folder 
(/wp-content/plugins/). Log in to your admin area and activate the plugin, then 
go to Settings | WP Super Cache.
You may see a warning message advising you that 
wp-content is writeable. If this is the case, use your 
FTP client to change the permissions for your wp-
content directory to 755. 

Managing Growth
[ 296 ]
Select the Caching On radio button and then click Update Status:
The plugin is now set up. If you click the Advanced tab on the WP Super Cache 
Settings page, you will see that by default PHP is being used to cache iles. This 
is a slightly slower method of caching than using mod_rewrite. However, setting 
up mod_rewrite caching is slightly more complicated. If you'd like to switch to 
mod_rewrite, the plugin has plenty of documentation and an active support forum 
to help you out. For new users, PHP caching is recommended and it works just ine.
You can check that the plugin is working by viewing your blog and opening a 
few random pages. Now go back to WP Super Cache Settings and click on the 
Contents tab. Click Regenerate cache stats, and you should see that some pages 
have been cached:

Chapter 11
[ 297 ]
Outgrowing your web host
This won't be a problem for you if your blog is running on your company web 
server, managed by the IT department. However, many readers will have installed 
their self-hosted WordPress blog on a shared hosting account. This means it's on a 
web server alongside lots of other people's websites, all of which have to share the 
server's resources, such as memory (RAM) and processing power.
Shared hosting accounts have limits set on disk space and bandwidth. As the trafic 
volume to your blog increases, you may well start to exceed these limits. You may 
also experience performance issues (remember you're sharing memory and processor 
with lots of other websites). There may well come a time when your blog simply 
outgrows its shared hosting space, and you have to think about upgrading. If this 
happens, you need to move to a dedicated server.
As its name suggests, a dedicated server is all yours. There will be no more sharing 
of resources, which should improve performance. Also, the bandwidth limits on 
dedicated servers are usually much higher. The downside is that you will see 
a considerable increase in your monthly hosting bills. Unfortunately, that's an 
unavoidable cost of your new-found success!
As with desktop computers, server specs are constantly improving. Choosing a 
dedicated server is a bit like choosing a new desktop computer—you should go for 
the fastest processor and the largest RAM you can afford. For most standard blogs, 
disk space is less of an issue. These days, even low-end servers come with at least 
250 GB hard disks. That should be more than enough, unless you have a lot of media 
iles such as video, audio, and images.
With a dedicated server, you also need to consider server administration. Web 
servers don't just run themselves; they need to be constantly monitored and 
maintained. With your shared hosting account, all of the server administration is 
done by the hosting company. However, for a dedicated server, essential routine 
tasks such as backups, operating system patches, virus scanning, reboots, and 
monitoring are not necessarily included in your monthly rental costs. You're 
probably not a dab hand at server administration via the command line, so you'll 
need to buy in this expertise. Most hosting companies will offer server admin as an 
add-on service, or you may be able to ind it cheaper if you outsource to a specialist 
server admin company (you provide them with access to your server and they carry 
out all the maintenance tasks remotely).

Managing Growth
[ 298 ]
You should also check that your new dedicated server has all the software you 
need to run WordPress. Many web hosts will provide their dedicated servers pre-
conigured with a similar setup to their shared hosting plans. But some web hosts 
might just provide an empty box and you may have to ask them to do the initial 
setup for you. As a minimum, you need to have installed: a Linux operating system, 
Apache web server, a control panel (for example cPanel or Plesk), PHP (version 5.2.4 
or higher), and MySQL (version 5.0 or higher) with phpMyAdmin.
The web hosting industry is a very competitive market, so it's well worth shopping 
around and doing some research. There are literally thousands of hosting companies 
out there. I've listed a few of the best known and established hosting companies 
next, all of which offer dedicated servers. This is in no way an endorsement of these 
companies, nor is it anywhere near an exhaustive list. I've just provided them as a 
starting point for your own diligent research:
• 
Rackspace: http://www.rackspace.com
• 
Media Temple: http://www.mediatemple.net
• 
GoDaddy: http://www.godaddy.com
• 
Host Gator: http://www.hostgator.com
• 
Lunarpages Dedicated: http://www.lpdedicated.com
Of course, you may decide to remain loyal to your existing 
hosting company if they offer dedicated servers! In fact, there 
could be advantages of staying with your existing web host; 
they may offer to move your WordPress blog and database for 
you, if you upgrade to one of their dedicated servers. 
Virtual Private Servers and Cloud Servers
Dedicated servers are no longer the only alternative to traditional shared hosting 
accounts. You may also wish to consider a Virtual Private Server (VPS) or a Cloud 
Server. A VPS is a server that resides on a Virtual Machine, which is a completely 
isolated guest operating system within a normal host operating system. I know  
that sounds a bit complicated, but all you really need to know about VPS hosting 
is that, in terms of cost and performance, it sits between shared hosting and a full 
dedicated server.

Chapter 11
[ 299 ]
Cloud hosting has developed into a mainstream product over the last couple of 
years and is the latest buzz word in the web hosting marketplace. Cloud hosting 
gives you all the features of a dedicated server but with the added beneit of almost 
limitless scalability. So instead of renting a single physical server with its inite 
resources (disk space, memory, processor speed, and so on), you can take all the 
resources you'll ever need from the cloud and just pay for what you use. Think of 
it as hosting provided as a utility, in the same way that power is provided by the 
electricity grid. 
Moving WordPress to a new server
Once you've chosen your new dedicated hosting package, you'll need to move your 
blog to it. Moving WordPress is not a particularly dificult task, but as with any job 
involving a remote web server, things can go wrong. Check with your new web host 
and see if they offer any assistance in moving websites for new customers—some 
companies do offer this service and it's always good to have some personal assistance 
from experts who have done it before.
If you're taking on the task yourself, here are a few preliminary guidelines before we 
look at the detailed procedure:
• 
Make a full backup of your WordPress iles and database before you begin 
moving your blog, just in case things go wrong (see Chapter 5, Content is King 
for backup instructions).
• 
Try to igure out the time and day of the week when your blog is quietest, in 
terms of trafic. Use Google Analytics to work this out. Moving your blog to a 
new server will inevitably mean it's unavailable for a certain amount of time. 
Doing the work at a quiet time will minimize disruption for your readers. 
It's worth choosing the slowest time of the week, even if that's 4 a.m. on a 
Sunday morning!
• 
Be sure to warn your readers in advance that your blog is likely to be 
unavailable at the speciied time. Try to give as much notice as possible, 
in a prominent place. Maybe use a text widget in the sidebar to make the 
announcement, or mention it in a blog post and on Twitter.
• 
Any delay is most likely to be caused when you change your domain's 
nameservers to point at your new server. It will take time for these new DNS 
settings to propagate across the Web. Ask your domain registrar and new 
web host for advice on how to keep this delay to a minimum.

Managing Growth
[ 300 ]
We'll now run through the process of moving WordPress. These instructions assume 
that you will be keeping the same domain (and subdomain, if you're using one). 
They also assume that you have already downloaded your blog's database as part  
of the backup process.
First, use your FTP client to download your entire WordPress installation to your 
computer—entire means all the iles and folders in the WordPress root directory. This 
may take quite a long time. The following screenshot shows the entire WordPress 
installation for WPBizGuru:
Once it's all downloaded, you can upload it to the correct directory on your new 
server (for example, if your blog was installed in a directory called blog on your old 
server, place it in a directory called blog on the new server).
Next we need to create a new MySQL database for WordPress. The best way to do this 
is to use phpMyAdmin. If your new server doesn't have phpMyAdmin installed, ask 
your web host if they can install it for you. When you create the database, try to use the 
same database name, username, and password as you had on your old server (this is 
not always possible, it will depend how your new web host has conigured MySQL).

Chapter 11
[ 301 ]
If you can't use the same database settings on your new server, 
make sure you change them in the wp-config.php ile in the 
root directory of WordPress. 
Once the database is created, you can upload all the WordPress tables using the 
backup copy of the database from your old server. Again, use phpMyAdmin for this. 
Select your new database from the list in phpMyAdmin:
Click on the Import tab:
Click on the Browse button and locate the backup .sql ile (remember, this is the ile 
you downloaded when you backed up the database from your old server):

Managing Growth
[ 302 ]
Now click the Go button and your database will be populated with all the 
WordPress tables from your old server:
Now all you need to do is change the nameservers for your domain so that it points 
to your new server. If you're not sure how to do this, seek advice from your domain 
registrar and web host. This is the point in the process where your blog is likely to be 
unavailable for a few hours while the new nameservers propagate. If you're using a 
subdomain, set this up for your new server using the control panel.
Do not delete the WordPress iles or database on your old server until you are sure 
the move to your new server has been successful. Once the changes have propagated 
across nameservers, view your blog. Make sure the content is all there and that all 
the permalinks are working. You may need to re-conirm the permalink settings  
(go to Settings | Permalinks).
There are some plugins available that automate the process of 
moving your WordPress blog to a new server. Most of them are 
paid-for plugins so you may not feel it's a worthwhile investment 
if you're only going to be moving your blog once. However, if you 
have several blogs that you're likely to be moving, it may be worth 
spending the money. One plugin to look at is called Move That Blog 
(http://www.23press.com/movethatblog).

Chapter 11
[ 303 ]
Bringing in other writers
This is a strategy that can bring a number of beneits as your blog grows. As we 
discussed earlier, as your blog trafic increases, so will your workload with an ever 
increasing number of comments and e-mails to answer. You may well ind that the 
time you have for writing new posts diminishes. This is where bringing in guest 
writers can be a big help. You can use them to create content so you don't have to.
There will also be periods when you can't devote time to your blog, for example, 
during vacations or when other work activities have to take priority. Again, a guest 
writer can provide a much-needed break from your blog work.
Unless you are very lucky, you will also experience a common problem faced by 
most bloggers: writer's block. If you can't think of anything to write about, bring 
someone else in to plug the gap.
Guest writers will also add variety to your blog, which may help to keep your 
readers interested and provide them with a new perspective. Working with guest 
writers will also demonstrate your connectedness with the blogosphere, as most of 
them are likely to be bloggers themselves. They will undoubtedly tell their readers 
that they are posting on your blog, which can bring new visitors for you.
How to ind guest writers
Often the best people to approach to be guest writers are your most active 
commenters. These are people who already know your blog and have already 
taken the time to contribute content. They also enjoy your blog because they keep 
returning to view your posts and add comments.
You could also approach other bloggers who you follow on a regular basis—maybe 
ones who you have included in your blogroll. Pay particular attention to bloggers 
who appear to be keen networkers; these are the ones who are active commenters  
on several other blogs that you read.
Other possibilities for guest bloggers could be well-known people in your industry. 
They may not necessarily have their own blogs but could have done some ofline 
writing in industry journals and magazines. Your colleagues, associates, and even 
clients may also make very good guest writers.
If your blogging budget is big enough, you may even consider hiring a freelance 
writer. This should guarantee some good copy. However, it's not always necessary 
to pay your guest writers. Most of them will be happy to gain the exposure and links 
back to their own blog (if they have one). You could also engage them on a quid pro 
quo basis, where you agree to do some guest writing for them some time.

Managing Growth
[ 304 ]
You stand a better chance of having prospective guest writers accept your invitation 
if you don't demand too much from them. Don't set them a challenging assignment 
that requires lots of research and writing time. Help them out by keeping your 
request fairly open ended so they can choose a topic they feel comfortable with.
Introducing WordPress Multisite
As your blog grows and you see the beneits it brings to your business, you or your 
colleagues may decide to set up other blogs. You may want each member of your 
team, or each department in your company, to have their own blog. Or maybe your 
CEO is so impressed that he or she wants his or her own blog, too. You could run 
each of these blogs with their own individual installations of WordPress. However, 
WordPress has built-in functionality that allows you to run multiple blogs from a 
single installation. It's called WordPress Multisite.
WordPress Multisite allows an unlimited number of blogs to run off one installation. 
All the blogs on such a network operate completely independently of each other. 
Each can use different themes and settings. The administrator decides which plugins 
to install, and can give different permissions to different users.
We'll look at the basics of WordPress Multisite so that you can see just how easy it 
can be to get multiple blogs up and running for your business.
Getting started with WordPress Multisite
You could set up WordPress Multisite on any existing installation of WordPress (3.0 
or higher). However, as this will be a test installation for you to experiment and play 
around with, I suggest you make a fresh installation of WordPress on your local 
development server. This way if you play a little too hard and break something, it 
won't affect anything on your live blog.
Note that on our local development server we won't have full functionality of 
WordPress Multisite. On a live web server, you would have the option to install each 
blog in the network on its own subdomain (for example, firstblog.mydomain.com, 
secondblog.mydomain.com, and so on.). However, to mimic this functionality on a 
local test server running on XAMPP, it would require lots of Apache coniguration 
work that is beyond the scope of this chapter. So we will be using a directory 
structure for our blog network (for example, http://localhost/wpmulti/
firstblog, http://localhost/wpmulti/secondblog, and so on). 

Chapter 11
[ 305 ]
As you can see from the previous example URLs, I have installed WordPress in a 
directory called wpmulti—you might want to do the same so that your URLs are 
identical to the ones in the rest of this tutorial.
Installing a network
In your new WordPress installation on your local development server, add the 
following code to the config.php ile, just above the line that says /* That's all, 
stop editing! Happy blogging. */:
define('WP_ALLOW_MULTISITE', true);
Log in to the admin area or, if you are already logged in, refresh the dashboard, and 
you will notice that Network Setup has been added to the Tools menu. Click on it, 
enter the Network Details and click Install:

Managing Growth
[ 306 ]
On the next screen you are given instructions to follow to enable the network.
Creating a .htaccess ile
When you get to step 3, you will need to create a .htaccess 
ile. To do this, open Notepad++ and select File | New, followed 
by File | Save As. Browse to the root of your new WordPress 
installation as the location to save the ile. Use the ile name 
.htaccess and for Save as type, select All types (*.*). 

Chapter 11
[ 307 ]
When you have completed all the steps, click on the link at the bottom of the page 
to log in to the admin area again:
Managing your network
To manage your network, click on the Network Admin link, which is on the 
drop-down menu in the top right-hand side of the main WordPress dashboard:

Managing Growth
[ 308 ]
You're now in the Network Admin dashboard. 
When you need to switch back to the main Site Admin 
dashboard, you'll ind the link in the same place—in the 
top right-hand corner.
As you can see, the network options and settings are fairly extensive, so we won't 
be going through all of them in this chapter. There is plenty of documentation at 
WordPress.org and elsewhere on the web to help you manage your network.
However, we will create a blog on your network so you can start to experiment with 
the WordPress Multisite features.
Click on Sites | Add New, enter a Site Address, Site Title, and Admin Email then 
click Add Site:
If you go to Sites | All Sites, you will see the new blog in the list. Hover over it and 
click Dashboard to access its admin area:

Chapter 11
[ 309 ]
The admin area should be familiar because it's very similar to a standalone 
WordPress blog. One difference you will notice is that you cannot install plugins and 
themes. This is a task that can only be performed by the main network admin user. 
For example, if you go back to the Network Admin dashboard and go to Plugins | 
Installed Plugins, you will see the option to activate a plugin for the entire network:
Developing a blog network
Hopefully you're beginning to see how easy it is to set up a network of blogs using 
WordPress Multisite. You could set up blogs for anyone in your company in no time 
at all. You could even conigure WordPress Multisite so that your colleagues can 
register for their own blogs without having to bother you. We'll set this up now.

Managing Growth
[ 310 ]
In the main Network Admin dashboard, go to Settings | Network Settings. In 
the Allow new registrations area, select the radio button for Both sites and user 
accounts can be registered:
This setting will allow anyone to register their own blog on your network. However, 
you only want people within your company to be able to do this. So scroll down  
to the Limited Email Registrations area and enter your company's domain:
Click the Save Changes button. Now registrations are restricted to people who have 
an e-mail address for your company. No one else will be able to sign up.
We can try this out. Log out from the main Network Admin dashboard. Go to 
http://localhost/wpmulti/ and click on the Register link. You will be taken 
to the registration page:

Chapter 11
[ 311 ]
In the Username box enter secondblog. To test the sign-up restriction, enter an 
e-mail address that does not end in @mycompany.com and click Next. You should 
see a message telling you that the e-mail address is not allowed:
So now enter an e-mail address ending with @mycompany.com and click Next again. 
You'll be taken to the next page, where you should enter Second Blog in the Site 
Title box and click Signup. You will be taken to the 'success' page:
As you can see, WordPress Multisite will now send a conirmation e-mail, which 
contains an activation link.

Managing Growth
[ 312 ]
Of course, we don't have e-mail functionality on our local test server. However, 
we can work around this for the purposes of this demonstration. Go to http://
localhost/phpmyadmin. Select the wpmulti database, and click the Browse icon for 
the wp-signups table. There should be a record for /wpmulti/secondblog/. Look 
for the activation key and copy it to your clipboard:
The activation link that the new sign-up receives in their conirmation e-mail looks 
like this:
http://localhost/wpmulti/wpmu/wp-activate.php?key=82b6df885db77f5e
Replace the activation key with the one you copied from the database and then enter 
the activation link URL into your browser's address bar. You should see a page 
telling you that the second blog is now active:
Copy the password and use the Login link to access your new blog's admin area.
That was a very quick run through some of the basic features of WordPress Multisite, 
but hopefully it has shown you how easy it is to create a network of blogs for your 
business. You now have a test installation of WordPress Multisite to experiment with 
and explore the features in more detail before deciding if you'd like to use it on a  
live server.

Chapter 11
[ 313 ]
Summary
In this chapter, we have discussed some of the issues that may arise as your blog 
grows. You learned how to improve your blog's performance by installing WP 
Super Cache. You should now know how to choose a dedicated server for when you 
outgrow your shared hosting account, and how to move your blog to the new server. 
You also had an introduction to WordPress Multisite and saw how it can be used to 
easily set up a network of blogs for your business. We also looked at how to make 
your blog mobile-friendly; how to handle the increased levels of correspondence you'll 
receive; and how to ind guest writers.


Index
Symbols
37signals Product Blog
URL  12
@font-face  53
.htaccess ile
creating  306
<Title> tag
about  155
guidelines  155
A
About page
about  138, 152
About your blog section  139
About you section  138, 139
Anything to declare section  139
About your blog section  139
About you section  138, 139
above the fold concept  47
AddThis
about  205
URL, for free account registration  206
Adobe Photoshop
about  100
URL  100
AdSense code
using, in WordPress  268-271
ad units
creating  267, 268
AdWords menu  258
afiliate marketing  271
afiliate networks  276
afiliate programs
about  271
Amazon associates  271, 272
Amazon associates widget, creating  273, 
274
aggregators  126
Akismet plugin
about  226, 227
comments, moderating  227, 228
Alexa
about  26
URL  26, 168
Alexa ranking  26, 173, 262
All in One SEO Pack plugin
about  156-159, 171
default settings  158
Amazon Associates widget
about  271, 272
creating  273, 274
using, in WordPress  274, 275
Amazon Standard Identiication Number. 
See  ASIN
Amazon Web Services Blog
about  20
URL  20
analysis, WPBizGuru makeover  39
Andrew Sullivan's blog
screenshot  9
Anything to declare section  139
Apache  70
Articulate
about  18
URL  18
ASIN  273

[ 316 ]
Atom  176
attachment  107
attachment page  107
authority  242
Automattic  55
Awesome Google Adsense  270
B
background-color property  62
backup ile
database, restoring from  145, 146
banner ads
placing  278
bashing. See  laming
BBC  176
blog
about  9, 11, 16, 43
About page  138
availability, ensuring for mobile users  292-
294
backing up  141 case study review  289, 290
comments, moderating  221, 222
examples  9-19
key feature  13
KPIs (key performance indicators)  238-240
monetizing  25
paid reviews  289
promoting  24
success, measuring  25
tactical goals  10
favicon, adding to  121, 122
guest writers, searching for  303
moving, to better web server  297, 298
promoting  175
trafic, managing  294, 295
usability and accessibility  53
workload, managing  291, 292
wp-content, backing up  141
writing tips, backing up  126-129
writing tips, restoring  126-129
blog, components
color  49, 50
layout  44-48
typography  51, 52
blog design
implementing  54
principles  43
bloggers  8, 125
blogging  7, 8, 211, 128
blogging strategy  10
blog network
developing  309-312
blogosphere
about  8, 9, 211, 128
engaging with  212, 213
feeding off  218, 219
blog plan  29, 33, 34
blog promotion
RSS syndication  175, 176
search egines, using  190
social bookmarking  205
social network used  193, 194
specialist blog engines, using  190
Twitter used  198
WordPress feeds  176, 177
blogroll
about  214, 217
links, adding to  214- 217
managing  214
SEO issues  217
blog URL
subdomain, using in  30
blog writing tips
backing up  126-129
ending with proactive question  130
killer headlines  126
links, to other blogs  128
post frequency  127, 128
post length  126, 127
post structure  129
quick checklist  130
restoring  126-129
tone, establishing  128
voice, establishing  128
body selector  62
body tag  60
Boeing
URL  13
brochure style sites  17
business blogger  7, 10
business blogging
about  9
strategic goals  10-19

[ 317 ]
business blogs
about  9
categorizing  19-23
business blogs, categorizing
about  19
company blogs  20, 21
expert blogs  22, 23
news blogs  21
product blogs  20
C
Captcha  228
Carrington
URL  55
Cascading Style Sheets. See  CSS
case study blog  30
categories
about  131
applying, to WPBizGuru  133-138
adding, to blogroll  214-217
links, adding to  214-217
using  131
versus tags  131
child themes
about  76
creating  79-81
dummy content  77, 78
new text editor, installing  79
setting up  77
ClickBank  276
cloud hosting  299
Cloud Server  298
color, blog  49, 50
color picker  51
colors, WPBizGuru design  87, 88
commenters  241
comments
about  83
about  220, 241
conversations, managing  221
moderating, on blog  221, 222
strategies  220
comments policy  223
Commission Junction  276
company blogs
about  20
examples  21
connected blogger
outline strategy  213
connectivity
about  211
need for  212
consumer key  201
consumer secret  201
contact form
installing  229
spam, preventing  232-235
Contact Form 7 plugin
about  229
using  230, 231
contact form spam
preventing  232-235
content  56, 125, 126
content, WPBizGuru makeover  38
conversation
about  220
managing  221
cookies  239
corporate blogging  212
corporate blogs. See  company blogs
Cost Per Click (CPC)  278
CSS
about  55, 56
code  58-60
content and style  56-58
CSS3  53
CSS Box Model  62
CSS rule
about  61
declaration  61
ID selector  61
selector  61
Cufón
URL  52
custom permalinks  177
D
database
about  141
backing up, phpMyAdmin used  142-144
restoring, from backup ile  145, 146

[ 318 ]
default Stylesheet, WPBizGuru design  83
deliberate laming  224
Delicious  205
descendent selector  66, 68
design, WPBizGuru makeover  37
Digg  205
Digg blog  16
Digg Effect  209
dimensions  100
Direct2Dell
URL  16
direct ad sales
about  276
banner sizes  276, 277
media packs  279
pricing models  278
rate card  279
rotating banner ads  280-288
div tag  65
DMOZ  168
Dreamweaver  79
E
element selector  61, 65
e-mail subscriptions  185, 241
embedded CSS  63, 64
Excerpt Editor  165
excerpts
about  177, 178
using, on home page  165-167
expert blogs
about  22
examples  23
external CSS  64
F
Facebook  
about  176, 193, 194
page  194
favicon
about  121
adding, to blog  121, 122
features, WordPress blogs
content management  25
good design  24
promotions  24
revenue streams  25
statistics, analyzing  25
success, measuring  25
usability, maximizing  24
feedback  241
FeedBurner
about  178, 179, 240, 261
RSS feeds, enhancing  178
setting up  179-183
URL  178
using  183-190
FeedBurner feed  183
FeedBurner FeedSmith Extended plugin
about  178, 183
URL  178
FeedBurner Stats
about  261
item use  262
subscribers  261
uncommon uses  262
FeedBurner Stats tools  180
FeedFlare  184
feed reader  175
Feed Stats Dashboard  261
ile size  100
indability feature  148
Firefox SEO extensions  173
lamers  224
laming  224
Flickr
URL  21
font replacement  52
Font Squirrel
URL  52
fonts, WPBizGuru design  87, 88
footer, WPBizGuru design  96, 97
Fotolia
about  111
URL  111
Free Themes Directory
URL  54
FTPing iles  70
full posts  177

[ 319 ]
G
gallery  112
Garmin
about  11
URL  11
Gawker  165
Generate Tag feature  233
Genesis
URL  55
GIF  99
gigabytes (GB)  100
GigaOM
URL  22
Gizmodo  165
GoDaddy
URL  298
Google  205
Google +1  205
Google AdSense
about  40, 266
ad units, creating  267, 268
overview  266
URL, for documentation  266
Google AdWords  258, 259
Google Analytics
about  25, 247-249
content  259
tracking code  248
Trafic Sources option  257, 258
URL, for documentation  260
using  250
Visitors menu  253-256
working  250-253
Google Analytics for WordPress
URL  249
Google Blog Search
URL  213
Google Fonts API
URL  52
Google Page Rank  173
Google PageRank. See  PageRank
Google Reader  176
Google robot  164
Google Sitemap
about  160
adding  161
Google Toolbar
about  26, 242
URL  26
Google Video
about  120
videos, incorporating from  120
Google Voice number
URL  231
Google webmaster tools  148, 170-172
Google XML Sitemaps  160
growth, WPBizGuru makeover  41
guest writers
about  303
searching, for blogs  303
Guy Kawasaki's blog
URL  23
H
header  60
header, WPBizGuru design  84, 85
head tag  60
hexadecimal RGB color system  50, 51
hits  238
home page
excerpts, using on  165-167
Host Gator
URL  298
HTML  55
HTML document
stylesheet, applying to  63-68
html tag  60
Hybrid
URL  55
HyperText Markup Language. See  HTML
I
ID selector  61, 65
image gallery
NextGEN Gallery  111-117
page, creating  117-119
setting up  110
image measurements
dimensions  100
ile size  100
resolution  100

[ 320 ]
images
sources  111
styling  109
thumbnail, creating for  101-105
images sources  111
images, WordPress posts
about  101
attachment size  107, 108
styling  109
thumbnail creation  101-105
thumbnail size  106, 107
image theory
basics  99
inbound links
about  161, 162, 242
suggestions  162, 163
warnings  163
incite laming  224
index  148
inline declarations  63
In-Page Analytics feature  260
installing
new text editor  79
The GIMP  101
Thematic theme framework  77
WordPress  74, 76
WP Super Cache plugin  295, 296
XAMPP  71, 72
Interactive Advertising Bureau (IAB)  276
J
Jetpack
URL  243
Jetpack plugin  244
Joost
about  14
URL  14
JPEG  99
K
Key performance indicators (KPIs), for blog
about  238
comments and feedback  241
inbound links  242
search engine result  241
subscribers  240
trafic  238
keyword density  152
keywords
about  130, 149
selecting  149-151
tips, for selecting  152
using  152
keyword selector tool  150
keyword stufing  153
killer headlines  126
kilobytes (KB)  100
Kuler
URL  50
L
layout, blog  44-48
level 1 heading  60
level 2 heading  60
link  64
link baiting  162
LinkedIn
about  193, 196
URL  196
link reciprocity  214
Link Relationship (XFN) option  216
links
adding, to blogroll  214-217
link tag  64
local development environment
setting up  70
Lunarpages Dedicated
URL  298
M
main content area, WPBizGuru design  89, 
94
Marriott blog  19
Mashable
URL  22
media pack
about  279
contents  279
Media Temple
URL  298

[ 321 ]
megabytes (MB)  100
menu, WPBizGuru design  85, 87
metadata  60
meta tags  157
Microsoft Paint  50
Microsoft Visio  49
minor blog indexes  193
Mobile Switcher  293
mobile users
blog availability, ensuring for  292-294
monetization  265
Move That Blog plugin
about  302
URL  302
Multisite feature  41
MySQL
about  70
root password, setting for  73
MySQL database
creating, for WordPress  300
N
negative comments
dealing with  223-225
Network Admin dashboard  308
news blogs
about  21
examples  22
new server
WordPress, moving to  299-302
NextGEN Gallery
about  111-117
image gallery page, creating  117-119
Nofollow Blogroll SEO plugin
URL  217
Notepad++  79, 186
O
OnRamp  280
Open Directory Project  168
OpenX  280
OpenX WordPress Widget  286
optimization  100
P
page layout, WPBizGuru design  82
PageRank  26
page views  240
paid reviews  289
paragraph tag  60
Pay Per Post
URL  289
permalinks  153, 154
personal bloggers  8
personal blogs  9
personal journals  7
Photoshop  50
PHP  70
phpMyAdmin
about  74, 142
used, for backing up database  142-144
Ping  190
pinging  190
Ping-O-Matic  191
Pingshot  191
PingShot tool  178
pixels per inch. See  ppi
plugins
backing up  146
PNG  99
political blogs  9
post
length  126, 127
structure  129
post editor  127
post frequency  127, 128
ppi  100
product blogs
about  20
example  20
professional bloggers  8
promotion, WPBizGuru makeover  39
Q
Quality slider  103

[ 322 ]
R
Rackspace
URL  298
rate card  279
raw trafic  238
ReadWriteWeb
URL  277
Reddit  205
Redirection  154
resolution  100
revenue generation, WPBizGuru makeover  
40
ReviewMe
URL  289
Robert Scoble's blog
URL  23
robots  148
robots.txt ile
about  164
optimizing  164
root password
setting, for MySQL  73
rotating banner ads  280-288
RSS
about  175, 176
blogging  176
RSS 0.91  176
RSS 1.0  176
RSS 2.0  176
RSS feeds
about  126, 176
Burner used  178
RSS Grafiti  194
RSS readers  126
RSS subscriptions  240
RSS syndication  176
S
sales blog  11
Search engine optimization. See  SEO
search engines
about  17, 147
results  241
working  148
search engine submissions
about  167
big four search engines  167
DMOZ  168
minor search engines and directories  168, 
169
selector  61
SEO
about  24, 126, 148
principles  148
results, viewing  173
software and tools  169
SEO professionals  149
SEOQuake  173
SEO software and tools
about  169
Firefox SEO extensions  173
Google webmaster tools  170-172
Web CEO  169, 170
Seth Godin's blog
URL  23
Share Results  276
SI CAPTCHA Anti-Spam  228
sidebars  46
sidebars, WPBizGuru design  94, 95
Simple Sitemap plugin  159
site iles  141
sitemap  159
SmartFeed  184
social bookmarking
about  205
links, adding  205-207
tips  208
social networks
Facebook  194-196
LinkedIn  196, 197
Twitter  198, 199
using  193, 194
social web  211
standalone gallery  110
standards compliant  53
static content  140
stock.xchng
URL  111

[ 323 ]
strategic goals, business blogging
about  10
awareness, raising about products and 
services  13, 14
customer service, providing  15
dialog, opening with customers  13
expertise, demonstrating  14
knowledge, demonstrating  14
personality, providing to your corporate 
image  18, 19
public relations, improving  16
sales, increasing  11
trafic, driving to your other websites  17, 18
value, adding to products and services  12
strategic goals, WPBizGuru  32-35
StumbleUpon  205
style
about  56, 57
tweaking  68, 69
style.css  81
stylesheet
about  61, 63
applying, to HTML document  63-68
rules  61
sub-categories
avoiding  132
subdomain
using, in blog URL  30
subscribers  240
subscription, types
email  241
RSS  240
success
measuring, for blogs  25
syndication  175, 176
T
tactical goals, for blogs  10
tactical goals, WPBizGuru  36
tag cloud  135
tags
about  131
applying, to WPBizGuru  133-138
using  132
versus categories  131
TechCrunch
about  165
URL  22
Technorati
about  25, 149, 191, 192, 242
URL  213
tenancy  278
text editor
installing  79
Text Widgets  186
The Daily Dish  9
The GIMP
about  100
installing  101
The GNU Image Manipulation Program. See  
The GIMP
Thematic
URL  55
Thematic framework  293
Thematic theme framework
about  55, 76
installing  77
theme framework  54
Thesis
URL  55
thumbnail
creating, for image  101-105
size  106, 107
thumbnail size  106, 107
title tag
about  60, 155
guidelines  155
tone
about  128
establishing  129
trackback
about  225, 226
spam  226-228
trafic
about  238
managing  294, 295
trafic measuring methods
about  238
hits  238
page view  240
unique visitors  238, 239
visits  239

[ 324 ]
Trafic Sources option  257, 258
trolls  224
tutorial tag  138
Twitter
about  193, 198
Goodies  203
setting up, in WordPress  199-205
URL  198
typography, blog  51, 52
U
ul tag  60
Ultimate Tag Cloud Widget  135
unique visitors  238, 239
unordered list  60
URLs
about  16
for accessing feed formats  177
V
video
about  119
incorporating, from Google Video  120
incorporating, from YouTube  120
using  120
Virtual Private Server (VPS)  298
Visitors menu  253-256
visits  239
voice
about  129
establishing  129
W
Web  8
Web analytics tools
about  243
Google Analytics  247-250
WordPress.com Stats  243-247
Web CEO
about  169, 170
URL  169
web colors
URL  51
web color theory  50, 51
web host
selecting  297, 298
web images
formats  99
optimizing  100, 101
web images, formats
comparisions  99
GIF  99
JPEG  99
PNG  99
web safe fonts  51
web server  70
web standards  53
Wikipedia  211
wireframing  49
word count feature  127
WordPress
about  7, 24, 25, 53
AdSense code, using in  268-271
Amazon Associates widget, using in  274, 
275
categories  131
installing  74, 76
moving, to new server  299-302
MySQL database, creating for  300
tags  131
Twitter, setting up in  199-205
WordPress 2.6  70
WordPress blog
about  7
features  24, 25
WordPress blog, features
content management  25
good design  24
promotions  24
revenue streams  25
statistics, analyzing  25
success, measuring  25
usability, maximizing  24
WordPress Codex
URL, for child themes  76
WordPress.com Stats  243-247
WordPress feeds
about  176, 177
excerpts  177, 178
full posts  177

[ 325 ]
WordPress LinkedIn App  196
WordPress Mobile Pack plugin
about  292, 293
URL  292
WordPress Multisite
about  304
blog network, developing  309-312
network, installing  305-307
network, managing  307, 308
setting up  304, 305
WordPress.org  78
WordPress posts
images  101
WordPress themes
about  24, 79
workload
managing  291, 292
worldwide web
history  55
World Wide Web Consortium (W3C)   54
WPBizGuru
about  29, 30, 101
About page  139, 140
blog plan  33, 34
business situation  32
categories, applying to  133-138
goals  31
planning  31
strategic goals  32-35
tactical goals  36
tags, applying to  133-138
URL, for inished version  30
WPBizGuru About page  139, 140
WPBizGuru design
colors  87, 88
default Stylesheet  83
inished theme  97, 98
fonts  87, 88
footer  96, 97
header  84, 85
main content area  89, 94
menu  85-87
page layout  82
sidebars  94, 95
WPBizGuru feed  176
WPBizGuru makeover
about  37
content  38
design  37
growth  41
promotion and analysis  39
revenue genration  40
wp-content
backing up  141
WP-Polls plugin  289
WP Super Cache plugin
about  295
installing  295, 296
WP to Twitter  199
X
XAMPP
about  70
installing  71, 72
Y
Yahoo!  176
YouTube
about  120
videos, incorporating from  120
YouTube video
embedding  120
Z
Zeldman
URL, for blog  15
ZoneID  287


Thank you for buying 
WordPress 3 for Business Bloggers
About Packt Publishing
Packt, pronounced 'packed', published its irst book "Mastering phpMyAdmin for Effective 
MySQL Management" in April 2004 and subsequently continued to specialize in publishing 
highly focused books on speciic technologies and solutions.
Our books and publications share the experiences of your fellow IT professionals in adapting 
and customizing today's systems, applications, and frameworks. Our solution based books 
give you the knowledge and power to customize the software and technologies you're using 
to get the job done. Packt books are more speciic and less general than the IT books you have 
seen in the past. Our unique business model allows us to bring you more focused information, 
giving you more of what you need to know, and less of what you don't.
Packt is a modern, yet unique publishing company, which focuses on producing quality, 
cutting-edge books for communities of developers, administrators, and newbies alike. For 
more information, please visit our website: www.packtpub.com.
About Packt Open Source
In 2010, Packt launched two new brands, Packt Open Source and Packt Enterprise, in order to 
continue its focus on specialization. This book is part of the Packt Open Source brand, home 
to books published on software built around Open Source licences, and offering information 
to anybody from advanced developers to budding web designers. The Open Source brand 
also runs Packt's Open Source Royalty Scheme, by which Packt gives a royalty to each Open 
Source project about whose software a book is sold.
Writing for Packt
We welcome all inquiries from people who are interested in authoring. Book proposals 
should be sent to author@packtpub.com. If your book idea is still at an early stage and you 
would like to discuss it irst before writing a formal book proposal, contact us; one of our 
commissioning editors will get in touch with you. 
We're not just looking for published authors; if you have strong technical skills but no writing 
experience, our experienced editors can help you develop a writing career, or simply get some 
additional reward for your expertise.

WordPress Complete
ISBN: 978-1-904811-89-3             Paperback: 304 pages
A comprehensive, step-by-step guide on how to 
set up, customize, and market your blog using 
WordPress
1. 
Clear practical coverage of all aspects of 
WordPress 
2. 
Concise, clear, and easy to follow, rich with 
examples 
3. 
In-depth coverage of installation, themes, 
syndication, and podcasting
 
WordPress Theme Design 
ISBN: 978-1-847193-09-4            Paperback: 224 pages
A complete guide to creating professional WordPress 
themes
1. 
Take control of the look and feel of your 
WordPress site
2. 
Simple, clear tutorial to creating Unique and 
Beautiful themes 
3. 
Expert guidance with practical step-by-step 
instructions for theme design
4. 
Design tips, tricks, and troubleshooting ideas
Please check www.PacktPub.com for information on our titles

WordPress 3 Site Blueprints
ISBN: 978-1-847199-36-2            Paperback: 230 pages
Ready-made plans for 9 different professional 
WordPress sites
1. 
Everything you need to build a varied 
collection of feature-rich customized WordPress 
websites for yourself 
2. 
Transform a static website into a dynamic 
WordPress blog 
3. 
In-depth coverage of several WordPress themes 
and plugins
4. 
Packed with screenshots and step-by-step 
instructions to help you complete each site 
WordPress 3 Plugin Development 
Essentials
ISBN: 978-1-84951-352-4             Paperback: 300 pages
Create your own powerful, interactive plugins to 
extend and add features to your WordPress site
1. 
Everything you need to know to develop your 
own plugins for WordPress
2. 
Walk through the development of ive plugins 
from ground up
3. 
Prepare and release your plugins to the 
WordPress community
Please check www.PacktPub.com for information on our titles

