
Praise for the Second Edition of Working Virtually
“Trina has been thoughtfully examining nontraditional employer/employee 
relationships for longer than nearly anyone in the industry. What makes this 
book unique is that presents tangible beneﬁ ts for both the employer and 
employee. All relationships must work for both sides or sooner or later they 
stop working. Trina’s book fully recognizes this in a far more workable way 
than too many other one-size-ﬁ ts-all plans on the market. Every business 
and every relationship in a given business is unique and must be treated that 
way. Working Virtually provides guides to manage an ever-changing process, 
not just a list of policies that may or may not work for my business. As such, 
it is a go-to outline for making the new workplace work.”
—Doyle Albee, President, Metzger Associates
“Virtual is now both the vehicle and the platform for most work. Are you 
ready? Trina Hoeﬂ ing masterfully maps the three most powerful paths you’ll 
travel to succeed virtually. She is the perfect guide, simpliﬁ er, and coach for 
every virtual team and overworked manager! Hoeﬂ ing helps us see that every 
virtual choice is ultimately about ourselves—our mindsets, our  ability to learn 
and unlearn, and how we embrace change. Get Working Virtually now—to 
get working virtually and to unleash all that is within you and your teams!”
—Bill Jensen, author of Future Strong and Disrupt! 
“Working Virtually does an outstanding job of reminding us that the things 
that make for meaningful work in face-to-face environments apply more 
so when working at a distance. Generosity, trust, and collective meaning-
making are at the core of very practical approaches to working across 
 distances— geographic or otherwise.”
—Jerrold McGrath, President, Intervene Design Incorporated; Leadership 
 Faculty, Banff Centre for Arts and Creativity, Alberta, Canada
“Having worked with Trina both in a classroom and virtually ‘across the 
pond,’ I have no hesitation in recommending her and this very helpful book 
on coming to terms with the new virtual work reality. Organizations, leaders, 
and individuals—everyone is coming to terms with this new phenomenon 
and the implications, challenges, and opportunities related. It’s an easy read 
with helpful pointers on what we all need to grapple with in our digitally 
enabled work/life environments.”
—Martin Allison, Chairman, Cimlogic, West Yorkshire, United Kingdom

“The past 20 years have seen a steady increase in the percentage of the work-
force that doesn’t go into an ofﬁ ce every day. Trina Hoeﬂ ing provides an 
important addition to any manager’s or virtual worker’s toolkit, describing 
in clear, jargon-free language the skills that separate high-performing virtual 
workforces from their less effective counterparts.”
—Ceil Tilney, Covalent Solutions, San Francisco, California
“I write this from my favorite table at my favorite cafe. An ofﬁ ce? Not so 
twenty-ﬁ rst centry. And that’s exactly what Trina Hoeﬂ ing is exploring in 
this engaging new book. Read it while you’re sipping a cappuccino, you’ll be 
enlightened.”
—Dave Taylor, Principal, Intuitive Systems, LLC.; 
and Ask Dave Taylor blog, Boulder, Colorado
“A gem of a book! Despite rapid advancements in collaboration technology 
and dramatic increases in the work-from-home movement, many leaders are 
left to ﬁ gure out on their own what it takes to drive high performing teams in 
this new environment. Trina Hoeﬂ ing reminds us that the quality of human 
interaction ultimately makes, or breaks, a team and expertly lays out the tools 
and techniques for success.”
—John Short, Global HR Business Partner, MilliporeSigma, a business of 
Merck KGaA, Darmstadt, Germany
“Having been involved in this ﬁ eld since 1982—virtually the Stone Age of 
virtual work—I’ve seen this ﬁ eld emerge, develop, and morph. This book 
provides a welcome and needed fresh look at the various ﬂ avors of mobile, 
distributed, and virtual work as it exists today and will grow tomorrow. 
 Managers and organizations that want to work smarter and engage their 
 professionals should follow this guide closely. Those that still resist virtual 
work and distributed workplaces can bury their heads in the sand and keep 
sending e-mail with their 1200-baud modems.”
—Gil Gordon, acknowledged expert in the implementation of  telecommuting 
and telework, author of TURN IT OFF: How to Unplug from the 
 Anytime-Anywhere Ofﬁ ce Without  Disconnecting Your Career
“Successful virtual teamwork does not just happen. Even though members 
know how to use communication technologies, and have integrated mobile 
devices into their everyday lives, more is needed. Leadership, shared pur-
pose, clear expectations and trust are all essential but challenging to carry 

out. Working Virtually offers important guidance for virtual team sponsors, 
leaders, and members. The understandings gained from this book will save 
time, money, and heartache!”
—Janet Salmons, Indie Translational Scholar, Vision2Lead; Dissertation Chair 
& Qualitative Methodologist, Walden University; and Chair, Academy of 
 Management Ethics Education Committee
“Technology has changed the workplace in many ways. At the same time, 
creating a high-functioning environment continues to challenge organiza-
tional leaders. Working Virtually clearly deﬁ nes the speciﬁ c issues that call 
for learning how to work with people in today’s work world. Building 
trust and communicating effectively about the tasks to be accomplished 
and expectations for performance in the virtual organization top my list 
of requirements for success in today’s companies. Learning how to bring 
individuals together to best support individual satisfaction has never been 
easy. Hoeﬂ ing’s depth of experience and wisdom provide ways leaders can 
engage and increase their personal effectiveness for brilliant performance 
with their teams.”
—Judith Light, Certiﬁ ed Management Consultant
“Working Virtually addresses organizational team issues and what managers/
leaders need to do to be effective in dealing with the changes that the 
workplace is experiencing—and will continue to do so.”
—Steve Dorn, Pivotal Resources
“Could not ask for a timelier book. People who work together in the same 
place at the same time will be a distinct minority before this decade is out. 
I love this; it’s all in one place. It is not only current but also put together 
so it is constantly curated as new tools are found, new techniques devel-
oped. I would say what you have here is not only best practices but also ‘next 
 practices.’”
—Char lie Grantham, Community Design Institute


WO R KI N G  V I RT UAL LY


WORKING VIRTUALLY
Transforming the Mobile Workplace
SECOND EDITION
Trina Hoefl ing
Foreword by Didier Elzinga
STERLING, VIRGINIA

COPYRIGHT © 2017 BY 
STYLUS PUBLISHING, LLC.
Published by Stylus Publishing, LLC.
22883 Quicksilver Drive
Sterling, Virginia 20166-2102
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reprinted 
or reproduced in any form or by any electronic, mechanical, 
or other means, now known or hereafter invented, including 
photocopying, recording, and information storage and 
retrieval, without permission in writing from the publisher. 
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Names: Hoeﬂ ing, Trina, 1958- author.
Title: Working virtually: leading your organization and team, 
and advancing your personal career, 
in a mobile world/Trina Hoeﬂ ing.
Description: Second edition. | 
Sterling, Va. : Stylus Publishing, 2017. | 
Includes bibliographical references and index.
Identiﬁ ers: LCCN 2016035684| 
ISBN 9781620362914 (cloth : alk. paper) | 
ISBN 9781620362921 (pbk. : alk. paper) | 
ISBN 9781620362938 (library networkable e-edition) | 
ISBN 9781620362945 (consumer e-edition)
Subjects: LCSH: Virtual reality in management. | 
Virtual work teams. | 
Teams in the workplace--Computer networks. | 
Organizational effectiveness. | Personnel management.
Classiﬁ cation: LCC HD30.2122.H63 2017 | 
DDC 658.4/022--dc23 
LC record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2016035684
13-digit ISBN: 978-1-62036-291-4 (cloth) 
13-digit ISBN: 978-1-62036-292-1 (paperback)
13-digit ISBN: 978-1-62036-293-8 (library networkable e-edition)
13-digit ISBN: 978-1-62036-294-5 (consumer e-edition)
Printed in the United States of America
All ﬁ rst editions printed on acid-free paper 
that meets the American National Standards Institute
Z39-48 Standard.
Bulk Purchases
Quantity discounts are available for use in workshops and for 
staff development. 
Call 1-800-232-0223 
First Edition, 2017
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1

In the ﬁ rst edition of Working Virtually, I thanked Marianne 
Weidlein as one of my “abiding earth angels.” She was a 
proliﬁ c writer who kept me focused on being a teacher and 
illuminator. She passed in the summer of 2015 while I was 
writing this new book. I dedicate this edition to Mari and so 
many dear friends, mentors, family, and teachers who have 
passed recently.
—Trina Hoeﬂ ing


vii
CONTENTS
FOREWORD 
ix
 Didier Elzinga
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
xiii
INTRODUCTION 
1
 
The Network Is the New Workplace
PART ONE:  VIRTUALLY MOBILE, ORGANIZATIONALLY ATTACHED
 1. VITAL MIND-SET SHIFTS IN A MOBILE WORLD 
13
 2. VIRTUAL ROADBLOCKS AND ESSENTIAL DRIVERS 
24
PART TWO: WILL VIRTUAL WORK HERE?
 3.  REDESIGNING THE WORKPLACE FOR THE 
HUMAN NETWORK 
33
 4.  SYSTEMS READY, PEOPLE WILLING, ORGANIZATION 
ENABLED 
44
 5.  BUILDING BLOCKS FOR VIRTUAL TEAM LEARNING 
58
 6.  LEARNING FROM THE LAST 20+ YEARS 
67
PART THREE: ESSENTIAL VIRTUAL COMPETENCIES
 7. VIRTUAL LEADERSHIP DIFFERENTIATORS 
75
 8.  HENHOUSES AND JAZZ MUSICIANS 
91
 
When Is a Team a Team?

 9.  MORE THAN SMARTS—VIRTUAL TEAM MEMBER 
COMPETENCIES 
100
PART FOUR: THE THREEFOLD PATH OF HIGH-PERFORMANCE 
VIRTUAL TEAMS
10. THE FIRST PATH—DEVELOP YOUR TEAM 
113
11. THE SECOND PATH—SUPPORT YOUR TEAM 
123
12. THE THIRD PATH—PRODUCE SUCCESSFUL OUTCOMES 
138
PART FIVE: FROM ME TO WE
13. COLLABORATIVE TOOLS THAT WORK 
151
14. PRACTICAL GUIDELINES FOR VIRTUAL COMMUNICATION 
168
15. VIRTUAL TEAM RISKS AND HACKS 
185
PART SIX: EXPAND EMOTIONAL BANDWIDTH
16. VIRTUAL TEAM TRUST 
197
17.  VIRTUAL EMPLOYEE ENGAGEMENT IN 
CYNICAL CULTURES 
214
18. THE FOURTH PATH—LEAD YOUR CAREER 
229
19. WHAT’S NEXT? 
245
INDEX 
253
viii  
CONTENTS

ix
FOREWORD 
I
t is a testament to the forward-thinking of its author Trina Hoeﬂ ing 
that the ﬁ rst edition of Working Virtually was published almost 20 years 
ago. Back then the idea of “telecommuting” was a new and unfamiliar 
 concept, so the fact that a book existed that explored a model to make it 
work—and saw it for all its beneﬁ ts, as well as challenges—was actually quite 
a profound achievement. 
Today a lot of organizations have remote employees. Some companies 
like Automattic, who built the hugely successful WordPress platform, are 
made up entirely of people who work virtually from all around the world. 
This second edition of Working Virtually succeeds in highlighting concrete 
actions that managers can use to engage virtual teams. It’s one thing to allow 
your people to work remotely, and quite another to engage them in the 
shared mission and values of your company. 
I am CEO of Culture Amp, a company that helps other organizations 
measure and improve how they engage their employees. I was surprised to 
discover that not much has changed in the past 20 years when it comes to 
engaging remote workforces. Building and developing a strong company cul-
ture is an increasingly important concept, and it’s a very powerful one—it’s 
the only competitive edge that any company has. If you aren’t engaging your 
remote employees in that process, you are failing them. Further still, they will 
be failing you. It’s that simple. 
The remote workforce is one that is here to stay. As Trina wrote when she 
ﬁ rst published her book in 2001, “Virtual work was a ‘novel idea’ employed 
to retain that exceptional employee.”1 These days, having ﬂ exibility is one 
of the key drivers—and expectations—that attracts and retains talent. She 
notes that “people will work for less or are less willing to leave for a job that 
offers more, if they are able to work from home.” I doubt there is a CEO or 
manager out there who does not have to address this. 
So how do we make sure that today’s virtual managers are effectively 
engaging their remote employees?
There were two things that really spoke to me in the book, mostly 
because I saw them so clearly reﬂ ected in the values we have at Culture Amp. 
Of course, I was pleased to see validation of those core beliefs in the work of 
a respected authority on building engaged remote employees. 

x  
FOREWORD
The ﬁ rst thing to speak to me was, as Trina points out, we have to 
“change ourselves ﬁ rst” if we expect the same of others. Meeting the needs of 
virtual workers can often be seen as something they have to initiate and own, 
but that really is the wrong way to think about it. It takes two parties to make a 
worker remote. Trina quotes Bill Jensen, who says, “If you want to lead oth-
ers into a strong future, you need to be keenly aware of how your own inner 
truths, biases, fears, courage, values and dreams do or do not impact the daily 
work of others.”2 At Culture Amp, we have a value that I believe encapsulates 
this idea—and seeks to live it out in our working life: “Have the courage to 
be vulnerable.” Don’t pretend to know what you don’t. Be open and honest 
about your limitations and shortcomings. 
If you are struggling to connect and collaborate with a remote team or 
individual, stop and think about what it is that you can change, and openly 
let your remote coworkers know how you are struggling—chances are they 
are feeling the same way. Unless you identify issues in an open and trans-
parent way, it becomes hard to address them. As Trina says, “Cynicism and 
judgments often limit our ability to learn and change, or at least slow us 
down because we are convinced something won’t work (cynicism) or is a 
poor choice (judgment).” 
The lesson here is to try, and try without fear of failure. And when you 
fail, seek to understand why, learn from it, and improve. 
The second thing to speak to me and that I felt was so nicely articulated 
by Trina when she talks about the value of trust is: “Trust others to make 
decisions.” This can be especially hard when a team or person is remote, but 
the beneﬁ t to individuals and companies is huge. Unfortunately, as Trina 
reminds us, “In a virtual environment with technical monitoring, a sense 
of Big Brother watching increases tenfold.” When you trust your people to 
make decisions you unblock a lot of bottlenecks that exist in organizations. 
We’re all familiar with scenarios where to get something approved it has to 
cascade through three different teams and managers to see the light of day. 
Companies that trust their employees beneﬁ t from smarter, quicker deci-
sions; better morale; and more engaged employees. 
The same beneﬁ ts exist for both remote and ofﬁ ce-bound workers, 
though building up that trust can often be harder when you work across 
times and locations. Again, the change starts with you. The more you trust 
your remote people, the more likely they are to live up to that trust. The same 
for distrust: When people don’t feel trusted, they are likely to act that out. 
Some other key takeaways for me were the following:
• “Technically enabled people can work virtually and still have a seam-
less connection to the team. In 2015, telecommuting was named the 

FOREWORD  xi
top desired employee beneﬁ t. No organization wants to lose its best 
people because of a long commute, a spousal relocation, or child care 
conﬂ icts. Organizations experience 20% reduction in turnover when 
virtual work is an option.”
• “Bring people together digitally and face-to-face, synchronously (live) 
and asynchronously (when they work best). Organizations add value 
when talent is supported and well deployed.” 
• “The real purpose of virtual work is not to allow distance but to create 
synergy without limitations of time or space.”
Anyone who wants to build stronger relationships across time, space, 
and teams will ﬁ nd value in reading this book. 
Didier Elzinga
CEO and cofounder of Culture Amp
Notes
1. Trina Hoeﬂ ing, Working Virtually, Stylus Publsihing, 2017.
2. Bill Jensen, Future Strong (Melbourne, FL: Motivational Press, 2016), www
.goodreads.com/book/show/26583278-future-strong. Also, see Jensen’s TED talk: 
“Are You Future Strong?” Tedxtalks.ted.com, added May 29, 2015, http://tedxtalks
.ted.com/video/Are-you-Future-Strong-Bill-Jens


xiii
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
I
t took a virtual team to write this book. When I ﬁ rst committed to a 
revision, I thought it would be easy because so much of what under-
pinned the book in the late 1990s is still true today—to help people work 
together better in an increasingly distributed work world. 
People are brilliantly complex and amazingly consistent in how we 
relate to each other and adapt to a changing world. The principles of virtual 
teaming haven’t changed much. The work world of 2016, however, is trans-
formed.
Telecommuting was a concept more than a practice 20 years ago. Early 
adopters successfully led the way, but working virtually was still mostly in a 
pilot phase. The technology was tied to the desktop. The user interface wasn’t 
seamless yet, let alone integrated. The Internet of Things was science ﬁ ction. 
Today people understand the concept of mobile work, but I underestimated 
how challenging a book update would be. 
Generous ﬂ exwork and telework colleagues contributed richly to this 
book. I’d like to thank the book’s team, even though I’m the only named 
author. 
Charles Grantham helped with ruthless cutting and generous reminders 
that we write the next book only because we forget the pain of writing the 
ﬁ rst. His early and progressed wisdom about virtual work is astounding. 
Eddie Caine has been a colleague since the 1990s, a champion of public-
private partnerships that enable companies to bring work-life balance through 
telework initiatives. As a content reviewer and subject matter expert, his cli-
ent examples and observations were invaluable. Always pragmatic, Eddie 
kept me focused on what most matters—the virtual leaders and their teams. 
Kathy Kacher, a respected researcher, consultant, and trainer in ﬂ ex 
work, shared tools and assessments, research reports, and thoughtful conver-
sations that raised my standard. 
Susan Krautbauer, a woman of many talents and strategic genius, devel-
oped graphic images.
Kevin Ward, colleague and friend, nudged me to start writing again.
Judith Light, Lisa Rice, and Erik Otto called up their copyediting skills. 
Allison Kessler and Steve Dorn added examples, hacks, and perspective 
as content reviewers. Their insight and clarity elevated the book. 

xiv  
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
I’d like to acknowledge all who responded to my survey and interview 
requests. I can conﬁ dently say this book is grounded in real virtual teamwork 
practices. 
John von Knorring, my publisher, was patient during a year of unex-
pected events that took me away from the manuscript too often. 
I’m blessed with earth angels and tribal drummers who support me. To 
all those named and unnamed, here and passed, who have emboldened and 
supported me as I traveled this writing path . . . thank you.
Trina Hoeﬂ ing

1
INTRODUCTION
 The Network Is the New Workplace
“There is no end to education. It is not that you read a book, pass an examination, and ﬁ nish 
with education. The whole of life, from the moment you are born to the moment you die, is a 
process of learning.”
—Jiddu Krishnamurti
Work—and How We Are Compensated for It—Is Changing
Work is a collection of activities we undertake to add value to an enterprise 
or community for which we are compensated. But we’re just not working in 
the same old way. 
Smart technology applied to enterprise solutions has changed the way 
we work and manage. It has also impacted the traditional employee con-
tract. Though the U.S. tax code and much of our societal mind-set haven’t 
changed as quickly, much of the U.S. workforce is already doing transactional 
work that is provided by contract workers—freelancers, contract employees, 
consultants. U.S. political rhetoric speaks of job creation with little under-
standing that many U.S. workers (forecast to be half by 2020) are working 
independently and often virtually.1 
The nature of the employment contract has a direct impact on how vir-
tual teams are managed and led. Virtual leaders are managing alliances more 
than controlling work or managing individuals.2 Organizations with ﬂ ex-
work options attract a more agile workforce from a bigger talent pool. 
This book applies best practices to working virtually in the context of 
this changing workplace landscape. More of us are collaborators with portable 
skills. We see ourselves as companies of one, navigating our own career path, 
no longer following one laid out for us by our employer. In 1989, Charles 
Handy wrote about the emergence of portfolio workers—individuals who reject 
the notion of a single, permanent job. Today’s millennial workers think as 
portfolio workers. In 1997, Daniel Pink started the Free Agent Nation when 
he became an independent contractor himself.3 Flexible work options and tel-
ework are no longer an emerging trend. We’ve surpassed the tipping point, 
and they have become normal.

2  
INTRODUCTION
This book provides a clear road map to navigate today’s work realities 
while producing team results and working virtually. This book is for the execu-
tive who focuses on integrating networks of teams, working with information 
services to set up real-time information networks, connecting more and con-
trolling less, and adapting performance management processes to be more 
team driven and technology leveraged. For those just beginning, Working 
Virtually has practical advice for leading changes in an enterprise that is pre-
paring for virtual work.
You’re reading this book because you want to learn more about virtual 
work. Maybe you’re looking for a permanent job offer or promotion. Maybe 
you are like a lot of us, a little collaboration technology intimidated and afraid 
to look dumb. Maybe it’s simply a way of remaining employable. Or like the 
traditional reader of the ﬁ rst edition, perhaps you work or manage virtually. 
This book is for the professional who works from an ofﬁ ce, a home, or a 
hotel. You need to know about the process of getting your enterprise, your 
teams, and yourself enabled for virtual collaboration. This is not a technol-
ogy how-to book, though you will learn something more  important—the 
principles and guidelines to select and use tools well.
This book is written to and for the virtual leader. It shows managers a clear 
path to develop, support, and lead high-performing virtual teams. Working Vir-
tually provides an understanding of the context in which we all work, as well 
as the roles and responsibilities that go with a career in the mobile workplace.
Worker: Brings Talent to an Organization, Exchanging It for 
Money
Worker is a lowly term. Work isn’t an exciting word. A Wikipedia search of 
“worker” redirects to “laborer.” 
Regardless of label, however, we work for hire. Therefore, for convenience 
as a reader of this book, you are a worker. I mean great respect. Workers bring 
their talent to work—often virtually. You are also a leader. Today’s teams 
collaborate, and the best ones manage themselves. If you’re a virtual worker, 
you are a coleader for bridging virtual distance, a responsibility that is seldom 
formally deﬁ ned in the contract.
Virtual Wor kers
Most people think of virtual workers as telecommuters, but that is only one 
type. Eddie Caine, a nationally recognized and oft-quoted expert with more 
than 25 years’ experience, deﬁ nes virtual workers as not only teleworkers but 
also

INTRODUCTION  3
• nontraditional workday extenders who work evenings and weekends,
• part-time or occasional teleworkers,
• job sharers, and
• remote employees from a satellite ofﬁ ce or traveling employees.
Leaders work collaboratively with human resources, information tech-
nology/information services, and facilities departments to determine the 
equipment, real estate, and policy requirements for each type of worker. 
Ofﬁ ce and digital network design warrants some systemic thought.
Network: The Vehicle and Platform of Work
We are in a relationship with technology. We are nodes on vast interlock-
ing networks across work and home. We must navigate the changing work 
habitat and our careers. If you think of yourself (and your team) as connectors 
(or nodes), your value grows as you forge stronger ties with your professional 
networks—all enabled digitally.4
We can’t talk about work without referring to the network. Work is built 
on networked technology platforms, even if team members are not working 
virtually. The leading dictionary deﬁ nition of a network is a group of two or 
more computer systems linked together.5 Networks in virtual organizations 
are the structures we use to connect and communicate. 
Professional and social media networks are increasingly part of work life, 
too. They include the people and groups with whom we stay connected. These 
are purposeful relationships we develop face-to-face and online through 
social media, such as LinkedIn.6 
The network has expanded to embrace the technical and human, and 
they are inseparable.
Professional relationships inside and beyond organization boundaries are 
essential to career success. Many service ﬁ rms expect their people to develop 
a robust internal network, taking an active role in sourcing projects for them-
selves under the organization umbrella. More organizations are considering 
the value of a candidate’s professional network in hiring decisions, leveraging 
the node that is you.
This Book Is for You If . . .
You are reading the right book if you work with, lead, or support teams 
who aren’t always together at the same time. Human resource, information 
technology/information sciences (IT/IS), and facilities professionals will 
beneﬁ t from reading this book. 

4  
INTRODUCTION
Executives will see their organization differently if they read this book. 
Organizations coordinate work through networks of teams, and any who 
read this book will see the power of a technology network built for relation-
ships.
Team managers are the obvious audience and beneﬁ ciaries of Working 
Virtually, as are virtual team members. Everyone inﬂ uences the team’s success 
and, therefore, is a virtual team leader. Here are some of the key questions 
answered in this book:
• How will virtual teams affect the organization’s culture? Our team’s 
esprit de corps?
• How will I know people are working? How will my manager know I 
am working?
• How will I coach people and support a team I don’t see?
• Can we trust each other?
• How will I get what I need and not feel isolated?
• Am I using the technology correctly and using all the capabilities my 
team needs?
• How will working virtually affect my career? 
At the core of these questions is one answer: Learn how to maintain strong, 
trusted relationships, digitally and in person. 
Everyone must build and nurture relationships across time and distance, 
even the traditional ofﬁ ce employee. Understanding today’s work realities 
helps map a strategy to thrive in today’s mobile work world. Working Virtu-
ally provides a guidebook that works today. In reading, discover what works 
for you and your virtual team. 
Why Working Virtually Now? Because It Matters
The way we connect has evolved since the ﬁ rst edition of this book was 
published at the turn of the twenty-ﬁ rst century. Virtual connection mat-
tered then, but it was a limited set of options, usually blended with in-ofﬁ ce 
team time. Virtual connection is easier now as technology has transformed. 
It  matters even more since many teams are virtually full-time.
People Matter
Technology is an indispensable team enabler, but people are still the key. To 
adapt President Clinton’s famous quote, “It’s about the people, stupid.” Despite 

INTRODUCTION  5
the changing employer-employee contract and rapid increase in work auto-
mation that eliminates some positions, people are essential. Many of us have 
looser ties to our employers, but we still want to do work that matters with 
people with whom we work well. In a virtual work world, team members 
need support, whether traditional employees or contracted experts. Everyone 
needs to be enabled to collaborate virtually and motivated to perform well. 
As this book will reveal, teams won’t get that support without competent 
leadership. Many organization and virtual team leaders stiﬂ e productivity 
without knowing it. This book shows how to unleash talent, and how to do 
it virtually.
The Virtual Leader Matters
The virtual manager is the key inﬂ uencer of work satisfaction and employee 
retention. The team leader is key to knowing how our work contributes, and 
that we are valued. The manager greatly inﬂ uences how committed people 
will remain to the team and the organization. In a mobile work world, lead-
ers must reexamine how to reward and lead through virtual inﬂ uence, reach-
ing out so people want to bring their intelligence and creativity to the team. 
Leaders who genuinely connect virtually with their people are, simply, better. 
Technology Matters
Technology is a disrupter and an enabler; we are virtually mobile and organi-
zationally connected. We must master relationships with people and tech-
nology, using the network and collaborative tools to come together. Today’s 
executives are rightly focused on redesigning organizations to be digitally 
integrated and network based—a network of teams.7 
What You Will Be Able to Do After Reading This Book
Unleash your own and others’ talent, clear obstacles, and collaborate with 
people face-to-face and virtually. Lead engaged virtual teams, whether you 
are a team member or manager. Learn to develop and nurture authentic, 
trusting relationships across the digital divide. The role of technology has 
grown dramatically since publication of the book in 2000, and it continues to 
drive the way we work and manage. Performance management is more auto-
mated—for example, by leveraging task and project management tools. You’ll 
learn when and where to use technology to manage people and to collaborate.

6  
INTRODUCTION
What has not and cannot be automated, however, is the team. When people 
come together as one, they hope to form a team that comes to think of itself 
as a dynamic force. Teams don’t just coordinate intellect and skills. They open 
themselves to the potential of doing something together that none could do 
alone. The organization’s integrated technology facilitates collaboration, but 
the virtual leader and team members make it happen. 
Evolve your practices from what you learn in this book. Use and adapt 
technology and tools that support the people part of virtual teams—the 
uniqueness only you and your team can be. 
Go to the book’s information website (www.WorkingVirtually.org) and 
download additional tools and assessments to improve your virtual work and 
team, available free for book readers. Start building your tool kit.8 
Included as a thank-you gift is a FREE BONUS CHAPTER: Virtual 
Meeting Management.
How to Navigate the Updated Edition of Working Virtually
I have curated workplace ﬂ exibility experts’ experiences, sought client input, 
and interviewed all levels of the organization, exploring what has changed 
in the last two decades, not wanting to rely on just my own client work. 
This second edition incorporates shared wisdom into a road map for virtual 
mastery. This book travels a Threefold Path to team performance, as shown 
in Figure I.1. This edition also introduces the Fourth Path to a successful 
professional career. The team leader begins the team on the development 
path, launching or repositioning the virtual team to work together well. The 
support path begins while forming the team and continues throughout the 
life of the team, closing the distance that comes with virtual work. The out-
comes path produces results that bring it all together for the team. Mission 
accomplished.
The book is laid out so you can go directly to the section or chapter you 
need most, though a front-to-back read is obviously what I hope you choose 
to do. Table 1.1 provides a quick reference of each part.
Part One speaks to how the workplace is mobile and the current state of 
ﬂ ex work, telework, and virtualization. It also warns where to shift mind-sets 
to thrive in a mobile work world. It deﬁ nes drivers and blocks to virtualizing 
their operations for collaborative work, including cost savings and effective-
ness statistics. 
Part Two assesses an organization’s virtual effectiveness. You also have 
access to free downloadable resources, a virtual readiness assessment and 

Figure I.1. The Threefold Path for high-performance teams.
Support the Team 
Community.
     - Maintenance
PATH TWO
O1
O2
O3
The
Threefold
Path
for
Produce Successful Outcomes:
 - Celebration
 - Quality Deliverables
High-Performance Teams
THIRD PATH
Support the Team 
  Community:
    - Maintenance
      - Emotional Bandwidth
          - Synergy
              - Assistance
SECOND PATH
      Create a Cohesive Team 
      Culture:
    - Team Development
-   -  Planning
    - Structured Trust
FIRST PATH
EMPLOYEE ENGAGEMENT
  - Interpersonal Caring
  - Organizational Commitment
MIND SHIFTS
  - People, Not Place 
 -  Network Is the Workplace
  - It’s All Part of the Job
Change the Deﬁnition of Work
Follow the Threefold Path
Enjoy Strong Relationships
 ©  2016 - Trina Hoeﬂing, The SMART Workplace 

8  
INTRODUCTION
sample opportunity proﬁ le matrix, so you have a point of comparison for 
your own organization.9 
Part Three provides the information you need to be, hire, and develop 
competent team leaders and virtual professional team members. It discusses 
stages of development for new virtual workers and teams, and how the manager 
can respond. It lays out the Threefold Path for high-performance virtual teams.
Part Five steps through many pragmatics to build a virtual toolbox for 
the team. Communication and tool choices impact relationships and trust 
and team results. 
Part Six focuses on the interpersonal dynamics that build trusting teams 
and expand the emotional bandwidth in relationships. We examine what it 
takes to have a virtually engaged workforce and set up professionals for lifelong 
career success. The book ends with a chapter on my thoughts about what’s next.
Why Am I Your Pathfinder and Guide?
I’ve been at this for a while. I developed an early remote management train-
ing program in 1984, before telecommuting or virtual work had a name, 
in an effort to help engineers in a global corporation manage matrix-based 
project teams built on expertise, not geography.10 They were separated by 
culture, continents, and language, but they were connected by a shared team 
mission. We didn’t have a word for virtual team management then. I still 
TABLE I.1
Navigating the Book’s Reading Path
Part One: Virtually Mobile, 
Organizationally Attached
Vital mind shifts, virtual drivers and blocks
Part Two: Will Virtual Work 
Here?
Redesign of the workplace systems and processes 
to leverage mobility
Part Three: Essential Virtual 
Competencies
Virtual team leader and member competencies, 
team qualities
Part Four: The Threefold 
Path of High-Performance 
Virtual Teams
Virtual team leader and member competencies; 
team qualities; and team development, support, 
and results management
Part Five: From Me to We
Technology, tools, and communication for 
collaborative teamwork
Part Six: Expand Emotional 
Bandwidth
Having relationships based on trust and generos-
ity, engaging virtually, and navigating the fourth 
path to a successful career

INTRODUCTION  9
help individuals and organizations work together better after all these years, 
often virtually. I wrote Working Virtually: Managing People and Organiza-
tions for Virtual Success, ﬁ rst published at the turn of the century, while 
I was Telecommuting Success, Inc.’s vice president of training programs. 
I’ve continued to grow as I provide strategic organization transformation to 
organizations seeking to retain an engaged virtual workforce. At the same 
time, too little has changed when I work with people. Good people struggle 
to help people work together, especially virtually, prompting me to curate 
what I’ve learned. I sincerely hope my update is helpful for today’s mobile 
workforce.
Notes
1. Dan Schwabel, “10 Workplace Trends You’ll See in 2016,” Forbes, Novem-
ber 1, 2015, www.forbes.com/forbes/welcome/#6bbe75a4456e1fe51497456e
2. Reid Hoffman, Ben Casnocha, and Chris Yeh, The Alliance: Managing Tal-
ent in the Networked Age (Boston: Harvard Business Review Press, 2014).
3. Daniel H. Pink, “Free Agent Nation,” Fast Company, December 31, 1997, 
www.fastcompany.com/33851/free-agent-nation
4. “Node (computer science),” Wikipedia, last modiﬁ ed July 2015, https://
en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Node_(computer_science)  
5. “Network,” Webopedia, www.webopedia.com/TERM/N/network.html
6. Trina Hoeﬂ ing, “Making Your Net-Work,” public workshops, 2006–2015, 
various locations. 
7. Deloitte University Press, “Global Human Capital Trends 2016: The New 
Organization: Different by Design,” https://forms.workday.com/us/landing_page/
webinar_deloitte_global_hcm_trends_report_lp.php?camp=70180000001EaaM&
campid=ussm_lip_c_hc_no_15.151 
8. www.WorkingVirtually.org 
9. Go to www.WorkingVirtually.org for additional resources and assessments. 
Download a free bonus chapter on how to manage virtual meetings!
10. Team managers in the U.S. Midwest were managing engineers in Japan.


PART  ONE
VIRTUALLY MOBILE, 
ORGANIZATIONALLY 
ATTACHED
“We are all virtual leaders, whether we have the title or not. 
We are all virtual team members, whether we’re in charge or not.
We all work from wherever we are, digitally connected, 
whether we telecommute or not.”
—Trina Hoeﬂ ing, Working Virtually: Managing People for 
Successful Virtual Teams and Organizations, ﬁ rst edition
 


13
1
V I TA L  M I N D - S E T  S H I F T S  I N 
A  M O B I L E  W O R L D
“Learn how to see. Realize that everything connects to everything else.”
—Leonardo da Vinci
“It is not the strongest of the species that survives, nor the most intelligent that survives. It is the 
one that is most adaptable to change.” 
—Charles Darwin
“The most dangerous place to make a decision today is in the ofﬁ ce. I run most of my business  
from my phone. . . . Everything is connected, collaborative, and mobile.”
—Ulrik Nehammer, CEO, Coca-Cola
H
ow we think deﬁ nes what we see and how well we lead. Our mind-
set limits or opens us to adapt.  In 1996 Atlanta, Georgia, hosted 
the Olympics. Coca-Cola brought my company in to prepare for 
trafﬁ c congestion since their ofﬁ ces were located near Olympics events and 
hotels. We developed a temporary telecommuting work plan. Concurrently, 
we conducted a Telecommuting Readiness Assessment to see if this could be 
a pilot program from which Coca-Cola Corporate could implement a fuller 
virtual work solution.  
The Olympics initiative went well, but they were not ready for telecom-
muting. The infrastructure, job analyses, and capabilities were in place. The 
culture, however, was not. In the mid-1990s, status and prestige were obvious 
at Corporate. Ofﬁ ce grandeur, tailored suits—image mattered culturally as 
well as implicitly; it was a reﬂ ection of status.
No change plan could quickly change the hearts, minds, and egos of 
upwardly mobile managers. It was too much to go against a cultural norm 
that was, quite literally, grounded deeply in that building. Instead of saying 
no to telecommuting, however, leadership decided, “No, not now.” Culture, 

14  
VIRTUALLY MOBILE, ORGANIZATIONALLY ATTACHED
especially perks such as large ofﬁ ces, had to change ﬁ rst to break a strong 
career incentive that was deeply woven into their way of being. Once perks 
began to decouple from ofﬁ ce spaces, mind-sets changed, followed by cultural 
shifts. As years passed, Coca-Cola changed. It got virtual. CEO Nehammer, 
quoted at the beginning of this chapter, is a global leader, not in downtown 
Atlanta. The CEO is a virtual worker. 
Visionary Leader or Nineteenth-Century Executive Mind-Set?
The German Post Ofﬁ ce held the ﬁ rst management conference in 1882, 
for CEOs only. The conference was for one purpose: to help CEOs not be 
afraid of the telephone. Nobody showed up. The invitees were insulted; the 
idea that they should use telephones was unthinkable—telephones were for 
secretaries. 
The same story applies to executives not long ago about the personal 
computer. Today, everyone has multiple devices—computer, tablet, smart-
phone, all backed to the cloud—that simplify our smart lives. Technology is 
no longer science ﬁ ction; we’ve become the Internet of Things. The iPhone 
broke through in record time, an indication of the pace with which we adapt 
today. It took 76 years for the telephone to reach half the population. The 
smartphone did it in less than 10 years.1 The iPad penetrated even faster. 
Ninety-six percent of workers use the Internet, e-mail, and mobile devices 
to work; 81% of employees spend an hour or more on work-related e-mail 
during the workday.2 
Our behavior has shifted individually, and so has the virtually mobile, 
smart organization. The way Coca-Cola used the Olympics to explore a more 
virtual workforce is laudatory. It adapted its culture to ﬁ t the mobile work-
place. Despite its entrenched incentives, Coca-Cola’s leadership saw what 
needed to happen—shift mind-sets to ﬁ t today’s world—and it successfully 
changed. How much has your mind-set shifted to match a virtually mobile 
work world?
TABLE 1.1
Mobile Work Mind Shifts
1. “Best Fit” Environment
2. The Network Is the Workplace 
3. The Paradox of Meaningful Work and Looser Employment Ties
4. Reward Collaboration Over Individual Expertise

VITAL MIND-SET SHIFTS IN A MOBILE WORLD  15
Organizations and leaders who are ready to thrive virtually adapt to cre-
ate the best ﬁ t workplaces that support their people in achieving the organiza-
tion’s mission. As Table 1.1 shows, best ﬁ t considers the virtual and colocated 
work environment, organization culture, and teams structured in ways that 
ﬁ t the work being done.
Mind Shift #1: “Best Fit” Environment
In a virtually mobile organization with collaborative capabilities, the  work space 
is decided on “best ﬁ t” environments. Ofﬁ ces and team spaces are resources, 
not status symbols. People don’t think of a designated work space (except their 
computers and devices), and work is an ongoing event based on responsibili-
ties, not a physical place. Organizations are learning to do the following:
• Transform a virtual workforce into a functioning virtual organization 
with viable teams who ﬁ nd meaning and satisfaction from the work 
and colleagues—across time and distance—while producing results.
• Design business operations and work spaces to be more collaborative 
and responsive to what workers need.
It may seem counterintuitive that groups can link more cohesively across time 
and space than happens typically in person, but it is counterintuitive only if 
you believe face-to-face interaction is essential to develop team trust. Face 
time can quicken relationship development, but it is not essential and poten-
tially not even best, depending on the work performed. Many  organizations 
function in a matrix today, meaning that managing multiple relationships 
is a core competency for everyone, not just managers or executives. Team 
members belong to multiple teams simultaneously—based on function, 
project, and customer initiative. Showing up for multiple team meetings by 
web  conference, without leaving one’s workstation, is a  signiﬁ cant time-saver. 
 Talent availability and bandwidth are, more than ever, less limited by a physi-
cal workplace. 
“Best Fit” Organizations
“Best ﬁ t” organizations integrate operationally. Enterprise solutions enable 
people to work together in many ways, such as face-to-face conference rooms 
(colocated ofﬁ ce space) that are web enabled (allowing virtual participa-
tion). This means an equal opportunity for integration of a distributed talent 
pool. Some teams are obviously virtual, ﬁ tting their organization structure 
to accommodate distance, but other teams are less obviously so. In today’s 

16  
VIRTUALLY MOBILE, ORGANIZATIONALLY ATTACHED
global marketplace, for example, most executive teams are virtual already, 
made up of leaders based on value, not place. Even if executive ofﬁ ces are 
colocated, executives usually have little face time, but connect virtually on 
a frequent basis. Department teams may be wholly colocated, blend ofﬁ ce 
workers with telecommuters, or be completely virtual. When organizations 
realize how integrated and virtual we already are, redesigning ofﬁ ce space and 
business processes for best ﬁ t happens naturally with little curve.
“Best Fit” Teams
How a team structures itself depends on the team’s purpose. One structure 
does not ﬁ t all. Traditionally, employees were members of one “ﬁ xed” depart-
ment and perhaps on committees, maybe stretch assignments. Today, multiple 
team memberships are common. Organizations are made up of networks of 
teams, and team members are connectors in those networks.
 Agile teams form and reform readily. The proverbial revolving door of 
rolling entry and exit needs leaders to jump-start team relationships. Seldom 
does a team begin and end together. You know you’re a twenty-ﬁ rst- century 
worker when you’ve worked for ﬁ ve organizations in two years without 
changing desks! Team members are recruited for their expertise and inﬂ u-
ence, not based on hierarchy. Teams often share leadership and are somewhat 
self-directed. And most teams are, at least partially, virtual. 
The First Path of virtual teams facilitates the fast formation and agility of 
high-performance teams because it follows the principle of best ﬁ t. Members 
ﬁ t a team based on multiple factors, such as expertise, functional (perhaps 
political) representation, professional ﬁ t, or simple availability. Team mem-
bership may shift based on project stage or assignment to a customer or 
value stream. The team may include workers who go to a traditional ofﬁ ce, 
telecommuters, and traveling employees.
Teams are also increasingly made up of members who cross organizational 
boundaries, including customers, strategic partners, contract specialists, or 
vendors. Cross-organizational alliances require “ﬁ tting” knowledge-sharing 
infrastructure to be secure while encouraging open sharing and protection 
of organizational boundaries, such as intellectual property and proprietary 
 processes. Fitting includes facilitating easy cooperation across permeable 
organization boundaries while managing risk and learning to quickly ﬁ t 
together and be effective fast. 
All this serves to increase team and organizational leaders’ need to man-
age, onboard, and coach differently, enabling people to work where and how 
best ﬁ ts them. In the coordination of team activities, the team members 
develop a way of working together that “ﬁ ts” them. 
Do you think Best Fit?

VITAL MIND-SET SHIFTS IN A MOBILE WORLD  17
Mind Shift #2: The Network Is the Workplace
It is no longer necessary to go to a place to perform basic functions—
buy, sell, train, collaborate, or recruit. LinkedIn has virtually replaced the 
long-form resume. Organizations can distribute organization learning fast 
through knowledge-sharing networks and online learning platforms. Inte-
grated organizations leverage intellectual capital, making it available through 
the digital network. Virtual work gives organizations the agility to increase 
speed, expand expertise, and access strategic opportunities to better meet 
customer demands—with less expense. 
Design thinking is evolving as business leaders rethink how to structure 
the organization into a network of collaborating teams. Virtual work is no 
longer a last resort to keep a good employee; it’s not a compromise when 
people can’t meet in person. It is not an overlay, a replication, or a poor 
substitute. It is our way of working. IT has transformed intranets to be more 
than a place to store our data and ﬁ les; we connect there.
What Is the Network?
A company network is the culmination of basic virtual work processes and 
systems, and the people. It is the road, the car, and the map. Think of the 
network as how: 
• Work is done.
• Teams are built.
• Knowledge is shared.
• Complexity is managed.
• Relationships are developed.
• Agreements are solidiﬁ ed and trust is maintained.
The organization is literally built around the interconnectivity of virtual, 
human, and electronic networks, not a physical workplace. We are hyper-
connected already; we can watch The Voice on broadcast media, smart 
devices, and the Internet, all available 24/7. Why not leverage that hyper-
connectivity at work? Why add 20% to the average person’s workweek in 
commute time? Whether Samantha drives 10 miles to an ofﬁ ce or walks 
down the hallway at home, she will be logging into the network, check-
ing e-mail, handling correspondence, and responding to people—probably 
without talking to anyone. She is a virtual worker, regardless of whether she 
telecommutes. 
Where do you work?

18  
VIRTUALLY MOBILE, ORGANIZATIONALLY ATTACHED
Mind Shift #3: The Paradox of Meaningful Work and Looser 
Employment Ties
This is a time in work history when we are less tied to our employers and not 
tied to a desk. The trend continues to loosen organization ties with shorter 
contracts. At the same time, we seek more connection with others. We’re in 
a paradox in this increasingly virtual work world, where team members are 
more geographically and physically isolated not only from their team but also 
from their organizations. The isolation of virtual work along with a short-
timer mentality makes the virtual leader’s job challenging. 
Since the Industrial Age, managers have tried to motivate employees, 
so creating a motivating environment today is nothing new. Unfortunately, 
when surveyed, employees continue to say that we are failing to engage their 
hearts and minds. Many report feeling isolated from their teams, disengaged 
and unmotivated. Many hope to change to a job where they can engage and 
make a difference. The good news is managers and workers want to be part of 
committed, high-performance teams. The virtual challenge is that distance 
can slow down the onboarding and enculturation process if the organization 
isn’t designed for inclusion and virtual collaboration, and if the manager isn’t 
prepared to lead talent virtually.
Are you connected to your team and organization?
Mind Shift #4: Reward Collaboration and Openness Over 
Individual Expertise
Esko Kilpi, founder and principal of a leading research and consultancy 
ﬁ rm working with the challenges of knowledge work and digital work envi-
ronments, says, “The focus should now be on cooperation and emergent 
interaction based on transparency, interdependence and responsiveness. It 
really is a fast-and-loose world.”3 Organizations are often well-connected 
digital networks, yet results prove teams aren’t fully maximizing collabora-
tion. One leading inhibitor is the organization’s tendency to deﬁ ne a person’s 
value by how much expertise she holds. Hiring contingent workers encour-
ages skill-based hiring, and it makes sense. At the same time, a competency 
plug-and-play approach to team formation is only one facet of hiring a well-
balanced team. It implies our unique expertise increases our value because 
of what we alone know, more than sharing our wisdom does. It’s actually a 
disincentive to collaborate with the team. If a team member’s value depends 
on unique contribution, peers become competition, not allies. Workplace 
reward systems, compensation, and performance appraisal need to reward 

VITAL MIND-SET SHIFTS IN A MOBILE WORLD  19
information sharing, not hoarding, and team performance as well as indi-
vidual results. Examine and structure your systems for collaboration, not 
vicious, hidden cycles of built-in internal competition. 
 Two Tenets to Enable Generosity and Openness
Colocated work environments facilitate knowledge sharing, accidentally 
and simply by being present. Even in a mobile work world, knowledge 
is often shared due to proximity, timing, mentoring, or intentional alli-
ances. Virtual work can create literal distance between knowledge and the 
people. Workers are left out and disengaged; performance is at risk when 
vital information isn’t ﬂ owing and people hesitate to ask for help virtually. 
 Accidental communication is and always will be a part of how people learn 
and  collaborate. 
Tenet 1: Look for Spontaneous Connections With Your Virtual Team
Intentional knowledge sharing should be formally structured and 
rewarded, of course, but there is power in informal sharing. In the emerg-
ing and boundary-crossing global workplace, with the hyperconnected-
ness of “smart” devices and shared apps, it’s easy to capture and share 
intelligence. It’s easy to start team chatter and cross-team conversations 
by facilitating informal and accidental learning while helping people get 
to know one another. Currently, most knowledge sharing is reliant on the 
manager to facilitate (and sometimes learning and development depart-
ments). Having managers be the conduit to the team is just too slow, 
unreliable, and costly. Does your organization rely on managers to cascade 
organization communication? For the informal manager, virtuality may 
have introduced new constraints to cascading organizational news. Are 
your virtual teams as well informed as those who work at a corporate 
ofﬁ ce?
Tenet 2: Structure Knowledge Sharing and Information Dissemination
Time is of the essence to shift organizations toward open collaboration, 
rewarding team success over individual excellence. Corporate America is vul-
nerable. As far as I can tell, most companies are not managing knowledge 
sharing and organization wisdom capture well, even though they could. I 
facilitate in the board room and engage and listen in the trenches. I “hear” 
into executive thinking while also “seeing” into the belly of the operational 
beast. What I see is unsettling—scary misalignment between a networked 
organization’s strategic thinking and what gets rewarded in their everyday 
systems, processes, and management practices. 

20  
VIRTUALLY MOBILE, ORGANIZATIONALLY ATTACHED
Simply put, if performance management, appraisal, and pay remain 
individually focused (and, therefore, competitive at its core), all the best col-
laboration tools and training won’t be enough to get people to become part 
of high-performing teams. Authentic collaboration comes when people not 
only are technology enabled but also are connected to their team and care 
about team results as their ﬁ rst priority. They know if the team wins, every-
body wins. 
Open sharing, passing wisdom on to others, fundamentally changes a 
culture. It won’t happen if it’s not mapped to how people are paid. Tradition-
ally, people were rewarded based on rugged individualism, on their propri-
etary wealth of knowledge. Today, hoarding expertise is a barrier to virtual 
teams and organizations. Unintentional virtual worker ignorance because of 
poor virtual communication risks performance. If a networked collaborative 
mentality is to emerge organizationally, generous sharing must be rewarded. 
 Boomers Are Taking Knowledge With Them When They Go
Another organization issue is a frightening vulnerability. People are retiring, 
letting organization knowledge leave when they do. Right now, one-third of 
baby boomers, the organization wisdom keepers and experts, are eligible to 
retire.4 If not actively managed now, much organization wisdom retires with 
them. I see strategic conversation, but not enough action.
At the least, encourage people to generously pass along the wisdom. 
Much “work” contribution is primarily mental, not muscle. 
People Will Share What They Know—If
It shouldn’t “cost” workers to cooperate; rather, they should be rewarded for 
being nodes in the network, connectors and coaches. Financially reward it. 
Social network analysis can directly and objectively measure who is a valuable 
node in the organization. 
A robust knowledge management infrastructure also quickly enables 
people to access help when needed. Just as anyone can access a universe of 
knowledge through Google search, so should a virtual team member be able 
to access a wealth of organizational knowledge without leaving the work-
station. Organizations that fail to technically integrate and culturally col-
laborate will never fully engage the workforce or unleash all the intelligence 
available. Too much will leave with the boomers.
How organizations address training also changes in a collaborative orga-
nization, and more so when virtual. Training is no longer reserved for “learn-
ing events.” Information-rich employees become valued resources in the 
network—coaches and teachers. While classrooms and other synchronous 

VITAL MIND-SET SHIFTS IN A MOBILE WORLD  21
training opportunities still have value, so does the need for continuous 
and readily available modular learning on demand, anytime, often online. 
MOOCs5 and other on-demand learning portals6 are primary learning 
resources, cutting T&D budgets or redirecting budgets to strategic leader-
ship and talent development, while providing vast resources to employees.
Open, collaborative cultures unleash potential for dramatic expansion 
of organization capability. Learning happens anytime through many modes. 
How does your organization encourage sharing and collaboration?
 How Do We Work Together if We’re Working Apart?
Disengaged virtual workers are not only isolated but also dangerous. 
At the management level, if distributed team members do not have a 
clear sense of how their work “ﬁ ts in” with the overall plan, they risk disen-
gagement and missed performance metrics. Individual efforts run a greater 
risk of being misaligned with strategic priorities and team goals, regardless of 
how hard individuals may be working. I’ve facilitated heart-sinking conver-
sations when the worker and manager both realize that the worker was not 
laying off work, but feverishly working in the wrong direction. Communica-
tion had broken down. 
Virtual work demands everyone’s commitment to communicating—lis-
tening and speaking up. How else will the team ensure everyone is working 
on the right track? This isn’t optional. The team depends on each other. 
Individually and collectively, the “virtual job” creates outputs that come from 
coordinating work, managing each other, negotiating competing priorities, 
and delivering team outcomes through coordinated efforts. Lead and com-
municate actively. Be a role model. Teamwork supports the adage that two 
brains are better than one. Workers who want to be part of high-performance 
teams also want a voice in deﬁ ning the quality of their work lives and organi-
zations. They want more than “just a job.” In order for any collection of 
individuals to function as a team that is able to respond, barriers need to 
fall between managers and employees, among the network of teams, across 
geography and culture, and within operations seeking efﬁ ciency while ﬂ ex-
ibly serving the customers. We’re in this together, communicating and con-
necting.
 What Makes an Organization Come Alive and Take on a Life of 
Its Own? 
A healthy organization community is a collective of what is held in com-
mon by its members, a “creation of some jointly imagined possibility.”7 A 

22  
VIRTUALLY MOBILE, ORGANIZATIONALLY ATTACHED
company is not a thing that preexists, which people join to merely contrib-
ute “outputs.” It is a living organism that changes based on the collective 
beliefs and actions of its members. I’ve been with virtual organizations that 
are alive and buzzing, more like a beehive of collective focus. The air almost 
vibrates across the airwaves; nothing can disrupt enthusiasm and belief. And 
I’ve more often seen the opposite (it’s often why I’ve been called in). It’s so 
simple that most miss it.
 It’s About Us!
Whether colocated or distributed, team members are more committed to the 
organization when they see how they contribute to its very existence, even if 
they contribute for only a short time. Their commitment may be to be reli-
able workers, and not to seek ambitious careers—to be engaged employees, 
happy when they are contributing. 
Distance does not need to create distance. The virtual environment 
appears to risk increased disconnection and isolation, and it may, if the 
organization leaders do not do the following:
• Shift toward a more systemic, integrated view of the organization, 
and communicate with everyone to know how they ﬁ t into the whole.
• Support the network infrastructure that facilitates hyperconnection.
• Actively support a culture where workers share in the rewards of team 
collaboration.
Leaders should encourage and help people develop relationships across 
and beyond organization boundaries, and bring people together digitally 
and face-to-face, synchronously (live) and asynchronously (when they work 
best). Organizations add value when talent is supported and well deployed. 
In a virtual environment, traditional status barriers disappear, or at least 
become less visible—such as ofﬁ ce size and other status perks—and uncon-
scious cultural biases and even some ofﬁ ce politics become less relevant. With 
fewer barriers to keep us apart, collaboration can thrive.
 Don’t Wait for Them
You may not be in a position to affect operational priorities, and your organi-
zation may not have shifted mind-sets yet. You can do something. One leader 
had a “corner ofﬁ ce status issue.” He proposed a plan to remove the status 
barrier by mandating work away from the ofﬁ ce. People were to use the 
ofﬁ ce as an exception, and be there less than a certain percentage of work 

VITAL MIND-SET SHIFTS IN A MOBILE WORLD  23
hours. This unusual move lowered the barrier to having conversations across 
status because of ofﬁ ce ﬂ oors, posted titles, or doors. The temporary man-
date forced people to shift their habits, and, perhaps most importantly, it 
was applied fairly. Even executives agreed to the mandate. In this example, 
distance created togetherness.
Collaborative work cultures are often thought of as an organizational 
ideal—a value, not an operational requirement. Social time in meetings gets 
pushed aside for urgent agendas, for example. If people interacting is the 
actual process of work, and collaborative technology platforms are set up to 
help us function as a network of teams, then isn’t now the time for us to get 
good at collaborating virtually? 
As you read this book, ask yourself how you can better create the beliefs, 
habits, systems, and processes that develop teams you want to lead.
Notes
1. Bob Moritz, “Global Annual Review 2014: Technology Breakthroughs,” 
PWC.com’s Annual Published Review, New York, 2014, p. 10.
2. Shane Ferro, “Virtual Labor Organizing Could Be How the Next Gen-
eration of Workers Get Unionized,” Business Insider, June 10, 2015, www
.businessinsider.com/the-century-foundation-wants-the-unionization-movement-
to-go-online-2015-6
3. Stowe Boyd, “Esko Kilpi on the Architecture of Work,” interview published 
by Work Futures Institute on Medium, https://workfutures.io/esko-kilpi-on-the-
architecture-of-work-1b35f9fb4bc0#.n7ix4bqla
4. Dr. Tasha Eurich, “Generational Leadership,” Rocky Mountain Human 
Resource Professional Society, Denver University, Denver, CO, April 16, 2015.
5. MOOCs are massive open online courses, such as MIT’s EdX online learn-
ing.
6. Lynda.com is currently popular.
7. John Niremberg, The Living Organization (New York: Irving Professional, 
1993), 29.

24
2
V I RT UA L  RO A D B L O C K S  A N D 
E S S E N T I A L  D R I V E R S
“We have modiﬁ ed our environment so radically that we must modify ourselves in order to exist
 in this new environment.”
—Norbert Wiener
“There is no lostness like that which comes to a man when a perfect and certain pattern has
 dissolved about him.”
—John Steinbeck 
“The barn has burned down! 
Now, at last, I can enjoy 
The sight of the moon.”
—Mizuta Masahide
Distributed Work Is Here to Stay
Technology makes workplaces intelligent, connecting virtual workers  easily. 
Three-fourths of all ofﬁ ce workers believe smart technology makes them 
more efﬁ cient and productive, with half believing their company should 
invest more in integrated collaborative tools. Global Workplace Analytics, an 
emerging workplace strategies research ﬁ rm, estimates that 64 million U.S. 
employees, fully half the workforce, hold jobs compatible with part-time 
telecommuting.
Two Remaining Virtual Roadblocks
Roadblock 1: Lack of Support for and From Middle Managers
Kathy Kacher, president and founder of Career/Life Alliance Services and 
coauthor of the 2014 National Workplace Flexibility Study,1 ﬁ nds compa-
nies are moving ahead with ﬂ exwork options but aren’t following accepted 

VIRTUAL ROADBLOCKS AND ESSENTIAL DRIVERS  25
principles of change management or providing much managerial support. 
“Organizations continue to believe that the culture will just come along once 
they have rolled out a policy or redesigned their technology platform.”2
The most frequently cited reasons for poor organizational adoption of 
ﬂ exwork options were the following:
• Poor communication from corporate about initiatives and upcoming 
changes
• Lack of urgency from senior leaders and middle managers regarding 
the people impact
• Fear of career penalty by out-of-sight virtual and ﬂ ex workers
• Lack of manager training to effectively lead mobile teams3
Managers Aren’t Intentionally Throttling Their Team’s Success
Virtual managers and their teams struggle without training. Metrics reveal 
that organizations do not adequately train their managers, if they provide any 
training at all. A recent workplace study found the greatest barrier to success-
ful program rollout was getting middle manager buy-in. When trained, they 
get on board.4 Managers consistently list three concerns about virtual and 
ﬂ ex work. Each is easily addressed with training. Managers have expressed 
the following:
1. Staying connected to the team is harder when I don’t see them.
2. Managing employees on ﬂ ex complicates my job.
3. How do I know they’re really working?
Remove the Roadblock
In a controlled study, managers completed training in managing ﬂ ex work-
ers, which included formulating a draft of their team plan—the First Path of 
team development. While implementing ﬂ ex work, they experienced signiﬁ -
cant improvements in team performance and functioning, and even more 
improvement once teams adjusted to the new environment. They achieved 
the following self-reported skill and conﬁ dence gains after training (notice 
how dramatically their conﬁ dence grew):
• Understanding of ﬂ ex improved 75%. 
• Comfort discussing ﬂ ex options improved 68%.
• Team interaction improved 53%.
• Team communication improved 55%.
• Understanding of performance goals improved 41%.

26  
VIRTUALLY MOBILE, ORGANIZATIONALLY ATTACHED
• Customer service improved 24%.
• Productivity improved 20%.
After training, 85% of the managers stated they felt more prepared, which 
was up from 60% readiness prior to training. They also were more conﬁ dent 
that their employees were really working. Almost half the managers felt they 
could easily measure performance after training. It’s only half, but it’s signiﬁ -
cantly higher than the 34% conﬁ dence prior to training.5
I hope this book helps today’s virtual leaders until they have access to 
skill development.
Roadblock 2: Human Nature’s Comfortable Habits
Untrained managers are more comfortable managing by habit. Many 
workers worry about isolation and career invisibility. Organization leaders 
worry about company culture. People are slower to change than technology 
because habits slow us down. Neuroscientists show us how our brains build 
neural networks that develop into habits. We have to be able to challenge 
our habits to deepen and broaden our skill sets. How easily we do that is 
limited by our willingness to experience discomfort and stretch ourselves, and 
whether learning resources are available. People run from discomfort, even 
though it’s necessary for growth. We’re more open to discomfort when we 
understand why we need to change, and when we can learn safely. Mistakes 
are learning opportunities, not career risks, and training is available to initi-
ate better habits.
Removing the Roadblocks
Train, coach, and communicate the hows and whys of virtual team leader-
ship.
Virtual Drivers
1: Workers Expect Smart Collaboration
The millennials are an educated, technically savvy generation that has 
 expectations, like full digital integration of the workplace. They already 
 collaborate digitally, so a Facebook-like user experience is a minimally accept-
able standard. 
Dated technology isn’t the only contributor to poor collaboration. When 
older workers don’t feel comfortable in a digital workplace, or are unsure how 
to use the collaborative tools, organizations aren’t attractive to millennials. 
In a virtual environment, collaboration platform and tool training brings 
fast return on investment (ROI) for the technology averse, teaching practical 
skills and removing mental roadblocks. 

VIRTUAL ROADBLOCKS AND ESSENTIAL DRIVERS  27
As boomers are retiring, millennials are moving into leadership positions 
faster than any previous generation. They are the most educated workforce 
in history. They were raised with technology and interface with it easily. As 
workers, they expect digital collaboration; as leaders, they’ll demand it.
2: Meaningful Work Bridges Distance
Millennials are motivated differently than boomers were in their early careers. 
Millennials’ top priority isn’t making money or reaching a certain status—it’s 
being engaged at work.6 More than ever, leaders need collaboration compe-
tence built on real relationships—not just for productivity and workﬂ ow but 
to keep people engaged. With looser ties between professional and employer, 
loyalty is earned, and the manager is key to earning that loyalty.7 
A 2015 survey sponsored by the Economist was revealing. Over one-
third (35%) of millennial respondents conﬁ rm that the manager is key. 
The manager’s ability to support the team through facilitating a sense of 
shared purpose and common corporate culture drives millennial loyalty. 
One-third also say they value meaningful work over pay.8 Seventy percent 
plan to change jobs soon and half are conﬁ dent they will do so successfully. 
Meaningful work has turned out to be the most signiﬁ cant recruitment and 
retention tool. 
3: Flex Work Leads Recruitment and Retention
When I ﬁ rst published this book in 2001, virtual work was often a “novel 
idea” used occasionally to retain exceptional employees. No longer novel, it’s 
becoming a worker expectation. A ﬂ exible workplace attracts and retains top 
talent. A Society for Human Resource Management (SHRM) survey discov-
ered that four of ﬁ ve employees crave ﬂ exibility, which includes the ability to 
work from home.9 A strong word, crave shows the strength of worker desire. 
People will work for less—or are less willing to leave for a job that offers 
more—if they are able to work from home.10
People want and need ﬂ exibility for a variety of reasons—lifestyle choice 
and work-life-family balance being common. Technically enabled, people 
can work virtually and still have a seamless connection to the team. In 2015, 
telecommuting was named the top desired employee beneﬁ t. No organiza-
tion wants to lose its best people because of a long commute, a spousal relo-
cation, or child care conﬂ icts. Organizations experience a 20% reduction in 
turnover when virtual work is an option. Virtual work has become a leading 
recruitment beneﬁ t.
4: It’s Socially Responsible
Half of American workers could work virtually. Even if people worked from 
home half the time, greenhouse gas emissions would reduce by 54 million 

28  
VIRTUALLY MOBILE, ORGANIZATIONALLY ATTACHED
metric tons annually, the equivalent of taking almost 10 million cars off the 
road. We would consume 640 million fewer barrels of oil annually.11 While 
this isn’t a leading driver currently, perhaps executives should follow the lead 
of companies like Dell and Xerox that are striving for a 50% virtual work-
force by 2020 as a strategic commitment to the environment.12
5: It Saves Money—Big-Time
Real estate savings. Telecommuting delivers real estate savings. IBM and 
American Express turned around in the 1990s largely by shedding real estate 
costs through telecommuting. Real estate is expensive, so if a company can 
disperse its employees, having them colocated in less geographically expen-
sive places or as teleworkers, tremendous savings fall directly to the bottom 
line. Corporate real estate is being rebudgeted from long-term, ﬁ xed assets 
to provisioning dispersed networks of workplaces to support ﬂ exible, mobile 
work. Real estate is becoming a variable cost. Facilities and IT are the strate-
gic partners in redesigning the physical/digital workplace for full integration 
and collaborative cultural impact.
Productivity gains. Managers continue to worry about production on a 
virtual team. “How do we know remote employees are really working?” When it’s 
actually measured, however, it’s a needless worry. Virtual performance meas-
urements indicate an average productivity increase of 20%. Virtual workers 
have fewer distractions, and virtual workers also work more hours. More 
work is being done virtually than we know, often off the clock. Telecommut-
ers are almost twice as likely to work more than a 40-hour workweek. Only 
28% of nontelecommuters work more than 40 hours a week, while 53% 
of telecommuters do.13 The higher the skill level of the virtual worker, the 
greater the productivity gain.
Lower overhead costs.14 The Productivity, Innovation and Entrepre-
neurship program at the National Bureau of Economic Research monitored 
one home-based call center virtualization. The company saved $1,900 per 
employee in overhead reduction while per-employee productivity increased 
by 13.5%. Also, virtual call centers spent less in retraining because turnover 
reduced by half, with employees stating increased job satisfaction as their 
reason for staying.15 That’s not a typo—half.
Sun and Cisco share virtual work ROI—undeniable! The rewards to the 
organization are undeniable, as evidenced in this chapter and elsewhere. In 
2006 Sun Microsystems, an early adopter of virtual work, published metrics 
of its telecommuting initiative, including cost savings directly attributed to 
virtual and ﬂ exwork environments. This was before integrated technology 
was robust, suggesting even greater gains if implemented today. At that time, 
20,000 Sun employees from 33 countries telecommuted at least 2 days a 

VIRTUAL ROADBLOCKS AND ESSENTIAL DRIVERS  29
week, and 1,760 of those employees telecommuted 60% to 100% of the 
time. This was half the workforce. Fourteen drop-in centers were used by 
5,000 telecommuters, and 127 physical locations were deﬁ ned as work spaces 
by global telecommuters. The results?
• 6,600 “work seats” were eliminated without losing employees
• $63.9 million was saved in the ﬁ rst year
• $319 million was saved over ﬁ ve years
• $24 million was spent on technology16
Cisco not only offers market solutions for virtual work but also does what it 
sells. It shared ROI metrics gathered from virtual workers who used a touch-
down ofﬁ ce in one San Jose campus. It provided Cisco workers the option of 
working from anyplace and provided a physical work space for anyone who 
needed to touch down or hold a meeting. The beneﬁ ts were irrefutable:
• Real estate costs were reduced by 37%
• New facility construction costs were reduced by 42%
• Workplace services (infrastructure and support) costs were reduced 
by 37%
• Furniture costs were reduced by 50%
• IT capital costs were reduced by 40%
• Cabling costs were reduced by 60%
• Equipment space requirements were reduced by 50%17
These are typical results when organizations measure virtual work effectiveness.
Virtual work is not unusual anymore. With a bit of organizational sup-
port and training, managers release old habits, removing two major virtual 
roadblocks. We have many ways to come together once the barriers are 
removed. Platforms and integrated tools have evolved. It’s human nature 
to connect, so we don’t need to evolve. Some of us just need to learn, and 
organizations just need to virtually connect. 
Notes
1. Kyra Cavanaugh, Jennifer Sabatini Fraone, and Kathy Kacher, “National 
Workplace Flexibility Study,” 2014, www.bc.edu/content/dam/ﬁ les/centers/cwf/
research/highlights/pdf/NWFS-Report-012014.pdf
2. Kathy Kacher, interview by Trina Hoeﬂ ing, personal notes from an inter-
view with author in 2015.
3. “Survey on Workplace Flexibility,” October 2013, Worldatwork.org

30  
VIRTUALLY MOBILE, ORGANIZATIONALLY ATTACHED
4. Ibid.
5. Cavanaugh, Fraone, and Kacher, “National Workplace Flexibility Study.”
6. Dr. Tasha Eurich, Bankable Leadership: Happy People, Bottom-Line Results 
and the Power to Deliver Both (Austin: Greenleaf Book Group Press, 2013).
7. Deloitte Consulting, “Mind the Gaps: The 2015 Deloitte Millennial Sur-
vey,” 2015, www2.deloitte.com/content/dam/Deloitte/global/Documents/About-
Deloitte/gx-wef-2015-millennial-survey-executivesummary.pdf
8. The Economist Intelligence Unit, “Automated, Creative, & Dispersed: The 
Future of Work in the 21st Century,” Economist, May 20, 2015, p. 5.
9. Donna Fuscaldo, “Why Your Company Should Offer a Flexible Work Envi-
ronment,” Glassdoor.com, October 7, 2013, http://employers.glassdoor.com/blog/
why-your-company-should-offer-a-ﬂ exible-work-environment/
10. “Flexibility or Salary: Which Do You Value More?,” Free Money Finance, 
February 6, 2012, www.freemoneyﬁ nance.com/2012/02/ﬂ exibility-or-salary-which-
do-you-value-more.html
11. For current data on telecommuting and other work environment statistics, 
see “Latest Telecommuting Statistics,” Globalworkplaceanalytics.com, August 14, 
2015, http://globalworkplaceanalytics.com/telecommuting-statistics
12. Sara Suton Fell, “How Telecommuting Reduced Carbon Footprints at 
Dell, Aetna and Xerox,” Entrepreneur.com, April 22, 2015, www.entrepreneur.com/
article/245296
13. Jennifer Parris, “New Statistics on Telecommuting and the Workforce,” 
Flexjobs.com, August 21, 2013, www.ﬂ exjobs.com/blog/post/new-statistics-on-
telecommuting-and-the-workforce/
14. Phyliss Korkki, “Yes, Flexible Hours Ease Stress: But Is Everyone on 
Board?,” New York Times, August 23, 2014, www.nytimes.com/2014/08/24/business/
yes-ﬂ exible-hours-ease-stress-but-is-everyone-on-board.html?_r=0
15. Nicholas Bloom, “To Raise Productivity, Let More Employees Work From 
Home,” Harvard Business Review, January/February 2014, https://hbr.org/2014/01/
to-raise-productivity-let-more-employees-work-from-home/ar/1
16. “Sun Microsystems,” Smart Commute, 2006, http://smartcommute.ca/
more-options/telework/sun-microsystems/
17. Charles Grantham and James Ware, “Measuring the Business Value of 
 Distributed Work,” White Paper, The Work Design Collaborative, Prescott, AZ, 
February 2006, used with permission.

PART  T WO
WILL VIRTUAL WORK HERE?
“Whatever you can do, or dream you can, begin it. Boldness has genius, power, and magic in it.”
—Goethe
“We have it in our power to begin the world again.” 
—Thomas Paine, Common Sense (1776)


33
3
R E D E S I G N I N G  T H E 
W O R K P L A C E  F O R  T H E 
H U M A N  N E T W O R K 
“We’re not just talking about the computer network anymore. We’re talking about the human 
 network, and having an impact on the way people work and live. . . . It’s about tapping into a 
brand new collaborative business process to accelerate the pace that business is done.” 
—Don Proctor, SVP, Cisco Networks, leader of Cisco’s Cybersecurity Task Force
“A single orchestration platform is effectively the brain and is an absolutely fundamental require-
ment for a smart workplace. . . . The more connected things you want to coordinate, the more 
likely it is for the whole network to become a cluttered mess if not orchestrated properly.”1 
—Mark Furness, CEO, Essensys
 J
effrey, the CEO of Fast Growth Company Inc. (FGC), meets with a key 
strategic partner. They have an opportunity but are nervous about the 
turnaround time. Jeffrey calls the ofﬁ ce from his car—powwow, confer-
ence room, 15 minutes. All priorities are realigned. Jeffrey walks in, coffee 
brewing, whiteboard wiped clean, the team assembled minus Marianne (still 
at lunch). The meeting begins. Thirty minutes later, COO Joan takes over 
the huddle, mind mapping and negotiating tasks. Marianne returns, reviews 
the whiteboard, rolls up her sleeves, and dives in. Jeffrey leaves for a customer 
meeting. 
Two hours later, Jeffrey ﬁ nds the team scattered, on the phones and com-
puters. With the meeting scheduled to reconvene at 5:30 p.m., Jeffrey stops 
in Marianne’s ofﬁ ce to make sure she’s fully briefed. He then remembers 
that Cranton needs some ﬁ gures to run a forecast, pulls the data, and carries 
hard copy over to Cranton’s ofﬁ ce after uploading the ﬁ le to the shared drive. 
Cranton isn’t there, so Jeffrey writes a quick note and leaves the material on 
his MacBook Pro. 

34  
WILL VIRTUAL WORK HERE?
At 5:30 p.m., everyone scurries to the conference. Packets are distributed, 
everyone with a tree’s worth of paper. Everyone takes notes. The next assign-
ments are relegated based on agreed adaptations. A writing lead is assigned to 
compile the pieces into one ﬂ owing proposal. Because of the company’s fast 
growth and similar events, the team agrees to the short-straw method. It will 
require someone pulling another late night to meet the deadline. All agree 
it’s worth it, the payoff’s spectacular, and everyone secretly hopes they get to 
head home. Because of past experiences, a second straw is to proofread, in by 
6 a.m. with a rested eye.
Everyone works in parallel. All input their revisions and notify the short 
straws. Many offer availabilities. Jeffrey has to catch a plane to make a key 
presentation for additional funding and will be unavailable after noon, so 
the document has to be in his hands by 11:15. All nod their heads, look at 
their watches, and count stock options in their heads instead of sheep in their 
beds.
And so it goes.
FGC is fast growth, fast paced. The culture is highly collaborative out 
of necessity, habit, and choice. Meetings, paper, more meetings, more paper, 
and long hours at high speed are the norm; people are energized.
How might virtuality change this company culture? Would it improve 
 efﬁ ciency but interfere with the focused energy? How can FGC redesign its work-
place to keep the good going but coordinate more efﬁ ciently? 
Organization Design, Culture, and Virtual Team Synergy
Designing the workplace means to simplify, entering information into con-
text and facilitating conversations with interdependent team members in a 
way that gets work done. Because time and place have been separated from 
the work, design isn’t limited to buildings anymore.
This chapter explores how to help an organization develop virtually 
without sacriﬁ cing the culture and team synergy. Virtual work does bring 
change, however. It is naïve to think that virtual work does not impact 
organization design, or that culture won’t impact both. For example, a 
previous client is a large global manufacturer, private and family owned. 
The face-to-face, family feel was deeply valued. Voice mail was used often, 
an age-old habit of talking even when people aren’t available (though an 
e-mail would be a better choice for many messages). The business-to- 
business sales division was unproﬁ table because its product distributors 
were often small retail stores in rural areas. Account representatives lost 
time driving every day. 

REDESIGNING THE WORKPLACE FOR THE HUMAN NETWORK  35
When leadership decided to have account managers do more virtual 
account management, account representatives were hesitant, understandably. 
This was not their way to build and maintain accounts; they had face-to-face 
relationships. The company implemented the change anyway.
After implementing a partially virtual solution, replacing drive time with 
phone time, these same account representatives were convinced, becoming 
advocates. They had watched their sales ﬁ gures grow exponentially (in some 
cases 100%), and their customers were thrilled with the arrangement. Virtual 
account management was a success, occasional face-to-face visits were cost-
effective, and everyone was happy.
Because of the productivity and ﬁ nancial gains, plus increased employee 
and customer satisfaction, the strategic decision, naturally, was to expand the 
initiative to other departments. Luckily, we conducted a Virtual Readiness 
Assessment.2 It uncovered that, culturally, they were not ready for signiﬁ cant 
virtual work expansion beyond account management. The in-person com-
munication patterns were so entrenched that people needed to transition, 
not jump, into virtuality. They began adjusting systems and habits cultur-
ally so that the close-knit, family culture could be preserved while building 
readiness.
Telework was not abandoned. Its implementation schedule was adjusted 
so that the culture could adapt with the shifting work environment. Virtual-
ization can be done without paralyzing the organization. If moving in a more 
virtual direction is strategically intelligent (and it is), intentionally nudging 
your organization onto the virtual path is the only reasonable choice.
Technology has already changed the way we work, with organizations 
designing work around the network. If virtually connected by more than a 
shared storage drive, how might Jeffrey’s company have achieved the same 
synergy, met the same turnaround target, and allowed more efﬁ ciency and 
work-life balance? What if the team’s meeting was captured on a digital white-
board, and one master document was shared by all contributors, structured 
for consistency across sections for better ﬂ ow, available outside the confer-
ence room digitally? What if one instant message notiﬁ ed all team members 
when a member’s section became available for review? What if Cranton could 
go into the network to pull what he needs? What if Jeffrey could check in on 
document progress anytime? 
Organizational Paradigms in Recent History
We’ve gone through major transformations regarding work, beginning with 
the farm, and we are going through one now. Work was where the farm was, 

36  
WILL VIRTUAL WORK HERE?
the market was local (until refrigerator trucks made distant markets viable), 
and the tools needed were the horse and plow or tractor. The primary asset 
was land, tying the worker to the workplace.
From Farm to Manufacturing
The Industrial Age came with the factory, also local, and the technology 
was machinery and assembly line. The primary asset was capital equipment. 
Work was standardized, and factories focused on Frederick Taylor’s model 
for efﬁ ciency in repetitive work, leading to high productivity and quality 
control. Workers were location bound, based on where the manufacturing 
line was.
Certain unexamined “beliefs” deﬁ ned work because we went to a place to 
work. Work happened there. The more successful the organization, the big-
ger and better the work space (like acreage on a farm). Manufacturing is still 
a strong workplace-reliant sector of the economy today, though the mind-set 
has broadened toward the digital age. R&D, marketing, sales, and customer 
support are digitally connected functions that have redesigned manufactur-
ing into an integrated ecosystem with fewer location-dependent aspects to 
the business. In fact, service worker roles make up more than one-third of 
manufacturing workers, linking designers, developers, production, and cus-
tomers across the globe.3 
From Manufacturing to the Knowledge Worker
In the late twentieth century, the Information Age redeﬁ ned the business 
environment again. Technology enabled “the corporation” for unlimited 
growth. Work became nonlocalized, but management habits remained tra-
ditional. 
Knowledge-based work is still prevalent today, though it’s more complex 
and boundary crossing. We work in a digitally integrated, hyperconnected 
network with commitments to strategic alliances, public-private partner-
ships, and corporate and social communities. Companies are just beginning 
to see the need to redesign systems and processes to accommodate this com-
plexity and interconnection. Executive surveys from 2016 reﬂ ect a growing 
awareness of the need, though many aren’t prioritizing it yet.4 Currently, 
chief information ofﬁ cers (CIOs) report organization network redesign is 
prioritized by fewer than 35% of global companies.5
Manage From the Network, Not Place
In a way, the future of work is a reversal of a 350-year trend. Work and home 
are coming back together, like the farm, only better because you can work 

REDESIGNING THE WORKPLACE FOR THE HUMAN NETWORK  37
anywhere. People don’t have to go to a place to be connected. Unfortunately, 
our people management hasn’t changed as much. Management standard-
izes work to measure productivity, and cultures continue to gravitate toward 
bureaucratic control using technology. Technology, being neutral, complies. 
New enterprise solutions are emerging to partner with managers for per-
formance management. Analytics are information rich and should be used, 
but not in ways that keep organizations culturally stuck in old management 
habits. It’s good to control the controllable; however, organizations need to 
evolve to embrace the team leader’s role as fostering interdependence, inno-
vation, and collaboration. Let the network and technology solutions assist 
in traditional management activities and efﬁ ciently gather and disseminate 
information. We must manage from the network, partnering with collabora-
tion and management software.
The Nudge Needed Isn’t Always a Big One, but . . .
Beliefs and Habits
F GC is a perfect company for partially virtual work, yet it continues to func-
tion from unexamined “beliefs” about people needing to be together for 
synergy. Despite its progressive actions regarding strategic alliances, opportu-
nity response speed, and aggressive leadership, the team still revolves around 
meetings, paper, and parallel work ﬂ ow with designated integration points. 
The templates to shift habits and beliefs are available, this book being 
one. Many have paved the way for effective workﬂ ow collaboration. The 
common practice of outsourcing, for example, embeds virtual management 
practices just by nature of the contract. FGC, for example, outsources its 
human resources, digital marketing, and public relations functions. In such 
agreements, focus is less on physical presence and more on the agreements 
between the companies, clarifying clear outcomes and expectations. Provid-
ers are selected based on compatible approaches, values, and ability to rep-
resent a positive image to customers (if they will be representing the client). 
Is This Anything New, Really?
Maybe not, but few organizations have fully redesigned for collaboration, 
and team leaders don’t see what integrators and connectors they are. Today’s 
teams are more like the movie industry. The cast and production “team” are 
built around a shared goal, a good movie, and members are highly interactive 
and interdependent—producers, director, screenwriters, actors, cinematog-
raphers, musicians, editors, and crew. Rather than a traditional organization 

38  
WILL VIRTUAL WORK HERE?
chart, today’s teams are aligned around interdependent competencies and 
relationships. There are no middle managers keeping everyone organized; 
the nature of the relationships and outcomes builds in accountabilities and 
collaborative management practices.
Multiple Teams in a Matrix Environment
People are often on multiple teams and have multiple alliances. Committees, 
task forces, and project teams often require team members to carry the addi-
tional role of “representative” to the organization as members in a network 
of teams. This is especially common in matrix organizations. The matrix 
has great usefulness and integrates beautifully with digital collaboration, but 
it has been mistakenly applied to organization design. The matrix isn’t an 
organizational design. The matrix was intended as a structured communica-
tion and relationship network, and it works best when seen as the ﬂ exible 
network that adapts to user needs. Too often it becomes a rigid structure. In 
order for enterprises to evolve organization design to embrace virtual work, 
leaders need to further their understanding of the integrated relationships 
among people, technology, and process. 
We’re not just linked, but inseparable. 
Are You a Hyperconnector?
We have work to do to become collaborative cultures. We’ve become bionic 
with our technology personally but not fully as teams and organizations. In 
a matrix corporate structure, there’s no getting around it. In such dynamic 
work environments, the team members’ primary alliance is to their “home” 
team (or profession). Other team commitments are deprioritized as less 
important or juggled. “Representation” often feels like protection, advocacy, 
and politicking. If the organization is traditional, it is encouraging a compet-
itive culture among star performers, too. It can interfere with team members’ 
commitment to and identiﬁ cation with their teams. 
This is an organizational design issue as much as it is a culture issue. 
Many organizations still evaluate performance traditionally. Virtual team 
leaders must learn how to evaluate the effectiveness of team collaboration, 
coach for collaboration, and help people manage multiple commitments. 
Team members will need to negotiate competing priorities. 
 Teams are part of larger systems, and team members have to be able to 
manage the pull. They must be able to network not only with their own team 
but also with the larger organization and its alliances. 

REDESIGNING THE WORKPLACE FOR THE HUMAN NETWORK  39
You cannot build networked organizations on electronic networks alone; the 
culture must encourage human networking. Workers and leaders beneﬁ t from 
using network tools as relationship management vehicles, though collabora-
tion is sustainable only when people are willingly open and communicating. 
Communication is, in fact, where most of the actual process of work gets 
done. A Harvard study examined complex and dynamic businesses that were 
undergoing radical changes, often unsuccessfully. It concluded that an orga-
nization is fundamentally a social structure. It may be motivated for various 
reasons and designed in various ways, but the workﬂ ow to achieve strategic 
objectives is always driven by social interactions.6 
Are Executives Missing the Mark?
The Harvard study also found that “despite this clearly relational nature,”7 
an increasing preoccupation with structural control has resulted in execu-
tive teams focusing on centralization, decentralization, and formalization. 
In other words, research proves that social relationships are the fuel of 
organizations, but organizations continue to seek control through met-
rics, which usually hinders collaborative social relationships. This is the 
organizational equivalent of shooting yourself in the foot, missing a design 
opportunity to better match organization structures to the way work really 
gets done. 
I recently reviewed a job opportunity for a coaching client, clicking 
through on what seemed a perfect ﬁ t based on the job title—Employee 
Engagement Coordinator. Talk about missing the mark! Rather than a job 
to help link people and teams to the technology, this position was an IT 
analyst job to design the digital network, but with no involvement with the 
users themselves. The strategy was to design a foolproof network path where 
employees would follow digital pathways so well built they would be “forced” 
through a prescribed pathway to the information needed. That’s a start, but 
it’s an attempt to control behavior, not design systems around workﬂ ow. 
Where’s the user engagement in the design?
If social interaction in your organization ﬂ ows through hierarchy and 
permissions, expect a challenge in becoming collaborative. 
Begin with assisting people, teams, and departments to create “hab-
its” of digital interaction and knowledge exchange. Help your team’s new 
habits seep into the social design of the organization. You will be preparing 
the organization for a virtual environment. Virtual work is helping weave a 
sustainable, invisible fabric of collaboration into company cultures and the 
design. 

40  
WILL VIRTUAL WORK HERE?
Tighten Loose Relationships
Many workers begin as loose-tie contractors who eventually become more 
strongly tied to an organization. Time and multiple projects create bonds 
between the worker and the organization, creating stronger ties of trust. 
Smart executives develop high-performance workers, including contractors. 
Reliable talent redeployed knows the organization, making it more valuable. 
By doing so, the relationship, while still based on a contract, is less transac-
tional, more durable.8
Buildings That Support Virtual Teams
The physical design of a building can support or deter virtual collaboration. 
As more employees are off-site, the physical ofﬁ ce changes to accommodate 
teams more than individual work spaces. Facilities take on a different look 
and feel, more like gathering places and drop-in work sites. Not everyone 
needs to be a virtual employee, but many will, and facilities adapt. When 
people gather face-to-face, they still want a place to put their “stuff,” so smart 
facilities managers provide lockers, for example. In addition to teaming 
rooms, have workstations that are plug-and-play—a docking station, white-
board, and shared printer. Ask employees about little touches that make a 
difference for them.
Have rooms of various sizes, grandeur, formality, and privacy. Buy furni-
ture lines designed for on-the-ﬂ y redesign. Lightweight tables can be joined 
together to form a conference table and pulled apart to form smaller table 
groups. Web conferencing is available in all teaming rooms. Whiteboards are 
electronic and app enabled for digital storage and display. A room may hold 
a training session in the morning and a project team in the afternoon. 
Build your organizational design on the network and adapt buildings to 
encourage a ﬂ exible, dynamic teaming environment, amorphous and con-
nected. Use the collaborative tools whether sharing a visual on a wall or over 
the network. As your organization plans, facilities morph to support hyper-
connected collaboration. 
Cultures of Independence, Competition, and Control
Having teams collaborating together requires a shift in the emphasis from 
“me” to “we.” Train people to use the collaborative technology, though tool 
competence is only part of the solution. Developing collaborative environ-
ments is easier said than done. Competition is baked into the way we do 

REDESIGNING THE WORKPLACE FOR THE HUMAN NETWORK  41
business and is part of how people are typically rewarded. Recently, a global 
consulting ﬁ rm examined its own culture for evidence of collaboration, 
knowledge sharing, and effective use of technology. It found embarrassingly 
little cooperation among staff until it reached the partner level. Instead, it 
found an extremely competitive, individualistic operating norm. Upon inves-
tigation, compensation and career opportunities rewarded competition, even 
though the ﬁ rm had invested heavily in tools to improve communication, 
which were used as personal organizational tools. Its investment added no 
more value than the simplest personal productivity apps available on smart-
phones and tablets. 
The ﬁ rm’s mantra for years had been team cooperation for the customer, 
but the unspoken culture was lone ranger heroics and ﬁ ghting for a seat on 
the next team. Recruitment policies and compensation packages reinforced 
this culture. Performance appraisal processes often reinforced it. 
What does your organization reinforce?
 The Emperor Has No Clothes
Very few organizations stand up to the scrutiny of being culturally open 
and collaborative. Very few individuals stand up to the scrutiny. Business is 
built on capitalism, which has taught us to stand out, to have a unique value 
 proposition that helps us compete professionally and in the marketplace. 
Since business organizations compete in a capitalist, competitive society, 
 everyone holds beliefs, habits, and past experiences that interfere with our 
ability to be fully open and collaborative. So which comes ﬁ rst—changing 
your culture to ﬁ t the virtual environment, or implementing virtual teams 
that lead the charge to a more collaborative culture? 
BOTH. They feed and support one another. 
Making Virtual Work in Your Culture
Organizations have to incorporate virtuality into their current cultures. The 
challenge is greater or less, depending on the gap between an organization’s 
current culture and a virtual, collaborative one. Most organizations are not 
going to wholesale redesign themselves overnight, so start where you are. All 
organization cultures are more and less conducive to virtual work and virtual 
teams. It’s not about what’s better—it’s about identifying what in the culture 
supports virtual work now, what is ready for intentional change, and where 
total transformation is needed. 

42  
WILL VIRTUAL WORK HERE?
Virtual Leader Responsibilities
Regardless of an organization’s core culture, strive for the following respon-
sibilities, shared by everyone regardless of status, longevity, or experience:
• Build trust instead of suspicion, and value sharing over secrecy. 
• Achieve the end product together; no one “hands off” responsibility 
until the goal is achieved. Everyone is responsible.
• Seek knowledge. No one is excused because they “didn’t get the 
memo.”
• Create meaningful work.
• Leverage learning across the organization. 
How Naked Is the Emperor?
To know how big the gap is between a virtually effective culture and your 
current state, conduct a top-down/bottom-up assessment of virtual work as 
a viable workplace strategy. Look at current organizational, strategic, opera-
tional, managerial, employee, technical, facility, and performance man-
agement readiness. For organizations already partially virtual, assess the 
consistency with which virtual work is being implemented across divisions, 
departments, facilities, and teams. An honest examination identiﬁ es issues 
and opportunities for expanding a virtual environment.
Culture is maintained through communication, connection, and shared 
agreements about “how we really do things around here.” Technology has 
always played a role in creating and maintaining organizational culture. The 
technology of the pen and paper were predominant connectors prior to the 
typewriter. The telephone was dominant prior to e-mail. Previous technolo-
gies do not go away; the cadre of available tools merely expands. At ﬁ rst, a 
technology seems unnecessary, and then becomes indispensable. The more 
we use technology, the more it becomes a transparent, necessary tool, like a 
ﬂ ipchart or whiteboard. The iPad seemed ludicrous to me until I got one. 
Who remembers having only the telephone and U.S. Postal Service? Our 
organization cultures are already interdependent with the technology tools.
One can certainly argue about tool misuse or overdependence, but one 
cannot argue against the tools themselves. Smart-tech competence is hardly an 
option. We now view virtual communication as being as vital as face-to-face 
(often superior). Where asynchronous communication is needed, virtual tools 
serve well, and keep people connected between live, synchronous meetings. 
It is one thing to connect teams with tools; it is more powerful to inte-
grate organizations. People and technology are merging into integrated 

REDESIGNING THE WORKPLACE FOR THE HUMAN NETWORK  43
partnerships. Networks are human systems that rise from the “people parts.” 
Cisco calls itself “the human network.” The technology is a powerful enabler, 
better every day, and affects organization design.
Real collaboration is still about people working together to fulﬁ ll their 
intentions and commitments. Good organization design supports interac-
tion; the tools become the mechanisms to perpetuate a collaborative culture. 
When a company is a truly networked organization, it’s the quality of rela-
tionships and conversations that make it so. It’s the people who matter most. 
When relationships are strong and communication is good, the organization 
is also better able to respond to a market that’s constantly on the move. 
It’s all about the people. 
Notes
1. Internet of Things/Smart Technology Blog, “Single Orchestration Platforms 
Are Key to Smart Ofﬁ ce Set-Up—Here’s Why,” Computer Business Review, April 
18, 2016, www.cbronline.com/news/internet-of-things/smart-technology/single-
orchestration-platforms-are-key-to-smart-ofﬁ ce-setup-heres-why-4867647
2. You can download a free Quick Check Organization Virtual Readiness 
Assessment at www.WorkingVirtually.org or see it in more detail in Chapter 4, this 
volume. 
3. Sarah Miller Caldicott, “Steve Case Predicts Four Keys to Success With the 
Industrial Internet,” Forbes, March 31, 2015.
4. Josh Bersin, “Predictions for 2016: A Bold New World of Talent, Learning, 
Leadership, and HR Technology Ahead,” Bersin by Deloitte, Deloitte Publishing, 
2016, http://marketing.bersin.com/predictions-for-2016.html
5. Leading Edge Forum, “There’s a New Digital Drama Unfolding in the C-Suite,” 
Virtual-Strategy Magazine, June 15, 2015, www.virtual-strategy.com/2015/06/15/
there%E2%80%99s-new-digital-drama-unfolding-c-suite#ixzz3dEaglNEi
6. Christopher Bartlett and Sumantra Ghoshal, “Beyond the M-Form: Toward 
a Managerial Theory of the Firm,” Strategic Management Journal 14 (1993): 23–46, 
doi:10.1002/smj.4250141005.
7. Ibid.
8. Reid Hoffman, Ben Casnocha, and Chris Yeh, The Alliance: Managing 
 Talent in the Networked Age (Boston: Harvard Business Review Press, 2014).

44
4
S Y S T E M S  R E A DY,  P E O P L E 
W I L L I N G ,  O RG A N I Z AT I O N 
E N A B L E D
“What could be more important than doing unimportant things? If you stop to do enough of 
them, you’ll never get to where you’re going.”
“But why unimportant things?”
“Think of all the trouble it saves. . . . For there’s always something to do to keep you from what 
you really should be doing.”
—Norton Juster and Jules Feiffer, The Phantom Tollbooth
“The real basic structure of the workplace is the relationship. Each relationship is itself part of a 
larger network of relationships. These relationships can be measured along all kinds of dimen-
sions—from political to professional expertise. The fact is that work gets done through these 
relationships.” 
—Michael Schrage, No More Teams
W
e are currently in the middle of a fundamental transformation in 
the way organizations function. “Integration” is not just hard-
ware, software, applications, and platforms. Integration means 
networking people, work, communication—the very structure and systems 
of organizations. 
Yet people resist letting go of old ways of thinking and doing: “Virtual 
work leads to chaos.” “I’d get so lonely.” “It’s okay for those high-tech compa-
nies, but it won’t work here.” These are direct quotes from professionals inter-
viewed in 2015.
In virtual organizations, well-developed systems help alleviate such fears. 
Each organization needs to take an honest inventory of current readiness 

SYSTEMS READY, PEOPLE WILLING, ORGANIZATION ENABLED  45
for virtualization. If you have a road map to get from here to there, you will 
avoid chaos and disjointed efforts.
Teams can work virtually as systems evolve, but their success will be 
hampered if not connected through an integrated network. This chapter dis-
cusses requirements and considerations for networked, collaborative systems 
that support a network of virtual teams. 
At its broadest level, systemic soundness is a manifestation of a con-
nected organization. Inﬂ uential forces are part of a common process that 
informs the system. Patterns and cycles become obvious when we look at 
the whole system.1 The behavior of an organization follows common prin-
ciples that have been widely studied, so we have a solid body of knowledge 
to inform us.2 An organization functions organically, not as a machine. The 
networked databases and collaborative applications need to integrate in order 
to facilitate the processes people use naturally. Just as we humans are more 
than the sum of our parts, so are organizations. 
Organization Realignments and Considerations—New Vistas
Building community in the workplace is viewed by many as ideal but unreal-
istic. It doesn’t need to be. Connected teams utilize the digital network better. 
They are part of larger organizations, team communities within an organiza-
tional community, nodes within the network. Rather than creating distance, 
collaborative tools enable organizations to build connections within and 
among teams by facilitating relationships.
If team relationships are where work really gets done, and if people want 
to be part of a work community, then virtual teams open opportunity to 
redeﬁ ne relationships within the organizational system as a whole.
The key to successfully expanding virtual work is integrating the follow-
ing four critical success factors (CSFs):
1. Collaborative tools and systems
2. Intranet and networked infrastructure
3. Business processes
4. People and inspiring leaders
All four CSFs are part of an enabled organization. Relationships among 
teams are organic, like a living body. People and communication are aligned 
around strategy more than they are limited to functional departments. The 
network, rather than hierarchy, forms the backbone of the operation, and 
team tools are linked if not fully integrated. 

46  
WILL VIRTUAL WORK HERE?
Sound Like Too Much?
Not every organization needs to leap into full virtualization. Telecommuting 
and other ﬂ exwork options are steps forward that don’t require major system 
overhauls. Let’s examine how to get a sense of your organization’s readiness 
to leverage virtual work.
Ready, Set, Jump?
Unless you are truly virtual—and few are—assess the readiness, willingness, 
and ability of your organization to work virtually. Assess technology, facili-
ties, culture, systems and processes, and management practices. The speed of 
adoption (and level of employee satisfaction while undergoing the change) 
depends on organization readiness. It goes faster and easier when the change 
plan is built from a solid analysis. You will also discover how quickly and 
in what areas of the company to initially execute. You’ll discover where to 
change now, where to begin preparation, and where resistance and challenges 
remain. You’ll have hard data to inform your plan.
What You Have to Assess
Readiness is the organization’s preparedness. Like a runner that is posed at the 
starting line waiting for the gun to go off, be ready for the race. Willingness 
is the desire to step into change. Ability is just that—infrastructure, systems, 
processes, and people capable of operating virtually. 
Organization readiness, willingness, and ability across the four CSFs 
may not be uniform; the assessment results will vary across the organization. 
For example, one client assessment showed IT was ready, willing, and able. 
Affected systems and processes could be ready with few revisions. Growth had 
created a cramped ofﬁ ce; the organization needed to expand without walls 
through telework or lease more space. Legal resisted due to security and lia-
bility concerns, but these concerns were easily remedied. The discomfort of 
cramped quarters had increased people’s willingness to try something new. 
Many employees wanted more ﬂ exibility in their work/home balance. Yet 
 people were still reticent. 
The company’s culture was a face-to-face habit—birthdays and anniver-
saries celebrated in break rooms, in-person meetings, and friendships formed 
that extended beyond the workday. The worry was, “How will virtual work 
impact this culture?” People are seldom prepared for dramatic change. This 
does not mean virtual work won’t work; it does mean you need a clearer pic-
ture of how, when, where, and how fast to change hearts and minds. Their 
assessment indicated a need for work on people’s readiness.

SYSTEMS READY, PEOPLE WILLING, ORGANIZATION ENABLED  47
Organization Virtual Readiness Assessment
Take the time to conduct an honest organization self-assessment.3 Start with 
focused questions. Table 4.1 shows a full set to consider.
Most questions can be answered with a little research, asking, and listen-
ing. The greatest resource for real answers lies with the workers themselves, so 
include a cross section of surveys and interviews in your analysis. 
Condense your gathered information into a proﬁ le of the organization’s 
readiness, willingness, and ability to work in a virtual, mobile work environ-
ment. A simple opportunity proﬁ le provides concise data and a way to com-
municate with decision makers. Table 4.2 shows an example of one client’s 
opportunity proﬁ le matrix (OPM) using a scale.
As you can see from this client proﬁ le, they met the baseline require-
ments to initiate virtual work after addressing readiness and willingness. This 
culture’s organization isn’t fully ready to transform its work environment, 
nor is the employee career path and talent management process, but there is 
enough to begin. The organization is structured adequately to move forward, 
enabling processes to be readied for virtuality fairly easily.
Feel free to download the Organization Virtual Readiness Assessment, 
data-gathering instruction, and this real client’s OPM summary as examples 
to follow. Use the assessment to help your leaders prioritize how you proceed 
with business virtualization.
Tooled Up and Trained
People’s virtual collaboration comfort ranges from fearless to terriﬁ ed. 
If team members view virtual tools as a challenge, they approach warily. 
I know a colleague who was a vocal opponent of virtual work until she 
accepted a position recently not realizing it was 90% virtual. Because it 
was her new employer’s “way of doing things around here,” she changed her 
mind. I laughed when she declared enthusiastically how much she loved 
telecommuting and her teammates, and she couldn’t imagine working any 
other way. 
This was a complete mental turnaround in less than three weeks because 
she had no choice (and had a great virtual team leader). Executives and team 
leaders must use the collaboration tools as an operating practice and train peo-
ple to use the tools well. Encourage new ways to use tools to discover what 
works for what kinds of team activities. Without integrating them into the 
way the team works together, tools will be used sporadically and primarily 
as personal organizational tools. While this is helpful, it falls far short of the 
team’s potential.

TABLE 4.1 
Organization Virtual Readiness Assessment
Technology
Work environment
Work systems and processes
People
Readiness and 
willingness
How effectively does 
the current information 
technology infrastructure 
support remote access and 
collaborative tools?
Does the organization’s 
budget support equipping 
and supporting remote 
team members?
How does the organization 
handle equipment and 
network issues now?
How might security 
policies need to change in 
an electronically connected 
environment?
Is bandwidth adequate ev-
erywhere it will be needed?
What is the attitude toward 
virtual work here? (Seen as 
mainstream, special circum-
stances, exception, perk?)
How do the organization’s 
culture and values support or 
contradict virtual work?
Will virtual work have any 
impact on the customer?
How is the organization’s 
core culture conducive to 
virtual work?
What is the overall manage-
ment style? Communication 
style? Meeting style?
How are teams currently 
being used? How might that 
change if virtual teams are 
implemented?
Which job families and functions are 
virtually conducive?
How do remote locations commu-
nicate and report to the rest of the 
organization?
How is productivity measured? Ef-
fective results? How will that change 
virtually?
What systems are set up that support 
and measure virtual work?
What beliefs does your organization 
have about compensation and incen-
tives? Do these change in a collabora-
tive team or virtual environment?
Do reward systems recognize collabo-
ration across boundaries?
How are employees guided on their 
career path? How will that change in a 
virtual environment?
How well do current business process-
es support virtual work ﬂ ows?
What are the management 
constraints? Supports? At 
what levels or divisions?
What are the human 
resources constraints or 
supports? Training/learn-
ing and development?
Overall, what do people 
like about virtual work or 
teams? Dislike? What are 
their fears and concerns? 
Desires?
How engaged are em-
ployees now? How will 
that need bolstering in a 
virtual environment?
How committed is the or-
ganization’s leadership to 
virtual work as a strategic 
initiative?

Are mechanisms in place 
for knowledge manage-
ment access and sharing?
Does the union support 
virtual work?
What is your competition 
doing with virtual work?
How well designed is the 
ofﬁ ce to accommodate more 
team meeting spaces? Drop-
in cubicles?
Are human resources, organization 
development, corporate communi-
cations, and other functions able to 
adjust their delivery mechanisms and 
policies or procedures to support 
virtual work?
How does training currently get done? 
How is that impacted by remote 
employees?
What are the organization 
challenges that a virtual 
team member faces? A 
virtual manager? How can 
leaders address challenges?
Ability and 
training needs
Do the collaborative tools 
function in a way that 
supports business processes 
and people’s needs?
Can information be shared 
quickly and fully enough, 
regardless of location?
Do all have equal access to 
tools and training?
Do team members know 
how to fully utilize the col-
laborative communication 
tools available, and are they 
comfortable sustaining 
relationships through tool 
usage?
Will any additional long-
term support be needed?
What communication plans, 
educational campaigns, and 
other change management 
strategies need to be imple-
mented?
Are resources (time, facilities, 
budget) set aside for virtual 
team development and proj-
ect planning activities?
Can delivery systems get resources 
and tools to the people when needed, 
regardless of location?
Can training, product updates, and 
mentoring be delivered virtually, or in 
combination with face-to-face?
Do people know how to 
fully utilize collaborative 
software tools?
Can team leaders and 
members rally a team 
around a common pur-
pose, and maintain com-
mitment and productivity, 
regardless of dispersed 
team members?
Are people trained in 
remote operations, 
netiquette, and voice mail 
etiquette?

50  
WILL VIRTUAL WORK HERE?
TABLE 4.2 
Virtual Opportunity Proﬁ le for XYZ Company, a Financial Services Company
Factors
Assessment items
Division level
Capability
Readiness
Willingness
Environment (average)
3.67
3.17
3.00
By locations
3
3
3
Number and status of management levels
4
3
2
Security policies
4
3
4
Ease of implementation:
Technologically
4
4
4
Geographically
3
3
3
Management decision-making ability
4
3
2
Technology (average)
3.33
3.17
3.33
Environment 
4
3
4
Decentralization
3
4
4
Ease of implementation:
Technologically
3
3
3
Geographically
3
3
3
Facilities
3
3
3
IT decision-making ability and user 
engagement
4
3
3
Culture (average)
3.50
2.33
3.00
Compensation and incentives
4
3
4
Performance management system 
3
2
3
Motivation for telecommuting
3
2
3
Risk-taking
3
2
2
Telecommuting empowered by managers
4
2
2
Communication channels
4
3
4
People (Average)
3.89
2.98
3.55
Training
4
4
4
Teams
4
3
4
Career path dynamics
4
2
3
Average OPM
3.57
2.90
3.19
Note. 1 = low probability of success; 3 = baseline; 5 = high probability of success.

SYSTEMS READY, PEOPLE WILLING, ORGANIZATION ENABLED  51
Tribal Walls to Open Collaboration
As discussed in the design chapter, workers today are often members of mul-
tiple teams and connecting nodes in the organization network. Even when 
the organization is designed for connection, organization systems such as 
performance management and reward systems may be misaligned. If not 
adapted for team collaboration, old management practices and appraisal 
systems reinforce, for example, an individually competitive culture at the 
expense of collaboration. 
When salaries and other rewards are based only on individual contribu-
tion, no organization can design a network well enough to change behavior. 
Generally, a minimum of 20%–30% of base pay should be tied to team 
performance in order to reinforce a collaborative culture. Please note that the 
organization should do this only if team members have inﬂ uence and real 
impact on team results.
Structure performance appraisal and reward systems to support well-
developed relationships and generous knowledge sharing if you want a col-
laborative culture that adapts quickly. It takes time to dissolve tribal walls, 
competitive behaviors based on self-interest, and information hoarding. Be 
patient and immovable about the virtual collaboration commitment, and 
align systems to support the emerging culture.
Embed Openness and Virtual Connection
Obviously not every system, process, or work ﬂ ow has to be perfect to col-
laborate virtually. The Organization Virtual Readiness Assessment questions 
help you identify where the greatest supports and obstacles are. 
Let’s look at speciﬁ c systems and processes most impacted by virtual 
work, and that most impact people’s readiness, willingness, and ability to 
collaborate virtually.
Is the Job Virtually Viable?
Some activity is not amenable to virtual work, such as manufacturing parts 
assembly (though 3D printing may change that), food service, and some on-
the-job training. Other functions are already partially or fully virtual, such as 
online training and human resources (HR) employee and beneﬁ ts adminis-
tration. Here are some pointers for virtualizing job roles and functions:
• Be sure that job descriptions become less about task responsibilities 
and more about building the integrated “web” of expertise, experi-
ence, and collaboration the team or department needs.

52  
WILL VIRTUAL WORK HERE?
• Make sure that everyone’s job description clearly states expectations 
for virtual collaboration and knowledge sharing, regardless of whether 
working virtually.
• When planning team assignments, balance skill competencies and 
collaborative mind-sets, discounting location as a critical variable.
How Are You Measuring?
A later section focuses on virtual management, but a few guidelines for the 
organization are worth noting:
• Remote performance management cannot be any more effective than 
current on-site management practices. Virtual work is an opportunity 
to look at current practices and intentionally move to a more col-
laborative, shared responsibility approach to team performance lead-
ership. Project and task management tools do a lot of the individual 
activity management, collecting much information for the manager.
• In a collaborative culture, individual and team-based results matter. 
Both the team member and the team are held accountable for 
commitments.
• More structure and planning are required. Management and 
team leaders need to become more thoughtful and organized. 
Disorganization confuses virtual teams.
• Less structure is also required. Command-and-control management 
doesn’t work well virtually and interferes with synergy.
• Managers need training in virtual leadership and tool use. The good 
news is managers can use this as an opportunity to “brush up” on 
basic management and team leadership.
• With virtual teams, poor managers usually show up, while good 
managers get better. The same holds for teams.
Getting There From Here (Virtually)
HR and line managers work together to assist individual team members to 
navigate the organization, as well as to source opportunities for employ-
ees. In a collaborative culture, people are valued for their competence and 
knowledge, but they are also appreciated for their collaborative approach 
and inﬂ uence on their teams. When team members are virtual, career 
opportunities are widely communicated and fairly distributed throughout 
the organization so virtual employees know they’re on the career track as 

SYSTEMS READY, PEOPLE WILLING, ORGANIZATION ENABLED  53
much as their in-ofﬁ ce peers. If 75% of all promotions come out of Chi-
cago, for example, what message does that send to other regional ofﬁ ces? 
HR systems are becoming digital and analytics driven. A new generation 
of talent management and learning and performance management systems 
is available for today’s workforce. New HR support tools designed to accom-
modate complex, mobile workforces integrate the talent management cycle, 
from recruitment to training. “Design thinking is impacting every part of HR 
(including performance management, onboarding, and employee lifecycle pro-
grams),” conﬁ rms Josh Bersin of Deloitte.4 People analytics are part of the 
emerging talent management support tools, objectively assessing individuals’ 
current value and development opportunity. 
Invisible Learning
Learning is a social phenomenon above all. Integrated networks and col-
laborative tools enable people to learn from each other through just-in-time 
coaching and training. Informal learning happens in everyday interaction, 
invisibly. Formal learning is channeled through systems like online training 
libraries. 
Informal learning is at risk virtually. Isolation and disconnection are more 
likely, lessening the opportunity for accidental learning. Virtual  workers need 
to be connected to their teams and larger organization, so they are part of this 
culture and laying groundwork for peer learning. We learn about resources 
and shortcuts in casual conversations. The more virtual, the more  connection 
is needed, especially to become a high-performance virtual team.  Virtual 
team leaders get tongues wagging and ﬁ ngers keying about many topics 
throughout the day.
How Does Work Flow?
Flow will vary from team to team depending on the team’s work. Some high-
level business processes may need to adjust to be virtual, but most are ready. 
Obviously, document ﬂ ow is digital, fully virtualized already. Team work 
ﬂ ows include work done:
• Simultaneously (parallel work, may require coordination)
• Serially (sequential work completed in assembly-line fashion, may 
require cooperation) 
• Together (integrated or cocreated, requires collaboration) 
• Independently (does not need to be integrated with other work in a 
signiﬁ cant way)

54  
WILL VIRTUAL WORK HERE?
Some changes aren’t big. Work that doesn’t need to be integrated can be 
accommodated through simple management tools, easily virtualized. Coor-
dinated work comes together at designated times in the process. To coordi-
nate, virtual teams utilize templates for easy handoffs, chat rooms or instant 
messaging, web conferences, document sharing with publisher and review 
protocols, and good old-fashioned in-person meetings.
Fit the communication and collaboration tools to your work ﬂ ows. 
 Technology aids are just that—aids, not tyrants. Train teams to use tool 
 functions that ﬁ t their virtual work processes.
For example, in early weeks of virtual teaming, have teams structure tem-
plates from current and previous work cycles (if they are not already stan-
dardized or built into the collaborative tools). Improve little things to better 
support virtual work, but no more than is necessary. Simple, easy integration 
is the overriding guideline. Try not to add layers of bureaucracy. Use tools 
already in place as much as possible.
What structures will your team agree ease work ﬂ ow, coordination, and 
 cooperation?
Everything’s Going to Change!
Working virtually is strategic and practical, but will change the way people 
work. This entire book is a road map to manage the transition, starting with 
an examination of how your team currently works to deliver results. The 
mind shifts discussed earlier help virtual leaders see ways to adapt that won’t 
disrupt business. For example, if an employee relations manager currently 
holds coaching sessions in his ofﬁ ce because that’s traditionally how he has 
built trust, he can “change” to web conferencing for virtual employees. If 
minds have shifted and the network is enabled, little changes yield fast results 
with less resistance.
How Do I Get My Stuff?
Centralized purchasing makes ﬁ nancial sense because of economies of scale 
and ability to harness and distribute resources efﬁ ciently. However, how 
does virtual work—especially for home-based teleworkers or traveling road 
 warriors—impact such a simple delivery system as ofﬁ ce supplies? If vir-
tual workers are part-time virtual, the delivery system is not signiﬁ cantly 
impacted; people just pick up supplies while on-site. If they are mostly 
 virtual, does Purchasing set up master accounts with ofﬁ ce supply stores and 
courier services? Virtual workers need to be as fully supported as their in-
ofﬁ ce counterparts with a simple system for getting supplies. 

SYSTEMS READY, PEOPLE WILLING, ORGANIZATION ENABLED  55
Help! My Network Is Down and It Won’t Come Up!
When all equipment was in one or a few locations, a maintenance program 
was easy. When equipment is literally all over the globe, different systems 
need to be created. Some devices are company owned, some worker owned. 
Who is responsible for maintenance and security? Many options are pos-
sible, as long as Information Services sets clear policies and support systems, 
ensuring the organization isn’t adding duties to the virtual worker. The fact 
that one becomes a virtual worker does not mean one becomes a technical 
expert. Basic troubleshooting and maintenance make sense, but what does 
the virtual worker do when basic strategies fail? If your workers are distrib-
uted globally, that may mean 24-hour support.
To Whom Can I Turn?
People learning to work differently want to know they have a lifeline that 
won’t let the new way they work get in the way of the work they need to 
produce. Set up multiple support systems, especially if the organization is 
actively virtualizing or expanding its ﬂ exwork program. Create a corps of 
“helpers” who are experienced and committed to virtual teaming. Create 
virtual buddy systems. Provide online access to real virtual coaches. These 
can be internal or external resources. Perhaps the training department out-
sources virtual management training, subscribing to a virtual university 
that provides immediate access to training in, for example, setting up a 
home ofﬁ ce, managing stress on the road, or quickly realigning a troubled 
team. 
Train to the Tools
You can’t leverage technology if you don’t invest in training. When team 
and manager train together, they are developing protocols and agreements 
while learning. Even if only some team members work remotely, the entire 
team is a virtual team, so collaborative tool training helps everyone. By 
the way, collaborative tools are best learned with others, using the tools while 
learning. Meaningful use of the tools increases the likelihood they will be 
fully utilized. Little learning happens by seeing a demonstration without 
engagement.
Classroom training still works as long as learners are using the tools 
they’re learning with each other. Try to have some components of collabora-
tive tool training be virtually delivered. If virtual workers are expected to con-
duct virtual web-based meetings using collaborative tools, for example, they 
must actually work with the tools before facilitating. In many ways, online 
learning as a team is ideal for tool training. Give people time to experiment 

56  
WILL VIRTUAL WORK HERE?
and play. Provide exercises that use the team’s actual work whenever possible 
so that learners see immediate application. Otherwise, deadlines and other 
work pressures preoccupy people’s minds, and training falls by the wayside. 
Teams learn on the ﬂ y, and bad habits develop.
As you virtualize your team processes, systemically review and adapt 
other areas, too. New employee orientation would include, for example, an 
introduction to the virtual team environment and collaborative culture. 
Connecting People to Virtual Work
“We underestimated the technology needs. We corrected that the ﬁ rst year. 
However, our single biggest mistake was not understanding the people issues. 
If we were starting over we would spend more time and resources emphasiz-
ing training and communication.” So states Robert Egan, director of global 
mobility and virtual work at IBM about its early adoption of telecommuting. 
This book is about the people part of working virtually. As I frequently say, 
technology is the enabler, but people are the key. 
All organization systems should serve the needs of the people and be 
structured for virtual work when possible. Improvements and innovations 
focus on making work easier for people. If workers have to adapt too much to ﬁ t 
organization requirements, virtual work will always remain an initiative. For 
smart companies, it’s a way of life. Integrate technology, culture, systems, and 
processes to sustain an innovative, collaborative culture.
Maintain Engagement in a Virtual Organization—SMART 
Guidelines
It’s good to connect through common tools; it is better to become a network of 
teams. Remember these guidelines as you lead your organization’s changes: 
• Structure teams as interlinking nodes in a network of teams and alli-
ances, rather than as a hierarchical chain of access and reporting.
• Make conversations happen, rather than “cascading” information 
down and out.
• Activate robust (push, post, and pull) communication systems.
• Reach learners and develop leaders in many ways (face-to-face and 
online, live and self-paced, individual and team learning).
• Tap people as knowledge-rich nodes in the network. 

SYSTEMS READY, PEOPLE WILLING, ORGANIZATION ENABLED  57
Manage System Changes—Verifone’s Advice
Verifone, a well-known early virtual success story, followed four core guide-
lines during its virtualization. These principles can guide your virtual rollout 
while also summarizing this chapter:
1. Be eternally vigilant, build on success, remedy glitches, and support 
 virtuality. Prototype and build out without hesitation. Notice they did not 
pilot whether it worked—they prototyped to learn how it worked for them.
2. Constantly communicate at all levels of the organization.
3. Operate based on clear and unambiguous value statements. In a dis-
persed work world, core values guide behavior and decisions, and provide 
identiﬁ cation with the organization.
4. Focus on all elements of success, not just the technology budget or real 
estate savings.
Notes
1. For those wanting a valuable primer, Stafford Beer’s work is a good 
grounding. “Stafford Beer,” Wikipedia, last modiﬁ ed September 7, 2015. http://
en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Anthony_Stafford_Beer 
2. Peter M. Senge, The Fifth Discipline Fieldbook: Strategies and Tools for 
 Building a Learning Organization (New York: Currency, Doubleday, 1994).
3. For your convenience, you can download this Quick Check Organization 
Virtual Readiness Assessment set of questions at www.WorkingVirtually.org
4. Josh Bersin, “Predictions for 2016: A Bold New World of Talent, Learning, 
Leadership, and HR Technology Ahead,” Bersin by Deloitte, Deloitte Publishing, 
2016, http://marketing.bersin.com/predictions-for-2016.html, p. 31.

58
5
B U I L D I N G  B L O C K S  F O R 
V I RT UA L  T E A M  L E A R N I N G
“In times of change, the learners inherit the earth while the learned ﬁ nd themselves beautifully 
equipped to live in a world that no longer exists.”
—Eric Hoffer
“The human individual is equipped to learn and go on learning prodigiously from birth to death. 
Man has at various times been deﬁ ned as a building animal, a working animal, and a ﬁ ghting 
animal, but all of these deﬁ nitions are incomplete and ﬁ nally false. Man is a learning animal, 
and the essence of the species is encoded in that simple term.”
—George Leonard
Teams Leave Contributions on the Table
Interestingly, the aspirations of my team have become quite homogenous 
over time. Still, we have incredibly high standards for what we do, but 
within the context of what we already provide. This also connects to our 
personal embodiment of purpose. Our team is very committed to the excel-
lent outcomes we produce for our clients, but this now tends to be held 
together by our traditions, not by a sense of creating an expanded future 
that better serves. There is respect for the contributions people make to each 
other and the broader body of knowledge we work from. This  contributes 
to the products we develop for our clients, but our team’s  learning tends to 
be peripheral and accidental. (Global services [virtual] manager and virtual 
member of a network of teams, personal communication)
The purpose of knowledge management is not to store information, but to 
build knowledge across the organization. 
The real purpose of virtual work is to prevent distance from isolating team 
members and instead create synergy without limitations of time or space. 

BUILDING BLOCKS FOR VIRTUAL TEAM LEARNING  59
This global service manager’s experience is typical. Individual learning is 
peripheral; the team is functioning because everyone is professional, but they 
are not excelling. This limits the organization’s potential. I’m guessing this 
global company’s leadership is unaware of the problem. 
 Another Retention Tool
Learning opportunity is also growing as a desired employee beneﬁ t, impact-
ing employee retention and engagement ratings, according to Deloitte’s 
2016 HR Trends report.1 Employees want to access online learning when 
they have a need, in addition to having access to professional and leadership 
development programs. Learning management systems are evolving to be 
mobile, highly focused, interactive, and user friendly. They are able to help 
the learner choose what and how best to learn, often with just-in-time learn-
ing modules available anytime online. 
 It’s Alive!
“Knowledge” is not a collection of static facts. It is alive—forever changing, 
growing, and evolving. It often requires unlearning to enable innovation, 
making room for new possibilities. Every nugget of knowledge won’t be fully 
captured. Knowledge becomes nested within other knowledge, and not all 
events are recorded or even remembered. Real learning happens in relation-
ships outside any “training” environment. 
 Knowledge Management—Learning From the Past
Structured knowledge management, simply put, is a way to capture and 
organize information so we can ﬁ nd it, learn from it, and use it. The structure 
can’t fully capture abstract thoughts, but systematically managing informa-
tion is an integral part of enterprise architecture. Its purpose is simple—help 
people ﬁ nd what they need when they need it to do their work. The type 
of information stored hasn’t changed much in 20 years,2 but how it’s done 
has transformed. Employees can access information through powerful enter-
prise search engines immediately, leveraging captured organization wisdom. 
Today’s learning organizations are those who shift to interdependent wis-
dom, the collective captured knowledge of the organization.3 Most organiza-
tions have excellent knowledge-sharing architecture in place; it’s just often 
underutilized.

60  
WILL VIRTUAL WORK HERE?
 Innovation—Learning From the Future
The heart of a virtual team is its commitment to each other and the mem-
bers’ shared vision of what they are creating. Virtual leaders continually man-
age teams with a future focus. Without a reason, little innovative learning 
occurs naturally. Teams may learn from the past but not have a n eye on 
what’s coming. In a fast-changing world where past learning is insufﬁ cient, 
future-focused learning is imperative. High-performance teams learn and 
adapt however needed to achieve the goal.
 The Best Learning Happens When . . .
Organizations learn when people share insights, knowledge, concerns, and 
experiences. Project management tools and search engines are excellent 
resources for learning, but they seldom yield the kind of insights that come 
from conversations. Breakthrough thinking comes from people talking, from 
hearing others’ thinking. We learn how to learn from one another. Learning 
organizations leverage team learning across all areas of the business, often open-
ing conversations to include strategic allies and collaborators from all sides.
Learning teams and organizations depend on the virtual leader to open 
the team to the collective mind. 
People search to ﬁ nd solutions, to conﬁ rm their knowledge, or to 
improve an approach. That speciﬁ c focus is helpful, but people often don’t 
recognize information that is available, but not where they’re looking. Infor-
mation becomes invisible because we have tunnel vision. People who don’t 
think systemically are more prone to myopia and, therefore, limited learn-
ing.4 The best team learning connects formal learning with coaching and lots 
of informal conversation. Knowledge gets shared, captured, cataloged, and 
posted to be available. 
 Learning Is Individual and Collective
Learning and development departments have traditionally trained individ-
uals. Training to the individual is a limiting paradigm that doesn’t always 
reﬂ ect good learning theory in today’s collaborative and distributed team 
environment.5 While learning is an individual responsibility, it is also a group 
activity. Coach teams as you would individuals. Regularly reﬂ ect on a simple 
question: What does the team need to learn in order to produce successful out-
comes while maintaining the well-being of its members?
Facilitate conversations that look toward what’s coming. Ask people to 
share reasons for positions they take, to learn from each other’s logic and per-
spectives. Expect people to ask for help and offer peer coaching. This spon-
taneous, free-ﬂ owing team communication is as important to team learning 

BUILDING BLOCKS FOR VIRTUAL TEAM LEARNING  61
as are formal systems.6  Virtual communication tools provide many ways to 
capture knowledge, especially when coupled with robust conversations. 
 Building Blocks for Virtual Team Learning and Innovation
1. Train Together on the Tools
Learn collaborative applications as a group, letting the team be the learning 
lab. Adapt as the team discovers better solutions.
2. Give Forth, Don’t Hold Back
Generosity is not a common business term, yet isn’t a spirit of generosity an 
essential part of sharing knowledge? In the past, experts became indispen-
sable and highly paid because they held knowledge. A historical culture of 
“information as power” doesn’t dissipate overnight. 
Building cultures that support and reinforce knowledge sharing over 
hoarding, however, can be done when it’s supported and rewarded. Every 
team member is a node in a virtual information network; communication 
pathways connect us. Catalyze team learning by asking provocative ques-
tions and inviting dialogue. Ask members to consider other perspectives. 
Acknowledge experts who freely give forth advice. Seek creative ideas in the 
inexperienced person’s questions. Reward mentoring and coaching, and rein-
force learners, too. Help your team discover the whole really is more than the 
sum of its parts. 
 3. Reinforce Synergy
Some teams perform together quite easily, almost breathing together while 
running down the virtual path. They exude generosity and excitement. They 
trust the team framework they cocreated, which guides their behavior and 
team culture. They’re a cohesive community of high-performing learners who 
developed into a synergistic team. They have a natural and informal informa-
tion ﬂ ow that is fast—pushing, pulling, and posting information constantly. 
They know when to work with the tried and true, and when to innovate.
Why doesn’t this happen for all teams?
People do what they get reinforced for doing. If you want to support 
generous knowledge sharing across individual competencies and functional 
or virtual boundaries, reward it. Do not acknowledge unique expertise unless 
the experts develop others by sharing their knowledge. Make learning and 
teaching an ongoing goal for the team, especially if innovation is a core value 
or team requirement.

62  
WILL VIRTUAL WORK HERE?
 4. Build Commitment, Not Control
Team and organization learning works better when it is facilitated. In 
a team, technology rules and organization controls will never replace the 
 virtual team’s need to think for itself. Managers naturally want to control the 
controllable. However, with performance-tracking tools, managers can eas-
ily impose too much structural control, perhaps unintentionally, which can 
have a demotivating impact. Instead, develop team protocols using  project 
management and collaboration tools to facilitate easy work coordination 
and metrics. Helpful tracking is less work for the team and supports sharing 
knowledge, which adds to everyday learning.
 5. Onboard Rolling Team Members
Team members often roll on and off teams and need to quickly learn how to 
ﬁ nd information that helps them contribute fast. The team with published 
team agreements and onboarding resources is welcoming. They make it easy 
to learn team protocols. Peer coaching and scheduled conversations provide 
opportunities to ask questions. The team’s culture is assimilated quickly. 
 6. Virtually Coach and Mentor
Mentoring is a long-standing tradition for sharing knowledge and developing 
the wisdom of star performers. Without intentionally planning for emerging 
leaders’ development, mentoring suffers in a virtual environment. Spontane-
ous coaching happens less often because accidentally observed opportunities 
aren’t obvious or frequent. Just as books don’t teach us under our pillows at 
night, specialized knowledge isn’t transferred by osmosis in a virtual environ-
ment. (It isn’t really transferred by osmosis in a colocated environment, but 
informal and natural conversation is an invisible “learning forum” that isn’t 
replaced virtually without intention.)  
The Magic Word Is . . . Network
Encourage people’s networking. A collaborative culture encourages relation-
ships at many organizational levels and across teams and boundaries. Smart 
virtual leaders encourage team members to invest time with their networks 
to exchange information, ﬁ nd expertise, and pool resources and talent. These 
networks also cross-pollinate organization learning.
Every team member is a rich “node” connected to a network of human 
beings loaded with knowledge. Mapping organization networks reveals who 
talks to whom about what kinds of issues. Social network analysis maps 

BUILDING BLOCKS FOR VIRTUAL TEAM LEARNING  63
the digital communication of a team or an entire organization. Social net-
work analytics show how information ﬂ ows, quickly identifying people who 
are information-rich nodes—important go-to people—or who are bottle-
necks—important information blockers. Use analytics to improve team 
communication pathways. Where are the information gaps, redundancies, 
people who are bottlenecks or valued advisers? Who’s being left out or not 
responding regularly? 
Know Whom Your Team Relies On
People need people. We form alliances because that’s what we do. Onboard-
ing team members come to your team with existing networks on which they 
already rely. You want to help onboarding team members to quickly rely 
on their new team, too. If they don’t, individuals may remain overly reliant 
on their outside network, taking needed emotional bandwidth away from 
the team. Be a virtual connector, a sort of people resource search engine. 
 Consider how to support your team’s relationships with each other. Expand 
the team’s access to needed resources. 
Also, watch to see if team members are overly dependent on one person 
(often the virtual leader), which creates bottlenecks (and possibly perceived 
favoritism). As the virtual leader, encourage cross-pollination and nurture the 
team’s interdependence. Unless your team functions more like a work group 
that isn’t reliant on each other, this may be your primary responsibility. (In 
part three of this book we’ll talk about how a manager leads different types 
of virtual teams.)
Some teams learn well together but insulate themselves from the rest of 
the organization. They are overly reliant on each other, not linking enough to 
other teams, forming a semiclosed system. Closed systems are not learn-
ing teams and often become misaligned to the organization’s priorities, so 
keep the team connected to and reliant upon the larger organization.
 A Learning Team Is a Performing Team
Until a team comes together to do more than perform a job, it’s not a per-
forming or learning team. The team functions normally, but it will not per-
form to potential, as the global services manager’s experience demonstrated. 
Teams need to talk about more than project updates. People learn from one 
another by talking, watching, and imitating. Virtual teams have to reach out 
to do that, which may not happen without the virtual leader. Soon people 
will naturally continue conversations and want to engage when they see the 

64  
WILL VIRTUAL WORK HERE?
beneﬁ ts and rewards to themselves and the team. Lead by initiating. Partner 
a millennial “digital native” with a Luddite boomer and what do you get? 
A chance to encourage the cultural value of mutual coaching. Deliberately 
create learning opportunities if reasons to talk are not in place already. Begin 
by looking at how you currently share new information. What are you doing 
now, however informal? Can this be used or adapted when you are leading 
the virtual team? Embed sharing as a habit on your team. 
 Innovation Events
Pharmaceutical company Novo Nordisk developed a collaborative culture of 
innovation with a colocated and virtual workforce. Its approach shows how 
easy it is to engage people virtually in a way that invites disruption and inno-
vation without having to change the culture. Leaders held a virtual innova-
tion process to engage all employees through crowdsourcing.7 They posed a 
current organization challenge to “the crowd” for a limited time. Employees 
participated in two ways. They submitted ideas of their own, and they evalu-
ated others’ submitted ideas.  Co-innovators posted comments and voted for 
best ideas, and they worked in temporary teams to hone and submit the best 
one based on predetermined criteria. They learned how to develop ideas into 
businesses cases and then prototype quickly. The ﬁ rst event was so success-
ful they did it again. More employees participated than expected—job titles 
ranged from chief medical ofﬁ cer to administrative assistant, reaching across 
the whole organization.8 Talk about a team-building experience!
A team can host its own innovation event. For example, ﬁ nd hacks, or 
shortcuts, to speed up a project dynamic that interferes with high perfor-
mance. Try hacking business issues in multiple collaborative forums, and see 
what works best for the team—workshops launched from a presentation, a 
posed question, or a targeted focus that launches a web conference dialogue, 
brainstorming asynchronously in discussion forums, coming together for 
colocated discovery labs.9 
Whatever the desired outcome, build in social time, too. Much learning 
happens informally on scheduled event breaks. If virtual, plan for continued 
connection to keep the learning going.
Innovation is critical for most organizations to stay competitive. Innova-
tion and learning are inseparable. Rosabeth Moss Kanter researched inno-
vative organizations for years.10 She summarized a critical differentiator 
between innovative organizations and the rest. The results are surprising: The 
innovative organizations reward people who maintain multiple and over-
lapping networks, both inside and outside the organization. These valued 

BUILDING BLOCKS FOR VIRTUAL TEAM LEARNING  65
workers cross-pollinate ideas, with the organization being beneﬁ ciaries of 
that  network. The more expanded the team’s collective web of networks, 
the more likely the members have access to everything and anyone they may 
need.
Fortunately, the same cultural and structural commitments that build 
successful virtual organizations also produce a learning environment for 
strong innovation. A vital knowledge management process then leverages 
team learning across the organization. 
Embedding an integrated approach to team learning signiﬁ cantly 
increases engagement, too. Teams that take the time to learn together record 
higher employee satisfaction and performance.11 The team becomes a valu-
able asset to itself and others thanks to a well-networked knowledge man-
agement process. In short, strive for networked teams, share responsibility 
for open and lively communication, encourage boundary crossing, facilitate 
access to people and information, and connect teams to their mission and 
organization for useful learning and necessary innovation.
Notes
1. Josh Bersin, “Predictions for 2016: A Bold New World of Talent, Learning, 
Leadership, and HR Technology Ahead,” Bersin by Deloitte, Deloitte Publishing, 
2016, http://marketing.bersin.com/predictions-for-2016.html
2. Alan Frost, “Knowledge Management,” Knowledge Management Tools, last 
modiﬁ ed 2015, www.knowledge-management-tools.net/#ixzz3bpq08beM
3. “Learning Organization,” Wikipedia, last modiﬁ ed September 1, 2015. 
Peter Senge deﬁ ned the learning organization as one that features systems thinking, 
personal mastery, mental models, shared vision, and team learning. These are tenets 
consistent with the principles of this book. For a primer and as a link to more infor-
mation, begin with https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Learning_organization 
4. Gerald C. Kane, Doug Palmer, Anh N. Phillips, David Kiron, and  Natasha 
Buckley, “Strategy, Not Technology, Drives Digital Transformation: Becoming 
a  Digitally Mature Enterprise,” MIT Sloan Management Review Research Report, 
Deloitte University Press and MIT, 2015, www2.deloitte.com/content/dam/
Deloitte/cr/Documents/audit/documentos/auditnews/151106-Strategy-not-
techonology-drives-Digital-Transformation.pdf
5. Albert Bandura, “Social Learning Theory (Bandura),” Learning-Theories 
Knowledge Base and Webliography, 1971, www.learning-theories.com/social-learning-
theory-bandura.html
6. Jane Hart, “Learning & Collaboration: The Difference Between Social 
Learning and Social Collaboration,” Learning in the Social Workplace, C4LPT blog, 
March 18, 2015, www.c4lpt.co.uk/blog/2015/03/18/the-difference-between-social-
learning-and-social-collaboration/

66  
WILL VIRTUAL WORK HERE?
7. “Crowdsourcing refers to a wide range of activities, providing different ben-
eﬁ ts for its organizers. Crowdsourcing in the form of idea competitions or innova-
tion contests provides a way for organizations to learn beyond what their ‘base of 
minds’ of employees provides (e.g., LEGO Ideas).” “Crowdsourcing,” Wikipedia, 
last modiﬁ ed September 8, 2015, https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Crowdsourcing
8. Lorri Freifeld, “Novo Nordisk’s Ideastream,” Training Magazine, May 12, 
2015, www.trainingmag.com/novo-nordisk’s-ideastream
9. “Hackerspace,” Wikipedia, last modiﬁ ed June 27, 2015, https://en.wikipedia
.org/wiki/Hackerspace
10. Paul S. Meyer, ed., Knowledge Management and Organization Design 
(Boston: Butterworth-Heinemann, 1997).
11. Andrea Foertsch, “The Innovative Corporate Workplace: Incorporating 
Coworking, Makerspaces and Accelerators,” Agile Workplace Conference, Washing-
ton, DC, September 15, 2015. 

67
6
L E A R N I N G  F R O M  T H E  L A S T 
2 0 +  Y E A R S
“‘You’ll ﬁ nd,’ he remarked gently, ‘that the only thing you can do easily is be wrong, and that’s 
hardly worth the effort.’”
—Norton Juster and Jules Feiffer, The Phantom Tollbooth
“The thing with high-tech is that you always end up using scissors.”
—David Hockney
What Have We Learned? 
In the mid-1990s, I was a founding executive in a company dedicated to vir-
tual work implementation and training. We asked dozens of executives and 
telecommuting program managers to identify what implementation com-
ponents helped or hurt their success. Most initiatives were begun internally 
without external assistance, and the champions were usually workhorses and 
advocates. All had been working virtually for at least one year, most much 
longer. We asked about lessons learned as an organization. Common themes 
recurred. 
I was curious to update lessons learned 20 years later to see what had 
changed. I talked to many, including ﬂ exwork and business design experts 
and clients. In some cases, I was able to ﬁ nd the same people.1 I reached out 
to previous and current clients (at all levels, teleworkers through executives). 
Much had changed, as expected:
1. People had more comfort and familiarity with and willingness to do ﬂ ex 
work, particularly part-time telecommuting. 
2. Everyone used web conferencing and some version of SharePoint2 or 
other virtual back-ofﬁ ce solution (e.g., Redbooth) that enabled net-
worked digital coordination.3

68  
WILL VIRTUAL WORK HERE?
3. Policies no longer required only company-owned equipment (for risk man-
agement and security). Work was done through a combination of worker-
owned (bring your own device) and company-provided equipment. 
4. Security remained a concern, though it was no longer a reason not to 
implement telework.
Lessons in Hindsight
Here’s the updated summary of lessons learned. 
 Then: The Culture Wasn’t Considered
Overwhelmingly, most organizations had failed to give adequate considera-
tion to the cultural impact of distributed work. It slowed their ability to 
quickly adapt to a virtual environment. 
Now: Unfortunately, Nothing Has Changed
As one ﬂ exwork expert admitted, 
Organizations continue to believe that culture will come along once they 
roll out policy. The greatest barrier to implementation is getting middle 
managers to buy in. One ﬂ exibility study4 shows that only a small percent-
age of companies do any type of formal training when it comes to virtual 
work or workplace ﬂ ex.
 Then: Pilots Were the Thing
Organizations found limited success when they took a temporary or frag-
mented approach. Looking back, most agreed they should not have “piloted” 
virtual work because it sent a message that 
• this is another management fad, 
• we don’t know if it works, and 
• we’re taking a risk with your career. 
This wasn’t the message they wanted. When participants volunteered to 
become virtual employees, pilots were hugely successful. When expanded 
to less enthusiastic employees, the resistance became obvious. Employees 
were fearful that their career visibility would suffer because the organization 
did not fully embrace virtual work. Nothing was in place to support virtual 
worker visibility, for example. 

LEARNING FROM THE LAST 20+ YEARS  69
With hindsight, organizations realized they were not piloting virtual 
work. Rather, they should have been prototyping how to make it work in this 
organization. This sends the right message about organization commitment 
while acknowledging a period of time to accommodate this culture.
Now: It Still Takes Organization Support to Launch Right
Executives underestimate the importance of getting departments that support 
the organization and employees on board with virtual work. Eddie Caine, an 
expert in telecommuting solutions for public and private enterprises, advises, 
Virtually every support department (except the champion) views telecom-
muting as more work—Human Resources, Information Technology, Facil-
ities, Risk Management, Legal, and especially middle managers. They have 
to be given little choice and some motivation. By focusing on best practices 
during change with the employees and managers in the conversation, we 
help create smoother transitions. 
Digital work space expert Charlie Grantham agrees: 
Eddie is spot on. They do much better with a scalable plan for rollout. 
Learn from prototypes, modify, expand. Without total collaboration across 
HR, IT, facilities management, and the business unit, you don’t get adop-
tion. Work on that collaboration ﬁ rst.
Kathy Kacher, a ﬂ exwork expert, recently completed a report on current 
ﬂ ex/virtual work.5 “Transparency is key to success, instead of an under-the-
radar pilot approach. Organizations need to leverage their workforce, get 
feedback, and ﬁ nd ambassadors who can tell the real story before the rumor 
mill starts churning.” For resistant organizations, Kacher proposes what she 
calls “a pulling rollout.” Restrict teams that want to try virtual work until all 
team members agree and cocreate a communication strategy. Not everyone 
needs to telecommute, but the whole team must agree to become a virtual 
team. The result? Motivated teams lead the way, getting everyone on board 
and navigating barriers. As Kacher shared, “It takes longer, but the transition 
is smoother because the hard work is done in advance.”
 Then: Training and Organization Support Was Underdeveloped
Organizations often provided inadequate support and training to the vir-
tual workers. Organizations that provided training in change and virtual 
management achieved sustainable success faster than those that didn’t. 
When provided support—technical help desk and virtual coaching, for 

70  
WILL VIRTUAL WORK HERE?
example—virtual employees rated virtual job satisfaction higher than those 
who did not receive targeted support. 
Nothing dampens enthusiasm more than having a whole new “job” 
called virtual work. Provide training and support because their productivity 
and job satisfaction are more likely to be higher than not.
Now: Sad, but Still True
Eddie Caine on reviewing virtual work installations today: 
We ﬁ nd the same thing. At the heart of the problem is a lack of understand-
ing as to why virtual work pays off for all. Seldom do organizations measure 
the impacts—when they do it’s typically for a pilot. Too seldom is actual 
management development training provided, especially in leveraging col-
laboration tools. They ﬁ nish the pilot and stop measuring the impacts 
because they proved it works. Once they stop measuring, they forget how 
valuable the program was to begin with. Priorities change and . . . because 
companies seldom manage virtual work holistically, causing issues to arise. 
Issues become problems; problems that are resolvable and unnecessary if 
they had received basic support.
Then: Trial-and-Error Learning Slowed Team Formation
Interviewees recalled reinventing the wheel when virtual teams didn’t learn 
from each other. Virtual teams “discovered” their own habits and protocols, 
but little was in place to help other teams learn from them so they could 
become productive quickly. When individuals changed teams they had to 
learn completely new team habits. Smart organizations learned to provide 
sample team agreements, templates, and communication protocols applied 
consistently across all teams. 
Now: Finally, Some Progress!
We’ve gotten better at managing change when the commitment is real and 
determined not to be a fad. Here is a summary of the best advice I can share 
from my experience and conversations with seasoned leaders about how to 
ease the transition to virtualization:
• “An effective communication campaign is invaluable.”
• “You need a formal marketing campaign beginning way before you 
start implementation. Position what’s upcoming so people are ready. 
That means social media and short training videos also.” 

LEARNING FROM THE LAST 20+ YEARS  71
• “This change in work patterns needs to be taken as seriously as a 
product development process and/or rollout. The same business 
principles apply.”
• “Align, align, align to the mission and vision. Then create a brand, 
communication strategy, and ongoing plan to keep it alive. Champion 
an internal advisory team that commits to support virtual success.” 
• “Keep fresh views on the team. Celebrate success. It reduces burnout.”
Notes
1. I’d particularly like to thank Charles Grantham of Community Design 
Institute; Eddie Caine of Eddie Caine Consulting, LLC; Kathy Kacher of Career/
Life Alliance Services; and Steve Dorn of Pivotal Resources for their ongoing conver-
sations beyond my initial interview. They especially helped solidify the results and 
opinions I heard in my interviews.
2. “SharePoint,” Wikipedia, last modiﬁ ed September 13, 2015, https://
en.wikipedia.org/wiki/SharePoint
3. Established all-in-one work stream collaboration and communications plat-
form that makes teams more productive and accountable with a seamless integration 
of chat, ﬁ le sharing, search, task management, and video and voice, centralized into 
an intuitive virtual work space. Founded in 2008, Redbooth is a pioneer of team 
collaboration and communication solutions. “Redbooth,” Wikipedia, last modiﬁ ed 
September 10, 2015, https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Redbooth
4. Kyra Cavanaugh, Jennifer Sabatini Fraone, and Kathy Kacher, “National 
Workplace Flexibility Study,” 2014, www.bc.edu/content/dam/ﬁ les/centers/cwf/
research/highlights/pdf/NWFS-Report-012014.pdf
5. Ibid.


PART  T H RE E
ESSENTIAL VIRTUAL 
COMPETENCIES
“Collaboration isn’t about being best friends, or even necessarily liking everyone you’re working 
with. It is about putting all and any baggage aside, bringing your best self to the table, and focus-
ing on the common goal.”
—Meghan Biro, Forbes contributing writer


75
7
V I RT UA L  L E A D E R S H I P 
D I F F E R E N T I ATO R S
“If you want to awaken all of humanity, then awaken all of yourself. Truly the greatest gift you 
have to give is that of your own self-transformation.”
—Lao Tzu
“The major barrier to developing a sustainable virtual organization is a polity that lacks basic 
competencies to pull organizations forward in the direction of societal evolution. That direction, 
by the way, is towards continuously greater connectivity, harmony of relations among different 
groups and the recognition of unity of purpose. But most leaders today don’t know what 
they don’t know.”
—Charles Grantham, designer of Talent Integration Ecosystems
Poof! You’re a (Virtual) Manager
You no longer gather in a conference room on the spot. Your team stretches 
around the globe. You are the link between the team and the organization.
Regardless of how virtual the organization is, the virtual manager is 
always the primary link between team and organization. If even one team 
member is virtual, you are a virtual manager. Regardless of whether you are 
virtual yourself, you are leading remotely. Leading virtually means managing 
a network of interdependent relationships while keeping the team focused 
on mission accomplishment. It is active management through relationship, 
communication, and coaching, skills critical to a virtual manager. 
Colocated teams are no longer the ideal, with distributed team members 
a compromise. High-level interaction, interdependence, and performance 
occur in multiple work environments. With available technology tools, you 
have a full spectrum of connection vehicles. Business virtualization has ena-
bled teams regardless of where they work. 

76  
ESSENTIAL VIRTUAL COMPETENCIES
It’s team communication that changes most virtually, creating challenges 
for virtual managers. Virtual teams usually meet virtually and face-to-face, 
work independently and interdependently. It’s not either/or. This chapter 
deﬁ nes competencies most critical for leading in a virtual and continuously 
changing environment, which can be daunting when moving to virtual 
work. The virtual leader is the change manager and face of support during 
the transition. What must you do differently? What changes as you move to 
mobile work? 
Change Ourselves First
Stop believing today’s managers are effectively engaging employees. They are 
not. We are wasting far too much human intelligence. Multiple talent reports 
tell us repeatedly, and have for years, that the biggest change leaders need to 
make is surprisingly simple.1
In Future Strong, Bill Jensen writes, “If you want to lead others into a 
strong future, you need to be keenly aware of how your own inner truths—
biases, fears, courage, values and dreams — do or do not impact the daily 
work of others.”2
In other words, know yourself. Others see us. We show ourselves in our 
communication. We learn about ourselves when we listen to the language 
we use. Most people typically focus on the past, a habit that limits us to 
learning only from what we already know. Cynicism and judgments often 
limit our ability to learn and change—or at least slow us down because we 
are convinced something won’t work (cynicism) or is a poor choice (judg-
ment). One coaching client shared this realization simply: “Logic, rituals, 
and habits can stand in the way of thinking about a future where I can learn 
and innovate.”
Managers of ﬁ rst-time virtual workers are asking them to change, let go 
of the familiar, and embrace the new. It might help to remind the team this 
is new for the leader, too. When leaders are open (and make it safe for others 
to be as well), teams are more inclined to allow new habits to emerge and be 
patient with themselves while they ﬁ nd their new work rhythms and ﬂ ows. 
What assumptions, fears, and past experiences are preventing you from opening 
to what’s new?
Distrust Is the Natural State
Let’s be honest, though. Distrust is natural in corporations. If management 
hovers, appearing to distrust, team members are self-conscious and more 

VIRTUAL LEADERSHIP DIFFERENTIATORS  77
careful. In a virtual environment with technical monitoring, a sense of Big 
Brother watching increases tenfold. Career caution is built right into the fab-
ric of organizations and isn’t overcome by exhortations to trust. 
If management hovers digitally, trust will not increase or decrease in a 
virtual environment. Old habits get re-created virtually, perpetuating a cli-
mate of distrust. Instead, build trust through supporting people while man-
aging team results. 
I interviewed an inﬂ uential virtual leader who manages several global, 
virtual teams. She described what happens when organization culture fails 
to support virtual teams, as is the case with this young leader. She asked to 
remain anonymous.
There is no question that we have used tools to effect operational improve-
ment, and our team is on purpose and shares principles. Encouragement 
and support are not strong values in my company, though, so having prac-
tice with tools to use them more effectively is not a focus for the company.
Instead, mistakes are seen as grave errors in judgment, rather than 
learning and growth opportunities. Coaching is not freely given; it is some-
thing that has to be sought out, and can be intimidating to ask for. 
I think people start out wanting to give to the organization, but with 
time and the lack of appreciation of intellectual capital, many people “check 
out” and give the bare minimum because there is a lack of motivation or 
clear goals and mission.
Is it any wonder that distrust is the natural state? Unfortunately, this 
cultural state limits the opportunity for collaborative learning. 
For the remainder of this chapter, reﬂ ect on your management strengths 
and areas for improvement. You are the only person who decides whether 
the past repeats itself or a new future can emerge. Unexamined assumptions 
about people may be limiting your potential. Be open to examining your 
assumptions about how to manage and lead.
Be willing to reconsider your understanding of power and inﬂ uence in 
work relationships. 
Navigating the Threefold Path
As Figure 7.1 shows, we begin on the First Path for high-performance virtual 
teams: team development.
The virtual manager launches the team by facilitating its members get-
ting to know each other while clarifying the team charter, team scope, and 
expected deliverables. The First Path also includes team decisions about 

Support the Team 
Community.
     - Maintenance
PATH TWO
O1
O2
O3
The
Threefold
Path
for
Produce Successful Outcomes:
 - Celebration
 - Quality Deliverables
High-Performance Teams
THIRD PATH
Support the Team 
  Community:
    - Maintenance
      - Emotional Bandwidth
          - Synergy
              - Assistance
SECOND PATH
      Create a Cohesive Team 
      Culture:
    - Team Development
-   -  Planning
    - Structured Trust
FIRST PATH
EMPLOYEE ENGAGEMENT
  - Interpersonal Caring
  - Organizational Commitment
MIND SHIFTS
  - People, Not Place 
 -  Network Is the Workplace
  - It’s All Part of the Job
Change the Deﬁnition of Work
Follow the Threefold Path
Enjoy Strong Relationships
 ©  2016 - Trina Hoeﬂing, The SMART Workplace 
Figure 7.1. The Threefold Path for high-performance teams.

VIRTUAL LEADERSHIP DIFFERENTIATORS  79
communication and work agreements, timelines and quality expectations, 
and team processes.
The virtual manager spends most of her time navigating the Second 
Path. The Second Path may be, in fact, the driving success factor for virtual 
team success, collectively and individually focused on team support. An effec-
tive virtual leader clears the path that builds trust and sustainable performance.
The Third Path actually begins before and continues throughout the life 
of the virtual team’s charter. It’s the production path to successful outcomes. 
Performance management has changed, with smart virtual managers part-
nering with the collaborative tools. As a virtual manager leading your team 
through the Threefold Path, use and adapt work tools that help you track 
and measure performance. Today’s technology functions as a reliable man-
agement partner, so the manager spends less time tracking activity because 
project management tools automate much of it. This opens more time for 
engaging with people and connecting resources.
Conversation and attention to relationships have to be scheduled into 
the virtual manager’s day. Use the collaborative tools to develop trusting 
 relationships with your team. They can be highways for trust and commu-
nication that inform you about how to facilitate team processes and work 
ﬂ ows, leverage metrics and analytics, and ensure outcomes around a clearly 
deﬁ ned strategy for your team.
The Manager Matters
Over one-third (35%) of U.S. employees say managers need to be better at 
nurturing talent and connecting people.3 Research, employee surveys, and 
exit interviews conﬁ rm that the manager is the main reason people stay or 
leave.4 People will work for up to 10% less money for someone they like and 
respect. 
Leadership effectiveness research shows us that virtual managers must do 
four things better:5
1. They must effectively communicate and facilitate others’ communication 
face-to-face, virtually, in writing, and audiovisually through web/audio 
conferences.
2. They must manage by results with a focus on coaching and development.
3. They must trust employees and provide coaching based on team mem-
bers’ stages of virtual effectiveness.
4. They must facilitate introductions and career growth opportunities.

80  
ESSENTIAL VIRTUAL COMPETENCIES
These require strong relationship management skills and social intel-
ligence—inﬂ uencing people across the organization and within the team. 
The virtual leader advocates for the team. This means he needs to build and 
maintain his own network in order to widen available support for the team. 
Understanding the power and politics of the business operation is like having 
a private invitation to the party, and you bring invitations back to your team. 
And remember, as the geographic boundaries that deﬁ ne organizations fade, 
the virtual manager is the face of the organization to the virtual team. 
The Language We Use Confines Us or Opens Us
Virtual competency is more than web conferencing. It requires self-awareness 
and ability to express ourselves clearly. Begin to listen to how you—and your 
team—talk. Listen to examples, stories, metaphors, and images used. Are you 
imaginative, inviting new possibilities? We are unaware of how mechanical 
many of our business metaphors are. Business processes are compared to an 
assembly line since work ﬂ ow seems straightforward. What really happens is 
usually more organic, ﬂ owing through people. A metaphor from nature may 
be a more accurate description, such as the root system of an aspen grove. If 
you and your team are still “thinking” with unevolved metaphors, it limits 
your ability to learn and innovate quickly.
Leverage Complexity
Virtual managers often work in a complex work environment, such as a 
matrix. A matrix is not an organization structure so much as a set of reporting 
relationships that tie the organization together laterally. Complexity always 
increases interdependencies, requiring communication and cooperation by 
more parts of the whole. Mechanical metaphors limit a leader’s ability to see 
the potential of such a rich, dynamic environment. Leverage complexity by 
thinking more in terms of relationships:
• Handle multiple relationships across lines of power, politics, and 
authority.
• Collaborate virtually to manage competing resources across lines of 
business. 
• Inﬂ uence to ﬁ nd needed resources for the team.
• Practice patience (within limits).
• Navigate power struggles and ﬁ nd wins for everyone.
• Be authentic and communicate with sensitivity to others. 

VIRTUAL LEADERSHIP DIFFERENTIATORS  81
Relationship management can be planned, supported, and even mea-
sured. As you plan your virtual team’s interaction with the larger organiza-
tion, think of relationships you need to develop. Help your team members 
have access to needed inﬂ uencers. Facilitate access so that all stakeholder 
perspectives are considered by your team. Issues are resolved faster because 
people have better information. Virtual communication protocols can be 
cascaded into organizational rhythms, habits, and ﬂ ows.
What About When It Doesn’t Go According to Plan?
Team members face a number of predictable barriers to performance. Virtual 
teams more so. Predictable barriers (and common complaints) encompass 
the following: 
• Reliance on other teams who don’t prioritize your team’s needs
• Organization politics and cultures of cynicism
• Geographic, temporal, language, and cultural differences
• (Un)reliable technology
• Difﬁ cult people
A proactive leader anticipates barriers, opens doors, and coaches team 
members to navigate barriers. A proactive virtual leader uses technology to 
help. Of course, the objective of a virtual team is to complete the work. The 
virtual team leader is focused less on task and more on relationships on and 
beyond the team. 
Virtual Coaching and Support
For newly formed teams or teams that are newly virtual, the virtual leader 
must focus on virtual competencies and team development. Some virtual 
team struggle is normal, especially as members move through team develop-
ment stages.6 Teams adjust as they discover how to navigate conﬂ icts and 
differences, becoming high functioning as a unit. 
As a virtual leader, do not shy away from team frustration, irritation, mem-
ber withdrawal, or disengagement. The team should expect rough spots at ﬁ rst 
and learn to talk about and negotiate challenges. Expect to facilitate evolving 
team agreements, adjusting as needed when it’s clear something must change. 
The performance of a newly formed team improves as fast as its members. 
Learning comes from addressing confusion and disagreement. As people get 
to know each other better, they begin to self-manage to talents and strengths.

82  
ESSENTIAL VIRTUAL COMPETENCIES
If the team doesn’t do this, the virtual manager must step in. The virtual 
leader keeps everyone actively engaged and speaking up. Most teams will not 
reach optimal performance. Too many “diplomats” or “peacemakers” may 
prevent a virtual team from reaching its full potential. In a virtual environ-
ment, it’s easier to become disengaged because team members can more eas-
ily disappear. The virtual manager is a facilitator who holds the team together 
until members develop their own bonds and healthy practices.
Developing New Virtual Team Members
Managing a virtual team does not require a magic pill. It does require more 
planning, thought, and organization, as well as clear communication and 
proactive coaching. With time, the attentive virtual leader becomes more 
in tune with team challenges and member motivations. As team members 
adjust to a virtual environment, managers facilitate the team’s successful pro-
gression to full productivity as quickly as possible. 
Typically, virtual workers will go through four stages of personal adapta-
tion to the virtual work environment: excitement, disappointment, confu-
sion, and synergy. (Visit www.WorkingVirtually.org to download a free job 
aid describing the stages with management responses.7) Virtual leaders help 
improve virtual worker competence in the new virtual environment. Everyone 
becomes personally effective, working and collaborating virtually. You will 
coach on the following:
• New and adjusted work habits
• Communication and cooperation
• Emotional support while team members adjust to the remote work 
environment 
• Virtual ofﬁ ce setup, if needed
You are not coaching to job competence; that is assumed and remains 
unquestioned, especially if the virtual workers performed the same job com-
petently prior to moving to a virtual work environment. If performance fal-
ters when it was up to standard before, it is a virtual work environment or 
team issue, not a job competency issue. Coach to the real issue.
Virtual work is common but not pervasive, so team members will have 
varying virtual competence. For seasoned virtual team members who have 
had good experiences, the development stages of virtual competence are 
complete. These team members can be recruited to help move newer virtual 
workers up the learning curve quickly. 

VIRTUAL LEADERSHIP DIFFERENTIATORS  83
Every virtual worker joining a new team goes through an adjustment 
period. Teams are living organisms, each unique. Watch for indications of a 
virtual team member’s conﬁ dence with the virtual work environment, and 
respond situationally. Some frustration is natural for new teams. Knowing 
it’s normal helps everyone get through it.
Managers should remind themselves and team members that structure 
is the servant of the team, not the ruler. All procedures and rules are servants 
themselves. They are in place to serve the delivery goals, not enslave people 
to unnecessary rules. 
The First Path of high-performance teams begins with involving the team 
in setting its own rules, protocols, agreements, communication rhythms, and 
collaborative ﬂ ows. These guidelines can and will adjust as everyone settles 
in.
Often challenges come from outside the team. Helping the team handle 
challenges may require assertive advocacy. Do you need to solicit additional 
budget to bring the team in for a confab? Challenge operational routines? 
Push for more robust and integrated collaborative tools? Your networking 
and inﬂ uencing skills are more critical than ever as you advocate for high 
performance in a virtual organization. 
Managing virtually may be new to you as well, meaning you are going 
through your own developmental stages. It’s not just the team that is learning 
and adjusting; you are, too. Accept some emotional ups and downs but don’t 
get lost in them or question the validity of virtual work. 
Eight Virtual Leader Competencies
Leading adaptive, virtual, fast-paced teams is exhilarating and challenging. 
“Old” competencies don’t become defunct. Bring the best of the past into 
your virtual management practices. Become a leader who commits to con-
tinuously improving eight competencies that shift team management to a 
shared responsibility for performance. 
1. Build Commitment, Not Control
Command-and-control management methods simply do not work in a vir-
tual work environment. The organization is too complex. There is obviously 
a place for structure, but not stricture. Virtual teams look to the virtual man-
ager to keep an eagle eye on how the team coordinates with the rest of the 
organization. They want to know for what—and whom—they are working.
Gain the team’s commitment by modeling and expecting consistency, 
fairness, and trustworthy action. Commitment is given fully only when trust 

84  
ESSENTIAL VIRTUAL COMPETENCIES
is present. Otherwise, a transactional agreement is struck, but not true com-
mitment. 
Never confuse the two. Accept that until trust is present, transactional 
agreements are as good as it gets, and engagement will be limited. As it relates 
to the team’s work, the virtual leader has to pull everyone into the project 
vision enough for team members to suspend their distrust, minimally agree-
ing to meet their obligations. Build commitment in small steps until the 
team stops transacting and begins cooperating. 
Commitment builds more commitment, so start small if that’s where 
people are. Be scrupulously fair and begin the team engagement with the 
trust glass full. Show you trust ﬁ rst and set up team agreements that support 
the trust glass staying full. Expect commitments to be honored, and do not 
settle for excuses. 
As a virtual manager, face your own discomfort with managing in a less 
controlled environment. Negotiate with yourself and others to ﬁ nd that per-
sonal edge—that place where discomfort pushes you to new learning but 
where loss of control isn’t pushing anyone over the edge into chaos and panic. 
2. Focus, Coordinate, and Communicate—Don’t Authorize, 
Command, or Plan
The old joke goes, If you want to hear God laugh, tell him your plans. An 
 antithetical saying says, Failure to plan is guaranteed failure. These are not 
contradictory; they are both absolutely true. The virtual leader needs to focus 
and ﬂ ex, coordinating all the pieces of the game plan without becoming 
entrenched in how it has to go. If a plan is too structured, it will not be able 
to keep up with fast-paced demands. If there is no plan, the fast pace of 
change will whip the team around much like a loose garden hose with the 
water gushing, nothing to “hold the direction.” It’s hard for a team to hold 
its focus when reacting.
Virtual workers expect strong leadership—someone to “hold the direc-
tion” of the garden hose. They will not tolerate, however, rigid commandeer-
ing or entitlement authority. Today’s workers want and need structure but do 
not perform well with onerous rules and invasive oversight. 
A signiﬁ cant twentieth-century contribution has been productivity 
mechanisms that collect, manage, and measure data. For repeatable work, 
control by measurement makes sense. The work product structures produc-
tivity, in a sense. Software tool builders continue to respond to executives’ 
cries for more controls and oversight, producing useful enterprise solutions 
in HR, ﬁ nance, and operations. Solutions produce analytics that inform and 
direct operational behavior. For traditional production work, this is great. 

VIRTUAL LEADERSHIP DIFFERENTIATORS  85
For collaborative virtual work, solutions also prioritize coordination and 
open communication. It makes the manager’s job easier to share information 
through dashboards to keep the team informed. Performance feedback ena-
bles people to course-correct. People like to know how they’re doing, so why 
not let the tools help you inform them? When we know where we are with a 
team, a project, or a deliverable, we can focus on moving the work forward 
instead of wasting time wondering and seeking answers.
3. Connect, Don’t Gate-Keep
A team leader’s credibility is directly related to her ability to obtain resources 
across the organization. Networking, keeping people informed, and solic-
iting input from team members, stakeholders, partners, and customers are 
an integral part of a team leader’s job, virtual or not. In a virtual environ-
ment, it is critical, especially if team members are virtual full-time, reducing 
their visibility to executives and inﬂ uencers. 
Virtual team leaders open doors to information, resources, and people. 
Ensure that your team members are known by upper management and have 
the opportunity to work in high-proﬁ le capacities. Make your virtual team 
“visible” to the organization to guarantee that virtual status does not derail 
your team’s career paths. 
This involves networking up, down, and across organizational bound-
aries, sometimes outside the organizational walls. What would make your 
virtual team and members visible in the organization, regardless of location? 
When a team member’s role on a project is coming to an end, for example, a 
virtual leader scouts for the next opportunity and advocates for and positions 
team members. Successful career connectors will never want for professional 
workers willing to serve on their virtual teams. 
4. Manage by Results, Not by Sight
It’s true that managers can’t manage what they can’t see . . . using old tech-
niques. Old performance management techniques may work, but only if 
they translate well to an electronically networked environment. Call center 
managers, for example, can manage agent performance electronically much 
more easily than a new product launch team leader. Available technology 
opens managers to rethink how to manage performance. For example, when 
is the individual the right focus for performance evaluation, and when is it 
the team that should be evaluated based on collective results? 
One of the bigger barriers to virtual work has been managerial fear of 
the answer to the following: “How do I know they’re really working?” The 
better question is, “How do I know they’re working now, in a traditional 

86  
ESSENTIAL VIRTUAL COMPETENCIES
ofﬁ ce?” If you can answer that question, you can usually extrapolate how to 
know people are working in a remote environment. If you don’t know how 
they’re working now, then what difference does it make? You have some ﬁ rst 
steps to improve your performance management. (We’ll look at that more 
closely in chapter 12.)
The question “How can I manage virtual team performance?” is better 
reframed as “How do I support collaboration and teamwork so that we reach 
our targets?” 
Along with enterprise collaboration tools, virtual leaders also rely upon 
team agreements and feedback loops built by the team during the First Path 
of development. These and the team’s goals are the basis for performance and 
results management. At the very least, a virtual leader must stop being preoc-
cupied with clock time and start thinking about outcomes. Focus on com-
munication and facilitating team processes. Let the team know the lengths 
and limits of their authority, how and in what ways to involve you. Reward 
collaboration, knowledge sharing, and team learning explicitly. Help the 
team honor those who meet commitments. Celebrate results and compen-
sate accordingly.
5. Coach, Don’t Manage
One of the bigger challenges for the virtual leader is developing team mem-
bers without the traditional face-to-face interaction and observation. Typi-
cally in a colocated environment a manager would observe a coachable 
moment, and use that as a reason to approach the team member. 
Observation looks different virtually; it isn’t as easy to detect frustration 
and casually intervene or see someone putting in long hours and ask what 
you can do to help. Virtually, the leader seeks the subtle cue: sharper than 
usual e-mails with an almost staccato feel, e-mails spread throughout the day 
from 7:00 a.m. until 10:30 p.m., a curious drop in communication from 
someone. Become sensitive to the subtle cue. Sometimes it’s nothing—the 
team member is splitting her day in order to spend time with her children 
after school, hence the early and late correspondence. Sometimes, however, 
behavior change signals a warning—a client was unhappy with a milestone 
deliverable, and the team member doesn’t know how to ask for help or feels 
overwhelmed.
While how you observe behavior changes, the basic coaching skills do 
not change virtually. Effective coaches guide team members into increasingly 
effective performance without doing it for them. They anticipate problems 
and conﬂ icts, intervening before they get too big. An effective coach is the 
person to whom a team member goes to get alignment on a project or for 
advice. This is no different virtually. 

VIRTUAL LEADERSHIP DIFFERENTIATORS  87
How and where you give feedback change. Face-to-face is not always an 
option in virtual organizations. The coaching axiom is to praise publicly and 
through all media; give constructive feedback privately and in person. The 
axiom holds true virtually with the exception of “in person.” 
One “virtual reality” to keep in mind: One-way feedback is critically 
important to deliver with care. The poorer the context, the fewer “clues” 
to meaning (e.g., facial expression or voice tone), the higher the likelihood 
of misunderstood meaning. A simple piece of advice via e-mail is more easily 
misconstrued as harsh criticism than that same advice delivered over lunch in 
person. A telephone conversation conveys more meaning but is still missing 
the smile that softens the words.
When in doubt, go with the “richest” medium that is possible and prac-
tical. Videoconferences have become acceptable for performance feedback 
since the video streaming is almost like being in person. A genuinely involved 
manager facilitates coaching conversations and schedules ongoing follow-up. 
She ensures the situation is improving for everyone. A perfunctory manager 
handles the situation by talking to the involved parties. The difference is 
small but signiﬁ cant. Take the time you and the team need to hold full, vigor-
ous conversations that end with improvement plans.
6. Dialogue, Don’t Dictate
Many businesses must innovate quickly, meaning they are learning fast. 
Learning organizations require facilitative managers who help people interact 
with an inclination toward fast adaptation. Teams are more likely to be inno-
vative when they freely share experience and knowledge through intentional 
conversation. Being able to innovate as a team requires the team to hold 
challenging, creative conversations that unearth new possibilities. Collabora-
tive work needs healthy conﬂ ict and active debate in order to generate ideas. 
Generative thinking comes from debate. As the team’s manager, facilitate vig-
orous inquiry and advocacy by everyone, encouraging differences of opinion.
Facilitate your team’s ability to test and experiment quickly through pro-
totype, reﬂ ection, and adjustment. Work-focused conversations should lead 
somewhere—a decision to try something before analysis paralysis sets in, 
a creative resolution to a stubborn problem, combining multiple opposing 
ideas into a better option. Help the team reach majority agreement, if not 
consensus, coming back together after robust debate.8
When people don’t see each other daily, actively facilitate discussion 
opportunities. Teams need practice talking before they need to solve tough 
problems together. As fast as the work landscape changes, virtual managers 
must be able to move their teams from initial idea to execution or prototype 
with little time to adjust. The better the team discusses together—debating, 

88  
ESSENTIAL VIRTUAL COMPETENCIES
exploring, assessing, deciding, designing, trying, adjusting—the more agile 
it can be.
High-performance team leaders have more than a good plan, an effective 
process, and team eagerness; they facilitate teams that quickly and intelli-
gently think together. Conversations are the equivalent of teams thinking out 
loud. Everyone’s hearts, wills, and minds are, ideally, engaged in an ongoing 
commitment to create solutions and ﬁ nd improvements. 
Provide “sacred spaces” to talk. Some conversation is simply download-
ing information so everyone has shared knowledge. Many business conversa-
tions function at the level of debate, essential to assess the value, risk, and 
potential of options. Healthy conversations expand perspectives and invite 
questions. Healthy disagreement enables teams to question current “truth” 
in search of a more ﬁ tting, generative “truth.” 
Dynamic conversations are most likely to be transformative when they 
ﬂ ow freely. Workers are often unwilling to challenge the status quo. Many 
work experiences leave people disinclined to respond to emerging needs, 
especially without encouragement. One of the greatest gifts you can offer 
your virtual team is to encourage them to ask deeper questions, explore, and 
take time to reﬂ ect. Questioning is legitimate and important and accesses 
more of the team’s brilliance. The tone of the conversation becomes one of 
shared curiosity. Invite people into virtual conversations, both synchronous 
and asynchronous, who bring different perspectives. Let new ideas emerge 
from the team, often thoughts that would not have occurred to anyone if 
everyone had not been talking.
Get people in the habit of discussing their ﬁ ndings and exploring what 
comes. Let the group determine relevance. Encourage team members to have 
wide-ranging conversations with their networks. Capture learning as a group, 
and seek larger implications for future projects. This creates true synergy and 
shared responsibility for continuous improvement rather than allowing team 
members to delegate up the organization, relying on you.
7. Blend Technology and People
People versus technology is a false choice. They are not mutually exclusive. 
Virtual managers do need to be technology competent, but the focus is still 
on the people connection. Most tools are user friendly, so learning to facilitate 
using collaborative software does not have to demand technical expertise. 
The real power of a virtual leader is in understanding the nature of people 
and teams, and applying the collaborative capabilities the tools bring. 
In its original meaning intimacy did not mean emotional closeness, but 
the willingness to pass on honest information. Team intimacy can be created 

VIRTUAL LEADERSHIP DIFFERENTIATORS  89
and enhanced through multiple vehicles, and the team needs to decide which 
technologies are best for it. Anonymous polling functions, for example, are 
great for getting a sense of the group around sensitive issues without ask-
ing people to declare a position. Chat rooms allow group interaction and 
casual, more reﬂ ective conversation. An audioconference is a terrible vehicle 
for reﬂ ective dialogue; the silence appropriate to dialogue is confusing on a 
phone—was the team member unintentionally disconnected from the call 
or quietly thinking? Videoconferencing enables fast movement. The energy 
you want to build, the pace you want to move, and the container you want 
to create are all inﬂ uenced by the medium you use. 
8. Integrate, Don’t Comply
Develop and adapt guidelines, processes, and infrastructure to meet the 
team’s needs. Include connection to the larger organization. Virtual team 
members can be confused and feel cut off from the organization if there isn’t 
enough visceral connection. They can collectively or individually drift off 
or become renegades. They may lose their sense of value if they lose track of 
how they are mission-critical to the organization. A virtual manager needs 
to help the team feel “embedded” and integrated into the larger community. 
Help team members integrate their work with the team, and the team’s work 
with the organization. Be the duct tape—the sticky factor—for your team.
Walking the Talk of the Threefold Path
With strong virtual competency, you are creating and sustaining a cohesive 
team culture, supporting your team community, and doing your part to 
ensure that team goals are met. Walking the Threefold Path to manage high-
performance teams is more an art than a science, so ﬁ nd ways to make your 
management style your own. All virtual managers need to be involved in the 
work, but more often they facilitate team functioning, clear obstacles, or rally 
resources. Sometimes a leader’s daily activity is less with the team and more 
in the organization—networking, advocating, and leading change. 
Your commitment, as a virtual leader, is clear: to purposefully and inten-
tionally support your team and the organization in achieving meaningful stra-
tegic goals. Team leaders always attend to that and facilitate continuously 
for effective ﬂ ow. All structure, technologies, and systems serve to support 
results. When in doubt, ask, “How can I support and sustain a virtual com-
munity so that everyone feels included, clear, involved, and responsible? How can 
I tear down silos and walls that interfere with that?”

90  
ESSENTIAL VIRTUAL COMPETENCIES
Notes
1. Kyra Cavanaugh, Jennifer Sabatini Fraone, and Kathy Kacher, “National 
Workplace Flexibility Study” and “Global Workplace Flexibility Pilot,” 2014, 
www.bc.edu/content/dam/files/centers/cwf/research/highlights/pdf/NWFS-
Report-012014.pdf, 2014. Many current research reports and survey analyses are 
referenced elsewhere also. To avoid redundancy, I’ll cite one insightful study: http://
clalliance.com/CLASEL/docs/global%20ﬂ ex%20pilot%20ppt.pdf
2. Bill Jensen, Future Strong (Melbourne, FL: Motivational Press, 2016), www
.goodreads.com/book/show/26583278-future-strong Also, see Jensen’s TED talk: 
“Are You Future Strong?” Tedxtalks.ted.com, added May 29, 2015, http://tedxtalks
.ted.com/video/Are-you-Future-Strong-Bill-Jens
3. The Economist Intelligence Unit, “Automated, Creative, & Dispersed: 
The Future of Work in the 21st Century,” 2015, www.futureofworkhub.info/
allcontent/2015/5/1/automated-creative-and-dispersed-the-future-of-work-in-
the-21st-century
4. Again, so many reports say the same thing. A few highlighted conclusions 
that make the case: Employee Beneﬁ t News reported 70% of employees are poised to 
leave because of their manager; Gallup ESat conﬁ rms 75% are disengaged; Carnegie 
Institute states virtual team issues are 85% people problems, 15% technical chal-
lenges; Microsoft (UK) ﬁ nds communication, performance management, and trust 
named as biggest virtual challenges.
5. Among others, Jonathan Whited, “Virtual Team Leadership Skills Delphi 
Method” (DBA diss., University of Pheonix, 2007).
6. “Tuckman’s Stages of Group Development,” Wikipedia, last modiﬁ ed 
 September 6, 2015, https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tuckman%27s_stages_of_group_
development
7. For more detail on developing new virtual team members, download a free 
job aid, “The Virtual Manager’s Guide to Developing New Virtual Team Members,” 
at www.WorkingVirtually.org
8. Linda A. Hill, Greg Brandeau, Emily Truelove, and Kent Lineback, Collec-
tive Genius: The Art and Practice of Leading Innovation (Boston: Harvard Business 
Review, 2014). 

91
8
H E N H O U S E S  A N D  J A Z Z 
M U S I C I A N S
When Is a Team a Team?
“May your adventures bring you closer together, even as they take you far away from home.” 
—Trenton Lee Steward, The Mysterious Benedict Society and the Perilous Journey
“It takes two ﬂ ints to make a ﬁ re.”
—Louisa May Alcott
“Five guys on the court working together can achieve more than ﬁ ve talented individuals who 
come and go as individuals.”
—Kareem Abdul-Jabbar
W
hat are the differences between work groups and teams, and why 
should you care? Whether you’re a virtual leader or a team mem-
ber, you need to know the difference in order to do the following: 
• Leverage your team’s careers by ﬁ nding best ﬁ ts. 
• Build teams with the kind of open and collaborative team dynamic 
that attracts high-quality team members.
• Produce successful team outcomes.
How a group works to accomplish the team purpose should be driven by 
the work itself. Team relationships develop through coordinated work, but 
how much of an authentic, nontask-focused relationship does the manager 
need in order to lead team members? I believe the deeper the interdepen dence 
required of team members, the stronger the connection. More dynamic, 
complex work will, by its nature, demand more cooperation on the team. 

92  
ESSENTIAL VIRTUAL COMPETENCIES
Sometimes, however, work is simpler. Before selecting your team, answer the 
following: 
• How much cooperation does the team need?
• How often will the team need to work together?
• In what ways must the team cooperate for the work to get done right 
and timely?
From these answers, you begin to know how connected you need 
team members to be and how important virtual collaboration competency 
becomes in your hiring. When colocated, work friendships come naturally, 
sometimes becoming work-intimate strong. When teams seldom or never 
see one another, the virtual manager has an additional job responsibility—to 
facilitate friendly work relationships until they develop on their own, espe-
cially if the work itself doesn’t require it.  
Team Competence, Cooperation, Consideration
Obviously, candidates meet professional skill requirements before considera-
tion for team membership. An equally important consideration virtually is 
the candidate’s desire to cooperate with others and support the team as a 
whole. Look at how effectively a potential team member can work the way 
this team functions and ﬁ ll the role that this team needs. For example, I 
worked with a colleague who was strong at building on others’ ideas but una-
ble to design from scratch. She would be a poor candidate on an innovation 
team that needed to develop new possibilities. On a continuous improve-
ment team, however, she would excel. 
Two people with the same job competencies can bring dramatically dif-
ferent energies to your team as well. Someone who does exceptional work but 
won’t share credit with others can leave virtual teammates feeling unappreci-
ated and derailed. 
Who is a good choice for your team? 
Ensuring Diversity and Team Balance
The virtual leader facilitates the fast formation of aligned high-performance 
teams through facilitating cohesion. You want a cohesive team culture that 
grows out of shared values, beliefs, negotiated agreements, and behaviors 
of the team. Every team’s culture strongly inﬂ uences how people behave—
hopefully, they’re engaged.

HENHOUSES AND JAZZ MUSICIANS: WHEN IS A TEAM A TEAM?  93
At the same time, cohesive teams can come to think too similarly over 
time. When a team values harmony and alignment over accurate analysis 
and critical evaluation, a phenomenon called groupthink can set in. Group-
think truly limits any team’s ability to respond to its environment quickly, 
if at all. Groupthink leads to individual team members unquestioningly 
 following the majority. It discourages disagreement.1 If a team prone to 
groupthink makes one false assumption in a decision-making process, it 
means the team is acting from faulty foundational thinking, thereby putting 
its results at risk.
To avoid this risk, you want your team members to see the team’s work 
from different perspectives. An analytical person will excel at ﬁ nding the 
operational strengths and weaknesses of various options with an eye toward 
quality control. A people-oriented teammate will look at the impact on peo-
ple with an eye toward advocacy for all stakeholders. You want both perspec-
tives in the conversation and at the decision-making table. You want a virtual 
team that is aligned, but also speaks up, reaches out, advocates, and inquires. 
You want a team that challenges itself and each other. 
Diversity on your team is like getting a booster shot against risk.
Diverse teams can harness collective intelligence because multiple per-
spectives are considered. Team diversity is more than culture and race. Team 
members come with different values, personalities and social styles, experi-
ences, backgrounds, and cultures. 
The evidence is unequivocal.2 Scott E. Page, political scientist and eco-
nomics professor at the University of Michigan, used mathematical mod-
eling and case studies to show how variety in stafﬁ ng produces organizational 
strength. Teams made up of similar team members consistently under perform 
diverse teams. One reason for this is that teams whose members have simi-
lar experience, backgrounds, and personalities tend to share similar perspec-
tives and approaches. They enjoy working together more often because they 
think and work similarly. They reach consensus more easily. They also fail 
more often. Their lack of diversity creates collective blind spots for the team, 
increasing the risk of missing important information. Homogeneous teams 
think too much alike. Team diversity leads to broader collective thinking and 
better decisions.3
Personality proﬁ les and temperament assessments are a popular way to 
ensure team diversity that is less obvious than race or culture. The Meyers-
Briggs Type Indicator (MBTI),4 for example, sells nearly two million assess-
ments annually in the United States. Assessments like the MBTI, DiSC,5 
and others are easy to grasp and an inexpensive way to assess team member 
preferences with a goal of selecting team members who bring a full perspec-
tive and balance to the team. 

94  
ESSENTIAL VIRTUAL COMPETENCIES
StrengthFinders,6 developed by Gallup, is another tool that identiﬁ es 
individual strengths in many areas of interest and performance. Its strength-
based philosophy enables leaders to build on team member strengths. When 
a team is well balanced, team members don’t have to be strong in every team 
role in order for the team to perform. Excellent performers are rarely well 
rounded. They have edges, but the team that comes together around its 
aligned work is well rounded.
A cohesive team will collaborate by delegating to strength. 
When selecting team members, look for “best ﬁ ts” based on all relevant 
factors, such as experience; education; functional (perhaps political) rep-
resentation; organization cultural ﬁ t; and, in some cases, availability. Best 
ﬁ t team members complement one another to make a good ﬁ t together. A 
collaborative culture, the culture of a typical high-performing virtual team, 
for example, attracts team members who are naturally open, generous, and 
responsive. People culturally want to approach goals and deliverables with a 
shared focus and faster results.
Think about the kind of team balance you need in your team selection 
process. Plan for a diverse team before building your team. Seek team mem-
bers who meet three criteria:
1. Candidates demonstrate essential and desired virtual competencies (dis-
cussed in chapter 9).
2. Candidates have a natural afﬁ nity for the vision, values, and culture of 
the team they are joining.
3. The team as a whole is diverse—selected team members bring different 
experiences and training, cultural diversity, and a balance of personality 
types and style preferences. 
As a virtual leader, you have the advantage of a larger talent pool because 
you’re not limited by geographic availability. Widen your search to ﬁ nd and 
build the best team you can.
You want your team to be
• aligned around purpose (shared purpose and meaning of the team’s 
work);
• in agreement about the team’s approach to getting work done (values, 
operating procedures, and team agreements);
• in consensus about wanting to collaborate together; and
• willing to not always agree; healthy debate and even strong opposition 
unearth hidden risks and innovative solutions. Diversity brings 
different points of view. 

HENHOUSES AND JAZZ MUSICIANS: WHEN IS A TEAM A TEAM?  95
Are you selecting, measuring, developing, and planning careers for your team 
members based on strengths, balance, and diversity?
 Are You a Henhouse or an Orchestra?
Many work groups call themselves teams, but they’re not. 
Maybe they don’t need to be! 
The ﬁ rst question a team leader must ask is, “Is this really a team, or is 
this a work group?”  
Not all work groups should become teams. 
Hens in a henhouse are colocated and are all expected to perform the 
same task—lay eggs. Their charter of laying eggs, however, does not require 
them to work together to accomplish that task. In fact, to charter hens with 
cooperative egg laying wouldn’t make sense. It would take hens off their nests 
for team meetings, cutting into egg-laying time! 
Select team members who are best ﬁ ts for your team, which begins with 
examining how the team needs to work together. Don’t force task coordina-
tion on employees who work independently. Do encourage conversations, 
letting people get comfortable while talking about something related to the 
work. You can develop team commitment, but you don’t need interdepen-
dence to encourage it. 
Most teams today are not henhouses, however. The work is more dynamic 
and complex. Virtual team leaders function more like orchestra conductors 
than overseers of a chicken coop. The contributions of each team member 
add to a collective production—the performed music, if you will.
 Four Criteria of a Team
Four basics call for an orchestra instead of a henhouse. Ask the following 
questions, and you will know if you are developing and supporting a work 
group or a team.
1. Does the group have a reason for working together? Is there a shared purpose 
and vision of how to accomplish it? Are team members coresponsible 
for the team’s product or service outcome? A symphony, for example, is 
chartered with creating and performing beautiful, harmonious music. If 
a musician wants a solo career in jazz, he or she might not be the best 
recruit for the conductor.
2. Are group members dependent on each other? Individual musicians in a 
symphony cannot perform musical scores without each other. Even a 

96  
ESSENTIAL VIRTUAL COMPETENCIES
virtuoso pianist cannot perform an overture alone. Working together is 
essential. The product is truly team created. 
3. Is the team committed to working together? If the group is reticent to work 
together for any reason, start team development here. 
4. Does the team answer for its work as a team? How people are rewarded 
may deter team cooperation. Many organizations make the mistake of 
rewarding individual performance while expecting team cooperation. In 
keeping with the symphony metaphor, if the musicians are paid indi-
vidually based on demonstrating superior musical skills and receiving fan 
feedback, then human nature will seek distinction. As a result, coopera-
tion will suffer if bonuses are based on individual virtuosity. As a virtual 
manager, be aware of hidden, insidious disincentives to teamwork. Table 
8.1 summarizes the requirements of a team.
If these four criteria are not in place, you can still manage a very effec-
tive virtual work group (and even call it a team), but people will work 
more independently from one another, probably communicating more 
through and with you. The team may enjoy working together and will 
hopefully develop professional friendships, but it’s not necessary for the 
team’s success. 
Teams require more collaboration than henhouses, so members also 
need to have good relationship-building skills. To become a virtual team, 
the leader has to ﬁ nd synergies and habits that work for the whole. In many 
ways, a virtual team is just like any other team, only more so. Teammates don’t 
have to be best friends, but they need some rapport, respect, and conﬁ dence 
in one another. 
If teaming is appropriate but your team does not meet all the criteria, 
strengthen your team based on the principles of this book. In a virtual envi-
ronment, commitment and connection can dissipate without the virtual 
manager’s care and feeding, so work at team connection as a virtual team 
priority. 
TABLE 8.1
Four Criteria of a Team
Team charter
We have a purpose.
Interdependent
We can’t do it without each other.
Committed
We want to be part of this team.
Accountable
Others are counting on what we do together.

HENHOUSES AND JAZZ MUSICIANS: WHEN IS A TEAM A TEAM?  97
Managing a Henhouse
If teaming is not necessary, a virtual work group is easier to manage virtu-
ally. It has fewer complexities. Don’t let this tempt you to create virtual work 
groups by reducing interdependencies, however. It isn’t necessarily easier to 
manage folks who do not need to interact with each other much. This hen-
house philosophy can be good, but consider a few points carefully before 
choosing the henhouse option. 
• More falls to the virtual manager. A work group manager is primarily 
responsible for the workers’ connection to the organization and its 
mission. As more people see their jobs as temporary, the virtual man-
ager is the key connector for people to feel part of the larger organ-
ization. Less interdependence on the team will usually mean more 
one-on-one coaching and support from the manager. Plan for more 
individual time with virtual workers.
•  Autonomy doesn’t encourage cooperation. If virtual workers are too 
independent, they may not support a collaborative culture, such as 
working with other departments. 
•  Cooperation increases commitment to the company. How much team 
members must rely on each other to get things done correlates positively 
with how committed they are to the organization. This challenges 
some virtual managers’ tendency to want to decrease the amount of 
cooperation required by virtual workers. If high commitment to the 
organization is desired, a teaming environment is preferred. Design 
your business processes to increase interdependence when possible.
•  Cooperation increases commitment to the team. Virtual teams cannot 
be any more cohesive than a traditional, colocated team, of course. 
If a virtual manager wants to manage individuals instead of a team, 
complete task autonomy is appropriate but may not be smart. Job 
satisfaction is higher when we like who we work with and interact 
with teammates often. Studies of workplace behavior prove that 
the more team members naturally work together, the greater their 
commitment is to each other and the team. 
If the work doesn’t demand team interaction, the virtual man-
ager will need to intentionally facilitate team bonding. In virtual work 
especially, business process and workﬂ ows should support frequent 
and ongoing interaction and cooperation when possible.
•  Cooperation increases people’s desire to help. How regularly and enthu-
siastically the team engages affects individual members’ willingness 
to help each other. In other words, the more team members have 

98  
ESSENTIAL VIRTUAL COMPETENCIES
to rely on one another, the more likely and willing they are to do so. 
Whether the motivation is enlightened self-interest or the satisfaction 
and expanded emotional bandwidth that comes from knowing people 
better, it is what it is. Use it.7
 Motivating Today’s Team
David McClelland’s human motivation theory teaches that every person 
has one of three driving motivators: the need for achievement, afﬁ liation, or 
power. McClelland’s need theory was the basis of twentieth-century manage-
ment theory.8 None of the three motivators are inherent; we develop them 
through culture and life experiences. The old management model under-
pinned managerial behaviors by determining that for most people, the need 
for power and achievement drove motivation in the workplace.
Power and achievement are not what motivates most workers today, par-
ticularly with the inﬂ ux of millennials into the workforce. Their life experi-
ences give rise to the driving motivator of afﬁ liation. Workers are motivated 
when they work with an organization that is contributing “meaningful 
work.” We want to be part of something bigger and more important than 
ourselves, communities we are proud to be part of.
Regardless of whether you manage hens or conduct a symphony orches-
tra, you want to hire the right people to do the job. Find people who like what 
they do and see the value they provide, whether it’s a call center employee 
helping customers with technical challenges or a scientist joining a team hop-
ing to solve a major health issue. Once you’ve determined whether you need 
a team or a henhouse, it’s time to select the right team members, the focus 
of the next chapter.
Notes
1. “Groupthink,” Psychology Today, www.psychologytoday.com/basics/
groupthink
2. Claudia Dreifus, “In Professor’s Model, Diversity = Productivity,” New 
York Times, A Conversation with Claudia column, January 8, 2008, www.nytimes
.com/2008/01/08/science/08conv.html?_r=1; Natalie O’Toole, “Diversity Leads to 
Stronger Outcomes,” Cornell Chronicle, August 26, 2016, www.news.cornell.edu/
stories/2015/04/diversity-leads-strongeroutcomes-says-lecturer
3. Scott E. Page, The Difference: How the Power of Diversity Creates Bet-
ter Groups, Firms, Schools and Societies (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 
2007).

HENHOUSES AND JAZZ MUSICIANS: WHEN IS A TEAM A TEAM?  99
4. “MBTI Basics,” The Myers and Briggs Foundation, www.myersbriggs.org/
my-mbti-personality-type/mbti-basics/
5. “What is DiSC?” DiscProﬁ le, www.discproﬁ le.com/what-is-disc/overview/
6. www.gallupstrengthscenter.com
7. James Wallace Bishop and K. Dow Scott, “How Commitment Affects Team 
Performance,” HR Magazine 42, no. 2 (February 1997): 107.
8. “Need Theory,” Wikipedia, last modiﬁ ed July 26, 2015, https://en.wikipedia
.org/wiki/Need_theory

100
9
M O R E  T H A N  S M A RT S —
V I RT UA L  T E A M  M E M B E R 
C O M P E T E N C I E S 
“It’s very important in a restaurant to do the right hiring, because there’s no restaurant that you 
have one cook and nobody else in the kitchen.”
 —Wolfgang Puck, restaurant owner
“Actually,” [Wax] said, “we came here because we needed someplace safe to think for a 
 few hours.”
 Ranette: “Your mansion isn’t safe?”
 Wax: “My butler failed to poison me, then tried to shoot me, then set off an explosive in
 my study.”
 Ranette: “Huh . . . You need to screen these people better, Wax.”
—Brandon Sanderson, The Alloy of Law
V
irtual leaders do their job best when they focus on communication 
and interpersonal relationships combined with simple and carefully 
chosen team tools. Managers are faced with and measured by two 
main tasks—their ability to do the following:
1. Make sure the job gets done.
2. Help the team members trust the team’s ability to function as a unit and 
that the organization will keep its promises. 
The virtual roads have been built and well traveled by virtual leaders that 
have paved the road for virtual teams. Three roads, in particular, are now well 

MORE THAN SMARTS—VIRTUAL TEAM MEMBER COMPETENCIES  101
traveled enough that best practices are available and continuously improving. 
This chapter helps the virtual team know how to do the following:
1. Start together. The First Path develops teams that are aligned and pre-
pared.
2. Continue together. The Second Path is one of support and attends to rela-
tionships and resources.
3. Finish well. The Third Path ensures successful outcomes so that teams 
accomplish their goals.
Current research on high-performing teams conﬁ rms that all managers 
actively manage the Threefold Path, virtual or not. 
Structure serves productivity and relationship. The First Path (Develop 
the Team) structures the team’s ability to start, continue, and ﬁ nish well 
within the virtual work environment. The Second Path (Support the Team) 
is where the virtual manager spends most of his or her time. It may be, in 
fact, the driving success factor for virtual team engagement. This is the path 
of virtual leader and peer support. Virtual managers have help with the Third 
Path (Produce Successful Outcomes), thanks to technology-enabling tools. 
The ﬁ rst two paths will put the team on the third path of producing success-
ful outcomes with help from you, the virtual leader.
Before any virtual team pathﬁ nding, however, you want to consider 
team selection as you prepare for the additional complexity of working in a 
virtual environment.
Virtual Team Member “Employability” 
The leadership competencies delineated in Chapter 7 may actually be employ-
ability competencies for all workers, not just leaders. Every skill and compe-
tency is essential for the virtual manager and the professional worker. 
Talent managers are beginning to seek what they call sustainable employ-
ability.1 Similar to the competencies of the virtual manager, sustainable 
employability means having the ability to develop and learn, adapt, and be 
self-reliant and self-managing. There are no hard-and-fast rules about who 
will best succeed in a virtual work environment, but certain qualities and 
competencies have emerged as essential or highly desirable. Pick team mem-
bers carefully based on experience, competence, and reputation. 
Select team members who have high integrity and good reputations 
for mutual support and team play. People who aren’t team players bring a 

102  
ESSENTIAL VIRTUAL COMPETENCIES
distinct disadvantage to the team’s ability to perform. True sports profession-
als play the game well because they know how to play with others. They want 
the team to win, not just achieve personal stats. 
You, as virtual leader, want to know if your team members are able to 
play well with people they won’t see every day. Select people who are essen-
tially honest and capable of commitment. Select people who do what they 
say they will do without prodding. Team members need some reasonable 
respect and conﬁ dence in one another in order to become a trusting team. 
This is even more so in a virtual environment because face-to-face interaction 
isn’t there for reassurance.
Essential Knowledge/Competencies
Communicates Well
Good communication skills, both written and spoken, are critical in a 
 virtual environment, which is synchronous and asynchronous. Writ-
ten communication is especially prone to misinterpretation and coldness 
because there is no immediate feedback happening between the sender and 
the receiver. Clear articulation, interpersonal caring, effective listening, 
and clear writing are all part of today’s teamwork. Choose team members 
who can have different kinds of team conversations, written and spoken; 
information sharing and factual clariﬁ cation; healthy comparison and 
debate; and curious exploration and discovery. Today’s virtual collaborators 
also often need to be able to inﬂ uence and present well. Communication 
 competence matters.
Has the Skills
An important rule of effective team making, virtual or not, is to hire com-
petent people in the ﬁ rst place. Unless you intend to provide skill training, 
skill competency is a baseline before considering someone for the team. As a 
virtual team leader, you must have conﬁ dence that this person can do the job 
without continuous coaching or oversight of the job itself, especially when 
the new hire is working virtually. Trust in an individual’s abilities allows you 
to focus on other priorities, like team maintenance, clearing obstacles, ﬁ nd-
ing resources, and relationship management. Some organizations stipulate 
that employees cannot work in a virtual environment until they have per-
formed their job responsibilities for a certain time or maintain average or 
above ratings on performance appraisals.

MORE THAN SMARTS—VIRTUAL TEAM MEMBER COMPETENCIES  103
Leverages Technology (or Can Learn)
In order to lay the path for a productive team—performing on time, within 
budget, and without interpersonal fallout—all members need to be com-
petent with the collaborative tools and comfortable functioning virtually. 
Decide if you want to select only candidates who are already tool competent, 
or if you will help transition teams systematically from colocated work habits 
to online collaboration through the network. 
Reassure team members that you, as virtual leader, will coach them. 
Make training available and consider requiring it. You can’t expect every can-
didate to be equally as prepared. Of course, many people have virtual team 
experience, and not all have had good experiences. Not everyone comes onto 
a team with the same commitment, conﬁ dence, or competence in virtual 
collaboration. The First Path, developing your team, is the time to align eve-
ryone to the tools as much as the goals. 
Work gets done by people through the digital network. The tools are 
easier and more integrated, so virtual competency is not as challenging as it 
used to be. Online learning is familiar to everyone today, enabling just-in-
time (JIT)2 learning through on-demand tutorials, self-paced courses, or a 
YouTube demonstration. 
One advantage of enterprise solutions is that everyone across the organi-
zation uses the same platform and tools, shortening learning curves. Team 
members are expected to learn and use them. Virtual work shouldn’t become 
an employee’s “other job” to ﬁ gure out the technology, but today’s profession-
als should expect some learning when they join a new organization. Training 
team members in the basic tools will save everyone inordinate frustration. 
Is Able to Self-Manage
While this is valuable in any environment, it’s indispensable in a virtual 
environment, especially if the team member telecommutes. Setting up a 
virtual ofﬁ ce, managing home and work boundaries, maintaining two or 
more work spaces if telecommuting part-time, and coordinating communi-
cation and work ﬂ ow require a high level of organization and time manage-
ment.
Desirable Knowledge/Competencies
Is Assertive
One of the challenges of a remote work environment is that the next ready 
resource isn’t as simple as a holler over a cubicle wall or a quick walk to an 

104  
ESSENTIAL VIRTUAL COMPETENCIES
expert on the second ﬂ oor. Chat functions and other real-time collaboration 
help, but if no one is available, you want your team member to be proactive. 
Deadlines may also drive a need to decide without full input. In order to get 
the virtual worker’s needs met, sometimes that means speaking up, asking for 
help, or making the call and moving forward anyway.
If your candidate is the kind of person who doesn’t like to reach out, 
the autonomy and responsibilities of telecommuting may not be for him. As 
much as an organization and a team leader attempt to keep remote members 
informed, usually the fear of “out of sight, out of mind” still happens, and for 
less assertive virtual workers especially. Also, initiators and solution ﬁ nders 
are more quickly trusted by teammates. Last, the more team members assert 
themselves to engage with the team, the less likely the team will stall from the 
inertia that can come virtually.
Handles Differences Well
You want people who are able to deal directly with opportunities, issues, 
challenges, and conﬂ icts. Proactive outreach is indispensable in a virtual 
environment where it is too easy to avoid issues until it is too late. Team 
agreements help avoid unnecessary conﬂ ict, but some conﬂ ict is needed to 
test and improve team outcomes. It helps to select team members who are 
able to disagree and debate—without being disagreeable.
Relationship intelligence combines the multiple intelligences of Howard 
Gardner3 and Albert Bandura’s4 social learning theory and can’t be overem-
phasized. Look for people who know themselves and their impact on others. 
Team players take care, genuinely feeling empathy and showing compassion 
for others.
Knows the Organization
Even though virtual team members will not be in the corporate ofﬁ ce, they 
are, nonetheless, members of an organization bigger than themselves. Con-
tractually, they take on the rights and responsibilities of that membership. 
Knowing her rights and responsibilities, plus the informal “lay of the land,” 
increases a sense of belonging and purpose for the individual new member. 
New team members spend signiﬁ cant energy ﬁ guring out how to ﬁ nd what 
they need, who to turn to for what, and how to best ﬁ t in. If joining members 
are not already familiar with the organization, your team will need to bring 
them on board quickly. This includes helping people learn informal norms 
and political realities. Coach team members to navigate the organization for 
personal and company success.

MORE THAN SMARTS—VIRTUAL TEAM MEMBER COMPETENCIES  105
Candidates’ organization knowledge can be a value-add to your team. 
Connectors are skilled at and ﬂ uid in crossing boundaries and building 
bridges, becoming nodes of inﬂ uence. Having connectors on your team 
broadens access to resources and synergies because of their already existing 
high-trust relationships. 
Essential Characteristics and Qualities
Takes Initiative
Virtual employees must be able to work without the reassurance of others or 
constant feedback. The best virtual performers are those who enjoy working 
alone and with others. They are action oriented. You want virtual team mem-
bers who conﬁ dently reach out to the team when needed and conﬁ dently act 
on behalf of the team when needed. 
Is Open
Paradoxically, your ideal candidate is both independent and open to col-
laboration. It’s a myth that the independent virtual team member is any less 
committed to the team than colocated employees who see their teammates 
every day. In my work, I’ve found people believe that introverts make the best 
home-based workers. What I’ve found in reality, however, is that both extro-
verts and introverts succeed virtually. In fact, extroverts may have a slight 
edge because they naturally seek interaction across time and distance and 
seek out relationships. 
I’ve also seen extroverts and introverts fail virtually. Just because someone 
works independently and virtually does not mean she operates in a vacuum. 
There are times when reaching out is required. Virtual team members open 
up to the team, seeking collaboration when appropriate, not letting personal 
tendencies or distance isolate them. 
Is Adaptable
When I wrote the ﬁ rst edition of this book, adaptability was highly desir-
able. Today it is essential. A distributed work environment does have its 
challenges that require quick adjustments. Networks go down. Technology 
malfunctions. Customer crises emerge while you’re in the ﬁ eld. Plans and 
schedules change. You want team members who are able to anticipate, plan 
for, and ﬂ ex with issues and delays. The more comfortable people are with 
the unexpected, the more comfortable they will be in a virtual environment.

106  
ESSENTIAL VIRTUAL COMPETENCIES
Has Integrity
Doing what we say we will do is probably the biggest contributor to develop-
ing team trust, critical to a high-performance virtual team. Meeting deadlines 
and achieving quality standards with little supervision are essential. Teams 
with integrity follow through and communicate clearly when anything inter-
feres. People own mistakes and seek solutions.
Is Committed
Feeling a sense of “ownership” in a project and the team brings a sense 
of belonging and shared responsibility. Being committed to and seeking 
achievement for self and the team help individuals connect emotionally. It 
takes an emotional connection to get past virtual isolation issues, which can 
be debilitating for some. 
Desirable Characteristics and Qualities
Is Resourceful
There is a correlation between candidate resourcefulness and access to a 
trusted network. One key to career success is our ability to build a personal 
professional network that helps us know more, by proxy, than we can on our 
own. LinkedIn, for example, is not just a career-building platform; it’s a place 
to ﬁ nd and engage with professional communities and continue our learn-
ing. Selecting candidates with an existing network might be helpful. Current 
HR big data tools are, in fact, often examining employees’ social network 
activity as part of their talent research analytics. Ask the candidate about his 
or her resourcefulness speciﬁ cally, and listen for whether the candidate seeks 
outside input, such as through professional connections. 
Sets Boundaries
It is not uncommon for the telecommuter to become the neighborhood UPS 
and FedEx delivery stop. Until the household and neighbors are “trained,” 
family and friends may unwittingly assume that if someone is home, he or 
she is available. Boundaries for household situations help virtual workers 
stay productive and focused. Team members who cannot say no may spread 
themselves too thin. I have a neighbor who still gets my voice mail 80% of 
the time because she calls during my workday. She sees my cars and knows 
I’m home, unable to grasp my world. It’s okay, but voice mail has become a 
time management tool for me.

MORE THAN SMARTS—VIRTUAL TEAM MEMBER COMPETENCIES  107
Virtual employees also need to set boundaries with work colleagues, 
household members, customers, and managers. Disorganized or crisis-driven 
virtual teams can pull virtual teammates into work more frequently and cre-
ate more stress than is really needed. 
Being available at all hours and all places is creeping into work con-
sciousness today with smart technology keeping us connected 24/7. It leads 
to burnout and work addiction. Everyone—virtual or not—has the right and 
responsibility to be unavailable sometimes. 
Self-Starts and Self-Stops
The previous quality focused on managing external boundaries. It is equally 
important to manage our internal boundaries. If you are the kind of person 
who has a hard time getting started in the morning, “going to the ofﬁ ce” 
naturally helps to get into work mode. For a teleworker, that structure isn’t 
there. Interview candidates about how they create “get-to-work” rituals, or 
help them create some. 
What I have found more often, however, is that people have difﬁ culty 
stopping the workday. Virtual workers stop distinguishing between work and 
home: “I just want to check e-mail one more time before we watch that 
movie.” Two hours later . . . Workweeks in the United States have reached 
an average of 50 to 70 hours a week. Work addiction is at an all-time high, 
even though we don’t often call it out. If virtual workers aren’t careful, they 
ﬁ nd themselves “selling their souls to the company store.” Most of us don’t 
even recognize when we’re doing it since work is ubiquitous. You don’t want 
burned-out teams. 
Is Focused
The very structure of a “workplace” is missing for the teleworker. The tradi-
tional ofﬁ ce helps people to focus on work. Outside the traditional environ-
ment, it is imperative that the virtual team member be able to create and 
maintain his or her own structure and discipline.
Other Factors to Consider
Home Work Environment
Virtual team members are not all home based, but for those who are, a 
 separate and sacred work environment is important. Making room on the 
corner of a dining room table is not conducive to a sustainable work focus. 
Virtual workers need a safe, ergonomically suited, and well-ventilated and 

108  
ESSENTIAL VIRTUAL COMPETENCIES
well-lit work environment that is away from household activity. A phone- or 
terminal- based worker does not require much space and could even use a 
corner in a spare bedroom. For other workers, it may mean a room set aside 
with desk space, computer station, ﬁ ling cabinets, storage areas, and room 
for peripheral devices, like printers and scanners—and a door. Help team 
members consider how much space is needed, what safety requirements must 
be met, and whether this space is removed enough from household trafﬁ c to 
provide adequate work focus and sufﬁ cient work-home separation.
Connectivity
Equipment, telephony, and Internet access and broadband speed require-
ments will vary depending on the job requirements. Virtual workers need 
to ensure that their virtual ofﬁ ces are located where reliable connectivity (at 
the needed bandwidth) is no barrier. The household itself needs to be able to 
handle increased bandwidth demands.
With these criteria in mind, you are in a better position to assess the 
appropriateness of each virtual team candidate. 
Three Virtual Team Responsibilities
Everyone shares responsibility for the team. High-performing virtual team 
members play three additional roles to ensure effective collaboration and 
high performance. Select team members who agree that everyone does the 
following.
1. Manages the Team
All team members co-manage healthy group functioning. This is even more 
critical in a virtual team. For all virtual teams, spend time explicitly deﬁ ning 
and negotiating expectations in a virtual environment, and how the team 
holds itself accountable. 
Colocated team members don’t typically think of themselves as manag-
ers. It’s easier to let the colocated environment carry the burden for clarity, 
information sharing, and team functioning. Traditional work environments 
don’t guarantee good communication, but the chances are greater that 
 everyone will hear what they need to hear and share what needs sharing just 
by virtue of everyone being in the same place. The ofﬁ ce environment helps 
facilitate the process of communication. 
In a virtual environment, unless everyone clearly takes responsibility for 
communication and feedback loops, communication will break down. Every 
team member, regardless of job description, is responsible to co-manage the 

MORE THAN SMARTS—VIRTUAL TEAM MEMBER COMPETENCIES  109
team’s effectiveness. Luckily, because it is a virtual environment, people take 
the process of maintaining healthy teams more seriously. Because they don’t 
see each other often, they are more inclined to ask, “What did you do today? 
What’s happening in your life? What have you learned recently? What do I 
need to know?”
Communication breakdowns still happen, unintentionally. It doesn’t change 
the potential fallout, however. A signiﬁ cant percentage of company informa-
tion sharing occurs naturally and accidentally by overhearing or being in the 
right place at the right time. 
Remove the literal “watercooler,” and see how much communication 
occurred this way (and, by extension, how much the virtual worker misses 
out without informal conversation). Intentional communication chan-
nels must be re-created virtually. I know how it feels to be left out of the 
 communication loop. I know how it feels to be angry and feel like someone 
let me down—my teammate, my team lead, the human resources depart-
ment, the account manager. In a virtual team, it’s not going to do anyone any 
good to withdraw or point ﬁ ngers. Everyone has to take a shared responsibil-
ity for making sure to clean up issues quickly, and ensure that no one is out 
of sight or out of mind.
People in general, in a business environment, want to focus on the 
work. Teams don’t need everybody to like each other, but in a virtual 
work environment, people need to proactively communicate and remedy 
 misunderstandings before they lead to unnecessary conﬂ ict.
2. Coaches and Learns
Some communication protocols are needed, and they will change as the team 
develops. Who will manage team routines? How will audio conference notes 
be captured and summarized, stored, and retrieved? Who is expected to read 
them later? Who will onboard new team members to what aspects of the 
work and the team? These and other responsibilities can be assigned, del-
egated, and rotated based on logic, or remain with the team leader. How 
they are delegated is not as important as that the team learns and adapts as 
needed.
3. Advocates
Whether virtual or not, team members share responsibility for helping fel-
low team members succeed. In a virtual environment, the team leader takes 
on additional responsibility to advocate, especially when virtual teams are 
primarily temporary teams. Team leaders can anticipate and design rotation 
schedules and stretch projects to expose virtual team members to the larger 

110  
ESSENTIAL VIRTUAL COMPETENCIES
organization. Team members hopefully want to be actively involved in creat-
ing opportunities. When a team is ending or a team member’s role is end-
ing, work with the team member and the organization to create a successful 
transition to another meaningful project. 
Organizations are political, and if not careful, virtual team members are 
at a career disadvantage. Celebrate the team’s accomplishments and broadcast 
good news. Ensure that individual contribution is recognized within the team 
and in the larger organization. Ideally the company’s talent management pro-
cess is prepared to seek and ﬁ nd virtual workers who aren’t obviously on a 
visible fast track. Help ﬁ nd other opportunities that will progress members’ 
careers. Advocate for your team members. High-performing teams advocate 
for each other willingly, especially when they see their leader doing so.
In building your team, once you’ve identiﬁ ed candidates who meet the 
job requirements, assess them against these characteristics and competencies. 
You’ll choose people who ﬁ t a virtually collaborative team culture. Before 
your team can effectively come together, however, the individuals you have 
selected will still need some help to become a team. Let’s bring the team 
together and begin walking the First Path, the development path, in the next 
chapter.
Notes
1. “Employers and Skills? What Does It Mean to Be Employable,” Limerick 
Institute of Technology, accessed August 14, 2015, http://193.1.88.47/careers/units/
unit-s029.shtml
2. “JIT Deﬁ nition,” www.wisegeek.com/what-is-just-in-time-training.htm#
didyouknowout
3. “Emotional Intelligence,” Wikipedia, last modiﬁ ed September 15, 2015,
 https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Emotional_intelligence
4. “Social Learning Theory,” Wikipedia, last modiﬁ ed August 14, 2015,
 https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Social_learning_theory

PART  F OU R
THE THREEFOLD PATH OF 
HIGH-PERFORMANCE VIRTUAL 
TEAMS
“Coming together is beginning. Keeping together is progress. Working together is success.”
—Henry Ford
“To die for the revolution is a one-shot deal; to live for the revolution means taking on
 the more difﬁ cult commitment of changing our day-to-day life patterns.”
—Frances M. Beal
“As a leader, you can’t control or determine how situations occur for others, but you do
 have a say.” 
—Dave Logan, Three Laws of Performance


113
10
T H E  F I R S T  PAT H — D E V E L O P 
Y O U R  T E A M
“Talent wins games, but teamwork and intelligence win championships.”
—Michael Jordan
“Don’t be afraid to take a big step if one is indicated. You can’t cross a chasm in two small jumps.” 
—David Lloyd George
Teams Work Together Differently When Virtual
Technology gets most of the attention, but it’s the changes in the way teams 
connect when working virtually that create new challenges for team leaders 
and members. As enterprises learn to manage dynamic complexity, virtual 
and blended teams are increasingly temporary. Team membership on mul-
tiple teams is common; frequent team switching is normal. Today’s pro-
fessional might be on one team for years. Another professional might be 
on a half dozen teams in as many years for the same or several different 
organizations. The higher up in the hierarchy team members are, the more 
likely they are on multiple teams simultaneously. Perhaps they are a team 
leader on one team, a project champion on another, and a team member 
on a third. 
The team you develop will be based on the cooperative principles of the 
Threefold Path to high performance. Member mobility across teams adds 
complexity to the virtual manager’s job, but it also brings welcomed diversity 
with rolling team members. Serving on multiple teams broadens the worker’s 
perspective about the organization. Hopefully, team members see their peers 
as collaborators rather than competition for the next promotion. 
Team members’ mobility within the same company helps corporate cul-
tures evolve from competition toward collaboration. This critical mind shift 

114  
THE THREEFOLD PATH
must happen to fully leverage collaborative teamwork. Team members work 
best when they’re complementary rather than competitive. 
Traveling the First Path of High-Performance Virtual Teams
Today’s work environment moves quickly, so the virtual leader has the 
responsibility for launching a new (or changing) team fast. Individuals go 
through stages of development when navigating from a traditional ofﬁ ce to 
a virtual one. Teams as a group go through developmental changes as they 
learn to work together. The Threefold Path, as shown in Figure 10.1, pro-
vides a road map that you and your team can use to become high performers 
quickly.
This chapter describes the stages and decisions a team navigates in order 
to achieve a highly successful launch. It also deﬁ nes the most important 
actions to take as a virtual leader that help teams launch quickly. The First 
Path for virtual teams is to develop your new team. Involve them right away. 
Whether a series of team development meetings or one launch meeting, 
being proactive in developing the team helps avoid unnecessary confusion 
and anxiety.
As one virtual team member shared in her interview:
My coworkers all strive for good performance; they want to do a good job. 
Encouragement from leadership is lacking so being self-led and improving 
the team’s work are not things that my coworkers attempt. Our team is in 
constant ﬂ ux, so the core group dynamics are constantly changing. The 
composition of the core group is the only thing that doesn’t change, as it is 
dependent on the CEO and president, who, by the way, rarely take input 
from us.
This virtual worker’s team is underperforming through no fault of their 
own. Trusting that the manager is committed to the team facilitates fast 
development. The next section explores how to structure virtual trust and 
expand emotional bandwidth until genuine team relationships form. This 
chapter lays the groundwork for developing team agreements, structure for 
work ﬂ ow, and communication.
 Stages of Team Development
Permanent teams are often functional departments that work closely 
with other departments. Most organizations have project teams and 

Support the Team 
Community.
     - Maintenance
PATH TWO
O1
O2
O3
The
Threefold
Path
for
Produce Successful Outcomes:
 - Celebration
 - Quality Deliverables
High-Performance Teams
THIRD PATH
Support the Team 
  Community:
    - Maintenance
      - Emotional Bandwidth
          - Synergy
              - Assistance
SECOND PATH
      Create a Cohesive Team 
      Culture:
    - Team Development
-   -  Planning
    - Structured Trust
FIRST PATH
EMPLOYEE ENGAGEMENT
  - Interpersonal Caring
  - Organizational Commitment
MIND SHIFTS
  - People, Not Place 
 -  Network Is the Workplace
  - It’s All Part of the Job
Change the Deﬁnition of Work
Follow the Threefold Path
Enjoy Strong Relationships
 ©  2016 - Trina Hoeﬂing, The SMART Workplace 
Figure 10.1. The Threefold Path for high-performance teams.

116  
THE THREEFOLD PATH
 cross- departmental teams. This means team members are moving around 
inside the enterprise, joining teams in different combinations. 
Despite the advantages of team member mobility, the synergy of high-
performing teams gets disrupted each time. This is why workers adapt better 
when they have professional relationships that extend beyond their every-
day workmates. Professional networks are not just for job seeking, friend-
ship, and resource ﬁ nding. Fast-performance teams typically establish swift 
trust and team agreements more easily when members know each other by 
reputation at least, if not previous experience. Teams become productive 
more quickly because they are building on existing relationships. Temporary 
virtual teams go through the same predictable stages of team development 
and functioning. They experience end stages because they know they are 
impermanent. 
Despite the virtual leader’s best intentions, often a team will hit a wall 
before fully settling into performance. This happens in multiple ways—col-
lective frustration at the perceived lack of organizational support, interper-
sonal conﬂ ict, task or role confusion, feelings of isolation, or some other 
obstacle. Good planning, an observant “virtual eye,” and swift intervention 
as the virtual leader keep the team developing and improving. Help the team 
quickly settle into sustainable performance. 
Teams go through up to six predictable development stages. Only high-
performing teams achieve the fourth stage, where you want your team to 
“live” most of the time. 
 Forming
You chose these people to be on your team for a reason. Communicate why each 
team member was selected. Share strengths a nd passions. The team needs 
real agreements. Structure ways for the team to learn about each other, the 
team’s goal and mission, the agreements and plans. This is a polite phase, so 
facilitate honest conversation by being a role model.
 Storming
Inevitable disagreements and misunderstandings will surface. Patience can 
run short when the team needs tolerance to get past politeness. However, the 
team can become stronger, more versatile, and able to work better together. 
Some teams never evolve past this stage, but yours can and will. The virtual 
leader’s focus is to hold ﬁ rmly to the team’s work focus while facilitating the 
working out of differences. 
Some conﬂ ict is necessary to help the team build its muscle. Have small 
team deliverables due near the beginning of the virtual team’s tenure. 

THE FIRST PATH—DEVELOP YOUR TEAM  117
 Norming
The agreements and planning settle in as the team normalizes. Members 
establish their rhythms and ﬂ ows, and team agreements need little adjust-
ment. Genuine norming sets the stage for the performing stage. Most teams 
reach this stage of development and work fairly well. The risk to watch for is 
that members are so focused on avoiding conﬂ ict that they are accommodat-
ing the norms more than authentically ﬁ nding team rhythms that work for 
everyone. This is necessary to grow to the next stage. 
 Performing
This is a team working well and able to course-correct. Anyone who has been 
a member of a high-performing team knows viscerally the difference between 
a normed team and a high-performing team.1
Renorming
Work environments will change. The team gets a new manager, members roll 
off, and new members join a team. Ongoing teams will go through a period 
of adjustment. 
 Adjourning
Transforming and mourning team dissolution are the last stage for tempo-
rary teams. As more teams are time-dated, temporary, or project teams, say-
ing good-bye brings healthy closure. Help people adjourn with celebrations 
at the completion of the project and provide assistance for redeployment 
onto other teams in the future.2
 Commit to Front-End Planning
A structured team development process is a highly effective way to get a vir-
tual team started right. If possible, bring the team together in person, espe-
cially if these are people who don’t know each other or who are unfamiliar 
with virtual teaming. 
Combine virtual and on-site collaboration early in the team formation, 
if not ongoing. Conduct initial one-on-one and team meetings. Let the team 
know that this team will function virtually. Leave room to deﬁ ne together 
what collaboration guidelines will be critical to the team’s success. You may 
provide training on the tools and want to reinforce their usage. Move for-
ward steadily until everyone is clearly committed and conﬁ dent, working 
together virtually.

118  
THE THREEFOLD PATH
Time together doing team planning saves time later, guaranteed. If it’s 
not possible to meet face-to-face for a day or two, plan to get acquainted 
virtually through team communication channels, such as chat rooms and 
web conferences. Schedule multiple online two-hour team conferences to 
complete the team development process with clear agendas for each session. 
It’s more challenging to stay fully present for a full-day meeting when virtual, 
so break into smaller sessions. If you will be facilitating virtual team meet-
ings, download this book's free how-to bonus chapter on virtual meeting 
management.3
Face-to-face interaction always helps teams form fast, and the team 
development process is ideal to launch in person. Include support functions 
and key stakeholders appropriately in sections of your virtual team develop-
ment sessions in order to build relationships important to the team. Conﬁ rm 
 project expectations and deliverables and establish stakeholder commu-
nication. Use this time to agree on how the team wants to be supported, 
managed, and evaluated. If the team isn’t familiar with the project and task 
management system, educate the members about how to simplify their work 
and collaborate with the team. Structure communication, feedback, and 
follow-up in partnership with the tools. (Don’t forget that paper, pencil, and 
scissors are viable tools, too.)
 Team Charter and Parameters
Launch the team with a discussion about the underlying principles that 
will guide them as they prioritize and decide, engage and behave, work and 
 produce. This leader discussion is more clariﬁ cation than it is a negotiation. 
Review and conﬁ rm team member understanding and agreement about the 
following:
•  Team purpose/project justiﬁ cation (problem or opportunity addressed)
•  Reorganization and stakeholder expectations
•  Team goals and deliverables
•  Success criteria (including project metrics such as schedule, cost, 
quality, innovations, and improvements) 
•  Deadlines and milestones
•  Scope and authority of team, roles, and team inﬂ uence
•  Metrics, team evaluation, compensation, and recognition
•  Scope management issues (including ways that scope changes will be 
handled and contract change orders will be processed) 

THE FIRST PATH—DEVELOP YOUR TEAM  119
 Work Flow and Coordination, Processes and Procedures
Technology is the enabler, so enterprise policies regarding collaboration tools 
will dictate much of how work is completed. The virtual team has choices 
about how to adapt the organization’s processes to ﬁ t its needs. Develop as 
few or as many group guidelines as the team needs, but commit to using 
them.
 Customized Collaboration
Deﬁ ne common language to simplify understanding and ensure shared 
meaning. When you can, use few methodologies and processes to keep it 
simple. For example, I’m on the Virtual Workplace University design team. 
We use only a few tools. We use Google+ for our team communication and 
home ofﬁ ce. We decided against task management apps, such as Wunder-
list and Asana, because our customer management tool, Insightly, includes a 
robust task management application for our team needs.
 Decision-Making
Start by surfacing criteria for both project decisions and emerging team 
needs. Create and commit to the way the team will inform and involve one 
another and relevant stakeholders, especially if the project scope shifts and 
different decisions are required.
Communication
Decide team availability (work hours, time zone, emergency and off-hour 
availability). Set meeting requirements, attendance options (virtual or in-
person), and schedule protocols. Think through what the group uses to 
verify shared understanding , formally and informally. Anticipate when and 
where the team needs to inﬂ uence, and coordinate communication accord-
ingly. Remember to incorporate multiple or shifting team members’ needs 
into communication. This is discussed more fully in chapters 11 and 12, the 
 communication and tools chapters.
 Team Dynamics and Engagement
The virtual manager is not the only person who can support the team; 
everyone shares responsibility for keeping the team on track. Develop 
interpersonal relationships individually with team members. Encourage 

120  
THE THREEFOLD PATH
the team to do the same. Aim for fair division of team caretaking labor. 
Share responsibility for getting the team back on track if virtuality becomes 
a problem.
Acknowledge occupational and cultural differences, while develop-
ing the team’s culture. Talk during team formation about what would cre-
ate commitment. While together, take a team picture and encourage team 
members to upload it to their computer’s wallpaper or screensaver. Listen for 
metaphors and team anchors that emerge during launch sessions. Use them 
so everyone can reference the metaphors and anchor the team’s way of think-
ing of itself as a team. Basically, attend vigilantly to the team’s need to be 
connected to one another during and after the team launch. The team may 
not think it matters, but you know better.
 Team Agreements
Help team members agree on how they will work with one another. Set 
expectations while you facilitate team development. Individuals need to 
know they will be evaluated not only on their expertise and end product 
but also on their ability to meet the social contract of the team and the 
organization. 
As you develop team agreements, you want team members who will 
perpetuate the team’s well-being. The team’s ability to weather storms helps 
solidify team power and inﬂ uence in the larger organization, and political 
maneuverability. Team members who span boundaries as representatives of 
the team help seed functional integration and innovation for and beyond the 
team.
Team agreements serve an immediate purpose—to develop the team’s 
inﬂ uence and respect with and on behalf of each other. Determine the team’s 
preferences and differences, and then negotiate shared agreements about 
team functioning, such as the following:
• Participation and availability to the team (as already mentioned)
• Loyalty and commitments
• Representation in the larger organization
• Team values (e.g., does your team value sharing over secrecy?)
• Accountability and peer management
• Slippage and scope adjustments
• Conﬂ ict and disagreement
• Tone and how team members talk to one another

THE FIRST PATH—DEVELOP YOUR TEAM  121
 Team Development Planning Agenda
Your team’s launch and development should cover six factors. How detailed 
you get is up to you and what your team needs. A complete checklist detail-
ing the six factors is available for download, including starter questions to 
consider when building your team’s development plan. Use it as is, modify it, 
simplify it, and improve it.4 
The six factors anticipate essential areas of team functioning that are 
impacted in a virtual environment. Negotiate each area with your virtual 
team, and review the agreements when a new member joins the team. By 
facilitating team development, you will have a team charter, a project plan, 
agreements, and communication protocols in place. 
 The Six Factors of Team Launch and Development
1. Getting acquainted: Getting to know the team members
2. Team charter, vision, values: Governance
3. Team/project planning: Project planning is the time to conﬁ rm project 
goals, identify resources, set milestones and deliverable deadlines, and 
delineate everyone’s roles and responsibilities; also the time to decide how 
to share and embed learning, team norms, and team reﬂ ection time
4. Team processes: Determine how you will ensure the team functions effec-
tively together as a collective
5. Communication and collaboration tool infrastructure: The subject of 
 chapters 11 and 12
6. Membership and maintenance
Facilitating a team development process implies a promise to your team. 
You are promising to lead in certain ways based on shared agreements and an 
understanding of what you came together to do. The plan your team creates 
provides a basic structure for action that brings forth a new future together. 
Since the future is essentially unknowable, your team has taken its ﬁ rst big 
step in cocreating itself. The First Path of high-performance virtual teams has 
been laid. It’s time to live up to the team promise by building the Second Path.
Notes
1. “Tuckman’s Stages of Group Development,” Wikipedia, last modiﬁ ed 
 September 
6, 
2015, 
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tuckman%27s_stages_of_
group_development

122  
THE THREEFOLD PATH
2. Another, less well-known team development model is the Drexler/Sibbet 
Team Performance Model. It illustrates team development as seven stages, four to 
create the team and three to describe increasing levels of sustained performance. It 
also works well as a development model for virtual teams. “Drexler/Sibbet Team 
Performance™ Model,” The Grove, accessed August 14, 2015, www.grove.com/
ourwk_gm_tp.html 
3. Download free at www.WorkingVirtually.org 
4. All downloads (management aids and assessments) are available at www
.WorkingVirtually.org

123
11
T H E  S E C O N D  PAT H —
S U P P O RT  Y O U R  T E A M
“I reject the Great Man theory. . . . We make each other better every time we operate together. . . . 
It’s most important to get the team to believe in a common effort and a common cause. It takes a 
group of people who believe, moving in the right direction. You don’t become committed to a task, 
you become committed to each other.” 
—General Stanley McChrystal, Team of Teams
“I’d have done anything for that man.”
—General Bill Garrison, General McChrystal’s teammate
“We all do better when we all do better.” 
—Paul Wellstone
E
ngaging and supporting people are the work of the Second Path. 
Establish communication protocols that help teams relate well and 
perform at their best. “Good communication” isn’t enough to achieve 
virtual team synergy. One reason virtual groups fail to become performing 
teams is that we fail to remember that most work gets done through relation-
ship, not task. Peter Drucker reminds us, 
We are not going to breed a new race of supermen. We will have to run our 
organizations with people as they are. . . . The essence of management is to 
make [people and their expertise] productive. Management, in other words, 
is a social function.1

124  
THE THREEFOLD PATH
Teamwork Is Fundamentally Social, Regardless of Whether the 
Team Is Virtual
The virtual leader is the lead pathﬁ nder for her team’s success on the threefold 
path. As you can see in Figure 11.1, the Second Path of high-performance 
virtual teams is one of team support. 
Unless you are managing a henhouse, you do not want to be your team’s pri-
mary relationship at work. All team leaders, virtual or not, support their team 
by unleashing talent, connecting to resources, and removing obstacles. Good 
virtual leaders also facilitate opportunities for team members to expand emo-
tional bandwidth with one another, especially virtually. Great virtual leaders 
are servant leaders, facilitators who become the invisible glue that connects 
people to the organization until they develop their own relationships. 
What if you could unleash the agility and cohesion of a high-performance 
team? It takes time to become a trusted, collaborative “value node” in the 
larger system. The virtual leader sets the standard and guides the team. Start 
by being an entrusted, collaborative team supporter. Then nudge the teams 
to continuous improvement and innovation. Reinforce team-balancing 
behaviors that produce exceptional ﬂ ows, pathways, and rhythms. Support 
happens when everyone is doing the work of work. 
The Virtual Manager as Facilitator and Servant Leader
Servant leadership2 was ﬁ rst deﬁ ned in 1970 and further developed by many 
leadership masters like Peter Block and Adam Grant, author of Give and 
Take: Why Helping Others Drives Our Success.3 Servant leadership tenets 
reﬂ ect the qualities needed in a virtual team leader. They stand strong as 
guiding  principles for all virtual leaders: 
Servant leaders are the beneﬁ ciaries of important contacts, information, 
and insights that make them more effective and productive in what they do 
even though they spend a great deal of their time sharing what they learn 
and helping others through such things as career counseling, suggesting 
contacts, and recommending new ways of doing things.4
Servant leadership is not an altruistic act. Servant leaders are value nodes, 
connectors for the team and organization. Valuable connectors think of their 
own careers and work commitments while also thinking of the organization 
and team’s needs. They function as chief team advocate. Very little we accom-
plish is truly ours, but the result of a team. Team leaders, when the most 
powerful and effective, know this and are servants to the team’s effectiveness. 

Figure 11.1. The Threefold Path for high-performance teams.
Support the Team 
Community.
     - Maintenance
PATH TWO
O1
O2
O3
The
Threefold
Path
for
Produce Successful Outcomes:
 - Celebration
 - Quality Deliverables
High-Performance Teams
THIRD PATH
Support the Team 
  Community:
    - Maintenance
      - Emotional Bandwidth
          - Synergy
              - Assistance
SECOND PATH
      Create a Cohesive Team 
      Culture:
    - Team Development
-   -  Planning
    - Structured Trust
FIRST PATH
EMPLOYEE ENGAGEMENT
  - Interpersonal Caring
  - Organizational Commitment
MIND SHIFTS
  - People, Not Place 
 -  Network Is the Workplace
  - It’s All Part of the Job
Change the Deﬁnition of Work
Follow the Threefold Path
Enjoy Strong Relationships
 ©  2016 - Trina Hoeﬂing, The SMART Workplace 

126  
THE THREEFOLD PATH
Team advocacy begins with member selection. You want to uncover can-
didates who demonstrate cooperation during the interview, as we discussed 
earlier. If you have a team member who isn’t open with the team, coach him 
off quickly. 
Noncollaborators do not thrive on healthy teams; being a service- 
oriented team works only when mutual. Being of service does not mean 
accepting poor performance or disrespect. Sometimes the team will see poor 
team play sooner than the manager. If the team is performing, the members 
will often manage the problem themselves. Aim for that kind of self-directed 
virtual team.
Teamwork First
Jeff Bewkes, chair and CEO of Time Warner, insists the most important 
workplace competency is teamwork. “You have to know how to work with 
others who want to work with you. It’s probably the crucial skill and yet 
education is mostly about solo performances.”5 Best-selling leadership books 
perpetuate the myth of the lone hero. Even heroes rely on their teams for 
execution. An outlier in leadership literature, respected U.S. military leader 
General Stanley McChrystal wrote a book called Team of Teams.6 He found 
the lone hero myth crumbled quickly to a more accurate truth—it takes a 
“team of teams.” Since work gets done through others, we all beneﬁ t from 
continuously getting better at building and supporting teams.
Can a Virtual Team Have a Home Court Advantage?
Where does the team gather digitally? In a virtual environment, take extra 
time to give everyone a sense of “place,” a sense of a home community. MIT 
professor and architect Kevin Lynch7 asked community residents to draw a 
map of how their home city was laid out, from memory. Several elements 
helped people make sense of where they live—physical markers like a town 
square, for example. A virtual team doesn’t have the familiar elements of an 
ofﬁ ce to anchor its sense of place—no statue or ﬂ ag in front, no hallways or 
break rooms, no departments sitting together, no executive suite. The team 
has to re-create a sense of place, on the network. Here are a few elements of 
community to re-create virtually:
• Landmarks: Provide context, reference points, logos and other items 
that support self-identiﬁ cation with the team and organization com-
munity. 

THE SECOND PATH—SUPPORT YOUR TEAM  127
• Paths and edges: Help your team walk the virtual hallways of the 
organization and learn where the less obvious boundaries and edges 
might be. Discuss politics and cultural norms that may not be obvious to 
a virtual worker. Map the connections of the organization for your team.
• Districts: We don’t walk down the hall and around Legal to get to 
Accounting anymore. Departments are the metaphorical districts of 
a community. They still exist virtually, but the boundaries aren’t as 
obvious. Again, map the virtual territory for your team members, and 
have them help improve the map as they foray into the districts and 
discover new paths.
• Nodes: Information has always been power. Today it’s about sharing, 
not hoarding. Hoarders stop ﬂ ow, are the opposite of connecting 
nodes, and eventually lose value to the organization.
However you integrate the team’s way of working and coordination, 
prioritize one digital team hub that will host a dashboard, team directory, 
virtual watercooler—a team home place to gather and become a community. 
Rhythms and Flows
Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi,8 positive psychology master, deﬁ ned ﬂ ow as that 
timeless mental state of focused effort that brings the joy and power of being 
in the zone. Repeating that timeless ﬂ ow state helps people create ﬂ ow state 
habits, making it easier to jump-start ﬂ ow on demand. Teams can be con-
ditioned for ﬂ ow as well. To get to ﬂ ow states, teams establish rhythms and 
ﬂ ows, repeatable habits and routines. They create the conditions for people 
to quickly and naturally jump into team ﬂ ow. 
Four Flow Starters to Guide the Virtual Manager
1. Give the team inﬂ uence.
2. Make the work intrinsically rewarding by deploying to strength and passion.
3. Set up and use multiple sources of feedback, including project and task 
management tools.
4. Help team members protect their space for focus without interruption.
Rhythms
Rhythms are organic. They are the natural connecting and interdependent 
activities that bring teams together and apart in routines and habits that are 
easy and repeated. They keep people informed and ﬂ owing individually and 
as a team community. 

128  
THE THREEFOLD PATH
Knowing and Caring Help Us Want to Stick Around!
People are more willing to help each other when they know one another. 
We want to help people we like. Facilitate relationships as well as meetings, 
projects, and performance; help the team develop bonds and be able to give 
direct feedback to one another.
If managers and teammates display conﬁ dence in each other, workers 
feel trusted and valued, and they are more likely to hold their own work to 
higher standards. If every team member has conﬁ dence in his or her work 
and knows it is valued, the team will synergize. When everyone can relate to 
one another, they are better able to collaborate virtually. 
People also tend to attach to people with whom they share common 
ground. A team certainly qualiﬁ es as common work ground. Commitment 
is deepened when the team actually feels that it is a “community” with shared 
purpose, responsibilities, rituals and habits, successes and challenges, stories, 
symbols, brand, and history. It’s easy to jump into teamwork without ﬁ rst 
taking precious time for team development. Don’t skip developing your team 
(First Path) if you want your team to be supportive and supported (Second 
Path)!
A virtual team manager needs to help the team intentionally develop 
shared experience together. Out of shared experience, people come to know 
one another and, hopefully, respect each other enough to trust the team. Not 
everyone may like each other, but the goal is to grow enough team commit-
ment so that everyone extends support to the whole.
Keep the Conversations Going
In virtual teams, we often ask team members to trust one another and 
become interdependent, sometimes sight unseen. Trust is tentatively given; 
it’s not guaranteed to continue. We give it temporarily until experience proves 
the trust is deserved. Research shows that virtual teams maintain high trust 
through social communication interweaved with task-based conversations. 
Virtual managers have to facilitate the team’s talk, at least at ﬁ rst. Con-
versations are an irreplaceable way that relationships develop. Trust grows 
or declines, and collaboration happens. Small talk actually improves social 
intelligence, especially as people get to know each other. Chitchat gives eve-
ryone a chance to get familiar with each other’s style. Some people are more 
naturally animated or reactive. To know that helps the team recognize when 
something is off, when behavior is out of the ordinary for that person.9
High-performance teams talk, a lot. Much informal learning occurs 
through conversation. Getting people talking about something they care 

THE SECOND PATH—SUPPORT YOUR TEAM  129
about gives conversations passion and opens a path for easy sharing. A good 
conversation is a gestalt—it creates something bigger than the sum of its 
parts. “Talking” explores new territory and creates new understandings, espe-
cially if the team gets past the download and debate style of communication 
so common at work. 
People hanging around and talking isn’t a distraction. It’s the work of col-
laboration. 
If it isn’t happening, the virtual leader’s job is to stir things up and 
get tongues wagging and ﬁ ngers smoking on the keyboards. Talk about the 
game last night (NBA play-offs are going on as I write this). Ask Mary 
how her minitriathlon went last week. Invite cooking aﬁ cionados to share 
recipes.
Pointers for a Conversation-Rich Team
• Remember that a team leader does not need to be aware of all conver-
sations going on. You don’t have the time.
• If you have team members working together on a project, ask about 
each other’s perspective on it. 
• Invite responses to a question or issue in an online team conversation. 
• Get a discussion going simply for exploration, not decision.
• Remind people to speak directly to one another. Especially if there is 
tension among team members, encourage them to “send the mail to 
the right address.”
• Assume the team is communicating. Expect people to be aware of 
each other’s contributions when asking about the project. Verify with 
simple questions in your one-on-ones, such as, “When you spoke to 
Carol last, did she have any insight?” 
Realize each meeting, e-mail, phone call, and IM becomes a stream of inter-
related business conversations that impact team relationships. Conversation 
is part of the team’s work—encourage it. People are shyer virtually. As one 
coaching client shared, 
It’s more difﬁ cult for me when I don’t know the other members or don’t 
know them very well. I often feel like I’m not participating enough for fear 
of being too pushy or overbearing. I sometimes don’t contribute to the 
discussion because I often feel like an outsider.
Facilitate!

130  
THE THREEFOLD PATH
Create Stories Together
The team must come together in real time to maintain emotional band-
width. It takes time for the team’s culture to form, a curation of experiences 
and stories, norms, shared rituals, repeated interactions, and fun. That can’t 
happen if the manager doesn’t provide opportunities to meet—both face-
to-face and digitally. Even henhouses beneﬁ t from together time once in a 
while. Shared experience creates shared stories. Shared stories deepen bonds. 
How Do You Spell Relief?
Support is more than interpersonal connection. Practical helping hands 
are extended on a supportive virtual team. Ever had one of those days? The 
 project is offtrack and behind schedule, the children are sick, the customer 
is cranky, and the network has gone down twice. These are the days when 
teammates become friends, when the delivered pizza is so appreciated. 
In the team development session, discuss how to handle expected chal-
lenges like technical access issues and dependent care surprises. One of the 
beneﬁ ts of being on a team is being able to support one another. That doesn’t 
change virtually.
Interpersonal support doesn’t have to be driven by crisis. Knowing 
each other allows for team give-and-take. Some people like to be more fully 
informed; others prefer to have information on a need-to-know basis. It gets 
more complicated when one person’s need-to-know looks different from 
another’s desire for autonomy. Not getting clear with one another about 
interpersonal needs and preferences can push patience to the limit. 
Most of us know that commitment on a team is desirable but not guar-
anteed. If issues continue or crop up often, go back to the First Path, team 
development, to uncover what’s derailing synergy. Even the best team will 
launch without anticipating every need, so continue to ask, “What does full 
support look like for this team?” The answer depends on organizational cul-
ture to some degree, but also, more importantly, the interpersonal prefer-
ences of the team members themselves and the work requirements, of course. 
On challenging days when the strength of the team’s emotional band-
width holds up (or doesn’t), look for ways to make ongoing support easier. It 
may be difﬁ cult for people to call a team member they barely know and ask 
for help. Facilitate it at ﬁ rst.
Of course, you want a team that doesn’t need to structure kindness, but 
structure it anyway until genuine care is the team norm. Compassion at work 
is not automatic, or at least obvious. Approximately 66% of team members 
in a recent survey stated they would “extend more effort if my supervisor 

THE SECOND PATH—SUPPORT YOUR TEAM  131
listened to me and cared.” The Saratoga Institute found that 80% of employ-
ees left their previous position because of an “undesirable relationship with 
someone at work.”10 Genuine compassion comes through, but some people 
need a little coaching in compassion.
Three Compassionate Behaviors
The following are three ways to practice compassion, as shown in Table 11.1
1. Take the other person’s perspective: No one has to adopt anyone else’s beliefs 
or values, but to work well on a team, people have to be able to put 
themselves in another’s shoes. When we truly understand where another 
is coming from, we become less judgmental.
2. Be available to listen: Unless a team member is ofﬂ ine and checked out, 
the team should be available to help one another, as should the virtual 
leader. Often this simply means listening as a teammate thinks out loud.
3. Remember a time when . . . : When it’s hard to appreciate someone else’s 
struggle, remember a time when you were tired, confused, unhinged, or 
discouraged. I like this reminder from Brene Brown in Daring Greatly: 
“When I judge myself for asking for help, I can’t offer help to others 
without judging them.”11
Virtual Storming—Feel the Static in the Air?
Have you ever been on a conference call when something was obviously being 
said “between the lines”? Have you noticed sudden changes in the tone of 
e-mails from a colleague in the length and frequency of channel posts? These 
can be signs the team is moving into the storming stage. This is a challenging 
time. It takes effort and energy on everyone’s part. Storming is particularly 
risky in new virtual teams. 
“Well-facilitated conﬂ ictual conversations can open the team to rewrit-
ing its future together,” shared one virtual team member I coached recently. 
She’s right, but avoiding conﬂ ict at work has become an art form for many. 
TABLE 11.1
Compassionate Teams
Compassionate Team Guidelines
1. Take the other person’s perspective.
2. Be available to listen.
3. Remember a time when . . .

132  
THE THREEFOLD PATH
It seems noble to avoid conﬂ ict, but avoidance often fans ﬂ ames, resulting in 
more strife and keeping teams functioning less than optimally. Often  political 
or polite behavior stiﬂ es ﬂ ow. Teams need dynamic tension to be fully learning.
Every group that develops into a team negotiates and renegotiates. Its 
work agreements are the foundation that recommits the team. As the team 
begins to live its agreements, important and meaningful feedback will hone 
and adjust the team members over days and weeks. The storming stage of team 
development can be a scary time, or it can be a curious discovery process. More 
conversations about the adjustment period ease the path through storming.
Invite team members to ask questions about the team’s process. Note 
observations and bring them to the team as feedback. “What new under-
standing did we get about the role we play in the value chain? What infor-
mation do we need that we don’t have? What issues continue to take our 
attention? What did we try this week that has made work easier?”
Instead of focusing on what’s wrong, help the team focus on improve-
ment. An appreciative inquiry into how the team is doing, especially in the 
early weeks, helps members let go of old habits that just won’t work with this 
team. 
There’s no need to keep circling the wagons. Don’t drag it out: Discuss, 
agree—done. It’s time to get real, see things and people as they are, adjust, 
and get on with it. I’ve seen too many virtual managers let the team indulge 
too many individual habits and workarounds. Too much ﬂ exibility slows 
down synergistic team rhythms and ﬂ ows. Team members can ﬂ ex them-
selves into ineffectiveness and sucking up precious meeting time addressing 
preference disagreements. 
Your team won’t be perfect. (Your job probably isn’t perfect either.) 
Strong leaders, regardless of title or role, lead from the team agreements. 
The team will normalize itself. Facilitate healthy norms during the storming 
phase before bad habits settle in.
Psychological Distance
Risk is high if you want a problem-solving team in a culture of blame and 
shame. Storming can stir blaming and protective behaviors. A blaming cul-
ture creates psychological distance, triggering protection, a human survival 
instinct. Social and geographic distance can add to a sense of isolation, a 
real vulnerability of virtual teams. Nip the blame game in the beginning by 
reframing conﬂ icts into solution-ﬁ nding or improvement conversations.
Virtual team members can feel isolated and not an integral part of the 
team. This is especially true when some team members work together in an 

THE SECOND PATH—SUPPORT YOUR TEAM  133
ofﬁ ce while others work virtually. Until your team is high performing, you are 
the primary link between the team and the organization. Initially you help 
link the team members to each other. Without regular contact, the virtual 
worker loses peripheral vision of what is occurring on the team and in the 
organization. 
We are social creatures. In the movie Castaway,12 Tom Hanks’s character 
formed a friendship with his only island companion, a ball named Wilson. 
The world was created for “we,” not “me.” When Hanks’s character had 
exciting news, he needed to tell somebody. Wilson, the inanimate object, 
became his “other.” To help your virtual team feel like they are not talking 
to a ball, close psychological distance across the miles. In one-on-ones, talk 
about personal and professional goals, not just the team’s work. Demonstrate 
you care. Develop your own virtual team support rhythms by scheduling 
simple things, such as sending birthday e-cards and promoting team suc-
cesses. Be sure the right people are aware. 
Recognition and appreciation are two very powerful motivators to bring 
the team closer psychologically, and it makes people want to stick around.
Renorm to Perform
A good team development process will serve the team, but that is not enough. 
Regularly review the norms and agreements, systems and tools, processes, 
and the team’s well-being. Team and work needs shift naturally and often. 
Adjust and negotiate to better ﬁ t the team’s emerging needs. Ask them what 
is working and what is not, and what they think needs to happen next. Are 
there common technology challenges that need additional support or train-
ing? Make modiﬁ cations or recommitments to keep the team energized, 
cohesive, and balanced.
Remember that in most teams, trust has to be structured ﬁ rst. Find vehi-
cles to “speed up” the familiarity period. Include face time. 
Holding (Virtual) Space
The team exists, even when it isn’t electronically or personally connected. 
Virtual team effectiveness is directly linked to nonwork-related, informal 
interaction that keeps the team connected between meetings. Team lead-
ers hold the space for the group between getting together, ensuring that the 
sacred space continues regardless of who is currently “in the virtual room.”
The lack of access to the atmosphere in a shared ofﬁ ce workplace 
changes dramatically in a virtual environment. It’s why virtual team 

134  
THE THREEFOLD PATH
communication must go beyond traditional communication. The leader 
needs to informally re-create the organization’s atmosphere virtually. When 
in a colocated work ofﬁ ce, the team room or “space” holds the energy of the 
group, forming a sort of container, just as a glass holds water or a pocket 
holds personal effects. Usually, remnants of previous meetings linger on the 
whiteboard; people walk in with their favorite coffee mugs, gravitating to 
the same chair at the table; habits breed familiarity, comfort, and a sense 
of belonging. 
Virtual Teams Experience Energy Leaks
Distance does impact team energy, especially soon after a high-energy team 
session. It’s as if the glass is tipped over if sacred virtual space isn’t  created 
and nurtured. The team needs help occasionally to keep the ﬁ res burning. 
When two team members have their heads together and hit a “Eureka!” 
moment, they need to run virtually to the whole group and share the excite-
ment. Then. Not later. When a team member receives a special award, feature 
her in a podcast or press release. Develop a habit of posting fun and exciting 
news to a team dashboard or shared stream (similar to your Facebook time-
line). Celebrate accomplishments as a team, even when dispersed. Celebrate 
again when you are face-to-face. 
No team can be too spirited, whether virtual or colocated. Do a virtual 
jig. Send e-cards. Have fun. It’s a good thing. Meet face-to-face and take a 
team picture to post on the team’s dashboard. Post a map with everyone’s 
locations. Use the “like” button in conversation channels. Schedule lunch 
with team members. Encourage team members who live near one another 
to join the same gym. Schedule more social time when you are face-to-face 
and facilitate virtual icebreakers before starting virtual meetings. Facilitate 
conversation starters while waiting for everyone to join the web confer-
ence. Make it about work if that’s the culture, but get people to converse 
 informally.
At the same time, energy cannot be at full throttle all the time, or 
the team would burn out. If the energetic ebb and ﬂ ow aren’t managed, 
the team risks too much dissipation virtually, resulting in lagging commit-
ment and difﬁ culty keeping focus. Practical mechanisms can help develop 
rhythms and ﬂ ows that balance out the workweek. Make sure your team 
has known ways to reach out—quick communication channels and virtual 
watercoolers, like IM (instant messaging); open and ongoing chat rooms, 
like Skype and electronic dashboards; as well as virtual and face-to-face 
team meetings. 

THE SECOND PATH—SUPPORT YOUR TEAM  135
Check-Ins and Check Outs
Frequent check-ins should be the norm. Most of us don’t know to ask for help 
as soon as we should, so check-ins help us get our heads up to look around a 
bit and breathe. Sometimes we need to check out. Burnout is high in corpo-
rate America, and virtual workers experience it at higher levels. Whether it’s 
the thin boundary between work and home or the extra pressure some virtual 
workers feel to prove they’re really working, checking out and unplugging 
should be mandated for all team members regularly. Help people refresh. 
So Why Did Mayer Ban Telecommuting? Synergy and Innovation
“Communication and collaboration will be important. . . . Some of the best decisions and insights 
come from hallway and cafeteria discussions, meeting new people, and impromptu team 
meetings. . . . We need to be one Yahoo! and that starts with physically being together.” 
—Melissa Mayer, CEO, Yahoo!
Mayer’s argument holds water. Yes, studies have found that employees, par-
ticularly employees in process-intense jobs, are more efﬁ cient when working 
from home. But employees are most innovative when they know each other 
and work together often. It turns out Mayer’s declaration that communica-
tion is needed for collaboration wasn’t so much about working virtually or 
not as it was about building synergy. Her choice was to build that synergy 
during turnaround by gathering the troops together physically. 
Innovation is critical in most companies today, so the impact of virtual 
work on a team’s creativity is relevant. Most innovation happens because 
of teamwork—communication and collaboration—whether in the ofﬁ ce 
or virtually. The interplay of thoughtful face-to-face conversation is more 
natural and helps innovation take off. It can happen virtually also, but not 
until the team has synergized. Innovation happens more naturally, regardless 
of work environment, when a team thinks together, combining efforts and 
resources. Facilitate that kind of synergy and spark virtually, and you are on 
the Second Path of high-performance virtual teams. 
Communicate Results
Words are powerful tools. Add one or two more sentences to every e-mail to 
expand emotional bandwidth. For instance, if someone has done something 
outstanding, call out the performance, and continue by saying, “And this is 

136  
THE THREEFOLD PATH
exactly the kind of behavior we all want to see in order to reach our goals”—
it takes ﬁ ve seconds and it works. Always be looking for ways to reinforce 
teamwork, to help team members have a sense of themselves as a team.
The Rolling Present : Entry, Exit, Reentry
One of the beneﬁ ts of virtual work is that you can bring in new members 
from anywhere as required by the project, although the challenge remains to 
form a team quickly or add new members fast. Virtual teams do have a dis-
tinct advantage when onboarding new team members who enter or reenter 
the team along the way. Much work is done asynchronously; thus, much is 
documented and provides a history to review. On the other hand, the sheer 
volume can be overwhelming. The team manager needs to help new team 
members sort through the history for fast assimilation of knowledge. Here 
are questions to guide team members who are rolling onto the team:
• What reference documents, history, strategic-planning documents, 
progress plans, and deliverable requirements do joining team mem-
bers need to review? Can you create a static infographic road map, or 
will a more dynamic orientation be needed?
• Whom do joining team members need to talk to, and about what? 
Structure their onboarding plan.
• Who will serve as an orientation coach? A work buddy? Make it easy 
for people to know where/who is the ﬁ rst point of contact for what 
kind of help.
• How will new team members learn the operating norms of this team? 
Don’t leave people to watch and learn through trial and error.
• How will new team members be introduced to the existing team? 
Hopefully, it won’t be just before the new team member’s ﬁ rst report 
out.
The informal aspect of rolling entry is more social. Minimally, con-
ference virtually to introduce the new team member. Have the team share 
in onboarding new members to the group’s culture, metaphors, rhythms, 
norms, and etiquette. Structure scheduled interviews between the new mem-
ber and the rest of the team. You cannot fully replace the juicy human energy 
that gets created with live conversation, so have live conversations. 
The last act of the virtual manager is to prepare the team member for 
exit, the next deployment. This may be as simple as a LinkedIn recommen-
dation, but often also includes introductions and advocacy onto another 

THE SECOND PATH—SUPPORT YOUR TEAM  137
team. This kind of team support builds people’s commitment to you even 
after they are no longer working for you.
At the End of the Day . . .
Everyone is busy processing information and demands moment to moment. 
In the midst of the busy, be a role model. Show caring and support for your 
team. Take just a few moments daily to reﬂ ect on the team’s well-being, taking 
at least one action that helps a team member (and thereby the whole team). 
Others will follow your lead. The team is on its way to healthy norming and 
soon to performing. The few rough spots will be remedied with little distur-
bance to the overall efﬁ ciency and functioning of the virtual team that con-
sistently and easily produces results, the Third Path of virtual management.
Notes
1. Zachary First, “Technology Changes, Good Management Doesn’t,” 
 Harvard Business Review, Managing People, April 7, 2016, https://hbr.org/2016/04/
technology-changes-good-management-doesnt
2. Home page, Greenleaf Center for Servant Leadership, http://www
.greenleaf.org
3. Adam Grant, Give and Take: Why Helping Others Drives Our Success (New 
York: Penguin, 2014), www.giveandtake.com
4. James Heskett, “Why Isn’t Servant Leadership More Prevalent?” Forbes, 
May 1, 2013, www.forbes.com/sites/hbsworkingknowledge/2013/05/01/why-isnt-
servant-leadership-more-prevalent/
5. Quote taken from CNN interview, Fareed Zakaria GPS. Aired Novem-
ber 30, 2014. Transcript available at www.cnn.com/TRANSCRIPTS/1411/30/
fzgps.01.html 
6. General Stanley McChrystal et al., Team of Teams: New Rules of Engagement 
for a Complex World (New York: Penguin Random House, 2015).
7. “Kevin Lynch,” The MIT Press, accessed August 14, 2015, https://mitpress
.mit.edu/authors/kevin-lynch
8. “Flow (Psychology),” Wikipedia, last modiﬁ ed September 8, 2015,
 https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Flow (psychology)
9. Yolanda Wikiel, “Get Smart, People,” Real Simple, July 2015.
10. Tasha Eurich, Bankable Leadership: Happy People, Bottom-Line Results and 
the Power to Deliver Both (Austin: Greenleaf Book Group Press, 2013).
11. Brene Brown, Daring Greatly: How the Courage to Be Vulnerable Transforms 
the Way We Live, Love, Parent, and Lead (New York: Penguin Publishing, Gotham 
Press, New York, 2012). 
12. Castaway, directed by Robert Zemeckis (2000; Los Angeles, CA: 20th 
 Century Fox, 2001), DVD.

138
12
T H E  T H I R D  PAT H —
P R O D U C E  S U C C E S S F U L 
O U TC O M E S
“Teamwork is the fuel that allows ordinary people to achieve extraordinary results.”
—Dale Carnegie
“People who feel good about themselves produce good results.”
—Ken Blanchard
“Culture drives great results.”
—Jack Welch
W
hile team support matters, mission accomplishment is still the 
goal. The trust developed within any team is fragile and even 
more so in a virtual team that isn’t performing up to standard. 
The Third Path (see Figure 12.1) of producing successful outcomes actually 
begins with the First Path—clear and shared purpose, roles, goals, and expec-
tations. All teams need clarity to achieve concrete, complete results—mission 
accomplishment. 
More Structure
In order to accomplish team missions virtually, more structure and planning 
are required. Emergency gatherings and on-the-ﬂ y planning are exhilarating, 
and can be done virtually as the exception rather than the rule, but they can-
not be the standard. Chaos and frustration result and virtual team members 
see through the exhilaration to the disorganization lying beneath the surface. 

Support the Team 
Community.
     - Maintenance
PATH TWO
O1
O2
O3
The
Threefold
Path
for
Produce Successful Outcomes:
 - Celebration
 - Quality Deliverables
High-Performance Teams
THIRD PATH
Support the Team 
  Community:
    - Maintenance
      - Emotional Bandwidth
          - Synergy
              - Assistance
SECOND PATH
      Create a Cohesive Team 
      Culture:
    - Team Development
-   -  Planning
    - Structured Trust
FIRST PATH
EMPLOYEE ENGAGEMENT
  - Interpersonal Caring
  - Organizational Commitment
MIND SHIFTS
  - People, Not Place 
 -  Network Is the Workplace
  - It’s All Part of the Job
Change the Deﬁnition of Work
Follow the Threefold Path
Enjoy Strong Relationships
 ©  2016 - Trina Hoeﬂing, The SMART Workplace 
Figure 12.1. The Threefold Path for high-performance teams.

140  
THE THREEFOLD PATH
If everybody starts with the same vision and knows what their role is in 
the agreed-upon plan, and if the team has a clear structure for communica-
tion and feedback in place, you’re off on a good performance management 
path. The structure, using collaboration tools when possible, keeps everyone 
focused. It’s easy for virtual members to work hard but get four degrees to the 
left of where they originally meant to go. Undetected, six or seven people are 
going in different directions without knowing it. Nothing is more frustrat-
ing than working hard only to discover rework is required because the focus 
was slightly off—and no one knew. Everyone needs to take an active role in 
 making sure feedback loops keep everyone aligned. 
 Less Structure
Paradoxically, less structure is also required. Command-and-control manage-
ment doesn’t work in a virtual work environment. Relationship and com-
munication hold the team together, not controlling oversight. The mission 
and goals are the North Star, and the team relationships are the best account-
ability mechanisms. Margaret Heffernan, an expert on competitive and 
 collaborative work cultures, reminds wisely that 
genuine critical thinking and innovation require that the mind is allowed 
to wander, to try out answers that don’t work, to test concepts, and, cru-
cially, to make mistakes. All of this is directly discouraged when the focus 
of learning is on results.1
If performance management and measurement are structured too tightly, 
people will “perform to the test,” rather than seek to excel. 
Manage the team through personal relationships—team development 
and support, team agreements, organizational relationships, individual per-
formance, coaching, decision-making, and advocacy—as well as through 
project management tools.
 What Am I Really Managing?
Other than e-mail, do the team tools you use primarily function to capture 
information and control and monitor activity? This would be typical when 
the culture expects adherence to goals and metrics. Ask yourself the following 
questions unabashedly as team leader (or about your manager if you’re not 
the leader):

THE THIRD PATH—PRODUCE SUCCESSFUL OUTCOMES  141
• How much time do I give to managing performance (walking the 
Third Path)? 
• How much time do I give to supporting my teams in the organization 
(walking the Second Path)?
• How much time do I have to develop my members (walking the First 
Path)?
• How much time do I protect for reﬂ ection and my own requirements 
(the Fourth Path of career leadership, which we cover in a later chapter 
of the book)?
• Do I need to adjust anything to have a better balance for the team?
There is only one wrong answer—and many right answers—to these ques-
tions. How you prioritize your time shifts based on many factors, such as the 
stage of members and team development, or mission and organization com-
plexity. If, however, you spend most of your time managing the Third Path, you’ve 
got the wrong answer. This chapter helps you adapt performance management 
for virtual teams so more time is spent on the First and Second Paths of lead-
ing high-performance teams. 
 When Am I the Performance Boss?
Manage individual performance on such matters as the following:
• Technology competence
• Social intelligence and team play
• Stage of virtual team effectiveness
• Engagement and career goals
• Job skills and competencies
• Individual deliverables
Manage team performance on the following:
• Team play and virtual communication
• Customer service (internal or external)
• Engagement and commitment
• Quality standards
• Milestones and deliverables
• Team learning

142  
THE THREEFOLD PATH
Moving from colocated to remote management is like moving into man-
agement for the ﬁ rst time. The more you are a results-based leader of the 
team and its members, the easier the Third Path will be. You are coaching 
people individually, and you are managing team outcomes.
You aren’t just managing virtual performance. You’re managing virtual 
employee engagement. Virtual workers say the biggest drawback to telecom-
muting is feeling out of the loop. “I don’t know what’s going on,” “I’m not 
included in the scope change conversations,” and “I don’t have enough 
 information” were the most common complaints heard from virtual team 
members. 
Overdo information sharing, announcement posting, and team feed-
back. Never back off the communication for long, as it guides effective 
 performance and team alignment. 
Let the Tools Facilitate Self-Management
You spend most of your time as a facilitator and connector. When your 
team partners with enabling technology, the team becomes increasingly self- 
managing. This is important because you want to spend more of your time
• nurturing relationships throughout the organization’s network;
• seeking professional development and redeployment opportunities 
for the team, especially near the end of a team’s charter;
• clearing obstacles and ﬁ nding resources and commonalities across 
competing priorities and boundaries; and
• cross-pollinating—facilitating, connecting, and developing the organi-
zation networks. Even with great communication protocols, it can 
still be hard for virtual team members to keep up, so get out and 
connect.
Let technology free your time and keep the team focused on work, 
minimizing reporting. A relevant team dashboard is visual, quick to grasp, 
an indispensable task and project management aid, a team home page, and 
a conversation starter. It guides every team member’s day and structures 
 prioritization. Your team will use as many collaborative tools as it needs, 
aggregating much of the performance activity for you. Task management 
systems and other project management software help everyone stay on track. 
Virtual teams who embrace task management software will have an edge 
on productivity and work-life balance. It’s a time-saver and a team-focusing 
agent.

THE THIRD PATH—PRODUCE SUCCESSFUL OUTCOMES  143
A virtual leader also has a more objective set of information to consider 
in evaluating performance through the software. This frees everyone to spend 
more time working smarter and less time documenting work activity. You are 
aggregating activity and production information automatically that informs 
you about individual performance as well. 
Your job isn’t done yet, though. 
The Rule of Three
Some performance management still falls to the virtual manager, of course. 
Whether focused on the team or individual performance level, apply the 
Rule of Three against all performance evaluation:
1. Relevance: Be sure the information you collect is relevant to the perfor-
mance of the job or the effectiveness of the team. 
2. Fairness: Ask periodically if you’d have monitored the same way if the 
team member were colocated with you. Are you managing fairly in terms 
of frequency, type of questions asked, and making judgments based on 
similar observations? These are especially important questions to ask if 
you manage some team members virtually and some in person. 
3. Completeness: Note positive and negative events and observations over 
a period of time. We tend to remember the unusual and the recent, so 
keeping a record of objective observations helps control our natural 
bias.
 Establish Baseline Performance
All of the results across the organization must align to achieve the strategic 
goals. The virtual leader aligns his team’s work and outcomes to be account-
able as well as to hold the team up as a winning success story to the organiza-
tion. It’s one thing to manage a person’s work, it’s another to manage a team of 
smart people freed to work at their best. You want to manage as little as possible 
while still having your ﬁ nger on the pulse of performance. 
As you lead your team to produce successful outcomes, use the collabo-
ration tools so that results are ensured—in other words:
• What are your metrics, and what collaboration tools capture that 
information, or what could be adapted to do that?

144  
THE THREEFOLD PATH
• How will you know the team is on track? Does your project or task 
management tool set up production feedback loops, leaving as little 
“reporting” and activity documentation responsibility to virtual team 
members as possible? 
• How can your team results leverage careers and deliver excellence? Is 
information captured in such a way as to be able to broadcast good 
news? For example, how easily can you note an accomplishment in 
the virtual employee’s ﬁ le?
 RAMP Up Productivity
 Of course, you can monitor only what you tell the technology, which 
means you and the teams have to know your own metrics ﬁ rst. The Third 
Path to outcomes actually begins during the First Path of team develop-
ment.  Hopefully, you and the team have determined the team’s metrics dur-
ing your team planning. Your organization may have a robust performance 
 management process also, which is integrated into your team’s results and 
management processes. 
Whatever you have already in place, it should answer a few questions 
that help high-performance virtual teams stay productive. The Results and 
 TABLE 12.1
Results and Management Process
WHAT is 
effective 
performance?
HOW do I 
recognize and 
measure?
HOW do I 
communicate about 
performance?
(Map to your team’s 
communication 
commitments.)
WHEN do I 
communicate and 
how often?
(Map to your team’s 
communication 
commitments.)
What results 
are desired?
How much? 
How well? 
How many? 
How often?
When live (synchro-
nous)? When pushed 
out and available 
(asynchronous)? Doc-
uments and collabo-
ration tool reports?
Daily? Weekly? 
Monthly? Quarter-
ly? About what?
What are 
minimum 
standards?
What are our 
collaborative 
management 
tools that track 
performance 
and activity?
One-on-one and 
team sessions?
Milestones?

THE THIRD PATH—PRODUCE SUCCESSFUL OUTCOMES  145
Management Process (RAMP) in Table 12.1 is a very simple framework you 
can bring to your team. Use or adapt the framework as a team activity with 
the sole purpose of getting everyone’s agreement and understanding about 
how they will be evaluated. 
 Before You Go Too Far Down the RAMP . . .
Command-and-controlled hierarchical structures are less effective than most 
managers believe, though 86% of people surveyed for a Future of Work study 
said that leaders believed wrongly, and needed to change to be more col-
laborative.2 
Distrust Is Natural in Corporations, Especially Bureaucracies
So much so that risk management is a department. You don’t want your 
virtual leadership style to breed distrust unintentionally. If management hov-
ers, appearing to distrust people, team members will be suspicious, too. New 
virtual managers tend to hover.
The trust will not increase or decrease in a virtual environment if old habits 
get re-created virtually. You are simply ﬁ nding different ways to perpetuate a 
climate of distrust. Instead, you can build trust (possibly change the culture 
to be more collaborative at the same time) through managing the Third Path 
of production with this or another team-negotiated RAMP. 
Remember, more and less structure is required virtually. Structure your 
RAMP, but accept the limits of the structure. I’ve never known a documented 
performance agreement to motivate anyone to give 100%, but I have seen 
a lack of performance clarity wreak havoc. You need the structure and the 
involvement of your team.
 Focus on Ends Before Means
One of the most common fears expressed by managers whose employees 
telework is, “How will I know they’re working?”
The simple answer is: “You won’t.” Keep in mind that realistically 
you can’t be sure they’re working when you see them in the ofﬁ ce, either. 
Your team tools will show if they hit milestones, match activity levels with 
other team members, and deliver results. Partner with the project man-
agement tools to know if they’re working. Let the tools inform you ﬁ rst; 
then engage in conversation and give everyone feedback and coaching. A 

146  
THE THREEFOLD PATH
management habit that can suffer from virtual distance is forgetting to 
give ongoing feedback. The best feedback is offered informally, regularly, 
and intentionally in the virtual environment. When you notice good per-
formance, say something. Make extra effort—a brief voice mail or e-mail 
works wonders. Remember, virtual workers’ biggest stated dissatisfaction is 
lack of feedback.
Make yourself accessible to your employees. 
One way to be available without breeding dependency is to set ofﬁ ce 
hours—periods of time when you will be available. Some leaders set a ﬁ xed 
time each workday, and others block off time weekly. Decide, let your 
employees know, and then stick to the schedule. If your organization uses 
a team discussion tool (similar to Facebook for organizations), use it. If you 
have open chat rooms, post your chat availability for “ofﬁ ce hours.” Virtual 
workers need an echo—to know there is someone else out there. Ping people 
and encourage the team to ping back.
Just as you would for any other employee, schedule regular one-on-ones, 
as well as quarterly or semiannual performance reviews as a team, perhaps 
individually. Face-to-face meetings are always more effective, but chatting by 
phone or videoconference works, too. 
Make every business conversation and every operational meeting count. Vir-
tual work tends to bring out impatience when time isn’t valued. You’ll want 
to talk to your team often, about many things. Ensure your team comes to 
conversations or meetings prepared. You’ll facilitate a better meeting, provide 
better guidance, and keep yourself organized and on point.3
Types of Conversations
Table 12.2 shows a way to help structure yourself for leading performance 
and project management conversations. (This is a sample. You or your 
organization may already have its own structure.)
 Don’t Confuse Activity With Achievement! 
This ﬁ nal guideline for producing successful outcomes may be the most 
important. Virtually, busywork is less an issue since no one is watching. Nev-
ertheless, keep yourself and your team focused on the horizon. At the end of 
the day, the results determine all.

TABLE 12.2
Types of Conversations
Conversation/meeting 
focus
Frequency
Conversation/meeting structure
Purpose or outcome sought
Business processes
Daily scheduled at same time
Live web conference 
Stand-up meeting
Check in on progress, course corrections, updates
Celebrations 
Suggestions for improvement
Quality control checks
Weekly
Quality metrics/report 
Live web conference
Identify root cause and correct issues
Assign actions (in task management system)
Stakeholder 
feedback (formal and 
anecdotal)
Monthly team meetings
Assessment and feedback results—
report reviewed prior to session
Live web conference 
Encouragement
Discover and correct problems
Assign actions
Productivity and ﬁ nancial 
results
Quarterly executive  webcast
Team meeting follow-up 
All-company webcast
Follow-up web conference
Encourage positive behaviors
Discover and correct problems
Align team results and relevance
Should be informational, inspirational, honest, 
strategic and holistic, and tells the story
Operational and planning 
sessions
Midyear and year end
Team sessions, ideally face-to-face
Stakeholders are invited
Reenergize the team
Resolve issues and improve process
Celebrate successes
Plan upcoming year
Employee engagement
At least annually as an orga-
nization 
At least monthly as a team
Surveys and quick polls
Conversations
Team meeting process debriefs
Gauge understanding and commitment
Improvement plans to support team members

148  
THE THREEFOLD PATH
Notes
1. Margaret Heffernan, A Bigger Prize: Why Competition Isn’t Everything and 
How We Can Do Better (New York: PublicAffairs, 2014).
2. Multiple citations support this. A few especially cogent sources include Dorie 
Clark, “Are Workplace Hierarchies Becoming Obsolete?” Forbes, August 8, 2012, www
.forbes.com/sites/dorieclark/2012/08/08/is-workplace-hierarchy-becoming-obsolete; 
J. Strikwerda, “Organization Design in the 21st Century: From Structure Follows 
Strategy to Process Follows Proposition,” Social Science Research Network, February 
9, 2012, http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=2002236; Lowell Bryan 
and Claudia Joyce, “The McKinsey Quarterly: The 21st Century Organization,” 
CFO Journal, August 16, 2005, http://ww2.cfo.com/human-capital-careers/2005/08/
the-21st-century-organization/; and Brian Robertson, “What’s Wrong With Your 
Organizational Structure?” Holacracy Blog, August 5, 2013, https://medium.com/
about-holacracy/whats-wrong-with-your-organizational-structure-91dd71a76eb7
3. For step-by-step guidance in planning for, setting up, facilitating, and 
 following up on effective virtual meetings, download a digital Working Virtually 
bonus chapter at www.WorkingVirtually.org

PART  F IVE
FROM ME TO WE
“The network is the ampliﬁ er.”
—Reid Hoffman, founder of LinkedIn
“The digital universe is a portal to connect people with people. . . . The technology is the clothing 
on the actor of this interactive space experience.”
—Jaron Lanier, computer scientist, author, composer
“Build more nets than walls.”
—President Bill Clinton, founder, The Global Initiative


151
13
C O L L A B O R AT I V E  TO O L S 
T H AT  W O R K
The ﬁ gure slowly climbed toward the summit of the mountain; hand over hand, pulling up 
toward the guru’s cave. The climber reached the top, ﬁ ngers raw and clothes tattered. He beheld 
the master: long white hair, wearing a ﬂ owing robe, indeterminate age. The master sat in the 
lotus position and seemed totally detached from worldly concerns.
The pilgrim knew he could ask only one question. A question for which there were no answers in 
the books, the journals, or from consultants. He approached the master and asked, “Master, what 
is the secret of staying connected across time and distance?”
The master was quiet for a long time, considering this question. At last she spoke. “You could 
just Skype.”
—Adapted from The Grenierian Chronicles
S
eventy-four percent of executives say collaborative tools increase how 
fast they access knowledge; 58% say they have reduced technology costs 
with the aid of integrated platforms and tools.1 Global HR trends of 
2016 suggest that organization leaders are redesigning systems and processes 
to build and support networks of teams, including setting up real-time infor-
mation networks. Smart leaders are designing for organization connection, 
not performance control. They’re adapting performance management pro-
cesses to be more systemic (i.e., recruitment through retirement), automated, 
and team driven. HR is integrating big data and analytics into talent man-
agement. Most organizations have adopted the kinds of team-based tools 
discussed in this chapter.2 
Teams and technology go hand in hand, jointly affecting each other. As 
you conﬁ gure your team’s tools, ask how the team wants and needs informa-
tion to move around, where it needs to go, and when and how it comes back. 
In the next chapter you’ll ask these questions more deliberately, since team 
communication and collaboration tools are inextricably linked.

152  
FROM ME TO WE
This chapter reviews, from a nontechnical perspective, the types of tools 
most often used to conﬁ gure virtual teamwork and when each is used best. 
Analyst David Coleman recently surveyed over 500 people working collabo-
ratively in corporate and government enterprises. Eighty-seven percent col-
laborate virtually, but he discovered the vast majority of work teams are using 
tools ineffectively and practice methods that limit effective collaboration.3
Essentially, you and your team are customizing your virtual ofﬁ ce from 
what is (or will be as organizations redesign) an orchestrated, integrated 
 technology set that coordinates work and facilitates communication and 
 collaboration. 
Collaboration Tools Are “Sticky”
Uniﬁ ed communication is increasingly simple, thanks to fast evolution in 
technology. The team obviously needs to take advantage of collaboration 
technology in order to coordinate work. Less obvious is how much the tools 
facilitate team synergy when used well, helping the leader keep the team con-
nected. Utilizing tools more effectively also helps virtual teams identify with 
their organizations. For virtual teams, the tools are the team’s primary vehicle 
for connection. They represent the company’s “hallways”—the places we go 
to ﬁ nd each other. This chapter explores the most helpful collaborative tools 
your virtual team will use.
Tools should support types of conversations that serve multiple goals. 
Virtual work is supported or derailed because of people’s patterns of interac-
tion or isolation, their habitual communication pathways. Teams need to 
talk, as we’ve discussed, but for what end? Conversations, like meetings, serve 
a purpose. It helps to have a sense of why communication needs to happen 
before determining how and through what technologies virtual teams will 
best communicate. 
There is wisdom in the Chinese proverb “Calling things by their right 
name is the beginning of understanding.” Most conversations are both task and 
interpersonally focused in order to support the work and the relationships. 
Understanding the importance of both, of incorporating and adapting to 
the social needs of the team while being productive, is paramount when we 
communicate. 
Every conversation or meeting should further the relationship, the work, 
or both. You want your virtual team to easily ﬁ nd pathways for free-ﬂ owing 
conversations, within reasonable structure. Some messages may be best deliv-
ered through an e-mail for one team member, while someone else needs an 
in-person call. Still another prefers a text message. The more you learn about 

COLLABORATIVE TOOLS THAT WORK  153
your team, the easier it is to ﬁ nd habits and communication rhythms that 
ﬂ ow for everyone. 
What if your team could be in a chat session and seamlessly switch to 
voice with one click, like you can with Skype? Are your shared virtual work 
spaces organized with a clean and friendly interface? Can you add web links 
and ﬁ les with full previews to a team discussion channel? Are you capturing 
tasks during team meetings directly into a tracking system without leaving 
the web conference? 
Collaboration platforms already provide this robust set of capabilities. 
Your organization has some form of platform with integrated tools, perhaps 
invisible to the typical employee. For example, most American corporate 
employees already collaborate using a web application platform in the Micro-
soft server suite called SharePoint.4 SharePoint combines various functions 
that used to be separate, like intranet, extranet, document and ﬁ le manage-
ment, enterprise social networking, intranet search, workﬂ ow management, 
e-mail, shared calendars, and so on.5 SharePoint servers might be deployed 
alongside Microsoft Exchange, Skype for Business, and private company web 
servers, for example. Employees use the tools, unaware of the technology 
backbone making it all happen.
In 2015 Gartner named a relative newcomer, Redbooth, as a Cool Ven-
dor in Uniﬁ ed Communications. Redbooth was founded in 2008, but is 
rapidly becoming the choice of agile, self-directed teams who want to gain 
competitive advantages by changing the way they work. Redbooth’s user 
experience is engineered speciﬁ cally to drive collaboration, while it also 
provides team managers with analytics to quickly and accurately track and 
measure the effectiveness of a team’s work.6 Things are evolving quickly, and 
companies have more and more choices for technology providers. I’m not 
recommending Redbooth; it’s just one example of a steady performer in a 
fast-changing environment.
Remove the Mystery of Online Collaboration
For reticent virtual team members, insist that the technology and communi-
cation protocols be followed. In developing your team, some members may 
advocate against changing their habits. Respectfully but ﬁ rmly expand the 
team’s willingness (and provide training) to leverage the tools more fully. 
Coach, provide training and support, and remind, but do not let the expectations 
or standards slip. 
Most of us, by nature, resist change we don’t understand or didn’t choose. 
Recently I provided instructional design support to a colleague. This person 

154  
FROM ME TO WE
was unwilling to use a virtual ofﬁ ce or shared storage because she was so con-
ditioned to e-mail; phone; and, most important for her, face-to-face. I drove 
200 miles multiple times to accommodate her, which was unsustainable for 
my schedule. Eventually, I completed my handoffs and left the project early, 
even though I co-design often with teammates virtually. The difference is 
virtual comfort, competence, and desire to work together cut through all 
virtual barriers. 
That’s the difference virtual team competence can make for your team. Rein-
force increased and regular tool use to build competency and conﬁ dence. If 
a tool clearly is not performing well, or the tool choice seems inappropriate 
to the task, then—and only then—revisit your choices and make any adjust-
ments or changes. 
Ideally, collaborative tool training for a virtual environment is available 
organization-wide and will not fall to the virtual manager. However, be pre-
pared to resource training yourself. If the members are competent with the 
tools, they will quickly develop as a team.7
Principles for Selecting Collaboration Tools
Communication is the most critical success factor for any team, virtual or 
not. Virtual leaders have a responsibility to model good communication 
using virtual media, as well as face-to-face. No one choice will always be the 
best choice, so be versed in multiple tools. Consider three additional factors 
before choosing your team’s toolbox:
1. Time. How much of our communication will be live (synchronous)? Not 
(asynchronous)?
2. Place. Will a communication event be in a colocated or virtual environ-
ment? Both? 
3. Forum. If colocated, the medium is face-to-face conversation in a con-
ference room. A meeting may be partially colocated, with some team 
members web conferencing in. If that’s the case, the team room needs to 
be media equipped for the remote connection. 
Obviously, technology has evolved, providing many tools to achieve 
effective and timely communication with options. Types of tools that most 
of us are familiar with include instant messaging, a company social network 
(e.g., Jive), shared ﬁ le management (e.g., Google Docs or Dropbox if your 
organization doesn’t have an intranet), group calendar scheduling and alerts 
(SharePoint with Outlook), project plan software (like Microsoft Project), 

COLLABORATIVE TOOLS THAT WORK  155
decision-making support systems (anonymous and named voting, polling, 
and other group decision-making tools), wikis (evolving shared knowledge 
databases), and web conferencing (Citrix and GoToMeeting being well-
known options), to name a few. 
Which do you use, for what end?
What Are You Trying to Accomplish?
Match the tool to the intention of the communication. How people interact 
virtually—how deeply, thoroughly, honestly, thoughtfully, quickly, slowly, 
patiently, individually, or collectively—is greatly inﬂ uenced by the tool, 
setting, tone of the facilitator, and who else is in the “virtual room.” For 
example, a telephone conference call with three or four people can be highly 
interactive, fast-paced, energizing, and as productive as a face-to-face meet-
ing, assuming there is no need for visual focus and everyone has patience 
with unintended interruptions. Take those same three or four people and 
place them on a facilitated bridge call with 100 others, and the telephone 
conference takes on a whole different feel. The medium is still the same—the 
telephone. The forum, however, has changed from a team conversation mov-
ing at a fast clip to a facilitated bridge call with rules for participation, such 
as muted telephones. 
Ask ﬁ rst, What are we trying to accomplish? Then ﬁ nd the options that 
will ﬁ t your purpose.
System Requirements
Any collaborative tool must meet your organization’s system requirements. 
The IT department manages most of this, but for the nontechnical person, it 
helps to be aware of some typical functionality and requirements:
• Security: System security for intellectual property and sensitive infor-
mation (customer data, ﬁ nancials, etc.).
• Authentication/authorization: Only allowed individuals get access 
• Workﬂ ow: Adhere to basic workﬂ ow processes. 
• Backup: Information and processes backed up for the team.
• Availability and access: The information and processes must be 
available when needed from anywhere.
• Administration: An authorized IT staff to manage assets, users, and 
related communications and permissions.

156  
FROM ME TO WE
• Forum: A dynamic social communication application (e.g., Jive, 
Slack, or Trello, currently popular team discussion tools) that keeps 
an inventory of threaded and linked conversations.
• Wiki: A more static knowledge storage system for team resource 
sharing.
• FAQ/trouble reporting: A way to report and assign resources to 
problems, saving virtual team members from needing to be technical 
troubleshooters. 
• Document and ﬁ le collaboration: Contributions to a single ﬁ le (or 
multiple documents) by multiple contributors, simultaneously or in 
parallel.
• Project and task management: Basic tasking, resource entry, status, 
adaptation, and reporting; assign actions required and follow-ups, 
and name project owners by using the tools during team meetings, or 
post soon after each meeting.
When you explore what is available you will see how many choices there 
are. By the time this book goes to press, some of the players will have changed, 
though the focus on functionality for the team remains. Have team needs 
match up to tools. The overriding goal is always to sustain a cohesive team. 
Rely on this checklist when considering different tools.
Virtual Collaboration Tool Checklist
Rely on the following checklist when considering different tools.
• Time (Does the team need to connect live or not?)
• Place (Do we need to meet in a virtual conference room or face-to-
face?) 
• Forum (When does the team need a small interactive group, when an 
information-sharing forum, and so on?) 
To help set the stage for effective communication, now ask: 
• “What is the intention of each major type of communication/meeting we 
will need?” What are the primary and secondary objectives or out-
comes expected? What is the timeline for our meeting and must-do 
goals (deﬁ ne milestones if possible)?
• “Do we have any limitations to consider?” Is there a time or cost 
factor that might limit choices? Do we need training? Are there user 
limitations we need to consider?

COLLABORATIVE TOOLS THAT WORK  157
• “Who is the target audience?” Is the receiver of a communication going 
to be a team member? The manager? The whole team? A different 
department? A customer? A team of teams? The entire organization? 
Anyone who may be interested? 
• “What is the focus of this communication?” Is it primarily information 
sharing? Relationship building and interaction? Will they be only 
listening, or engaged? This impacts not only the message but also 
how you deliver that message and in what forum.
• “How critical is time?” Is immediate communication required? Is an 
immediate response equally as critical? 
• “What tone does the communication set?” Is it a formal or informal 
message? Personal? Coaching performance? Fast or slow? High or low 
interaction?
For years I was chair of a conference planning team that communicated 
through three media:
• Potluck dinners every quarter (we traveled some distance to be 
together)
• Individual side conversations (telephone and e-mail) 
• Team channel (we used Yahoo Groups) for free-ﬂ owing conversation, 
document sharing, and planning logistics
Each team member initiated communication in the forum (dinners, side 
conversations, or team channel) appropriate to the communication. The car-
ing and commitment of the team came through in all forums, yet each had 
its own “presence” and tone. My favorite was the potlucks; they included 
wine and laughter!
Being heard and seen virtually changes how we interact. Most home 
ofﬁ ce networks can handle the bandwidth that video streaming requires. 
Consider using it frequently since seeing one another adds “space and pres-
ence” virtually. It is not just “more.” Team members can scan their work 
space with their camera, giving others a “picture” of the environment they 
work in each day. Having facial expressions, a voice, and the visual to go with 
the sound warms up the conversation. Visual presence holds meaning long 
after the interaction is complete. 
You may want to experiment with various forums for variety and to 
notice the differences in team dynamics. The more choice a team has, the 
more competence in multiple tools, the more ﬂ exible and powerful the team 
can become. Eventually the team will settle into its ways.

158  
FROM ME TO WE
If your team is relatively new to virtual collaboration, you can use col-
laboration tools to check in on the team and gather individual input on how 
each is doing. For example, virtual polling is ideal to elicit divergent opin-
ions. You can also poll to get a quick pulse check of members’ energy at any 
given time. A simple poll function becomes a team support mechanism as 
well as a decision-making device.
As team members gain tool competence and trust in one another, even 
complex and conﬂ ict-ridden issues can be resolved virtually.
What About Informal Communication?
In colocated work environments, much “real work” gets done in casual 
places, like bathrooms and break rooms. The virtual watercooler doesn’t hap-
pen by itself the way it does when people work in the same building. Set up 
and use enterprise social networks (a private Facebook-like interface) to have 
conversations that used to happen casually when walking by and wander-
ing into conversations, and in “oh-by-the-way” catch-ups when passing one 
another in the halls. In other words, provide a virtual space for posting and 
participating informally in conversation and appropriate work gossip. Set up 
and add to company wikis where people can ask, “What does XYZ acronym 
stand for? Who can help me with ABC?”
Don’t stop there. Conduct fun polls for the team and organization. 
“What are you doing with your volunteer day off this year?” “Who’s your team 
in the NHL playoffs?” “Can you spot the spellling error in this sentence?” Jive, 
an intranet social network used by many enterprises, has a virtual praise fea-
ture where you can give someone a beer or ﬂ owers. Use the fun functions and 
emojis. 
Choosing Well
The group’s communication habits, norms, and culture (e.g., one of giv-
ing forth over holding back) inﬂ uence the communication tools you choose. 
Other than your organization’s enterprise requirements, there is no hard-
and-fast rule for tool selection. It helps to consider your team’s tool com-
petency and the culture you want to create when deciding. Think through 
how your options integrate to create a fully functioning virtual ofﬁ ce. If your 
enterprise has not made tool choices for you, progressing through the sets 
of questions and considerations as we are doing in this chapter will help 
you and your team choose well. Do you need a robust project management 
software like Microsoft Project, or will a team task management application 

COLLABORATIVE TOOLS THAT WORK  159
sufﬁ ce, such as Asana,8 a popular tool with small teams? Do you also need to 
manage customers? Consider Insightly9 because it includes a dandy task and 
project management tool.
You want the tools to talk to one another if they’re not already inte-
grated. For example, when a task management system assigns a document 
review to a team member, it should automatically include a link to the docu-
ment to be reviewed, which is connected to the team member’s calendar for 
task management reminders. The team member should not have to hunt 
down what he needs to complete the assigned task. Setting alerts keeps the 
right people informed about progress without the virtual leader needing to 
do the reminding. Use the tools to make your team’s work easier. 
Think of your virtual work tools as a conﬁ guration of activities and vir-
tual places around a web-centric hub that is your virtual ofﬁ ce. As  Figure 13.1 
shows, your collaboration tool conﬁ guration equips the team for project, 
workﬂ ow, calendar, document management, web conferencing and other 
message vehicles (like e-mail and IM), team learning, and shared task man-
agement. Your integrated tools also facilitate casual and ongoing conversa-
tion.
You have a fully functioning virtual ofﬁ ce that integrates in the back-
ground, allowing your team members to focus on work, not tools. Technol-
ogy is the enabler, and good enablers become nearly invisible.
Documents
Conferencing
Workflow
Projects
Messaging
Curation
Browser
Cloud
Collaboration
Platform
Calendar
Task Manager
Listserv
Figure 13.1. The virtual team ofﬁ ce.

160  
FROM ME TO WE
This sample virtual ofﬁ ce conﬁ guration represents typical relation-
ships among necessary technology functions needed to support virtual work 
teams. Functionality has moved into the Internet cloud and off team mem-
bers’ equipment. As organization tools move to the cloud, you will see more 
of this network of functions integrating. Of special note is the develop-
ing role of “curation.” Curation is much more than a simple collection of 
 datasets or a robust wiki. It involves additional analysis and evaluation that 
sort and synthesize on behalf of the team. It is becoming a central tool for 
distributed teams to curate and share the critical information, while archiv-
ing the rest.
You are structuring your team’s community commons, a virtual ofﬁ ce 
work space that organizes work-related conversations and activity. You want 
your team to be able to ﬁ nd what and whom they need. Does everyone in your 
team community know where to check current project status? Find policies 
and procedures? Do they know how to ﬁ nd a needed resource in real time? 
This is a time of fast improvements in virtual collaboration tools, so do 
your own research. If, however, you are not part of a corporation that has its 
own intranet and platform, some of the more popular options you may want 
to try include:
• Dropbox: Personal and shared team storage and collaboration, ﬁ le 
backup. 
• Slack or Trello: Two virtual team ofﬁ ce and communication hubs 
that integrate with complementary platforms. For example, Slack 
connects task management (Asana), ﬁ le sharing (Dropbox), audiovisual 
conferencing (Skype), e-mail, and other tools.
• Asana: A virtual team task management tool. 
• Insightly: An easy-to-use customer management system with task 
management.
• Various web-conferencing companies (Zoom, GreenLight Collabo-
ration, and GoToMeeting are three I use frequently).
• Pocket or Evernote: Research and intelligence sharing.
• Skype, FaceTime, telephone: One-on-one and small-group live con-
ver sation.
• E-mail: Communication that doesn’t happen elsewhere.
• FreeConferenceCall: Audio conference and bridge calls. It just launched 
videoconferencing in 2015.
• Yahoo Groups and LinkedIn: Learning communities and professional 
networking.
• Google+, Hangouts, Gmail: A fairly complete virtual ofﬁ ce and cloud 
hub.

COLLABORATIVE TOOLS THAT WORK  161
So Which Tools for What?
The rest of this chapter deﬁ nes various collaboration mechanisms and sug-
gested uses for each.
Dynamic Document Management
Most shared work involves collaborating dynamically. To stay effective, the team 
needs a robust ﬁ le-sharing and management system that does the following:
• Supports version control
• Supports many ﬁ le types (text documents, CAD drawings, etc.) 
• Handles large ﬁ les 
• Provides simple viewing and markup capabilities for multiple users 
• Has security to protect against unauthorized access or document 
changes 
• Is intuitive and requires little or no training 
• Performs archiving, backup, and recovery
E-mail
E-mail is great for quick, short messaging that keeps conversation and infor-
mation moving. It is good for individual quick conversations, howdies, 
straightforward and noncontroversial communication, and logistical coor-
dination if collaborative software isn’t available. E-mail is best suited for 
one-on-one communication, and occasional group messaging and copying 
others. E-mail and telephone communication are probably the two most 
common one-on-one communication tools. 
E-mail is not a good medium if the sender is expecting fast turnaround. 
E-mail obesity has become a real problem. I used to limit myself to 25 e-mails 
in my in-box, forcing me to act on them. At this moment I have over 900, 
17 unread. If my in-box were my task management system, I would drop 
balls all the time. E-mail remains, however, an indispensable tool, being the 
destination where most team members will want to have their alerts sent. 
E-mail and all communication tools have limits because they are one-
way with no immediate feedback. Without added clues like voice, eye con-
tact, and body language, a message can be “heard” much differently than 
intended. For example, one virtual manager found that communication chal-
lenges between two team members were magniﬁ ed when the workers began 
to rely on e-mails. That manager insisted that for the time being, the ﬁ rst 
communication attempt for this duo had to be by telephone. This was not 
“normal protocol” for the team, but situational leadership saw the negative 

162  
FROM ME TO WE
impact remote communication was having on this particular relationship. It 
eliminated the problem, and within two weeks the duo was able to return to 
team protocols, including e-mail. 
Broadcast E-mail and Team Channels
The Listserv was developed in 1986. A Listserv is a group forum for con-
versations, the technical backbone of online discussion communities. When 
e-mail is addressed to a Listserv, it is automatically broadcast to everyone on 
the list. This is a better vehicle for group communication than e-mail alone. 
Yahoo Groups was early to offer Listservs for self-formed groups. As I men-
tioned previously, I’ve led online planning teams using Yahoo Groups for 
years. Listservs are great for any ongoing communication that impacts more 
than two people, with all the advantages of e-mail and the added feature 
of threading to track conversations. Look for a group channel communica-
tion tool that can be sorted by sender, topic, date, and what’s new since the 
team member last participated. Most have taken on a Facebook-like inter-
face so the learning curve is nil. It’s more a matter of the team developing 
new habits.
The advantages are obvious. New or returning members can get up to 
speed by reviewing the discussion history, “lost” messages can be searched 
more easily than they can with e-mail, team channels keep in-boxes cleared 
without fear of losing important communications, and the platform does 
some organizing for the team. Each team member can choose messages to be 
delivered on a schedule, or held on the server until accessed, though the team 
may set protocols for everyone. 
Live Voice
The telephone and VOIP (voice over Internet protocol) are indispensable 
for virtual team conversations. The gain in immediate, live conversation is 
a much richer, more accurate communication than text-only forums, like 
e-mail and Listservs. With wireless mobility, it also increases the chance of 
reaching someone now, not later. Obviously, it is great for highly interac-
tive conversation. Many VOIP options also provide a recording function 
for reference later. Highly interactive teams use Skype, Google Hangouts, 
GoToMeeting, or the enterprise’s equivalent, sometimes for no reason except 
to check in.
Voice Mail
Occasionally people are still not available, and voice mail becomes the tool 
for relaying a complicated or sensitive message. Sometimes you don’t want 

COLLABORATIVE TOOLS THAT WORK  163
to disturb the receiver, such as late at night, but want to describe something 
that is easier than when writing. It is another one-way medium, however, so 
it isn’t ideal for resolving conﬂ ict.
Audio Conferencing and Bridge Calls
Conference calls are a great forum for meetings if a visual focus, like a shared 
document, isn’t required (in which case, use web conferencing). It’s also help-
ful when bandwidth is limited for some participants, eliminating the need for 
video broadcast. Conference calling is good for high interaction with small 
groups. Bridge calls are better for larger groups when a presenter or speaker 
is the primary focus, with question-and-answer periods built in at speciﬁ c 
intervals using chat or opening phone lines. 
Chat Rooms
People seem to love or hate chat rooms. Some insist that the artiﬁ cial envi-
ronment interferes with full conversation, while others love it as a medium 
for work, online community, and other quick uses. Some teams like having 
chat open at all times for easy reach-out, while others see the chat room as 
an open door to disruptions. Keep chats to a relatively small group, and 
remember that unless in a private chat, any team member can lurk (watch 
without participating). Instant messaging is a better choice for dyadic, pri-
vate conversation. 
Instant Messaging
Instant messaging (IM) is just like a chat room except it is between two peo-
ple and private. Through IM, a team member can seek another team member 
to see if he is online at the time. Status can show a person is available, in a 
meeting, away from his or her desk, or set to “do not disturb.” Through IM 
you can also quickly share a document on your screen, or make a video call. 
The IM chat box pops on the screen, and you’re live. 
Home Pages and Team Dashboard
Team home pages and dashboards serve as places to post progress and updates, 
as well as create a bridge to the larger networked organization. In addition to 
progress updates, post upcoming events, hot links, strategic company wins, 
and whatever seems relevant. 
When a team member wants to get a quick overview of where the team 
or project is, this will be the ﬁ rst stop. When a new team member joins the 
group, this is a vital forum for orientation. 

164  
FROM ME TO WE
Task Management System
A good task management system keeps everyone clear. Less slips through 
the cracks. A vital collaboration solution, it connects the worker to the task 
assigned. For example, a project task could be the following: “Review design 
document and user requirements.” When the responsible team member sees 
this in her task list, she has linked access to the work ﬂ ow and document asso-
ciated with it. Notiﬁ cation settings are set so the team can control reminder 
frequency. As manager, you can check on an individual’s progress and better 
prepare for your next one-on-one coaching session. 
Project Management Software
Planning, coordination, and tracking are standard tasks handled by all task 
and project management tools. Collaborative project management software 
can be lightweight and super easy to use, or robust like Microsoft Project, the 
lodestone of project management software. Project management software is 
more robust than task management systems because it is dynamic, linking 
sets of behaviors and adjusting schedules automatically. As things in a project 
change, participants’ tasks and deliverables will also change, pushing noti-
ﬁ cation to all participants about these “big picture” changes and the team’s 
sense of ongoing progress.
These tools also help team members know where they ﬁ t in the big pic-
ture. Individual team members don’t know how their work “belongs” to the 
bigger picture, possibly interfering with their sense of meaning and purpose. 
As we know about today’s workforce, most are motivated by having a sense 
of work purpose. Choose a project or task management solution that is trans-
parent so that it helps everyone see impact. 
Video Web Conferencing and Web Casting 
Video is no longer a high-end solution. It does not mean, however, that every 
team meeting should use video. If video can add something to the meeting 
or conference, then use it. Most web-conferencing software is designed for 
training and group meetings, and includes decision-making support systems 
using group techniques, like polling, surveys, shared screens, and video-
recording capabilities. A chat room runs in the corner. For working meetings, 
the facilitator can turn over the “reins” and let others “drive” the meeting and 
share screens with others.
With web casting, some limited interactivity is usually possible, such as 
polling and chat. It is a perfect forum for large “keynote” meetings, like CEO 
state-of-the-enterprise talks, guest presenters who will have wide appeal, or 
anytime a team needs to send a consistent message to a large audience. 

COLLABORATIVE TOOLS THAT WORK  165
For many virtual workers, data are still being moved through home 
networks, however. With streaming technologies, video streaming can slow 
down the transmission. With asynchronous playback, that may not be an 
issue; the document, animation, or presenter’s image can be buffered and 
stored in temporary memory. If the conference is live, however, bandwidth 
still matters. I live in the mountains, where I get “up-to” speeds but no guar-
antees. I participate in video conferences often, but on days when my upload 
speed is slow, I turn off my video upload feed, saving bandwidth. And I don’t 
have to ﬁ x my hair!
Many still ﬁ nd web conferencing cumbersome in a team meeting format 
because there are built-in limits to simultaneous input. Sometimes organized 
“chaos” is necessary to get juices going for synergy. When people talk over each 
other in meetings, that can be a good thing; in a web conference, it’s just noise. 
People rely on visual cues to know when to “jump into” a conversation. 
Like me, some people prefer to be visually unavailable or are calling in by 
phone, so it’s easy to accidentally jump in and “step on toes.” Until a team 
gets its own cadence, patience and a good facilitator help.
Facilitation of a web conference is similar to face-to-face or audio confer-
ence facilitation, but there are virtual facilitation competencies worth noting. 
In-person facilitators often rely heavily on their observations of the group 
and their own personal presence. These elements—especially if video is una-
vailable—are missing in a web environment. Feedback features like hand 
raising are intended to provide the facilitator feedback, but they are limited. 
The facilitator gains tool comfort with practice. For newcomers to web 
conferencing, pick a low-stress meeting topic to start so that you can focus 
on increasing tool and virtual facilitation competence, not the content of the 
meeting per se. 
People participate slightly differently when in an online conference. Peo-
ple tend to be more aware of what they say or hesitate to speak up for fear of 
interrupting. This can stiﬂ e spontaneity, so remind people that some awk-
wardness is okay, especially with a new team. It is important, just like any 
team meeting, to facilitate a good summary of each session. What were the 
key learnings? What decisions were made? What are the next steps? 
Synchronous Web Conferencing
Synchronous, or live, web conferencing captures energy and enthusiasm that 
feeds on itself. Everyone is present, and this supports fast movement. An 
advantage of synchronous web conferencing is that meetings are generally 
shorter, forcing the team to focus. Sideline conversations (e.g., sidebar chats) 
can occur without disrupting the meeting ﬂ ow. Decisions are recorded and 

166  
FROM ME TO WE
captured, making next steps easier. Shared screens keep the team focused; 
everyone is walking away with the same visuals. 
One disadvantage of synchronous web conferencing is that extroverts 
may overrun the meeting. It’s also easier for quiet members to remain quiet. 
Facilitators need to be aware of this and pull out all relevant voices.
Asynchronous Web Conferencing
Asynchronous web conferences occur over a designated period of time where 
people participate on their own schedule. They are underutilized as a team 
learning forum. An asynchronous conference can have one subject or entire 
“learning tracks” with different events scheduled at different times, similar 
to attending an in-person conference. Synchronous web presentations can be 
recorded for later, asynchronous listening. Team members can participate in 
the whole conference or only those sections relevant to their responsibilities 
or interest. Time becomes a range rather than an event. 
People have a chance to prepare a response, and then post during the 
asynchronous session, moving the conference objective forward over time 
along with everyone else. Side conversations cannot interrupt the meeting. 
People can participate when convenient. Teammates can leave and re-enter, 
quickly catching up. 
If facilitated and focused well, web conferencing, synchronous or not, 
can serve to unite a team around speciﬁ c work, just as effectively as a team 
celebration. 
Mix It Up Until Synergy Strikes
Team communication needs to be robust and full, which is hard to accom-
plish using just e-mail, the most common communication tool despite the 
better options that are available. Try different solutions and combinations. 
You may not always be happy with the results, especially in the beginning. 
Through trial and error you may ﬁ nd the task management system is redun-
dant to the project management platform and can be eliminated. When 
technology creates unnecessary complexity, it doesn’t mean the virtual tool 
has failed. It could be just a bad meeting, lack of familiarity, the facilitation, 
or the tool itself. Examine all possibilities before changing course. 
As you browse your options, know what you want your team to be able 
to do together and learn together. Use both virtual and face-to-face com-
munication to facilitate conversation and connection, especially relying on 
virtual communication when you want to harness the group’s collective intel-
ligence.10 With your team’s input, choose purpose-deﬁ ned, integrated tools 

COLLABORATIVE TOOLS THAT WORK  167
that allow for easy collaboration, provide true anytime/anywhere mobility, 
and enable the team to access information and each other. 
Now that you’re familiar with the tool options, you’re ready to facilitate 
your team’s communication habits.
Notes
1. Forbes Corporate Communications, “Increasing Complexity Is Driving 
Value of Collaboration and the Right Collaboration Tools, Says New Report by 
Forbes Insights and join.me,” Forbes, December 16, 2014, www.forbes.com/sites/
forbespr/2014/12/16/increasing-complexity-is-driving-value-of-collaboration-and-
the-right-collaboration-tools-says-new-report-by-forbes-insights-and-join-me/
2. Josh Bersin, “Predictions for 2016: A Bold New World of Talent, Learning, 
Leadership, and HR Technology Ahead,” Bersin by Deloitte, 2016, http://joshbersin
.com/2016/01/the-bold-new-world-of-talent-predictions-for-2016/
3. David Coleman, “Top 10 Collaboration Trends for 2015,” CMS Wire, Feb-
ruary 20, 2015, www.cmswire.com/cms/social-business/10-collaboration-trends-
for-2015-028173.php
4. Joel Oleson, “7 Years of SharePoint—A History Lesson,” Joel Oleson’s 
Blog—SharePoint Land (Microsoft Corporation), MSDN Blogs, December 28, 
2007, http://www.collabshow.com
5. Mark R. Gilbert, Karen M. Shegda, Gene Phifer, and Jeffrey Mann, “Share-
Point 2010 Is Poised for Broader Enterprise Adoption,” Gartner, October 19, 2009, 
www.gartner.com/doc/1209350/sharepoint--poised-broader-enterprise; “What Is 
SharePoint?” Microsoft Ofﬁ  ce 2010 Answers, Microsoft, http://ww25.microsoft-
ofﬁ  ce-2010.com/answer/q/What-is-sharepoint
6. Home page, Redbooth, August 22, 2015, https://redbooth.com
7. Luckily good online and classroom training is available, synchronously and 
just-in-time. The site www.Lynda.com is another popular resource. A new online 
university for today’s workplace is www.virtualworkplaceuniversity.com (In full dis-
closure, I’m a founder and course developer/facilitator.)
8. Home page, Asana, https://asana.com
9. Home page, Insightly, www.insightly.com
10. David Engel, Anita W. Woolley, Lisa X. Jing, Christopher F. Chabris, 
and Thomas W. Malone, “Reading the Mind in the Eyes or Reading Between 
the Lines? Theory of Mind Predicts Collective Intelligence Equally Well Online 
and Face-to-Face,” PLoS ONE 9, no. 12 (2014): e115212. doi:10.1371/journal
.pone.0115212; Chloe Medosch, “I Know What You Think: Collective Intel-
ligence in Online Communication,” PLoS Blogs, June 22, 2015, http://blogs
.plos.org/everyone/2015/06/22/i-k now-what-you-think-collective-intelligence-in-
online-communication/

168
14
P R A C T I C A L  G U I D E L I N E S 
F O R  V I RT UA L 
C O M M U N I C AT I O N
“Precision of communication is important, more important than ever, in our era of hair-trigger 
balances, when a false or misunderstood word may create as much disaster as a sudden 
thoughtless act.”
—James Thurber
“You can have brilliant ideas, but if you can’t get them across, your ideas won’t get you anywhere.”
—Lee Iacocca
“Keep things informal. Talking is the natural way to do business. Writing is great for keeping 
records and putting down details, but talk generates ideas. Great things come from our luncheon 
meetings, which consist of a sandwich, a cup of soup, and a good idea or two. No martinis.”
—T. Boone Pickens
N
ow that you have a sense of the tools and technology your team 
has available, this chapter provides considerations to structure your 
team’s communication processes. Team communication focuses on 
work (task) and interpersonal relationships (social). Both deserve attention 
if your team is to become high performance faster. Teams that communicate 
mostly about task can reach the third stage of team development and normal-
ize quickly, but seldom reach high performance. There’s so much competing 
for attention that it’s easy for the team to stay task focused, reactive, and 
impersonal.
Don’t let them. Formal communication protocols provide valuable struc-
ture for new teams to learn to trust one another. Haphazard communication 
is the enemy of team effectiveness, so begin with more structure than might 
be needed when a team is colocated. 

PRACTICAL GUIDELINES FOR VIRTUAL COMMUNICATION  169
This chapter integrates the principles of communication for the larger 
organization as well. You’ll collect a series of communication guidelines and 
principles to weave into your team. We’ll look at how to do the following:
• Use (and improve) systems and processes already available. 
• Leverage tools for cohesive, robust team communication, structured 
and informal.
• Structure communication to support trustworthy behavior while 
managing performance.
Can Communication Serve?
All communication impacts the team’s relationships, and every communica-
tion has a purpose. 
Web conferencing isn’t just for meetings or sales presentations. Actu-
ally, it never was; the collaborative capabilities of virtual conferencing have been 
signiﬁ cantly underutilized. Does your team need to make presentations? Use 
web conferencing to form a mini Toastmasters group, for example. You want 
your team to get in the habit of being in touch, to develop rhythms and ﬂ ows 
of information sharing and check-ins, and to think about how to use tools to 
collaborate and communicate.
The previous chapter focused on the technology, while this chapter 
focuses on the structure of team communication itself—the purpose, tone, 
and message—all the choices that elevate the quality of communication hap-
pening on multiple levels. 
Communication is both structured and spontaneous, of course. In devel-
oping the team while on the First Path to high performance, focus on struc-
tured communication that ensures the work of the team gets done. While 
communication is usually task focused on the surface, all communication is 
about relationship—the team’s process of being open, transparent, reliable, 
and clear about its commitments. The tone of all communication channels, 
conversations, and meetings underpins the emotional ground of team com-
munication. Develop team communication habits that support healthy and 
productive relationships among team members. 
In general, teams communicate for one of at least ﬁ ve reasons (the ﬁ ve 
Cs), all necessary for the team to be fully engaged. The ﬁ ve Cs of team com-
munication inform how your team develops its communication infrastruc-
ture. Everyone communicates across the ﬁ ve Cs for full effectiveness. Use the 
ﬁ ve Cs or a similar structure with your team to decide why and how you will 
communicate. You should expect your team to have a general sense of where 
everyone else is in their work at any time. The more virtual employees com-
municate virtually, the more assurance that work stays coordinated. 

170  
FROM ME TO WE
The Five Cs of Purposeful Team Communication
Table 14.1 shows the ﬁ ve Cs, one way to thoughtfully organize and plan 
team communication based on knowing the reason for the message. This 
kind of purposeful communication builds and strengthens the team’s rela-
tionships. 
A busy virtual leader may want to create a personal plan for purpose-
ful communication. I set personal task reminders for myself to follow up 
with key people so that if I get too busy and forget to reach out, a task ping 
reminds me. Adapt the ﬁ ve Cs to reﬂ ect your leadership style. For each team 
member ask yourself the following:
• Have I checked the team member’s understanding of task, authority, 
responsibility? 
• Is the team member connected to me, the team, the organization? 
How do I know?
• When talking, are we communicating candidly and authentically? 
• Are we moving the team’s work forward (not being perfunctory or on 
autopilot, shutting down innovation and creative potential)? 
TABLE 14.1
The Five Cs of Team Communication: What Communication Should 
Accomplish
Purpose of 
communication
 Communication actions 
Clarity: Gain or 
conﬁ rm under-
standing
Facilitate on-the-ﬂ y conversations virtually if people don’t 
know one another in order to gain understanding of each 
other.
Conﬁ rm working agreements and reafﬁ rm with the team.
Clarify understanding and verify decisions and task 
agreements—big and small.
Connection to 
purpose: Link to 
the work, each 
other, and the 
stakeholders
Have regular connecting conversations that focus on the 
why as a way to keep teams focused.
Keep in mind that connections let isolated virtual workers 
know their place in the bigger mission.
Create emotional proximity and give virtual team 
members a sense of belonging.
Ensure a shared team understanding of why the interde-
pendent work of the team matters.
Note that reliable technology is critical to feel connected.
(Continues)

PRACTICAL GUIDELINES FOR VIRTUAL COMMUNICATION  171
Purpose of 
communication
 Communication actions 
Candor: Willing-
ness to be honest 
and bring all rele-
vant information
Willingness to trust takes time, but less time when the 
virtual leader creates a safe work environment. Safety be-
gins when the leader is candid and responds openly when 
others are candid. 
Systems and structures for sharing knowledge are usually 
built into global enterprises, but their use depends on 
team members’ willingness to share. Build it into your 
team’s communication rhythms. 
Lack of proximity—emotional or physical—creates a safe-
ty that enables people to tell their truth. Use this tendency 
to your advantage.
Lack of social cues makes for easily misunderstood com-
munication, so virtual members must take care in messag-
ing and be willing to speak up when confused or upset.
Cocreation: 
Collectively create 
and innovate 
together
Virtuality limits the easy build of team synergy, so match, 
accommodate, and structure time for thinking together. 
If not intentionally facilitated, cocreation and innovation 
don’t happen often. 
Feeling heard and valued is less clear virtually, so be sure 
contributions are acknowledged to keep contributors 
actively engaged. 
Seek “net neutrality” in how we value everyone as contrib-
utors, assessing the ideas, not from whom or where the 
ideas originate. 
Be inclusive. Ask for input from everyone. Some partici-
pants will be reluctant to jump into the conversation (es-
pecially in a large virtual group) and may need prompting.
Commitment 
check: Verify to 
help everyone stay 
on point
Follow up on commitments. Doing what we say is a com-
munication in itself.
Local demands may take short-term precedence—the cry 
of the urgent—so keep distant team members informed of 
any priorities that will impact them. 
Focus on the whole person. People are more than their job 
descriptions. 
Care enough to exert effort to understand what’s being 
said, inquire deeply, and advocate assertively for your own 
point of view. The goal is a better outcome, so commit to 
striving for it.
Show interpersonal support. Teams don’t stay strong with-
out feeling support.
Note. Adapted from The Handbook of High-Performance Virtual Teams (San Francisco: Wiley, 2008).
TABLE 14.1 (Continued )

172  
FROM ME TO WE
• Have I conﬁ rmed the team member’s commitment to the team and 
the mission?
• You also want your communication to show you care. When 
communicating, consider asking about their lives outside work. “Did 
I ask how little Maria’s T-ball game went last weekend?”
Team Communication
One outcome of your team’s development is an agreed-upon formal commu-
nication infrastructure. It informs everyone about how the team works. You 
can count on team members having different preferences. Navigate differences 
with the team’s needs in mind ﬁ rst, not individual’s. If it’s going to work for 
everyone on the team, everyone needs to speak up and make sure they can 
commit to the team’s decisions.
The millennial generation, for example, embraces text messaging, social 
media, and being hyperconnected, while boomers tend to prefer more per-
sonal connection like phone calls and coffee dates. Boomers may resist what 
millennials simply expect. People rely on familiar communication habits, 
and I still ﬁ nd most virtual leaders hold themselves and their teams back 
unintentionally by defaulting to personal preferences, not team needs.
A few years ago I was part of a corporate conference team led by a millen-
nial. She asked everyone to communicate logistics by text during the confer-
ence. I was a boomer team member who had a “Eureka!” moment. I realized 
how limited my thinking had been. I’d never before thought to use text at 
work, a ridiculously late awareness for me. This was 12 years after I wrote the 
ﬁ rst edition of this book!
Communicate with people the way they like as much as possible, but 
facilitate differences until you get the team to agree. Team members who 
have strong preferences but don’t speak up lose their right to complain. Vir-
tual team members may occasionally feel out of the loop, but leaders should 
remind the team to reach out whenever these feelings begin.
The team gets to practice swift trust and openness, and the leader gets to 
practice candor and create a safe environment and a container for trust. As 
the team learns about each other, adapt the team’s communication pathways 
to ensure that team trust doesn’t break down due to unintentional misunder-
standing. 
Four Team Communication Criteria
Basically you are getting your team to agree on a strategy to manage and 
coordinate your work. A warning: This can become too cumbersome to be 

PRACTICAL GUIDELINES FOR VIRTUAL COMMUNICATION  173
useful, so simplify as much as possible how the team shares critical infor-
mation. The goal of structured communication is communicating the right 
information to the right people about what’s needed at a time and in a way 
that people can take it in. Begin with four simple guidelines. The team’s for-
mal communication should be: 
1. Standardized
2. Organized
3. Timely
4. Easy
In any organization larger than one, we need to communicate. There are 
myriad choices about how to do it. Structured communication isn’t every-
day, people-to-people discourse that happens spontaneously. It is structuring 
communication to make sure it happens. This may be a revelation of the obvi-
ous, but the number one stated reason for big and small organization issues is 
poor, inconsistent, or haphazard communication. The effective virtual leader 
will not leave communication to chance, especially task-related communica-
tion. 
I teach University of Denver graduate students who are full-time pro-
fessionals. Across several courses and topics, when students conduct root 
cause analysis of organization challenges, the leading organization failure (and 
ultimate solution) involves communication. Communication is vulnerable to 
breakdown at the organization and relationship level, impacting trust and 
commitment. The better the communication, the higher the commitment 
and trust on a team. 
We all listen but not well—we ﬁ lter what we hear and process the infor-
mation based on our experience, education, and background. Even the best 
communicators aren’t always clear, and messages aren’t always complete. The 
best listeners don’t listen without bias, or always understand what they’re 
hearing. To complicate things, people’s preconceived notions about what is 
“good communication” vary greatly. Add to this dangerous brew the reality 
that most people draw judgments about others based on often unexamined 
assumptions. 
For example, when I moved to Colorado I was highly offended when 
business colleagues would take days to return calls. In the Midwest, one day 
was an unspoken but clearly shared protocol in my business circles; not so 
in Denver. First, I had to realize that I made an assumption about business 
etiquette being the same everywhere. Second, I acknowledged that I was cor-
relating my ability to trust “these Denverites” with timely callbacks, even 
though I had not shared my expectations clearly. I needed to take responsibil-
ity to be clear in my message if I needed a faster call return. 

174  
FROM ME TO WE
That simple change worked. In virtual teams especially, it is easy (and 
smart) to set agreed-upon and articulated protocols and team agreements, 
preferably developed collaboratively during the team development process, 
adjusting as needed. Prevent unnecessary confusion and conﬂ ict, and quickly 
establish the virtual ground under the team that builds a sense of safety and 
conﬁ dence; it makes everything easier.
The Four Ps of Structuring Communication Flow
The four Ps are a simple way to map communication ﬂ ow. They are an easy 
way to think through how best for the team to communicate habitually (also 
with the organization). The four Ps also help prevent overcommunication 
and ﬂ ooding people with so much information that all meaning gets lost in 
the volume.
The four Ps of communication ﬂ ow (summarized in Table 14.2) are as 
follows:
1. Pushed communication is important enough to intrude into people’s days 
to get through. Individuals or groups can push information out to peo-
ple. For example, CEO web casts, project change orders, and company 
newsletters are examples of communications that can be pushed through 
e-mail and other one-way communication methods. The team dash-
board is a push destination, for example. As a communicator, is your mes-
sage important, timely, and necessary enough for you to push it out?
2. Pulled information is available to ﬁ nd when needed. When someone 
pulls information, that person is going to a resource, such as a database, 
and pulling the data out of a database, an analysis, a person, or another 
resource. Asking to pick a mentor’s brain about a report due by end of 
week is an example of pulling information. Doing a web search pulls 
information immediately. Putting out a request for assistance through 
your professional network pulls information. 
3. Posted information is just what it sounds like; information that is posted 
for viewing as needed. The age-old cork bulletin board is a post meth-
odology, as is the more current electronic bulletin board. The shared 
network, or intranet, is the destination where the team most commonly 
posts. 
4. Positioned communication informs people about what is coming so they 
can be prepared. The virtual leader is a change manager, and change doesn’t 
happen without early and ongoing communication. Change-related com-
munication is more a campaign, multiple waves of information sharing, 

PRACTICAL GUIDELINES FOR VIRTUAL COMMUNICATION  175
TABLE 14.2
Four Ps of Structured Communication Flow
Communication action 
Purpose of information
Timing
Push
Inform
Now
Pull
Ask for input
Immediate or by 
requested deadline
Post
Make readily available
24/7
Position
Prepare for what’s coming and 
provide relevant information
Before the “event” 
and over time
Teach your team about the four Ps before developing your communica-
tion infrastructure so together you can ask, “Should we push, pull, post, or 
position this communication?” Communication ﬂ ow is a shared responsibility 
of everyone, so build it together. Use the four Ps to ease the communication 
labyrinth and keep everyone informed without being overloaded.
Organization Impact
Get everyone collaborating by building the team’s bigger social network. 
 Consider who and what parts of the organization will impact and are 
impacted by the team. You want to clearly articulate key interdependencies, 
as well as identify where the team may want to build social capital. Encour-
age your team to develop key relationships and seek opportunities to expand 
emotional bandwidth in the organization. 
Style Differences
Extroverts want to think ideas through with someone before writing a straw-
man proposal. Structured types like to document processes. Millennials are 
more comfortable digitally, rarely using voice mail.1 Our personality types 
and generational preferences affect our communication choices. Some appre-
ciate a warm greeting and some small talk before getting to the task request. 
Others want to cut to the chase. I ﬁ nd in my own communication I convey 
more warmth by voice than I do written words, so I am aware of that ten-
dency and adjust my messages. Find this team’s way.
rather than a communication event. Position communication messages 
early enough to set the stage for what’s next. More communication will 
follow when it’s time. Table 14.2 summarizes it brieﬂ y.

176  
FROM ME TO WE
Cultural Considerations
Especially if you manage a global team, you also must navigate cultural 
 considerations. One young U.S.-based millennial virtual manager had a data-
base analyst on her team from India. He was culturally respectful of hierarchy 
despite the manager’s collaborative style. He was not comfortable asking ques-
tions on a conference call. He would IM his question to his manager, and then 
she would ask the larger group. Rather than expecting him to deny a lifetime 
of culture, this millennial manager wisely factored the cultural norms into her 
team’s communication protocols and adjusted her personal management prac-
tices with this team member. (Many experts have written about the impact of 
diversity on the team, so while I’ve considered diversity in writing this book, 
I’ve not focused on it. Others have written brilliantly about managing diver-
sity, so I focus on my expertise—managing relationships across the miles.)
Supply Chain Considerations
If your team is part of a nonlinear, complex supply chain (or supply web), the 
team is a node of great importance. Node teams have a responsibility to con-
sider communication throughout the network in addition to internal team 
communication. It’s too critical to be left to chance. Determine, given the 
additional communication responsibilities, what additional protocols might 
be needed: 
• Who can or should participate in what kinds of conversations? 
• What roles do other parts of the organization need to play? 
• How must others interact with the team? 
• How will disputes and competing priorities get resolved? 
The complexity and lack of linearity in a global supply web create signals 
and communication ﬂ ows among network nodes. The ﬂ ow of information 
is as important as the physical ﬂ ow of materials. Establish a communication 
infrastructure that facilitates information ﬂ ow to all involved individuals. 
The virtual leader has to know how to lead and coordinate a vast and decen-
tralized communication web, or risk being caught in it. 
Communication Standards, Limits, and Easy Flow
Teamwork is inherently cooperative, so mapping communication ﬂ ows ena-
bles cooperation among multiple individuals and groups, but it’s still peo-
ple talking to people that brings teams to life. As you negotiate and decide 

PRACTICAL GUIDELINES FOR VIRTUAL COMMUNICATION  177
your team’s communication, function from the premise that the structure 
 facilitates work getting done while still relying on conversations. 
Your organization may have set communication protocols. Structurally, 
the collaboration platform contains much of what the team needs—ﬁ le- 
sharing notiﬁ cations, messaging and team communication channels, and 
project and task management deadlines, for example. You have all the tools 
to structure what works best, simply, easily, and well for your team.
It’s time for the team to make some team structure decisions, completing 
the First Path of team development and setting yourselves up for success. Set 
the following according to the team’s standards of participation and team play: 
• Availability to one another (hours of availability, time zone, emer-
gency availability)
• Shared ﬁ le protocols
• Required meetings, attendance options (virtual, in person), group 
scheduling, and notiﬁ cations
• Standard team response times (e.g., e-mail and voice mail responded 
to within 24 hours)
Next, clarify the team’s boundaries, key relationships, and how far the 
team’s communication needs to reach and to whom. Ask the following:
• Who needs to communicate to whom about what, and through what 
medium?
• How often does this communication occur, and who else needs to be 
informed or involved?
• What issues command full team attention, and what forums do we 
use to come together?
• How will knowledge and scope changes be managed and shared?
 
¡ How much information is enough? Too much?
 
¡ What’s the preferred format? Pushed? Pulled? Posted?
 
¡ What upcoming information needs positioning?
• Who is the ﬁ rst point of contact for what kinds of issues or questions?
• What does help look like for this team? What is appropriate to ask for, 
offer, and leave alone? By whom?
Team Communication Infrastructure
Use or adapt this structured set of questions suggested in the team communi-
cation infrastructure shown in Table 14.3 to facilitate these communication 
decisions and help capture your team’s agreements.

TABLE 14.3
Team Communication Infrastructure
Who
Needs to talk to/
respond to whom
About what
For what 
purpose
How 
(through 
what 
medium)
Push, pull, 
post, or 
position
In what 
time frame 
How often
Who else 
needs to be 
informed
Manager
Team
Individuals
Strategic partners
Customers/users
Support functions
Other supply chain 
partners 
Other stakeholders

PRACTICAL GUIDELINES FOR VIRTUAL COMMUNICATION  179
Make sure the team commits to honor agreements and give feedback to 
you about what’s working, what’s not, and what needs adjustment. Especially 
in the early weeks, modify agreements and protocols as needed based on 
emerging team hits and misses.
Additional Considerations
• If any team member has technical limitations, remove the limits 
or build the communication infrastructure to the lowest common 
denominator.
• Some personal preferences can be accommodated. If so, document 
team members’ primary and secondary ways to connect spon-
taneously. For example, I prefer digital communication, but I am also 
available by phone.
• Respect others’ work-life balance regarding time zones, work hours, 
and off-hour availability.
Simple Matters That Matter
I conducted a simple survey of virtual team members, asking for one sugges-
tion that makes team communication better (and that most people wouldn’t 
think of). The advice was powerful in its simplicity: 
• Think about who should have information pushed to them—for 
example, does the team push out to impacted people in copies of 
e-mails (cc) or can it be posted for anytime retrieval? It’s tempting to 
overcommunicate, but balance informing with overloading. 
• Easy descriptors help e-mails stand out. Change subject lines or start 
new channels if a topic expands. For example, lead with “Action 
Required” (e.g., the CFO needs a signature on a supplier letter). 
• Decide how often the team needs to check in (e.g., check e-mail four 
times daily during core work hours, one time daily during weekends) 
and acceptable response times (e.g., respond to all nonurgent e-mail 
within 48 hours).
• People deﬁ ne urgency differently, usually based on their own needs. 
Decide what is urgent for the team. How will the team prioritize 
messages marked as high importance?
• Decide appropriate and inappropriate uses for nontask communi-
cation (e.g., Internet jokes and other humor is/is not acceptable).

180  
FROM ME TO WE
A Word About Words
The language we use when writing is inﬁ nitely more important than the 
language we use when we are speaking. With voice and visual, people have 
multiple cues to interpret meaning. Digital words are ﬂ at. They do relay 
emotion and attitudes, though often inaccurately or in a way that is distorted 
through the lens of the reader. For example, these six words convey six differ-
ent meanings, depending on which word is emphasized: 
I didn’t say she loved me.
I DIDN’T say she loved me.
I didn’t SAY she loved me.
I didn’t say SHE loved me.
I didn’t say she LOVED me.
I didn’t say she loved ME.
Read this aloud—you will clearly hear the differences in meaning.
Our tone obviously impacts how our words are heard, similarly to the 
way meaning changes in the example based on emphasis. Be aware of your 
mood when you make requests, declarations, observations, or assessments. 
Give the communication your full attention out of respect for your audience. 
Let’s say you want everyone to update their tasks in the project manage-
ment tool before the stand-up meeting. You send out a reminder message. 
Did you proof your message? 
I often write quickly, thinking I’m being efﬁ cient and keeping everyone 
informed. I’ve learned to read before sending, as my writing style can sound 
authoritative and even demanding. A simple copyedit greatly enhances my clar-
ity and intended tone, which I want to be collaborative though fast-moving. 
Unintentional distancing in written communication is common, unfor-
tunately. Without meaning to, managers limit open sharing and response 
with their tone. A task-driven, efﬁ cient manager is invaluable for team per-
formance. At the same time, efﬁ cient communication can close down con-
versation. Many resent taking orders, especially if the manager says, “We 
respect all employees,” or “We value your feedback and opinion,” but doesn’t 
slow down long enough to listen or ask how someone is.
Enlivening the Team’s Written Conversations
Here are a few suggestions to enliven your team’s written communication:
• Lighten up on the formality. Use emoticons and font changes to com-
municate tone of message. Emojis are increasingly popular not just 

PRACTICAL GUIDELINES FOR VIRTUAL COMMUNICATION  181
because they are fun; they contextualize meaning by implying mood 
and emotion. Use humorous expressions that everyone can under-
stand, and that are culturally and media sensitive. Work doesn’t have 
to be serious all the time.
• Show excitement with punctuation and font emphasis, too! 
• Personalize your e-signature with a quote or inspirational message. 
Add a tagline that reﬂ ects the team’s “brand.”
• Unless the communication is a written report, it’s meaning that 
matters, not grammar. Online communication is less formal, so 
forgive little things as long as the message comes through. 
• Become skillful at understanding the meaning of an entire idea from 
a few words. When in doubt, ask. In other words, clarify meaning as 
a habit.
• Verify understanding and agreements as a precaution.
• Use simple words and metaphors. People think and integrate with 
pictures, so use them freely. Build an infographic to communicate 
concepts and present positions. 
• Obtain local translator assistance if crossing cultural language 
boundaries.
Despite your best efforts, miscommunication happens, no matter how 
hard you or your team tries. Be patient and “check in” more frequently and 
actively about the quality of communication until the team feels conﬁ dent 
in the team’s ability to track group dynamics. Do this formally at the end of 
every meeting or milestone, as well as informally as a managerial practice. 
Adjust and adapt, all while remaining fully committed to the team ﬁ nding 
rhythms and ﬂ ows that work.
Rolling Present
Unless clear protocols are set for checking in, there may be disparity among 
team members about what is considered “current.” What is current is usu-
ally driven by how much time has passed since a team member last logged 
in. One team member may be logged in up to 14 hours a day, checking his 
team dashboard and e-mail numerous times. For him, the current is liter-
ally backlogged only by hours. Another team member may be committed 
to multiple teams and this team’s project isn’t her only priority. She may 
check in only once weekly. For her, what is current covers a week. You may 
need to set and adjust protocols to slow down or speed up the team’s rolling 
present.

182  
FROM ME TO WE
Shared Work Space Management
Without clear protocols for how to organize the team’s virtual work space, 
channels of communication and tools, and shared drives, things can get con-
fusing, especially when team members are sharing documents and using dif-
ferent naming and ﬁ le folder protocols. Agree to some basics. Information 
can be organized many ways, as needed by the team, customer, or organiza-
tion. Minimally, items should be searchable by time, subject and tags, ver-
sion, and person responsible. 
Documentation and Storage Guidelines
A few team-deﬁ ned protocols will eliminate much confusion. Here’s what 
my interviewed virtual workers deﬁ ned as most important:
• Create and work from predeﬁ ned templates for plans, reports,  status 
updates, project requirements, change orders, and cost estimates. 
As everyone gets used to the templates, they are easier to work with, 
read, scan, and complete quickly.
• Store all team documents on the shared drive. Team documents 
saved to local computer drives won’t work for collaborative teamwork 
and increase the risk of multiple versions being active, risking much 
confusion.
• Put page numbers, version numbers, and dates on all documents if 
your document storage application isn’t doing it for you automatically.
• Decide archiving and ﬁ le storage protocols (that aren’t decided for you 
by the technology). What’s current and what’s archived, for example?
• Adhere to security protocols.
A healthy caution is necessary here. Databases and shared folders can be 
cumbersome if not managed. Information obesity is a real danger for virtual 
teams because people tend to overreport and oversave ﬁ les as a strategy to 
feel connected and noticed, or to CYA, or “cover your [behind].” This is 
especially true if trust is mediocre or there isn’t much interaction among 
team members. Overreporting can be a way to make sure that everyone 
“knows how hard I’m working.” Watch for spikes, seek more information, 
and archive ﬁ les that are no longer useful and needed.
Information obesity can also occur if the document storage protocols 
have no mechanism for sorting and weeding information that has served 
its purpose. Just because we can store lots of information doesn’t mean we 

PRACTICAL GUIDELINES FOR VIRTUAL COMMUNICATION  183
should. Individual members may have different preferences, and some per-
sonality types will want to store more information than others. One team 
member may want to be a pack rat and save every version of every document 
(and he can, but not on the team’s space). Another fast-moving teammate 
may be a minimalist record keeper, driving the pack rat to distraction if their 
work is interdependent. 
Team protocols set the standard, and team members adapt to meet the 
team’s norms. The fast-moving teammate will need to document more than 
she would otherwise. The pack rat will need to document less (at least on the 
team site). The negotiated protocol is for everyone. 
What Happens to Paper? 
The prognosticators used to say we were fast moving to a paperless society. It 
hasn’t happened yet. It probably won’t. Paper is comfortable and easier on the 
eyes. What is important to virtual teams, however, is that work is moved elec-
tronically, leaving the tactile choice about printing up to the team member.
Push Team Learning
Gestalt psychology discovered that the whole is greater than the sum of its 
parts. A team should be more “intelligent” collectively than any individual is 
alone. This is the power of teams and one signiﬁ cant source of innovation. 
If the communication infrastructure doesn’t support cooperative discovery, 
learning, and communication, the team cannot function at its full capac-
ity. Therefore, any communication infrastructure should include intentional 
dialogue, deeper conversation, and informal chatting so that people can 
think together better. Get in the habit of doing so. 
When new learnings, insights, or information is valuable to the whole, the 
communication infrastructure should already have a strategy to “push” the 
information out. If it is relevant but not critical, have a method to “post” 
the information for access or “position” an exploratory dialogue, rather than 
forcing data into inboxes. Again, ask yourself the questions that inform how 
to best structure your team’s communication. 
This chapter has focused on the infrastructure of communication that 
facilitates structured and unstructured conversations. The team can structure 
its intentional communication, but it cannot—and does not want to—con-
trol or stiﬂ e free-ﬂ owing conversations. 
Conversations develop relationships as people get to know each other 
better. Moving people from individualistic to collaborative behavior is 

184  
FROM ME TO WE
nudged through communication structure, but unleashed through multiple 
conversations. That’s what super teams do: They reach out, listen, make con-
nections, and share more than average teams. 
Communication is the backbone of all collaborative work, virtual or not. 
Synchronous or not. Technologically enabled or not. Attend to it. Get better 
at it. Enjoy the synergy that results. Communication is wonderfully messy 
and open—open to misinterpretation, open to potential. It builds trust or 
breaks faith. It’s pervasive, an organization’s lifeblood and the primary way 
we connect with each other. In developing the virtual team’s formal and 
informal communication habits, you are ensuring communication ﬂ ows and 
encouraging deeper relationships to develop.
I heard Tom Hanks summarize beautifully the choice people make about 
their connection to others and their willingness to communicate openly:
Truth is, I’ll never know all there is to know about you just as you will 
never know all there is to know about me. Humans are, by nature, too 
complicated to be understood fully. So, we can choose either to approach 
our fellow human beings with suspicion or to approach them with an open 
mind, a dash of optimism, and a great deal of candor.2
Notes
1. Steve Raabe, “The Multigenerational Workplace: Today’s Employers Must 
Manage a Workforce That Is a Mixture of Young and Old,” Denver Post, April 11, 
2012, www.denverpost.com/topworkplaces2012/ci_20358187/todays-managers-must-
manipulate-workforce-that-is-mixture 
2. www.tomhanks-online.com/tomHanks/quotes/

185
15
V I RT UA L  T E A M  R I S K S  A N D 
H A C K S
“All married couples should learn the art of battle as they should learn the art of making 
love. Good battle is objective and honest—never vicious or cruel. Good battle is healthy and 
 constructive and brings to a marriage the principles of equal partnership.”
—Ann Landers
“Is anyone so wise as to learn by the experience of others?”
—Voltaire
“What I like about experience is that it is such an honest thing. You may take any number of 
wrong turnings, but keep your eyes open and you will not be allowed to go very far before the 
warning signs appear. You may have deceived yourself, but experience is not trying to deceive you. 
The universe rings true wherever you fairly test it.”
—C. S. Lewis, Surprised by Joy
The Best Laid Plans of Mice and Men . . .
Even the best, most experienced virtual leader has challenges. This chapter 
provides targeted advice to be able to do the following:
• Quickly see early warning signs of team struggle.
• Know when to step in and when to let the team work it out.
• Act fast before struggle becomes dysfunction.
• Use team challenges to help the team become a team .
Some issues are more stubborn, and predictable, in a virtual team. Bad 
habits can get exacerbated in virtual environments, and new risks are intro-
duced. Disengaged employees are more difﬁ cult to motivate virtually. Con-
ﬂ ict can more easily go underground and be ignored, risking a trust rift. 

186  
FROM ME TO WE
Distance Creates Distance
Distance exacerbates how much time and energy we spend interpreting oth-
ers’ actions based on limited information and wondering what others inter-
pret about us.
“She didn’t answer the part of my e-mail where I shared my con-
cerns, but she did decline my invitation to lunch next week. What 
do I make of that?”
“Margaret hasn’t given me comments on that marketing brief, and I 
need to deliver the final to Steve by Thursday. Is she blowing me off, or 
is the writing that bad? Did she even get it? I know she’s busy, but. . . .”
Virtual work makes relationships less easy to read. Everyone is function-
ing with more data and information, but less knowledge about each other. 
Having face time and breaking bread together speed up relationships. 
Plan to be together in the same place regularly. 
Virtual teams experience risk because it takes longer to learn people’s 
nuances, things that are easily misunderstood. At the same time, team mem-
bers must trust one another quickly. To manage risk, team leaders move 
teams from structured to genuine trust by removing barriers to connection. 
This chapter identiﬁ es risks likely to occur and how to identify and prevent 
issues, and shares ways to hack fast remedies when things go wrong anyway. 
The Impact of Virtuality on Feedback Loops
Cause and effect are seldom closely related in time or space, yet we act as 
though they are. If there is a problem with sales renewals, managers provide 
incentives for salespeople to ﬁ nd new customers rather than research the 
problem. If call center wait times are too long, we incentivize representa-
tives to improve average speed of answer and reduce call length. It’s easier to 
address the immediate issue than look for the root cause.
In a complex system, the cause leading to the effect is seldom linear. 
Renewals may be down because technical support is slow, or call reps rush 
the call. (That may be too simple, but it’s a real client example.) When the 
organization doesn’t look for the larger feedback loops that link root causes 
with true effects, it can exacerbate the problem. 
Add time and space, and feedback is often delayed more. Slow feedback 
loops contribute to organizations over- and underreacting. Knowing this 
happens helps the organization (and you) prevent breakdowns when working 
virtually. Consciously link causes and time or geographically distant effects 

VIRTUAL TEAM RISKS AND HACKS  187
on your virtual team. Be conscious of the impact time and distance have on 
relationships.
In a virtual team, when things go awry, they can do so for a longer period 
of time before they’re noticed, so the virtual team leader—or any team mem-
ber—must be vigilant to catch early warning signs. The problem is not usu-
ally intentional. It’s usually some communication or feedback breakdown. 
Eliminating or reducing delays shouldn’t involve Big Brother monitor-
ing. Instead, practice the tenets of this book, use the collaboration tools, and 
build a professional team that maintains strong ties.
You Need to Know When It’s Not Working—Fast
When problems erupt in a virtual team, the problem is not usually differ-
ences or inability to handle conﬂ ict . Rather, the problem is usually mutual 
trust erosion stemming from hidden conﬂ ict gone unaddressed or unrecog-
nized. Miscommunication and misunderstanding also erode trust, or at least 
conﬁ dence. When you’ve got people colocated, red ﬂ ags are more obvious. 
Virtually, problems can go on too long. 
Symptomatic Warning Signs
Let’s examine the symptoms of a problem, probable causes, and fast hacks 
and solutions.
Direction Is Lacking, Focus Is Confused
Symptoms
Miscommunication. Lack of feedback . Holding different assumptions about 
what matters. Pieces aren’t coordinating smoothly. The team experiences fre-
quent direction switches. Frequent disagreements erupt about what the team 
should do next.
What’s Happening
The team charter is no longer clear. Virtuality has allowed misalignment to 
go undetected or without response, increasing virtual distance. The work-
ﬂ ow process or communication infrastructure is failing, not being utilized, 
or wasn’t clearly understood in the ﬁ rst place. 
Hacks
• Have everyone conduct stakeholder interviews with each other and 
key organization members. Help them see their role from others’ 

188  
FROM ME TO WE
points of view. This helps them practice empathic listening and 
appreciative inquiry1 and provides information to get back on track.
• Collectively review stakeholder interview results, and then clarify the 
team charter and expectations, and make adjustments to the project 
plan. Do this together as a team.
• Acknowledge the confusion, get past the racket, tell the truth, and 
minimize risk by clarifying or adjusting team agreements. If the 
conﬂ ict is between team members, hold coaching conversations 
individually and together.
• Consider a blank canvas and rebuild interpersonal agreements con-
sensually. 
• Bring an expert in to realign and broaden perspectives. 
• Celebrate small victories, and acknowledge great work.2
Excessive Caution
Symptoms
Team dynamics change. Team members who used to be transparent and 
engaged can hesitate or exercise excessive caution and political posturing. 
Normally outspoken team members become withdrawn. Work products 
are timidly introduced. People say “okay” too much. People overinform, as 
though they need to prove they are working.
Aggression may also grow. People may make out-of-the blue critical 
comments. Harsh words slip out. Rushed statements are tossed into cyber-
space without much thought to how they might be received. These may be 
unintentional, but words have impact.
What’s Happening
Usually, trust is broken or at risk. One team member can negatively impact 
whole teams. Unfortunately, people can be cruel in a faceless environment, 
or they forget that written words are easily misunderstood. E-mail bullying is 
rare on teams, but fast-paced teams are breeding grounds for getting straight 
to the point and forgetting a real person is at the other end of the missive. 
Unintentional disrespect happens. Attention to the interpersonal impact of 
language and tone cannot be stressed enough virtually . 
Hacks
• Privately let the team member know his or her missives were not pro-
ductive. Some people just need a reminder. 
• Ask the team members how they like to receive feedback.

VIRTUAL TEAM RISKS AND HACKS  189
• Suggest team members reach out directly to each other, especially if a 
behavior is causing them to withdraw or react. Help sort out what is 
his, hers, and theirs.
• Coach the team about timing and intensity. The pace of business and 
forceful communication can shut people down, even if not meant 
to. If a team member is accidentally closing people down, coach to 
the behavior. Growing professionals appreciate coaching, as we often 
don’t see our blind spots. 
Information Anorexia or Obesity
Symptoms
Team members aren’t sharing quickly or fully. Information is hoarded. Or the 
reverse, information obesity, is another clue to virtual team problems. The 
database doesn’t hold all the latest information, holds skimpy documenta-
tion, or has conﬂ icting versions of documents. Too many people are copied 
into correspondence. The team isn’t using the same ﬁ ling system, causing 
confusion when looking for documents. When information obesity comes 
primarily from one person, it also indicates that a team member needs a sim-
ple organization training, or that person may be feeling isolated and looking 
for some forced acknowledgment, recognition, or reassurance. 
What’s Happening
Sometimes it isn’t a people problem. “Accidental” discovery is less likely 
to occur virtually. Informal sharing hasn’t been re-created virtually . Team 
agreements may not be fully functioning yet, or there may be inadequate 
 information-processing protocols or team disagreement about them. Or 
maybe the organization rewards information as power.
“Information as power” still lingers in many company cultures. One of 
your team members may believe hoarding knowledge creates job security, 
but it creates slowdowns, bottlenecks, and frustration for the team, inevitably 
interfering with productivity. Eventually, trust issues develop between infor-
mation hoarders and others, which interferes with team learning and severely 
limits the team’s potential.
Hacks
Utilize your tools! Project and task management systems resolve much when 
people realize how a good document management system works. The tools 
should help drive the team’s effectiveness. Change the reward system to sup-
port protocols. Coach them if they’re changing tools or habits, but hold the 
performance standard as team habits adjust. Hold the team accountable 

190  
FROM ME TO WE
to protocols and agreements; revisit; revise; reinforce; and, again, coach as 
needed.
Conflict Goes Underground
Symptoms
Sometimes people are too nice, and there isn’t enough healthy difference of 
opinion. Most people don’t seek conﬂ ict , and the virtual environment makes 
it easier to let the conﬂ ict go underground, remaining hidden. When it 
erupts suddenly, it has been boiling. Similar to excessive caution, this is usu-
ally an interpersonal issue within the team. When conﬂ ict goes underground, 
communication is interrupted or diverted. The low-touch communication 
exacerbates any team alignment challenge as well as any interpersonal issues 
rumbling. Team members may be following the team protocols literally, but 
not following their spirit. A team whose heart isn’t in it is communicating 
perfunctorily, and it is in danger.
What’s Happening
Low-touch communication leads to miscommunication and misunderstand-
ings. The risk of misconstrued messages increases in virtual communication, 
and trust can be broken unintentionally as a result. If trust is low, a conﬂ ict 
will go underground. When the team is forming, consider ground rules for 
surfacing issues, and then follow them. It prevents a lot of problems.
Hacks
Get back to the basics. Reestablish trust. Consider a team outing (jam session, 
volunteer day, happy hour). Remind people of good experiences (when they 
felt appreciated, why the project matters, the vision of the future). Expand 
emotional bandwidth so relationships are more resilient. 
Have one-on-ones with team members. Give everyone a chance to vent 
frustrations, share concerns, and make suggestions without disrespecting 
others. Revisit team member preferences for support. Do they need to ease 
into things with casual conversations about sports and the weather before 
getting down to work, or the opposite, jumping straight to the agenda? Sto-
ries are powerful, so tell one to unite the team again, reminding them about 
why the team matters. 
Four Individual Barriers to Honest Communication
Four internal barriers prevent us from moving beyond minimally engaged 
conversation that is task focused.3 They may be intentional or not, conscious 
or not, but they are common. We see evidence of barriers in others more 

VIRTUAL TEAM RISKS AND HACKS  191
easily than we see our own, so ask yourself what you might not be seeing or 
saying as you read about the barriers. Internal barriers risk reverting teams 
into storming or worse—disengagement. The four barriers are as follows.
Barrier 1: Not Recognizing What We See
We all have blind spots, at our own risk. A team that doesn’t see reality is vul-
nerable. Teams and individuals “go blind” at work sometimes. If you want to 
be an adaptive team, see what is, even if it’s not what you expected.
Barrier 2: Not Saying What We Think
People feel pressure to be politically correct and polite. Some fear speaking 
up, bringing negative experiences with them when they join new teams. Fear 
limits our brain’s functioning, which limits our ability to do our best or even 
to know how to speak up. Excessive peer pressure, bullies, and cynical cor-
porate cultures keep people quiet who need to be heard, especially when it 
affects the team’s work.
A virtual manager knows that team consensus means that while the deci-
sion made may not be everyone’s ﬁ rst choice, everyone agrees it’s the best 
decision at the time. Everyone commits to not only live with but also support 
the decision. If people acquiesce more than discuss, people aren’t saying what 
they think or they aren’t engaged. They’re going along, but not in consensus. 
This is a risk and a warning. 
Barrier 3: Not Doing What We Say
Integrity matters. Very simply deﬁ ned, integrity is meaning what we say and 
doing what we say we will. If something interferes, people with integrity 
communicate with enough notice to adjust and correct in order to maintain 
team trust.
Barrier 4: Not Seeing Our Impact
Self-awareness is a team competency. If needed, coach teams to see them-
selves accurately. This includes bolstering the team when they underestimate 
themselves, providing formative feedback, and compassionately uncovering 
blind spots that interfere with performance.
What About Other Team Issues?
What if a team member’s travel schedule requires videoconferencing, which 
is difﬁ cult because there is seldom privacy when on the road during business 

192  
FROM ME TO WE
hours? Simple realities not anticipated are the best opportunities to address 
team issues before they’re a problem. As teams gain synergy, they facilitate 
their own effectiveness. 
Virtual Hacks That Help
• Accept some loss of operational efﬁ ciency, at ﬁ rst. This doesn’t always 
happen, but it’s less frustrating when a certain “acceptable slippage” 
is allowed as the team forms. It will be regained. As Sheryl Sandberg 
reminds us, “Done is better than perfect.”4
• Fuel the ﬁ res of synergy. For team members used to colocated 
collaboration, going virtual is jolting. Synergy happens with virtual 
teams, but there isn’t always that extroverted high. Help them develop 
energizing team habits. As early twentieth-century minister Frank 
Crane reminds us, “Habits are safer than rules; you don’t have to 
watch them. And you don’t have to keep them either. They keep you.”5
• Find the space between the notes. Asynchronous communication 
dissipates group energy. The team can drift apart without regular, 
live contact. Team leaders must help the group feel that it creates 
music together. The lyrics are written metaphorically by structuring 
the team’s systems, processes, and working agreements. The melody, 
however, is in combining notes (together time) with silence between 
the notes (working independently). Good songs have breaks, musical 
bridges, crescendos, and quiet tones; a virtuoso virtual leader helps 
the team experience its song when together and apart. 
• Remember that structure serves. Too much focus on rules and 
procedures provides an illusion of control. Structure is a servant, not 
a master. Treat it as such. The collaboration tools help structure work 
and connect people, not become a way to virtually look over people’s 
shoulders.
• Embrace “I” and “us.” Acknowledge the differences among the team 
members, while developing “this team’s culture .”
• Be scrupulously fair. Avoid any temptation to rely on the closest 
person. Have the entire team in mind, not just the team members 
you see regularly. Attend to all team members’ needs, opinions, and 
contributions.
• Confront all nonperformance. Management responsibilities do not 
lessen in a virtual environment .
• Don’t be tempted to wait it out. Make a special effort to catch conﬂ icts 
early and deal with them fairly.

VIRTUAL TEAM RISKS AND HACKS  193
A Bit More About Conflict
If team members’ miscommunication doesn’t get acknowledged and reme-
died, it can lead to bigger trust issues. This can happen with colocated teams, 
too, but virtual miscommunication goes unrecognized, unaddressed, and 
unresolved far too long, too often.
It seems easier to sweep conﬂ ict under the rug (at least until it can’t be 
ignored). Don’t be tempted. Employee commitment decreases when conﬂ ict 
goes unresolved. Luckily, issues are opportunities for team development. A 
well-managed conﬂ ict increases team commitment . 
It’s the work environment and your job. It’s the virtual leader’s most impor-
tant charge to create a team environment to produce results. Most virtual 
risks can be prevented or managed by coming back to two things: knowing 
people’s habits so anomalies show up early as symptoms; and following the 
First Path of team development, which clariﬁ es purpose, commitment , com-
munication, and agreements.
Notes
1. Appreciative inquiry is a model that seeks to engage stakeholders in 
 self-determined change. Wikipedia deﬁ nes it at https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/
Appreciative_inquiry 
2. Thanks to global virtual team leader and millennial rising star Allison 
 Kessler for hack suggestions that cross generations and distance.
3. Otto Scharmer, Theory U: Leading From the Future as It Emerges (San 
 Francisco: Berret-Koehler, 2009).
4. Sheryl Sandberg, Lean In: Women, Work, and the Will to Lead (New York: 
Alfred Knopf, 2013). 
5. Frank Crane, BraneyQuote, https://www.brainyquote.com/quotes/quotes/f/
frankcrane101522.html


PART  S IX
EXPAND EMOTIONAL 
BANDWIDTH
The Far Mosque
The place that Solomon made to worship in,
Called the Far Mosque, is not built of earth
And water and stone, but of intention and wisdom
And mystical conversation and compassionate action.
Every part of it is intelligence and responsive
To every other. The carpet bows to the broom.
The door knocker and the door swing together 
Like musicians. This heart sanctuary does 
Exist, but it can’t be described. Why try!
Solomon goes there every morning and gives guidance
With words, with musical harmonies, and in actions,
Which are the deepest teaching. A prince is just
A conceit until he does something with generosity.
—Rumi


197
16
V I RT UA L  T E A M  T R U S T
“We shall never be able to remove suspicion and fear as potential causes of war until 
communication is permitted to ﬂ ow, free and open, across international boundaries.” 
—Harry S. Truman
“Trust is knowing that when a team member does push you, they’re doing it because they care 
about the team.”
—Patrick Lencioni, The Five Dysfunctions of a Team
I
n its original meaning, intimacy did not mean emotional closeness, but 
“the willingness to pass on honest information.”1 This is the essence of trust-
ing relationships. Emotional bandwidth is the personal and sustainable 
connection created among virtual team members who are working together 
for a common purpose toward a goal.2 The more emotional bandwidth, the 
more resilient the virtual team.
Technically, bandwidth measures the available capacity for information 
ﬂ ow. The more bandwidth, the faster data can travel. In this light, think of 
bandwidth as how open or limited our capacity is to build strong relation-
ships. We work through issues more easily and productively when we trust 
one another, believing one another to be well meaning. We manage conﬂ ict 
better when we like the people involved and trust them. Taking time to get 
to know and understand teammates expands emotional bandwidth, just as 
much as a ﬁ ve-bar cell phone signal yields better call quality. Expanding emo-
tional bandwidth opens the collaborative capacity of virtual teams. 
Research, surveys, and management gurus keep saying the best leader is 
authentic, has excellent emotional intelligence (EQ) and relationship man-
agement skills, listens, and is trustworthy. Leaders who can broaden their own 
emotional bandwidth build better virtual teams.
This chapter reexamines what we think we know about trust in teams. 
This is one area of virtual work that is nearly entirely people dependent. 
In collaborative work environments, trust is important—and more fragile. 

198  
EXPAND EMOTIONAL BANDWIDTH
We have almost unlimited digital bandwidth, but what about emotional 
 bandwidth ? During team formation, work agreements are made, and collab-
oration platforms and tools are deployed to build communication pathways 
and fulﬁ ll structured agreements. 
Is it enough?
The Organization’s Role in Trust 
The medium is the message, or at least part of the communication package 
that gives the message meaning. If the organization is designed well and pro-
vides network tools, teams can trust the company cares enough to help them 
work smarter together. If, however, the organization’s infrastructure is dated 
with clunky tools or processes, people will experience the opposite. 
If organizations want employee commitment, they must be trustworthy. 
Unfortunately, many virtual teams are undersupported. In fact, telecommut-
ing gets abysmal “ofﬁ cial” company support,3 which puts the burden on the 
virtual leader. Team trust doesn’t build faster with better technology, but trust 
will decline faster when adequate tools aren’t available . Technology connects 
us and facilitates communication, but it cannot drive commitment or trust. 
It’s a hygiene factor, like adequate pay. When it’s there, workers can focus 
on contributing; when it’s not, workers are distracted by trying to get their 
needs met.
Surveys report that employee commitment and trust in their employer 
rate low in corporate America. Many workers not only believe they are under-
supported organizationally but also have resigned themselves to a mediocre 
career. According to Deloitte’s 2014 survey on worker engagement, people 
accept mistreatment by their employer as normal.4 
Leaders who ignore the deﬂ ated mood of today’s workforce do so at the 
organization’s risk. Whether it’s outmoded organization design, systems, or 
processes, insufﬁ cient resources or tools, or poor leadership, the organization 
sets the tone for mutual trust by how well it supports its people.
When leaders prioritize system and process redesign to provide more 
control and performance monitoring, instead of collaboration, this demon-
strates lack of trust in people. Investments in tracking behavior, money, and 
“stuff” are necessary; however, the collaborative organization invests also in 
HR and team collaboration tools that help unleash talent, encourage inno-
vation, and help virtual workers stay connected to the company. Adopting 
collaboration tools system-wide is practical. Teams form faster when the way 
they collaborate doesn’t change from team to team. 

VIRTUAL TEAM TRUST  199
To set a digital course for the organization with an analogue workplace is 
like asking employees to walk in quicksand. Their work lives get compli-
cated, frustrating, and stressful. Without an organization-wide approach 
to the digital workplace, teams and business units tend on their own to 
acquire readily available cloud-based tools, add personal technologies, and 
start to work in ways that satisfy personal needs. So rather than reducing 
the complexity around technology, we add to it. To manage the complexity 
of the digital world, we need to step away from analogue workplaces and 
lead an organization-wide approach to making work easier.5
Is your organization’s IT budget balancing management and control with open 
collaboration? 
This chapter reinforces communication principles and collaboration 
technologies already discussed, blending task-related and social communica-
tion to lead virtual teams in a way that keeps the team on target while provid-
ing individual support. 
For example, couple up questions to support your team member (the 
Second Path to high performance) while also ensuring alignment with the 
team and being on track for results (the Third Path).
The simple question “What progress did you make today?” can be coupled 
with “Do you have everything you need to meet the milestone deliverable tomor-
row?” Or combine “What did you get done today?” with “What do you see 
coming up that we all need to be aware of and position for the team?” Coupling 
questions demonstrates care while ensuring progress, as well as invites deeper 
conversation when warranted.
Most Leaders Fail to Engage 
Fifty percent of workers don’t feel valued or that their work matters much. 
Only about 25% of workers believes his or her contribution matters at all. Even 
worse, 72% of millennial workers and 68% of baby boomers admit to having 
disengaged from work, no longer committed to their current employers.6
These are staggering statistics. This is broken trust. 
The digital bandwidth is here for fast collaboration, and workers can 
quite easily communicate broadly and fully with anyone. Tools facilitate 
communication that is task driven and interpersonal, face-to-face and digital, 
human to human and human to technology. 
It’s easy to connect, yet we don’t. Worker disconnection stands at 50%. 
Retired Army General Stanley McChrystal is one of the most trusted 
military leaders in U.S. history. In Team of Teams: New Rules of Engagement 

200  
EXPAND EMOTIONAL BANDWIDTH
for a Complex World 7 he concludes that trust comes as leaders develop relation-
ships on their teams, and as they do what they say they will.
McChrystal summarizes that we trust our leaders—or don’t—based pri-
marily on three factors:
1. Benevolence (we care about and promote our team)
2. Integrity (our actions are consistent with our stated values and commit-
ments) 
3. Competence (we are competent to lead) 
Benevolence is the Second Path of team support. The general reminds 
us that authentic support includes advocacy. The social ofﬁ ce environ-
ment vanishes virtually. The team is a major vehicle for members’ organi-
zation exposure. The virtual manager is an important connecting “node.” 
Virtual team members want to know their virtual leader is concerned for 
and will advocate on their behalf. General McChrystal reminds us that the 
leader’s job is quite simple. The virtual leaders help people gain conﬁ dence 
in their relationships and skills so they can function effectively and trust 
each other.
Trust and the Threefold Path
To build team conﬁ dence, the ﬁ rst development path for virtual teams can-
not be skipped! 
Most virtual team members begin with enthusiasm for virtual work. 
They want to work with a highly competent group of trustworthy, reliable 
folks who gel as a team. Trust is a precursor to virtual team performance, and 
begins while walking the First Path, developing the team’s ways of working 
together. The team develops stronger trust as it drops into its rhythms, ﬂ ows, 
and ways that work for everyone. The team’s process will emerge as they work 
out agreements that are a reﬂ ection of their values and stated commitments, 
building team integrity. 
Expand Emotional Bandwidth to Unlock Team Potential
Trust is found within a range of a relationship’s experience. That range deﬁ nes 
the emotional bandwidth available to the relationship. I discovered this while 
watching virtual leaders over time and after virtual management training. I 
noticed high-trust virtual teams were led by leaders who knew their people, 

VIRTUAL TEAM TRUST  201
enabling them to trust their teams and conﬁ dently build the team’s exposure 
in the organization. 
Motivating engaged team members takes expanded emotional band-
width. The broader the team’s emotional bandwidth with each other and the 
team leader, the more team potential is unlocked. Facilitate strong, honest 
relationships; it’s a trusted leader’s fastest path to high-performance teams. 
The quality of any work relationship often comes down to trust, knowing 
that you, as a team member, can say what you think with conﬁ dence and 
without fear, and everyone listens respectfully and attentively. Support peo-
ple who expand emotional bandwidth, and coach those who don’t. Develop 
relationships as a primary part of your job. Be an active contributor to team 
insights and creative thinking. Get to know people’s strengths, preferences, 
styles, and peccadillos. Virtual teams expand emotional bandwidth through 
relationship, not geography. It’s the opening where abiding trust begins. Are 
your team relationships strong enough to discuss, disagree, challenge, suggest, and 
consider opposing opinions?
Virtual Hallway Conversations
Maintaining work relationships when remote requires extra effort. People 
don’t bump into colleagues in the kitchen for small talk. Mundane as they 
may seem, those moments are important for building rapport with people. 
Virtual workers have to build rapport with casual conversation, too, but it’s 
not as natural. It’s easy to dive into Monday and ﬁ re off an e-mail asking 
about a deliverable. I’m guilty. I’ve forgotten to ask, “How was your week-
end?” when it had been a teammate daughter’s wedding. As a manager, it’s 
understandable to get task focused, but remember the power of simple care. 
Start phone calls off with some personal conversation—the kind you 
might have with a coworker in the ofﬁ ce kitchen while warming lunch in 
the microwave. If time doesn’t allow, say so with sincere regret. Schedule 
personal celebration reminders and send notes or gifts for team birthdays 
and anniversaries. 
Trust: The Simple Way
Without trust, team commitment is conditional and seldom full hearted. 
To overcome this all-too-common reality, virtual leaders generate trust in 
everyday interactions that inspire commitment and lower the threshold to 
connection. 

202  
EXPAND EMOTIONAL BANDWIDTH
In other words, talk to everyone. A lot. It is the foundational action 
needed to have a chance to engage today’s virtual worker. Strong leaders have 
“the ability to engage in conversations that allow for clarity . . . and elicit 
mutual commitment to a shared future.”8
Let’s face it, team members’ trust is partly based on our clarity. Poorly 
structured or confusing conversations between virtual leaders and their teams 
can cause concern about a leader’s ability to lead clearly in the larger organi-
zation. If this is coupled with organizational trust issues, team members don’t 
have a solid future they can trust. Team members buy in to the organization’s 
proposed future partly based on a matter of trust in their manager as repre-
sentative to the organization. 
Trust isn’t mysterious or difﬁ cult; it’s simply a belief others hold that we 
are reliable, truthful, able, and predictable. Trust is given when people see 
consistent honesty. When people also see a future for the organization they 
trust, engagement, the subject of the next chapter, follows.
Frequent and ongoing communication also lets remote team members know 
you value them. Remote workers are especially vulnerable to being overlooked 
and feeling unappreciated for the work that they are doing. Conversations help 
virtual team members feel supported and appreciated, and conditional trust 
develops into genuine trust over time. 
What Really Happens With Trust on Virtual Teams?
Many believe trust grows only over time spent together. Trust will continue 
to develop or erode based on experience. It is true that we’re more inclined to 
be trustworthy when we have to see people again. In other words, we follow 
through on commitments when we have to “face” each other later.
Evidence also suggests that ﬁ rst impressions really do count, and that 
distance can create distorted impressions. Communication among team 
members drops quickly even when separated by only one ﬂ oor in an ofﬁ ce 
building. Physical distance remains very real and affects interpersonal rela-
tionships in a mobile work environment. On the surface, this seems to chal-
lenge trust potential in virtual teams.
Virtual Trust Challenge—Cynicism
Today’s virtual manager has to get past cynicism that comes from people’s 
past and current societal culture, as shown in the disengagement statistics 
of today’s workforce. If current workplace research is accurately reporting 

VIRTUAL TEAM TRUST  203
workplace unfairness, cynicism is an appropriate emotional response. If man-
agement consistently fails to keep promises, people stop believing what they 
hear. Inspiring leaders encourage teams to put themselves wholly into an 
initiative, but if the inspiration isn’t backed by resources and support, cyni-
cism is sane.
Yet we want to be optimists. Most people want to believe their next team 
will be a good one—hence new teams’ initial excitement. Some team mem-
bers are less optimistic and don’t trust easily, if ever. This isn’t completely 
within the virtual manager’s control. When hiring your team, avoid hiring 
cynical people. 
Reversing Cynicism
We don’t fully control organization or team fails. In fact, innovative teams 
that are working near their competency edges should fail sometimes. Fail-
ure is not a broken agreement. Innovation doesn’t happen without missing 
the mark. The virtual leader creates space for mistakes, encouraging learning 
and renegotiation. This keeps the team from judgment, excessive worry, or 
discouragement. These are distractions that hijack team attention. Trusting 
teams function with a spirit of learning, course correcting instead of placing 
blame or pretending mistakes aren’t made.
A Solid Road Map to Virtual Trust
With decades of virtual experience and documented best practices, the 
 virtual leader has a solid road map for building trusting virtual teams. The 
most important tenets, when followed as described, work. Most of us want 
to be trustworthy. The team reﬂ ects individual reputations; we are invested 
together, committed to mutual success. 
The Māori culture has a word for commitment: utu, which means “bal-
anced exchange.” The virtual leader pursues team utu, actively seeking input 
about what’s working, what’s not, and why. She helps to produce results. This 
helps the team develop genuine trust.
Very simply, utu, or balanced exchange, supports everyone, including 
the organization it serves. How a team ﬁ nds its balance determines whether 
true trust develops, or whether it will remain a structured trust. It’s  facilitated 
by spending “real time” together, ﬁ nding common ground, ﬁ xing prob-
lems together, sharing excitement, and celebrating progress and milestones 
together. 

204  
EXPAND EMOTIONAL BANDWIDTH
What Helps Virtual Teams Trust
Band-Aids Are Okay, at First
The team’s rhythms and ﬂ ows get established early and become deeply 
 embedded habits, regardless of whether they are effective. Even when given 
better options, most teams stick with habits once created, so establish trust- 
building habits early, beginning on the team development path. Structure is 
an essential Band-Aid until the team gels.
Structure Swift Trust
Software developers have taught us a lot about team trust. Swift trust has 
proven to be a key indicator of team success. It is the practice of assuming 
our teammates are competent and trustworthy. The trust cup starts full, and 
it is depleted or replenished based on experience. Team research ﬁ ndings have 
corroborated the developer experience. Virtual teams that can begin with 
swift trust are more likely to thrive. 
The development path is a Band-Aid, in a sense, to give the team a struc-
ture from which to begin . It’s normal for onboarding members to be uncer-
tain and initially preoccupied with inclusion. The faster the virtual manager 
can help people overcome discomfort that comes with not knowing, the 
faster the team can move through its team development stages. 
Use Band-Aids until team bonds are strong. Collaboration requires trust, 
but we don’t start with it. If individuals’ reputations are impacted by team 
performance, high trust is high stakes. Settle fears by developing team struc-
ture. Team trust is supported initially by the professional reputation of fel-
low members, but trust isn’t guaranteed to continue. In other words, trust is 
granted based on assumed competence, temporary until experience proves it 
is deserved. As a result, trust may be at its height at the beginning of team 
formation. 
Establish That Foundation
Organize and structure communication to get work done during the devel-
opment path, as covered in chapter 10. Unintentional trust busting results 
from misunderstandings, so clear confusion before it happens with team 
agreements and active communication. 
Create Safety
How a team handles early conﬂ icts drives a team’s long-term trust. The more 
interpersonal conﬂ ict, the more team members want to quit a team, usu-
ally. If a team isn’t talking outside formal communication, conﬂ ict has gone 

VIRTUAL TEAM TRUST  205
underground. Left undetected or unresolved too long, conﬂ ict can break a 
team. When trust erodes, a member’s disappointment impacts team com-
mitment and individual productivity . Voluntary communication typically 
declines. Team trust will never evolve beyond structured trust when conﬂ ict is 
not managed because people naturally self-protect. When people feel unsafe 
or disconnected, they are less committed, so help work things through. The 
leader should get involved.
If the team is communicating, it can use inevitable conﬂ icts to deepen 
trust. A study from MIT’s Human Dynamics Laboratory conﬁ rms that the 
leading indicator of team success is how well the team communicates informally: 
“With remarkable consistency, the data conﬁ rmed that communication plays 
a critical role in building successful teams. In fact, we’ve found patterns of 
communication to be the most important predictor of a team’s success.”9
Even in the best teams members get on each other’s nerves. Just like 
neighborhoods, team members tolerate little irritations because they share 
common ground and experiences, and develop genuine community. How 
can you help your team see itself as a community? 
Reinforce Predictable Communication
High-performance virtual teams communicate many ways, sometimes 
intensely. How often is less important than the regularity. Task communica-
tion and social communication weave throughout the week. Teams that begin 
and end with high trust take time to know one another informally, and they 
follow structured agreements, and they give rich feedback to one another. Also, 
no high-performing teams rely on their manager to intervene but deal directly 
with each other. The opposite happens in virtual teams that never reach the 
performing stage of team development, never getting to sustainable synergy . 
The bottom line is when communication falters, the team is at risk. 
When communication ﬂ ows, team members are more able to trust the pro-
cess, not to mention each other.
Sonar Is Reassuring
Virtual team members seem to share one universal trait—a need for a 
response. “Are you out there?” Echoes are unnerving when feeling isolated. 
People want to be reassured they’re not lost in cyberspace. It’s hard to trust 
people we don’t see, especially when we depend on them. 
A simple response is all we need. When we hear only our own echo, we 
don’t know if we’ve been heard, or heard accurately. Acknowledge the callout, 
and commit to follow up. On virtual teams, responding is as critical as reach-
ing out. Distance constantly needs to be “closed.”

206  
EXPAND EMOTIONAL BANDWIDTH
Colocated teams interact naturally because of shared space; we “learn” 
our team simply by being around. Virtual teams don’t. 
It may seem redundant to say again, but trust is eroded when people don’t 
talk on virtual teams. The most underrated virtual trust-building strategy is 
simple interaction—lots of it—the full team and subsets. People are more 
likely to trust people they know and talk to regularly. Feedback happens when 
people talk, too, enhancing team performance. Find ways to make it happen.
Find Common (Virtual) Ground
Common ground is “a basis for mutual interest or agreement.”10 A team cer-
tainly qualiﬁ es as common work ground, with shared purpose and responsi-
bilities, rituals and habits, successes and challenges, and history. Use the First 
Path of team development to help the team intentionally design opportuni-
ties to develop common ground. 
Virtual teams have a more difﬁ cult time seeing themselves as a whole 
that holds common ground. Team structure helps, but it’s also important to 
help each member see how they and the others contribute to collective team 
movement.
Imagine a mobile. Each team member dangles from a wire, and the wires 
connect together into a ﬂ owing creation. The mobile pieces seldom touch, 
but they “ﬂ ow” together without effort and based on each other’s move-
ments. The team leader “wires” the team with shared purpose so that they 
are not isolated pieces but an integrated whole. This synergy, this “wiring” of 
individuals together through ﬁ nding commonalities , helps everyone feel like 
an individual and part of a team.
Is there a metaphor or analogy that symbolically wires your team together 
powerfully enough to remind everyone why you are together? Find ways to 
build common ground, such as team training or other shared experiences.
Provide Context
Contextualize people. Take extra time to give everyone a sense of team cohe-
sion. Team culture is a product of shared stories, norms, rituals, repeated 
interactions, and experiences. Provide opportunities to create “us-ness.” Pro-
vide context about each other personally, too. Share fun personal news before 
starting virtual meetings, for example. 
Contextualize tasks. When groups move too fast and act without seeing 
the bigger goal, they develop more slowly as teams and more frequently miss 
their marks. If speed to productivity is what the virtual team needs, “speed 
up” the familiarity period and create shortcuts the team understands to con-
textual information enough to keep teams on point. 

VIRTUAL TEAM TRUST  207
Sacred (Virtual) Space
Remember the last time you were in a meeting that was synergistic, with 
creativity ﬂ owing? You could feel the energy bouncing off the walls. One 
question led to an insight, which led to an improvement, which led to a 
breakthrough. The room, the space itself, held the energy of the group, form-
ing a sort of container, just as a glass holds water or a pocket holds personal 
effects. An ordinary conference room was transformed into an energy vortex, 
a sacred team space.
Virtual teams experience energy leaks, as though the glass has been 
tipped over. Team leaders need to create a virtual container for the energy. 
Energy cannot be at full throttle all the time; the team will burn out. If the 
ebb and ﬂ ow, however, aren’t naturally energizing the group, the risk is too 
much virtual dissipation, lagging commitment, and wandering focus. 
Each type of collaboration tool can be its own container and help man-
age the energy of the group. Just as a kitchen feels cozier than a dining room, 
or a meditation space is different from a family room, the communication 
tool you choose creates a different ambience. It gives a sense of the “room” 
one is entering. One-on-one conversation tools, such as Skype or IM, have 
more immediacy than e-mail . Chat rooms are casual, offering conversational 
freedom that team discussion forums do not. Well-facilitated web confer-
ences can corral team energy much as a physical room when live and mics are 
open. Web conferences are ﬂ exible, amenable to different types of communi-
cation—brainstorming strategies, weekly stand-ups, or client presentations, 
for example. Each is a web conference, but the meeting’s virtual work space 
changes to reﬂ ect the meeting purpose and formality.
The combined communication tools are the team’s virtual ofﬁ ce, the 
sacred work space everyone knows is the team’s ways of coming together. 
The team exists, even when it isn’t digitally connected. The virtual ofﬁ ce, the 
collection of team tools, holds the space for the group between connections, 
ensuring the team is available even when no one is in the virtual room. The 
“sacred space” of the team becomes its commitment to each other, not a work 
space. As the team connects formally and informally, it develops habits that 
help the team know it is always a team, even when not together.
A few guidelines:
• Minimize discussion of organizational hierarchy and other “power” 
variables unless they are highly relevant. It sets up a tendency to defer 
to the most powerful inﬂ uencer. Power suppresses people’s free ﬂ ow.
• All teams hold private conversations that are not relevant to the whole. 
This is essential and appropriate, and helps bond team members. Help 
them ﬁ nd virtually private conversation spaces. Just watch for cliques.

208  
EXPAND EMOTIONAL BANDWIDTH
• Honor team members’ personal values about their work space. A fast 
way to splinter a virtual team is to offend someone’s beliefs with a 
careless remark or raunchy joke. 
• Keep private conversation private unless it is relevant to the group. 
Private jokes hinted at in team meetings will isolate those on the 
outside.
Stoke Virtual Team Fires
The energy is built, the space is set, but virtual teams need to keep ﬁ res burn-
ing. When two team members hit a “Eureka!” moment, encourage them 
to run virtually to the whole team and share the excitement—then, not 
later. Broadcast in ALL CAPS. Let your enthusiasm show; embrace excla-
mation points! Deliver pizza and beer to everyone’s virtual ofﬁ ce. When a 
team member is recognized, feature her in a podcast sent to key stakehold-
ers. Develop a habit of pushing team news to targeted inﬂ uencers. Celebrate 
accomplishments as a team together, even when dispersed. Celebrate again 
when face-to-face. Virtual teams simply can’t be too spirited, especially when 
it’s bubbling up from the team. Do virtual jigs. Send e-cards and song links. 
Have fun. It’s a good thing.
Create Team Bonds
Shared experiences keep teams connected and feeling part of each other. 
In the ofﬁ ce environment, happy hours, team sports leagues, and learning 
lunches are opportunities to bond. If your team is virtual, create nonphysical 
ways to bond. What are people interested in? Video-desk yoga class together? 
Virtual book discussions? Start a Fitbit support team with goal achievement 
incentives that everyone can win. Essentially, structure the team’s connection 
enough to keep the team members communicating and engaged with each 
other about more than work.
Contract for Trust
Contractually, workers agree to adopt organization rules and values, to rep-
resent the organization appropriately and ethically. We receive compensation 
in exchange for our agreement. Virtual team agreements are soft contracts, 
transactional agreements that guide team behavior. Ideally they balance the 
team’s needs with individual preferences and organization priorities. They 
structure agreed-upon operating principles that keep everyone clear. Every 
team should have open discussions about expectations, making sure everyone 
commits.

VIRTUAL TEAM TRUST  209
Clearly stated agreements also help onboarding team members. Team 
agreements are trust builders simply through their clarity. Ideally, team val-
ues and agreements will be similar across teams. It’s comforting to recognize 
similar agreements across teams and over time. This layers organizational 
trust through systemic predictability. 
Expand Organization Connection
Rather than getting lost in a large enterprise, most virtual workers limit their 
world. They “understand” the larger organization through who they know, 
usually colleagues, customers, and other stakeholders. Virtual workers rely 
heavily on the people they interact with to navigate the organization. Team 
member alliances and friendships strengthen the team’s network. Be a facili-
tator of teams getting to know their organizational neighbors. 
After the team is performing well together, virtual team members still 
want feedback and to see the impact of their work. Build links between team 
members and the organization so that feedback loops extend beyond the 
borders of your team. 
Let Team Values Emerge
When the team is working well and meeting its commitments, trust more 
naturally develops. Core team values begin to emerge because everyone is 
behaving in ways consistent with their commitments. 
Limits of Structure
When structuring trust during the First Path of team development, you are 
also aligning the team to the organization vision and mission. If your team 
fails to develop into a fully performing virtual team, you will always need the 
team communication infrastructure, working agreements, and accountabil-
ity measures. You may or may not have deeply shared commitment, trust, or 
a sense of safety. Use organization policies, project requirements, and team 
agreements to structure trust until genuine trust develops on the team, and 
to help the team function well enough if it never does. 
Push structure too far, and you will create a greater trust barrier between 
you and your virtual team. The team may begin building its own alliances 
that you know nothing about. Structure is a good thing, and serves impor-
tant ends, starting with establishing healthy boundaries, clarifying roles 
and responsibilities, jump-starting team communication, verifying quality 
standards and production goals, and so on. In essence, you are deﬁ ning what 
behaviors are trust building and what outcomes are needed. Agreements do 

210  
EXPAND EMOTIONAL BANDWIDTH
nothing to create trusting relationships, but they clarify behavioral standards 
that everyone understands—because they helped create them. People trust 
more easily when they feel they have choices, so share decisions with the 
team when you can.11 Shared agreements and a safe work space enable teams 
to bring full strength, personality, heart, and mind to the job, and open the 
door to fast team trust.
Strong Relationships
Strong relationships are resilient. At the team level, simple conversation is the 
most powerful strategy for expanding emotional bandwidth to strengthen 
relationships. Face-to-face conversations, juicy e-mails, long telephone calls, 
online conferences—all add value by simply spending time together, as a 
team. Frequent “check-ins,” perhaps even daily, should be the norm when 
virtual. As a committed team leader, keep the conversations going.
Courtesy Matters
With the busy work pace, basic courtesy often gets left behind virtually, and 
it risks virtual teams. I witness global team members ﬁ re off communications 
and assigned tasks as their day ends, leaving colleagues on other continents 
to greet their morning with a full in-box of demands. Is this rude? Leverag-
ing? Efﬁ cient? 
It depends. . . . Your team decides what serves, and what impedes. What 
is authentic for this team? This culture? These people? Treat global colleagues 
as you would those sitting next to you, with courtesy as deﬁ ned by your 
team. Your virtual colleagues are just as real as your cubicle mate. When you 
talk work, maybe ask something about them, and listen to the answer before 
jumping to the task. It doesn’t take long.
Communicate, Converse, Connect
Teams have to talk about the work to maintain trust . Social, informal com-
munication that complements task communication strengthens trust faster 
but isn’t enough. An exclusively task-focused team runs the risk of dry com-
munication revolving around logistics, coordination, and reports. Teams 
have learned to trust the structure, but may never learn to trust each other. 
Facilitate your team’s balance.
Have many kinds of conversations. Convene to discuss strategy, pre-
pare team reports, and debate the merits of different approaches. Encourage 

VIRTUAL TEAM TRUST  211
open-ended dialogue at team meetings that goes where it will. The broader 
the communication, the greater the opportunity for the team to get to know 
how to work together better. This is invaluable. 
Some worry that too much talking interferes with our individual pro-
duction responsibilities, believing (wrongly) that getting to know people 
better takes too much time and is unnecessary virtually. Distance can make 
faceless abstractions of us all. Virtual team members are people with hopes, 
fears, and needs. We have to know people to know their needs, and we have 
to know their hopes to unleash their full talent. 
If you’re a busy virtual manager reading this, you may be wondering how 
to possibly get all these virtual tongues wagging and still get your work done. 
Find a way. Leverage your time however you need, but neglect team connec-
tion at your team’s risk.
Leaders who fail to effectively engage teams do more than slow down 
a team’s development. A weak relationship with a manager typically leads 
to polite unwillingness to challenge, itself a risk. Generate trust in everyday 
interactions and talk about team progress. Everyday interactions. Steve Dorn, 
director of client strategy for Pivotal Resources, states it bluntly: “Today a nec-
essary leadership competence is the ability to engage people in conversations 
that allow for clarity and elicit mutual commitment to a shared future.”12 
Trust Is the Bottom Line
Trust precedes willingness to collaborate with another person whose behavior 
cannot be controlled. Unless we strongly believe that others will not abuse 
our trust, we don’t really trust them. We structure implicit and explicit agree-
ments in the meantime.
If agreements are met, trust is built. If they’re not, trust has failed (or a 
poor hiring decision was made). It’s almost that simple. When asked, virtual 
team members say lack of trust and poor communication are the most com-
mon reasons teams underperform. 
When Can I Relax? You Know You Have a Trusting Team 
When . . .
All team members freely do the following:
• Admit mistakes.
• Ask for help.
• Accept input.

212  
EXPAND EMOTIONAL BANDWIDTH
• Give one another the beneﬁ t of the doubt.
• Offer feedback and assistance.
• Speak freely but without controlling the conversation.
• Appreciate (and show appreciation for) one another’s skills and 
experiences.
• Focus time and energy on important issues.
• Offer and accept apologies as necessary.
• Look forward to opportunities for collaboration.
• Support one another in ordinary—and extraordinary—ways.
Teams begin with swift, structured trust and hope to end with genuine trust. 
They show initiative and adjust to one another as team roles emerge and 
change, becoming a truly interdependent team that takes pride in delivering 
on its promise. Performing teams are, to summarize McChrystal, benevolent, 
behaving with integrity, and competent. Team conﬂ ict bonds them as they 
work through issues.
To simplify what it takes to be a trusting and trustworthy virtual leader, 
and to wrap up the essential learning of this chapter, ask yourself one ques-
tion regularly: “Does what I’m about to do create trust, or does it risk it?” Make 
it a habit and your mantra.
Notes
1. The word intimacy stems from the Latin intimatus, to make something 
known to someone else. Another derivation is the verb intimate, which originally 
meant to notify.
2. Trina Hoeﬂ ing, “The Three-Fold Path of Expanding Emotional Bandwidth 
in Virtual Teams,” in The Handbook of High-Performance Virtual Teams: A Toolkit 
for Collaborating Across Boundaries, ed. Jill Nemiro, Michael Beyerlein, Lori Bradley, 
and Susan Beyerlein (San Francisco: Jossey-Bass, 2008), ch. 3, p. 91.
3. This is my conclusion from well over 30 years of consulting, training, and 
coaching experience, validated through several interviews with long-standing and 
continuing experts who implement ﬂ exwork solutions for corporations. All our 
experience is supported by workplace studies.
4. Deloitte Consulting, “Big Demands and High Expectations: The Deloitte 
Millennial Survey,” White Paper, 2014, http://www2.deloitte.com/al/en/pages/
about-deloitte/articles/2014-millennial-survey-positive-impact.html
5. “Digital World: Analogue Workplace,” Sloan MIT Center for Information 
Systems Research, 2015, http://cisr.mit.edu
6. Deloitte Consulting, “Big Demands.”
7. General Stanley McChrystal et al., Team of Teams: New Rules of Engagement 
for a Complex World (New York: Penguin Random House, 2015).

VIRTUAL TEAM TRUST  213
8. Interview quote from Steve Dorn, director of client strategy, Pivotal 
Resources, 2015.
9. Jeff Haden, “10 Ways Great Bosses Use Science to Lead Great Teams,” Inc. 
Magazine, June 2015, www.linkedin.com/pulse/10-ways-great-bosses-use-science-
lead-teams-jeff-haden
10. “Common Ground,” Merriam-Webster.com, www.merriam-webster.com/
dictionary/common%20ground
11. Steve Dorn, “Improving Radical Organizational Change Implementation 
by Focusing Leadership Efforts on Building Commitment and Trust,” Capstone 
Project, University of Denver, 2015. 
12. Quoted from telephone interview Hoeﬂ ing conducted w ith Dorn, October 
2015.

214
17
V I RT UA L  E M P L OY E E 
E N G A G E M E N T  I N  C Y N I C A L 
C U LT U R E S
“Manners are a sensitive awareness of the feelings of others. If you have that awareness, you have 
good manners, no matter what fork you use.”
—Emily Post
“When you hear the corporate motto, ‘We value the individual,’ get ready for the layoffs.”
—Dr. Charles Grantham
A
re you encouraged or disappointed when you read this?
I work remotely; we are scattered all over the United States. Our depart-
ment has a primary purpose of serving the company and doesn’t really con-
sider the aspirations of the employees who make up the company. That 
makes it a challenge for employees to stay connected and engaged with the 
company. Our department has tracking software in place to keep employ-
ees on task, but this is obviously not the same as having a good manager 
who holds it—and us—all together, who makes it work. Our department 
is lacking in building commitment to team purpose.
Directors just don’t appear to be interested in connecting with the 
employee as an individual. All of my coworkers and myself (although I’m 
just becoming aware of this now) operate from a “what can I get” mentality. 
We are currently working on our new computer system that will eventually 
(hopefully) help us keep better track of our project files, deadlines, meet-
ings, and so forth. This new product is helpful in bringing us together as 
a team because it’s putting us all on the same page as we work to develop 
it while building it. We’re also getting to know each other. With some 

VIRTUAL EMPLOYEE ENGAGEMENT IN CYNICAL CULTURES  215
leadership, we could continue to grow into a team as we learn how to use 
the tool to help us coordinate. (Virtual team member, a millennial, who 
still believes and hopes, 2015)
This young, smart, virtual team member recognizes team potential, but 
she also sees lack of leadership. Some readers will see the irony in how much 
budget, time, and corporate attention are given to collaborative technology, 
obviously without attending to the lever that most impacts how well a virtual 
team engages—the virtual manager.
Engagement is measured by how much workers are motivated to con-
tribute to organizational success by applying discretionary effort. People in 
today’s workforce tell us they want to be—but aren’t—engaged; their leaders 
aren’t getting across that the effort is worth it.
All-Time High for Low Trust
Smart organizations are redesigning with better technology, as this young pro-
fessional’s company is doing. They know the network is the workplace. Still, 
workers report alarmingly high levels of employee disengagement,  costing 
money and productivity. Seven in 10 employees self-report  disengagement 
from their jobs. Actively disengaged workers cost business $550 billion 
annually, according to Gallup in 2014.1
SMART Organization Guidelines for Virtual Engagement
Organization leaders must change to reverse this disengagement trend, 
 starting with guiding principles that create a workplace environment for 
engagement. The following principles also remind managers how to engage 
their people: 
• Structure teams as interlinking nodes in a network of teams and alli-
ances, rather than as a hierarchical chain of access and reporting.
• Make conversations happen, rather than “cascading” information 
down and out.
• Activate robust (push, post, and pull) communication systems.
• Reach learners and develop leaders many ways (face-to-face and 
online, live and self-paced, individual and team learning).
• Tap people as knowledge-rich nodes in the network.

216  
EXPAND EMOTIONAL BANDWIDTH
Cardinal Signs of Disengagement
A culture of fault-ﬁ nding, ﬁ nger-pointing, and self-protective behavior 
develops in organizations, even among members who usually take responsi-
bility for their own behavior. Because company cultures are part of a bigger 
business culture that lacks perceived fairness and integrity, many people don’t 
trust organizations easily. When workers see evidence of leaders who don’t 
care, they are cautious, deﬂ ecting responsibility and disidentifying with their 
jobs, just as our anonymous millennial admits doing, to her own surprise.
You know your organization has an employee engagement challenge 
when the following is happening:
• People are afraid or unwilling to speak up for an idea or defend them-
selves.
• Corporate communication ﬁ nesses the truth and sells positions to the 
workforce, perhaps providing speciﬁ c talking points to managers to 
help perpetuate the “packaged truth.” (This is different when explaining 
a new initiative or strategic goal when information needs to be shared 
accurately.)
• Workers have to compete with each other to get redeployed, or 
they are evaluated in a forced rank system. (The old GE Jack Welch 
philosophy where everyone is ranked for performance and promotion in 
competition with their fellow employees.)
The main indicator of disengagement, though, is a poor relationship 
between employees and the manager who is responsible for their perfor-
mance evaluation.2 
The Manager Is the Critical Variable
Every manager is arguably a critical variable for team engagement or disen-
gagement. A virtual manager is the critical variable. Engaged managers are 
critical to virtual teams because they are the primary connective tissue to 
the organization. The engaged team with an involved virtual leader builds 
bridges to the bigger vision and organization mission, key to engagement.
As a virtual leader, you are key in each team member’s choice to engage. 
The key competency correlating to employee engagement is your communica-
tion skill. Studies by such wide-ranging sponsors as Microsoft and the Future 
Work Forum show that today’s managers must have better relationship com-
petencies, beginning with self-awareness about how they come across to 
others. If you don’t like interacting with people, you may not be a strong 

VIRTUAL EMPLOYEE ENGAGEMENT IN CYNICAL CULTURES  217
candidate for virtual leadership. Inauthentic interaction feels perfunctory to 
both the manager and the team member. Regular communication helps the 
virtual leader to do the following:
• Communicate face-to-face and virtually in a way that inspires and  clariﬁ es. 
• Build and maintain trusting relationships. 
• Manage collaboratively for results. 
This chapter examines what we know about today’s (demotivated) work-
force and what to do about it, particularly with virtual professionals. We’ll 
look at leading today’s increasingly diverse, multigenerational, mobile, vir-
tual, ﬂ exible workforce that needs to be engaged in order to feel connected, 
let alone motivated. 
We’ll look at how the virtual leader unleashes talent virtually to develop 
committed virtual teams that want to stick together. First, let’s look at the 
organizational cultures within which many virtual teams function.
Silence That Kills
Workers are not getting what they want. Across American companies, work-
ers don’t trust their organizations to be fair or have integrity. We’re chroni-
cally cynical, which saps potential and proﬁ t, if not the team’s life force.3 
When people see behavior they believe is unethical, most admit they say 
and do nothing. Research into organizational silence ﬁ nds that most working 
professionals, especially executives, frequently have information they don’t 
share and concerns they never voice. Two reasons are given: 
1. People fear retribution for going against the system.
2. They feel hopeless that what they say will matter. 
In other words, it’s not worth it.
In recent years, I’ve seen unapologetic bullying by leaders. Virtual 
employees complain that their virtual manager hides behind the digital net-
work, providing minimal genuine support. Communication is task driven. 
My graduate students report a preponderance of cynical cultures in their past 
and current employers. After investigating further, it seems workers justify 
bad managerial behaviors and adapt to demeaning cultures, letting go of 
initial hope and expectations.
Even involved managers become calloused, devolving to the managerial 
norm of the company culture. We want our employers to live up to our ide-
als, but more often see leaders who don’t. At all levels of the organization, the 

218  
EXPAND EMOTIONAL BANDWIDTH
workforce has come to expect little. It’s no wonder people lapse into acquies-
cent disengagement, whether out of cynicism, fear, or disappointment.
Social capital is a psychological term used to describe the mutual trust 
and reciprocity practiced by groups that make society resilient in times of 
stress. Teams with high levels of social capital are genuinely more fair and 
cooperative. Social capital diminishes when competitive pressure takes prec-
edence over sharing. Competitive corporate cultures are, in the long term, 
stiﬂ ing companies’ social capital and team relationship capital.
Threats to Integrity
Integrity is more than ethics. Integrity means the organization is structur-
ally sound, like a well-engineered bridge. A competent bridge builder ﬁ xes 
structural ﬂ aws at the root cause to ensure a safe and durable construction. 
Organizational integrity means long-lasting companies.
Leaders who seek the truth are acting with integrity, as a bridge engineer 
would. Those who can’t or won’t hear bad news put the system at risk. A 
bridge’s integrity is its structural soundness, its safety. If executives are choos-
ing to remain silent, what kind of structural integrity does the organization 
have? What can a leader, in good conscience, promise her team that is bank-
able on behalf of a low-trust, quiet organization? 
An organization’s integrity is a reﬂ ection of its ability to see and hear 
what is really going on, continuously improve and innovate, and deliver on 
its promise. People who share what they experience are nodes in the feedback 
loops of a healthy system. When it’s safe to speak up, when what we say is 
considered, we are more inclined to trust our effort is worth it. The virtual 
team needs its team leader to be a listener.
Whether out of fear or because they feel their comments will fall on deaf 
ears, people who don’t speak up are surrounded by others who won’t either, 
meaning mistakes are being perpetuated throughout the system. Those who 
choose silence over engagement will eventually lose faith in a system they see 
as ﬂ awed or at risk.
And they’re right. 
Fear-based silence is a symptom of ethical collapse in organizations.4 
Hypercompetitive company cultures are especially prone to poor ethics 
because winning is critical. The end becomes such a focus that the means 
become amoral. In other words, “winners” in competitive environments 
don’t think about behavior as good or bad; rather, behavior is good if it 
moves the worker closer to a win. 
People who are working in systems they see as structurally unsound or 
highly competitive (or both) feel unsafe. They learn that ﬁ xing the game is 

VIRTUAL EMPLOYEE ENGAGEMENT IN CYNICAL CULTURES  219
safer than playing fairly. Winning is more important than playing by or chal-
lenging the rules. Organization values and ethics get little, if any, considera-
tion in strategic conversations. Any ethical pondering remains internal, often 
creating cognitive dissonance for the individual who sees but doesn’t say. 
People act from basic survival ﬁ rst, understandably.
What happens in a void? People ﬁ ll it with stories and theories, some-
times accurate, often distorted through the lens of cynicism, judgment, and 
fear. The virtual worker in such circumstances works in an echo chamber, 
loosening yet one more tether to the organization. 
Myopia Is Disengaging
Most readers aren’t surprised that we’re cynical as a collective workforce, or 
that surveys report low levels of trust. Cynicism isn’t the only problem orga-
nizations face when it comes to engaging people, however.
Small-picture thinking is also disengaging and confusing. 
One of the best ways to build trust is connecting “the work” to the mis-
sion and strategic vision. Minimize any alignment issues by facilitating an 
emerging vision of how this team will manifest the strategic vision. Unfortu-
nately, only 25% of today’s workers feel connected to their company’s mis-
sion, and an unsettling 50% feel disengaged. The rest don’t know or couldn’t 
state the mission.5 This introduces another organizational integrity risk 
because fewer eyes are quality assessing the whole, seeing systemically. Myo-
pia in the end-to-end organization processes and production puts the system 
at risk and certainly isn’t motivating.
No strategy is sustainable if it has little energy or hope. Hope is the 
greatest motivation we have to attract people. When people have hope, their 
work matters and they emotionally connect to the organization and the 
team, which is energizing. A virtual leader harnesses this desire to connect to 
the vision. Hope may be the single commonality underlying all motivation. 
Even cynics are often tired optimists, so the more a virtual leader can uncover 
reason and meaning in the work, the better the chance to harness motivation 
and unleash energy.
We Bring Our Past With Us
Trust is not just the responsibility of the organization or manager. That is 
unfair. Not everyone comes into a team ready to trust. Many workers come 
with low trust based on previous experience, setting up a potentially self-
fulﬁ lling prophecy. Expect some people to trust slowly. Lead in a way so that 
people can safely lower their barriers. 

220  
EXPAND EMOTIONAL BANDWIDTH
Leaders come to teams with their own history, too. It’s important that 
virtual leaders can trust their people. A fast way to erode someone else’s trust 
in you is to not trust them. The more the virtual manager trusts his team, the 
easier it is to be a trusted manager. Continuously evolve your understanding 
of team strengths, talents, and shortcomings so you have no doubt about 
people’s ability to do their job. You need to know you can trust them to per-
form to expectations. To trust and be trustworthy is the single most impor-
tant commitment anyone can make to break down trust barriers.
Poor Communication Makes Everything Worse
It turns out that people judge others as untrustworthy when they are poor 
or sporadic communicators. Much of this book is about communication, so 
I’ll simply remind the reader about the data. Interpersonal and relationship 
intelligence is essential in the virtual work environment. It’s foundational 
because communication is what enlivens work groups to develop into teams.
Two Structural, Sticky, Fast-Acting, Tie-Tightening Organization 
Behaviors
Employee engagement has gone through name changes over the years and 
may be undergoing another with a resurgence in empowerment. In 1975, 
a “worker participation” initiative originated a shift to include labor’s input 
about improving the workday and manufacturing efﬁ ciencies. Involving 
labor in the conversation changed how jobs were organized without disrupt-
ing line efﬁ ciencies and increasing job satisfaction. Job enlargement and 
job enrichment were early examples of work process changes that improved 
employee satisfaction with repetitive work.6 
This collaboration between management and labor evolved, and a pattern 
emerged that identiﬁ ed four practices that historically catapult people’s com-
mitment in organizations. The ﬁ rst two practices are organizational options 
getting attention again today. The second two practices fall to the team leader.
1. Shared Ownership
Employee stock ownership plans (ESOPs) are becoming popular again as pri-
vate companies look at talent retention. For example, Left Hand Brewing, a 
Colorado microbrew, is sharing its future with its workforce, building strong 
employee ties. The craft brewery deployed investor shares into an ESOP that 
gives its workers a majority share in the business. No company sale can hap-
pen without the vote of the employee owners. 

VIRTUAL EMPLOYEE ENGAGEMENT IN CYNICAL CULTURES  221
That’s a strong commitment to people, and a strong stand by cofounder 
and CEO Eric Wallace. He embraces that his company’s future is inter-
connected with its people.7 Chobani has shared stock with every employee 
prior to going public. Most business leaders say that people are a company’s 
most precious asset; employee ownership is a potent way to prove it.8
2. Monetary Fairness 
According to a survey sponsored by the Freelancers Union, as many as one in 
three U.S. workers identiﬁ es as a freelancer—roughly 53 million Americans 
in all. What that means for recruiting and retaining talent is a large pool 
of potential independent contractors. These independent workers also have 
other opportunities. The best workers, therefore, get to pick and choose the 
companies with which they work.
If you want to hire and retain the best people, set your organization apart 
by offering interesting assignments and good working terms, train team lead-
ers, and pay well. The Container Store, for example, recently committed to 
paying retail associates a $50,000 base salary as their commitment to a living 
wage, sending the message that workers’ time has intrinsic value, regardless 
of their job duties.9 California and New York recently raised their minimum 
wage. Employers that want to retain a quality workforce are looking at fair pay.
Organizations can also provide incentives. Flexwork options work 
for employees and contractors alike. Consider team incentives by offering 
rewards tied to team metrics and milestones. This directly connects earning 
potential to the team’s success. You have more commitment without increased 
ﬁ nancial cost unless results are achieved. Motivating incentives include 
nonﬁ nancial opportunities as well. Today’s professionals want  learning and 
development opportunities they can’t easily provide themselves, formal and 
informal. Send your department to an international expo to talk to thought 
leaders and test-drive tools, and then have attendees offer a virtual brown-bag 
lunch show-and-tell of what they learned. Start a team wiki for sharing tools 
and resources and acknowledge contributors publicly. Find fun, simple, and 
inexpensive ways to ensure people feel they are being compensated fairly for 
their contribution—ﬁ nancially and nonﬁ nancially.
Two Collaborative, Commitment-Building, Employee-Engaging 
Virtual Leader Behaviors
The second two high-result motivation practices fall to the team leader. Col-
laborative teams thrive when teammates show up fully, work ﬁ ercely, and 
share willingly. Engaging team leaders create an environment for motivated 

222  
EXPAND EMOTIONAL BANDWIDTH
team members by developing the team, which is, in fact, the development 
path of the Threefold Path to high-performance virtual teams. 
1. Cogovernance and Collaborative Team Agreements
Shift people away from protective positions to open possibility by launching 
(or refocusing) your virtual team the right way. Navigate and negotiate until 
the team has a shared understanding of the mission, vision, values, outcomes 
and deliverables, work processes, and communication agreements—the team 
development path. Lead your teams progressively forward, learning from the 
past, seeing the present, and creating a successful future.10 Nothing builds 
commitment like cocreated success.
2. Empowering Leaders
Technology enables collaboration in a way that we’ve stripped out of many busi-
ness practices. The virtual manager’s job is to bring humanity to the value 
chain processes. Let technology do the tracking.
If it isn’t your management style already, learn to lead collaboratively in 
order to cocreate a better future with your team. People aren’t just human 
resources or FTEs (full-time equivalents), but real people who bring compe-
tency, qualities, and ideas to work. Unleash people during the Second Path 
of team support, and expect honest and full participation from everyone. 
Let the tools provide appropriate controls, while you focus on being the col-
laborative manager. 
For example, help your team switch from personal habits to team 
rhythms. This seems to be particularly tough for people not prone to collabo-
rating. The beneﬁ ts of using collaborative tools with shared protocols often 
require changing personal habits to a more transparent and precise way of 
communicating through team channels. Visibility can produce fear as often 
as motivation in cynical cultures or with low-trust personalities. The team’s 
comfort with transparent communication channels may be an indicator of 
how much safety your team feels, or it could be simply individual habits that 
are hard to change. Habits, once in place as a team, keep your team together. 
Hold the team, kindly but ﬁ rmly, to the communication commitments. 
Motivation—Theory to Practice
Virtual leaders are often middle managers who did not create the company 
culture or its values. At the same time, they are the most important factor 
in determining employee satisfaction. The manager, even in cynical or fear-
based cultures, can directly, positively impact trust. In fact, virtual managers 

VIRTUAL EMPLOYEE ENGAGEMENT IN CYNICAL CULTURES  223
may have an advantage over their colocated peers. The virtual environment 
gives the virtual leader a bit of room to insulate the team from the inﬂ uence 
of a toxic culture.
If you ﬁ nd yourself building a team in a toxic culture, don’t ignore or 
discount that problems exist. Teams shouldn’t ignore what’s happening that 
is outside their control; it will exacerbate fear. Control the controllable, inﬂ u-
ence the amenable, and be pragmatic about the rest.
Connect People’s Hearts and Minds
The virtual manager creates an environment where people motivate them-
selves. Today’s workers want to work for managers who connect emotion-
ally.11 Your best leadership advantage is fully in your control—how well 
you connect with people’s hearts and minds. When people are motivated and 
engaged, they think about work when they don’t have to, wanting to get back 
to it and anxious to hear how things turn out.
Psychologist David McClelland’s achievement motivation theory was 
the basis upon which modern management theory was built. His mid- 
twentieth-century management model showed that most people were moti-
vated by the need for achievement, followed by those most motivated by 
accumulating power, trailed by a group with a high need for afﬁ liation.12
Achievement is no longer most workers’ driving motivator. Particularly 
with the inﬂ ux of millennials into the workforce, driving motivators have 
reversed. People most seek afﬁ liation with an organization that is doing mean-
ingful work.
When 12,000 workers (and their managers) were asked what they 
believed motivated them most, almost all managers ranked recognition for 
achievement as the top motivator. Ninety-ﬁ ve percent of the managers were 
wrong. By a vast majority, employees most valued meaningful progress in their 
work. Employee motivation is less about being seen and more about seeing the 
meaning in the work.13
Come Together Purposefully
In order for workers to apply themselves fully on the job and for teams to 
achieve their best results, they want to know how their work ﬁ ts into the big 
picture. According to McClelland’s motivation theory, our primary need, or 
motivator, is not inherent; we develop it through our culture and life expe-
riences. The old management model underpinned managerial behaviors 
by determining that for most people achievement drove them. Therefore, 

224  
EXPAND EMOTIONAL BANDWIDTH
competition gave people opportunities to be recognized for their achieve-
ments. That was true then.
Enter millennials and more contract workers who work easily with 
others, even on temporary assignments. Our life experiences give rise to a 
primary motivation of afﬁ liation. A vast majority of today’s workers report 
being motivated when they are contributing “meaningful work” with others. 
It has certainly been true for me. People want to be part of something big-
ger than them; they want to afﬁ liate with groups and organizations they are 
proud to be part of.
Develop Authentic, Collaborative Relationships
People care about being cared about, and most of us smell empty ﬂ attery. It’s 
almost biological. We can’t fake caring (at least for long). It takes too much 
energy to keep up the charade. If you’re reading this book and think people 
leadership may be too much work, you may want to get out of manage-
ment. Virtual management is all about strong relationships. The foundation 
for healthy, long-lasting team cultures lies with our relationships—in other 
words, engaging people on more levels than a transactional job description 
and paycheck. Companies are missing out when they fail to help team leaders 
link organizational vision to teamwork.
Much corporate communication is so corporate centered that it fails to 
grab many workers’ attention, let alone motivate them. Often it places too 
much emphasis on beneﬁ ts to the company, not the people they’re address-
ing.14 As the virtual leader, be more than a messenger of cascading corporate 
communication. Bring meaning to the story.
Who Authentic Collaborators Are
Authenticity may not be teachable. I won’t say much more except to describe 
what authentic leaders do that builds strong team relationships: 
• They have integrity.
• They are honest. 
• They tell the full story—what people need to do, and under what 
conditions. They don’t sugarcoat. 
• They tell their truth.
• They hear others’ truth. 
• They take the time to learn about others and what makes them tick.

VIRTUAL EMPLOYEE ENGAGEMENT IN CYNICAL CULTURES  225
Six Engaging Leadership Practices
1. Provide Positive, Honest Feedback
Build team conﬁ dence with feedback, good news, and constructive advice. 
Especially until milestones are reached, praise effort. Recognize and share 
progress. Coach to hit closer to the mark next time. This will call out excel-
lence so the team can continuously learn and embed best practices. Help 
create an environment where people learn without fear and take reasonable 
risks without fear.
2. Provide Optimal Challenges With Just Enough Stress 
To build a team’s competency “muscle,” you want to challenge its mem-
bers. Unless people are stretching, they tend to fall short of potential. Teams 
are no different and do their best work when under some pressure (but not 
overly stressed). Virtual leaders focus conversations, meetings, and activities 
on team challenges.15
3. Ensure People Are Safe From Demeaning Treatment and Unfair 
Evaluation 
Safety ﬁ rst. Bullies are inconsiderate, even when making valid points. People 
need honest feedback, but how they hear the feedback is just as important. 
Performance evaluations and coaching sessions can be formative without 
demeaning or shutting people down. Make coaching sessions and evalua-
tions interactive, listen and respond openly to their perspective, and cocreate 
an improvement plan.
4. Ensure Empowerment
In contrast to routine, coerced, or instinct-driven cooperation, genuine col-
laboration not only requires but creates and supports individual empower-
ment. A hallmark indicator of real collaboration is that it is empowering! 
Collaboration nurtures and brings out strong personal power, which, in 
turn, nurtures collaboration.16 
Every leadership action is, in some sense, a moral challenge to see that every-
one comes out fairly. You can buy a person’s time, but not his heart or mind. 
A motto I learned from a spiritual teacher guides my life: “Is it fair, and 
does it serve the interest of all concerned?” Reframed for the empowering leader: 
“Does it empower my team to serve the interests of stakeholders?”

226  
EXPAND EMOTIONAL BANDWIDTH
5. Flex Your Style
Results will exceed expectations surprisingly often when we listen and adapt 
to our team. We are helping them work out how they work best. Work is more 
fun, people are more comfortable, and synergy comes more easily. Are you 
an adaptable enough virtual leader? Can you manage an effective response 
to any stage of a virtual worker or team development? I thought I was until 
an assessment showed me how predominantly I rely on only two manage-
ment styles, limiting my ability to lead everyone on my teams. I couldn’t ﬂ ex 
until I knew I wasn’t as adaptable as I thought.17
A 2010 Blanchard study found that 69% of leaders use one style exclu-
sively. Only 14% are fully ﬂ exible.18 Develop versatility.
6. Expand Emotional Bandwidth
Trust, engaged leaders and teams, effective communication, and  collaborative 
tools—a great formula that expands the emotional bandwidth available to 
sustain resilient relationships. 
Workers With Friends Are Happier
Great news! The virtual leader doesn’t have to do all the motivating! There’s 
one thing to do that trumps almost everything else to engage people and 
boost performance. 
Make a close friend at the ofﬁ ce. 
People with a “best work friend” are seven times more likely to be 
engaged in their work. Those with three or more work friends register a 
higher overall satisfaction in life. Gallup conﬁ rmed strong work friendships 
increase job satisfaction, collaboration, and team commitment. It further 
found that people with trusted work friends are more truthful and resilient. 
People were less willing to seek help from acquaintances. Friends are built-in 
support, the Second Path to high-performance teams.19
Today’s workplace often has trust challenges, but that doesn’t mean you 
can’t be a high-trust virtual team. Connect to your team members by watch-
ing, listening, and learning from them. Adapt your style to deepen the rela-
tionship, authentically, and encourage the team members to get to know and 
like each other.
Notes
1. Amy Adkins, “Majority of U.S. Employees Not Engaged Despite Gains 
in 2014,” Gallup, 2014, www.gallup.com/poll/181289/majority-employees-not-
engaged-despite-gains-2014.aspx

VIRTUAL EMPLOYEE ENGAGEMENT IN CYNICAL CULTURES  227
2. Deloitte Consulting, “Big Demands and High Expectations: The Deloitte 
Millennial Survey,” White Paper, 2014, http://www2.deloitte.com/al/en/pages/
about-deloitte/articles/2014-millennial-survey-positive-impact.html
3. I integrated, cross-referenced, and compared employee surveys and worker 
satisfaction research. I began with Stephen Covey’s research published in 1991 in 
Principle-Centered Leadership and continued to integrate updated research through 
March 2016. Some major references will be cited separately, but to include all cita-
tions is unwieldy. The longitudinal comparative analysis and conclusions are sum-
marized in this chapter.
4. Marianne Jennings, The Seven Signs of Ethical Collapse: How to Spot Moral 
Meltdowns in Companies Before It’s Too Late (New York: St. Martin’s Press, 2006).
5. Deloitte Consulting, “Big Demands.”
6. Worker participation brought labor into the conversation about how to 
modernize factory technology. Carol Haddad was a primary leader because she docu-
mented and tracked results, summarized in this chapter that have held up over time. 
Haddad teaches at Eastern Michigan University’s College of Technology and is the 
North American associate editor for the journal New Technology, Work, and Employ-
ment. (www.emich.edu/cot/faculty/faculty_proﬁ les/carol_haddad.php).
7. Ed Sealover, “Left Hand Brewing Employees Take Ownership,  Bucking 
Industry Trend,” Denver Business Journal, July 1, 2015, www.bizjournals.com/
denver/news/2015/07/01/left-hand-brewing-employees-take-ownership-bucking
.html
8. Margaret Heffernan, A Bigger Prize: Why Competition Isn’t Everything and 
How We Do Better (London: Simon & Schuster, 2014).
9. Deloitte Consulting, “Big Demands.”
10. Teresa Amabiel and Steven Kramer, The Progress Principle: Using Small Wins 
to Ignite Joy, Engagement, and Creativity at Work (Boston: Harvard Business Review, 
2011).
11. Bernard Burnes and Rune Todnem, “Leadership and Change: The Case for 
Greater Ethical Clarity,” Journal of Business Ethics 108 (2011): 239–252.
12. “Need Theory,” Wikipedia, last modiﬁ ed July 26, 2015, https://en.wikipedia.
org/wiki/Need_theory
13. Amabiel and Kramer, Progress Principle.
14. Bill Jensen et al., “The Future of Work: Making the Future Work 2015–
2020 and Decades to Come,” Search for a Simpler Way Study, Simpler Work: Com-
piled Research Results, 2014. 
15. Stephen Willis, Power Through Collaboration: The Formula for Success in 
Challenging Situations (n.p.: Willis Consulting, 2013).
16. Ibid.
17. The Hersey-Blanchard situational leadership theory was created by Dr. Paul 
Hersey, a professor and author of The Situational Leader, and Ken Blanchard, author 
of the best-selling The One-Minute Manager, among others.
18. Ken Blanchard, Situation Leadership II, www.kenblanchard.com
19. Tom Rath, interview by Jennifer Robison, in discussion with author 
of Vital Friends: The People You Can’t Afford to Live Without, October 12, 2006, 

228  
EXPAND EMOTIONAL BANDWIDTH
“What Are Workplace Buddies Worth? A Lot, Which Is Why Managers Should 
Be Fostering Friendships in the Ofﬁ ce,” Gallup, October 2006, www.gallup
.com/businessjournal/24883/What-Workplace-Buddies-Worth.aspx?utm_
source=position3&utm_medium=related&utm_campaign=tiles; and Jamie Hodari, 
“Is Working Remotely Sapping Your Creativity?,” Harvard Business Review, April 27, 
2015, https://hbr.org/2015/04/is-working-remotely-sapping-your-creativity

229
18
T H E  F O U RT H  PAT H — L E A D 
Y O U R  C A R E E R
“Above all, don’t lie to yourself. The man who lies to himself and listens to his own lie comes to a 
point that he cannot distinguish the truth within him, or around him, and so loses all respect for 
himself and for others. And having no respect he ceases to love.”
—Fyodor Dostoyevsky
“The only difference between the saint and the sinner is that every saint has a past, and every 
sinner has a future.”
—Oscar Wilde
“Conﬁ dence . . . thrives on honesty, on honor, on the sacredness of obligations, on faithful 
protection and on unselﬁ sh performance. Without them it cannot live.”
—Franklin D. Roosevelt
“Run from what’s comfortable. Forget safety. Live where you fear to live. Be notorious.”
—Rumi
Lead Yourself—a Networked Fourth Path to Career Success
Be the leader of your own professional life. This book shows how to be a 
valued team contributor by walking the Threefold Path, whether virtual 
leader or team member—key competencies today. A fourth professional 
path is fast becoming critical—the path of self-aware career acumen and 
relationship management. As Figure 18.1 shows, we are our own career 
developers and network managers. We aren’t always navigating an employer 
organization; we’re navigating multiple contracts, colleagues, and managers. 
As a Fourth Path professional, you negotiate on your own behalf, bringing 
attention to your value to the market. You manage a business back room, 
whether employee or contractor. You are your own human resources, ﬁ nance, 

230  
EXPAND EMOTIONAL BANDWIDTH
operations, marketing, and strategist. You may also be sales. To be the leader 
of your career, you are the chief advocate for you. 
When we consider the history of labor, working for employers wasn’t 
common until the early twentieth century. We’re returning to a time when 
work doesn’t mean going somewhere to do it. But we’re not tied to home, 
either. Many of us work for multiple organizations. One forecast estimates 
that over 60 million Americans will be “contingent” workers by 2020.1 The 
rules of work are changing.2 What deﬁ nes employment is being tested in 
court with California cases against Uber and Lyft. As of this printing, Uber 
had agreed to pay a signiﬁ cant sum to drivers for previous worker misclassiﬁ -
cation. They also agreed to signiﬁ cant policy changes in favor of driver rights 
that hadn’t been as clearly deﬁ ned as they would have been if a traditional 
labor-management agreement were in place.3
Internal Operating
System
The Contract You
Have With Them
YOUR
Your Tight
Connections
WORKMATES
Career
Relationships
Fourth Path
02
01
04
03
EMPLOYER
Resources You
Can Rely Upon
NETWORK
Figure 18.1. The Fourth Path.
Note. © 2016—Trina Hoeﬂ ing. The SMART Workspace.

THE FOURTH PATH—LEAD YOUR CAREER  231
Companies are recruiting differently as a result. On-demand contracts 
are common and include scientists, project consultants, faculty, market-
ing experts, programmers, process experts, trainers, change managers. HR 
recruiters use crowdsourcing platforms like Freelancer and Upwork to source 
talent, as needed, for projects and employment.4 Companies utilize intern-
ships and host innovation hackathons to cull talent and assess whom to hire.5 
LinkedIn hires employees for up to ﬁ ve years without intending most to 
become career hires.
We have become a workforce that doesn’t expect a long relationship with 
one employer. While companies still have employees to keep the engine run-
ning, often contract specialists do much of the engine building and specialist 
work. Virtual managers are leading people who may not be employees. In 
fact, the virtual manager may be a contractor.
For career professionals, this requires active Fourth Path navigation. 
Commit to develop these ﬁ ve continuing practices needed by today’s smart 
career professional:
Self-leadership. This means taking personal responsibility for your own 
development. It begins with discovering your own purpose and passion. 
Align with the people you work with and your profession. Self-leadership 
also includes putting people and systems in place to get real performance 
feedback when your leader doesn’t give it. Fewer human resources or learning 
and development departments offer fully developed programs to help you get 
better as a team member and leader. It’s up to you now.
Mind shift from “me” to “we.” This mind shift is the essence of truly 
collaborative teamwork and integrated organizations. Valued contributors suit 
up and show up, whether the job lasts a week or a career. Temporary teams 
require full commitment from team members. “Enlightened self-interest” has 
to evolve into a focus on the total ecology of the workplace, work teams, 
your community, and the entire social system that surrounds you, including 
yourself.
Adaptation to emerging realities. We’re all change managers, adapting 
to disruptive changes faster than at any time in recorded history. Profession-
als move among organizations and cultures, changing teams and alliances. 
Adaptability is key. The mantra is “Learn and evolve to keep pace.” We’re 
expected to adjust quickly to different teams’ rhythms and ﬂ ows. Much is 
emerging that has no precedent, requiring innovative thinking—individu-
ally and with teams. Teams face challenges not solved by past learning. They 
need collaborative, forward-focused innovators. And so do you. Your focus is 
on the present and the emerging future, and how that ﬁ ts your career plan. 
Regularly innovate your skill set, professional network, and career priorities. 
Reﬂ ect about what to hold on to, adjust, learn, try, and let go. 

232  
EXPAND EMOTIONAL BANDWIDTH
Relationship management. You are now responsible for managing your 
professional social network. It is the most common source of compensated 
work, professional resources, mentoring, and social support from trusted 
colleagues. You need to consciously build it, maintain it, and change it as 
conditions demand. Develop your personal “board of directors.” Choose 
advisers based on their competencies, integrity, and dedication to your suc-
cess. Develop a passionate network that opens doors for you (and trusts you 
to open doors for them). 
Technology literacy. Collaboration tools are really about communica-
tion in the largest sense. Marshall McLuhan said it best: “The medium is 
the message.”6 Today’s medium is digital—social media; mobile platforms; 
and knowledge-embedded, integrated networks. Everyone knows how to 
use the technology at a basic level for team coordination, such as calendars. 
That’s not enough to be a strong virtual team member, a primary role of the 
Fourth Path professional. You have to master enough collaborative technol-
ogy and social media to broadcast your competency and work with your 
colleagues. 
Fourth Path professionals are on the leading edge of a bigger trend. Walking 
the Fourth Path is smart for the career employee (whether you’ve worked for 
one or many employers) and the professional consultant. If you follow these 
SMART career principles, you will be ahead of the trend before it directly 
impacts you. You are in charge of your work life. 
Implied Promises in a Changing Landscape
You may be like many professionals who perceive the workplace to be unfair at 
times. Many contract workers (perhaps you) were previously career employ-
ees who got downsized, golden parachuted,7 or blindsided in another way. 
Perhaps your team was sent home or abruptly redeployed midproject because 
of strategic shifts and with little explanation and no apology. Managers are 
unfair when they present to decision makers and forget to share credit with 
the team. Many people have been negatively impacted by economic realities 
that were unfair in the last decade, though no less real. Baby boomers were 
not expecting their last work years to be so unpredictable. 
Today’s world is different. Some professionals need to reinvent them-
selves, learning to play by new rules they never thought they’d need. 
Trust is fundamental to effective relationships but can be easily broken. A 
promise is often interpreted as a guaranteed outcome, even though the future 
isn’t guaranteed. Initial commitments change as relationships (or situations 

THE FOURTH PATH—LEAD YOUR CAREER  233
or organization priorities) evolve. An implied promise is usually locked in 
our minds, however unintentionally, risking trust if not fulﬁ lled. 
Has corporate America8 broken its implied promise to a generation of 
the workforce? Minimally, we’re more cynical and less trusting. Transactional 
work relationships are initially built on implied promises and contracted 
agreements. They can evolve into loyal alliances, but most won’t—at least 
they won’t without time and attention given to the relationship. Nurture 
relationships with people and organizations you want to work with again. 
Hang out to strengthen bonds, virtually. Team chat about last night’s game 
or Dancing With the Stars. Get to know one another so trust survives chang-
ing landscapes. 
Fourth Path Competencies
Today’s career professionals aren’t just good team players. They are virtual 
relationship managers, with or without a formal title. That requires a few 
additional Fourth Path skills.  
Negotiate Terms
Compensation specialists know more about market pay rates than most con-
tractors. Recruiting ﬁ rms help organizations negotiate to their advantage. 
For example, one recruiter site posted this in 2014: “If the candidate has 
been unemployed, particularly for a long time, that could bring the pay rate 
down.”9 Research employee-to-contract pay rate conversion tables so you can 
become a good negotiator, account for tax consequences of your employee 
status, and know your skill-based market value. 
Lead Through Influence
You negotiate the leadership value you bring because you are, well, you. As 
this book has reiterated, today’s leaders are strong inﬂ uencers. Inﬂ uential 
leadership isn’t something you can fake. Your leadership and inﬂ uence skills 
should be obvious during the interviewing process. 
Master Change
Change masters create a narrative for change that people understand. People 
aren’t afraid or unwilling to change. They are resistant to what they don’t 
control or understand. Contract professionals adapt every time they join a 
new team or organization, so control your own story.

234  
EXPAND EMOTIONAL BANDWIDTH
Navigate Co-opetition
We tend to apply for positions as individuals, competing against people who 
may have been teammates last week. This forces people to carve out indi-
vidual accomplishments to show their unique value, implicitly at the team’s 
expense. Like political opponents who later become allies for their party’s 
nominated candidate, opponents are expected to forget the past in favor of a 
shared vision once on the team. Understand that when teams form and end 
quickly, professionals walk a tightrope of cooperation while deployed, but 
competition to get deployed, if they share similar expertise. It’s a paradox we 
all have to manage.
Make Your Net-Work
You need a good digital portfolio, starting with a LinkedIn proﬁ le, but that’s 
just the beginning. A closed network of known, trusted colleagues is easier 
to manage. It takes time to nurture relationships, but a small network limits 
your capacity to learn and ﬁ nd opportunity—a professional risk. Keep strong 
ties with your most trusted network friends—those people you know will 
come through for you. But don’t stop there. You need strong bonds with these 
trusted few, but you also need loose ties with a broad network. LinkedIn 
offers many ways to engage. It is my digital Central Station to stay cur-
rent with my network. Use LinkedIn and other social media to maintain 
loose ties with professional and industry communities, promote your work 
and thought leadership, support your professional friends, and manage your 
 contacts. And not just when you’re looking for the next opportunity.
Relationships Are Personal
Who we are shows up. If we hide who we are behind a role we play, we show up 
as inauthentic and closed. Guarded team members aren’t trusted as quickly. 
Work relationships affect us personally. We’ve been taught to leave our emo-
tions at home. But we don’t. We shouldn’t try. If we want to have a career that 
makes a difference, if we want to feel proud professionally, we must ﬁ nd 
organizations, teams, and colleagues with whom we can work collaboratively 
and deliver good results. 
Liking each other is nice, but respect is nonnegotiable. I’ve yet to ﬁ nd 
high-performance teams, virtual or not, that become effective without per-
sonal respect—granted and given. It’s impossible to put our full focus on 
work when we have to navigate distrust, disrespect, politics, and internal 
barriers. The best way to help a team trust is to be authentic, open, and 
trustworthy. Understanding people is a process, not an accomplishment. We 

THE FOURTH PATH—LEAD YOUR CAREER  235
are lifelong learners when it comes to relationships. Teams are our greatest 
learning ground, and our professional network is our circle of inﬂ uence and 
impact.
A Network of Relationships
The biggest responsibility of the Fourth Path is to manage a variety of rela-
tionships. Minimally, break your network into four types of relationships, 
shown in Table 18.1.
Each type of relationship has different requirements. They weave together 
on the Fourth Path, as shown in Figure 18.1, with many people coming and 
going in an active professional’s network. 
1. Yourself—You Matter, Too!
“We” begins with “me.” In leading ourselves professionally, we ﬁ gure out 
what we believe. Our beliefs inﬂ uence what we expect and how we respond, 
especially when expectations aren’t met. Be aware of what you believe about 
the worker relationship with the organization, what a successful career looks 
like, and what you believe about yourself. How do your beliefs open you to 
opportunity, and when do they limit your effectiveness? Know when and why 
you are difﬁ cult. Smart professionals work on themselves to manage relation-
ship challenges, not expecting others to change. We take responsibility for 
contract and relationship quality. We know what makes us tick, our internal 
TABLE 18.1
Four Types of Relationships
Relationship with
The impact of the relationship
Yourself
You live and work with yourself. If you don’t advocate for 
you, who will?
Employers, clients, 
and stakeholders
Whether you navigate a career as an employee or contrac-
tor, you are still in a worker-employer contract that deﬁ nes 
the terms of the relationship. (Stakeholders are key repre-
sentatives of the organization or its customers.)
Colleagues
These are the people you spend the most time with to 
produce successful outcomes. What’s your reputation with 
them?
Networks
These are your go-to people for help, intelligence, and 
support—loose and tight ties. Most career opportunities 
come through our network, not job boards.

236  
EXPAND EMOTIONAL BANDWIDTH
operating system, what we’re good at and enjoy. We’re honest with ourselves 
about our weaknesses and deﬁ ciencies. We plan for managing them.
Blind Spots
Everyone has blind spots, things about ourselves that others see more readily 
than we do. Our blind spots can hurt us because we’re vulnerable. We can be 
manipulated. Nudge your blind spot into the known, and see yourself honestly. 
When we see clearly, we can ﬁ nd opportunities to shine and claim strengths 
without apology. We are less vulnerable to fear or cynicism, know our value, 
and worry less about others’ judgments. We simply show up and contribute as 
team players. We have real conversations, instead of trying to anticipate what 
others expect, posturing and protecting our myths about ourselves.
You will uncover blind spots that reveal your contribution to relation-
ship issues, maybe a relationship that matters. If the air is cleared with more 
self-awareness, trust is strengthened in the relationship. Forgive others when 
they are unfair, ask for forgiveness when you’ve erred, remedy the issue if you 
can, structure trust more carefully next time, and learn.
Reality Checks
Self-assessments and coaches are two powerful ways to reveal blind spots.10 
Team assessments, well facilitated, also help teams clarify roles and expecta-
tions. Assessments help us understand our deepest motivations—what drives 
us, what we value, how we thrive. Style assessments inform us about how we 
get what we want, handle stress and conﬂ ict, and so on. Competency assess-
ments help identify natural talents and strengths. 
Here’s my unscientiﬁ c but quick self-assessment that, when honestly 
answered, can keep you focused on your career goals. Feel free to ask yourself 
these questions again and again until you feel complete:
• Who and what do I want to be?
• What is my unique value? What do I bring that is uniquely me? (Hint: 
It’s more than skill sets and professional certiﬁ cations.)
• What’s my likely future if things continue as they are likely to, unless 
I make changes?
• Do I see myself living the life I want, and what can I do today to get 
closer to my vision?
2. Employers, Clients, and Stakeholders
The Hiring Relationship
Hiring managers are usually more experienced at negotiating than you will 
be, yet you carry the responsibility to reach fair terms. Learn to negotiate, 

THE FOURTH PATH—LEAD YOUR CAREER  237
and know your requirements professionally and personally. Just as a com-
puter operating system can work only with compatible software and appli-
cations, so do you have an internal operating system (IOS) with its own 
requirements for optimal performance. Seek opportunities and cultures that 
ﬁ t you. Choose from the clear, conscious frame of reference that is your IOS. 
Look for organizations with a culture that brings out your best. Do you 
see a ﬁ t when you ask about management and reward practices (including 
compensation packages), career opportunity, coaching support and profes-
sional development, and so on? By doing this you shift your center of power. 
You are choosing your professional opportunities as much as you are being 
selected for hire. Realize how, where, and with what kind of people and 
circumstances you do best. Not every contract will be perfect, but you need 
sufﬁ cient ﬁ t. They need you, you need them, and customers need this con-
tractual alignment to deliver. 
Stakeholders
Stakeholder relationships include the people and teams to whom you are cur-
rently committed and accountable, and who impact or are impacted by your 
work. These are often tight relationships during a team engagement, and 
then become loose ties that move into your broader professional network 
as members roll on and off the team, or the team completes its mission. 
Some coworker relationships may remain tight, moving into your profes-
sional friendship network. 
3. Colleagues—Does Your Reputation Precede You?
Independent contractors stay in touch with their best teammates. They 
depend on their tight network for professional companionship since team 
memberships are temporary ties. When you’re able to develop true friend-
ships in your network, you’re building strong ties that may last a lifetime and, 
as we learned in the previous chapter, contribute to your work satisfaction. 
Leaving a team ends a temporarily tight relationship. When you “exit” 
team relationships, do you stay in touch? Do you respond promptly to col-
leagues’ e-mails when it’s not about the project? What does that tell your pre-
vious teammates about you? I’ve watched professionals treat each other well 
while deployed on teams, and then have little use for teammates when the 
project is over. Most of us aren’t anxious to stay in touch with people who are 
so distant and transactional. Many people engage their network only when 
they are looking for the next opportunity, lacking much real commitment 
to professional friends. They fail to develop trusted colleagues by being too 
utilitarian and communicating only when people help them in the moment. 
They go to networking events and speak only to those with the right title on 

238  
EXPAND EMOTIONAL BANDWIDTH
their name tags. This utilitarianism translates. It doesn’t take long for people 
to see a distinct lack of mutuality. Most colleagues silently withdraw support. 
Use discernment. Observe others. If someone acts in ways that are question-
able to your values, choose to adjust the relationship and move the person to 
the periphery or out of your network. 
Your previous teammates can share a lot about you professionally, about 
what it’s like to work with you. Your reputation precedes you. Of course, 
your resume and portfolio are stellar, but what endorsements do you have 
that reﬂ ect your professionalism and team play? Do you deliver on time and 
with full documentation? Do you share credit for team accomplishments? 
Are you honest? Do people trust you with their worries and concerns, or do 
they tell you what they think you want to hear? Do your references speak of 
your generosity? Do people say you are top notch? Loyal? Fun? Are you easy 
to work with? What do colleagues say about you?
4. Networks
Connections with people can be ﬂ eeting, which is understandable because 
of the pace at which we move and the ﬂ uid nature of temporary teams. It 
becomes an excuse not to extend effort. The faster we go, though, and the 
more contractually independent many of us become, the more important 
it is to have a strong network that survives time, distance, and the ups and 
downs of a career. 
I seek to work with those who are team oriented, smart, competent con-
tributors who naturally follow the Threefold Path. Minimally, I want col-
leagues I can trust to be generous, honest, and reliable—people who work 
hard for the team but without sacriﬁ cing themselves. They have healthy 
boundaries and come through. Competent, self-directed individualists tend 
to move out of my network pretty quickly, and I am unlikely to recommend 
or advocate for them. They don’t know how little they helped themselves by 
thinking only of themselves. What are your criteria to move from your outer 
network closer to your inner circle?
Extended Reach
Your social media network has extended reach. It includes those you know 
well, and people who are in the best position to open your career path, 
even if you haven’t met them yet. It includes LinkedIn members you’ve met 
through a LinkedIn interest group, virtual and quite loose. It includes indi-
viduals you don’t want to be closely afﬁ liated with, such as “frenemies” or 
professional competitors. It reaches to colleagues you worked with previ-
ously but no longer do. It includes people you meet in professional circles. 
It extends to schoolmates, neighbors, and friends. Follow people you admire 

THE FOURTH PATH—LEAD YOUR CAREER  239
on Twitter—your “wise ones.” Gather competitive market intelligence by 
following rivals and adversaries. Scan LinkedIn and Google+ communities 
aligned with your interests.
Online Forums and Communities of Practice
It turns out that Internet discussion forums are good for our well-being. 
The more active we are online, the more likely we are to be engaged locally 
in our geographic communities, and vice versa. Social networking sites like 
Facebook, LinkedIn, and Google or Yahoo groups have become destinations 
for discussion forums and virtual communities of practice, and dramatically 
increase our digital social engagement.11 Find some forums and join if you 
haven’t already. This isn’t to sell yourself into a network. These are places to 
learn and connect professionally with like-minded folks for dialogue and 
peer learning.
Your Professional Tribe
Commit to a number of close relationships from within your network of 
allies and professional friends. Your personal network has only tight, trust-
ing relationships. These are people you know, like, and trust. It’s sustained 
on mutual integrity, quality conversations, and time. Your professional tribe 
grows out of loose relationships with employees, customers, online connec-
tions, mentors, colleagues—your bigger professional world. Build and nur-
ture them. 
Your professional tribe should be strong, the ﬁ rst place you go to ﬁ nd 
your allies and supporters, invested people who believe in you. Tribal mem-
bers can be customers; managers; coworkers with whom you’ve developed 
good relationships; and your trusted advisers, such as your accountant and 
attorneys, too. Cultivate your own board of advisers if you’re self-employed. 
Seek network members who bolster you. 
Reach Out
Have proactive conversations. Schedule meet-ups. Conversations can be simple:
• “I need more of this kind of project. I bring. . . . Who might you 
know who needs me?”
• “I’m going to be at. . . . Is there anything you need that I can watch 
for?”
• “Before we ﬁ nish coffee, how can I help you in the next week or so? 
We talked about that article earlier. Would you like me to send you 
the link later today?”
• “Our conversations energize me. Can I take you to lunch again next 
month?”

240  
EXPAND EMOTIONAL BANDWIDTH
Ask for Stuff
Research suggests that a good method for deepening a friendship (and building 
trust) may be to ask for help. It turns out we feel good about helping others, 
so let others feel good by helping you. When we ask for something, we worry 
about seeming weak or that people won’t want to help. Most of us actually 
enjoy being helpful. Help others in their careers, and ask for help with yours.12
Commit!
This has been a theme throughout the book, but commit to people, especially 
those you genuinely like and respect. It’s okay not to care for someone; that 
doesn’t mean we aren’t reliable, respectful, and considerate. Our professional 
future is built on the Fourth Path of relationship and network management. 
It shows others we invest in our professional relationships. We need people to 
know and trust us, and not just when we’re being paid to perform. Don’t be 
someone who reaches out only when in need. Talented professionals severely 
limit their ability to collaborate effectively when they lead for themselves and 
forget it took a team to make them the professionals they have become.
The Leading Indicator of Career Success
Jeff Bewkes, chair and CEO of Time Warner, insists the most useful skill in 
business today is teamwork. You want people to want to work with you. He 
points out the irony of how we’re taught to build our careers: “Teamwork 
is probably the crucial skill, and yet education is mostly about solo perfor-
mances.”13 Most of us have some unlearning to do.
Give It Up, Girl [Boy]!
Be generous with your wisdom, resources, and connections. According to 
The Go-Giver author and relationship master Bob Burg, the most success-
ful professionals are go-givers, not go-getters.14 Go-givers are people who 
bring value to every relationship, understanding that their value, ﬁ nancial 
and nonﬁ nancial, is deﬁ ned by how much more they give than take. Go-
givers know what really determines their value—how many people they serve 
and how well they serve them. Go-givers are authentic because they know the 
best they have to offer is themselves. Go-givers understand reciprocity and 
mutuality, and they are open to receiving as well. Most important, go-givers 
place others ﬁ rst. We become inﬂ uencers because people know we are consid-
erate and concerned for their needs. They are safe with us, and often better 
for having known us. We’ve added value to them. When we are generous, we 
don’t deplete others. We abundantly increase our inﬂ uence. 

THE FOURTH PATH—LEAD YOUR CAREER  241
Do pay attention, though. Over time, if you’re not experiencing mutu-
ality in a relationship, no interest in you, begin to set different boundaries. 
Don’t give with the expectation of getting, but neither cast your pearls before 
swine. Some will take without thought. You decide the minimum quality of 
your relationships, both loose and tight. 
Over time, who we are is undeniably clear. Even if your reputation does 
not precede you, it will follow you. Care enough to be thoughtful, and if that’s 
a bigger commitment than you can make, care enough to give colleagues no 
cause to question your integrity. Practice being a go-giver, a generous spirit. 
This shows you have the relationship intelligence to thrive and lead yourself 
down a successful career path.
Set yourself apart as a collaborator who delivers, shares credit, and cares 
about the team. In a networked world of loose relationships, certain realities 
are truer:
• We can thrive together or struggle alone, which means giving up some 
control when we depend on others.
• We resist losing control and tend to want to be self-reliant.
• It’s harder to be self-reliant and successful for any length of time.
• Trust has broken at many levels of business and society.
• Trust still matters.
We have to come together quickly with people we don’t know well 
enough to trust, in a work world that shifts on a dime and hasn’t done much 
to earn our trust, and we trust anyway. I ﬁ nd that when a team is true to its 
agreements, team members who aren’t generous fall away (or are moved out) 
and trusted collaborators are rewarded, getting many opportunities. Collabo-
rate as if your success depends on it. Maybe it does!
Trina’s Five Commitments
The following are ﬁ ve commitments I make to be a good Threefold Path 
virtual team leader and fulﬁ ll my value commitments. I navigate my Fourth 
Path by nurturing a network that is resilient, powerful, supportive, and valu-
able to me.
1. I take responsibility for developing mutually beneﬁ cial relationships. My 
professional power and inﬂ uence depend on it. 
2. Adaptability is key. I learn and evolve to keep pace, without losing integ-
rity, adjusting quickly to different teams’ rhythms and ﬂ ows and learning 
their protocols.

242  
EXPAND EMOTIONAL BANDWIDTH
3. I focus forward. Much is emerging that has no precedent, demanding 
innovation.
4. I “suit up and show up.” My teammates can count on me.
5. I determine what and whom to hold on to, and whom to let go. Not 
every one moves from teammate to network, nor does everyone in my 
loose network make it into my inner circle.
Connect in Different Ways
Get out and about physically and digitally.
We are social. We gain energy when we spend time physically with oth-
ers, especially when we’re meeting around a common passion. Get out of the 
home ofﬁ ce.
Nurture Your Network
You want relationships that
• come from your current work colleagues and associates inside and 
outside your organization and profession;
• are fulﬁ lling and functional; and
• balance loose and tight relationships—people who know you well, 
some you admire but who don’t know you at all, and people who 
know you professionally.
You’re growing a professional ecosystem that spans boundaries virtually, 
locally, and across business communities. 
What I Learned From Rock ‘n’ Roll Photographer Bob Gruen
Bob Gruen toured for decades with the Rolling Stones and other rock leg-
ends, living an enviable career. A talented live action photographer, he was 
more than a photojournalist. He was an artist among artists. Gruen knew 
how to establish swift trust with rock stars accustomed to no-trust, tempo-
rary relationships. These were people who assumed everyone had an agenda. 
Bob Gruen had an agenda, too, yet famous artists trusted him. Why?
He wanted to make a career out of hanging out with rock stars and tak-
ing pictures while doing it. He had to be trusted and liked to have what he 
wanted. Gruen’s advice to photography enthusiasts sums up why he believed 

THE FOURTH PATH—LEAD YOUR CAREER  243
he was able to have what he wanted. It’s great advice for today’s Fourth Path 
career professional who will “hang out” with a lot of people in circumstances 
where you are a supporting player on their stage:
• Follow the ﬂ ow and make the best of every situation.
• Meet people, and with those you like, try to stay in touch.
• When you like someone, give that person something. Show him or 
her what you can do.
• Get out and have a life.
The Fourth Path to a successful career in a mobile work world is a wind-
ing one. It isn’t unpredictable, though, or doesn’t need to be. Once you know 
yourself, you can follow the ﬂ ow and make the best of each virtual team you 
join. Enjoy working with your teammates. Stay in touch with those you 
enjoy. Show up as a go-giver and have a positive impact. Expand the emo-
tional bandwidth on your team and in your life. 
Notes
1. Intuit 2020 Report, “Twenty Trends That Will Shape the Next Decade,” 
Intuit, October 2010; Lauren Weber, “One in Three U.S. Workers Is a Freelancer,” 
Wall Street Journal, September 4, 2014, http://blogs.wsj.com/atwork/2014/09/04/
one-inthree-u-s-workers-is-a-freelancer/
2. Aarti Shahani, “Service Jobs, Like Über Driver, Blur Lines Between Old 
Job Categories,” NPR.org, June 26, 2015, www.npr.org/2015/06/26/417675866/
service-jobs-like-uber-driver-blur-lines-between-old-job-categories; Annette Nellen, 
“Über, Lyft and Others—Worker Classiﬁ cation in the 21st Century,” Proformative, 
June 20, 2015, www.proformative.com/blogs/annette-nellen/2015/06/20/uber-lyft-
others-worker-classiﬁ cation-21st-century
3. Press announcement from Uber’s representing law ﬁ rm, Lichten & 
 Liss-Riordan, P. C.  http://uberlawsuit.com/Breaking%20news%20-%20Uber%20
will%20pay%20$100%20million%20to%20settle%20independent%20contractor
%20misclassiﬁ cation%20claims.pdf
4. Dr. Tomas Chamorro-Premuzic, “Why Millennials Want to Work for 
Themselves,” Fast Company, August 13, 2014, www.fastcompany.com/3034268/
the-future-of-work/why-millennials-want-to-work-for-themselves
5. Ibid.
6. Marshall McCluhan, Understanding Media: The Extensions of Man, 1957.
7. Golden parachute is a lay term for a ﬁ nancial offer given to an employee who 
is being invited to retire early.
8. Apologies for being U.S.-centric, but I can’t speak knowledgeably about the 
global picture.

244  
EXPAND EMOTIONAL BANDWIDTH
9. Debbie Fledderjohan, “Tips and Tools for Negotiating Contractor Pay 
Rates,” Top Echelon, updated September 16, 2014, www.topechelon.com/blog/
contract-stafﬁ ng-training/tips-and-tools-for-negotiating-contractor-pay-rates/
10. I’m also a fan of journaling and compassion-building activities, such as 
empathy walks and stakeholder interviews. The Presencing Institute has a helpful 
website to learn how to apply these tools: www.presencing.com
11.“Online Discussion Forums Good for Well-Being, Study Shows,”  U. of 
Exeter, April 21, 2015; Dr. Louise Pendry and Dr. Jessica Salvatore, “Individual and 
Social Beneﬁ ts of Online Discussion Forums,” Computers in Human Behavior, April 
20, 2015, www.exeter.ac.uk/news/featurednews/title_447204_en.html
12. Vanessa K. Bohns, “You’re Already More Persuasive Than You Think,” 
Harvard Business Review, August 3, 2015, https://hbr.org/2015/08/research-were-
much-more-powerful-and-persuasive-than-we-know
13. Fareed Zakaria, In Defense of a Liberal Education, p. 69, Norton Publishing 
Company, 2016.
14. Bob Burg and John David Mann, The Go-Giver: A Little Story About a 
Powerful Business Idea (New York: Penguin Group, 2007); It’s Not About You: A Little 
Story About What Matters Most in Business (New York: Penguin Group, 2011).

245
19
W H AT ’ S  N E X T ?
“A path is little more than a habit that comes with knowledge of a place. It is a sort of ritual 
familiarity. It is a form of contact with a known landscape. It is not destructive. It is the perfect 
adaptation, through experience and familiarity, of movement to place; it obeys the natural con-
tours; such obstacles as it meets it goes around. A road, on the other hand, even the most primitive 
road, embodies a resistance against the landscape. Its reason? It’s not simply the necessity for move-
ment, but haste.”
—Wendell Berry, The Art of the Commonplace
“I’ve always found that anything worth achieving will always have obstacles in the way, and 
you’ve got to have that drive and determination to overcome those obstacles on route to whatever it 
is that you want to accomplish.”
—Chuck Norris
The Threefold Path
This book has shared the Threefold Path to organize and activate virtual 
teams. See Figure 19.1 to review the Threefold Path virtual team manage-
ment model. There are many ways to navigate the Threefold Path, as long as 
all three tenets are there. A metaphor borrowed from Buddhism, the Three-
fold Path is a progressive path of action. Virtual workers are path follow-
ers who work with what is before them. They know that my success is our 
success. No worker is entirely separate from his team, and the team is not 
separate from the organization. 
In my experience, when a team agrees to follow the Threefold Path, it 
ﬁ nds its natural contours together while navigating the organizational land-
scape. There is no one way. Following the tenets of the Threefold Path, the 
virtual leader helps the team ﬁ nd its own way. The process strengthens team 
member ties. The team’s deliverables connect them to the organization. The 
Threefold Path leads them from being a work group to a collaborative team 
whose members communicate, give honest feedback, hold passionate debate, 
and continuously hit their marks, fueled with lively interaction.1

Support the Team 
Community.
     - Maintenance
PATH TWO
O1
O2
O3
The
Threefold
Path
for
Produce Successful Outcomes:
 - Celebration
 - Quality Deliverables
High-Performance Teams
THIRD PATH
Support the Team 
  Community:
    - Maintenance
      - Emotional Bandwidth
          - Synergy
              - Assistance
SECOND PATH
      Create a Cohesive Team 
      Culture:
    - Team Development
-   -  Planning
    - Structured Trust
FIRST PATH
EMPLOYEE ENGAGEMENT
  - Interpersonal Caring
  - Organizational Commitment
MIND SHIFTS
  - People, Not Place 
 -  Network Is the Workplace
  - It’s All Part of the Job
Change the Deﬁnition of Work
Follow the Threefold Path
Enjoy Strong Relationships
 ©  2016 - Trina Hoeﬂing, The SMART Workplace 
Figure 19.1. The Threefold Path for high-performance teams.

WHAT’S NEXT?  247
Working Virtually
Working virtually has changed our perception of the workplace. It’s changed 
the way companies recruit and hire. HR, IT, learning and development, per-
formance appraisal, and corporate cultures—all continue to evolve to meet 
the requirements of an interdependent, global, mobile, fast-paced work 
world. At a minimum, organizations have to do the following:
• Align strategy with people’s hearts and minds, reinforcing it every day, 
to engage them.   
• Engage virtual workers in the planning and design conversations while 
redesigning work spaces and business processes to ﬁ t all stakeholder 
needs.
What About the Next 20 Years?
It’s been almost 20 years since I wrote the ﬁ rst edition of Working Virtually. 
I’ve seen dramatic technical progress and acceleration of change. The next 
20 years will undoubtedly continue this trajectory. I’ve looked at workplace 
trends that will grow in importance. I highly recommend 12 responses.
12 Workplace Mandates
1. Organizations must get realistic and nimble at understanding and navi-
gating complexity (it’s more than matrix management or better IT ).
2. Organizations must see themselves as participants in a larger world, 
forming creative boundary-crossing alliances and partnerships. They 
should continue to invest in global network architecture.
3. Competitive cultures and reward systems must transform, especially in 
virtual organizations, to be more team focused, empowered, and col-
laborative. (I think most organizations and many leaders will stumble for 
a while, try to operate out of old cultures, and eventually learn from their 
progress. It may be a bumpy ride.)
4. Organizations must facilitate learning and provide access to always avail-
able, on-demand learning and online curriculum as a worker beneﬁ t. 
(Much can be outsourced, and learning and development budgets should 
increase somewhat.)
5. Training departments embrace blended learning, using a combination of 
massive open online courses (MOOCs) and online, on-demand modu-
lar learning ﬂ ipped classrooms, integrated with coaching and facilitated 

248  
EXPAND EMOTIONAL BANDWIDTH
employee/worker learning communities. (There is still a need for classroom 
training as well.)
6. Retiring boomers force increased attention to emerging leaders’ training 
and development for succession planning (usually an integration of courses 
and job aids/tutorials, heuristic knowledge management, coaching, and for-
mal mentoring programs).
7. Collaborative platforms and tools must continue to improve across 
organizational systems and processes, and be mobile app friendly.
8. Task and performance management technology (with Big Brother met-
rics) will be deployed ﬁ rst in organizations whose cultures don’t shift to 
being more collaborative. (It will meet with mixed reviews.)
9. More robust artiﬁ cial intelligence will be embedded in collaboration 
tools and equipment, embedding, even more, the indivisible relationship 
between technology and people. Some jobs will automate.
10.  HR will employ more nontraditional worker-employer contracts and 
ﬂ exible work arrangements. Maybe government and tax regulations will 
catch up to how work is really being done.
11.  Real estate footprints will continue to shrink with shared workspace 
designed around teams and drop-in work spaces.
12.  Serious consideration should be given to redeﬁ ning work and the value 
Western society places on it. Until deﬁ nitions of productivity and work 
can be adjusted, most of us will stay in struggle to some degree. (The 
U.S. tax code still reﬂ ects full-time work with one employer as normal. This 
prediction is somewhat my hope more than a prediction. It is, regardless, a 
looming conversation.)
Attracting Talent
HR departments need to attract and retain the youngest generation of profes-
sionals. An organization is more attractive to millennials when it’s designed 
around collaborative and mobile solutions, and supports a ﬂ exible work envi-
ronment. Eighty percent of surveyed global HR executives have altered or 
are considering changes to their talent-sourcing strategy to accommodate 
millennials’ expectations.2 As a talent development strategy, LinkedIn and 
Alphabet Inc. (the parent company of Google) have three to ﬁ ve-year “tour 
of duty” contracts for high performers, for example. The mutual expectation 
is employees leave the company within ﬁ ve years unless that “tour of duty” 
suggests a deeper relationship be formed. If so, a new contract is negotiated. 
eBay keeps an active database of previous and current employees as a robust 

WHAT’S NEXT?  249
internal network. It welcomes “boomerang employees” who leave but often 
come back, or return for a temporary project.3 
Trends indicate that by 2020 half of us will work on-demand or with a 
ﬂ exible work option. Seventy percent of millennials expect to spend part of 
their career working independently.4 They approach their careers entrepre-
neurially, ﬁ tting today’s business environment, intentionally navigating the 
Fourth Path of today’s mobile work world—the self-led career path. 
What’s Past, Current, and Always—People Are Key to Team 
Performance
In a mobile world, virtual leaders are the connectors of team members to the 
corporate community. Virtual team members say their ﬁ rst loyalty is to their 
team leader, especially when working from a contract. I’ve written this book 
as a framework and manual for all virtual leaders.5 Technology enables, the 
hiring organization provides the work environment, but people are still the 
key. Organizations have been underinvesting in their key asset, their virtual 
team leaders. Underinvesting in leadership development is an expensive mistake.
Executive teams are aggressively looking at how to integrate technically. 
They should be equally as committed to train people in how to collaborate, 
as well as how to use the tools. The team leader’s primary role is connecting 
people to get work done through networks of interdependent systems—across silos 
and tribes, choices and distractions, boundaries and walls, and beyond tradi-
tional organizational structures and management habits. Leading from this 
priority helps a team come to collaborative team results. 
In my professional and seasoned opinion, leaders need to prioritize their 
strategic attention and ﬁ nancial investment in two ways:
1. Support team leader training and development, especially virtual team 
leadership, facilitation, and social/relationship intelligence. Supporting 
management development demonstrates an organization’s commitment 
to providing a desirable employee beneﬁ t. After all, the manager is the 
single largest determinant of employee satisfaction.
2. Support systemic organization program management and training for 
telecommuters, ﬂ ex employees, and change managers. Flexwork experts 
report dismal progress over the last 20 years in how well organizations 
support their virtual workforce, despite how fast it’s grown.6
Employee disengagement is a huge challenge in corporate America. With all 
the technical collaboration tools, people need to learn how to connect, link, 

250  
EXPAND EMOTIONAL BANDWIDTH
and communicate as a way of life. My recommendation? Hire to it. Then train 
to it.
Networked organizations need virtual managers who actively engage 
and communicate with their teams. It takes many conversations and 
communication vehicles to embed a collaborative culture across a virtual 
workforce. Hanging cool posters in the hallways and break rooms doesn’t 
reach virtual workers. Conversational leadership opens dialogue at all lev-
els of the organization and isn’t limited by place. People align when team 
leader conversations provide a virtual common ground upon which all 
stand together, connected by shared purpose and technology—across the 
distance. 
Organizations can do better than they have to support virtual work. 
Managers can do better, too. It’s not always an easy path, but it is a proven 
one. As one member of an online community stated, “Get the commitment 
to the goal right, and you can put a team together with Dixie cups and string for 
communication devices, and they’ll probably soar!”
We Like Being on Teams
People enjoy working together, even if they are home-based telecommuters 
who seldom see teammates across an actual conference table. We are more 
satisﬁ ed at work when we 
• feel safe and respected;
• know we’re contributing because we get feedback; and
• believe others complement our talent for better results.
Interdependency makes a work group a team, as discussed earlier in the 
book and summarized in the ﬁ rst column of Table 19.1. The second column 
lists qualities that differentiate normal work groups from performing teams. 
Notice how decades of data have veriﬁ ed the simple correlation between collabo-
ration and effective teamwork. You can see that managing an effective virtual 
team is simply a matter of bringing a group together and focusing on four 
components.
Leading virtual teams is a commitment to a facilitative, collaborative 
leadership style, leading by inﬂ uence more than power or control and giving 
people a reason to work together and reinforce cooperation. Find the right 
mix of individual contribution and team interdependence, and the virtual 
team begins to see itself as a unit that gets the job done, bound together and 
committed.

WHAT’S NEXT?  251
TABLE 19.1
Collaboration and High-Performance Virtual Teams
Four criteria for collaboration—
what makes a team a team?
Qualities of high-performance 
virtual teams—how will you know?
Give them a reason to work together.
Showing pride in delivering on its 
team promise
Make them interdependent.
Showing initiative, adjusting to each 
other, helping each other, coordinating 
work ﬂ ow
Show commitment. 
Committing to personal and team 
success
Hold them accountable to each other.
Delivering to the organization/
customers
It Really Is Nothing New
I closed Working Virtually’s ﬁ rst edition with a story still poignant today. A 
colleague and I were discussing the question of virtual trust and the sustain-
ability of global work relationships. This gentleman shared about his Scottish 
family’s multigeneration lumber business. Three generations back, lumber 
was brought to Scotland from the United States and transported by suppli-
ers through multiple countries. All contractual work was struck based on 
people’s word—not even a handshake was involved over the ocean and miles 
when the business began. The technology did not exist for virtual signatures.
Relationships were built on trust, time, and results. Before there ever was 
a Threefold Path, there was this family-owned business. Along with several 
others across nations, it formed long-lasting, cohesive relationships (the devel-
opment path) that supported all partners’ longevity and proﬁ tability (the sup-
port path). Relationships were sustained by producing satisﬁ ed customers (the 
outcomes path). In this story is proof that while virtual work requires a shift 
in the way we work together it really is nothing new. Business has a tradition of 
virtual relationships that precedes the terminology and the technology. 
If a three-generation family-owned business could function virtually 60 
years ago without the tools, the technology, or the handshake, how much 
more is possible today?
A Final Author’s Note and Confession
I may not have used the word virtual as much as some readers may expect. 
What has changed in the last 20 years is that work is virtual, wherever 

252  
EXPAND EMOTIONAL BANDWIDTH
people’s work space is. In some ways, virtuality is the water the ﬁ sh lives in, 
inescapable and pervasive. I can ﬁ nd only two distinct differences between a 
telecommuter and a worker who goes to a location to work:  
1. Telecommuters don’t take transportation to get to and from work. 
2. Colocated teams meet face-to-face all the time. (Even then, team mem-
bers are often conferencing in, so these meetings are often virtual, too.)
You may be a reader who wanted to ﬁ nd more that is unique to virtual 
work. When I factor out what is true in both remote and colocated teams, 
the differences are few. Managers are key links between teams and organiza-
tions, and virtual managers even more so. If you want more focus on virtual-
ity, consider two actions:
1. Follow a few wise blogs and join some communities of practice.7
2. Trick yourself. At the end of a meal with friends in an Asian restaurant, 
you are served fortune cookies. To spice it up, read aloud your fortune, 
adding the words in bed at the end. It’s fun. Read this book again, and at 
the end of sentences, add virtually. I think you’ll ﬁ nd it satisfying.  
Notes
1. “Threefold Way,” The Buddhist Centre, https://thebuddhistcentre.com/
text/threefold-way
2. Deloitte University Press, “Global Human Capital Trends 2014/2015/2016: 
Engaging the 21st-Century Workforce,” White Paper, Author, 2014, 2015, 2016.
3. Reid Hoffman, interview by Emily Chang, notes from discussion on 
Bloomberg TV Studio 1.0, June 30, 2014; Eric Schmidt, Ask a Billionaire interview 
on Bloomberg TV, December 30, 2014, Bloomberg.com
4. Hoffman, interview by Emily Chang.
5. Remember to download additional resources at www.WorkingVirtually
.org 
6. Go to  http://clalliance.com/CLASEL/en/resources.asp to read more about 
success metrics when organizations support systemic ﬂ ex work, including providing 
management training. While there, download a free report on a global workplace 
ﬂ exibility pilot.
7. Steve Willis, the author of Power Through Collaboration, has a robust com-
munity on LinkedIn by the same name. I’m a member and hope to see you in the 
conversation! I also invite you to my blog, accessed at www.TheSmartWorkplace
.com or www.TrinaHoeﬂ ing.com 

253
0–9
 “diplomats,” 82
“habits” of digital interaction and 
knowledge exchange, 39
  “knowledge,” 59
 “peacemakers,” 82
 “sacred spaces,” 88
 350-year trend, 36
A
 accepted principles of change 
management, 24
 account managers, 35
 account representatives, 34–35
 adapt to a changing world, xii
 adapting performance management 
processes, 2, 151
 adjustment period, 83, 132
 agreed adaptations, 34
agreements
transactional, 84
 American Express, 28
applications
 collaborative, 45, 61
 audioconference, 89
 Automattic, ix
B
 baby boomers, 20, 199, 232
behaviors
competitive, 51
 best team learning, 60
 bottlenecks, x, 63, 189
 bridging virtual distance, 2
budget
additional, 83
 build stronger relationships, xi
 building and developing a strong 
company culture, ix
 building engaged remote employees, ix
 bureaucracy, 54
 bureaucratic control using technology, 
37
 business process and workﬂ ows, 97
 business-to-business sales division, 34
C
Caine, Eddie, xiii, 2, 69, 70
 call center managers, 85
 candidates’ organization knowledge, 
105
 capitalism, 41
 career in the mobile workplace, 2
 career opportunities, 41, 52, 235
 cascade organization communication, 
19
 cascading organizational news, 19
 centralized purchasing, 54
 CEO, ix, 14, 164, 174
 chat functions, 104
 chat rooms, 54, 89, 118, 134, 146, 
163, 207
 chief information ofﬁ cers (CIOs), 36
 child care conﬂ icts, xi, 27
 Cisco, 28, 29, 43
 Cisco workers, 29
 classroom training, 55, 248
 closed systems, 63
coaches
effective, 86
 Coca-Cola, 13, 14
Coca-Cola Corporate. See Coca-Cola
 co-innovators, 64
 coleader, 2
INDEX

254  
INDEX
collaboration
authentic, 20
competence, 27, 92
real, 43, 225
tools and training, 20 collaboration 
commitment
virtual, 51
 collaboration tools, . 62, 70, 86, 119, 
140, 143, 151, 152, 154, 158, 
16054, 187, 192, 198, 232, 248, 
249
leveraging, 70
collaborative
approach, 52
 social relationships, 39
 technology platforms, 23
 collaborative
work cultures, 23, 140
c ollaborative and distributed team 
environment, 60, 197
 collaborative applications, 45, 61
 collaborative capabilities, 15, 88, 169, 
250
 collaborative culture, 21, 38, 41, 43, 
51, 52, 56, 62, 64, 69, 94, 97
 collaborative cultures unleash potential, 
21
 collaborative forums, 64
 collaborative learning, 77
 collaborative organization
changes in a, 20
 collaborative software, 49, 88, 161
 collaborative tool training, 55, 154
 collaborative tools, 24, 40, 45, 151, See 
 collaboration tools
 collaborators, 60, 102, 113, 224, 241
 colocated
blend ofﬁ ce workers, 15, 22
discovery labs, 64
executives, 16
work environments, 15, 19, 62
c ommand and control management 
methods, 83
 communication
 asynchronous, 42, 192
virtual, 58, 141, 166, 168, 190, 
 communication and collaboration tools, 
54, 151
 communication breakdowns, 109
 communication protocols, 70, 81, 109, 
121, 123, 142, 153, 168, 176, 177
 communication systems, 56, 215
 company culture, ix, 26, 34, 39, 189, 
216, 217, 218, 222
 compensation, 19, 41, 48, 118, 208, 
233, 237
 competency plug-and- play approach, 
18
 concept of mobile work, xii
 confab, 83
contractors. See high-performance 
workers
 coordination of team activities, 16
 core beliefs, ix
 corporate America
vulnerable, 19
 corps of “helpers,” 55
 creating a motivating environment, 18
 critical differentiator, 64
 cross-organizational alliances, 16
 crowdsourcing, 64, 231
 cultural norm, 13, 127, 176
 culture, 53, 56, 68
collaborative, 51, 52, 56, 62, 64, 97
 competitive, 38, 51, 247
 emerging, 51
 virtually effective, 42
 Culture Amp, ix, x
cofounder of, xi
culture issue. See organizational design 
issue
 Current HR big data tools, 106
 customer crises, 105
 Cynicism and judgments, x, 76
D
 dashboards, 85, 134, 163
 databases

INDEX  255
networked, 45
 David McClelland’s human motivation 
theory, 98
 David McClelland’s need theory, 98
deliverables
expected, 77
 delivery system, 49, 54
 Dell, 28
 design thinking, 17, 53
 designated work space, 15
 designing the workplace, 34
 d esired  employee beneﬁ t, xi, 327, 59
 develop relationships across and beyond 
organization boundaries, 22
 developing protocols and agreements 
while learning, 55
 development path, 6, 110, 200, 204, 
222, 251
 developmental stages, 83
 digital collaboration, 27, 38
 digital network, 3, 17, 18, 39, 45, 103, 
217
 digital network design, 3
 digital work space, 69
 distributed work environment, 105
 document sharing, 54, 157
 drop-in centers, 29
 dynamic conversations, 88
dynamic work environments. See matrix 
coporate structure
E
 early adopters, xiii
 economies of scale, 54
Egan, Robert, 56
 eight competencies
improving, 83
 emerging and boundary-crossing global 
workplace, 19
 emerging talent management
support tools, 53
 emerging trend, 1
 employee engagement coordinator, 39
 employee lifecycle programs, 53
 employee relations manager, 54
 employee satisfaction and performance, 
65
employees
colocated, 105
virtual, 105, 107
 enterprise architecture, 59
environment
colocated, 62, 86, 108
virtual, x, 22, 26, 39, 41, 42, 62, 68, 
76, 77, 82, 85, 96, 101, 102, 103, 
104, 105, 108, 109, 121, 126, 
133, 145, 146, 154, 185, 190, 
192, 215, 223
 experts, 5, 20, 61, 67, 176, 231, 249
 extroverts, 105, 166, 175
F
 Facebook-like user experience, 26
 fear of career penalty, 25
 FedEx, 106
feedback, 69, 86, 96, 102, 108, 118, 
127, 128, 132, 140, 142, 144, 
145, 146, 147, 161, 165, 179, 
180, 186, 187, 188, 191, 205, 
209, 212, 218, 225, 245, 250
constant, 105
one-way, 87
performance, 85, 87, 231
First Path, 16, 25, 77, 83, 86, 101, 103, 
110, 114, 121, 130, 138, 141, 
144, 169, 177, 193, 200, 206, 
209
 ﬂ exible work options, 1
ﬂ exwork, 27, 221, 249
 ﬂ owing proposal, 34
 foolproof network, 39
 four core guidelines, 57
 four critical success factors, 45
 Frederick Taylor
model for efﬁ ciency in repetitive 
work, 36
 Free Agent Nation, 1, 9
 future-focused learning, 60

256  
INDEX
G
 Global Workplace Analytics, 24
 Google search, 20
Grantham, Charles , xiii, 
 greenhouse gas emissions, 27
 groupthink, 93, 98
H
hacking business issues, 64
Handy, Charles, 1, 69
healthy organization community, 21
henhouse, 91, 95, 96, 98, 124, 130
option, 97
high-performance team leaders, 88
high-performance teams, 16, 18, 21, 
60, 83, 92, 128, 141, 201, 226, 
234
high-performance virtual team, 8, 53, 
77, 106, 114, 121, 124, 135, 144, 
205, 22, 251
high-performance workers, 40
high-performing learners
cohesive community of, 61
hiring contingent workers, 18
Howard Gardiner and Albert Bandura’s 
social learning theory, 104
Human Resources (HR) employee, 51
Human Resources (HR) support tools, 
53
Human Resources (HR) systems, 53
human networking, 39
human resources, 51, 247
human systems, 43
hyperconnectivity at work, 17
I
IBM, 28, 56
improvements and innovations, 56
Industrial Age, 18, 36
informal and natural conversation. See 
invisible “learning forum”
information hoarding. See competitive 
behaviors
information services, 2, 55
information-rich employees, 20
initiators and solution-ﬁ nders, 104
in-ofﬁ ce counterparts, 54
in-person meetings, 46, 54
instant messaging, 54, 134, 154, 163
integrated collaborative tools, 24, 83
integrated relationships, 38
integrating networks of teams, 2
integration, 44, 54, 
integrators and connectors, 37
intellectual capital
lack of appreciation of, 77
intellectual property, 16, 155
interlinking nodes, 56, 215
Internet of Things, xii, 14
interpersonal dynamics, 8
interpersonal relationships, 100, 119, 
168, 202
intimacy, 88
introverts, 105
invisible “learning forum,” 62
iPad, 14, 42
iPhone, 14
isolating team members, 58
J
Jensen, Bill, x, 76
job analyses, 13
just-in-time (JIT) learning, 59
K
Kacher, Kathy, xiii
Kanter, Rosabeth Moss, 64
Kilpi, Esko, 18
knowledge management
purpose of, 58
knowledge management process, 65
knowledge sharing architecture, 59
L
lead mobile teams, 25
lead talent virtually, 18
leader’s daily activity, 89
leadership

INDEX  257
Coca-Cola, 14
virtual team, 26, 38, 53
leadership effectiveness research, 79
leading inhibitor, 18
learning and development departments, 
19, 60, 231
learning curve, 82, 103, 162
learning lab, 61
learning management systems, 59
learning modules, 59
learning opportunity. See also desired 
employee beneﬁ t
learning organizations, 59, 60, 87
level of employee satisfaction. See speed 
of adoption
lifeline, 55
Light, Judith, xiii
limitations and shortcomings, x
line managers. See also human resources, 
See also human resources
LinkedIn, 3, 17, 106, 136, 160, 231, 
234, 238, 239, 248, 254
loose-tie contractors, 40
lower overhead costs, 28
M
MacBook Pro, 33
magic pill, 82
maintenance program, 55
management
performance, 2, 5, 20, 37, 42, 51, 
52, 53, 79, 85, 86, 140, 141, 143, 
144, 151, 248
virtual, 37, 52, 55, 69, 83, 137, 200, 
224
management development training, 70
management model
old, 98, 223
management partner
reliable, 79
management practices, 19, 37, 38, 46, 
51, 52, 176
old, 51
virtual, 83
management strengths, 77
management tools
simple, 54
management vehicles
relationship, 39
managerial behaviors, 98, 217, 223
managing multiple relationships, 15
massive open online courses (MOOC), 
23n5, 247
matrix corporate structure, 38
matrix organizations, 38
meeting the needs of virtual workers, x
meetings
synchronous, 42
Meyers-Briggs Type Indicator (MBTI), 
93
middle managers, 24, 25, 38, 68, 69, 
222
millennial workers, 1, 199
millennials, 26, 27, 172, 175, 224, 248, 
249
inﬂ ux of, 98, 223
millennials’ top priority, 27
mind shifts, 8, 54
movie industry, 37
multiple alliances, 38
multiple support systems, 55
multiple team memberships, 16
myopia, 60, 219
N
National Bureau of Economic Research, 
28
navigating barriers, 69
needed emotional bandwidth, 63
network, 36
integrated, 45, 53, 232
network and technology solutions, 37
network of teams, 5, 21, 23, 38, 56, 
58, 215
networks. See human systems
collective web of, 43
integrated, 45, 53, 232
overlapping, 64

258  
INDEX
neuroscientists, 26
new employee orientation, 56
node in a virtual information network, 
61
nontelecommuters, 28
Novo Nordisk, 64
O
ofﬁ ce supplies, 54
old management habits, 50
old ways of thinking and doing, 44
Olympics, 13, 14
onboarding, 18, 53
onboarding resources, 62
onboarding team members, 63, 209
online learning, 17, 55, 59, 103
online training libraries, 53
operational routines, 83
opportunity proﬁ le matrix, 8, 47
organization
behavior of an, 45
networked, 19, 39, 43, 163, 250
traditional, 37, 249
organization boundaries
permeable, 16
organization controls, 62
organization culture, 14, 77
organization cultures, 41
organization design, 38
evolve, 38
good, 43
organization issue
second, 20
organization networks
mapping, 62
organization umbrella, 3
organization wisdom, 59
organization’s core culture, 42
organizational boundaries
protection of, 16
organizational community, 45
organizational culture
maintaining, 42
organizational design issue, 38
organizational support and training, 29
organizations
integrate, 42
integrated, 17
overhead reduction, 28
overriding guideline, 54
P
partnerships
integrated, 43
peer coaching, 60
peer learning, 53
people analytics. See emerging talent 
management
people management, 37, 50
performance appraisal, 19, 51, 247
performance appraisal processes, 41
performance evaluation, 85, 143, 216
performance management, 2, 20, 50, 
51, 53, 86, 90, 141, 144, 151
old, 85
performance tracking tools, 62
permanent job offer, 2
phone- or terminal- based worker, 108
pilot, xiii, 13, 57, 68, 69, 70
pilot phase, xiii
Pink, Daniel, 1
platforms
online learning, 17
platforms and integrated tools, 29
portfolio workers, 1
powerful enterprise search engines, 59
practice of outsourcing, 37
principles of virtual teaming, xiii
product distributors, 34
productivity gains, 28
professional and leadership 
development programs, 59
program managers, 67
telecommuting, 67
project management tools, 5, 60, 79, 
140, 145, 164
project vision, 84
promotion, 2, 113, 216

INDEX  259
proprietary processes, 16
public and private enterprises, 69
public-private partnerships, 36
published team agreements, 62
purposeful relationships, 3
R
real estate savings, 28
recruitment policies and compensation 
packages, 41
Redbooth, 67, 71, 153, 167
user experience, 153
relationship intelligence, 104
relationship management, 80, 81, 232
relationship with technology, 3
relationships
quality of, 43
remote employees, ix, 3, 28, 49
remote team, x, 48, 202
remote work environment, 82, 103
remote workforce, ix
removing mental roadblocks, 26
reports
multiple talent, 76
respected authority, ix
review protocols, 54
road warriors
traveling. See home-based teleworkers
infrastructure, 20, 22
ROI metrics, 29
S
sample team agreements, 70
San Jose campus, 29
scary misalignment, 19
search engines, 60
Second Path, 79, 101, 135, 141, 199, 
200, 222. 226
See human systems”
See integration” 
self-interest. See competitive behaviors
semiclosed system, 63
senior leaders, 25
service ﬁ rms, 3
SharePoint, 67, 71, 153, 154, 167
skill competency, 102
skill sets, 26, 236
smart companies, 56
smart organizations, 70, 215
smart technology, 1, 24, 107
smart virtual leaders, 62
smart-tech competence, 42
social interaction, 39
social media, 3, 70, 172, 232, 234, 238
social media networks, 3
social network analysis, 20, 62
social network analytics, 63
Society for Human Resource 
Management (SHRM), 27
software tool builders, 84
specialized knowledge, 62
speed of adoption, 46
spontaneous coaching, 62
spousal relocation, xi, 27
stakeholder perspectives, 81
star performers, 38, 62
strategic allies, 60
StrengthFinders, 94
structured knowledge management, 59
successful professional career, 6
Sun. See Sun M icrosystems
Sun employees, 28
Sun Microsystems, 28–29
support department, 69
sustainable employability, 101
synergistic team, 61, 132
synergy, xi
T
talent, ix, xiii, 1, 2, 5, 15, 18, 21, 22, 
27, 40, 62, 75, 79, 113, 124, 151, 
198, 211, 22, 231, 236, 248
unleash, 9, 211, 217
talent management
new generation of, 53
talent management cycle, 53
talent managers, 101
talent pool, 94

260  
INDEX
team
charter, 77, 96
cohesive, 93
colocated, 97
communities, 45
managment, 83
scope, 77
team agreements, 114, 116, 120 
team and organization learning, 62
team commitments, 38
team framework, 61
team leader
virtual, 4, 38, 85, 95, 102, 108, 249
team performance, 6, 19, 25, 51, 52, 
86, 141, 180, 200, 204, 206, 249
team players, 101, 104
team protocols, 62, 162, 183
team relationships, 16, 91
team tools, 45, 100, 140, 145, 207
team’s commitment, 83
teaming rooms, 40
teams
colocated, 75
connected, 45
motivated, 69
multiple, 38, 51, 113
virtual, 16, 40, 70, 76
teamwork, 21
technology aids, 54
technology network
power of, 4
technology rules, 62
telecommuters, 2, 16, 28, 29, 249, 250
telecommuting, ix, xiii, 8, 13, 24, 27, 
28, 46, 47, 50, 56, 67, 69, 103, 
135, 142, 192
adoption of, 56
autonomy and responsiblities of, 97, 
104
telephone, 87
telework, xiii, 1, 2
telework initiatives, xiii
teleworker, 2, 28, 107
homebased, 54
templates, 537, 54, 70, 182
the key drivers - and expectations, ix
Third Path, 79, 86, 101, 137, 138, 
141–45 199
Threefold Path, 6, 7, 8, 77, 78, 79, 89, 
101, 113, 115, 124, 125, 139, 
200, 222, 229, 245, 246
top desired employee beneﬁ t, xi
traditional environment. See traditional 
ofﬁ ce
traditional ofﬁ ce, 16, 85, 107, 108, 114
traditional ofﬁ ce employee, 4
traditional production work, 84
transactional work, 1
troubleshooting and maintenance, 55
trusted relationships, 4
twenty-ﬁ rst-century worker, 16
U
United States (U.S.) employees, 24, 79
United States (U.S.) political rhetoric, 1
United States (U.S.) Postal Service, 42
United States (U.S.) tax code, 1, 248
United States (U.S.) workers, 1, 221
unique value proposition, 41
V
valued advisers, 63
vast interlocking networks, 3
Verifone, 57
videoconferences, 87
videoconferencing, 89
virtual account management, 35
virtual and ﬂ exwork environments, 37
virtual buddy systems. See also corps of 
“helpers”
virtual call centers, 28
virtual collaborators, 102
virtual communication tools, 61
virtual competence
development stages of, 82
virtual connection, 7
virtual connector, 63

INDEX  261
virtual employees, 52, 5468, 70, 105, 
107, 170, 217
virtual environment, 26
virtual environment with technical 
monitoring, x, 76–77
virtual innovation process, 64
“virtual job,” 21
virtual job satisfaction, 70 See also 
virtual employees
virtual leader(s), 1, 2, 5, 6, 18, 26, 42, 
54, 60, 62, 63, 76, 77, 79, 80–89, 
92, 94, 100–3, 114, 116, 124, 
129, 131, 143, 145, 154, 159, 
170–74, 176, 185, 192, 193, 198, 
200, 201, 203, 212, 216, 217, 
219–26, 229, 249, 
attentive, 82
proactive, 81
virtual management training, 55, 2001
virtual manager(s), ix, 5, 25, 49, 58, 
75–77, 79, 80, 82–84, 87–89, 92, 
96, 97, 101, 113, 119, 124, 127, 
128, 132, 136, 143, 145, 154, 
161, 176, 191, 200, 202–4, 211, 
215–17, 220, 222, 223, 231, 250, 
252
virtual organizations, 22
virtual performance measurements, 28
virtual performers
best, 105
Virtual Readiness Assessment, 6, 35, 
47, 48
virtual rollout, 57
virtual team
managing, 77
virtual team environment, 56
virtual team member(s), 4, 20, 9, 83, 
89, 90, 101, 104, 105, 107, 108, 
109, 132, 138, 142, 144, 153, 
156, 170, 172, 179, 197, 200, 
202, 205, 209, 211, 232, 249
seasoned, 82
virtual team struggle, 81
virtual teaming, 54, 55, 117
virtual teammates, 92, 107
virtual team(s), ix, 1, 2, 4, 5, 6, 8, 19, 
40, 45, 48, 52, 54, 63, 70, 76, 77, 
81, 83, 85, 97, 100, 107, 108, 
109, 114, 116, 121, 124, 131, 
132, 134, 135, 141, 142, 144, 
152, 174, 182, 183, 186, 192, 
197–212, 216, 217, 245, 250, 251
barrier to, 20
First Path of, 16
implementing, 41
virtual teamwork practices, xiv
virtual university. See also virtual 
management training
virtual web-based meetings, 55
virtual work, ix, xi, xiii, 2, 6, 8, 17, 19, 
21, 27, 28, 29, 34, 35, 37, 38, 39, 
41, 42, 44, 45, 46–56, 58, 64, 
68–71, 82, 83, 85, 97, 103, 135, 
136, 146, 152, 153, 186, 197, 
200, 250, 251
“piloted,” 68
purpose of, 58
top-down/bottom-up assessment of, 
42
vocal opponent of, 47
virtual work environment
four stages of personal adaptation 
to, 82
virtual work group, 96
virtual worker(s), disengaged, 26
unintentional, workday, 117
virtual workforce, 9, 14, 15, 28, 64, 
249
virtualizing. See ﬂ exwork program
von Knorring, John, xiv
W
web conference(s), 15, 54, 64, 114, 
134, 147, 165, 207
web conferencing, 40, 54, 67, 80, 154, 
164–66, 169
WordPress platform, ix

262  
INDEX
work cycles
previous, 54
work virtually, ix, x, 27, 45, 46, , 133
workers
virtual, 2, 21, 24
work ﬂ ow, 159, 119
workforce(s)
agile, 1
mobile, 9, 53, 
U.S., 1
workgroups, 63, 91, 95, 96, 97, 220, 
245, 250
workplace behavior
studies of, 97
workplace ﬂ ex. See also virtual work
workplace ﬂ exibility experts, 6
workplace reward systems, 19
workplace strategy
viable, 42
workweeks, 107
X
Xerox, 36


