
WORLD SAVING, PROSPERITY AND GROWTH 

CENTRAL ISSUES IN CONTEMPORARY ECONOMIC THEORY AND POLICY 
General Editor: Mario Baldassarri, Professor of Economics, University of Rome 
'La Sapienza', Italy 
This new series is a joint initiative between Macmillan, St. Martin's Press, and SIP!, the 
publishing company of Confindustria (the Confederation of Italian Industry), based on 
the bookcollectionMONOGRAFIE RPE published bySIPI and originated from the new 
editorial programme of one of the oldest Italian journals of economics, the Rivista di 
Politica Economica, founded in 1911. This series is intended to become an arena in which 
the most topical economic problems are freely debated and confronted with different 
scientific orientations and I or political theories. 
The 1990s clearly represent a transition period in which the world economy will 
establish new international relationships and in this context, new challenges and new 
risks will have to be faced within each economic system. Fundamental issues on which 
economic theory and policy have long based their reasoning over the last two or three 
decades have to be critically reviewed in order to pursue new frontiers for theoretical 
development and economic policy implementation. In this sense, this new series aims 
at being a "place of debate" between professional economists, an updated learning tool 
for students and a specific reference for a wider readership aiming at understanding 
economic theory and policy evolution even from a non-specialist point of view. 
Published 
Mario Baldassarri (editor) 
KEYNES AND THE ECONOMIC POLICIES OF THE 1980s 
Mario Baldassarri (editor) 
INDUSTRIAL POLICY IN ITALY, 1945-90 
Mario Baldassarri (editor) 
OLIGOPOLY AND DYNAMIC COMPETITION 
Mario Baldassarri, John McCallum and Robert Mundell (editors) 
DEBT, DEFICIT AND ECONOMIC PERFORMANCE 
Mario Baldassarri, John McCallum and Robert Mundell (editors) 
GLOBAL DISEQUILIBRIUM IN THE WORLD ECONOMY 
Mario Baldassarri and Robert Mundell (editors) 
BUILDING THE NEW EUROPE 
VOLUME 1: THE SINGLE MARKET AND MONETARY UNIFICATION 
VOLUME 2: EASTERN EUROPE'S TRANSITION TO A MARKET ECONOMY 
Mario Baldassarri, Luigi Paganetto and Edmund S. Phelps (editors) 
INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC INTERDEPENDENCE, PATTERNS OF 
TRADE BALANCES AND ECONOMIC POLICY COORDINATION 
Mario Baldassarri, Luigi Paganetto and Edmund S. Phelps (editors) 
WORLD SA VlNG, PROSPERITY AND GROWTH 

World Saving, Prosperity 
and Growth 
Edited by 
Mario Baldassarri 
Professor of Economics 
University of Rome 'La Sapienza' 
Luigi Paganetto 
Professor of Economics 
University of Rome 'Tor Vergata' 
and 
Edmund S. Phelps 
McVickar Professor of Political Economy 
Columbia University, New York 
!50th YEAR 
M 
St. Martin's Press 
in association with 
Palgrave Macmillan 

© Servizio Italiano Pubblicazioni lnternazionali 1993 
Softcover reprint of the hardcover 1st edition 1993 978-0-333-58704-1 
All rights reserved. No reproduction, copy or transmission of 
this publication may be made without written permission. 
No paragraph of this publication may be reproduced, copied or 
transmitted save with written permission or in accordance with 
the provisions of the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988, 
or under the terms of any licence permitting limited copying 
issued by the Copyright Licensing Agency, 90 Tottenham Court 
Road, London W1P 9HE. 
Any person who does any unauthorised act in relation to this 
publication may be liable to criminal prosecution and civil 
claims for damages. 
First published in Great Britain 1993 by 
THE MACMILLAN PRESS LTD 
Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire RG21 2XS 
and London 
Companies and representatives 
throughout the world 
A catalogue record for this book is available 
from the British Library. 
ISBN 978-1-349-22927-7 
ISBN 978-1-349-22925-3 (eBook) 
DOI 10.1007/978-1-349-22925-3 
First published in the United States of America 1993 by 
Scholarly and Reference Division, 
ST. MARTIN'S PRESS, INC., 
175 Fifth Avenue, 
New York, N.Y. 10010 
ISBN 978-0-312-09582-6 
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data 
World saving, prosperity and growth I edited by Mario Baldassarri, 
Luigi Paganetto, and Edmund S. Phelps. 
p. em.- (Central issues in contemporary economic theory and 
policy) 
Includes index. 
ISBN 978-0-312-09582-6 
1. Saving and investment. 2. Economic development. 
I. Baldassarri, Mario, 1946-
. II. Paganetto, Luigi. 
Ill. Phelps, EdmundS. IV. Series. 
HC79.53W674 1993 
338.9-dc20 
92-40362 
CIP 

Contents 
I SURVEYS 
I 
The International Distribution of Saving: Past and Future 
5 
Robert Mundell 
2 
World Saving since 1960: Trends in Saving and its 
57 
Global Allocation 
Andrew Dean 
3 
The Effects of Capital Inflow on National Savings 
91 
Pasquale Lucio Scandizzo 
II EXPLANATIONS OF THE RECENT CHANGES IN THE 
PROPENSITY TO SAVE: THEORETICAL DEVELOPMENT 
AND EMPIRICAL EVIDENCE 
4 
An Attempt to Model a 'Tobin-Modigliani' Approach to Savings 115 
Mario Baldassarri, Paolo De Santis, Giuseppe Moscarini, 
Gustavo Piga 
5 
Some Macroeconomic Effects of Demographic Trends in Italy 
143 
Luigi Paganetto, Beniamino Quintieri, Furia Camillo Rosati 
6 
Saving and External Debt in Latin-American Countries 
169 
Michele Bagella, Martino Lo Cascio 
7 
Saving, Investment and Growth in the Industrialized 
225 
Countries: An Econometric Investigation 
Michael Beenstock 
8 
Recent Declines in the Savings Rate: a Life Cycle Perspective 
249 
Franco Modigliani 
9 
Global Effects of East European Rebuilding and the Adequacy 
287 
of Western Saving: an Issue for the 1990s 
Jean Paul Fitoussi, EdmundS. Phelps 

III 1HE EFFECTS OF 1HE CHANGES IN 1HE 
PROPENSITY TO SAVE 
10 Savings and Growth in an Interdependent World 
311 
Warwick]. McKibbin 
11 World Savings and Growth in Developing Countries 
345 
Deepak LAI 
12 Savings, Credit and Investmant: The Case of Southern Italy 
369 
Carlo Pace 
IV CONCLUSIONS 
383 
Edmund S. Phelps 
Index 
394 

I- SURVEYS 

The International Distribution 
of Saving: Past and Future 
Robert Mundell 
Columbia University 
This paper analyzes theories of saving applied to the international 
economy and the balance of payments. It is divided into three parts. 
Part I describes alternative concepts of saving from classical times 
through the present and discusses some of the facts and theories 
underlying the drop in the saving rate in the western world over the 
past two decades, with particular reference to the United States. Part 
II of the paper uses an inter-temporal trade model to analyze the 
effects of alternative changes in fiscal policy on the rate of interest, the 
balance of trade and international saving under different conditions of 
production and international openness. It is shown here that the 
effects of fiscal policy on the rate of interest and the balance of trade 
depends more on the period in which the government spending 
occurs than on the method by which the government spending is 
financed. 
Part III examines the demographic theory of flucutations in trade 
balances in the context of a four-generation model, where, in addition 
to the young and old generations, a distinction is made between junior 
and senior working generations: whereas both working generations 
work and save, the junior working generation invests more than it 
saves, whereas the senior working generation saves more than it 
invests. This means that in periods when there are few senior workers, 
the national balance of trade is negative; and when there are many it 
is positive. It is conjectured that the small number of depression 

6 
Robert Mundell 
babies in the United States was insufficient to maintain the national 
savings rate when they reached mature working life in the 1980s, 
creating the huge trade deficits; in the following period, starting in the 
middle 1990s, when the baby-boomers come of senior working-len-
ding age, they will restore the saving rate and turn the balance of 
trade deficit into a big surplus; but following this period, in the second 
decade of the next century, the offspring of the depression babies are 
too few to support the dependent generations (including the baby-
boomers in retirement) and the trade balance again worsens. The 
conjecture depends on asymmetries between the maturity structure of 
the populations in the United States and the rest of the world, but 
there is prima facie evidance that such asymmetries exist. 
1. - The Saving Concept 
Like other major concepts in economic science, saving has been 
subject to the vicissitudes of changing fashions. Under the sway of 
mercantilist writers, and Mandeville's Fable of the Bees in particular, 
the private virtues of thrift were believed to confilict with the public 
virute of spending, one of the first expositons of "the paradox of 
thrift". Mandeville's popularity was high throughout the eighteenth 
century- Adam Smith spoke of "the profligate Mandeville"- but it 
collapsed during the Napoleonic Wars (1). 
Classical economics, in contrast to Mandeville's, thrived on the 
high employment, inflationary conditions of the Napoleonic era, when 
restraint, not profligacy, was needed. Almost to a man the classical 
economist praised savers as creators and vilified spendthrifts as 
destroyers of capital. The more saving, the greater the bequest of 
capital to the next generation (2). 
(1) Bernard Mandeville (1670-1793) was a Dutch physican who had settled in 
England and wrote his Fable of the Bees in different editions running from 1714 to 
1729. While castigating self-love, luxury and the pursuit of gain as personal vices, he 
nevertheless argues that they are indispensable to the public good; hence his sub-title, 
Private Vices, Public Benefits, an anticipation of the laissez-faire school idea that the 
pursuit of private gain does not necessarily conflict with the attainment of maximum 
satisfaction. 
(2) Thus Mill (1871, p. 72) writes: "Saving, in short, enriches, and spending 
impoverishes, the community along with the individual .... ". 

The International Distribution of Saving: etc. 
7 
The classical economists defined saving both as the difference 
between income and consumption and as an addition to the capital 
stock: "Capital", said John Stuart Mill, "is the result of saving, and the 
only way to accelerate the increase of capital is by increase of 
saving ... " (3). 
Mill recognized several of the traditinal reasons for saving, in-
cluding elements of hump saving or the life cycle saving pattern: 
"There would be an inducement to lay by in good times a provision for 
bad; to reserve something for sickness and infirmity, or as a means of 
leisure and independence in the latter part of life, or a help to children 
at the outset of it" ( 4 ). 
The classical economists in general saw no problem arising from 
the fact that savers and investors are different individuals or institu-
tions. Whatever was saved would get invested. In his note on saving in 
Palgrave's Dictionary, Edwin Cannan identifies saving with invest-
ment the case of a isolated economy (such as a single individual or a 
communist state): "Saving in the case of an isolated community or in 
the case of a communistic society, obviously means the action of 
producing in a given period of time a surplus of goods over and above 
those consumed in that period. Thus Robinson Crusoe "saved", when 
in addition to providing Jor his daily need he managed to build himself 
a boat. the boat was the addition to hs capital which he "saved". A 
communistic society, too, would "save" when it added to its capital 
any useful material object, such as a house, a mill, or a ship". 
But the same is true, according to Cannan, in an exchange 
economy in which saving is not ipso facto invested in capital goods, 
but is lent to entrepreneurs who make the capital goods: "In a 
community recognising private property and practising exchange, the 
(3) Mill (1871, p. 70). But Mill did not fall into the error of which Keynes accused 
the classical economists, of assuming that saving could only be increased by reducing 
consumption. Mill recognizes that an increase in income will normally be divided 
between consumption and saving just as Keynes had done; and that an increase in 
production can make room for a simultaneous increase in consumption and saving: "It 
is obvious that whatever increases the productive power of labour creates an additional 
fund to make savings from, and enables capital to be enlarged not only without 
additional privation, but concurrently with an increase in consumption.... and", "to 
consume less than is produced, is saving; and that is the process by which capital is 
increased; not necessarily by consuming less, absolutely." And, again, "to increase 
capital there is another way besides consuming less, namely to produce more". 
(4) See MILL (1871, p. 729). 

8 
Robert Mundell 
process of savings is just the same. The savings of any particular 
period appear at the end of that period in the form of additions made 
during it to the capital or stock of useful mateial objects in existence. 
The savings of the United Kingdom, for example, since 1830, include 
the whole of the railways therein ... " (5). 
Before Irving Fisher, saving had been identified as an increase in 
the capital stock without explicit reference to interperiod allocation. It 
was Fisher ([10], [11], [12]) who made intertemporal analysis ex-
plicit, and who provided the analytical framework for the wealth 
effect, hump saving, life-cycle, permanent-income and intergeneration 
hypotheses that form the basis for most contemporary discussions of 
saving. The basic contribution of Fisher's intertemporal approach is 
that consumption does not depend on income but on total resources 
allocated over a lifetime. 
The integration of Fisher's great contribution into the corpus of 
economic theory was interrupted for three decades by the distraction 
of the world wars and the aftermath. Classical economics had thrived 
on the backdrop of an ordered world stabilized by the gold standard 
and an automatic tendency toward full employment. World War I 
opened up a new era that included the breakdown of the international 
gold standard and an abortive attempt to revive it in the 1920s. The 
focus of theorizing about economic policy was shifted from the long 
run to the short run, from micro-allocaton problems to macro-stability 
problems, and from stable money with fixed exchange rates to 
unstable money with fluctuating exchange rates. The role of saving in 
the macroeconomic system also underwent a significant change. 
Instead of saving being the progenitor of long-run capital accumul-
ation, it became a major desideratum in business-cycle theory. "Over-
saving" and "under-saving" theories took their place alongside "over-
investment" and "under-investment" theories of the business cycle. 
Keynes was instrumental in promoting the new view that the gap 
between investment and saving produced not changes in the interest 
rate, as in classical analysis, but changes in the level of output. 
Already in his co-authored pamphet, Can Lloyd George Do It?, there 
was a discussion of the secondary effects of increased spending on 
(5) EDWIN CANNAN in Palgrave's Dictionary [42], vol. III, p. 356. 
Advise: the numbers in square brackets refer to the Bibliography in the appendix. 

The International Distribution of Saving: etc. 
9 
output and employment, the germ of the multiplier theory (6). In his 
Treatise on Money, Keynes explicitly conscripted saving and invest-
ment as determinants of short-run fluctuations in income. Savings and 
investment were defined to differ, in the Treatise, by the amount of 
windfall profits or quasi-rents, which in turn provided the motivation 
for changes in output. But this innovation was dropped in the new 
static definitions of the General Theory, where saving and investment 
were defined as identically equal. In the latter, income would in-
stantaneously adjust to induce the saving needed to make investment 
and saving equal. Whereas in classical theory saving was active and 
always got invested, in Keynesian theory, investment was active and 
always got saved! 
Post-Keynesian writers have stressed the differences between 
planned saving and planned investment, closer in spirit to the dynamic 
formulation in the Treatise and the Stockholm (7) school than to the 
General Theory itself. Dynamic versions of the Keynesian system 
stress the Treatise-like proposition that the investment-savings gap 
motivates the growth of output and employment. Keynesian-oriented 
textbooks have generally adopted the inequality of saving and invest-
ment as a disequilibrium phenomenon: saving is simply defined as 
"the difference between disposable income and consumption expen-
ditures" with no explicit refemce to the growth of the capital stock 
(8). 
During the great depression, Keynesians had blamed excessive 
saving for insufficient effective demand and employment. Curiously, 
(6) See PATINKIN [43], pp. 192-4. Keynes discussion of secondary effects em-
phasized the inputs at different stages of production (which does not imply a multiplier) 
but he also recognized that "The fact that many workpeople who are now unemployed 
would be receiving wages instead of unemployment pay would mean an increase in 
effective purchasing power which would give a general stimulus to trade ... " quoted in 
Patinkin's book. 
(7) Particularly significant are the contributions of WICKSELL [55], MYRDAL [38]. 
[39], LiNDHALL [21], as reviewed in OHUN [41]. 
(8) See for example, SAMUELSON - NORDHAUS [52]. p. 982. In Mundell (1965), I 
argued that the failure to take account of the growth rate of the capital stock and 
income (given positive net investment) represented a fallacy repeated ad nauseum in 
textbook versions which assume a constant money stock; growing income would cause 
a rising demand for money which, in connecton with a constant stock of money, would 
in turn induce a rising interest rate, causing capital losses on bonds. 

10 
Robert Mundell 
national saving was defined to include a budget surplus so that a 
policy-induced increase in the budget deficit would be able to decrease 
"saving" and therefore increase aggregate demand. In the face of a 
low propensity to invest measures should be taken to raise the 
consumption function, including redistribution of income through 
taxes from wealth high-savers to poor low-savers (9). If income 
redistribution through taxes did not work, government would have to 
overcome excess saving or a low inducement to invest in the private 
sector. However, the depression was a long one despite budget 
deficits, leading to the claims of critics that the theory was wrong, and 
of defenders that the fiscal deficits were too little to have the desired 
effect. Some support seemed to be given to the Keynesians when 
government spending soared with the rearmament campaigns and the 
outbreak of World War II. This "victory" for Keynesian theory helped 
to spread the gospel world-wide. 
Toward the end of the war, however, Keynesian econometricians 
had predicted a collapse of demand and a renewal of the depression as 
a result of falling defense expenditures, as the reverse multiplier was 
expected to work its wicked magic. But the consumption function 
shifted upward, invalidating the prediction and suggesting another 
force working on consumption. The neglected factor was wealth. 
Shortages, price controls and rationing had led to forced saving in the 
form of vast holdings of financial assets. With deregulation of prices, 
these funds were spent, offsetting the drop in government spending. 
The omission of wealth effects meant that the Keynesian consumption 
function was unstable whenever wealth effects were important. In the 
post-war era, the paradox of thrift evaporated in a burst of overspend-
ing and inflation. 
The failure of Keynesian theory to predict the great post-war 
boom set the stage both for a modification of the Keynesian equations 
by adherents and major revision by critics. The critics had the first 
shot. The introduction of the relation between saving and wealth in 
writings by Pigou (46], Metzler (26] and Patinkin (43], [44]; under-
(9) Income redistribution from the rich to the poor, however, raises the consump-
tion function only if the marginal propensity to save of the rich is higher than that of the 
poor. It does not work with the linear consumption functions drawn in most text-books. 

The International Distribution of Saving: etc. 
11 
cut Keynes's proposition of unemployment equilibrium even in 
flexible wage and flexible price economy (10). 
Four other lines of research attempted to show how income 
entered the consumption function, Duesenberry argued that past 
income plays a role through habit and Veblenesque effects; Harrod 
that people saved over lifetime to accumulate funds for retirement 
(hump-saving); Modigliani-Brumberg [29] made the life-cycle hypo-
thesis explicit; and Friedman [13] used the concepts of permanent 
and transitory income to argue that the consumption function was a 
straight line through the origin. Modigliani-Brumberg's life cycle and 
Friedman's permanent income hypotheses could both be interpreted 
as suggestions for showing how income variable enter the consump-
tion function (11). If saving indeed depended on wealth, transitory 
changes in income should have a smaller effect on consumption than 
permanent changes. 
Rapid recovery and high growth in Europe and Japan in the 
1950s combined with the Sputnik challenge to give growth a higher 
priority in US economic policy; saving once again became respectable. 
In the following decade, however, a tax cut that stimulated the 
economy was soon followed by the high employment pressures of the 
war in Vietnam and the "War on poverty". The emphasis on growth 
abated in the following decade with US successes in space, the 
zero-growth-garbage movement, and the distraction of the breakup of 
the international monetary system and the subsequent (12) oil crises. 
Two breakthroughs in economic ideas since the breakdown of the 
Bretton Woods system have been supply-side economics and the new 
classical economics. It was supply-side economics that brought saving 
again to the fore and the new classical economics that provoked a 
major breakthrough in integrating the Fisherian intertemporal budget 
constraint more generally into macroeconomic theory. 
( 1 0) Attention was initially focussed on only a part of the wealth effect, what 
Patinkin first called the "Pigou effect" and later relabelled the "real-balance effect"', 
because that relationship was relevant to the controversy over the possibility of an 
equilibrium at less than full employment. 
(11) See HALL [14]. p. 154. 
(12) One could also say "consequent" since the oil crises could not have been so 
protracted without the excess liquidity following the breakdown of the gold exchange 
standard in 1971 . 

12 
Robert Mundell 
The remarkable political success of supply-side economics in 
reducing inflation and reforming the tax system in the 1980s, when 
the movement was hardly a decade old, led to the longest sustained 
economic expansion in US history. But the success was purchased at a 
price expressed in large budget deficits and trade imbalances and 
consequent rise of domestic and international debts. This defect of the 
1980s gave urgency to a re-examination of the relationship between 
deficits, debts and savings. 
How does a budget deficit affect saving? Insofar as it increases the 
public debt and wealth, saving should fall; a reduction in the deficit (and 
the growth of the public debt) should therefore increase saving and 
growth. but is the public debt net wealth? If the future tax proceeds 
required to finance the servicing of the debt are fully capitalizaed, private 
sector wealth will decline to the same extent that the public debt has in-
creased and there will be no net effect on saving (13). The effect of the 
public debt on saving therefore turns on the degree to which the public 
fails to take into consideration offsets to the public debt component of 
gross wealth in the form of future taxes required to service it. 
In recent years, growing concern has been expressed over the 
inadquacy of saving in the United States and in the world as a whole. 
In World Development Report 1984 the World Bank called attention 
to the effect of demographic trends on reducing world saving; the IMF 
recently took up the same issue in the World Economic Outlook (14). 
( 13) Allowance for the capitalization of taxes to finance the debt had been noted by 
Ricardo, and Keynes and explicitly analyzed by MUNDELL [31] and Barro (1973). 
Ricardo notes the theoretical equivalence "but the public who pay the taxes never so 
estimate them, and therefore do not manage their affairs accordingly ... " Keynes' 
position is noted by PATINKIN [45], p. 103; it occurs in a letter to Kalecki dated March 8, 
1944, in which he says "Assuming that interest is paid on [the national debt] out of 
taxation, it cannot affect the wealth of the community one way or another". In 
MUNDELL [30], I argued that METZLER [26], in his analysis of changes in the public debt 
through open market purchases, had failed to take into account the effects of 
capitalizing the tax reductions made possibile by lower interest payments, on the debt; 
and that when these are taken into account, as especially in the case of fully-capitaliz-
able corporate tax reductions, the rate of interest in his model ia a real rate as in the 
classical model; see Metzler (197 3) for his reply. Barro (197 3) made an important 
contribution by asking explicitly whether the public debt is net wealth and in showing 
how to demostrate intergenerational transfers can lead to a negative answer. I have 
reviewed this literature in detail in MUNDELL [37]. 
(14) See Deepak Lal's paper in this volume. La! was himself associated with World 
Development Outlook 1984; [20) the background papers for the volume are published 
in LAL - WOLF [20). 

The International Distribution of Saving: etc. 
13 
The facts on saving have been gathered in a special study by the 
OECD that documents a general fall in national savings ratios in the 
OECD countries, with net saving falling more than gross saving (15). 
It is noteworthy that the biggest country has had the lowest saving 
rates and one of the steepest declines (16). 
There is a problem with the definition of a saving rate. If saving is 
a function of wealth as well as income, why should the share of saving 
in GOP be a relevant consideration? Individuals, say Irving Fisher and 
the New Classical Economics, possess intertemporal utility functions 
and wealth constraints out of which they optimize spending over time 
USA 
Japan 
Germany 
France 
Italy 
UK 
Canada 
NET (N) AND GROSS (G) SAVING RATIOS 
AS PER CENT OF GROSS NATIONAL PRODUCT 
1960-1970 
1971-1980 
N 
10.6 
8.9 
G 
19.6 
19.5 
N 
25.6 
24.6 
G 
35.0 
34.4 
N 
19.9 
14.3 
G 
27.3 
23.7 
N 
19.3 
16.3 
G 
26.3 
25.4 
N 
15.0 
12.1 
G 
21.0 
19.2 
N 
11.1 
7.7 
G 
18.6 
17.7 
N 
11.3 
13.3 
G 
21.8 
23.1 
1981-1988 
3.7 
16.1 
20.4 
31.4 
11.1 
22.2 
8.2 
19.8 
75 
15.6 
5.6 
16.8 
9.4 
20.3 
( 15) See OECD [ 40); see also DEAN [8). I am grateful to Andrew Dean of the OECD 
for these references. The following table from OECD [40], p, 14, showing the systematic 
decline in savings ratios among the G-7 applied to all the smaller countries as well with 
the exception of Norway. 
(16) The low propensity to save in the United States is not a new problem nor is it a 
problem necessarily associated with deficits. Over twenty years ago Henry W ALUCH 
[54] registered this complaint: "The American economy is not a high saving economy. 
Saving at full employment has averaged 16%, in contrast to countries like Germany, 
whose postwar saving rate has ranged in the neighborhood of 25%, or Japan, where it 
has been as high as 40%. The full employment saving rate in the American economy has 
been remarkably stable, however, 15.8% in 1929, 16.2% nel 1955, 16.5 in 1966, a 
phenomenon sometimes referred to as Denison's Law". 
Despite "Denison's Law" the saving rate has dropped in the United States, falling from 
10.6% in the 1960s to 8.9010 in the 1970s to 3.7% for the first eight years of the 1980s. 

14 
Robert Mundell 
(17). This view has focussed attention on the need for ensuring 
consistency of ad hoc consumption-savings functions with intertem-
poral utility considerations, supplementing income as an argument in 
the Keynesian saving function with wealth and/ or the rate of interest. 
How much faith should be put in statistically-measured savings 
ratios? There are several problems with the concept of savings derived 
from the national accounts: 1) consumer durables are not included, 
yet they constitute an important element in any theoretical definition 
of saving; 2) budget deficits are counted as dissaving regardless of the 
extent to which government expenditure is directed at capital goods; 
3) capital gains in the stock and bond markets are excluded from 
saving; and 4) expenditure on human capital formation is excluded. 
Moreover, if government "saving" is excluded from the data to get 
private saving, the trend changes substantially. Gross private saving, 
as a percent of GNP, has been constant or has risen slightly in many of 
the countries including the United States, where it rose from 17.7% in 
the 1960s to 18.7% in the 1980s. Nevertheless, there remains a 
statistical fact to be explained. 
What are the benefits to be expected from an increase in the 
"saving rate"? Some expect it to reduce the budget deficit, others to 
reduce the trade deficit. while others focus on its effect on capital 
formation, productivity and income growth. Neo-Keynesians think 
that an increase in the saving rate will reduce the budget and trade 
deficits and presumably also the growth rate. Theorists of the new 
classical school, however, doubt that fiscal (or monetary) policy has 
any effect on the savings rate. A third view -
supply-side economics 
-
argues that tax policies which reduce the budget deficit may reduce 
the rate of capital formation, and that debt finance of government 
spending on capital projects is a perfectly legitimate exrcise of fiscal 
responsibility; on the other hand supply-side economics conedes, as 
did Adam 'Smith, that there is an inefficiency cost of the taxes required 
to service a large public debt. 
One theory of the decline in net savings is related to the wealth 
effect. The US stock market since 1982 has quadrupled, making 
(17) See LucAS (1976) for the attack on econometric savings (consumption) 
functions and HALL [14] for an analysis of consumption and saving on this line of 
thought. 

The International Distribution of Saving: etc. 
15 
Americans rich enough to reduce their savings. Capital gains could 
alternatively be included in the definition of savings, thus reducing the 
extent to which corrective measures have declined. However, for the 
wealth effect to play an important role in explaining the drop in the 
saving rate, the wealth-saving ratio would have to rise. This does not 
appear to have been the case in the United States. (18) 
Another theory of the drop in the net US saving rate is based on 
the wicked deficits. The budget deficit has been fully financed interna-
tionally, leaving Americans with lower taxes but higher debts. Part II 
of this paper will discuss this issue from a theoretical point of view. 
Another theory of the change in saving rates arises from the 
lifecycle approach, which implies a target level of wealth at each stage 
of life. Saving, therefore, should be a function of the age distribution 
of the population. If the age distribution changes in a direction that 
involves more or fewer people in the youngest and oldest age groups, 
relative to those in the working age, the saving rate will accordingly 
fall or rise. Similarly, in cross-section analysis over countries, relative 
national savings rates will be a function of relative age distributions. 
(19) Part III of this paper will present a model that shows how 
demographic disturbances affect the balance of trade. 
2. - Fiscal Policy and International Saving 
How does fiscal policy, in the form of an increase in government 
spending, whether financed by taxes or borrowing, affect the level and 
distribution of international saving? To make progress we must make 
assumptions. I assume a full employment economy in which the 
major choice facing the economy in question, as in the rest of the 
world, is whether to produce, consume, borrow and lend in the 
(18) Data from the Federal Reserve (1989), show that the value of the stock 
market shares as a percent of income was 62 in 1980, 69 in 1985, 7 5 in 1986, 68 in 1987 
and 66 in 1988, no evidence of a compelling change. Nor does the more comprehensive 
net-wealth/income ratio appear to have moved enough to account for the changes in 
the saving rate. See the discussion of this point and related issues in OECD [40], p. 40. 
(19) Apart from Fisher's early work and MoDIGUANI- BRUMBERG [29], one should 
note ANoo- MoDIGUANI [1], Musgrave (1982) and MODIGUANI [28]. For other recent 
references see OECD [ 40), p. 34. 

16 
Robert Mundell 
present time period or a future time period. Saving can be defined in 
terms of the difference between output and consumption in the first 
period or in terms of the increase in output made available by the 
saving in the second period. (20) To analyze the effects of an increase 
in government spending, it is necessary to bear in mind the following 
distinctions: 1) is production fixed or can it be shifted intertemporally 
between the two time periods?; 2) is government spending directed 
toward the present period, the future period or is it «permanent» in 
the sense that it takes place in both periods?; 3) is government 
spending productive in the sense that it increases production possibili-
ties in the future period or is «unproductive», as in the case of wartime 
spending? (21); 4) is the economy open or closed to international 
capital and commodity movements?; 5) is there any difference be-
tween the credit-worthiness of the public and private sectors?; 6) is 
the international rate of interest independent of economic actions in 
the home country? 
Our interest is in establishing propositions with respect to the way 
in which the interest rate, international borrowing and world saving 
will be affected by changes in government spending or taxing under 
the alternative assumptions noted above. In the model under con-
sideration the change in the rate of interest will depend less on the 
method by which the spending is financed than on the period to which 
the government spending is allocated, with analogous conclusions 
holding with respect to changes in the balance of trade in an open 
economy. 
2.1 Fixed Production 
The case of fixed production is especially interesting because it 
(20) The value of saving measured in present time units will be equal to that 
measured in future time units when the latter is discounted by the equilibrium rate of 
interest. 
(21) The distinction between productive and unproductive government expen· 
diture is not intended to imply that one is better than the other. As some of the classical 
economists -
especially Me Culloch -
noted, spending for defense that prevents the 
destruction of a nation is not in any normative sense "unproductive". See MUNDELL 
[37]. 

The International Distribution of Saving: etc. 
17 
was the case implicit in the analyses of Ricardo and his followers. (22) 
In a closed economy, the assumption of fixed production means that 
extraordinary government spending, as for a war, must be paid for by 
an equal reduction in current consumption regardless of the method 
by which the expenditure was financed. There is no possibility of 
deferring maintenance expenditures in order to produce more in the 
present period at the expense of the later period. The burden of the 
war falls on the current generation. 
2.1.1 Closed Economy 
What will be the effect on the rate of interest of an increase in 
government spending on goods in the current period? The answer is 
depicted in graph 1 a, where the abcissa represents goods in the 
present period and the ordinate goods in the future period. TPT' is the 
transformation "curve" under conditions of fixed production in each 
tme period. Before government spending (in a closed economy) the 
point P represents both production and consumption equilibrium. The 
relative price of present and future goods in given by the absolute 
value of the slope of the tangent to the indifference curve at P; the rate 
of interest is equal to that slope minus unity. Now suppose the 
government spends (and taxes away or borrows) an amount of 
current goods equal to At ( = C'P). This reduces the budget of the 
private sector and results in a new consumer equilibrium at C' where 
the new indifference curve will have a tangent at C that is steeper than 
the tangent at P. This means: an increase in government spending on 
current goods raises the rate of interest (23). 
Now consider a situation where government spending of the 
amount Bt ( = C'P) is directed at the future period, as shown in graph 
1 b. Production stays at the point P but consumption moves to C' and 
(22) See RICARDO [48], [49] and VINER [53]. Both economists assumed that the 
burden of a war was put entirely on the people at that time, which implies the extreme 
case where production cannot be shifted from one time period to the next. 
(23) If government spending is on current goods, but taxation is on future goods, 
the government can borrow C'P to finance its current purchases and repay debt plus 
interest amounting to C'Z in the future period. The analysis of this model is unaffected 
by the method by which government spending is financed because the indifference 
curves assume complete information about the intertemporal budget constraint. 

18 
Robert Mundell 
~ -
>-:e 
0 
.t) 
z 
E-. 
0 
~ 
u 
il:l 
Q 
<!) 
il:l g 
u 
i-.. 
0 
c:::1 -

The International Distribution of Saving: etc. 
19 
the rate of interest falls. An increase in (expected) government 
spending on future goods lowers the rate of interest (24). 
Graph 1 c shows the combined case where government spending 
is divided between present and future goods. A "permanent" increase 
in government spending would correspond to the case where spend-
ing is equally divide between present and future goods. A permanent 
increase in government spending may either raise, leave unchanged or 
lower the rate of interest; there is no presumption one way or the 
other. In contrast to the other cases, the effect on the rate of interest 
of a permanent and anticipated change in government spending is 
ambiguous and cannot be ascertained without specific information 
about the· patterns of government and private spending. 
In the general case the effect of a change in .g!Jvernment spending 
on the rate or interest depends on the time profile of the government 
spending. Government spending is a transfer from the private to the 
public sector and the criterion for any transfer problem. An increase 
in government spending financed by bonds or taxation will raise or 
lower the rate of interest according to whether it shifts demand onto 
or away from present goods. Specifically, an increase in government 
spending will leave the rate of interest higher, unchanged or lower 
depending on whether 
where g and c refer respectively to the marginal propensities of the 
government and the private sector to spend in the periods indicated by 
the subscript (25). 
(24) As in the preceding case it makes no difference whether taxes are levied in 
the current period or the future period because the method of finance has no effect on 
the intertemporal budget constraint. 
(25) The transfer problem literature in the theory of international trade extends 
back to the early classical economists, but its solution was not obtained until the work 
of Pigou, Haberler, Meade and Samuelson. See MuNDELL [30], [33], [35], [36] for 
discussions and a review of the literature. The particular form of the criterion (using the 
relative slopes of Engel's curves) used in the text was first developed in SAMUELSON [50], 
[51], which improves upon the Haberler-Meade criterion involving marginal propen-
sities because it retains a high degree of validity in the cases when there are more than 
two goods, particularly relevant in the case where a sustantial part of income is spent on 
domestic goods. 

20 
Robert Mundell 
2.1.2 Open Economy 
We are now in a position to determine the effects of an increase 
in government spending in an open economy, first under the assump-
tion that the international rate of interest is constant and that the 
private sector is credit-worthy. The possibility of international 
borrowing and lending allows the consumers in the home country to 
experience the gains from trade by intertemporal optimization at the 
international rate of interest. The initial situation is depicted in graph 
2a where production is at P but consumption is at C, implying an 
excess of domestic expenditure over production in the first period 
equal to HC, and an equal excess value of production over expen-
diture in the second period of HP: the trade deficit and borrowing of 
HC in the current period is financed by the trade surplus and 
repayment or lending of HP in the future period. 
Now consider an increase in government spending on current 
goods equal to PL. The new budget line for the private sector is LK 
and the preferred point on it is C' which establishes the new consump-
tion equilibrium. The current trade deficit has now increased from HC 
to JM, and the future trade surplus has increased from HP to JP. An 
increase in government spending on current goods in an open 
economy increases the current trade deficit (or reduces the current 
trade surplus) and the rate at which the country is increasing its 
indebtedness. 
Now consider the case where expected and actual government 
spending on future goods increases, as in graph 2b. the intertem-
poral budget constraint of the private sector is again LK and the 
new consumption equilibrium is again at C'. The trade deficit of JC 
has now become a trade surplus of GP, exchanged for a trade 
deficit of NG in the future period. Expected (and actual) future 
government spending generates a trade surplus (or a reduced 
deficit) as the community saves in anticipation of future taxes on 
lending. 
A permanent increase in spending of the government means that 
its spending is divided between current and future goods, as in graph 
2c. Assume that the intertemporal budget constraint of the private 

The International Distribution of Saving: etc. 
21 
----------L-----------~0 

22 
Robert Mundell 
sector is reduced by the same amount as in the preceding cases (26). 
Then, as shown in graph 2c, the consumption equilibrium will again 
be at C' and the extent to which the balance of trade is affectd will 
depend on whether the reduction in spending of the private sector is 
biased toward or against future goods compared to the pattern of 
private spending. 
The trade balance will worsen, remain unchanged or improve as 
a result of government spending according to whether 
gl I g2 ~ Ct I C2 
A permanent increase in government spending, equally divided 
between present and future goods, may therefore, raise or lower the 
trade deficit and the level of current international borrowing. The 
effect of government spending on the trade balance depends rather on 
the comparative patterns of government and the public than on the 
method by which government spending is financed. 
2.1.3 Adjustment in the Rest of the World 
Up until now we have assumed that the country under considera-
tion is too small to affect the international rate of interest. It is 
necessary now to relax this assumption to allow changes in capital 
imports or exports in the home country to alter the international rate 
of interest. Graph 3 therefore plots the possibilities of producing 
current and future goods in the world economy. The dimensions of 
the box indicate current and expected (and actual) future world 
production in the home economy and the rest of the world. The point 
P represents the international division of production and C the 
international division of consumption. Production equilibrium is as-
sured by the assumption of fixed production. Consumption equili-
(26) The significant factor in this model is not the size of government spending in 
any period but the wealth-value of all anticipated government spending. $200 of 
government spending in the first period would have the same capital value as $100 in 
the first period and $110 in the second period if the rate of interest is 10%. In graph 2, 
equal values of government spending are defined by equivalent downward shifts in the 
intertemporal budget constraint regardless of the diversion of spending between the two 
periods. 

The International Distribution of Saving: etc. 
23 
brium depends on the demand conditions as represented by the 
indifference curves. Home indifferences curves emanate from the 
origin 0, and ROW's from the other origin, CY'. Consumption equili-
brium C takes place at the intersection of the contract curve, KK, and 
the (common) budget lines of the two countries which must pass 
through B, whatever the equilibrium price ratio. The equilibrium rate 
of interest is again equal to the slope of the price line PC reduced by 
unity. 
Now consider the effect of an increase in government spending 
on current goods in the home country, equal to PR. At a constant 
international interest rate, private consumption moves down to a 
point like C', which combined with government spending of 
C'D ( = RP), implies a national demand indicated by the point D. 
Because, at constant interest rates, demand in ROW is unchanged, 
there is now an excess demand for current goods equal to ED and an 
excess supply of future goods equal to EC. Global equilibrium can only 
be restored by a rise in the rate interest (27). The national shift of 
demand onto current goods at the expense of future goods raises the 
international rate of interest. 
It is easy to see that analogous conclusions hold in the other 
cases. An increase in government spending in the future period lowers 
the rate of interest but a permanent increase in government spending 
may raise, leave unchanged or lower the rate of interest depending on 
whether the combination of goods given up by the private sector, 
compared with the combination taken up by the public sector, 
increases, leave unchanged or lowers, espectively, the demand for 
current goods. 
With respect to direction of change the conclusions are the same 
as in the case of the closed economy. An increase in government 
spending raises or lowers the rate of interest according to whether it is 
directed at present or future goods. The degree of change, however, 
cannot be the same. In all normal cases, the change in the rate of 
(27) The exact position of the new equilibrium must be at the intersection of the 
foreign offer curve (not drawn) radiating from P and from the new government-
modified offer curve (also radiating from P) that goes through the point D. The exact 
change in (unity plus) the rate of interest as a proportion of the increase in government 
spending can be shown to be the ratio of the domestic marginal propensity to spend on 
future goods and an elasticity factor. See, for example, MUNDELL [30]. 

24 
Robert Mundell 
GRAPH 3 
~----------r-----------------------~·0* 
K 
0 
T 
interest is smaller in the case of the world economy model than in the 
case of the closed economy model. The reason for the difference is 
that in an open economy, changes in the trade balance alleviate 
whatever new scarcity is created by the policy change. For any given 
domestic disturbance to excess demand, the elasticities of demand in 
the world economy are higher than those in the home economy; the 
rest of the world cushions the impact of the change in the rate of 
interest, the home country is better off after the increase in govern-
ment spending than it would be if it did not have access to the 
international market. 
The question now arises whether the changes in the rate of 
interest resulting from government policy benefit or hurt the domestic 
economy, in the sense that they make the private sector better or 
worse off than if the rate of interest had not changed. The answer is a 
quick one: if the domestic country is a capital importer, a rise in the 
rate of interest will make it worse off than if the rate of interest had 

The International Distribution of Saving: etc. 
25 
stayed constant; and if the domestic country is a net lender, the rise in 
the rate of interest will make the economy better off than if it had 
remained constant. The rate of interest represents the terms of trade 
between the two countries and changes in it will produce secondary 
effects on real income. Because these secondary effects imply an 
externality, a nationalistic government should, cet. par., try to direct 
its spending in the period that will improve the country's terms of 
trade, shifting part of the burden of the change in govenment 
spending onto the foreign country. 
Is it even possible that a country can shift the entire burden of the 
government spending and more besides onto the rest of the world? 
The answer is yes, if the urgency of foreign demand for domestic 
goods is suddiciently high, i.e. if the elasticity of foreing demand is 
very low. Suppose, for example, that a relatively capital-rich country 
in a capital-hungry world embarks on program of government spend-
ing; the examples of Japan and Germany come to mind. It is then 
possible that the rate of interest rises by so much that the rest of the 
world has to pay a larger quantity of future goods for a smaller 
quantity of current goods. The condition for this to occur is that the 
foreign elasticity of demand for current goods be less than unity. The 
same conclusion is possible even if part of the government spending is 
directed at future goods, although in this case the foreign elasticity of 
demand must be lower than uiJ.ity by the domestic marginal propen-
sity of the government to spend on foreign goods (28). 
Is ROW made better or worse off as a result of an increase in 
government spending in the home country? The answer to this 
question dependes both on the intertemporal pattern of the govern-
ment's demands and on whether ROW is a capital importer or 
(28) The analogy here, as in other parts of the model, to conclusions in interna-
tional trade theory is apparent. The fiscal policy change has its counterpart in changes 
in output in one of the countries. The possibility that a country could be made worse off 
as a result of growth can be reversed to show that it can be made better off as a result of 
decline. Indeed, from the standpoint of the private sector, government spending has the 
same effect as a collapse of productivity when no account is taken of the utility of 
government spending. 
The possibility of what he called «damnifying» growth was analyzed by Edgeworth 
and the complete formula was first advanced by MEADE (1950). See also JOHNSON [15], 
(16], BHAGWATI (3], and MUNDELL (30], pp. 22-6 e (33], pp. 46-7) for a derivation ofthe 
formula, discussion of the literature and generalization to many countries and 
commodities. 

26 
Robert Mundell 
exporter. The basic proposition is that the rest of the world will be 
better off with a rise in the rate of interest if it is a lender but a fall in 
the rate of interest if it a net borrower; and the direction of change in 
the rate of interest will depend on the pattern of the shift in govern-
ment demand. The magnitude of its change in real income will depend 
on the extent of the initial shift in excess demand in the home country 
and the elasiticity of demand in the rest of the world. 
2.2 World Saving 
How are national, rest-of-the-world and world saving affected by 
the fiscal policy? If government spending is directed at the current 
period and world saving defined as delivery of income for the future 
period, the answer is not at all. Our assumption of fixed production 
bites hard here. There is no way that world saving, in the productive 
sense of increasing future income, can be increased because future 
income is fixed. No matter how much abstinence from consumption 
there is, no matter what the gap between current income and current 
consumption, future income will not be higher than that ordained by 
nature. If goods are perishable, like fish before refrigeration, there is 
no way in which eating less or catching more will increase future 
eatable fish (29). Government spending affects future income only 
insofar as it is itself directed at the future (30). 
With respect to the international distribution of saving, however, 
a different conclusion applies. An increase in unproductive govern-
ment spending reduces domestic saving (provisions for future goods) 
in the home country but increases or decreases it in the rest of the 
world depending on whether the government spending is on present 
or future goods. If the government spending is directed at present 
(29) This assumes that the stock of fish in the ocean is independent of the day's 
catch. If it were not, fish could be "stored" in the sea by catching less and increasing the 
marginal productivity of fishermen in the future. 
(30) It would be possible to create an asymmetry between public and private 
saving to allow for the fact that the government or the private sector may have different 
resources available to them to produce goods for the future. if government spending 
had opportunities open that were denied the private sector, an increase in current 
government spending could increase world saving. That possibility, however, conflicts 
with the assumption made in the text. 

The International Distribution of Saving: etc. 
27 
goods, the rate of interest will rise until the rest of the world is 
induced to save and lend more in exchange for greater future income; 
whereas if government spending is on future goods, the rate of 
interest will fall until the rest of the world is induced to make more 
goods available in exchange for an decline in current saving. 
2.3. Variable Production 
It is necessary now to relax our assumption about fixed produc-
tion and allow for the fact that accumulation of capital in the current 
period can increase production possibilities in the future period. an 
interesting, if slightly implausible case is where present goods can be 
transformed into future goods at constant costs. The possibility of 
shifting production at constant costs establishes an equilibrium inter-
est rate in a closed economy equal to the rate of transformation, i.e., 
the absolute value of the slope of the production possibility curve 
reduced by unity. Graph 4 plots such a curve as IT'. Consumption 
and production equilibria before government spending are at P. 
Suppose now government spending of a capitalized value equal to TB 
in terms of present goods or T'B' in terms of future goods. Whatever 
the pattern of government spending, consumption will shift to C' and 
production will adapt to make supply equal to demand. If, for 
example, government spending is entirely in the current period, 
production will accommodate it to produce at the point P'; if govern-
ment spending is entirely on future goods, production will shift to the 
point P''; and for mixed government spending the production equilib-
rium will be between these two points. 
The introduction of international trade would result in complete 
specialization in either current or future goods in either the home 
country or the rest of the world. Although this seems an unlikely 
result for large economies, it is not impossibile for small countries 
with a narrow production base or climate-oriented production ( 31) 
especially of a short-run seasonal variety. 
(31) See MUNDELL [34] for a model of international trade between Cancer and 
Capricorn countries, depicting trade between the northern and the southern hemis-
pheres. 

28 
Robert Mundell 
GRAPH 4 
CONSTANT OPPORTUNITY COSTS 
T' 
T 
The more general case, perhaps, is that of non-constant oppor-
tunity costs. Although both increasing and decreasing costs are 
interesting possibilities, it will be necessary to confine our attention 
here to the case of increasing costs. Graph 5 illustrates the closed 
economy equilibrium where initial consumption and production take 
place on the production possibility curve IT' at the point P. To find 
the equilibrium after government spending, it is necessary to derive a 
consumption possibility curve for every level and distribution of 
government spending. In graph 5, government spending is directed 
only at goods in the first period. The new consumption possibility 
schedule, WW', will be to the left of the production possibility curve, 
IT', by the amount of government spending. Because the slope of 
WW' at any ordinate is the same as the slope of IT' at the same 
ordinate, the slope of WW' at Pis the same as the slope of IT' at P. 
The question now is to determine the effect of the change in govern-
ment policy on the rate of interest. 

The International Distribution of Saving: etc. 
29 
GRAPH 5 
INCFREASING OPPORTUNITY COSTS 
W 
T 
At a constant interest rate, national production would remain at P 
and the private consumption mix would be limited to that production 
mix indicated by P'. But this could not be an equilibrium because, at a 
constant interest rate, the pattern of demand at the lower budget 
constraint would include more current goods (32). There is therefore 
at a constant interest rate an excess demand for current goods and an 
equivalent excell supply of future goods, forcing an adjustment of the 
rate of interest until demand and supply are again equal. Consump-
tion equilibrium of the private sector will be at a point on WW' like H 
where an indifference curve is tangent to WW'. Production equili-
brium will be on IT' at P" with the gap HP" equal to government 
spending. H must be below and to the right of P' and the national 
production equilibrium must be below and to the right of P, where the 
steeper tangents imply a higher rate of interest. 
(32) This assumes no future goods that are non-superior. 

30 
Robert Mundell 
The increase in government spending on current goods implies 
lower absolute levels of both national and personal saving (33). What, 
however, can be said about the "saving rate" in the private sector? If 
we make the stronger assumption that indifference curves are 
homethetic (same slope on any ray from the origin), it is possible to 
show that the private saving rate will increase in the sense that the 
ratio of future to current consumption will have increased, even 
though the national savng rate, absolutely and relatively, has declined. 
The increase in government spending on current goods raises the 
private propensity to save through its effect on the rate of interest. 
We could now proceed to consider the solution where govern-
ment spending is directed at the future period and where it takes place 
in both periods. The conclusions, however, follow easily by analogy 
with the foregoing analysis and the conclusions reached under fixed 
production; the reader can construct for himself the appropriate 
diagrammatic solutions. When government spending takes place in 
the next period, the rate of interest falls, and national saving increases 
(34). In general, the effect of government spending on the rate of 
interest depends on the comparative propensities of the government 
and private sector to spend on current and future goods as in the 
transfer analysis developed earlier. 
2.3.1 The Open Economy 
Now consider the effects of opening the economy for the case of 
variable production in the simple case where the international rate of 
interest is constant. In graph 6, initial production equilibrium is at P 
and consumption equilibrium is at C, with capital imports and a trade 
deficit of HC and future capital exports and trade surplus of HP. An 
increase in government spending on home goods will now lower the 
consumption possibility schedule of the private sector ( orginally the 
(33) It seems simplest to define the saving rate in terms of the ratio of the excess of 
future over current income, to current income itself. Any change in saving that raises 
the ratio of future to current consumption would imply an increase in the propensity to 
save. 
(34) The private saving rate, however, decreases because of the fall in the rate of 
interest, although the proof again depends on the hometheticity assumption. 

The International Distribution of Saving: etc. 
31 
GRAPH 6 
budget line PC extended) to WC extended; the horizontal distance 
between WC and PC is the amount of government expenditure on 
current goods. The national consumption point is at J, so that the 
increase in governemnt spending on present goods has attracted 
increased capital imports and a correspondingly larger trade deficit 
equal to KJ, and future capital exports (repayments) and a future 
trade surplus equal to KP. The trade balance rather than the rate of 
interest bears the brunt of the adjustment in an open economy with 
ready access to the international capital market. The conclusions 
arrived at in consideration of the case of fixed production in an open 
economy continue to hold in the case of variable production when the 
international rate of interest is constant. 
Let us now relax the assumption that domestic fiscal policy has 
no effect on the international rate of interest. In this case the impact 
of adjustment is shared between borrowing and adjustment of the 
international rate of interest. The direction of change in the rate of 
interest depends on the composition of government spending: the 

32 
Robert Mundell 
international rate of interest rises if that spending is on current goods 
and falls if it is on future goods. An increase in the rate of interest will 
normally be accompanied by an increased trade deficit, and a de-
crease in the rate of interest will normally be accompanied by a trade 
surplus. 
Because the interest rate corresponds to the terms of trade, 
domestic consumers will pay more than the tax or less than the tax 
depending on whether the terms of trade fall or rise. Two considera-
tions must again be taken into account in determining whether a 
country pays more or less than the tax: whether the country is a 
borrower or a lender; and whether government spending is directed at 
current or at future goods. If the country is a net borrower, domestic 
consumers will pay less than the tax if the rate of interest falls, which 
will be the case if government spending is on future goods; but if the 
country is a net lender, domestic consumers will pay less than the tax 
only if government spending is directed primarily at current goods. 
The possibility that the domestic consumers of a country can be made 
better off despite the increase in government spending and taxing -
the whole burden and more of the tax being shifted abroad -
arises 
again here if the demand in the rest of the world for the country's 
products is sufficiently inelastic. It must be recognized, however, that 
variable production increases the foreign trade elasticities so that the 
result is less likely, ceteris paribus, in the case of variable production 
than in the case of fixed production (35). 
3. - Population Structure and the Trade Balance 
It is necessary now to develop the sequences over time that follow 
the initial choice made in the present and to consider the different 
equations that determine the economy's path in the future. 
(35) The elasticity of demand for imports (capital imports in the above case) in a 
country is equal to the weighted sum of the elasiticity of demand for the good and the 
elasticity of supply of the good, the respective weights being, respectively, ratios of 
consumption and production to imports. See MUNDELL [30], [33] 25{). 
For reasons of space, I have not developed the cumbersome diagrams relevant to 
the case of variable production under increasing cost in both the home country and the 
rest of the world. One adept in the geometry of international trade, however, will know 
that the complete equilibrium is most completely developed using the techniques 
originating in MEAnE [23]. 

The International Distribution of Saving: etc. 
33 
Intertemporal trade rests on the same foundation as trade in the 
present; it depends on the pattern of comparative advantage in 
producing and consuming present and future goods. What accounts 
for differences between countries in the time profile of costs and 
utilities? One answer is climate, the subject of the analysis in Mundell 
[34] already alluded to. Seasonal trade between the northern and 
southern hemispheres is an obvious example where there is a rotating 
pattern or sequence of changes in comparative advantages; at one 
time one region will have a comparative advantage in present goods, 
at another time in future goods, only to reverse the pattern in the next 
season. 
Another possibility is comparative advantage resting on demogra-
phic structure, the hypothesis discussed in the framework of the 
life-savings model literature. How does demography fit into the theory 
of comparative advantage and how does it affect the balance of trade 
today and at different periods in the future? 
To set the rudiments of the theory suppose that births B and 
deaths D depend upon the total number and the age distribution of the 
population. Thus: 
B = B (a, b, c, d , ... ) 
and: 
D = D (a, b, c, d , ... ) 
are birth and death functions, where a, b, c, d, ... represent the 
number of the people in each generation. To be specific, let us assume 
that there are four "generations" of, say 20 years each, so that a, b, c, 
and d respectively represent the number of people in the age groups 
0-19, 20-39, 40-59 and above 60. Also assume linear birth and death 
functions such that births do not occur in the first and last gener-
ations, and deaths do not occur in the first and second generations. 
The specific birth and death functions are therefore: 
B(t) = u b(t) + wc(t) 
and: 
D(t) = rc(t) + sd(t) 

34 
Robert Mundell 
where, at time t, v and ware the reproduction rates of the band c 
generations, and rand s are the death rates of the c and d generations; 
I shall assume that all members of the oldest generation die so that 
s = 1. 
Also suppose the output Y is a linear function of the age 
distribution, with production only occurring in the b and c gener-
ations. Thus: 
y ( t) = h b ( t) + j c ( t) 
We also want to assume that saving and investment are functions of 
the number and age distribution of the population. For simplicity 
consumption is assumed to occur equally in all generations: 
C(t) = e N(t) 
where: 
N=a+b+c+d 
is the total population. 
Investment, however, is assumed to have an uneven pattern over 
the life cycle, bulking most heavily in the junior working age group, 
the b generation (36). I assume that all investment takes place in the 
second generation so that: 
I(t) = I b (t) 
where I is the expenditure on investment per second-generation 
person. 
In a closed economy the balance of trade would equal zero. We 
shall assume, however, that the economy is open and that individuals 
within the community can borrow at a constant international rate of 
(36) The second generation b invests in houses and children, and while it saves 
heavily it also invests even more than it saves, going into debt. The first generation's 
investment, mainly in education, is counted as part of the second generation's 
investment. 

The International Distribution of Saving: etc. 
35 
interest (37). The balance of trade surplus, equal to the level of net 
lending abroad (38), is the difference between income and domestic 
expenditure (absorption). In the absence of a government sector the 
balance of trade surplus is equal to: 
T(t) = Y(t)- C(t)- l(t). 
By substitution from the preceding equations we can relate the 
balance of trade to the number of people in each age group: 
T(t) = - e a (t) + (h -
e -
f) b (t) + (j- e) c (t) -
e d (t) 
or, as a proportion of the total population: 
T(t)/P(t)= T' (t)=- e a' (t)+(h- e- f) b' (t)+(j- e) c' (t)- e d' (t) 
where the primes indicate that the variables are expressed as a 
proportion of the total population. This equation shows the way in 
which the balance of trade (and lending) per caput is a function of the 
age distributions of the population. 
What are the respective contributions of each age group to the 
income, expenditure and balance of trade? Under the assumptions 
made thus far, the youngest and oldest generations consume but do 
not produce in the current period; they are an unambiguous drain on 
the balance of payments and, other things equal, the larger these 
groups are the worse will be the trade balance. The two working 
generations impact differently on the balance of trade. The average 
person in the second generation produces h but consumes e and 
invests f; it is not therefore clear a priori whether the junior working 
generation is a liability or an asset to the balance of trade surplus. 
(37) This assumption is not implausible for a credit-worthy small country, but, as 
the analysis in Part II made clear, it would not hold for a large country. The trade 
balance and lending of a large country would affect the international rate of interest in 
order to establish global equilibrium. We discuss below the implications for a country 
that is large enough to affect the international rate of interest. 
(38) The trade balance equals net lending (in a non-monetary economy) only if 
there are no unilateral transfers or debt service items. To abstract from the issues 
pertaining to debt service I assume that the international rate of interest is zero. 

36 
Robert Mundell 
However, the senior working generation will contribue j-e to the 
balance of trade and this item must be unambiguously positive, given 
the intertemporal budget constraint of each individual. 
Each individual must produce what he spends over his lifetime. 
Production, h + j, must equal lifetime, consumption, 4e, plus invest-
ment f. Thus: 
h+j=4e+f 
is the intertemporal budget constraint (39). 
What can be said about the relative mangitudes of h and j, i.e., 
the relative productivities of the 20-39 and 40-59 age groups? The 
junior working group has the advantage of strength and vitality, but 
the senior has more experience and wisdom. In past times and 
perhaps still in primitive countries where life expectancy is low, h has 
been larger than j; but in more recent times, as human capital has 
played an increasingly important role in production, j has become 
larger. I shall assume that the two factors offset one another and that, 
as far as production is concerned, h = j; the junior and senior 
working generation make equal contributions to wealth and the 
balance of trade. It follows that h - e = e + f/2 > 0 so that the 
senior working group must make a positive contribution to the 
balance of trade. 
What about the relative spending propensities of the junior and 
senior working groups, b and c? The saving behavior of the two 
groups is the same, but the investment behavior is different. The 
junior working group invests in capital assets (housing, cars, edu-
cation of his family), whereas the senior working group invests in 
financial assets, either to repay debts incurred from earlier invest-
ments or in preparation for retirement. The senior working group is 
therefore unambiguously a net lender; whereas the junior working 
group is a net borrower or a net lender according to whether its 
investment exceeds or falls short of its saving ( 40). It is more probable 
(39) We shall later modify this budget constraint, however, to take account of less 
than perfect expectation of survival into the retired generation. 
(40) What about intergenerationallinks? There are different ways of treating the 
links between the first and second generation. One attractive possibility, not developed 
here, is to assume that the junior working generation makes an intergeneration transfer 

The International Distribution of Saving: etc. 
37 
that despite its saving the junior working group is a net borrower, 
finally repaying its mortgages and other debts only after it· has been 
promoted into the senior working generation. I shall assume that 
spending in the junior working group exceeds its income and (there-
fore) that its investment exceeds its saving, so that h - e - f < 0. All 
age groups except the third age group thus consititute a net drain on 
the balance of trade ( 41). The balance of trade can therefore fluctuate 
with the maturity structure of the population. 
to the first generation to finance its consumption, and a loan to finance its investment 
in, say, higher education. Alternative possibilities would be to assume that the working 
generations are taxed to finance upkeep of the children and retirees. 
Another question concerns the finance of the spending of the senior generation. 
There are several possibilities: 1) the real assets bought during working youth can be 
realized and the proceeds spent as retirement incmpe; 2) the retirees, can be supported 
by the previous generation, their children, as in three-generation societies; 3) the 
working generation can pay social security taxes and receive retirement benefits when 
they come of age; 4) they can save and buy financial assets to support their retirement 
benefits when they come of age; 4) they can save and buy financial assets to support 
their retirement from the income and amortization of the assets. 1) depends on the rate 
of depreciation of assets; 2) depends on the social and religious mores of the 
community; 3) is a function of the role of government in effecting intergeneration 
transfers; and 4) depends on the voluntary self-interest and foresight of the working 
generations. These important issues cannot be considered in this paper. 
(41) The fourth generation could, however, be completely self-supporting if its real 
assets were sufficiently large and durable to cover retirement consumption. The 
intertemporal budget constraint should be modified to take account of actuarially-ex-
pected early death. Three factors would modify the intertemporal budget constraint: 1) 
anticipated mortality; 2) retirement assets; and 3) a positive rate of interest. First, to 
modify the intertemporal budget constraint for early mortality, I assume that in-
dividuals plan to save for retirement only the amount e multiplied by the probablity of 
survival ( l -
r) from the fourth to the third generation. The budget constraint then 
becomes: 
h + j = (4 -
r) e + f. 
Second, to allow for durable assets into retirement, assume some fraction, z, of f 
remains as a source of income into retirement, making the following modifications 
necessary: 
h + j = ( 4 -
r) e + f ( 1 -
z) . 
Third, to allow for a non-zero rate of interest, a discount fact must be applied to the 
later income and expenditure streams: 
- a+ (h - e- f) I (l + i) + (j- e) I (1 + if + [z f- e (l -
r)] I (1 + i)3 . 
To abstract from these complications I assume in the text that the rate of interest is zero 
and that investment assets depreciate completely over each lifetime. 

38 
Robert Mundell 
We now need to use the birth and death functions to generate the 
future population according to age groups, given the initial conditions 
(42). The initial population is: 
Po = t2o + bo + Co + do . 
Given the birth law B = vb + we, births in the zero-th period will be 
vb0 + wco and this will establish the number of people in the youngest 
generation of the following period; thus a2 = vb0 + wc0• Given the 
death law D = rc + sd (where s + 1), the proportion r of the gener-
ation c in the current period dies, leaving only ( 1 - r)c0 = d1 to 
become the oldest generation in the next period. The population in 
period one is therefore: 
P1 = u bo + w Co + t2o + bo + ( 1 - r) co 
The next period is similarly determined. Births in period one are 
( vao + wb0 ) so the population in period two is: 
P2 = (u ao + w b0) + u bo + w co + t2o + (1 -
r) bo . 
Births in period two are in turn v( vbo + wc0 ) + wao so the 
population in period three is: 
P3 = t> (t> bo+W Co)+ W ao+(t> ao+ W bo)+t>bo+ W Co+(l- r) t2o. 
Births in period three are v( vao + wb0 ) + w( vb0 + wc0 ) so the popul-
ation in period four is: 
P4 = u(uao+wbo) + w(ubo+weo) + u(ubo + wco) + wao + 
+ u ao + w bo + (1 - r)(u bo + w Co) 
and so on indefinitely. Given the initial distribution of the population, 
the feritility and mortality laws govern the path of the future popula-
(42) For a pioneering and general discussion of population growth see BoULDING 
[4), reprinted in BoULDING [5). 

The International Distribution of Saving: etc. 
39 
tion, in each age group and that in turn determines income, consump-
tion, investment and the balance of trade and lending. 
The trade balance in successive periods is determined by sub-
stituting into the trade balance equation: 
T = -
e a + (h - e - f) b + (j -
e) c - e d 
the values for a, b, c, and din the corresponding year. Thus: 
To = -
e ao + (h - e - f) bo + (j - e) co - e do 
T1 = - e (u bo + w co) + (h - e - f) ao + (j - e) bo - e (1 -
r) co 
T2 = - e (u ao + w bo) + (h - e - f) (u bo + w co) + 
+ (j -
e) ao - e (1 -
r) bo 
T3 = -
e [u (u bo + w Co) + w ao] + (h - e - f) (u ao + w bo) + 
+ (j- e)(u b0 + wc0)- e(l- r) ao 
T4 =- e[u(uao+wbo) + w(ubo+wco)] +(h-e-f)+ 
+ [u (u bo+ W Co)+ W ao)+ (j- e) (u ao+w bo) - e (1- r)(u bo+W Co) 
and so on. 
Let us now consider some specific possibilities by assuming 
particular values for the parameters. We start with the individual's 
budget constraint which restricts expected lifetime spending to life-
time earnings: 
- e + (h - e - f) + j - e -
(1 -
r) e = 0 . 
Let us assume e = 2; f = 6.5; h = 7; and j = 7. Thus individual 
wealth is h + j = 14; spending on consumption is e = 2 units for 
three periods and e( 1 -
r) for the last period to take account of the 
probability of not surviving into retirement; we shall assume that 
r = 1/4 so that national consumption is 3.75e = 7.5. Investment 
spending is f = 6.5 which improves the quality of life for the rest of 
that generation's life but then is fully depreciated. Each generation i 

40 
Robert Mundell 
makes a contribution to the balance of trade equal to Ti, equal to the 
excess of its income over its expenditure. The "generational balances 
of trade" are as follows: Ta = - 2a; Tb = (7 - 2 - 6.5)b = -l.Sb; 
Tc = (7 - 2)c = Sc; and Td = - 2d = The national balance of trade 
is: 
which is equal to: 
T = - 2a- 1, Sb + Sc- 2d. 
This equation shows how the balance of trade depends on 
whether the lending of the third generation outweighs the consump-
tion and investment spending of the other generations. 
Let us now make numerical assumptions about birth and death 
laws, B = vb + we, and D = rc + sd. Assume that the average 
couple in the second generation has two children: each person just 
reproduces himself so that v = 1. Assume also that one out of every 
five couples in the third generation has a child, so that w = 1/10; 
because the two generations together more than reproduce them-
selves (b + w > 1), the population will be expanding. Assume also 
that 1/4 of the third generation, and all of the fourth generation, dies 
so that r = 1/4 and s = 1. Our numerical birth law is then 
B = b + (1/lO)c and our numerical death law is D = (1!4)c + d, 
normally resulting in a steady increase in the population. The increase 
in population is: 
B - D = b + (1/10 -
1/4) c + d 
which will be non-negative unless b < 0.15c + d 
On the basis of the production and expenditure equations and the 
birth and death laws we can determine future population patterns as a 
function of initial conditions, and then show how spontaneous 
changes in conditions affect the balance of trade and lending of future 
periods. 
Table la shows how the populations and the balance of trade 
change before introducing shocks. Initial conditions provide a bal-

The International Distribution of Saving: etc. 
41 
TABLE la 
POPULATION 
Age group 
Total 
Period 
Births 
population 
A 
B 
c 
D 
1 
0. 0 •• 0 
0 ••• 
110 
100 
100 
100 
75 
375 
2 
• 
0 •••• 0 
0 
•• 
110 
llO 
100 
100 
75 
385 
3 
0 ••• 0 
0 •••• 
120 
110 
llO 
100 
75 
395 
4 
0 0. 0 
0. 0 •• 0 
121 
120 
llO 
llO 
75 
415 
5 
••• 0 
0 ••••• 
131 
121 
120 
110 
82 
433 
6 
••••••••• 0 
133 
131 
121 
120 
82 
454 
7 
0 
0 •••••••• 
143 
133 
131 
121 
90 
475 
8 
• 
0 
0 •••• 0 
•• 
146 
143 
133 
131 
90 
497 
9 
• 
0 ••••••• 0 
156 
146 
143 
133 
98 
520 
10 
•• 0 
•• 0. 0 
•• 
160 
156 
146 
143 
99 
544 
anced age distribution of 100 in each of the first three generations and 
75 in the fourth generations (allowing for the 25% attrition rate); the 
numbers in each age group in the initial period are indicated in the 
first row. The fertility laws determine the number of births, equal to 
the number of people in the second generation plus 1/10 of the people 
in the third generation; births in the first period are therefore 110. 
These births now become the 110 people in the first age group in the 
second period; and similarly, the 100 people of the first generation 
become the 100 people of the second generation; and again, the 100 
people in the second generation in the first period become the 100 
people of the third generation in the second period; and finally, the 
1 00 people of the third generation in the first period become the 7 5 
people of the fourth generation in the second period, after allowance 
for the attrition rate. In turn the number of people in the second and 
third generations determine current births which become the first 
generation of the third period; and so on until the population table is 
completed. 
Table 1 b deflates the figures in Table 1 a by total population, 
giving the percentage shares of each age group in the population. 
Note how the expansionary birth law leads to a persistently high 
percentage of people in the younger groups compared to that of the 
first period: 

42 
Robert Mundell 
TABLE lb 
PERCENT OF POPULATION 
Period 
Births 
A 
B 
c 
D 
1 .............. 
29.3 
26.7 
26.7 
26.7 
20.0 
2 
••••••• 0 
•• 0 
•• 0 
28.6 
28.6 
26.0 
26.0 
19.5 
3 
0 •• 0 ••• 0 •••••• 
30.4 
27.8 
27.8 
25.3 
19.0 
4 
•••• 0 
0 •••••••• 
29.2 
28.9 
26.5 
26.5 
18.1 
5 .............. 
30.2 
27.9 
27.7 
25.4 
19.0 
6 
• 
0 •••••••••••• 
29.3 
28.8 
26.6 
26.4 
18.2 
7 
••• 0 
0 ••• 0. 0 0. 0 
30.2 
28.1 
27.6 
25.3 
19.0 
8 
•• 0 •••••••• 0 
•• 
29.4 
28.8 
26.8 
26.4 
18.1 
9 
••••• 0 •••••••• 
30.1 
28.1 
27.5 
25.6 
18.9 
10 
••••••••••• 0 •• 
29.4 
28.7 
26.8 
26.2 
18.3 
Table 1 c shows the contributions to the balance of trade of each 
age group. It is derived by substituting for the population cohorts a, b, 
c and d from Table 1a into each generation's balance of trade 
equations. In the first row, consumption of the youngest group is 2 
per person, so the total for 100 units of people is - 200: this is the 
(negative) contribution of the youngest age group to the balance of 
trade; a typical person in the second generation produces 7, consumes 
2 and invests 6.5, so his net surplus is - 1.5, again a drain, equal to 
- 150 for the hundred units; the third group produces 7 but consumes 
only 2, lending 5, so the contribution of 100 units of people of the 
TABLE lc 
TRADE BALANCES 
Period 
A 
B 
c 
D 
Total 
1 
•••• 0 ••••• 0 ••• 
-200 
-150 
+500 
-150 
= 
0 
2 
••••••• 0 
0 ••••• 
-220 
-150 
+500 
-150 
= -20 
3 
••••••• 0 •••••• 
-220 
-165 
+500 
-150 
= -35 
4 .............. 
-240 
-165 
+550 
-150 
= -
5 
5 
•••• 0 ••• 0 ••• 0. 
-242 
-180 
+550 
-165 
= -37 
6 
•• 0 •••••• 0 •••• 
-262 
-181 
+600 
-165 
= -
8 
7 .............. 
-266 
-196 
+605 
-180 
= -37 
8 
0 
•• 0 •••••••••• 
-286 
-199 
+655 
-180 
= -10 
9 
• 
0 •••••••• 0 ••• 
-292 
-214 
+665 
-196 
= -38 
10 .............. 
-312 
-219 
+715 
-199 
= -16 

The International Distribution of Saving: etc. 
43 
third generation is + 500; and finally, the average member of the 
fourth group consumes 2 but only 7 5 units have survived so the 
contribution to the balance of trade is - 150. In the first period, the 
particular trade balances of the age groups sum to zero and that 
represents the national trade balance for the first period. 
In the next period, however, births in the preceding period have 
increased the number of people in the first generation and that 
increases expenditure relative to income, creating a trade deficit _of 
-20 financed by borrowing on the "collateral" of increased earning 
power as the large new generation matures. In period three the trade 
balance (and borrowing) worsens still further to -35 as the higher 
plateau of births maintains a high proportion of the young generation 
and as the second generation move into the earning, but also investing 
and borrowing, stage of the life cycle. Only when the generation born 
in the first period reaches the third and lending generation in the 
fourth period does the trade balance show a remarkable imporve-
ment. 
Two features stand out in Table 1 c. First, even though each 
individual balances his lifetime budget, the community as a whole has 
a chronic external deficit owing to the growth of population. Second, 
even though we have begun with a balanced age distribution, an 
uneven distribution develops because of the increase in births over 
deaths, producing fluctuations in the balance of trade surplus. 
Table 1d summarizes the results. It provides the data for income, 
TABLE ld 
INCOME, EXPENDITURE AND THE TRADE BALANCE 
Period 
y 
E 
B 
(BI Y) (%) 
1 
• 
0 
0 
0 •••••••••• 
1225 
1225 
0 
0.00 
2 
•••••• 0 
0 •••••• 
1225 
1225 
-20 
-1.63 
3 
0 ••••••••••• 0. 
1225 
1260 
-35 
-2.86 
4 
••••••• 0 •••• 0. 
1295 
1300 
-
5 
-0.39 
5 
••••••• 0 
•• 0 ••• 
1344 
1381 
-37 
-2.75 
6 .............. 
1414 
1422 
-
8 
-0.57 
7 .............. 
1477 
1514 
-37 
-2.51 
8 
0 ••••••• 0 ••• 0. 
1547 
1557 
-10 
-0.65 
9 
0 •••••••• 0 •• 0. 
1617 
1655 
-38 
-2.35 
10 
•• 0. 0 
0 •••••••• 
1694 
1700 
-
6 
-0.35 

44 
Robert Mundell 
expenditure, and trade balance as a percentage of national income for 
each of the periods. National income is equal to Y = 7(b + c); 
expenditure is equal to E = 2a + 8.5b + 2c + 2d; and the trade 
balance is T = Y - E. 
3.1 Shocks to the System 
Our next step is to show the effects of shocks. Three shocks are 
considered for the current study: 1) the drop in births during the 
1930s in the United States, giving rise to the «depression-babies» or 
«baby-busters» cohort; 2) the baby-boomers in the post-war years; and 
3) the decline in the mortality rate over the last half century. How do 
these demographic facts affect the balance of trade and lending? 
3.1.1 The Baby-Busters 
Table 2a uses the same population laws as in Table 1 a but it 
makes a once-for-all disturbance to the demographic pattern in the 
form of a sudden drop in births in the first period. In order to bring 
out their significance clearly I shall exaggerate the changes that 
actually occurred. Ordinary births would be 110 in the first period; 
TABLE 2a 
POPULATION 
Period 
Age group 
Total 
Births 
population 
A 
B 
c 
D 
1 .......... 
75. 
100 
100 
100 
75 
375 
2 .......... 
110 
75 
100 
100 
75 
350 
3 .......... 
85 
110 
75 
100 
75 
360 
4 .......... 
117 
85 
110 
75 
75 
345 
5 .......... 
96 
117 
85 
110 
56 
368 
6 
••••••••• 0 
126 
96 
117 
85 
82 
381 
7 .......... 
107 
126 
96 
117 
63 
403 
8 
0 ••••••••• 
135 
107 
126 
96 
88 
417 
9 .......... 
120 
135 
107 
126 
72 
441 
10 .......... 
146 
120 
135 
107 
94 
458 

The International Distribution of Saving: etc. 
45 
instead, I assume that the depression shock leads to only 7 5 units of 
babies, shortfall of 35 (43). 
Even though this shock is temporary, it has a permanent effect on 
age distribution, leading to cycles of births, age structures and 
population around a growing trend. Table 2b shows how these cycles 
in turn create a pattern of trade balances by generations over time: 
TAV. 2b 
TRADE BALANCES BY AGE GROUP(*) 
Period 
A 
B 
c 
D 
Total 
1 
0 
0 
•• 0 
0 
0 0. 0 •••• 
-200 
-150 
+500 
-150 
= 
0 
2 
• 
0 
0. 0 ••• 0 ••••• 
-150 
-150 
+500 
-150 
= 
so 
3 
0. 0 •••• 0 
•• 0. 0. 
-220 
-112 
+500 
-150 
= 
17 
4 .............. 
-170 
-165 
+375 
-150 
= -110 
5 
•••• 0 
•• 0 
0 •• 0 
•• 
-235 
-127 
+550 
-112 
= 
75 
6 
•••••••• 0 •• 0 
•• 
-192 
-176 
+425 
-165 
= -108 
7 .............. 
-252 
-144 
+588 
-128 
= 
64 
8 
• 
0 
0 ••• 0 
•• 0 •••• 
-216 
-189 
+480 
-176 
= -100 
9 
• 
0 ••• 0 ••••••• 0 
-271 
-161 
+630 
-144 
= 
53 
10 
•••• 0 ••••••••• 
-241 
-203 
+539 
-189 
= -
94 
(*) Figures in these other tables have been rounded. 
The drop in births in the first year has a positive effect on the 
trade balance in the next year because it reduces the number of young 
mouths to feed. The positive effect is still there but the improvement is 
weakened in the third period because births in the previous period are 
back on schedule. The most important effect, however, comes in the 
fourth period -
the 1980s -
when the depression babies -
the 
baby-busters -
mature into the lending generation; the depression 
babies in the most productive lending generation are spread too thinly 
over the rest of the population to avoid an excess supply of bonds and 
the trade deficit their sale abroad finances. The situation takes a sharp 
(43) A spontaneous change in the number of births would probably alter spending 
patterns of the other generations (particularly the parents) directly or through changes 
in taxes made possible by the lower number of youths. I have not made any adjustment 
for these intergenerational relations. It would also be possible to treat the depression-
baby phenomenon by assuming an exogenous drop in production and expenditure, and 
a link between births and incomes. 

46 
Robert Mundell 
turn for the better in the fifth period, however, when two things 
happen: 1) the relatively small number of now aged depression babies 
retire, becoming an especially low drain on national resources; and 2) 
the small number of children born in the third period leads to an 
especially low level of investment spending on consumer durables. 
These results are summarized in Table 2c, which shows the 
fluctuations in national income, domestic expenditure and the trade 
balance as a percentage of national income: 
TABLE 2c 
INCOME, EXPENDITURE AND THE TRADE BALANCE 
Period 
y 
E 
B 
{B/ Y) 
1 
•• 4 
•• 0 
0 •••••• 0 
1400 
1400 
0 
0.00 
2 
••• 0 ••••• 0 
0 
•• 0 
1400 
1350 
50 
3.57 
3 
••••••••• 0 
0 ••• 
1225 
1207 
18 
1.43 
4 .............. 
1295 
1405 
-110 
-8.49 
5 
• 
0 
0 •• 0 
0 •••••• 0 
1365 
1290 
75 
5.49 
6 
•••••• 0 
0. 0 ••• 0 
1414 
1522 
-108 
-7.66 
7 
• 
0 ••••• 0 •••• 0 
0 
1491 
1427 
64 
4.29 
8 
• 
0 ••••••• 0. 0 
•• 
1554 
1654 
-100 
-6.49 
9 
••••••• 0 
0 
•• 0 
•• 
1631 
1577 
-
53 
3.26 
10 
••• 0 
•• 0 
0 ••• 0. 0 
1694 
1788 
-
94 
-5.56 
Note that the devastating trade deficit in the fourth period is 
reversed in the fifth period -
the 2000s? -
when two factors work to 
turn around the trade balance: 1) the relatively small number of 
babies born in the third period becomes a slow drain on spending on 
consumer durables when they are in the second generation; and 2) the 
depresson babies retire and exert a relatively smaller drain on re-
sources. The cycles repeat every other period as the small generation 
immortalizes its scarcity in sparse offspring, leading to persistent, but 
ever more muted cycles. 
3.1.2 The Baby-Boomers 
It is time now to introduce a second population shock in the form 
of the post-war baby-boom. The baby-boomers, following on the heels 
of the baby-busters, create a bulge in the population that travels 

The International Distribution of Saving: etc. 
47 
through the genertions until they die. Instead of births of 110 in the 
second period, which would follow from the population laws, I 
assume births of 125, an additional 15. I shall superimpose that 
change on the previous model that portrayed only the baby-buster 
shock. Table 3a combines the spontaneous drop in births in the 
depression with the spontaneous upsurge of births after World War II. 
TABLE 3a 
POPULATION 
Age group 
Total 
Period 
Births 
population 
A 
B 
c 
D 
1 .......... 
75 (*) 
100 
100 
100 
75 
375 
2 .......... 
125 (**) 
75 
100 
100 
75 
350 
3 
••••••• 0 •• 
85 
125 
75 
100 
75 
375 
4 
• 
0 
0 ••••••• 
132 
85 
125 
75 
75 
360 
5 
••• 0 •••••• 
97 
132 
85 
125 
56 
398 
6 
••••••••• 0 
141 
97 
132 
85 
93 
408 
7 
•••••• 0 •• 0 
110 
141 
97 
132 
63 
434 
8 
•• 0 •••• 0 
0. 
150 
110 
141 
97 
99 
448 
9 
•••• 0 
0 •••• 
124 
150 
110 
141 
73 
475 
10 
• 
0 
0 ••••••• 
161 
124 
ISO 
110 
lOS 
492 
(*) Downward temporary shift in the birth function in the 1930s. 
(**) Upward temporary shift in the birth function in the late 1940s and early 1950s. 
Note how the unusual population cohorts move down the dia-
gonal and reverberate in successive generations, with corresponding 
impacts on the trade balances, as shown in Table 3b: 
TABLE 3b 
TRADE BALANCES BY AGE GROUP 
Period 
A 
B 
c 
D 
Total 
l 
••••••••••••• 0 
-200 
-150 
+500 
-ISO 
= 
0 
2 
•••••••••• 0 ••• 
-150 
-150 
+500 
-150 
= 
so 
3 
•••••• 0 ••••• 0. 
-250 
-112 
+500 
-150 
= -
12 
4 
••••• 0 
0 •••• 0 
•• 
-170 
-187 
+375 
-150 
= -132 
5 
••••••••••• 0 
•• 
-265 
-127 
+625 
-112 
= 
120 
6 
•••••••••• 0 
0 
•• 
-195 
-198 
+425 
-187 
= -156 
7 
• 
0 
••• 0 
0 ••• 0 
0 
•• 
-282 
-146 
+662 
-127 
= 
106 
8 
• 
0 •••••••••••• 
-221 
-211 
+487 
-198 
= -144 
9 
• 
0. 0 ••• 0. 0 •••• 
-301 
-166 
+705 
-146 
= 
91 
10 
••••••••• 0 •••• 
-249 
-226 
+553 
-211 
= -133 

48 
Robert Mundell 
As we have seen earlier, the striking effects of the drop in birth 
rates in the depression are seen in period 4 when the baby busters 
reach the senior working group and there are too few producers 
around with surpluses to counteract the spending of the other gener-
ations. Note the particularly heavy negative impact on the trade 
balance of the baby-boomers, now second generation yuppies, who 
are spending huge amounts on consumer durables. Capital market 
equilibrium cannot be achieved without international borrowing; the 
trade balance plummets. 
There is, however, life after deficits! In the next period the 
baby-boomers come to the rescue. As the yuppies become mature 
working people who not only save but lend, their huge number 
creates an excess of surpluses over deficits. The trade balance stages a 
magnificent recovery; it is transformed into a whopping surplus. The 
huge deficits of the 1980s and early 1990s are transformed into big 
surpluses in the late 1990s and early 2000s. 
Even this silver lining, however, has a cloud. When the baby-
boomers retire in the sixth period into the 201 Os, they create a huge 
deficit in the social security accounts, and the next generation to them 
is not large enough to carry the burden without huge international 
borrowing. The trade balance in and after the second decade of the 
next century turns strongly negative until it is relieved by the children 
of the baby-boomers who now, in the late 2030s, in large numbers 
move into the third, the lending, generation. The subsequent sequen-
ce of changes in income, expenditure and the trade balance over ten 
periods is shown in Table 3c: 
TABLE 3c 
INCOME, EXPENDITURE AND THE TRADE BALANCE 
Period 
y 
E 
B 
B!Y 
1 
eo o 
o 
o 
o 
o o 
o 
o 
o 
o 
o o 
1400 
1400 
0 
0.00 
2 .............. 
1400 
1350 
50 
-
3.57 
3 
•• 0. 0 ••••••• 0 
0 
1225 
1237 
-
12 
-
0.98 
4 .............. 
1400 
1532 
-132 
- 9.43 
5 
••••••••• 0 •••• 
1470 
1350 
120 
8.16 
6 
••••• 0 
0 ••••••• 
1519 
1675 
-156 
-10.27 
7 
0 ••••••••••• 0 
0 
1603 
1497 
106 
6.61 
8 
•• 0. 0 ••• 0 ••••• 
1666 
1810 
-144 
-
8.64 
9 
0. 0. 0 ••• 0 ••••• 
1757 
1666 
91 
5.18 
10 
•• 0 •• 0 ••• 0 •••• 
1820 
1953 
-133 
-
7.31· 

The International Distribution of Saving: etc. 
49 
The cycles go on but become more damped as population and 
income grow. 
3 .1. 3 The Life Extension Phenomenon 
Over the past several decades the human life span has increased. 
What is the effect of increasing long~vity on the balance of payments? 
Some idea can be had by analyzing the effect of eliminating the 
assumption that some people die upon reaching retirement age. 
A change in expected longevity alters the lifetime budget con-
straint ( 44 ). When there was a 25% chance of death it was rational for 
a person (with no plans for bequests) to reduce retirement saving to 
adjust for the fact that it might be wasted (45). Increased longevity, 
however, makes it rational to save more for retirement or to pay more 
taxes to finance government-administered old-age pensions; the inter-
temporal budget constraint is itself a function of longevity. Each 
individual must increase his income ( 46) or reduce spending (either 
because of voluntary saving or higher social security taxes) in order to 
meet his new intertemporal budget constraint. 
For simplicity I shall assume somewhat arbitrarily that invest-
ment in consumer durables, f, bears the burden of adjustment to 
greater longevity. Lifetime income, Y, is unchanged at: 
Y= h + j = 14. 
Lifetime expenditure E is now composed of 2 units (instead of 
1.5 units) of spending in the old generation so that lifetime consump-
(44) There may be a lag between the drop in morality and the realization of it. To 
the extent that the individual is not aware of it he may save less than is needed to 
maintain consumption through retirement. To the extent that the government has not 
takes adjusted taxes for it, the social security accounts will be in deficit. 
( 45) This assumption appears more plausible when account is taken of the fact that 
the higher probability of death makes lifetime annuities cheaper. Similarly, the 
probability of early death in a given population reduces the taxes needed to finance the 
social security pensions of the survivors. 
( 46) Changes in leisure as a result of increased longevity are ruled out in this fixed 
production model. In the real world, however, part of the adjustment would probably 
be borne, in the long run, by an increase in the retirement age and perhaps working 
longer hours to build up more funds for use in retirement. 

50 
Robert Mundell 
tion is now 8 instead of 7. 5. It follows from the lifetime budget 
constraint: 
Y- c- I= 7 (h + j) - 4e - I= 14 - 6 - I= o 
that investment must now be 6 instead of 6.5. 
I assume that the reduction in mortality takes place all at once in 
the second period and that there is no lag in the adjustment of 
expectations to the new actuarial situation. Table 4a provides the 
population data. In period two of Table 4a there is no attrition in the 
third generation of the first period. This change, which is assumed to 
be permanent, has no effect on the birth rate; it merely increases the 
number in the retired generation and the total populaton. The effects 
of this change in longevity are superimposed, in Table 4a, upon the 
two population shocks discussed in the preceding sections. 
TABLE 4a 
POPULATION 
Age group 
Total 
Period 
Births 
population 
A 
B 
c 
D 
1 
••• 0 ••••• 0 
75 
100 
100 
100 
75 
375 
2 .......... 
125 
75 
100 
100 
100 (*) 
375 
3 
•••• 0. 0 0. 0 
85 
125 
75 
100 
100 
400 
4 
•• 0 •• 0 •••• 
132 
85 
125 
75 
100 
385 
5 
••• 0 •••• 0. 
97 
132 
85 
125 
75 
442 
6 
•••• 0 ••••• 
141 
97 
132 
85 
125 
417 
7 .......... 
110 
141 
97 
132 
85 
455 
8 .......... 
150 
110 
141 
97 
132 
480 
9 .......... 
124 
150 
110 
141 
97 
498 
10 .......... 
161 
124 
150 
110 
141 
525 
(*) New figures indicate that mortality on retirement is zero rather than 25%. 
Now we can consider the trade balances, presented in Table 4b. 
There are two factors at work. The larger population, composed of 
consumers rather than producers, imposes heavier demands on the 
economy which, by itself, has the effect of enlarging the trade deficit; 
against this, however, must be set the effects of the perceived new 
intertemporal budget constraint, which reduces investment of the 
second generation. In the third period, however, the extra saving has 

The International Distribution of Saving: etc. 
51 
TABLE 4b 
TRADE BALANCES BY AGE GROUP 
Period 
A 
B 
c 
D 
Total 
1 
•••••• 0 •••• 0. 0 
-200 
-150 
+500 
-150 
= 
0 
2 
•••••••••• 0 ••• 
-150 
-100 
+500 
-200 
= 
so 
3 
0. 0 ••••••••• 0. 
-250 
-
75 
+500 
-200 
= -
25 
4 
0. 0 
•• 0 •••••••• 
-170 
-125 
+375 
-200 
= -120 
5 
0 
0 •••••••••• 0. 
-264 
-
85 
+625 
-150 
= 
126 
6 
0. 0 ••••••••• 0. 
-194 
-132 
+425 
-250 
= -151 
7 
••••• 0 •••••• 0. 
-281 
-
97 
+660 
-170 
= 
112 
8 
0 ••• 0 ••••••••• 
-220 
-141 
+485 
-264 
= -140 
9 
•••• 0 ••••• 0 ••• 
-300 
-110 
+705 
-194 
= 
101 
10 
•• 0 •••••• 0 •••• 
-248 
-150 
+550 
-282 
= -130 
a smaller effect because of the small numbers of depression babies 
that have reached the second generation; the trade balance is there-
fore worse in Table 4b than in the corresponding figure in Table 3b. In 
the the fourth period, the situation worsens drastically as the baby-
boomers become the investing-borrowing class, while the depression 
babies become the saving-lending class, spread too thinly to satisfy the 
demands of the yuppie borrowers; the trade balance in this fourth 
period plummets. But the drop is not quite so large. because of the 
reduction in spending prompted by the longer average time horizon 
and the new intertemporal budget constraint. 
The levels of income, expenditure and the trade balance as a 
percentage of income, in Table 4c, are as follows: 
TABLE 4c 
INCOME, EXPENDITURE AND THE TRADE BALANCE 
Period 
y 
E 
B 
(B! Y) 
1 
••••• 0 •••••••• 
1400 
1400 
0 
0.00 
2 
• 
0 
0 
0 
•• 0 ••••••• 
1400 
1350 
so 
3.57 
3 
0. 0 •••• 0 •••••• 
1225 
1250 
-
25 
-2.04 
4 
0 ••••••• 0 ••••• 
1400 
1520 
-120 
-8.57 
5 
••••••••••• 0 
•• 
1470 
1344 
126 
8.57 
6 
••••••••••• 0. 0 
1519 
1670 
151 
-9.94 
7 
•••••••••• 0 
••• 
1603 
1491 
112 
6.99 
8 .............. 
1666 
1806 
140 
-8.40 
9 
••• 0 ••••• 0 
0 ••• 
1757 
1656 
101 
5.75 
10 
••• 0 ••••• 0 •••• 
1820 
1950 
130 
-7.14 

52 
Robert Mundell 
The sequences of surpluses and deficits follow the same 
alternating pattern as before but are blunted by the drop in investment 
of the second generation. 
Concluding Remark 
The three population shocks studied above present an alternative 
explanation for the very large changes in the trade deficit and current 
account of the United States. Conventional explanations have em-
phasized the need to balance the budget or further devalue the dollar. 
Yet if the present analysis has validity these factors would not correct 
the current account deficit. A correction of the budget deficit by an 
increase in taxes 
might 
induce 
compensatory private-sector 
borrowing; and further depreciation of the dollar would not eliminate 
the trade deficit if national borrowing persisted. To the extent that the 
present analysis has sufficient empirical foundation the current excess 
of expenditure over income in the United States will have its counter-
part in a future excess of income over expenditure. The borrowing 
today takes place on the prospect of future output from which 
repayment and additional lending can take place. 
Is the demographic theory of US deficits compatible with equilib-
rium in the rest of the world (47)? The answer is yes, if there is 
demographic assymmetry. Actual US borrowing and lending must 
have its mirror image in the rest of the world. If, on the contrary, the 
population shocks in the United States were duplicated in the rest of 
the world, the United States and the rest of the world would want to 
be borrowers and lenders at the same time; if that were true interest 
rates would have to rise or fall to ensure capital market equilibrium 
and there would be no explicit reason why the United States would 
emerge from the competitive struggle as a borrower or as a lender. 
Was there an assymmetry in demographic experience between 
the United States and the rest of the world? The most relevant 
countries in the rest of the world are Japan and Germany because it is 
(47) Jean Paul Fitoussi asked this question at the Villa Mondragone Seminar where 
the paper was presented. 

The International Distribution of Saving: etc. 
53 
those two countries that have current account surpluses that match 
current US deficits. It would beyond the scope of this paper to study 
these statistics, but the different political situations of those countries 
in the depression years and the post-war years suggest the possibility 
that such an assymmetry exists. 

54 
Robert Mundell 
BIBUOGRAPHY 
[1] A.Noo A. - MODIGUANI F.: «The life-Cycle Hypothesis of Saving: Aggregate 
Implications and Tests», American Economic Review, vol. 53, March 1963, pp. 
1-20. 
[2] BARRO R.J. (ed.): Modern Business Cycle Theory, Cambridge (Mass.), Harvard 
University Press, 1989. 
[3] BHAGWATI J.: «lmmiserizing Growth: A Geometric Note», Review of Economic 
Studies, vol. 25, June 1958 
[4] BoULDING K.E.: «Toward a General of Growth», Canadian Journal of Economics 
and Political Science, vol. 19, n. 3, August 1953, pp. 326-40, reprinted in 
BOULDING K.E. (5]. 
[5] --: Beyond Economics, Ann Arbor, University of Michigan Press, 1968. 
[6] CANNAN E.: Production and Distribution, 1983. 
[7] Cox P.R.: Demography, Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, 1970. 
[8] DEAN A.: «World Saving since 1960: Trends in Saving and its Global Allocation», 
Rivista di Politica Economica, no. 10, October 1990. 
[9] EDGEWORTH F.Y.: Papers Relating to Political Economy, vol. 2, London, 1925. 
[10] FISHER 1.: «What, is Capital?», Economic Journal, Dicember 1896. 
[11] - -: «Senses of Capital», Economic Journal, June 1897. 
[12] --: The Nature of Capital and Income, 1906. 
[13] FRIEDMAN M.: A Theory of the Consumption Function, Princeton, Princeton 
University Press, 1957. 
[14] HALL R.E.: Consumption, in BARRO [2], Ch. 4. 
[15] JOHNSON H.G.: «Increasing Productivity, Income-Price Trends and the Trade 
Balance», Economic Journal, vol. 64, September 1954, pp. 462-85. 
[16] JOHNSON H.G.: «Economic Expansion and International Trade», Manchester 
School of Economic and Social Studies, vol. 23, May. 1955, pp. 95-112. 
[17] JOHNSON H.G. -SwoBODA A.K.: «The Economics of Common Currencies», London, 
Allen and Unwin, 1973, Proceedings of Optimum Currency Areas Conference, 
Madrid, 16-19 March 1970. 
[18] KuRIHARA K.K. (ed): Post-Keynesian Economics, London, Allen and Unwin, 1955. 
[19] LAL D.: «World Saving and Growth in Developing Countries», Rivista di Politica 
Economica, no. 10, October 1990. 
[20] LAL D. -WoLF M.: Stagflation, Savings and Growth, New York, Oxford University 
Press, 1986. 
[21] LINDAHL E.: The Means of Monetary Policy, 1930. 
[22] MANDEVILLE D.: Fable of the Bees: Private Vices, Public Benefits, 1714-1729. 
[23] MEADE J.E.: A Geometry of International Trade, London, Oxford University Press, 
1952. 
[24] --: The Balance of Payments Mathematical Supplement, London, Oxford 
University Press, 1951. 
[25] MELTZER A.H.: Keynes Monetary Theory: A Different Interpretation, Cambridge, 
Cambridge University Press, 1988. 
[26] METZLER L.A.: «Wealth, Saving and the Rate of Interest», Journal of Political 
Economy, vol. 59, 1951, pp. 93-116. 

Ihe International Distribution of Saving: etc. 
55 
[27] MILL J.S.: Principles of Political Economy, London, Longmans Green and Co., 
1909. 
[28] MoDIGUANI F.: «Life Cycle, Individual Thrift and the Wealth of Nations», 
American Economic Review, vol. 76, no. 3, June 1986, pp. 297-313. 
[29] MoDIGUANI F. - BRUMBER G.R.: Analysis and the Consumption Function: An 
Interpretation of Cross-Section Data, in KURIHARA [18]. 
[30] MUNDELL R.A.: «The Pure Theory of International Trade», American Economic 
Review, vol. 50, March 1960, pp. 67-100. 
[31] --: «The Public Debt, Corporate Income Taxes ad the Rate of Interest>>, Journal 
of Political Economy, vol. 68, 1960, pp. 622-6. 
[32] - -: <<Capital Mobility and Stabilization Policies Under Fixed and Flexible 
Exchange Rates>>, Canadian Journal of Economics and Political Science, vol. 29, 
November. 1963, pp. 475-85, reprinted in MUNDELL [33]. 
[33] --: International Economics, New Jork, MacMillan, 1968. 
[34] --:<<Uncommon Arguments for Common Currencies», 1970, in JOHNSON -
SWOBODA [ l 7]. 
[35] --: <<Trade Balance Patterns as Global General Equilibrium: The Seventeenth 
Approach to the Balance of Payments>>, Rivista di Politica Economica, vol. 79, 
June 1989, pp. 9-60. 
[36] --: <<The Global Adjustment System», Rivista di Politica Economica, vol. 79, 
December 1989. 
[37] --: <<Debts and Deficits in Alternative Economic Models>>, Rivista di Politica 
Economica, vol. 80, July-August 1990. 
[38] MYRDAL G.: Pricing and the Change Factor, 1927. 
[39] - -: Der Gleichgewichtsbegriff als Instrument der Geldtheoretischen Analyse, 
in HAYEK F. (ed.), Vienna, Julius Springer, 1933. 
[40] OECD: Economic Studies, no. 14, Spring 1990. 
[41] OHUN B.: <<Some Notes on the Stockholm Theory of Savings and Investment>>, 
Economic Journal, vol. 47 part I, March and part II June 1937, reprinted in 
Readings in Business Cycle Theory, Philadelphia, Blackistono. 
[42] PALGRAVE R.H. (ed.): Dictionary of Political Economy, Londra, MacMillan, 1926. 
[43] PATINKIN D.: <<Price Flexibility and Full Employment>>, American Economic Re-
view, vol. 38, September 1948, pp. 543-64. 
[44] --: Money, Interest and Prices, Evanston, Row and Peterson, 1956. 
[ 45] - -: Anticipations of the General Theory?, Oxford, Blackwell, 1982. 
[46]. PIGOu A.C.: <<The Classical Stationary State>>, Economic Journal, 1944. 
[47] PROCHNOW H.V. et al.: The Five-Year Outlook for Interest Rates, Chicago, Rand 
McNally, 1968. 
[48] RICARDO D.: Principles of Political Economy and Taxation, 1817, in SRAFFA (ed.), 
vol. I, Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, 1957. 
[49] --: Funding System, 1818, in SRAFFA (ed.), vol. IV, Cambridge, Cambridge 
University Press, 1962). 
[50] SAMUELSON P.A.: <<The Transfer Problem and Transport Costs: I, The Terms of 
Trade When Impediments are Absent>>, Economic Journal, vol. 57, June 1952, pp. 
278-304. 
[51] --:<<The Transfer Problem and Transport Costs: II, Analysis of Effects of Trade 
Impediments>>, Economic Journal, vo!. 59, 1954, pp. 264-90. 

56 
Robert Mundell 
[52] SAMUElSON P.A. - NORDHAUS W.O.: Economics, 13'h ed., New York, McGraw-Hill, 
1989. 
[53] VINER J.: «Who Paid for the War?», Journal of Political Economy, vol. 28, 1920, 
pp. 46-76. 
[54] WAWCH H.: «The Five-Year Outlook for Interest Rates», in PROCHNOW et AL. [47], 
Ch. 4. 
[55] WICKSELL K.: Geldzins und Guterpreise, 1989. 

World Saving since 1960: Trends in 
Saving and its Global Allocation 
Introduction 
Andrew Dean ( 1) 
OECD, Paris 
A major international concern in recent years has been the 
supposed inadequate level of world saving. This concern is likely to 
continue for some time, given the additional claims on resources that 
are likely to be entailed in any programme of restructuring in the 
formerly centrally-planned economies of Eastern and Central Europe 
and the continuing calls on capital from developing countries. 
Furthermore, the ageing of the population in the industrialised coun-
tries might also tend to lower saving rates in coming years. This paper 
attempts to give some focus to this concern by examining the trends in 
world saving over the last 30 years and giving some information on 
prospective developments. 
The level of world saving is not the sole savings preoccupation of 
policymakers, however. It is the allocation of savings that has been at 
the centre of attention in recent years, in particular concern with the 
current-account imbalances that have been unprecedently large and 
persistent in the three largest OECD economies (the United States, 
( 1) The paper represents the views of the author and does not necessarily reflect 
the views of the OECD. The author is grateful for the help of various colleagues, in 
particular Martine Durand, John Fallon and Peter Hoeller, who were co-authors of an 
OECD study of savings on which this paper is partly based (DEAN et AL., (4]). This paper 
also draws freely on the complementary work of the IMF which has also recently 
completed a study on national saving (AGHEVU et AL., [1]). The author is also grateful to 
Anick Lotrous and Jackie Gardel for excellent statistical and secretarial assistance. 
Advise: the numbers in square brackets refer to the Bibliography in the appendix. 

58 
Andrew Dean 
Japan and Germany) since the mid-1980s. This imbalances issue was 
at first viewed as a trade issue, and still is by some (2). But increas-
ingly, the savings dimension of the problem has been brought to the 
fore. 
There is a widely held belief that the world is now short of 
savings, that the rest of the world will be increasingly reluctant to 
finance the US external deficit and that interest rates will have to 
remain high or even rise further. 
The current concern with the level of savings arises from a variety 
of factors which include: a) the decline in saving rates in indus-
trialised countries in the 1980s compared with the 1960s and 1970s; 
b) the similar decline of saving rates in developing countries, in 
particular the heavily indebted countries, even though they have an 
urgent need for new capital; c) the capital requirements of East 
European countries as their economies are restructured; d)worrying 
changes in sectoral savings behaviour in certain countries: the persis-
tence of the US budget deficit in the context of low private sector 
savings there and the sharp fall in household savings both in the 
United States and a number of other OECD countries; e) high real 
interest rates across the globe, which are taken to be a reflection of 
inadequate savings; and f) low levels of investment, related to the low 
levels of savings and high real interest rates, causing concern about 
the development of potential output. 
This paper looks at some of these factors in order to examine 
whether we should be concerned with savings. The first section of the 
paper looks at savings in the OECD countries, where the data are 
relatively good, focusing first on inter-country differences, trends 
since 1960 and sectoral savings. The emergence of important savings-
investment gaps is then examined and this leads to a shorter discus-
sion of savings in developing countries, where the data are much less 
reliable. This allows an assessment of overall world savings positions. 
The global allocation of saving is considered in the light of the data on 
current-account surpluses and deficits over the last 30 years, although 
(2) In political circles, the US external deficit carne to be viewed by some as an 
issue of competitiveness and unfair trade practices with respect to Japan and some 
Asian economies. As such it was responsible for the development of a strong US 
protectionist sentiment in the second half of the 1980s. 

World Saving since 1960: Trends in etc. 
59 
some elements of a longer-term perspective are mentioned. The 
relationship between savings and interest rate is then explored. Final-
ly, certain prospective factors concerning saving developments are 
given, the main focus being on demographic trends. 
1. - Saving in OECD Countries 
1.1 Country Differences 
National saving rates in OECD countries in the 1980s, before 
depreciation, lay in a range of about 15% to just over 30% (Graph A). 
The highest saver was Japan but there were two other countries in the 
25 to 30%- range one a significant financial centre (Switzerland) and 
the other a major oil producer and exporter (Norway) (3). The only 
comparable high saving ratios outside the industrialised countries 
were for some Middle-Eastern oil producers in their better days and 
more recently for certain dynamic Asian economies. At the other end 
of the scale is a whole group of countries with gross saving ratios in 
the 1980s of around 15%, with Denmark and Belgium at the bottom 
of the pack and the United States not far behind. 
This relatively wide spread of saving rates between countries in 
not too dissimilar states of economic development has led to a vast 
amount of research on saving behaviour. Much of this has been 
concerned with household behaviour, focusing in particular on demo-
graphic factors (4). The many factors affecting savings are not re-
viewed here, although demographic factors are raised in considering 
future saving developments. 
There has also, quite rightly, been much attention paid to 
measurement issues (5). Many of the measurement issues affect 
(3) The standardised OECD National Accounts, which are used extensively 
throughout this paper in order to get as good a level of international comparability as 
possible, show Luxembourg to have an even higher gross saving ratio of over 40% but 
the accounting conventions used in this particular case mean that the figure is probably 
an overestimate. 
(4) The literature is enormous, but useful studies of two major countries at 
opposite ends of the spectrum, the United States and Japan, include HAYASHI [9], 
HORIOKA [ 11], KAWASAKI [ 13] and SUMMERS - CARROL [ 19]. 
(5) The issues of the treatment of consumer durables, pensions, R&D and human 
capital are discussed in DEAN et AL. [5]. 

60 
Andrew Dean 
GROSS SAVING RATIOS IN OECD COUNTRIES 
( 1981-1988 average, in percent of GNP) 
GRAPH A 
sectoral savings but do not affect aggregate national savings, one 
major exception being depreciation. Gross saving rates are used 
throughout this paper because of the notorious difficulties in esti-
mating capital depreciation, but the national accounts data indicate 
that the change in the composition of the capital stock to shorter-lived 
assets has increased the amount of depreciation over the last 30 years. 
As an example, for the United States depreciation has risen from 9% 
of GNP in the 1960s to 12.5% in the 1980s. Thus while the US gross 

World Saving since 1960: Trends in etc. 
61 
saving rate was 16% in the 1980s, the net rate was less than 4%- the 
lowest of all OECD countries. 
The inter-country differences in gross savings depicted in Graph A 
have been fairly persistent through the period since 1960 although 
there have of course been some changes in the relative ranking of 
some countries. But the United States has remained a "low saver" and 
Japan a "high saver". There does seem, however, to have been a 
downward trend in national saving rates across virtually all OECD 
countries. 
1.2 Changes in Saving Rates since 1960 
For the OECD countries in aggregate, the rate of national saving 
rose a little through the 1960s and up to 1973 (Graph B). It then fell 
sharply after the first oil price shock -
while OPEC savings of course 
picked up- and, after a slight recovery in the mid-1970s, declined 
rather slowly until the late 1980s. The gross saving ratio for the OECD 
area in the 1980s is about 3 percentage points lower than it had been 
in the 1960s ( 6), with the investment ratio falling by 2 percentage 
points (Table 1). The only country not to experience a lower saving 
rate over the last 30 years is Norway, where oil production must have 
had and important impact. The saving rates in the United States and 
Japan both fell by 3.5 percentage points, though the decline for the 
former country was from a much lower level and the net US saving 
rate in the 1980s fell to an extremely low level- to only 2.5% at its 
lowest -
just prior to the October 1987 stockmarket fall. 
1.3 Sectoral Savings Behaviour (7) 
Movements in sectoral savings provide some clues as to why 
national saving rates have changed. It is interesting to split out 
( 6) The net saving ratio is some 6 percentage points lower. 
. 
(7) The Tables and Graphs for sectoral savings do not have a full coverage of OECD 
countries because full data for all sectors since 1960 are not available. The text generally 
refers only to those countries where full figures are available. 

62 
Andrew Dean 
GRAPH B 
TRENDS IN NATIONAL SAVING AND INVESTMENT RATES 
• 
.. 
., 
" 
• 
II 
• 
II 
-- Gross saving (per cent of GNP) 
Gross investment (per cent of GNP) 
United SJates 
10 
• 
II 
,. 
.. 
Japan 
• 
.. 
Gennany 
" 
10 
" 
" 
France 
.. 
II 
II 
II 
10 12 .... 70 72 74 71 71 10 12 14 •• 
Source: Ol!cn: National Accounts. 
OECD-Total 
• 
" 
.. 
United Kingdom 
• 
10 
Italy 
" 
Canada 

World Saving since 1960: Trends in etc. 
63 
GRAPH B continued 
TRENDS IN NATIONAL SAVING AND INVESTMENT RATES 
" 
10 
JO 
" 
10 
.. 
-- Gross saving (per cent of GNP) 
Gross investment (per cent of GNP) 
Austria 
Belgium 
Denmark 
Finland 
' .. 
" 
.. 
10 
:\ 10 
" 
10 
<1(1 
10 
, 
" 
JO 
• 
10 
60 
62 
64 66 68 
70 
72 
7<4 
76 
78 8J 82 84 
86 88 
Fonte: OECD, National Accounts. 
Greece 
r~ 
Ireland 
, 
/\ '. 
' . 
. :.l \.··\\ 
.. 1 . . 
. 
•'· .... / \/ 
: ..... .... 
Netherlands 
10 
, 
" 
, 

64 
... 
, 
,. .. 
•• 
, 
.. 
" 
JO 
Andrew Dean 
GRAPH B continued 
TRENDS IN NATIONAL SAVING AND INVESTMENT RATES 
Gross saving (per cent of GNP) 
Gross investment (per cent of GNP) 
Norway 
.. 
.. 
New Zealand 
.. 
" 
" 
~ 
, 
1\ 
.. 
! \ 
.. 
i \ 
. .. 
. . 
:15 
' 
\ 
:15 
\ 
: 
20 
\t\J 
.. 
Portugal 
, 
IS 
IS 
to 
.. 
, 
Australia 
, 
Jll 
• 
.. 
Spain 
, 
JO 
IS 
15 
.. 
to 
Sweden 
, 
Switzerland 
, 
" 
" 
IS 
IS 
~ ~ ~ ~ M ro n u ~ n ~ ~ ~ M • 
eo 82 e. ee ea 10 12 
74 11 78 ., a 
1M • 
• 
Source: 0Eco: National Accounts. 

World Saving since 1960: Trends in etc. 
NET AND GROSS NATIONAL SAVING RATIOS 
(As per cent of net and gross national product) 
Averages 
1986 
1960-1970 1971-1980 1981-1988 
United States .......... net 
10.6 
8.9 
3.7 
2.5 
gross 
19.6 
19.5 
16.1 
14.7 
Japan ................ net 
25.6 
24.6 
20.4 
20.8 
gross 
35.0 
34.4 
31.4 
31.9 
Germany ............ net 
19.9 
14.3 
11.1 
13.1 
gross 
27.3 
23.7 
22.2 
23.9 
France ................ net 
19.3 
16.3 
8.2 
8.6 
gross 
26.3 
25.4 
19.8 
20.0 
Italy .................. net 
15.8 
15.8 
10.7 
10.4 
gross 
25.5 
25.6 
21.8 
21.3 
United Kingdom ...... net 
11.1 
7.7 
5.6 
5.1 
gross 
18.6 
17.7 
16.8 
16.3 
Canada .............. net 
11.3 
13.3 
9.4 
7.0 
gross 
21.8 
23.1 
20.3 
18.5 
Austria 
•••••• 0 ••••••• net 
18.2 
18.0 
13.1 
12.7 
gross 
28.0 
27.6 
24.0 
23.7 
Belgium .............. net 
14.4 
13.9 
7.0 
8.3 
gross 
22.6 
21.8 
15.7 
16.9 
Denmark ............ net 
17.4 
13.3 
6.6 
8.3 
gross 
23.2 
20.3 
15.0 
16.7 
Finland 
••••••• 0 •••••• net 
15.7 
14.2 
10.3 
8.7 
gross 
25.6 
26.7 
23.8 
22.6 
Greece .............. net 
15.3 
20.7 
8.5 
5.4 
gross 
19.7 
26.2 
16.5 
14.3 
Ireland .............. net 
12.0 
13.1 
8.6 
8.1 
gross 
18.6 
21.0 
18.5 
18.1 
Netherlands .......... net 
19.9 
16.4 
13.3 
14.2 
gross 
26.9 
23.9 
22.3 
23.0 
Nmway .............. net 
16.1 
14.0 
15.2 
10.6 
gross 
27.5 
27.0 
27.8 
23.4 
Portugal .............. net 
19.8 
22.0 
19.9 
22.2 
gross 
23.9 
25.6 
23.5 
25.6 
Spain ................ net 
16.7 
16.7 
10.1 
11.5 
gross 
25.5 
25.0 
20.6 
21.7 
Sweden .............. net 
16.6 
11.7 
5.8 
7.2 
gross 
25.0 
21.0 
16.9 
17.9 
Switzerland .......... net 
21.2 
19.4 
20.6 
22.3 
gross 
29.6 
28.0 
28.4 
29.7 
Australia .............. net 
13.6 
10.9 
4.8 
3.8 
gross 
24.7 
23.6 
20.1 
19.9 
New Zealand .......... net 
14.2 
15.0 
14.0 
14.8 
gross 
21.2 
21.8 
20.9 
21.6 
Average of ............ net 
14.6 
13.5 
8.6 
8.2 
above countries ........ gross 
23.3 
23.5 
20.2 
19.7 
Source: OECD: Annual National Accounts. 
65 
TABLE 1 
1987 
1988 
2.4 
3.3 
14.5 
15.1 
21.2 
22.0 
32.3 
33.2 
12.9 
13.9 
23.6 
24.5 
7.9 
9.2 
19.6 
20.5 
9.8 
10.2 
21.7 
20.9 
5.3 
5.2 
16.3 
16.4 
8.5 
10.5 
19.6 
21.1 
13.1 
14.8 
24.0 
25.4 
8.8 
11.1 
17.1 
19.1 
7.5 
7.3 
16.2 
16.2 
8.6 
10.8 
22.4 
24.2 
5.8 
8.7 
14.6 
16.8 
10.8 
10.9 
20.3 
20.4 
12.2 
14.6 
21.4 
23.6 
10.8 
10.4 
24.1 
24.7 
24.5 
22.5 
27.8 
25.9 
12.4 
13.0 
22.1 
22.8 
7.3 
7.8 
18.1 
18.6 
22.9 
23.7 
30.3 
31.2 
6.8 
9.9 
21.9 
23.8 
12.5 
13.8 
19.5 
21.0 
8.2 
9.2 
19.6 
20.4 

66 
Andrew Dean 
government and private sector savings and, within the latter, to look 
at the breakdown between households and companies. 
1.3.1 Government Savings 
An important contributory factor to the decline in national saving 
rates over the last 20 years has been the fall in government saving 
relative to GNP. Government saving rates in the 1980s have been 
lower than in the 1960s in all OECD countries where consistent data 
are available with the one exception of Norway (Table 2). In the 1960s 
government saving was positive and hence contributed to national 
saving in all the OECD countries covered. In the 1970s government 
saving fell as revenue growth slackened with the slowing of economic 
growth and social programmes inflated public expenditures. By the 
1980s public sector borrowing was therefore widespread and it was 
only Japan, Germany and Grance who were able to cover their 
current expenditures with current revenues (i.e. had positive saving). 
Elsewhere government dissaving rose alarmingly, to 2.5% of GNP in 
the United States and Canada, and to 6% of GNP in Italy and Belgium. 
Such countries were therefore covering none of their government 
investment from current income and were even borrowing significant 
amounts just to cover current expenditures. 
As between the 1960s and 1980s government saving fell by more 
than national saving in the United States, the United Kingdom, 
Canada, Belgium and Finland; private saving had therefore risen to 
offset some of the fall in government savings. In Japan and Germany, 
on the other hand, there was no such offsetting; government and 
private saving both fell. Norway was unique in that government 
saving rose, but this was partly offset by a fall in private sector saving. 
All of these trends are statements of ex post positions. There are 
of course important interactions between government deficits and 
private sector savings. Government tax and expenditure decisions 
affect private sector saving and expenditure decisions both directly, 
via for example taxes and the public provision of health services and 
pensions, and indirectly, via interest rates and economic conditions 
more generally. There have been many studies on the proposition of 
Ricardian equivalence and it is probably fair to say that there is no 

World Saving since 1960: Trends in etc. 
GROSS NATIONAL, GOVERNMENT 
AND PRIVATE SECTOR SAVING (*) 
(%of GNP) 
67 
TABLE 2 
Change in average 
Average ratios 
ratios between 
1960·1970 and 
1981-1987 
1986 
1987 
1981-1987 
United States ...... national 
-3.3 
16.2 
14.7 
14.5 
government 
-4,2 
-2.4 
- 3.1 
- 2.1 
private sector 
1.0 
18.7 
18.1 
16.7 
Japan 
••••••••• 0 
•• national 
- 3.9 
31.1 
31.9 
32.3 
government 
- 2.0 
4.3 
4.8 
6.5 
private sector 
-
1.9 
26.8 
27.1 
25.8 
Germany .......... national 
- 5.5 
21.8 
23.9 
23.6 
government 
- 4.4 
1.8 
2.4 
1.9 
private sector 
-l.l 
20.0 
21.5 
21.7 
United Kingdom .... national 
-
1.7 
16.9 
16.3 
16.3 
government 
-4.3 
-0.3 
- 0.1 
0.6 
private sector 
4.6 
17.7 
16.8 
16.3 
Canada 
••••••• 0 
•• national 
- 1.5 
20.3 
18.5 
19.6 
government 
-5.9 
- 2.2 
-2.3 
-
1.9 
private sector 
4.4 
22.5 
21.3 
21.3 
Austria ............ national 
-4.2 
23.8 
23.7 
24.0 
government 
-4.6 
2.6 
2.1 
l.l 
private sector 
0.3 
21.1 
21.6 
23.0 
Belgium 
• 
0 •••••••• national 
- 7.4 
15.2 
16.9 
17.1 
government 
- 7.9 
-6.6 
- 6.4 
-4.9 
private sector 
0.6 
21.8 
23.2 
22.0 
Finland .......... national 
-
1.8 
23.8 
22.6 
22.4 
government 
-3.6 
3.8 
4.6 
2.7 
private sector 
1.8 
20.0 
18.0 
19.7 
Norway .......... national 
0.8 
28.3 
23.4 
24.1 
government 
1.0 
9.1 
8.9 
7.0 
private sector 
-0.2 
19.2 
14.5 
17.1 
(*) Only countries with data for gross saving ratios covering the entire period are included in 
this table. Comprehensive sectoral savings data are available on the OECD's national accounts basis 
only up to 1987 though aggregate savings for 1988 are already available and are shown in Table I. 
Source: 0Eco: Annual National Accounts. 
unanimity about the extent of offsetting of private and government 
savings. The trends presented above would suggest that there is some 
offsetting for some countries but that it is far from full offsetting, but 
rigorous testing of the proposition requires a full modelling of the 

68 
Andrew Dean 
problem. A study conducted at the OECD by Nicoletti [16] found a 
close link between government and private sector positions in only 
two of the eight OECD countries studied, namely Belgium and Italy. 
As noted above, these are two countries with large public sector 
deficits. And they are the two countries in the sample with very high 
general government net debt ratios, which suggests that there may be 
some threshold of debt beyond which there is a much stronger 
relationship between government and private sector savings. 
1. 3. 2 Private Sector Savings 
The implication of the above is that private sector savings have to 
a certain extent "filled the gap" as government savings have declined 
and have therefore been an increasingly important source of finance 
for domestic investment. Over the last thirty years private sector 
savings have generally been fairly stable over time (Table 3). In most 
countries rates of private sector savings were much the same in the 
1980s as in the 1960s, having been a little higher in the 1970s (8). 
Gross private saving rates have been less volatile than national saving 
rates or the component business and household rates for nearly all 
countries. Some "piercing of the corporate veil" has taken place. The 
tendency for business and household sector savings to offset each 
other which had been noted by Denison in 1958 has been confirmed 
by many later studies. Although there has been a long-term stability in 
private sector savings there has nevertheless been a rather sharp drop 
in recent years in some countries. This has been most marked in 
Denmark, Norway and Sweden but has also been evident in the 
United States, the United Kingdom and Italy. In all these cases the 
origin of the recent fall, in an accounting sense, has lain in a decline in 
household savings, which has often been sharp and largely unexpec-
ted. Business savings, which tend to mirror profit developments 
rather closely, were very depressed earlier in the 1980s but have 
recovered strongly with the general economic recovery over the last 
seven years. 
(8) The United Kingdom and Canada were exceptions, with successively higher 
private sector saving rates through the 1970s and 1980s. 

World Saving since 1960: Trends in etc. 
NET AND GROSS PRIVATE SECTOR SAVING RATIOS 
(per cent of net and gross national product) 
Averages 
1986 
1960-1970 1971-1980 1981-1988 
United States 
••• 0 
0 
0 
0 ••• net 
9.9 
10.2 
8.1 
7.9 
gross 
17.7 
19.2 
18.7 
18.1 
Japan .................. net 
18.9 
20.1 
15.9 
16.0 
gross 
28.7 
29.9 
26.8 
27.1 
Germany 
• 
0 
•• 0. 0. 0 
0 
0 ••• net 
13.5 
11.0 
9.4 
11.1 
gross 
21.1 
20.2 
20.0 
21.5 
France 
•••••••••• 0 ••••• net 
. . 
13.8 
9.1 
9.9 
gross 
.. 
22.0 
18.8 
19.3 
United Kingdom ........ net 
6.3 
7.8 
7.9 
6.9 
gross 
13.1 
16.4 
17.7 
16.8 
Canada ................ net 
8.6 
12.3 
13.6 
12.1 
gross 
18.1 
20.7 
22.5 
21.3 
Austria •• 0. 0 •• 0 
0 
•• 0. 0 
•• net 
10.9 
12.2 
10.8 
11.3 
gross 
20.8 
21.7 
21.1 
21.6 
Belgium ................ net 
13.1 
14.9 
14.0 
15.6 
gross 
21.2 
22.5 
21.8 
23.2 
Denmark . . . . . . . . . . . . . . net 
.. 
8.1 
7.3 
2.8 
gross 
.. 
14.8 
15.2 
10.9 
Finland ................ net 
8.1 
6.7 
7.2· 
4.8 
gross 
18.2 
19.3 
20.0 
18.0 
Greece ................ net 
11.2 
18.7 
15.6 
13.7 
Netherlands . . . . . . . . . . . . net 
.. 
13.8 
14.7 
15.7 
gross 
.. 
20.8 
22.8 
23.7 
Norway ................ net 
7.4 
5.4 
6.2 
1.2 
gross 
19.4 
18.8 
19.2 
14.5 
Sweden ................ net 
. . 
5.3 
5.7 
5.4 
gross 
.. 
14.2 
15.5 
15.0 
Switzerland ............ net 
16.1 
15.2 
16.3 
17.5 
Australia ................ net 
.. 
10.5 
5.3 
4.2 
gross 
.. 
21.1 
18.4 
18.1 
Average of .............. net 
.. 
11.9 
10.1 
10.1 
above countries ........ gross 
. . 
21.2 
20.4 
20.2 
Source: OECD: Annual National Accounts. 
69 
TABLE 3 
1987 
6.5 
16.7 
14.4 
25.8 
11.7 
21.7 
8.6 
18.5 
6.6 
16.3 
12.4 
21.3 
12.8 
23.0 
14.5 
22.0 
3.2 
11.4 
6.9 
19.7 
14.4 
13.9 
22.3 
3.6 
17.1 
2.8 
12.7 
18.2 
5.5 
18.9 
9.4 
19.4 

70 
Andrew Dean 
1.3.3 Household Saving Rates 
Household saving rates rose substantially in the 1970s and then 
fell significantly in the 1980s (Graph C). The rise in the 1970s was 
related to inflation and can also be linked to the OPEC oil price rise 
and the ensuing uncertainty and unemployment (9). The fall in the 
1980s can be related to the disinflation process and the sustained 
recovery since the last recession. Comparing the 1980s with the 
1960s, household saving ratios are lower in all of the Scandinavian 
countries, in France and the United Kingdom, and in the United 
States and Australia. There has been a downward trend in household 
saving ratios in Japan, Italy and Ireland but they remain higher than 
in the 1960s. In retrospect, the high saving ratios of the 1970s look 
like an aberration related to inflation. 
An additional factor which appears to have led to reduced 
household saving in recent years has been the effect of financial 
market liberalisation, which has removed liquidity constraints for 
many individuals. It has also interacted with tax distortions, especially 
those concerning housing, to encourage consumer debt. In the United 
Kingdom, for instance, personal sector debt/income ratios doubled 
between 1980 and 1988 (10). There has also been a significant 
increase in the ratio of household wealth to income, related to sharp 
rises in housing and stockmarket prices, in many countries. This has 
been most pronounced in Japan but also important in France, Italy 
and the United Kingdom. Japan is by far the most extreme case, 
however. Between 1985 and 1987, the ratio of net wealth (including 
housing and land) to personal disposable income rose from 5. 7 to 7 .8. 
In each of the two years 1986 and 1987, the increase in wealth was 
thus equivalent on average to the total of personal income in the year, 
in other words income was doubled by capital gains. Although there 
was a 1 percentage point fall in the household saving ratio between 
1985 and 1987 it is surprising in such circumstances that the fall was 
(9) Adjusting standard measures of household saving ratios for holding gains and 
losses due to inflation significantly reduces the rise in such ratios in the 1970s (DEAN et 
AL. [4], Graph D). Other measurement issues and much greater detail on trends in 
household savings are given in DEAN et AL. [5]. 
(10) See Table 8 in DEAN et AL. [5] for details of personal sector wealth and 
debt/income ratios for the major seven economies. 

World Saving since 1960: Trends in etc. 
71 
GRAPH c 
GROSS AND NET HOUSEHOLD SAVING RATIOS 
-
Net saving ratio 
Gross saving ratio 
• 
United States 
• 
• 
21 
21 
It 
•• 
•• 
II 
II 
10 
II 
" 
.. 
• 
.. 
·····--
II 
II 
" 
. . 
.. .,....... 
·-................. 
14 
................. 1 ....... 
, ... \, 
21 
tl 
... 
11 
• 
•.. 
.. 
II 
a 
• 
• 
II 
• 
• 
" 
• 
• 
.. 
a 
a 
•• 
.. 
• 
• 
11 
II 
.. 
• • 
• • 
• 
21 
• 
• 
It 
• 
• 
,. 
I 
I 
II 
•• 
• 
10 
II 
• 
United Kingdom 
• 
" 
II 
II 
" 
II 
21 
II 
,. 
" 
II 
• 
10 
• 
• " 
.. 
• 
• .. 
.. 
a 
I 
.. 
• • 
• 
I 
II 
II 
.. 
.. 
• 
Germany 
• 
I 
• 
II 
It 
I 
• 
21 
It 
• 
• 
.. 
•• 
a 
I 
a 
a 
• 
• 
10 
10 
.. 
.. 
II 
.. 
•• 
11 .. • • 
• 
• 
I 
I 
• 
• 
Source: 0Eco: National Accounts. 

72 
Andrew Dean 
GRAPH C continued 
GROSS AND NET HOUSEHOLD SAVING RATIOS 
-
Net saving ratio 
Gross saving ratio 
• 
Canada 
• • 
Finland 
• 
ll 
II 
ll 
II 
ll 
II • 
II 
14 
,. 
,, 
,. 
a 
a 
a 
12 
• 
II • 
Ill 
II 
,, 
" 
" 
" 
" " 
" 
" 
'' 
" 
" 
IJ 
1J 
u 
1J 
•• 
" " 
II 
• 
I 
• 
• • 
• 
• • 
• 
I 
I 
I 
• • 
I 
• • 
• 
II 
ll 
II 
II 
~ 
II 
,. 
•• 
,. 
12 
a 
n 
.. • 
ll 
,. " 
II 
" " 
II 
14 
'' 
.. 
IJ 
1J 
u 
II 
.. 
10 
• • 
• 
• • 
• 
• 
• 
• 
I 
I 
I 
• • 
• 
Belgium 
• • 
Netherlands 
• 
II 
ll 
ll 
.. 
II 
II 
14 
14 
14 
12 
a 
n 
Ill 
• 
II 
" .. 
" 
" 
II 
" 
14 
,. 
14 
IJ 
u 
1J 
II 
.. 
.. 
• • 
• 
• • 
• 
• • 
• 
I 
I 
I 
eo 82 64 ·ee fJ8 
10 
12 
74 
78 
78 eo 
112 84 ea • • 
• 
11062648888 10 n 1• 16 16 eo 12 64 88 
Source: OECD: National Accounts. 

• " " " 
II 
" • • • 
I • 
-2 
.... 
.... 
.... 
_,. 
World Saving since 1960: Trends in etc. 
73 
GRAPH C continued 
GROSS AND NET HOUSEHOLD SAVING RATIOS 
Norway 
Portugal 
-
Net saving ratio 
Gross saving ratio 
• 
II 
II ,. 
II 
II • • • 
I • 
-I 
.... 
.... 
.... 
• " 
II ,. 
Sweden 
II •••• ,,/'•··-. 
,. 
''•....... ,,... ··--.. ,. .... , 
I 
\/ 
• • 
I • 
_, 
.... 
.... 
.... 
-II 
Switzerland 
Source: 0Eco: National Accounts. 
• " ,. ,. 
II 
" • • • 
I • 
-1 
.... 
.... 
.... 
• .. 
Ill 
24 
12 • " 
II ,. 
II 
" 
I 
I • 
I• .. 
• • 
Ill 
24 
12 • 
II 
II ,. 
II 
" • • • 
I 
I 

74 
Andrew Dean 
no greater. It may be that this effect will become more evident over 
time as the rise in wealth is built into Japanese perceptions of their 
permanent income. If so, this might have important implications for 
international saving positions discussed below. 
1.4 Saving - Investment Gaps 
Throughout the 1960s and 1970s there was broad balance be-
tween saving and investment in most OECD countries. Feldstein and 
Horioka [8] noted a strong covariation between saving and invest-
ment in 23 OECD countries using cross-country data for the period 
1960-1974. They also found a strong link between saving and invest-
ment for five-year sub-periods, with no noticeable tendency for any 
change. 
These findings are confirmed by a simple examination of the 
counterpart external positions -
current-account surpluses and defi-
cits -
over this period (Table 4). Large current-account positions in 
the 1960s and 197 Os were usually corrected rather quickly, although 
there were certain countries which tended to continue to run current-
account deficits throughout most of this period. These countries, 
which were traditional capital importers where the imported savings 
were frequently used for projects related to resource development, 
included Canada, Greece, Ireland, Turkey and Australia and New 
Zealand. For some other OECD countries, such as Denmark, there 
were not the same sort of "classic" reasons for importing that applied 
to the other countries, but for the remaining OECD countries -
the 
major six in particular -
the pattern of persisting current-account 
deficits did not occur (11). Among the major three OECD countries, 
none of their current-account positions was ever greater than 2% of 
GNP for more than two successive years throughout the 1960s and 
1970s. Even after the oil price shocks, when OPEC saving was 
increased and the net saving of OECD countries was reduced, the 
effect did not persist as adjustment occurred rather rapidly. 
(11) However, Luxembourg and Switzerland both had persistent and large sur· 
pluses throughout this period. 

World Saving since 1960: Trends in etc. 
75 
TABLE 4 
THE EVOLUTION OF WORLD CURRENT-ACCOUNT POSffiONS 
1975 
1976 
1977 
1978 
1979 
1980 
1981 
1982 
1983 
Current-account 
balance ($ billion) 
United States .... 
18.1 
4.2 -14.5 -15.4 -1.0 
1.4 
8.9 -7.1 -39.6 
Japan 
•• 0 ••••••• -0.7 
3.7 
10.9 
16.5 -8.8 -10.7 
4.8 
6.8 
20.8 
Germany ........ 
4.3 
3.7 
4.0 
8.9 -5.4 -13.8 -3.6 
5,1 
5.3 
OECD ............ 
5.7 -15.5 -21.0 
12.0 -27.5 -67.9 -22.3 -25.1 -17.2 
OPEC ............ 
19.9 
20.9 
5.3 -22.5 
27.0 
85.1 
48.2 -7.2 -20.7 
Non-oil LDCs .... -33.9 -19.0 -13.4 -23.0 -37.4 -64.8 -85.1 -69.1 -35.0 
East European coun-
tries ............ 
-9.6 -8.3 -3.2 -4.7 -2.4 
0.8 
0.9 
9.2 
12.8 
World discrepancy 
-17.9 -21.9 -32.3 -38.1 -40.3 -46.8 -58.3 -92.2 -60.1 
Current-account 
balance (% GNP) 
United States .... 
1.1 
0.2 -0.7 -0.7 -0.0 
0.1 
0.3 -0.2 -1.2 
Japan 
••• 0 •••••• -
0.1 
0.7 
1.6 
1.7 -0.9 -1.0 
0.4 
0.6 
1.8 
Germany ........ 
1.0 
0.8 
0.8 
1.4 -0.7 -1.7 -0.5 
0.8 
0.8 
Source: OECD: Economic Outlook 47, June 1990; projections for 1990 and 1991. 
TABLE 4 continued 
THE EVOLUTION OF WORLD CURRENT ACCOUNT POSITIONS 
1984 
1985 
1986 
1987 
1988 
1989 
1990 
1991 
Current-account 
balance ($ billion) 
United States .... -96.4 -122.4 -153.0 -159.6 -125.6 -103.7 -99.7 -96.9 
Japan 
•••••• 00 •• 
35.0 
49.2 
85.8 
87.0 
79.6 
57.2 
48.5 
59.4 
Germany ........ 
9.0 
16.4 
39.2 
45.2 
48.5 
52.7 
63.3 
61.7 
OECD ............ -55.1 -
62.2 -
35.5- 54.5- 49.7 -
84.4 -77.0 -66.8 
OPEC 
•••• 0 ••••••• -
5.6 
2.2 - 28.5-
6.2- 14.8 
4.1 -
2.9 
3.4 
Non-oil LDCs 
•• 00 
-21.8 -
23.9 -
10.3 
11.3 
4.7 -
4.4 -
6.9 - 8.6 
East European coun-
tries ............ 
14.0 
6.7 
8.5 
18.6 
13.5 
12.5 
11.0 -
1.1 
World discrepancy .. -68.5 -
77.1 - 65.8- 30.8- 46.2 -
72.3 -70.0 -73.1 
Current-account 
balance (% GNP) 
United States .... -
2.6-
3.0 -
3.6 -
3.5 -
2.6 -
2.0 -
1.8 -
1.6 
Japan .......... 
2.8 
3.7 
4.4 
3.6 
2.8 
2.0 
1.8 
2.1 
Germany ........ 
1.6 
2.6 
4.4 
4.0 
4.0 
4.4 
4.4 
4.0 
Source: OECD: Economic Outlook 47, June 1990; projections for 1990 and 1991. 

76 
Andrew Dean 
In the 1980s, this situation changed. The foreign financing of 
saving shortfalls became more important and it became easier to 
sustain saving-investment imbalances over longer periods of time. 
Among the major three countries, the current-account positions from 
the mid-1980s onwards were always greater than 2% of GNP. For 
Germany, the current-account surplus has been more than 4% of 
GNP, though the situation as regards East Germany and the rest of 
Eastern Europe means that the surplus German savings position may 
be eroded in the coming years. 
It has been surprising to many that the "imbalances" of the 1980s 
have persisted. There were fears, in particular, that the continuing US 
external deficit, with the implied accumulation of US foreign debt, 
would lead to the need for high real interest rates and to exchange-
rate volatility and financial instability. All of these things have indeed 
happened to some degree, but none of them have led so far to a 
discontinuity or to the crash that was feared. The US external deficit 
has been halved as a proportion of GNP, but still causes concern, 
matched as it is by weak savings in both the government and private 
sectors. The US situation may still have a sorry outcome but to date 
the financing has been forthcoming and therefore the external deficit 
has been sustainable. 
Viewed from the savings-investment side, the development of 
persistent current-account imbalances seemed to contradict the ear-
lier Feldstein-Horioka results. The correlations carried out in the 
initial study have been replicated and brought up to date by the OECD 
(and others). The new results, presented in Table 5, suggest a much 
less impo~ant correlation in the recent period. The "savings reten-
tion" coefficient drifts down, a result confirmed by Feldstein and 
Bacchetta [7]. Many commentators have pointed out that such 
correlations say nothing about capital mobility; for that one would 
need a structural model of the determination of savings and invest-
ment (Obstfeld [17]). One could also look for other types of evidence, 
such as a greater harmonisation of real interest rates across countries 
through time, as appears to have been the case in the 1980s. 
Furthermore, savings-investment gaps give some information on net 
capital flows, but say nothing about gross capital flows, which all the 
evidence suggests have grown extremely rapidly since the 1970s 

Period 
1963-1967 
1968-1972 
1973-1977 
1978-1982 
1983-1987 
World Saving since 1960: Trends in etc. 
RELATION BETWEEN GROSS NATIONAL 
SAVING AND INVESTMENT RATIOS (*) 
Constant 
SlY 
••••• 0 
•• 0 ••• 0 ••• 0. 0. 
0.033 
0.91 
(0.016) 
(0.064) 
.................... 
0.053 
0.80 
(0.020) 
(0.079) 
0 •••••• 0 •••••••••••• 
0.077 
0.77 
(0.044) 
(0.181) 
••• 0 •••••••••••• 0 ••• 
0.085 
0.71 
(0.035) 
(0.156) 
• 
0 
•• 0 ••• 0 
0. 0 
0. 
0 
•• 0 
•• 
0.094 
0.58 
(0.021) 
(0.098) 
77 
TABLE 5 
~ 
0.90 
0.82 
0.44 
0.47 
0.61 
(*) Pooled data for 23 OECD countries. The regression is: 1;/Y, = a. + ~ [S;/Y;], where 1;, S, 
and Y, are domestic investment, saving and income in country i. For countries with a statistical 
discrepancy, it is split between saving and investment. Investment and saving ratios are averaged 
over the subperiods. Standard errors are shown below coefficients. 
Source: OECD: Annual National Accounts. 
(Alford, Turner [2]). Such correlations do, nevertheless, reveal that 
domestic investment is no longer being so closely financed by national 
saving and hence indicate that net capital flows into or out of OECD 
countries have become of increasing importance in the 1980s. 
The current-account "imbalances" were a major cause of concern 
to policymakers from about the middle of the 1980s onwards. But as 
the surpluses and deficits persisted -
in fact there was a reduction in 
the US and Japanese external positions but an increase in the German 
surplus -
there was gradualy less anxiety about the necessary 
financing. It was the US deficit which was the particular concern but 
this peaked in 1987 at $160 billion (3.5% of GNP) and was down to 
about $100 billion (2% of GNP by 1989); the financing may well have 
been more difficult and even disruptive if there had not been the 
noticeable improvement of the last few years. 
Even at the time of the peak in the US deficit there was a school 
of thought that suggested that such a deficit should not be of concern 
and would anyway be self-correcting. In an open economy with free 
capital flows and no domestic distortions, there is no reason for 

78 
Andrew Dean 
domestic investment to be matched by national saving. Foreign capital 
inflows can finance domestic investment, even over long periods of 
time, so long as domestic investment generates the requisite income to 
repay the foreign debt. Differences in savings and investment will 
reflect different resource endowments and preferences for consump-
tion and production over time. Savings will cross borders to seek the 
highest expected, risk-adjusted rate of return with the capital flows 
equalising the demand and supply of loanable funds at a common 
global real rate of return. 
The extent to which the necessary conditions for such an ideal-
ised equilibrium exist -
namely the absence of domestic distortions 
and the free movement of goods and capital -
are subject to much 
debate, but the United States might be regarded as "cleaner" than 
some other OECD countries in some respects, especially as regards 
the flow of capital. Furthermore, the increasing trend to financial 
liberalisation as well as programmes of tax reform have probably 
meant that there are fewer distortions, domestic or international, to 
the efficient allocation of capital than used to be the case. From this 
point of view, it is perhaps not surprising to see the opening-up and 
persistence of "imbalances", though the latter term may indeed by a 
misnomer if the current-account positions are regarded in any sense 
as equilibrium positions arising from individual choices in the absence 
of major distortions or shocks. 
It is true that the large external deficits and surpluses of the major 
OECD economies in the last five years are unprecedented in the 
post-war period, or at least the period beyond the immediate post-war 
reconstruction. But they are far from unprecedented in terms of the 
longer sweep of economic history. Eichengreen [ 6] has documented 
the available evidence on capital flows around the turn of the century. 
For a sample of nine industrialising countries (12) in the period 1880 
to 1913, net capital movements were greater than at any time since. 
The absolute value of the surpluses and deficits on the current account 
of the balance of payments in that period averaged 2.9% of GNP. 
(12) The countries covered are Australia, Canada, Denmark, Germany, Italy, 
Norway, Sweden, the· United Kingdom and the United States with the figures being 
unweighted averages of the absolute values of the surpluses and deficits relative to each 
country's GNP. 

World Saving since 1960: Trends in etc. 
79 
Averages in later periods were 0.8% of GNP in 1924-1936 and 1.3% 
between 1965 and 1986. As indicated above, the years since about 
1984 -
characterised as being much freer as regards capital move-
ments -
have seen much larger absolute values of the deficits and 
surpluses than the rest of the post-war period, but the average for 
these same nine countries from 1986-1989 of 1.8% has still been much 
lower than that for the 30 years before the first world war and even 
less than the average of 4% of GNP between 1902 and 1913. 
Eichengreen considers three explanations for the much larger 
volume of capital flows relative to national income that characterised 
the period 1880-1913. The first is related to the exchange-rate stability 
of the gold standard which reduced currency risks which might 
otherwise have discouraged foreign investment. The second is in 
terms of stages of indebtedness, with differing stages of development 
leading to certain countries becoming infant capital importers during 
the early periods of industrialisation. The third is the existence of 
boom-and-bust cycles with lending first surging but then giving way to 
debt-servicing problems. Although Eichengreen provides some sup-
porting evidence for each of the three hypotheses he also points to 
weaknesses in each explanation and brings in a further consideration, 
the relative stability of commodity prices and interest rates prior to 
1913, a stability that has not been witnessed in any period since then. 
Two of these issues, concerning the stages of indebtedness and the 
movement of commodity prices, are relevant to the discussion of 
savings in developing countries. 
2. - Savings in Developing Countries (13) 
Economic theory suggests that developing countries are likely to 
be capital importers given the greater rates of return likely to be 
available relative to projects in developed countries. The level of their 
domestic savings relative to national income is less easily determined, 
depending on the degree of development, the financial system and 
other institutional and cultural factors. One surprise, however, is that 
(13) This section draws heavily on the recent IMF study of The Role of National 
Saving in the World Economy; see AGHEVU et AL. [1]. 

80 
Andrew Dean 
the data seem to suggest that the saving rate of the developing 
countries may have been higher than that of the industrialised 
countries prior to the onset of the debt crisis at the start of the 1980s. 
According to IMF figures, the national saving rate of the 
developing countries averaged 27% in the period 197 6-1981 but fell to 
an average of about 22.5% over the following seven years 1982-1988 
(Table 6). But there were very large differences between various 
groups of countries and very marked differences through time. At one 
extreme, the national saving rate of Middle-Eastern countries was 
almost 40% in 197 6-1981 while that of low-income countries was only 
just above 20%. But for the Middle-Eastern countries, as consumption 
picked up and the higher oil revenues were absorbed, the saving rate 
gradually subsided and then collapsed to less than half its previous 
value after the sharp fall in oil prices in 1986. The saving rate of these 
countries of just under 17% by 1988 was very similar to that in the 
low-income countries, where the fall was much less but from a far 
lower starting level. There were also large falls in saving in countries 
with debt-servicing problems and this is reflected in particular in the 
sharp fall in saving rates in Africa and to a lesser extent the Western 
Hemisphere group of countries. 
The notable exception to the decline in saving rates in developing 
countries was for the Asian group of countries where saving rates 
have remained close to 30% and have even been increasing through 
the 1980s. Investment rates in these countries, which include the 
dynamic fast-growing Asian economies, have been maintained at high 
levels. Elsewhere investment rates have shown parallel declines to 
saving rates although capital imports have tended to sustain domestic 
investment at higher rates than national saving. Overall the rate of 
domestic investment for developing countries fell from over 27% in 
1976-1981 to less than 23% in recent years. But the drop was 
particularly steep for countries with debt-servicing problems (27% to 
19%), which has clearly reduced the possibility of growing out of the 
debt crisis. Countries without such debt-servicing problems have 
witnessed rather stable, high domestic investment rates. 
The IMF has also examined the relationship between saving, 
investment and growth rates in developing countries. The correlation 
between saving and investment was relatively high in the period 

World Saving since 1960: Trends in etc. 
NATIONAL SAVING AND INVESTMENT RATES 
IN DEVELOPING COUNTRIES (*) 
1976-1981 
1982 
1983 
1984 
1985 
1986 
Developing countries 
National saving 
26.9 
23.0 
21.8 
22.6 
23.3 
22.0 
Domestic investment 
27.4 
25.2 
23.8 
23.5 
24.0 
23.3 
Current account hal-
ance 
••••••• 0 
0 
0 •••• 
-0.5 
-2.2 -2.0 -0.9 -0.7 -1.4 
Countries with debt-
servicing problems 
National saving 
23.0 
18.1 
17.7 
18.1 
18.9 
17.4 
Domestic investment 
26.9 
23.4 
19.4 
18.7 
19.1 
19.3 
Current account hal-
ance 
• 
0 ••• 0 
0 
0 
0. 0 
0 
0. 
-3.9 
-5.3 -1.7 -0.6 -0.2 -1.8 
Countries without debt-
servicing problems 
National saving .... 
26.1 
24.2 
24.2 
25.4 
26.1 
26.5 
Domestic investment 
27.8 
26.8 
27.0 
27.0 
28.6 
28.1 
Current account hal-
ance 
••••• 0 •••••••• 
-1.7 
-2.7 -2.8 -1.6 -2.4 -1.6 
High-income countries 
National saving 
27.7 
23.7 
22.1 
23.1 
23.3 
21.5 
Domestic investment 
27.6 
25.5 
23.7 
23.5 
22.8 
22.0 
Current account hal-
ance 
•••••••• 0 ••••• 
0.1 
-1.7 -1.5 -0.5 
0.5 
-0.5 
Low-income countries 
National saving .... 
20.7 
17.3 
16.7 
16.5 
17.8 
16.7 
Domestic investment 
23.6 
22.9 
21.6 
19.4 
20.4 
20.0 
Current account hal-
ance 
•••••••••• 0 ••• 
-2.8 
-5.5 -4.9 -2.9 -2.6 -3.4 
Africa 
National saving 
24.1 
17.7 
17.6 
17.4 
20.1 
17.0 
Domestic investment 
27.6 
23.7 
21.3 
19.8 
19.7 
19.9 
Current account hal-
ance 
0 
0 ••••••• 0 •••• 
-3.6 
-6.0 -3.8 -2.4 
0.4 -2.8 
Asia 
National saving 
27.9 
25.4 
25.8 
27.0 
27.7 
28.4 
Domestic investment 
28.7 
27.2 
27.6 
27.4 
29.2 
28.2 
Current account hal-
ance 
••• 0 
0 
0 
•• 0 
0 
0 •• 0 
-0.8 
-1.8 -1.8 -0.4 -1.5 
0.2 
Middle East 
National saving 
• 
0 
•• 
39.1 
31.6 
25.2 
25.0 
25.1 
19.2 
Domestic investment 
26.4 
26.1 
28.2 
27.4 
25.3 
22.5 
Current account hal-
ance 
••• 0 •••••••• 0. 
12.7 
5.5 
-3.1 -2.5 -0.1 -3.3 
Western Hemisphere 
National saving 
•• 0. 
20.8 
16.3 
16.4 
17.4 
17.7 
16.4 
Domestic investment 
24.7 
21.9 
17.5 
17.4 
18.1 
18.3 
Current account hal-
ance 
• 0. 0 
0 ••••• 0 ••• 
-3.9 
-5.7 -1.1 
-
-0.3 -1.9 
1987 
22.8 
22.8 
8 
18.3 
19.3 
-1.0 
27.3 
27.3 
-
22.6 
21.6 
1.0 
16.8 
19.8 
-3.0 
17.6 
18.8 
-1.2 
29.5 
27.7 
1.8 
18.8 
19.9 
-1.1 
17.7 
18.8 
-1.1 
(*) As per cent of national income defined as GNP plus net foreign transfers. 
Source: IMF staff estimates reported in AGHEVU et. AL., ( 1990). 
81 
TABLE 6 
1988 
22.2 
22.7 
-0.5 
17.9 
18.7 
-0.9 
27.4 
27.6 
-0.2 
22.1 
21.6 
0.5 
16.6 
19.9 
-3.3 
16.3 
18.3 
-2.0 
29.0 
28.2 
0.8 
16.7 
19.1 
-2.4 
17.2 
18.2 
-1.0 

82 
Andrew Dean 
197 6-1981 -
although not as high as in the industrialised countries -
with the major exception of the Middle East where the correlation 
was very low, reflecting the sharp rise in oil revenues and excess 
savings. But in contrast to the industrialised countries, the correlation 
strengthened in the period after 1982, reflecting reduced access to 
international capital markets in the period following the debt crisis. 
The relationship between investment and growth over the period 
1973-1987 for 125 capital-importing developing countries has been 
examined by the IMP [ 12]. The study found a positive and statistically 
significant relationship between investment and growth for all country 
categories. In the context of the close association between saving and 
investment rates, the rate of national saving is therefore an important 
factor to be taken into account when considering cross-country 
growth rates. But the causality is not clear and there are other factors, 
such as human capital and the efficiency of factor use, that have been 
found to be important in explaining differences in growth rates. 
3. - The Overall World Savings Position 
The evidence for both the industrialised and developing countries 
reviewed above indicates that the world savings ratio is now lower 
than in the 1970s and probably lower than in the 1960s (going on the 
data for OECD countries). Exceptions to these trends are certain 
countries -
Asian countries among the developing countries and 
Norway among OECD countries -
where special factors have meant 
that saving rates remained high or even increased over this period. 
The global allocation of world savings has also changed signifi-
cantly over the last 20 years, the OPEC price rises and the debt crises 
being perhaps the two most significant changes in the direction or 
magnitude of capital flows. The oil price shocks in the 1970s led to 
large current-account surpluses (excess savings) for the OPEC coun-
tries (Table 4) but these were soon dissipated as their capacity to 
absorb rapidly increased. The OPEC countries were back in deficit by 
1978, four years after the first oil shock, and then after an $85 billion 
surplus in 1980 were in deficit again in an even shorter period, by 
1982. Part of the counterpart to the OPEC surplus was in the 
industrialised countries but a large part was borne by the non-oil 

World Saving since 1960: Trends in etc. 
83 
developing countries whose aggregate deficit rose from $23 billion in 
1978 to a peak of $85 billion in 1981. With surplus OPEC savings 
being recycled to such countries, via the intermediation of the 
banking system of the North, the seeds of the debt problem of the 
developing countries began to take root. The debt crisis erupted in 
1982 and led to a severe curtailment of capital flows to these 
countries. Many of the traditional capital importers are no longer in a 
position to attract foreign savings because their external debt has 
reached such dimensions that in many cases new injections of private 
capital have dried up. 
Balance-of-payments statistics indicate that the non-oil developing 
countries in aggregate have been close to external balance on the 
current account since 1986, with surpluses occurring in 1987 and 
1988. Meanwhile, the OECD countries have been in apparent deficit 
in every year since the second oil shock. However, the existence of a 
world current-account discrepancy which has fluctuated between $30 
billion and $90 billion over the last decade, means that one must be 
very careful in drawing strong inferences from such data (Table 4). 
Superficially, however, it does look as if the OECD in aggregate has 
been a capital importer throughout the 1980s, a reversal of the 
traditional role one would expect from theoretical considerations 
concerning the stages of development. 
Another interesting way of looking at these developments is in 
terms of North-South movements. Martins and Plihon [14] have 
characterised the global transfers of capital since 1967 into three 
distinct phases: 
1) 1967-1973: North-South transfers, the main transfers being 
from Europe and Japan to the non-oil developing countries; 
2) 1974-1982: South-South transfers, principally from OPEC to 
other developing countries; 
3) 1983-1988: North-North transfers, largely from Japan and 
Europe to the United States, with the current-account positions of 
both OPEC and the non-oil developing countries being close to 
balance (14). 
(14) The OECD countries were in deficit during this period but there was also a 
world current-account discrepancy of approximately equal size, so that the true 
position is not clear. 

84 
Andrew Dean 
All three phases have involved financial intermediation by the 
banking system of the North. The movements summarised above are 
in terms of net flows, but in fact the gross flows have been enormous 
and have grown at an unprecedented speed. 
Additional evidence on the change in the OECD's role as a 
traditional capital exporter is offered by the measures of national 
saving and investment presented in Graph B. The OECD panel 
indicates that national saving exceeded national investment from 1 960 
to 1973, indicating the export of capital to the rest of the world. But 
this situation reversed itself from the mid-1970s onwards with the 
data indicating that the OECD countries have been importing capital 
from the rest of the world ever since, though this evidence must be 
treated with care as the domestic counterparts to the world current-
account discrepancy are difficult to establish. 
4. - Savings and Interest Rates 
In looking for reasons why the rate of world savings may have 
declined over the last 30 years it is natural to examine whether the 
price of savings, namely interest rates, may have played a role. The 
difficulty here is that there is no simple theoretical relationship 
between the two. Rather, theory indicates that the effect of real 
interest rates on saving is ambiguous. Empirical work has not pro-
vided conclusive evidence one way or the other although a survey by 
Smith [18] suggests that the link between interest rates and savings is 
relatively small. 
The evolution of gross saving ratios and long-term interest rates in 
the major. seven OECD economies is presented in Graph D. For most 
of the countries, though not for all periods, there does seem to have 
been an inverse relationship between the two. But as with the 
growth-saving relationship, the causality is very unclear, both series 
being highly endogenous and linked in various ways (15). There are 
also conceptual difficulties in defining the real interest rate, which is 
( 15) Whether this result would also hold if other factors such as demographics and 
wealth were held constant is thus an open question. 

" 
JO 
., 
10 
• 
World Saving since 1960: Trends in etc. 
SAVING RATIOS AND REAL INTEREST RATES (*) 
Real long-term interest rate 
Gross saving ratio 
., 
Japan 
., 
10 
.. -··· · ...... -.... 
.· 
', 
............... · 
· 
............. .. 
.. ................. .. 
, 
0 
., 
,. 
10 
,. 
., 
10 
eo 82 
154 ee ee 10 12 74 78 n ao 12sces ee 
,, 
-10 
Germany 
............ ··--............. .. 
·. 
United States 
... 
Italy 
.............. 
·-................. -···· .... .. 
eo 62 64 ea ee 10 n 
85 
GRAPHD 
.. 
., 
JO 
....................... 
" 
10 
,. 
-. ................................ ····· 
United Kingdom 
10 
10 
• 
10 
•• 
·I· 
·10 
., 
JO 
France 
Canada 
JO 
ts ....... ·····-............. . ....................... 
·-............... . 
,. 
" 
" 
" 
., 
10 
10 
10 
0 
• 
,, 
(*) Nominal long-term interest rates deflated by the change in the output price deflator over the 
following two years. 

86 
Andrew Dean 
here taken to be a forward-looking indicator which takes the output 
price deflator over the following two years as the measure of inflation 
expectations. The rise in national savings in the early 1970s in most of 
these countries looks to be linked to the sharp rise in prices in the 
wake of the oil crisis and the accompanying sharp fall in real interest 
rates in a number of countries at this time. And the period of high real 
interest rates and disinflation in the early to mid-1980s also seems to 
have witnessed a fall in saving ratios in most countries. Real interest 
rates have risen somewhat in 1990 though they have still come off a 
bit from the higher levels earlier in the 1980s. Looking over a longer 
period, however, real interest rates are still relatively high and may 
well be one reason for the lower rates of saving of recent years. 
5. · The Prospects for Savings 
Any projections of future world savings must necessarily be 
highly speculative. But it is possible to give some information on 
factors relevant to savings in future years. For example, as regards 
household savings, it has been pointed out above that the removal of 
liquidity contraints associated with financial liberalisation in certain 
OECD countries has been an important contributory factor to the 
decline in household saving ratios. But it is not likely that households 
will continuously increase their debt/income ratios; in fact it is 
impossible that they should do so as the heavily indebted developing 
countries have discovered. As borrowing limits are reached it would 
therefore be natural to expect a reversal in the recent downward 
trend; it is unlikely, for instance, that the net saving ratio of the 
Norwegian household sector should remain for long at its recent 
negative level. 
Another issue which is an important influence on household 
saving, whether one considers life-cycle behaviour or bequest motives 
for saving, is demographic factors. Since we already have reasonable 
information on demographic developments into the next century, it is 
possible to consider the way in which population changes may 
influence future household saving behaviour. Studies by Heller [10], 
Auerbach et AI. [3], and Masson and Tryon [15] indicate that the 

World Saving since 1960: Trends in etc. 
87 
ageing of the Japanese population in particular will have an important 
impact on national saving rates during the next century. Simulations 
of national saving rates up to the year 2050 indicate that Japanese 
national savings could decline significantly between 2000 and 2025 
with a subsequent sharp recovery in the ensuing years (Graph E). 
There might also be a slower but eventually equally significant decline 
in German savings, though here a new unknown is the evolving 
situation as regards East Germany. Such projections are of course 
highly speculative but they illustrate the potential importance of 
demographic factors in reducing the current high level of savings in 
two important surplus countries at the current time. 
An important issue that follows from such calculations is 
whether, in the current pessimistic mood about savings, we can 
happily contemplate a decline in German and Japanese savings. If one 
believes that the rest of the world is not saving enough and that the 
SIMULATED NATIONAL SAVING RATES 
National 
saving rate 
(%} 
24 
Japan 
····· .... 
.. 
. 
•.... 
Germany 
.... ' 
18 
16 
Sweden 
14 
• 
12 , ..... ·-· -
...... . 
...... 
10 -
...... --·-
...... 
8 
6 
-·.... . 
1 ..... _ 
...... -. 
United States 
4 
.... .. .. .... .. •• • .. · .. . . ····· 
GRAPH E 
National 
saving rate 
(%}. 
24 
22 
1985 1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 2015 2020 2025 2030 2035 2040 2045 2050 
Source: AUERBACH et AL [3]. 

88 
Andrew Dean 
investment needs of the developing countries and Eastern Europe 
need to be met by the excess savings of countries like Japan and 
Germany, then we should indeed be concerned with the ageing issue, 
even if we believe that economic behaviour will change in such 
countries in reaction to the demographic influences. This suggests 
that it might be wiser to worry less about high savings in Japan and 
Germany and to focus attention on the low savers, such as the United 
States. More fundamentally, we need to question whether the North-
North capital flows that have developed in recent years are leading to 
the most efficient allocation of world resources and are thereby 
optimal from the global point of view. 

World Saving since 1960: Trends in etc. 
89 
BIBliOGRAPHY 
(1) AGHEVU B. -BoUGHTON J. -MONTIEL P. -VILLANUEVA D. - WOGLOM G.: «The Role of 
National Saving in the World Economy: Recent Trends and Prospects», IMF, 
Occasional Paper 67, March 1990. 
[2) ALFORD J.- TURNER P.: «The Global Pattern of Capital Flows in the 1980s», Paper 
presented to the Kiel conference on Capital Flows in the World Economy, June 
1990. 
(3) AUERBACH A.J. - KOTUKOFF L.J. - HAGEMANN R.P. -NICOLETTI G.: «The Economic 
Dynamics of an Ageing Population: the Case of Four OECD Countries», OECD, 
Economic Studies 12, Spring 1989. 
[4) DEAN A. -DURAND M. -FALLON J. - HOELLER P.: «Saving Trends and Behaviour in 
OECD Countries», OECD, Economic Studies no. 14, Spring 1990. 
(5) DEAN A. -DURAND M. -FALLON J. - HOELLER P.: «Saving Trends and Behaviour in 
OECD Countries», OECD, Economics and Statistics Department Working Papers, 
no. 67, June 1989. 
[6] EICHENGREEN B.: «Trends and Cycles in Foreign Lending», Paper presented to the 
Kiel conference on Capital Flows in the World Economy, June 1990. 
[7) FELDSTEIN M. - BACCHETTA P·.: «National Saving and International Investment», 
NBER, Working Paper, no. 3164, November 1989. 
[8] FELDSTEIN M. - HORIOKA C.: «Domestic Saving and International Capital Flows», 
The Economic Journal, no. 90, June 1980. 
[9] HAYASHI F.: «Why is Japan's Saving Rate So Apparently High?» in FISHERS. (ed.): 
NBER, Macroeconomics Annual, 1986, MIT Press, 1986, pp. 147-234. 
[10) HoELLER P.: «Ageing, Savings, Pensions in the G7 Countries: 1980-2025», IMF, 
Working Paper, January, 1988. 
[11] HoRIOKA C.Y.: «Why is Japan's Private Saving Rate So High», IMF, mimeo, 1986. 
[12] IMF, World Economic Outlook, April 1988. 
(13) KAWASAKI K.: «Japanese Saving: a Survey of the Literature», OECD Economics and 
Statistics Department, Working Papers, no. 73, January 1990. 
[14] MARTINS J.O. - PuHON D.: «L'Impact des transferts internationaux d'epargne sur 
les desequilibres exterieurs», Economie et statistique, no. 232, 1990. 
[15] MASSON P.R. - TRYON R.W.: «Macroeconomic Effects of Projected Population 
Ageing in Industrial Countries», IMF, Working Paper, June 1990. 
[16] NICOLETTI G.: «A Cross-Country Analysis of Private Consumption, Inflation and the 
Debt Neutrality Hypothesis», OECD, Economic Studies, no. 11, Autumn 1988, pp. 
43-87. 
[17] 0BSTFELD M.: «Capital Mobility in the World Economy: Theory and Measure-
ment», Carnegie-Rochester Conference of Public Policy, supplement to Journal of 
Monetary Economics, no. 24, 1986, pp. 55-104. 
[18] SMITH R.: «Factors Affecting Saving, Policy Tools, and Tax Reform; a Review», 
IMF, Working Paper, May 1989. 
[19] SUMMERS L.- CARROL C.: «Why is US National Saving so Low», Brookings Papers 
on Economic Activity, no. 2, 1987, pp. 607-42. 

The Effects of Capital Inflow 
on National Savings 
I. Introduction 
Pasquale Lucio Scandizzo (*) 
Universita •Tor Vergata», ISPE, Roma 
Two phenomena that have characterized the development of 
major industrial countries have been the fall of natioal saving rates 
and the simultaneous widening of the current account gaps. The 
phenomena, which are well known and have been the object of a vast 
literature (1), are related in principle through the accounting identity I 
-
S = M -
X, whereby an internal inbalance between savings and 
investment has to be matched by an external inbalance between 
exports and imports. A widening gap between investment and savings 
due to a ceteris paribus fall in the saving rate will be accompanied, 
therefore, not only by a widening gap in the current account, but also 
by an increase in the international capital flow. Even without a fall in 
the saving rate, increasing inbalances in the two accounts may be 
caused by increased capital intensity since this can be expected to 
increase both the rate of fixed investment per unit of income and the 
imports of non-substitutable capital goods. 
This paper presents a theory of savings formation that provides a 
simple explanation of the phenomena described. According to this 
(*) This research is part of a broader project on the Internationalization of the 
Italian Economy supported by the National Research Council (CNR). 
(1) For the most recent contributions and updated bibliographies, see SMITH R.S. 
(15] and MOLHO L. (9]. 
Advise: the numbers in square brackets refer to the Bibliography in the appendix. 

92 
Pasquale Lucio Scandizzo 
theory, the need to balance the process of growth of productive 
capacity with adequate growth of effective demand results in three 
mutually compatible effects: a) an increase in the rate of growth of 
investment; b) a temporary current account inbalance matched by a 
foreign exchange inflow, and, c) a variation of the saving rate. 
These three effects can be seen as the result of a simple 
behavioral rule for the formation of domestic savings: that in each 
period the public reduces (increases) total ex ante savings of a fixed 
proportion of the realized (positive/negative) difference between ex 
post and ex ante savings of the latest period. As growth proceeds, 
therefore, the policy maker faces two inter-related problems: on the 
one hand, to balance demand and supply, investment has to increase 
at a faster rate the higher is the contribution of foreign capital inflow 
to domestic growth; on the other hand, overall growth will have to 
provide for the repayment of the foreign debt accumulated. 
As a consequence of these two conditions, the best policy is given 
by an appropriate combinations of three expansionary instruments: a) 
the rate of growth of investment; b) the current account balance and, 
c) the saving rate. These instruments can be used under the constraint 
that the present value of the foreign capital inflow, at a rate of 
discount reflecting country's preference for growth and international 
market conditions, be zero over an appropriate time horizon. 
2. - The Main Questions 
While the study of the relationship I - S = M - X, based on the 
so called «absorption» approach, dates back to Alexander [1], a more 
recent approach is provided by Sachs [ 13] and Frenkel and Razin [ 6]. 
According to these authors, integrated capital markets provide the 
countries with intertemporal opportunities comparable to those ex-
ploited by individuals through the life-cycle saving behavior. 
Increased international capital flows, therefore, can be seen as 
arising from a relaxation of the external budget constraint from the 
point of view of the individual countries. Whereas more limited 
integration of capital markets did not allow marked departures from 
year-to-year equilibrium in the trade balance, increased integration 

The Effects of Capital Inflow on National Savings 
93 
permits running current account deficits, provided that there is a 
reasonable expectation that they may be overtuned in the future 
giving rise to surpluses, which can in turn be used to repay the debts 
accumulated during the years of deficit. 
As Artis and Bayoumi [2] put it in a recent paper on this subject, 
a liquidity constraint dominates the behavior of a country under 
financial autarky. Conversely, sustaining a deficit or a surplus is a pure 
question of solvency for a country operating under fully integrated 
capital markets. 
Intertemporal expediency and solvability are thus the two main 
characteristics associated with modem thinking about the emergence 
of current account imbalances, the implications being rather striking 
in terms of predictable policy behavior and overall tendencies to 
"correct" the imbalances over time. For example, forward-looking 
behavior associated with intertemporal expediency implies that in-
come growth may give rise tro temporary deficits that eventually will 
be followed by surpluses. Temporary income declines will also be met 
by increases in deficits to support consumption, while productivity 
increases, to the extent that they give rise to expectations of higher 
returns than existing ones, can also be shown to result in temporary 
deficits. 
From the point of view of growth theory, these implications 
challange same of the established views on the relationship between 
savings, productivity and growth. Since the Harrod-Domar model two 
possibilities have been open to achieve equality between an exogenous 
"natural" rate of increase of the labor force (and/or its productivity) 
and the "warranted" growth rate capable of equating demand and 
supply. Since the latter equals the saving ratio divided by the capital 
output ratio, equality between the natural and the warranted rate can 
only be achieved if either the saving or the capital output parameter, 
or possibly both, can be brought to assume the values implied by the 
natural rate. Kaldor [8] and Pasinetti's [10] models are example of 
the first route, while Solow's [16] is the initiator of the second. 
With capital internationally mobile and forward-looking behavior, 
on the other hand, a third route becomes available. Current account 
deficits may be used to bring about the equality between the natural 
rate and the warranted rate at least for some time, provided that such 

94 
Pasquale Lucio Scandizzo 
a behavior can be squared with the solvency requirements that 
international markets are likely to impose in various degrees upon 
each country. 
Several problems are raised by this approach, however, both on 
theoretical and empirical grounds. From the theory standpoint, some 
question arises on how saving behavior can be expected to react to 
intertemporal policies designed to supplement the pool of domestic 
savings with foreign exchange inflow. If ex ante savings are not 
realized, i.e. if the extent of the gap between investment and foreign 
exchange inflow is not fully anticipated, domestic savers may react by 
contracting or expanding their planned savings next time around. 
Instability may thus arise from any unplanned or unpredictable 
current account inbalance. 
Domestic savers' reaction may specially involve the government, 
since even with highly integrated capital markets current account 
targeting can be expected to remain a feature of government policies. 
As Artis and Bayoumi [2] point out, several arguments could justify an 
interest in limiting capital outflow. Social and private benefits, for 
example, may diverge in decisions about foreign investment, because 
these are taken on the basis of expected after tax returns, while from 
the point of view of the potential capital exporting country, the 
relevant comparison is between the foreign after-tax rate of return and 
the domestic pre-tax rate of return, the domestic tax proceeds being 
retained at home. 
Even in the absence of restrictions to capital mobility, further-
more, it can be argued (e.g. Summers [17]) that the capital, account 
will generally be of concern to governments for a variety of reasons 
ranging from the solvency question to goals related to full employ-
ment- inflation policies (Weale et. al. [20]) or to aggressive search 
for competitive advantages (Schmitt [14], Vines and Sthephenson 
[79]). 
If private or public domestic savings are reactive to unplanned 
changes in the current account, is it still possible to think that foreign 
exchange flows may be used to achieve equilibrium growth? One 
possible answer on the empirical side may lie in the scruting of 
correlations between savings and investment. Feldstein and Horioka 
[ 4], who first searched the issue, on finding close cross-country 

The Effects of Capital Inflow on National Savings 
95 
correlation investment and saving ratios to GNP, used the evidence to 
argue against the case of integrated capital markets. The high correl-
ation, in fact, on the face of simple models where capital flows in 
response to differences in rate of return, suggests near financial 
autarky of each country. 
Over time correlations between investment and savings, reported 
by several authors (e.g. Artis Bayoumi [2], Frankel [5], Roubini [12]), 
on the other hand, suggest some reactivity from the private sector 
(Tesar [18]) or the government (Summers [17]) to unplanned saving-
investment and/ or C\lrrent account gaps. 
In conclusion, three main questions emerge from the debate in 
the literature. First, what are the effects of international capital 
mobility on the constraints to growth. Second, what does this imply 
for the behavior of domestic savers. Third, what are the consequences 
for policy prescription. 
3. - Saving Behavior and Possible Growth Rates 
Consider a country whose technology can be dynamically 
described by an equation of the Domar type: 
(1) 
DP(t) = cr I(t) 
where D is the operator d! dt, P (t) and I (t) are productive capacity 
and the investment as functions of time t, and cr represents the inverse 
of the capital output ratio. Assume also that the process of saving can 
be described by the simplest type of saving function: 
(2) 
S (t) = S (Y(t)) 
where S (t) stands for total savings (both private and governmental), 
and Y (t) for national income. In the simplest case, if we assume S (t) 
= I (t) and P (t) = Y (t), the warranted rate of growth of the economy 
described by (1) and (2) will be Ps· 
If a current account gap develops in any year, the ex post market 
equilibrium identity will require that ex post savings Sp (t) plus the 
current account gap F (t) equal ex post investment I (t). This ex post 

96 
Pasquale Lucio Scandizzo 
identity does not imply and ex ante equality among the same vari-
ables. Domestic savers, in fact, will try to plan their savings in 
accordance with equation (2) and their ex ante expectations may not 
match the outcome of the economic process. In the case in which a 
positive difference between ex ante and ex post savings arise, excess 
savings will be wiped out by movements in relative prices or they will 
be employed in less profitable activities. A movement toward equili-
brium can be therefore postulated in the form of an adjustment 
behavioral equation for planned domestic saving: 
(3) 
DS(t) =A. [/(t)- F(t)- S(t)] 
Substituing (2) with (3), carrying out the differentiation and 
rearranging gives an expression for the dynamic multiplier: 
(3') 
Y(t) = A.[/(t)- F(t)] 
(D+ A.)s 
where s is the (locally constant) marginal propensity to save. 
Expression (3') says that hypothesis (3) implies a non instantan-
eous, progressive multiplier. (3) and (3') are disequilibrium equations 
and appear more realistic than the usual equilibrium specification of 
these types of model. 
Equilibrium between increase in productive capacity P (t) and 
effective demand Y (t) requires: 
(4) 
DP(t) = DY(t) 
In order to respect this equilibrium condition investment has to 
be provided according to expression (1), i.e.: 
(5) 
1 
l(t) =- DY(t) 
cr 
With zero foreign exchange inflow, upon substitution of ( 5) into 
(3) we obtain: 
(6) 
DY(t) 
Y(t) 
A. as 
A.-as 

The Effects of Capital Inflow on National Savings 
97 
As in the basic Do mar case, in order to keep full capacity 
utilization, income, savings and investment will all have to grow at the 
common rate indicated by (6), with the only caveat that, because of 
the adjustment process, the adjustment coefficient y be greater than 
p5 , i.e. that the speed of adjustment be high enough to prevent the 
build-up unused capacity for lack of domestic savings. If y p5 , on the 
other hand, no positive equilibrium rate of growth can equate demand 
to supply. 
Consider now the case where F (t) -=1= 0. Substituting (5) into (3) 
we obtain: 
(7) 
')... (J s 
')... s 
DY(t) = f... _ cr 5 Y(t) + f... _ cr 5 F(t) 
Expression (7) enables us to prove Proposition 1, that reads as 
follows: the only constant rate of growth of domestic income and 
savings compatible both with full capacity utilization and with zero 
net present value of foreign exchange inflow (i.e. the only constant 
rate that is consistent with a sustainable equilibrium) is the rate of 
self-sustaining growth in expression (6). 
Proof: from (7), defining g = y Psh -
Ps and denoting with r the 
social rate of discount, we can write: 
T 
T 
T 
(8) 
J 
e-rt DY(t) = g J 
e-rt Y(t) dt + ! J 
e-rt F(t) dt 
0 
0 
0 
where T is an arbitrary period of the time within which foreign loans 
have to be repaid. By assumption the second term on the right hand 
side vanishes. If productive capacity grows at the exogenous (naural) 
rate f, we have: 
(9) 
(10) 
T 
T 
I J e-r-r) r dt = g J e<t- r) r dt 
0 
0 
Solving (9), we obtain: 
(f -
g) ( e<f -
r) T -
1 ) = 0 
(f- r) 

98 
Pasquale Lucio Scandizzo 
Comment: proposition 1 implies that the only way to grow at a 
constant rate satisfying both the equilibrium and the repayment 
conditions is to accept no foreign exchange inflow at all. The only 
constant rate of growth that is consistent with both conditions 
(domestic equilibrium and zero net present value of the capital inflow) 
in fact is the self-sustaining rate g, which corresponds to current 
account equilibrium in every period. 
Even capital movement, therefore, cannot change the knife-
edge result that wants the natural and the "warranted" growth 
rate equal only by chance, if intertemporal equilibrium is to be 
maintained. 
Rather than a constant rate of growth, however, expression (7) 
and the results obtained suggest that a variable rate of growth of 
domestic and foreign savings may be a more appropriate way to 
satisfy the internal and external equilibrium conditions. Assuming, in 
particular, that the growth period may be divided into two subperiods 
concerning, respectively, a borrowing and a repayment phase, we are 
able to state. 
Proposition 2: If income grows at the rate I < g from period 0 to 
period T to T, a sufficient condition for equilibrium and sustainability 
of growth is that g equal the weighted average of f and h, the weights 
being the respective present values of the incoime increases in the two 
periods. 
Proof: assume that: 
Ao 
~t O=:;;t 
=:;;T 
Y(t) = A1 
£1rt 
T1 < t 
=:;; T 
where h < g < I 
Applying (8) under the assumption: 
T J 
e-rt F(t) dt = 0 
0 

The Effects of Capital Inflow on National Savings 
99 
yields: 
(11) 
or: 
(12) 
Tt 
T 
f Ao J e<t- r> 1 dt + hAt J tfh- r> 1 dt = 
0 
~ 
Tt 
T 
= gAo J tfl- r) t dt + gAt J 
e<h- r) t dt 
0 
~ 
Solving (11) for g yields: 
Tt 
T 
f J 
e-rt Y(t) dt + h J 
e-rt Y(t) dt 
0 
0 
g = --=--------=T=-----=-----
J e-rt Y(t) dt 
0 
Proposition 2 yields the following corollary: if the rate of discount 
equals g, sustainable equilibrium growth between period 0 and period 
T requires that the arithmetic average of the growth rates between the 
same periods be also equal to g. 
Proof: the general solution of (7) can be written: 
(13) 
Y(t) = ef1 [ Y(O) + : J 
e-gt F(t) dt] 
or, for the terminal year T: 
(14) 
Since sustainability requires the second term in the square 
parentheses to vanish, it immediately follows that: 
(15) 
1 
Y(t) 
g = T log Y(O) 

100 
Pasquale Lucio Scandizzo 
Comment: with a constant saving ratio, the burden of adjustment 
to ensure equilibrium and sustainability falls upon investment and 
income. If productive capacity grows at a given, exogenous rate, 
because, for example, of labor productivity growth, this rate can be 
made compatible with full capacity utilization by running a temporary 
current account deficit: In order to ensure intertemporal equilibrium 
(zero present value of the current account), however, it is required 
that a rate of growth equal tog - y p/y -
Ps be maintained over the 
"life cycle" of this growth episode. During the subperiods composing 
such a period of time the growth rate may go above or fall below g 
provided that an appropriate weighted average of the single growth 
rates over the overall period is still equal to g. 
4. ·Varying Saving Rates 
Assume now that the marginal saving rate is not constant but 
may vary over time. In this case we may ask what would happen if all 
or some of the burden of ensuring equilibrium and sustainability were 
to fall on its time path rather than on income and investment. 
Considering first the case of equilibrium growth, we find the following 
Proposition (3) to hold: if investment and foreign exchange inflow 
grow at the respective arbitrary (constant) rates f and <I> < f, in order 
to achieve equilibrium growth, the saving rate has to fall or grow 
toward an asymptotic value equal to y II p (y + f). 
Proof: From equation (3), applying conditions (1) and (4) defini-
tion (2) yields: 
(16) 
s(t) cr /(t) = -A S(t) +A [/(t)- F(t)] 
Differentiating w.r.t. time: 
(17) 
s(t)ADl(t) + /(t)ADs(t) =- As(t)DY(t) + A[D/(t) + 
-
DF(t)] 

The Effects of Capital Inflow on National Savings 
101 
Applying again (1) and (4) and rearranging, we obtain: 
(18) 
( 
DI(t)) 
A. [Dl(t) 
DF(t)] 
Ds (t) = -
A. + -- s (t) + - -- - --
I(t) 
a 
l(t) 
l(t) 
The general solution of ( 18) for DI (t)/ I (t) = f and DF (t)/ F (t) = 
<I> is: 
(19) 
- C 
-<A+t>t 
F(O) A.q,e<+-t>r 
A.f 
s(t)-
oe 
-
/(O) a(A. + <j>) + a(A. +f) 
where: 
0 
F(O) 
A. <I> 
A. f 
Co= s() + /(0) a(A. + <j>) 
a(A. +f) 
Taking limits, under the assumption <1> < f: 
(20) 
. 
A. 
I 
lim s(t) = 
-
r-oo 
a (A. + f) a 
Results (18) and (19) yield also the following corollary: if foreign 
exchange. inflow is constant or grows at the same constant rate of 
investment, in order to maintain equilibrium, the saving rate will have 
to decline or fall toward the asymptotic rate in (20), at a rate equal to 
the sum of the adjustment rate and the investment growth rate f. 
Proof: if foreign exchange inflow is constant, the general solution 
in (19) becomes: 
(21) 
s(t) = [s(O)-
A.f 
] e-<Hf>t + __ 
A....:...f_ 
a (A. + f) 
a (A. + f) 
ifF is zero, on the other hand, we have, from (18): 
(22) 
A. 
Ds ( t) = -
(A. + f) s ( t) + - I 
a 
which yields the same general solution (21). 

102 
Pasquale Lucio Scandizzo 
Comment: In the simple Damar case where the identity S(t) 
l(t) -
F(t) holds also an ex ante equality, there is a unique saving ratio 
consistent with equilibrium. In fact, differentiating both sides of the 
saving-investment identity, and applying (1) and (4), yields: 
(23) 
s(t) cr /(t) = Dl(t)- DF(t) 
Assuming: Dl(t) I l(t) = f e DF(t) = 0, 
(24) 
s(t)=f/cr 
for all t. 
If domestic savers are able to fully anticipate net investment 
requirements, therefore, there is only a single saving rate consistent 
with a given "natural" growth rate f, equilibrium and constant foreign 
exchange inflow. However, if foreign exchange inflow is not constant 
and/or domestic savers' expectations are adaptive, the saving rate will 
have to follow, in order to ensure equilibrium, a path toward the 
asymptotic rate y!y + f (f)/p. 
Such a rate will be lower that the rate in (24) since y < y + f and 
will be independent of the rate at which foreign exchange flows into 
the country, provided that such a rate is less than the "natural" 
growth rate f. The convergence path, furthermore, will be declining if 
the initial saving rate is above the asymptotic rate and increasing 
otherwise. 
Note that this result imply smaller values of the saving rates than 
the values indicated by (24). For example, for f = 0.04 a year and p = 
0.33, s(t) would have to be 0.12 ro satisfy (24), but, for y = 0.1, only 
0.08 to satisfy (21). 
Assume now the condition of zero net present value of debt over 
an exogenously give period T. In this case, because the saving rate can 
be used also to ensure that enough savings are accumulated to repay 
foreign loans, Proposition (4) can be stated: In order to maintain 
equilibrium between demand and supply and ensure intertemporal 
equilibrium (i.e. zero net present value) of the current account, the 
ratio between the present value of savings and income changes has to 

The Effects of Capital Inflow on National Savings 
103 
equal (y!y + r/p, where r is the discount rate, plus a term depending 
on initial, and terminal conditions. 
Proof: from (18), multiplying by e -rtDY (t), applying (4), and 
integrating between 0 and T, we obtain: 
T 
T 
T 
(25) J e-rt DS(t)DY(t) =-A. J e-rts(t)DY(t)- cr J e-rts(t)dl(t) 
0 
0 
0 
T 
T 
+ A. J e-rt dl(t) - J e-rt dF(t) 
0 
0 
Integration by parts of the left hand side of (25) and application of 
(4) yields: 
(26) 
(27) 
T 
T 
J e-rt Ds (t) DY(t) = cr e-rt l(t) s (t) J + 
0 
0 
T 
T 
+ r J 
e-rl s(t) DY(t)- cr J e-rt s(t) dl(t) 
0 
0 
Substituting into (25) and simplifying, we obtain: 
T 
T 
T 
J e-rt s(t) DY(t) = _A._J e-rt dl(t)- _A._ I e-rt dF(t) + 
f...+r 
f...+r 
0 
0 
0 
-
-
0 -
[e-rt l(T) s(T)- 1(0) s(O)] 
A. + r 
Integrating by parts: 
T 
J e-rt[dl(t)- dF(t)] 
0 

104 
Pasquale Lucio Scandizzo 
we further obtain: 
T 
(28) 
J e-rt[dl(t)-dF(t)] = [e-r1(1(1)-F(1))-(l(O)-F(O)]+ 
0 
T 
T 
+ r J e-rt l(t) dt- r J e-rt F(t) dt 
0 
0 
Substituting (28) into (26), applying (4) and accounting for the 
vanishing by assumption of the last term of the right hand side of (28), 
we finally have: 
T 
(29) 
J e-rtdS(t) 
0 
A 
r 
-=r---- = _A_+_r -; • 
J 
e-rt dY(t) 
0 
. {t _ _!_ [e-rt F(T) -
F(O)] } 
r 
K(T) 
[A- cr s(T)] -rt 1(1) 
[A- cr s(O)] /(0) 
+ 
e ---
--
(A + r) cr 
K(T) 
(A + r) cr 
K(T) 
where: 
T 
K(T) = J l(t) e-rtdt 
0 
is the present value of the stock of capital at the end period. 

The Effects of Capital Inflow on National Savings 
105 
Comment: if the time horizon is sufficiently far away and initial 
conditions sufficiently close to the origin, expression (29) simply states 
that the aggregate saving ratio over the period 0, T, defined as the 
ratio between the present values of savings and income changes, is to 
equal the rate y/y + r r/p in order to simultaneously equate demand 
and supply and satisfy the intertemporal budget constraint. If produc-
tive capacity grows along a "natural" path determined by population 
growth or productivity, an infinite number of combinations of paths 
for income, the capital stock and the saving ratios can be followed, 
provided that equation (29) and (4) that: 
(30) 
J
T 
s* 
lim 
ff-1- r) 1 S {t) dt = --
T- >oo 
r- f 
0 
where s* = y/y + r r/p is the long-run equilibrium saving rate. 
From (30) we can state the following corollary: A sufficient long-
run condition for full equilibrium growth, under the assumption of 
arbitrary natural constant rate f and discount rate r, with r > f, is that 
the rate of growth of the saving rate be also constant and equal to the 
product of the difference r -
f) between the discount and the natural 
rate, and the percentage increase (s* -
s (o))/s* between the asympto-
tic and the initial saving rate. 
Proof: assuming s(t) = s (o) eh1, by substitution into (30), taking 
limits and solving for h: 
(31) 
(s* -
s (0)) 
h = (r- f)----
s* 
Comment: in order to achieve equilibrium, the aggregate saving 
rate (defined as the ratio between the present values of saving and 
income changes) is to equal to asymptotic rates*. In order to do this, 
the present value of the saving changes at the current saving rate has 
to equal the present value of the saving changes at the asymptotic 
rate. This requires the current saving rate to grow at a rate directly 
proportional to the distance between the asymptotic rate and the 
initial rate. Note that h > 0 only if he rate of discount is greater than 

106 
Pasquale Lucio Scandizzo 
the "natural" (and "warranted") rate of growth. Only if desired 
growth (or growth foregone) is greater than actual growth, in fact, 
there is any point in saving. 
To summarize: if productive capacity grows at the exogenous, 
natural, rate /, because of technological progress or population 
growth, full capacity utilization can be achieved by running a tem-
porary current account deficit. If the rate of discount is greater than 
the growth rate and the asymptotic rate of saving is above the initial 
rate, the rate of savings has to increase over time to respect the 
intertemporal budget constraint. 
The same result applies if the two differences above are both 
negative. If only one of the two differences is negative, on the other 
hand, the saving rate will have to decline in response to growth 
because current savings are too high with respect either to desired 
growth (r -
f < 0) or to the equilibrium rate (s* -
s < 0). 
Expressions (29) and, (31) further imply that we should expect to find 
a correlation over homogenous periods of growth between savings 
and investment. A correlation between rates of chage of savings and 
investment across countries, on the other hand, would be less likely, 
since it would depend on the similarly exhibited by the countries for 
the "structural" parameters that enter the asymptotic rate s*. 
5. - Conclusions 
Falling saving rates and widening current account gaps have been 
a prominent feature of the decade of the eighties. Increasing integra-
tion of capital markets and adaptative, time consistent behavior on 
the part of both households and governments provide an attractive 
hypothesis to explain these two phenomena. In this paper I have 
shown that a temporary imbalance in the current account can be used 
to finance maximal growth, by preventing accumulation of idle 
capacity. In order to meet appropriate solvability conditions, how-
ever, taking into account at the same time of adaptive reactions from 
domestic savers, a combination of a declining growth rate in income 
and of a declining saving rate is likely to be needed unless an 

The Effects of Capital Inflow on National Savings 
107 
exogenous boost to the growth rate is provided by autonomous 
productivity increases or other events of similar nature. 
Intuitively, these results can be explained by recalling the ration-
ale behind the growth models of the Harrod-Domar variety. Given a 
fixed capital output ratio, and a constant propensity to save, an 
autonomous increase in productive capacity corresponds, through the 
increase in investment, to an increase in effective demand. The 
growth in effective demand, being only a fraction of the investment 
increase, however, makes necessary a further increase in investment 
to create sufficient demand to absorb the output created by the new 
productive capacity. Such an increase in investment yields further 
capacity increase and further need for demand increases, in a process 
that converges to a single constant equilibrium ("warranted") rate of 
growth. This process, first described by Domar, remains virtually 
unaltered under the assumption of adaptive behavior from the part of 
savers and of foreign exchange inflow. 
However, if the current account gap that corresponds to foreign 
exchange inflow is only temporary an its present value· is zero over an 
appropriate time horizon, the rate of equilibrium growth, or the 
saving rate or both cannot be constant. 
Furthermore, a temporary current account cap can be used to 
achieve equality between the warranted rate of growthand the in-
crease in productiive capacity that would be permitted by population 
or productivity growth (Harrod's "natural" rate). In this case maximal 
growth at the natural rate can be achieved only for a limited period of 
time, since for a complementary subperiod growth will be dominated 
by the requirement needs. 
Within this context, the function of a variable saving rate is 
twofold. On one hand, if its value at the beginning of the period is low 
(with respect to the long run equilibrium rate), it will cause a lower 
value of the self-sustaining equilibrium rate (the "warranted" rate). As 
a consequence, larger current account gaps will be needed to bring 
the equilibrium rate toward the natural rate. In order to repay the 
foreign loans, the saving rate will thus have to raise eventually, 
because income growth during the repayment period cannot proceed 
at the natural rate. 
On the other hand, if the initial saving rate is high, the warranted 

108 
Pasquale Lucio Scandizzo 
growth rate for income will be high as well. Smaller flows of foreign 
exchange will be consequently needed, and eventually the saving rate 
will have to fall to prevent a slump in economic activity. 
Increasing integration of the capital markets is also likely to 
dramatize these foreseeable fluctuations of income growth rates and 
saving rates. As capital movement intensifies, the current account 
balance is increasingly turned into a residual variable, which can be 
used to ensure maximal, growth and demand-supply equilibrium. 
During this period of acceleration of capital movement across coun-
tries, therefore, we should expect to find, as we do, close correlations 
between saving growth rates and capital inflows and between saving 
and investment rates. 

The Effects of Capital Inflow on National Savings 
109 
APPENDIX 
Three questions emerging from the analysis in the text can be 
singled out for empirical testing: first, that saving rates tend to fall 
with time, second, that the rate of variation of savings is a function of 
investment and current account inbalances, and third, that income 
adjusts to ansure demand-supply equilibrium. 
During the past 15 years, savings as a proportion of GNP has been 
falling steadily in Italy. Table 1 summarizes some numerical measures 
of such a fall trhough the parameters of four alternative regression 
curves relating the saving ratio to time over the years 1972-1987. 
In light of this paper's conclusions on the tendency of saving rates 
to fall to accommodate part of the expansion in output due to foreign 
capital inflow, we should incorporate the trend in the saving ratio in 
the estimate of the saving function. An attempt to this effect is shown 
in Table 2, that reports alternative estimates for the same period of 
time. 
The table presents several equation estimates that have been 
ITALY: REGRESSION ESTIMATES 
OF TREND EQUATIONS FOR SAVING RATIOS 
(1975-1989) (*) 
Dependent variables 
~- 100 
Y(t) 
log ( S (t) • 100\ 
Y(t) 
7 
1 
-----·--
S(t)!Y(t) 
100 
( s (t) 
~ 
log --·100 
Y(t) 
Independent variables 
constant 
log (t) 
33.629 
-0.891 
log 3.612 
-0.186 
0.029 
0.0012 
3.530 
-0.033 
TABLE 1 
c. of 
correlation 
r 
-0.956 
-0.949 
0.970 
-0.964 
(*) The data used are from the OECD data bank. The symbols are the same used in the text. t is 
a trend variable (1 , . . . 15) with 197 5 = I. 

Saving function 
eq. 
Constant 
Elementary 
A.1 
-116599 
Keynesian 
(29340) 
A.l.2 
-73710 
(9198) 
8.1 
Duesemberry 
A.2.1 
-45250 
Modigliani 
(61537) 
A.2.2 
-94645 
(29583) 
A.2.3 
109309 
(2885) 
A.2.4 
84397 
(86763) 
Brown-Davis 
A.3.1 
525.4 
Friedman 
(23222) 
A.3.2 
-13117 
(60325) 
ESTIMATES OF PARAMETERS 
OFTHESA~NGFUNCTION 
ITALY (197 5-1989)(*) 
Coefficients of 
Y, 
Y,+t1 
Y,-t 
y,_, t 
0.684 
(0.089) 
0.532 
-0.012 
(0.269) 
(0.006) 
0.482 
(0.192) 
0.865 
-0.255 
(0.130) 
(0.142) 
0.109 
-0.133 
0.05) 
(0.05) 
0,564 
-0,013 
(0,254) 
(0,006) 
0.024 
(0.021) 
0.515 
(0.213) 
(*) The numbers under the coefficients are the standard errors. 
s,_. 
s,_. t 
t 
-7910 
(990) 
-5561 
(2088) 
-7162 
(1001) 
0.901 
(0.174) 
0.636 
-0.054 
(0.188) 
(0.023) 
TABLE 2 
~ 
D.W 
0,884 
1.2 
0.270 
033 
0.392 
0.62 
0.879 
1.66 
0.299 
052 
0,316 
0,36 
0.696 
1.30 
0.795 
1.29 
-
0 
~ 
~ 
:<:: 
!:) 
~ 
t-< 
~ 
s· 
2 
s. 
~· 

The Effects of Capital Inflow on National Savings 
111 
grouped under the three main headings of the elementary Keynesian 
functions, the Duesemberry-Modigliani model, with the inclusion of 
the highest past income (in practice last year income), and the 
Brown-Davis-Friedman model, that incorporates a Koyck-type lag in 
the dependent variable. For each model, the variables are measured in 
1980 prices. 
As the table shows, the negative trend is always highly significant, 
but the inclusion of a linear trend in the marginal propensity to save is 
generally matched by low coefficients of determination and Durbin 
and Watson statistics. Except for equation A.3.2. of the Brown-Davis-
Friedman variety, where the trend variable is attached to a weighted 
average of past incomes through the lagged value of savings, it is the 
Duesemberry-Modigliani specification A.2.2. that shows the best 
overall performance in terms of test parameters. 
The saving euqations estimated, however, are compatible with 
equation (3) only if income adjusts in the particular way described by 
equation (4). In order to test such compatibility, we directly estimated 
equation (3), obtaining: 
0.1) 
sr- st-1 = o.113 [.t:'-1- Fr-1- st-11 
(0.026) 
If= 0.572 
D. W. = 1.63 
where asterisks indicate that the variables are measured as percent-
ages of GNP. 
If there is compatibility, therefore, equation (1.1) provides a 
direct estimate of the adjustment coefficient y. Using equation (3'), on 
the other hand, we can estimate a locally constant marginal propen-
sity to save. 
By expressing ( 3 ') in terms of first differences and rearranging 
yields: 
A, 
(1.2) 
~ Yr +A. Yr-1 = -[lr-1- Fr-t1 
s 
where ~ is the finite difference operator. 
Substituting A.= 0.113 from (1.1) and estimating (1.2) yields: 
(1.3) 
~ Y1 + 0.113 Yr-1 = 0.738 [/1-1 -
F1-t1 
(0.022) 
If= 0.988 

112 
Pasquale Lucio Scandizzo 
BIBUOGRAPHY 
[1] ALEXANDER A.: «The Effects of Devaluation on the Trade Balance», Washington, 
International Monetary Fund, Staff Papers, vol. 2, April 1952, pp. 1-18. 
[2] ARTis M.- BAYOUMI T.: «Saving, Investment, Financial Integration, and the Balance 
of Payments», Research Department, International Monetary Fund, Working 
Paper, no. 89/102, December 1989. 
[3] DoMAR E.D.: «Capital Expansion, Rate of Growth and Employment», Econome-
trica, 1946, pp. 137-47. 
[4] FELDSTEIN M. - HoRIOKA C.: «Domestic Saving and International Capital Flows», 
Economic Journal, vol. 90, 1980. 
[5] FRANKEL J.: «Quantifyng International Capital Mobility in the 1980s», in DouG 
BERTHEIM - JOHN SHOREN, (eds.): Saving, Chicago, University of Chicago Press, 
1989. 
[6] FRENKEL JACOB A. - AssAF RAziN: Fiscal Policies and the World Economy, 
Cambridge, (Mass), MIT Press, 1987. 
[7] HARROD R.: Taward a Dynamic Economics, London, 1948. 
[8] KALDOR N.: «Alternative Theories of Distribution», The Review of Economic 
Studies, 1955-1956, pp. 83-100. 
[9] MoLHo LAzAROS: <<The Significance of the Current Account: Implications of 
European Financial Integration», IMF, Working Paper, April 1990. 
[10] PASINETTI L.: «Rate of Profit and Income Distribution in Relation to the Rate of 
Economic Growth», The Review of Economic Studies, 1962, pp. 267-79. 
[ 11] - -: Growth and Income Distribution, Essays in Economic Theory, Cambridge, 
Cambridge, University Press, 1973. 
[12] RouBINI N.: «Current Account and Budget Deficits in an lntertemporal Model of 
Consumption and Taxation Smoothing. A solution to the "Federal-Horioka 
Puzzle"?» National Bureau of Economic Research, Working Paper, no. 2773, 
November 1988. 
[13] SACHS J.: «The Current Account and Macroeconomic Adjustment in the 1970s», 
Washington, The Brookings Institution, Brookings Papers in Economic Activity, 
no. 1, 1981. 
[14] SCHMITT H.: «Mercantilism: A Modern Argument», Manchester School of 
Economic and Social Studies, vol. XLVII, 1979, pp. 39-111. 
[15] SMITH ROGERS.: «Factors Affecting Saving, Policy Tools and Tax Reform», Fund 
Staff Papers, vol. 37, no. 1, March 1990, pp. 1-89. 
[16] SoLOW R.: «Contribution to the Theory of Economic Growth», The Quarterly 
Journal of Economics, 1956, pp. 65-94. 
[17] SuMMERS L.: <<Tax Policy and International Competitiveness», in FRENKEL J (ed.): 
Aspects of Fiscal Policies, Chicago, Chicago University Press, 1988. 
[18] TESAR L.: «Savings, Investment and International Capital Flows», University of 
Rochester, Working Paper, no. 154, August 1988. 
[19] VINES D.- STEPHENSON A.: The Stevenson Lectures, University of Glasgow, 1989. 
(20) WEALE MARTIN - BLAKE ANDREW - CHRISTOOOULAKIS NICOS- MEADE JAMES - VINES 
DAVID, Macroeconomic Policy, Inflation, Wealth and the Exchange Rate, London, 
Unwin Hyman, 1989, Forthcoming. 

II - EXPLANATIONS OF 
THE RECENT CHANGES 
IN THE PROPENSITY TO SAVE: 
THEORETICAL DEVELOPMENT 
AND EMPIRICAL EVIDENCE 

An Attempt to Model a 
«Tobin-Modigliani» Approach to Savings 
Mario Baldassarri · Paolo De Santis - Giuseppe Moscarini 
Universita •La Sapienza», Rorna 
Gustavo Piga 
Columbia University 
Introduction 
Our aim is to shed some light on the differences of savings rates 
over time and among countries. 
This paper, which is the first step of a wider research program we 
are involved in, presents an additional point of view to the well-known 
and far developed debate on this subject. We first seek the micro-
economic foundations of savings behavior, then we infer its macro-
economic implications. 
We basically trust the explcative power of the Ufe Cycle Hypoth-
esis (LCH), but we are concerned with a new approach to the 
life-cycle income path in a stochastic environment. In order to deal 
with this particular matter, we formulate, a problem of career choice, 
formally similar to the Tobinian portfolio selection theory; however 
this problem is part of a life-cycle framework, determing the income 
path as the outcome of an optimal investment in human capital under 
uncertainty. 
We will try to formalize a general model of savings behavior; 
based on these microfoundations, we will infer macroeconomic impli-
cations, which will help, to some extent, to explain relevant 
phenomena in both industrialized and underdeveloped countries. 
In the former, our model explains the current fall in the savings 
rates as the winding of a spring: the increased average, amount, 

116 
M. Baldassarri - P. De Santis - G. Moscarini - G. Piga 
duration, and specialization of investments in human capital require 
high family expenditures for education, both direct and opportunity 
costs, accounted as consumption but implicitly creating the conditions 
for a steep rise in future incomes and savings. 
In the latter, our model provides a further rationale for the 
«poverty vicious circle». The poorer oppurtunities for education and 
the narrower range of careers available discourage a risk-taking 
attitude in educational and professional choices. Hence a new and 
different «Virtuous circle» of human capital accumulation -
edu-
cation, increase in earnings expectations, in savings and, as a conse-
quence, a widening of the range of job opportunities- cannot offset. 
The first section places our contribution within the existing 
literature in order to show the peculiarity of our approach. In section 
2 we sketch a simple model of career choice, examining its equilibria 
and deriving its comparative static properties. in section 3 we infer the 
macroeconomic implications deriving from the micro-model ( 1 ). 
1. - A Brief Survey of the Literature 
Since the first time the LCH has been modelled, a thorough 
research by Modigliani and various authors, whether theoretical or 
empirical, has taken place. Its final goal was to determine the relevant 
variables affecting consumer behavior, and therefore savings and 
wealth accumulation, and the macroeconomic implications of such 
behavior. Interest rates, growth rates, bequests, social security, family 
structure and demographic patterns were given particular care. 
At the same time, the life Cycle scheme became a powerful 
instrument of analysis, largely used in different fields of economics, 
when applied to overlapping generations. 
Another aspect of the LCH has however been treated outside (and 
partly before) the development of such literature: the life cycle path of 
income, and basically, of labor income since capital income issues 
could be dealt with by analyzing initial wealth and interest rates role. 
( 1) In this paper we limit our analysis to a static framework. Further developments 
will lead to specify and test the dynamic properties of the model and to verify the 
empirical evidence over time and among countries. 

An Attempt to Model a «Tobin-Modigliani» etc. 
117 
The pattern of such a path has in fact consequences on the 
behavior of the savings rate (whether individual or aggregate) that are 
at the same time important and easy to detect. The flatter the path, 
the more the rate of accumulation of savings until retirement will be 
constant over time, also if we take into account the elasticity of 
substitution. 
On the other hand, if the path is steep (and monotonically 
increasing until retirement) the rational consumer will tend to 
anticipate part of her consumption of future incomes in the first 
period of her working life. She will finance this additional consump-
tion (and the one during retirement) by the large amount of savings 
accumulated over the labor incomes received in the central part of her 
life, which are relatively larger. 
In the first case the individual savings rate has a substantially 
uniform pattern and becomes negative when old; in the second one 
the pattern is humped (please note that we here refer to the savings 
rate and not to total wealth, which has also a humped shape). 
Therefore, in the economy, the composition of the population by 
life-income paths becomes a key aspect (2). 
As we have already mentioned, what stands behind the shape of 
such a path, i.e. the behavior of the individuals and the economic 
performances of an economy, have been analyzed in a different 
framework of the economic theory. Human capital, arising from 
education and professional training, had already been dealt with by 
the marginalists but only during the late '50s and the early '60s it has 
been formalized appropriately. 
In Becker [2] one can find the basic theoretical results of the 
previous literature: 
a) investment in human capital has direct costs like every other 
(2) The labor incomes we refer to are intended as personal earnings deriving from 
professional services and not autonomous jobs. A broader definition of labor income 
should include medium and small size firm's earnings (i.e. from the entrepeneur's work 
and not from capital). Although all these incomes are affected by the same individual 
and market features, we cannot base the model of consumers' behavior on the latter' 
because the income path would be properly referred to the firm and not to the 
individual and therefore it is unrelated to a problem of optimal choice. 
(*) Advise: the numbers in square brackets refer to the Bibliography in the 
appendix. 

118 
M. Baldassarri - P. De Santis - G. Moscarini - G. Piga 
kind of investment, but also relevant opportunity costs, deriving from 
the labor incomes one foregoes. One incurs in both of these costs 
during the first years of her potential labor career, therebly resulting 
in an initially negative life-cycle income path; 
b) such a path becomes steeper and more concave as investment 
in education increases, since marginal producitvity of human capital is 
realistically positive and declining as investment grows, and as time 
goes by since depreciation decreases; 
c) the specialization of education implies a lower risk of unem-
ployment in the declining phases of the cycle (firms tend to dismiss 
unskilled workers) and a higher one during stagnations (a skilled 
worker who has been fired has lower chances of finding the desired 
opportunity); 
d) human capital, unlike physical, is fairly illiquid: it cannot be 
sold nor easily used as collateral due to problems of moral hazard; it is 
hardly diversificable, and therefore involves a higher risk on its 
productivity; 
e) human capital is particularly risky on its own because of the 
unavoidable uncertainty on some key aspects (personal skills, quality 
of education, future opportunities) and of the extended horizon over 
which to collect the results of such an investment (3). 
Finally, investment in human capital is generally financed per-
sonally (i.e. among the family) because of the already mentioned 
moral hazard effect in credit markets; however the increasing credit 
that will be reimbursed with future earnings is granted to students and 
training workers (4). 
After such a thorough analysis Becker turned his attention to the 
«economy of the family», while other authors have integrated such a 
(3) We should be careful in distinguishing the risk arising from the variability of 
income within a specific career, and the one from the possibility of undertaking a career 
different from the one expected according to the optimal investment in human capital. 
Since the former must be considered constant for any career, in our model only the 
latter is relevant. 
(4) Since investments in human capital realize large externalities, public financing 
which makes up for not sufficient private credits would maximize the welfare function. 
This would happen if and only if the public intervention doesn't take the form of a 
granted subsidy but requires the repayment of the loan by means of future labor 
incomes (Baldassari [ 1]) 

An Attempt to Model a «Tobin-Modigliani» etc. 
119 
formulation of life-income paths in the LCH. The ever more detailed 
models of Ben Porath [4], Heckman [13], Blinder and Weiss [7] 
describe a problem of optimization where the choice of the amount of 
investment in hwnan capital determines income, labor supply, con-
swnption of goods and leisure for the whole life cycle and the optimal 
bequest. 
This issue has also been treated in a framework of uncertainty, 
which takes into account the risk on future labor incomes and the 
correlation of such risk with the investment in hwnan capital. 
Levhari and Weiss [14] have proposed a Fisherian two-period 
model: .the agent's choice between hwnan and physical capital is 
made on the basis of their characteristics of riskiness and productivity, 
in order to establish that level of consumption which will maxmize its 
life time utility. So they have first underlined the differences and the 
analogies with Tobin's approach to portfolio selection. 
Olson, White and Shefrin [ 17] have extended the analysis to a 
«true» life-cycle of a given finite nwnber I of periods, where risk arises 
only from income and the choice variable is the period to be devoted 
to education. Nwnerical simulations lead the authors to conclude for 
the rationality of an «all or nothing» comer solution: it is the degree of 
risk aversion which determines whether to start work immediately or 
to study without ever interrupting the period of education. 
These analyses had led us to believe that the construction of an 
organic and general theory was about to come. In fact this has not 
happened: during the '80s, apart from some very specialized contri-
butions (Eaton and Rosen [9], Findlay and Kierzkowski [ 11]) resear-
chers have generally concentrated their effort on the issues of con-
sumption under uncertainty (which had never been neglected since 
the early '60s), producing a vast nwnber of theoretical instruments 
and of new and refined econometric techniques. 
A given stochastic path of income is generally asswned in these 
models: what determines such a path is teherefore set aside in order 
to strictly analyze the behavior of conswnption. Nor have traditional 
LCH developments not considered the problems arising from invest-
ment in hwnan capital under uncertainty and its consequences for 
savings. 
Our contribution is meant to reswne this field of analysis, thereby 

120 
M. Baldassarri - P. De Santis - G. Moscarini - G. Piga 
presenting a new way in which we believe the issue should be dealt 
with. 
We regard the choice of a career, concretely represented by the 
strategic choice made at the beginning of the working age (5), as 
completely autonomous from the problem of life-cycle consumption 
which comes as a logical subsequent step. Our model. here is based on 
the following key premise; a career (univocally identified by the 
life-cycle income path with associated risk and arising from a specific 
strategic choice of education) could be rejected even if it could grant 
the optimum over life-cycle consumption and leisure. This could 
happen because the choice of a career involves two features which are 
independent from consumption opportunities: 
1) the risk, expressed by the randomness of the variable future 
income, is an independent argument of the utility function and can 
therefore by itself be determinant of the choice; 
2) one cannot always and completely summarize the satisfaction 
deriving from the specific employment one aspires to, in terms of 
expected paths of consumption and income. However, in our model, 
this «psychological effect» is considered as far as it can be embodied in 
the risk (6). 
We can therefore justify a utility function which has as its 
arguments the risk and the expected income path. 
The problem ends up looking like a portfolio choice a la Tobin, 
but the analogy simply stops here. First of all we are concerned with 
the choice of a career among the several ones offered by the market. 
There is therefore no possibility of diversification in our choice. 
Second, our problem has a dynamic nature, although it is here limited 
to a choice to be made at one point in time (see footnote 5). 
What recalls Tobin, and which in fact gives potential explanatory 
power to our model, is the basic role played by the degree of risk 
aversion of the agents and of the average risk od the careers (con-
(5) In a general dynamic model we could allow for a continuous choice involving 
education, leisure and training. «Learning by doing» issues will be considered in that 
framework. 
( 6) Indeed psychological effects can be referred both to personal attitudes and 
preferences toward specific careers. Several elements, like working time, social prestige 
etc., are not strictly monetizable. Obviously these components of psychological effect 
not necessarily can be fully embodied in a risk variable. 

An Attempt to Model a «Tobin-Modigliani» etc. 
121 
ferred by the conditions of the economic environment). It is from the 
interaction of those two aspects that one determines the steepness of 
the income path, i.e. a shorter or longer education period, a different 
allocation of time among work, leisure and training, which will have 
their clear drawbacks on the national savings rate of a country. The 
macro-implications will be explored in depth in the final section. 
2. - Education, Professional Choice and Life Cycle 
Incomes Under Uncertainty 
2.1 A Model of Career Choice 
2.1.1 A Production Function with Human Capital 
The representative agent, when entering the labour market after 
a period of compulsory education, faces a optimal career choice 
problem. 
The decision variable is the fraction z of the T years of the 
working life to devote to investment in human capital which 
determines a time path of stochastic future incomes, according to a 
production function: 
(1) 
Yt = It (z, llt) 
with (following Levhari-Weiss [14]) 
()It 
It =->0 
z 
() z 
'i It 
ltzz = --
2 < 0 
az 
llt is a stochastic variable which depicts the state of nature. 
We assume the state of nature to be realized in a shift of income, 
distributed as a normal: llT"' N (O,cr~) and to be serially correlated in 
a non-stationary way: 
llt+ 1 = P llt + Et 
£t "' NID (0, S2) 
I pI > 1 
S2 known 

122 
M. Baldassarri - P. De Santis - G. Moscarini - G. Piga 
This reflects the accumulation over time of the divergence of 
actual income from the (trend) value associated to the investment in 
human capital. It follows; 
since cov (Jl,, £,) = 0 and S2 is constant and not relevant to the choice, 
we define: 
a,+ 1 = I pia, cioe a,+ 1 > a, 
The particular meaning of Jlr implies that: 
a /,1 a Jlr > o 
The investment in human capital involves explicit costs and an 
opportunity cost, the labor income given up throughout the education 
period [0, z1]; we also assume that these costs make the net income 
negative over this time interval and therefore define a «modified» 
production function: 
(2) 
Fr(Z, Jlr) = ( 1 -
Z ~) /r(Z, Jlr) 
In this way: 
Fr (0 , Jlr) = /r (0 , Jlr) 
income path of an untrained 
worker 
{< 0 for t<zT education period 
Fr (z , Jlr) 
for 
working period 
>0 
t > z t 
aFr{<O for t<to=T(~ +z) 
a z > o for t > to 
a 2 Fr {> 0 for t < It = T( 2 fz + z) 
fzz 
at <0 for 
t > ft 

An Attempt to Model a «Tobin-Modigliani» etc. 
123 
Because of the costs of education, and their linear correlation to 
the investment in human capital, the total life cyclea income is 
certainly positive for a zero level of investment: 
T 
Fr(O, J.11) > 0 
..lJ- t < T hence J F1(0, J.11) e-rt dt > 0 
0 
while obviously negative for z = 1, since the whole life is devoted to 
investment without collecting any return: 
hence: 
Ft (1 , !lt) = ( 1 -
~) /r (1 , !lt) < 0 
..lJ- t < T 
T J Ft (1 , J.11) e- rt dt < 0 
0 
From the hypothesis of continuity on the production function 
follows a critical value zma.x < 1 , corresponding to a zero total life 
cycle income: the earnings exatcly offset the costs of education. No 
rational agent, excluding psychological effect, will choose a z *greater 
than zmax (7). 
The larger the investment in human capital, the steeper is the 
income path and the higher its position in the future, as shown in 
Graph 1. 
2.1.2 Individual Preferences in Career Choice 
The agent cannot insure herself against the risk on the return of 
human capital, because of moral hazard; therefore she is obliged to 
indertake a gamble Y1 on her future income with values: F1 (z, J.11) and 
(7) As already hinted in footnote 6, psychic effects can be related to career choice. 
The choice of z* = I, or any z* > zmax, is obviously an absurd from a strict economic 
point of view. Psychological effects, however, can justify such a solution, once the 
individual is granted in some way his or her living on subsistence. This can be the case 
of a monk! 

124 
M. Baldassarri - P. DeSantis - G. Moscarini - G. Piga 
probabilities <P (J! 1). Thus she maximizes: 
(3) 
T 
U = J 
u (Y1 e-r~ e-ar dt 
0 
GRAPH 1 
where: r = real interest rate; e = subjective discount rate; U is a time 
separable, Von Neumann-Morgenstem utility function; so it can be 
expressed as: 
(3 bis) 
T 
U = J E u ( Y1 e- '~ dt = 
0 
T 
= J J u [Fr (z, Jl1) e-'1 <I> (Jlr) d Jlr e-ar dt 
0 llt 
In other words U depends on the vector (time path) of the 
incomes expected in all periods: 
Y(z) = {E Yo (z), E Yt (z) , ... , E Yr(z)} E RT+t 

An Attempt to Model a «Tobin-Modigliani» etc. 
125 
Furthermore the risk, denoted by the variance cr~ of income in 
any period, is an argument of U, specified as sum of expected 
instantaneous utilities ( u = felicity). With regard to the utility func-
tion we distinguish between individuals risk takers and risk averters. 
The former prefer the gamble to receive with certainty its expected 
value; the opposite for the latter. Graph 2 illustrates the situation in 
any moment of a risk averter, characterized by a concave utility 
function. 
GRAPH 2 
1-----...,.~J'.::;.~.,IIIIIIi:;;..-1--+--- E(u(y,)).,, 
E(u(y,))cr,, 
y, 
Then we can redefine the utility function: 
(3 ter) 
U = U(Y(z), cro) 
where: 
O'o = I P 1- 1 cr r 
a u 
au 
-->0 .J.I-t,--~0 
a E Y1 
a cr0 
depending on the attitude toward risk (positive for a risk lover). 

126 
M. Baldassarri - P. De Santis - G. Moscarini - G. Piga 
2 .1. 3 The Market Constraint 
The agent faces a market constraint, an expression of the features 
and general conditions of the economic system where she lives; such a 
constraint associates an average risk to each career, which is 
identified by the amount of investment in human capital. 
(4) 
cro = g(z) 
or 
When the education period increases, on the one hand the risk of 
unemployment (zero income) grows, because of the reasons 
mentioned in section 1; on the other hand new chances of extremely 
high unexpected earnings are available. Therefore: 
g (z) > 0 
and: 
z=g- 1 (cro) 
with: 
dg- 1 (cr) 
----> 0 
dcr 
The existence of the critical value zmax places a bind on the 
feasible set of the constraint, and even more a maximum risk: 
crmax = g (zrnax) 
The combinations (z, g, (z)) with z > zrnax are not relevant for a 
rational choice. 
2 .1. 4 The Optimal Choice 
The optimization problem is defined: 
max U = U(Y(z), cro) 
z 
s.t. cro = g(z) 
O"r =I P l1 cro 
z < zrnax 

An Attempt to Model a «Tobin-Modigliani» etc. 
127 
In order to show the constraint's properties in the space ( Y ( z), 
cr), the new domain of the utility function, we use the «modified» 
production function: from a relation g between risk and investment 
we get one h between risk and income path (to simplify we define 
again cr, = g(z) without the constant I Q 1'). Hence: 
(5) 
, 
aF1 
dg- 1 
{<0 per t<to 
hf(cr,) =- · -- = 
az 
dcr 
>0 per t>t0 
, 
a2 Fr 
( d g- 1 ) 2 
a Fr 
~ g- 1 
he ( cr r) = -a-t- · _d_cr_ 
+ -a -z . -d-cr--:2:-
We assume the risk of careers to grow with increasing rates: 
hence: 
Therefore h" < 0, apart from a doubtful sign in the very first 
periods, because of the effect of training and education costs; then h is 
in general increasing and concave as to the risk and represents the 
market constraint in the space [Y, cr]; joined to the preferences, it 
determines the agent's optimal choice in terms of risk and income 
path. 
The market constraint has been proved to be concave (except for 
the first periods). Therefore, according to previous analysis, a risk 
taker will be led to choose a corner solution, i.e. her optimal choice 
will always be z* = zrnax. On the other hand, for a risk averter 
problems of existence and uniqueness of equilibrium may arise. 
Indeed, from the calculation of the Hessian matrix we cannot be 
assured about the concavity of the objective function. However, 
reasonable assumptions may give the appropriate concavity of the 
utility function, therefore an optimal choice will be defined. 

128 
M. Baldassarri - P. De Santis - G. Moscarini - G. Piga 
2.2 A Simplified Two-Period Model 
2. 2.1 Graphic Analysis 
We present a simplified two-period version of our model in order 
to carry out a graphic analysis of equilibria. We assume determinant 
certain income in period 1, the choice relates to the 2nd period 
stochastic income and its risk. 
Y = (Y1, Y2) 
yl = yl 
Y2 = Y2 = f(z , ~) 
mF U = U[f(z, ~), cr] = u (YI) + (1 + e)- 1 J 
u ( 1 ~ r) <1> (~) d ~ 
or: 
s.t. a = g(z) 
z < zrnax 
max U = U(Y2 (z), cr) 
z 
11 
s.t. Y2 = h (a), 
z < zrnax 
We study the pattern of the indifference curves between risk and 
2nd period income. 
which has sign opposite to Ua 
UY2Y2 Ua -
Uy2 Ua Y2 
( Ua)2 

An Attempt to Model a «Tobin-Modigliani» etc. 
129 
which has the same sign as: 
For a risk-lover: Uo > 0 Uoy2 > 0 
thus: 
do 
d1'"2<0 
the indifference curve is downward sloped and either concave or 
convex as to the risk, as in Graph. 3. 
For a risk-averter Uo > 0 Uoy2 > 0 
thus: 
do 
-->0 
d 1'"2 
arnax 
GRAPH 3 
-
-h(a) 
amax = g(zmax) 
the indifference curve is upward sloped and concave, as in Graphs 4a 
and 4b, or convex as in Graph. 5. 

130 
M. Baldassarri- P. DeSantis • G. Moscarini- G. Piga 
The graphs show the optimal choice: this is always a corner 
solution for a risk lover (Graph. 3), who will decide to educate herself 
up to the point where z = zmax. 
For a risk-averter we may have three different cases: 
a) if: 
(the Tobinian «diver» in terms of utility function), which requires a 
Uay2 positive and large enough, and if: 
then a case of a diver will arise in our model, as shown in Graph 4a, 
i.e. the individual will either choose no education (z* = 0) or the 
GRAPH 4a 
(J 

An Attempt to Model a «Tobin-Modigliani» etc. 
131 
maximum of education (z* = zmax), depending on the indifference 
curves' and the constraint's relative slopes; 
b) if: 
(again a Tobinian «diver» in terms of utility function) and if: 
the individual will obtain an interior solution of the «diversifer» kind 
(0 < z* < zmax) leading to an optimal investment in human capital, 
excluding comer solutions, as shown in Graph. 4b; 
GRAPH 4b 
am ax 

132 
M. Baldassarri- P. DeSantis - G. Moscarini - G. Piga 
c) finally, if: 
(the 
Tobinian 
«diversifier») 
an 
optimal 
interior 
solution 
(0 < z* < zmax) exists, as Graph 5 shows. 
GRAPH 5 
L---------~----------------------~--------------~a 
am ax 
2.2.2 Comparative Statics 
The qualitative and quantitative development of the economic 
system, where the representative agent lives, makes the market 
constraint tilt upward, since it allows for higher incomes given the 
risk. Therefore a specific market constraint does exist for each stage 
of development. Moreover this development increases the critical 
value zmax, providing new career opportunities with greater earn-
ings, sufficient to offset the costs of a longer period of education. 
In Graphs 6 and 7 we show how this affects the agent's optimal 
choice. 
A risk averter increases the amount of her investment in human 
capital and chooses a career with higher income and risk, the former 
growing more than proportionally to the latter (Graph 6). 

An Attempt to Model a «Tobin-Modigliani» etc. 
133 
GRAPH 6 
amax1 
amax2 
GRAPH 7 
z* = 'l.lllax 

134 
M. Baldassarri - P. De Santis - G. Moscarini - G. Piga 
A risk lover chooses again the corner solution, which carries her 
to increase the investment in human capital (Graph 7). 
The same kind of development of the economic system, together 
with other factors of psychological and historical origin, may modify 
the agent's attitude toward risk. Therefore, to the tilting of the 
constraint can be associated a change in the pattern of the indiffer-
ence map. 
GRAPH 8 
The points F1, F2, F3, in Graph 8 denote the equilibria due to 
both phenomena: decreasing risk aversion and improving market 
constraint. 
Some peculiar cases may arise. For instance, a risk aversion 
increase, due to reasons independent from the determinants of the 
market constraint slope, will oppose the «positive» effect of develop-
ment on risk and preferences, as Graph. 9 points out. 
El = initial equilibrium; E2 = equilibrium following to an 
exogenous jump of risk aversion; £3 = equilibrium following the 
tilting of the constraint due to the development; E4 
= 
final 
equilibrium following the reduction of risk aversion due to the 
development. 

An Attempt to Model a «Tobin-Modigliani» etc. 
135 
From the interaction of the two effects can paradoxically turn out 
an equilibrium, like E4, with lower risk and a lower income increase 
as to what is likely to expect from the economic system development. 
GRAPH 9 
Yi 
The results obtained with the simplified model, graphically 
shown, can be extended to the general model, when the functions 
have the appropriate pattern in the RT + 1 space as well. 
Summarizing, our agent's problem can be seen as follows: 
a) she faces a range of stochastic life-cycle income paths; 
b) she focuses her choice under uncertainty defining her optimal 
investment in human capital; as a consequence, she derives her 
life-cycle income path; 
c) from this point on our analysis joins the traditional theory of 
the life cycle under uncertainty. 
Therefore the agent's optimal choice can be represented as a life 
cycle income path, becoming steeper and riskier (with a broader 
stochastic range) as the choice is less risk averse, as shown in Graph 
10. 

136 
M. Baldassarri - P. De Santis - G. Moscarini - G. Piga 
y, 
I 
I 
I 
I 
/ 
I 
I 
/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
,"' 
, 
------:-::-:=::==::-=:. ( 
O'o = 0) 
--
--------
... --- -----
,.,. 
.... -.... 
, ,, 
,, ,. 
, .,, 
, 
, 
T 
GRAPH 10 
3. - Macroeconomic Implications in Terms of Different Rates of 
Savings Over Time and Across Countries 
Some aggregate conclusions at a macroeconomic level can be 
inferred from the micro-model, according to different hypotheses on 
the distribution of the population by age and risk aversion, which is 
intended in terms of choice of careers under uncertainty referred to 
future income and future progress of the same chosen career. 
Our previous analysis helps us in shedding some light on some 
facts of the modem economies: 
1) the last decade's fall in the average rate of savings in almost 
every industrialized country; 
2) the permanent divergence of savings rates across indus-
trialized countries; 
3) the historical divergency of savings rates between under-
developed and industrialized countries. 

An Attempt to Model a «Tobin-Modigliani» etc. 
137 
In order to explain the first stylized fact, we observe that, in our 
model, to each stage of development corresponds: 
-
a given market constraint; 
-
a given degree of risk aversion. 
The further an industrialized country grows and develops, the 
longer and steeper is the market constraint (a wider range of careers 
and a greater zmax) and the flatter is the indifference map. Those two 
phenomena encourage the agent to undertake a higher risk in terms 
of investment in human capital. 
Changes in the demographic structure of the population by age 
class have often been used in recent years to explain changes in the 
attitude toward savings; however, in our model there cannot be such 
a univocally defined relation. 
In other words, in addition to the demographic factors, the 
«mental age», that is the attitude toward risk, appears to be relevant 
and not necessarily preferences follow the actual age. An economy 
demographically dominated by the elder class will see the negative 
effect on savings strongly reinforced by the presence of a class of 
young, even if a small one, with a marked tendency to invest in 
human capital and thus to delay their entering the labor market 
because of longer lasting education programs. 
Therefore, in the short run, the rate of savings of this economy 
will tend to be lower. However, as the life income path of this 
economy is likely to become steeper in the next future, we would 
expect the rate of savings to increase over time, given a certain level of 
risk. 
Obviously, to a steeper curve is associated a wider range of paths, 
which refer to higher risk both in positive and negative sense; a 
conuntry which invests relatively more in human capital could experi-
ence a micro behavior of strong will to accept risk, leading to highly 
skilled and specialized individuals. At the macro level, an excess of 
specialization may arise, making the situation inconsistent with the 
actual opportunites and supply of jobs and careers. In this case the 
excess of specialization can prove to be harmful. 
On the other hand, such specialization, whenever it turns out to 
be consistent with the productive system needs, may well give rise to 
an externality. Therefore a government intervention could be needed 

138 
M. Baldassarri- P. DeSantis - G. Moscarini - G. Piga 
to maximize social welfare, these externalities push toward public 
subsidies to education. but this intervention must be led well beyond 
the decision about just the amount of resources to be used in the 
subsidy plan; it seems necessary to make at the same time relevant the 
allocation of such resources between different educational programs, 
consistent with the economic conditions and perspectives of the 
system (i.e. too many lawyers, too few engineers). 
A further point is to be stressed here: the deepening of edu-
cational programs and of specialization is often accompained and 
followed by an increase of the service sector's relative weight in the 
economy, both in terms of output and employment, to the detriment 
of the primary and secondary sectors. In a non perfectly integrated 
world like ours, there may be a problem of optimal composition of the 
productive side of the economy: an extremely skilled and specialized 
labor force can experience unemployment while the use of less skilled 
immigrant workers increases. 
Beside these simple hints, we claim that the decline of the rate of 
saving could well reflect a sort of «winding up of a spring» (i.e. a 
«worm effect») due to the presence in the economy of a large part of 
agents investing in human capital. 
This effect is better seen in an economy numerically dominated 
by a risk-lover young cohort. In this case, the original demographic 
interpretation of the LCH would predict a high rate of savings in the 
economy. In our model this effect might be compensated by the high 
investment in human capital. 
A third case can be relevant: a population demographically 
dominated by the elder class joined to a young strongly risk-averse 
cohort. 
The modem theory of consumer behavior with a stochastic 
income path tells us that a higher degree of risk aversion corresponds 
to a steeper consumption profile, due to precautionary savings (Graph 
11). On the contrary, in our model the stochastic income path is the 
choice variable; the degree of risk enters directly the utility function. 
The precautionary behavior, consequence of risk aversion, moves the 
wary decision from saving to a flatter and less risky income path. 
Moreover, the reduction of uncertainty adds a further reason for the 
smaller quantitative relevance of precutionary savings. Indeed, if a 

An Attempt to Model a «Tobin-Modigliani» etc. 
139 
GRAPH 11 
The •precautionary savings hypothesis»: 
given the same stochastic income path, 2 is more risk-averse than 1. 
young risk-averse class chooses a lower, flatter and less dispersed 
path, savings will be more uniform over time and smaller than it 
would be expected in the «precautionary savings hypothesis». 
Furthermore, risk aversion will apparently lead to higher savings 
at the micro level because of the earlier entrance into the labor market 
and the smaller flow of investments in human capital. But this is the 
reverse side of the phenomenon of the «winding of the spring», since 
future incomes and savings will be much less growing. In any case at 
macro level a lower savings rate will be experienced for any given 
growth rate. 
This conclusion leads us toward the second fact, the divergence 
of rate of savings across industrialized countries, which has clear 
implications when referred to our model. As a matter of fact, it 
enables us to say that, in one moment of time and ceteris paribus, 
different attitudes toward risk correspond to different rates of savings. 

140 
M. Baldassarri - P. De Santis - G. Moscarini - G. Piga 
On the other hand, the degree of risk aversion is influenced by the 
stage of development of the country. Not only the market constraint, 
but also the shape of the preferences will feel the effect of occurring in 
a post-war period or in a long stable economy. 
The third fact we consider is the historical divergence of rate of 
savings between underdeveloped and developed countries. This is 
reflected in the market constraint regardless of the shape of the 
preferences. In an underdeveloped country the former limits the 
available choices of careers. 
What we refer to is the vicious circle of poverty in the light of our 
model: the fewer the choices (and logically the lower the «disposable» 
fractions of life to be spent in education), the lower the savings in the 
long run, the more the process of accumulation is frustrated and the 
range of available careers shrinks, etc. 
This vicious circle could be interrupted by preventing the market 
constraint from being binding: phenomena of investment in human 
capital abroad, if its productivity is spent in the country itself, may 
work in this direction. 
International transfers of financial and physical capital may be 
always useful and needed. However, what we want to stress is that 
intraregional and international transfers of resources, aimed 
at 
implementing investment programs in human capital, seem to be 
essential. According to our model, an optimization of the allocation of 
international resources transfers might be as relevant as, or even more 
relevant than, the absolute value of the transfers themselves. If we do 
limit the transfers to financial or physical capital, the scarcity of 
human capital will depress multiplier and accelerator effects, demand 
might grow faster then productive capacity and the flow of imported 
goods from developed countries could increase. 
On the other side, programs of human capital investments, with 
no financial facilities and technological transfers, will lead to «brain 
drains», and the productivity of such capital will give returns abroad. 
A flow of goods runs from developed to developing countries in the 
first case; a flow of workers runs in the opposite direction in the 
second. 
Moreover, in the latter case not necessarily the workers migration 
will result, in the developed country, in an employment consistent 

An Attempt to Model a «Tobin-Modigliani» etc. 
141 
with the worker's skills and qualifications. Very often LDC educated 
workers (for instance a gradutate) will produce higher returns if 
employed in her country, in a position related to her skills; while, after 
moving to a developed country, she will very likely find only a less 
skilled or totally unskilled job. An important social welfare loss will 
occur. Integrated programs at world level will turn out to be the best 
cooperative solution. 

142 
M. Baldassarri - P. De Santis - G. Moscarini - G. Piga 
BIBLIOGRAPHY 
[1] BALDASSARRI M.: «Tassazione distribuzione ed ottimalita dei programmi di sussidio 
all'istruzione», Rivista Intenazionale di Scienze Sociali, vol. XLVII, 1976 
[2) BECKER G.: Human Capital, London NBER, 1964. 
[3] --: «A Theory of Social Interactions», Journal of Political Economy, 6. 
[4] BEN PORATH Y.: «Production of Human Capital and the life Cycle Earnings», 
Journal of Political Economy, August 1967. 
[5] BLANCHARD 0.: «Debt, Deficits and Finite Horizons», Journal of Political Econo-
my, 1985. 
[6] BUNDER A.: <<lntergenerational Transfers and life Cycle Consumption», American 
Economic Review, 1976. 
[7] BUNDER A.- WEiss Y.: «Human Capital and Labour Supply: a Synthesis», Journal 
of Political Economy, June 1976 
[8] DAVIES J.: «Uncertain lifetime, Consumption and Dissaving in Retirement», 
Journal of Political Economy, 1981. 
[9] EATON J. - RoSEN H. S.: «Taxation, Human Capital and Uncertainty», American. 
Economic, Review, September 1980. 
[10] FELDESTEIN M.: «Social Security, Induced Retirement and Aggregate Capital 
Accumulation», Journal of Political Economy, 197 4 
[11] FINDlAY R. - KERZOWSKI H.: «International Trade and Human Capital: a Simple 
General Equilibrim Model», Journal of Political Economy, December 1983. 
[12] HAU.. R.: «Stochastic Implications of the life Cycle-Permanent Income Hypothe-
sis: Theory and Evidence», Journal of Political Economy, 1978. 
[13] HECKMAN J.: «A Life Cycle Model of Earnings, Learning and Consumption», 
Journal of Political Economy, August 1976. 
[14] LEVHARI D. -WEISS Y.: «The Effect of Risk on the Investment in Human Capital», 
American Economic Review, December 1974. 
[15] MODIGUANI F.: «The Role of Intergenerational Transfers and Life Cycle Saving in 
the Accumulation of Wealth», Journal of Political Economic Perspectives, no. 2, 
1988. 
[16] MODIGUANI F. - BREUMBERG R.: «Utility Analysis and the Consumption Function: 
an Interpretation of Cross-Section Data», in KuRIHARA K. (ed.): Post-Keynesian 
Economics, Rutgers University Press, 1954. 
[17) OLSON L. - WHITE H. - SHEFRIN H.: «Optimal Investment in Schooling when 
Incomes Are Risky», Journal of Political Economy, June 1979. 
[18] POTERBA J.- SUMMERS L.: «Finite lifetimes and the Effects of Government Deficits 
on National Savings», Journal of Monetary Economics, 1987. 
[19] TOBIN J.: «La preferenza per la liquidita come comportamento verso il rischio», in 
MoNTI M. (ed.): Problemi di economia monetaria, Milano 1969. 
[20] YAARI M.: «Uncertain lifetime, Life Insurance, and the Theory of the Consumer», 
Review of Economic Studies, 1965. 

Some Macroeconomic Effects 
of Demographic Trends in Italy 
Luigi Paganetto - Beniamino Quintieri - Furio Camillo Rosati 
Universita •Tor Vergata•, Roma 
Universita di Chieti 
1. - Introduction 
According to demographic projections the population will tend to 
decrease and show a significant ageing in most industrialized coun-
tries. The reduction in fertility rates, coupled with continuously 
increasing life expectancy, will generate, over the next decades, a 
reduction in total population and a marked increase in the number of 
aged people, both in absolute and in relative terms. This phenomenon 
can be expected to bring about major macroeconomic effects arising 
mainly from the changes in savings, labour supply, government 
spending and revenue. 
In this paper we offer a quantitative evaluation of these effects, 
using projections of the population of Italy for the next decades. 
The macroeconomic consequences of ageing cannot in general be 
unambiguously derived from theoretical models, as they depend inter 
alia on wage and consumption age profiles, retirement decisions, 
intergenerational links, capital market imperfections and so on. To 
take into account these factors we have based the analysis on a 
life-cycle simulation model which endogenously determines consump-
tion and labour supply. This allows us to consider the effects of an 
ageing population by focusing on the time path of saving and con-
sumption. As our intent was to highlight the effects of the demogra-
phic changes on life-cycle savings, we neglected the role of bequests. 

144 
L. Paganetto - B. Quintieri - F. C. Rosati 
We have also not explicitly considered capital market imperfections; 
however, we calibrated the model in such a way that the individual 
financial liabilities are quite small. This is coherent with the Italian 
case, in which the family sector holds a small amount of financial 
liabilities. 
Population ageing is characterized by the shift of the center of 
gravity of population distribution first towards the middle-aged and 
then towards the elderly. As a consequence the economic effects of 
ageing can differ according to the phase of demographic change 
which is taken into account, and for this reason we have considered 
projections at two different points of time: one at the year 2008, when 
the centre of gravity will be at about 40 years of age (compared with 
the current 20 years of age) and the other at 2038, when the centre of 
gravity will be at about 65 years. 
Obviously the results obtained should not be regarded as fore-
casts, both because of the length of the time horizon considered and 
because of the uncertainty of the birth rate projections. Rather, the 
aim of the paper is to give, within the aforementioned limits, an 
evaluation of the order of magnitude of the effects of the demographic 
changes. 
The plan of the paper is the following. In the next section we 
present the demographic projections for Italy up to 2038 and the 
implied change in the population's age structure for the next fifty 
years. In Section 3 we illustrate the life-cycle model employed for the 
simulations, while Section 4 is devoted to parametrization and base 
simulation. The effects on saving and labor supply are considered in 
Sections 5 and 6. Section 7 is devoted to analyzing the relationship 
between saving, the interest rate and the population's age structure. 
2. - Demographic Trends 
Ageing can simply be defined as a change in the age structure of 
the population such that its center of gravity shifts to a higher age 
group. The age distribution of a population changes in time as a result 
of two factors: a) the present age composition and b) trends in the 
age-related demographic key processes of fertility, mortality and 

Some Macroeconomic Effects of Demographic Trends in Italy 
145 
migration. Basically we can distinguish two types of ageing: ageing at 
the base of the age pyramid, mainly due to declining birth rates, and 
ageing at the top of the pyramid, due to a longer life span. 
As is the case in most western countries, the present age composi-
tion of Italy is, in rough outline, the result of a constantly increasing 
life span and a long-term, although not constant, decline in fertility. 
Until now migration has been a relatively unimportant factor in the 
evolution of the age structure. 
The age distribution that can be expected in the future will be 
determined to a considerable extent by the so called "birth plateau", 
consisting of the large number of people born between 1945-1975, 
now aged between 15 and 45. Reaching their old age in the first half of 
the next century, the plateau might form a burden for the active 
population at that time. Together with the changes in life span and 
fertility, this phenomenon will be highly instrumental in shaping the 
ageing process in the future. 
The quantitative evaluation of such a phenomenon is of special 
relevance in order to understand its ecoomic effects. 
Table 1 shows projections of the total population of Italy for the 
next fifty years. The first two columns refer to the forecasts of the 
Italian Statistical Office (!STAT) and column C shows other projections 
prepared by Vitali [ 19] for the Parliamentary Commission on "Social 
problems of an ageing population". The differences in projections are 
due to different assumptions regarding fertility and mortality rates. All 
DEMOGRAPHIC TRENDS 
TOTAL POPOLATION PROJECTIONS 
(thousands) 
A 
1988 
• 
0 ••• 0 •••• 0 •••• 0 
0 
0 
57.400 
2008 
•••••• 0 ••• 0 
•• 0. 0 
•• 
55.433 
2038 
••• 0 
0 ••• 0 •••• 0. 0 
•• 
42.764 
Legend: 
A: Decreasing fertility rates, (!STAT [ 6 ]). 
B: Constant fertility rates, (!STAT [6]). 
C: VITAU (19). 
B 
57.400 
56.808 
46.587 
TABLE 1 
c 
57.400 
50.850 
-

146 
L. Paganetto - B. Quintieri - F. C. Rosati 
DEPENDENCY RATIOS 
~e +60 
tot. pop 
A 
B 
1988 ·········· 
19.4 
19.4 
2008 .......... 
26.0 
26.0 
2038 .......... 
43.1 
39.8 
Legend: 
A: decreasing fertility rates, (lsTAT [ 6 ]). 
B: constant fertility rates (lsTAT [6]). 
~ 
+60 
+20 < pop< -60 
A 
B 
35.3 
35.3 
46.1 
46.1 
98.6 
88.3 
TABLE 2 
~ 
+60 
pop -20 
A 
B 
75 
75 
148 
148 
325 
264 
the projections, however, show a conspicuous reduction in the Italian 
population. 
The transformation in the population structure implied by the 
aforementioned demographic trends is well known, so only some 
basic facts are briefly reviewed here. Table 2 shows the expected 
evolution of some dependency ratios computed under the decreasing 
fertility A and constant fertility B hypotheses. The ratio to the total 
population of individuals over sixty is expected top grow from the 
current 20% to values between 40 and 43% in 2038, depending on the 
assumptions about the evolution of fertility rates. A more detailed 
picture of the population structure path at different periods assuming 
a decreasing fertility rate is shown in Graph 1 and 2. 
3. - The Model 
The individual is assumed to choose a path of consumption and 
labour such as to maximize the discounted value of the life time 
utility: 
T 
(1) 
J 
e-ar U[X (t), L (t)) d t 
0 

<a £ 
0 
'$. 
AGE STRUCTURE OF POPULATION 
(projected trends) 
10 
-----------------------------. 
9 
6 
3 
2 
1 -
0~--~~~-.--.--,r-~--~--.--.---r---~-,r-~--.---,--,---,__, 
0 
5 
10 
15 
20 
25 
30 
35 
40 
45 
50 
55 
60 
65 
70 
75 
80 
85 
90 
Age group 
0 
1988 
+ 
2008 
<> 
2038 
GRAPH 1 
~ 
~ 
[ 
~ 
;:$ c ;s 
fi• 
~ 
~ 
~ 
.Q, 
lt' 
;s 
~ 
~ 
fi• 
~ 
11) 
;:$ 
e-
s· 
~ 
~ -
~ 
-..1 

AGE STRUCTURE OF POPULATION 
(projected trends) 
5~---------------------------------------------------------, 
v 
., 
/ 
/ 
r, 
. 
. 
17 
vi' 
' , 
'' 
, 
r" 
~ 
I/ 
1/ 
, · 
17f• 
' 
I'-
• 
~-
17: 
v 
~ 
~ 
·~ 
' 
~ 
17~ 
~ 
~ 
~ 
~ 
v 
v~ 
~~ 
~ 
~~ 
~ 
~ 
~ 
~ 
~ 
./ 
v ~ 
v~ 
I'-
. 
'' 
, 7 
/~~ 
~ t~ 
/ 
. 
~~ 
/' 
v~ 
I/' 
.. ,, 
, 
v' _ , 
1 ·~ 
'·. 
~ 
~· 
~~ 
:/ !' 
1/ '· 
/ ' 
/ ··,-
't.r 
~ '·I / '~ . ·. ::: 
'· :· 
~ 
< 
-~I 
~, 
/' 
• ~ 
, 
.• 
•. '·· •• 
•• ~ 
I 
.... -·· 
, 
• 
• ··r;; 
~- .. . 
' 
..., 
.• / 
~ . 
/' 
1/ i' 
/ '. 
/' :.. 
··. / 
[./ ' .. 
/ ·, / 
/ '· ·~ 
~- .... r.t 
·, 
r· > ~' ~ 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
/ 
v 
/··, 
1/' 
.I 
7 
/ 
'• / 
/ 'v . '\, / 'l/ , '-:: / '· / 
r-~ .-
. 
;I 
v •, 
/ ·, 
/ '· . . . . •. 
... '• . . I/ . v -·· ·,, . / '... . ., / ' / .. r-
'· / 
'v 
.· 
, 
V 
,-
' 
/ 
/ 
I/ 
v 
/ 'V 
<· · ' 
/ '·.' 
··.... 
I" v 
'· · · I/ 
· · / 
l, '' 
; '/ I' 
vN~ vt· 
l/~t 
. ;: 
/f• .: 
,.r,< 
,~ vr-~ 
r- 1/ 
r-~ 
1/ 
"~ 
~ vl' 
/1-.. ~ "''v 
L/~.V . 
''.~ 
·I'·.-
·1' ;' 
~ vNI 
f' 
/ 
.' 
· 
1/ 
V vl' 
vi'-:' 
''"~ / 
H<:; /I'·. 
/,1 
~ '"v 
r-
/
11 
v~ 
L~r-r/ 
1/1'-~ vf'. 
l-"1' / 
-·~·~ l.1i'r;.. 
1..· • ~: /' ·· 
-'1' 
,r.~ 
'· 
I\ 
· '· 
(,.f',. 
L~r- / 
/~'·!';' Ill'{ 
vt-.~ /''1/ v ~ vt• ;: v· v /1,/ 
·-~ 
I'~ 
" 
.. 
L~ t.-·f' 
"~ -"t: vr-~ 1 
vi'/ ~,,~'-
t..-f' 
v < -·· 
~-", ~ 
,r,- v' 
~r-
-r-. 
v v 
r-.. 
~~ 
v~l; .. h~ /r-. 
v ·X~ -r-
t ...... ~ 
r ... ~ kr-.• ~ ... ~ , . 
~: 
~ 
!~ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
, 
v 
v 
~ 
,. 
l.' 
v 
v!'-1/ 
-,~ 1/ 
~ .' ,., 
·1' .... /r,r" 
~'r' vf'. /'' ,. .... r:.. 
" 
H/ vi'/, 
0 
. 
. 
. 
/ 
4 
,, 
/I', 
.. 
/1',1·" 
,r.,r.,., 
/h 
/. 
/ 
15 
20 
25 
30 
35 
40 
45 
50 
55 
60 
65 
70 
75 
'80 + 
[T"ZJ 
1988 
c:::J 
2008 
l'2:J 
2038 
GRAPH 2 -
"" 
00 
~ 
~ 
~ 
~ -
0 
!l' 
0 
~ s· -
~-
::!. 
~ 
0 
i 
:::. 

Some Macroeconomic Effects of Demographic Trends in Italy 
149 
subject to the budget constraint: 
(2) 
A= (1- tr)rA(t)+(l-tw) W(t)(1-L(t))-P(t)(1+tp)X(t) 
and the initial condition: 
(3) 
A (0) = AO 
where U is a utility function which enjoys the properties of strict 
concavity and time separability. The interval 0 T is the time horizon 
relevant to the individual; p is the rate of intertemporal time prefer-
ence; X is the quantity of private goods consumed at the time t; Lis 
the amount of leisure normalized so that 1 ::::;; L ::::;; 0; A the financial 
wealth; r is the rate of interest; W the pre-tax wage per unit of work; P 
is the price of the consumer goods; tw, tr and tp indicate respectively 
the proportional rate of tax on labour income, capital and consump-
tion. 
Throughout the paper we assume a perfect capital market, i.e. 
the individual can lend and borrow without constraint at the market 
interest rate r. Moreover, as is usual in life cycle models (see for 
example Heckman [5], Yaari [20] we do not assume r is necessarily 
equal to cr. 
The Hamiltonian associated with the household problem (2.1) is: 
H= e-aru[X(t),L(t)] + h(t)[r(l- tr)A(t) + 
+ (1 -
tw) W(t)(1 - L(t))- (1 + tp) P(t) X(t)] 
where h is the costate variable. 
The first order conditions for a maximum are: 
aH 
A(t) =-
tJh 
• 
aH 
h(t) =-
a A 
h 
aH 
-=-=0 
X 
aL 
h(1)A(1)=0 

150 
L. Paganetto - B. Quintieri - F. C. Rosati 
The transversality condition together with the hypothesis of 
nonsatiation implies A(T) = 0. Therefore the necessary conditions for 
an optimum require, in addition to constraint (2) and initial condition 
(3), the following equations to be satisfied (1): 
h = -
h (t) r 
aH 
-
= e-(Jt Ux- (1 + tp) P(t) h (t) = 0 
ax 
aH 
-=e-at UL- (1- tw) W(t) h(t) = 0 
aL 
from which: 
(4) 
h (t) = h (0) e-<:Jt 
(5) 
Ux(t) = h(t) e01 (1 + tp) P(t) 
(6) 
UL(t) = h (t) e(J1 (1 -
tw) W(t) 
If we utilize eq. ( 4) and strict concavity of U, first order conditions 
(5) and (6) may be inverted to reach the following "marginal utility" 
constant demand functions, h(o), for goods and leisure: 
(7) 
X= X[h (0) e<<:J-r)t (1 + tp) P(t), (1- tw) W(t) h (0) e<<:J-r)1 
(8) 
L = L [h (0) e<a-r)t (1 + tp) P(t), (1- tw) W(t) h (0) e<<:J-r)1 
To be able to obtain an explicit solution of the model in order to 
simulate individual behaviour over the life cycle it is necessary to 
(1) The substitution of demand functions (2. 7) and (2.8) into the Hamiltonian 
reveals the maximized Hamiltonian is linear in the state variable. Therefore the 
necessary conditions are also sufficient for an optimum. See ARROW- KuRZ [1], p. 45. 
Advise: the numbers in square brackets refer to the Bibliography in the appendix. 

Some Macroeconomic Effects of Demographic Trends in Italy 
151 
consider a specific form of the utility function. Following Auerbach 
and Kotlikoff [2] we assume that the instantaneous utility function 
has the form: 
(9) 
U, = [X,O- 1/P) + ct> L\1-1/P)](P/P- I) 
The parameter ~ determines how responsive an individual's 
annual labour supply is to that year's wage rate. As was first shown by 
Arrow et al. ( 1961), the elasticity of substitution between X, and L, is 
constant and equal to ~. The term <!> gives the household's preferences 
for leisure relative to consumption. The greater is <!>, the less labour 
the household will supply in order to obtain consumption goods, as it 
prefers to enjoy a greater amount of leisure instead of consumption 
goods. <!> equal to zero implies that households would choose to have 
no leisure, this implying a fixed labour supply assumption. cr is "pure" 
rate of time preference. It indicates the degree to which, other things 
being equal, the household would prefer leisure and consumption in 
earlier rather than later periods. The larger is <j>, the more of its 
lifetime resources a household will spend early in its life and the less it 
will save. The remaining taste parameter, Jl, can be shown to be equal 
to the household's intertemporal elasticity of substitution between 
consumption in different periods. The elasticity of substitution 
determines the percentage change in the ratio of any two periods' 
consumption with respect to a percentage change in the relative price 
of consumption in the two years. The higher Jl the higher the 
responsiveness of households to changes in the incentive to save. The 
utility function is fairly general, but it nevertheless embodies a set of 
constraints. First, both the intertemporal and the intratemporal 
elasticities of substitution, ~ and Jl, are assumed to be constant over 
time. Second, the intertemporal elasticity of substitution is assumed 
to be equal for leisure and consumption. Finally, time separability 
means that individual decisions at any time depend only on the 
future; past levels of consumption and leisure will bear on a 
household's preferred behaviour only so far as they alter the house-
hold's current net worth. 

152 
L. Paganetto - B. Quintieri - F. C. Rosati 
We assume that the objective of the individual is to maximize: 
(10) 
T 
U= 
J.1 
J<1+or<r-t>up-tM 
J.1- 1 
0 
where J.1 is the intertemporal elasticity of substitution. Maximization of 
eq. (10) subject to (2), (3) and to the transversality condition given the 
following expression for the time path of leisure: 
(11) 
where: 
L = L 
. 
. --. eO-t,>r 
[ ~-~ + <I>]-PIIl-1 [ 
1 
w,_, 
] 
t 
t- I 
zl/~ l + <J> 
1 + (J 
W, 
W,(1 -
tw) 
Z,=-----
P,(1 + tp) <I> 
The time path of consumption is linked to the time path of leisure 
by the following expression: 
(12) 
Given the initial value of L, obatined by integrating the budget 
constraint, equations, (11) and (12) can be used to derive the in-
dividual demand for leisure and consumption over the life cycle. 
4. · Parametrization of the Model and Base Simulation 
In order to simulate the model it is necessary to choose values for 
the preference parameters, the interest rate, the wage profile and the 
tax rates. The intertemporal elasticity of substitution J.1 was set equal 
to 0.4 which is in the range of the estimated value of this parameter 
(Auerbach-Kotlikoff [2]). The intratemporal elasticity of substitution~ 
was set equal to 1.1. The leisure preference parameter, <1>, was fixed at 
0.7. The pure rate of time preference, cr, for which hardly any 

Some Macroeconomic Effects of Demographic Trends in Italy 
153 
empirical evidence esists, was set at 0.001. Finally we assumed a real 
interest rate equal to 2%. 
In order to evaluate how sensitive the results obtained are to the 
value of the parameters, simulations were also run with different 
parametrizations. 
The simulations were run for a time horizon of 55 periods, 
assuming that the individual becomes "adult" at the age of 21 when 
he enters the labour market and that he expects, with certainty, to die 
at the age of 7 5. As no link between generations is assumed, wealth 
will be equal to zero at the beginning and at the end of the life-cycle. 
Tax rates were selected to reflect the currently observed Italian 
tax structure. In particular the rate of «wage» tax, tw, was set equal to 
29%, which is approximately equal to the ratio of the sum of direct 
income tax and social security contributions to Italian GNP net of 
industrial corporate profits. The indirect tax rate, tp, was fixed at 17%, 
a value obtained by dividing the revenue from indirect taxation by the 
value of final household consumption. Finally, because of the difficul-
ty in obtaining a measure of capital income, the rate of capital 
taxation, tr, was fixed at 20%, a value which is a rough average of the 
observed legal tax rates on financial assets. 
The wage profile was chosen in order to obtain from the model, 
given an endogenous labour supply, an age income profile similar to 
that observed for a representative Italian wage earner (Jappelli-Rossi 
[8]). Graph 3 shows the selected wage profile together with the 
estimated earning profile while, as can be seen from Graph 4, the 
simulated incoime profile is sufficiently close to the observed one. 
The results of the simulation performed using the described 
parametrization, which we will refer to as "base" simulation, are 
shown in Graphs 5 and 6. As can be seen, labour supply will show 
high values from the beginning, reaching a maximum between 40-45 
years and falling to very low levels after sixty years of age, thus 
generating an endogenous retirement period. The time path of con-
sumption is much flatter, slowly rising until 50-55 and then hardly 
declining, implying consumption levels at later ages higher then those 
observed at the beginning of the life cycle. 
Individual wealth is slightly negative for the first ten years. It then 
rises to reach a maximum at about fifty seven years and declines 

154 
L. Paganetto - B. Quintieri - F.C. Rosati 
WAGE AND EARNINGS 
life cycle simulation 
260-r-------~~-
:--------, 
240 
220 =p/ 
160 
140 
120 
100 
80 
60 
40 
20 
0 .. 
'' 
GRAPH 3 
25 
30 
35 
40 
45 
50 
55 
60 
65 
70 
75 
0 Earnings Age 
+Wage 
AGE - INCOME PROFILE 
life cycle simulation 
GRAPH 4 
260~----------------~~-------------------. 
240 
220 
200 
180 
160 
140 
120 
100 
60 
60 
40-
20~ 
o~.~.~~~.~.~. ~r.-~~~~~~-~~~~~rr.~~~ 
25 
30 
35 
40 
45 
50 
55 
60 
65 
70 
75 
Age 
0 Simulated 
+Observed 

Some Macroeconomic Effects of Demographic Trends in Italy 
155 
CONSUMPTION AND LABOUR SUPPLY 
life cycle simulation 
25 
30 
35 
40 
45 
50 
55 
60 
65 
70 
75 
Age 
0 Consumption 
+ Labour supply 
CONSUMPTION AND WEALTH 
life cycle simulation 
0 Consumption 
+Wealth 
GRAPH 5 
GRAPH 6 

156 
L. Paganetto - B. Quintieri - F. C. Rosati 
thereafter to reach zero by the end of the life cycle. This implies that 
savings are positive between 27 and 57 years, with heavy dissavings 
occurring during the last twenty years of the life cycle. Observe that 
this behaviour implies a low level of financial liabilities typical of the 
Italian households. 
Obviously the results obtained depend on the parametrization 
adopted. In Section 6 we will show how different values of parameters 
will modify the behaviour of the individual during the life cycle. 
5. · Effects of an Ageing Population 
on Savings and Labour Supply 
In this section we combine the information obtained from the 
simulations of the life cycle model with the population projections, in 
order to evaluate the impact of the demographic change on life cycle 
wealth, labour supply and ssaving rates. 
In order to highlight the effects of an ageing population we do not 
consider the effects of growth on labour and saving. 
We have defined life cycle wealth, according to the theoretical 
prediction of zero intergenerational transfers, as the sum over age 
classes of the accumulated differences between past streams of labour 
earnings and consumption. Analogously, labour supply is defined as 
the sum over age classes of the age specific labour supply. Finally we 
have computed the saving rate as the ratio of the sum over age classes 
of individual saving to the sum over age classes of individual income. 
As shown in Section 2, the demographic change expected for the 
future is the result of both a decrease in the total number of 
inhabitants and a change in the age structure of the population. In 
order to offer an assessment of the relative importance of these two 
effects, we have also considered throughout the papoer the conse-
quences of the change in the age structure assuming constant popula-
tion. This will allow us to identify what we have labelled as the 
"structural effect» of the demographic change. 
Let us consider the effects during the first phase of the demogra-
phic transition for which, as mentioned before, we have chosen 2008 
as a reference time point. As shown in table 3, life cycle wealth and 

Some Macroeconomic Effects of Demographic Trends in Italy 
157 
total labour supply are expected to show respectively a 15% and a 5% 
increase with respect to the results obtained using the 1988 popul-
ation. This is due to the fact that in 2008 the "baby boom generation" 
of the sixties will find itself in the middle of the life cycle where both 
wealth and labour supply are higher. On the contrary, the saving rate 
is expected to decrease by 1. 7 points owing to the fact that the saving 
profile shows a strongly decreasing pattern after forty-five years of 
age. If we consider the changes generated by the structural effect of 
ageing, we note a much smaller increase in wealth, a decrease in 
labour supply and an unchanged saving rate. This is the result of the 
fact that the increase in the relative weight of those aged between 
twenty and forty-five tends to increase the supply of labour while the 
increase of the weight of people above forty-five tends to reduce it. If 
we assume a constant population this last effect outweighs the former 
and thus we observe a reduction in labour supply, while it will 
increase when the projected path of population is taken into account. 
As far as savings are concerned considering the pure "structural" 
effect reduces in relative terms the weight of younger people and 
increases especially that of the middle-aged. The purely structural 
effect on the saving rate will therefore be negligible. 
The picture changes drastically when the second phase of the 
demographic transition is considered. Both the saving rate and labour 
EFFECTS OF PROJECTED DEMOGRAPHIC TRENDS 
(per cent changes) 
TABLE 3 
Total effect 
Structural effect 
constant 
decreasing 
decreasing 
constant 
fertility 
fertility 
fertility 
fertility 
Wealth 
••••• 0 ••• 0. 0. 0 •••• 
2008 
-
+IS 
+7.0 
-
2038 
+0.6 
-2.4 
+ 12.2 
+8.6 
Labour supply 
••••••••• 0 
0. 
2008 
-
5.1 
-2.4 
-
2038 
-11.0 
-24.0 
-12.6 
-11.0 
Saving rate (*) ............ 
2008 
-
-1.7 
0 
-
2038 
-13.1 
- 15.1 
-8.2 
-
(*) Absolute changes. 

158 
L. Paganetto - B. Quintieri - F. C. Rosati 
supply show a substantial reduction, while life cycle wealth will return 
just below its original level after the increase observed in the first 
phase. As mentioned before, these results arise from the combined 
effect of ageing and of the decrease in fertility. 
In order to evaluate how different fertility rates will influence the 
results obtained we have also considered the case of a constant 
fertility rate. Not surprisingly, the effects of an ageing population with 
constant fertility are less "drastic". It is, however, interesting to 
observe that the increase in fertility has a smaller effect on the saving 
rate then on the other variables, because high positive savings are 
concentrated in the middle aged cohorts. 
6. · Effects of Ageing Population 
with Different Taste Parameters 
We shall now consider how the results obtained are affected by 
the choice of the preference parameters in the utility function. As can 
be seen from Tables 4 and 5, a change in p, the intratemporal 
elasticity of substitution, has negligible effects on wealth and the 
saving rate, while labour supply tends to be smaller the higher p. The 
intertemporal elasticity of substitution, J.l, has a much stronger effect: 
higher values of J.1 imply that wealth, labour supply and the saving rate 
increase less or decrease more as a consequence of the demographic 
trends. Graphs 7, 8, 9 and 10 help to clarify how changes in P and J.1 
modify the individual time path of labour supply and consumption 
and hence the effects of the demographic trends. Case S refers to the 
"base" simulation, while case Sl illustrated the behaviour of the 
individual assuming P = 0.6 and ll = 0.1. Finally, S2 assumes P = 1.4 
and J.1 = 0.7. 
Clearly, a higher substitutability, both intertemporal and intra-
temporal, will modify the life cycle behaviour of the individual in two 
directions. Consumption demand will be lower in the first part of the 
life cycle and higher in the second, while labour supply and savings 
will be higher in the first part and lower in the second. This explains 
why the decrease in labour supply and savings due to population 
ageing will be higher the higher the values of P and J.l. As Tables 4 and 

Some Macroeconomic Effects of Demographic Trends in Italy 
159 
TABLE 4 
EFFECTS OF PROJECTED DEMOGRAPHIC 
(percentage changes with respect to 1988) 
f.1 0.1 
0.4 
0.7 
Wealth 
0.6 
2008 
+22.3 
+ 15.2 
+ 13.7 
.............. 2038 
+22.5 
-2.6 
-7.9 
1.1 
2008 
+22.6 
+ 15.3 
+ 13.6 
.............. 2038 
+23.8 
-2.4 
-7.9 
1.4 
2008 
+22.7 
-15.3 
+ 13.7 
.............. 2038 
+24.6 
-2.3 
-7.8 
Labour supply 
0.6 
2008 
+7 
+5.4 
+3.4 
.............. 2038 
-16.9 
-21.7 
-27.5 
1.1 
2008 
+6.8 
+5.1 
+2.9 
.............. 2038 
-18.9 
-24.0 
-30.2 
1.4 
2008 
+6.7 
+4.8 
+2.6 
.............. 2038 
-20.0 
-25.4 
-31.9 
Saving rate (*) 
0.6 
2008 
-0.1 
-1.7 
-3.4 
.............. 2038 
-7.6 
-15.2 
-24.2 
1.1 
2008 
-0.1 
-1.7 
-3.3 
.............. 2038 
-7.5 
-15.1 
-24.1 
1.4 
2008 
0 
-1.6 
-3.2 
.............. 2038 
-7.4 
-15.0 
-24.1 
(*) Absolute differences. 
5 show, the results are very sensitive to the "substitution" parameters 
and especially to J.l, the intertemporal elasticity of substitution. In fact, 
while life cycle wealth should increase in 2008 in all cases it could also 
increase even in 2038, with low values of J.l. As far as saving is 
concerned, a low intertemporal elasticity of substitution would imply 

160 
L. Paganetto - B. Quintieri - F. C. Rosati 
TABLE 5 
STRUCTURAL EFFECTS OF PROJECTED DEMOGRAPHIC TRENDS 
(percentage change with respect to 1988) 
l.l 0.1 
0.4 
0.7 
p 
Wealth 
0.6 
2008 
+ 13.6 
+7 
+5.5 
.............. 2038 
+41.0 
+11.9 
+5.9 
1.1 
2008 
+ 13.9 
+7.0 
+5.5 
.............. 2038 
+42.4 
+ 12.2 
+5.9 
1.4 
2008 
+ 14 
+6.9 
+5.6 
.............. 2038 
+43.3 
+ 12.3 
+4.7 
Labour supply 
0.6 
2008 
-0.6 
-2.1 
-3.9 
.............. 2038 
-4.4 
-10 
-16.5 
1.1 
2008 
-0.8 
-2.4 
-4.3 
.............. 2038 
-6.7 
-12.6 
-19.7 
1.4 
2008 
-0.9 
-2.6 
-4.7 
.............. 2038 
-8 
-14.2 
-21.6 
Saving rate (*) 
0.6 
2008 
+0.9 
0 
-0.9 
.............. 2038 
-3.8 
-5.4 
-13.3 
1.1 
2008 
+0.9 
0 
-0.9 
.............. 2038 
-3.6 
-5.2 
-13.0 
1.4 
2008 
+0.9 
0.1 
-0.8 
.............. 2038 
-3.6 
-8.0 
-12.8 
(*) Absolute differences. 
an almost unchanged saving rate in 2008 and a 7.5 points reduction in 
2038. Such a reduction would be much more marked when higher 
values of J.l are taken into account. Table 6 shows the results of the 
simulatiOJ?. for different values of the rate of time preference a. The 
results obvioulsy do not seem to be very sensitive to changes in these 

Some Macroeconomic Effects of Demographic Trends in Italy 
161 
CONSUMPTION 
different preference parameters 
0 
Sl 
+ s 
0 
S2 
LABOUR SUPPLY 
different preference parameters 
. '' 
70 
75 
~ 
~ 
~ 
~ ~ oo 
~ 
~ 
~ ro 
~ 
Age 
0 
Sl 
+ s 
0 
S2 
GRAPH 7 
GRAPH 8 

162 
L. Paganetto - B. Quintieri - F.C. Rosati 
GRAPH 9 
SAVINGS 
different preference parameters 
25 
"30 
35 
45 
55 
60 
65 
70 
75 
0 
Sl 
+ s 
<> 
S2 
GRAPH 10 
WEALTH 
different preference parameters 
I 
'I • 
, I. 
'I I l, 
I 1·. 
, I 
25 
30 
35 
40 
45 
50 
55 
60 
65 
70 
75 
Age 
n Sl 
+ s 
<> 
S2 

Some Macroeconomic Effects of Demographic Trends in Italy 
163 
TABLE 6 
EFFECTS OF PROJECTED DEMOGRAPHIC TRENDS 
(different rates of pure time preference) 
Wealth . . . . . . . . . . 2008 
2038 
Labour supply . . . . 2008 
2038 
Saving rate . . . . . . 2008 
2038 
Wealth . . . . . . . . . . 2008 
2038 
Labour supply . . . . 2008 
2038 
Saving rate . . . . . . 2008 
2038 
11 0.1 
+ 14.7 
-4.3 
+4.7 
-24.8 
-2.2 
+15.9 
+6.6 
+10.0 
-2.4 
-13.5 
-0.1 
-8.9 
Total effects 
0.4 
+ 15.3 
-2.4 
+5.1 
-24.0 
-1.7 
-15.1 
Structural effects 
+7.0 
+ 12.2 
-2.4 
-12.6 
0 
-8.2 
0.7 
+20.0 
+ 15.5 
+6.3 
-20.8 
-0.2 
-10.1 
+ 11.7 
+32.9 
-1.2 
-8.9 
+0.9 
-5.2 
parameters. However, an increase in c:r will reduce the effects of an 
ageing population on saving, as a higher time preference tends to 
increase consumption of goods and leisure at an early stage of the life 
cycle. 
7. · Ageing, Saving and the Interest Rate 
In recent years the relationship between saving and the interest 
rate has received particular attention. 
As is well known, from a theoretical point of view the effect on 
saving of a change in the interest rate is ambiguous. The literature has 
focused mainly on the attempt to solve this theoretical ambiguity 
empirically, but little attention has been given to the role of the age 

164 
L. Paganetto - B. Quintieri - F. C. Rosati 
structure of the poopulation in determining the elasticity of saving 
with respect to the interest rate. 
The potential role of such a variable emerges clearly when the 
effects of a change in the interest rate are analyzed within a life cycle 
model. It can be shown (2) that by differentiating the model illustrated 
in section 3 the interest rate will have the following effects on 
individual behaviour. If the sum of the own price and cross price 
elasticity of both demand for leisure and consumption is smaller than 
one, then both consumption and leisure will decrease in the first part 
of the life cycle and increase thereafter. These effects are shown in 
Figure 11 and 12, where the time path of consumption and labour 
supply are plotted for interest rates of 2% and 4%. 
As a consequence, individuals will save more when "young" and 
dissave more when "old". The aggregate outcome will not only on 
depend the preference parameters but also on the age composition of 
the population: the elasticity of saving with respect to the interest rate 
will become smaller the higher is the weight of older people in the 
economy. A possible explanation of the recent fall in the saving rate 
could therefore be found in the increase in the real after tax interest 
rate in a context of an ageing population. Recently Sheshinski - Tanzi 
[ 18] based an explanation of the behaviour of personal savings in the 
United States, on a similar line of reasoning without however offering 
any empirical support. 
In order to highlight the effects of an interest rate increase on 
savings under different population age struictures, we have simulated 
the aggregate effects of an increase of the interest rate from 2 to 4%, 
utilizing the current age structure of the population and that expected 
in 2008 and 2038. In this way we were able to assess how sensitive the 
aggregate propensity to save is to the age composition of the econo-
my. As is shown in Table 7, the age structure has a strong effect on the 
interest rate elasticity of saving: while the saving rate today, according 
to the life cycle simulation, would increase by almost 2 points, with a 
much older population structure, like the one expected in 2038, it 
would in fact be reduced by more than 2 points. It is clear, therefore, 
that an increase in the interest rate can have opposite effects on 
(2) See QUINTIERI - RosATI [15] Chap. 5. 

Some Macroeconomic Effects of Demographic Trends in Italy 
165 
GRAPH 11 
CONSUMPTION AND INTEREST RATE 
.. 
25 
30 
35 
40 
45 
50 
55 
60 
65 
70 
75 
Age 
0 
r = 02 
+ r = 04 
GRAPH 12 
LABOUR SUPPLY AND INTEREST RATE 
J. "'""""" "" 
I I 
I I 
I 
I 
I 
25 
30 
35 
40 
45 
50 
55 
60 
65 
70 
75 
Age 
0 
r = 02 
+ r = 04 

166 
L. Paganetto - B. Quintieri - F. C. Rosati 
saving, depending on the age structure of the population. This result 
holds also with different preference parameters, even if the absolute 
changes in the saving rate are obviously different. 
Observe finally that according to the results shown in Table 7, the 
reduction in the saving rate observed in Italy in recent years cannot be 
explained by the rise in real interest rates coupled with the higher 
weight of old people in the economy. 
EFFECTS OF AN INTEREST RATE INCREASE 
(from 2o/o to 4o/o) 
Saving 
rate 
1988 
+2.0 
2008 
+0.9 
2038 
-2.2 
s 
1.1 = 0.4; p = 1.1 
Sl 1.1 = 0.1; p = 0.6 
S2 1.1 = 0.7; p = 1.4 
8. - Conclusions 
s 
Labour 
-6.9% 
-9.5% 
-16.7% 
St 
Saving 
Labour 
Saving 
rate 
rate 
-0.2 
-1.4% 
+3.1 
+0.1 
- 1. 90/o 
+ 1.3 
-0.1 
-2.9% 
-4.2 
TABLE 7 
S2 
Labour 
-5.9% 
-8.0% 
+ 15.0% 
The aim of this paper was to offer a quantitative evaluation of the 
effects of the expected demographic trends on savings and labour 
supply. The analysis is based on a life-cycle simulation model using the 
most up-to-date official population projection for Italy. 
As we have seen, the ageing of the population will be character-
ized by the shift of the centre of gravity of the population toward the 
middle-aged. Accordingly the results obtained in terms of saving and 
labour supply depend crucially on the different phases of the demo-
graphic transition. 
The results obtained can be summarized as follows. During the 
first phase of the demographic transition, life cycle wealth and total 
labour supply are expected to show respectively a 15% and a 5% 
increase. This is due to the fact that in 2008 the "baby boom 

Some Macroeconomic Effects of Demographic Trends in Italy 
167 
generation" of the sixties will find itself in the middle of the life cycle, 
where both wealth and labour supply are higher. On the contrary, the 
saving rate is expected to decrease by 1. 7 points, owing to the fact 
that the saving profile shows a strongly decreasing pattern after 
forty-five years of age. 
The picture changes drastically when the second phase of the 
dempographic transition is considered. Both the saving rate and 
labour supply show a substantial reduction, while life cycle wealth will 
return just below its original level after the increase observed in the 
first phase. 
In order to evaluate the effects of demographic trends on the 
supply of savings the change in public savings should also be consi-
dered. As shown in Quintieri-Rosati [ 16], a sustantial reduction in 
government sector saving is expected to occur in 2038, and this 
should be added to the estimated reduction in private saving. Such a 
reduction in savings is likely to induce a change in the real aftertax 
interest rate, either by the working of market forces or by "ad hoc" 
fiscal and/ or monetary policies. The elasticity of saving with respect to 
the real interest rate becomes very important. As we shown in the last 
part of the paper, the sign and the magnitude of such elasticity 
depends on the age structure of the population. The elasticity of 
saving with respect to the real interest rate will become smaller with 
the ageing of the population. In particolar, it should be substantially 
negative under the population age structure expected for 2038. This 
implies that policies aimed at increasing the real yield of savings will in 
fact further reduce the aggregate saving rate. 

168 
L. Paganetto - B. Quintieri - F. C. Rosati 
BIBUOGRAPHY 
[1] ARROW K.J.- KuRZ M.: «Public Investment, the Rate of Return, and Optimal Fiscal 
Policy», Baltimore, The John Hopkins Press, 1970. 
[2) AUERBACH A. - KOTUKOFF L.: Dynamic Fiscal Policy, Cambridge, Cambridge 
University Press, 1987. 
[3] BANCA D'ITAUA: «I hiland della famiglia» (various issues). 
[4] BosKIN M.J.: «Taxation, Saving, and the Rate of Interest», Journal of Political 
Economy, no. 86, April 1978. 
[5] HECKMAN J.J.: «Ufe Cycle Consumption and Labour Supply: an Explanation of the 
Relationship Between Income and Consumption over the Ufe Cycle», The 
American Economic Review, vol. 64, no. 1, 1974, pp. 188-194. 
[6] lsTAT: «Previsioni della popolazione residente per sesso, eta e regione», Note e 
Relazioni, no. 4, 1989. 
[7) KOTUKOFF L.J. -SUMMERS L.: «Tax Incidence in a Ufe Cycle Model with Variable 
Labour Supply», The Quarterly Journal of Political Economy, August. 1979. 
[8] JAPPELU T. - Rossi N.: «Dinamica della popolazione e risparmio privato», Roma, 
Banca d'Italia, Ricerche e metodi per la politica economica, vol. I, 1989. 
[9] LEE R.: «Age Structure, Intergenerational Transfers and Economic Growth: an 
Overview», Revue Economique, 1980. 
[10] MoDIGUANI F.: «Life Cycle, Individual Thrift, and the Wealth of Nations», 
American Economic Review, June 1986. 
[11) OECD: Ageing Population, Paris, OECD, 1988. 
[12] PAGANETI'O L.: «Public Debt, Private Saving and Supply Side Policies» in BoSKIN M. 
- FLEMMING J. - GoRINI S.: Private Saving and Public Debt, Oxford, Blackwell, 
1987. 
[13] PoNTRYAGIN L.S. et AL.: The Mathematical Theory of Optimal Processes, New 
York, Pergamon Press, 1984. 
[14] OuiNTIERI B.- RosATI F.C.: «Fiscal Policy and Labour Supply», Public Finance, no. 
3, 1988. 
[15] QUINTIERI B. - RosATI F.C.: Politica fiscale ed incentivi al lavoro e al risparmio, 
Milano, F. Angeli, 1990. 
[16] QUINTIERI B. - RosATI F.C.: Demographic Changes and Public Budget: Simul-
ations within a Life Cycle Model, mimeo, 1990. 
[17] RosKAMP K.W.: «Optimal Ufetime Consumption Paths under Equal Yield Income 
and Consumption Taxes», Public Finance, no. 1, 1987, pp. 32-41. 
[18) SHESHINSKI E.· TANZI V.: «An Explanation of the Behaviour of Personal Savings in 
the United States in Recent Years», NBER, Working Paper, no. 3040, July 1989. 
[19] VITAU 0.: Aspetti quantitativi e tendenze evolutive dell'aggregato degli anziani, 
Commissione parlamentare d'inchiesta sulla dignita e la condizione sociale dell'an-
ziano, relazione conclusiva, volume degli allegati, 1989. 
[20] YAARI M.: «On the Consumer's Ufetime Allocation Process», International 
Economic Review, no. 3, September 1964, vol. 5, pp. 304-17. 

Foreword 
Saving and External Debt 
in Latin-American Countries 
Michele Bagella · Martino Lo Cascio 
Universita «Tor Vergata», Roma 
In the last few years the propensity to save has showed some 
declining signs in many industrialized countries, especially in the USA 
(Kotlikoff [17] (*) ). At the same time, similar tendencies emerged in 
developing countries, with an external debt progressively increasing 
especially since 1982. 
These signs, emphasized by the most recent World Bank [29] 
Reports, not only reduce the possibility of adjustment of the balance 
of payments for the developing countries in a short time, but they also 
limit further the possibility of a structural adjustment. In fact, while 
the propensity to save <::ontinues to decrease in most of these countries 
the flow of income transfers from factors grows in order to service the 
debt. 
Such disequilibrium is particularly evident in the most indebted 
Latin-American countries, like Argentina and Brazil, but also in 
Mexico and Venezuela. 
The first section of this paper will give an analysis of such 
phenomena for several Latin-American countries. The second part will 
try to describe the loops between saving formation and accumulation, 
and the future impact of the international framework upon the 
growth and resolution of the debt problem. 
(*) Advise: the numbers in square brackets refer to the Bibliography in the 
appendix. 

170 
Michele Bagella - Martino Lo Cascio 
l. · Propensity to Save, External Debt and Growth: 
the "New" Circuit of Depression in Latin-American Countries 
1.1 An Overall View 
If we look at the trend of propensity to save of Latin-American 
countries in the '80s a progressive slow-down is remarkably evident. 
At the same time, while observing the external debt/income 
relation, we see a progressive increase, which is especially fed by the 
rate of debt service, for the most part interest. 
Years 
1970/1974 .. 
1975/1980 .. 
1981/1985 .. 
Years 
1970/1974 .. 
1975/1980 .. 
1981/1985 .. 
ED/Y BN $US AT CURRENT PRICES 
(in%) 
Argentina 
Bolivia 
Brazil 
Chile 
Colombia 
7.40 
50.29 
10.95 
19.61 
13.36 
18.35 
52.24 
24.43 
46.38 
20.54 
78.35 
75.00 
65.11 
114.70 
40.61 
Mexico 
Paraguay 
Peru 
Uruguay 
8.99 
9.54 
20.44 
10.14 
26.20 
19.55 
41.35 
19.62 
63.93 
32.23 
75.13 
59.03 
ECU 
9.73 
59.99 
76.98 
Yen 
4.68 
27.60 
61.03 
Clearly, the situations differ from country to country, either with 
regards to the speed of the saving propensity fall or to the speed of the 
debt weight increase. 
Further on in the first of this paper, these situations will be 
analysed one by one for 11 countries, but it can be foreseen that even 
though the group taken into consideration includes countries different 
from each other for dimension and inner characteristics (Brazil and 
Bolivia, for example, or Venezuela and Uruguay), all of them, in the 
last ten years, showed an increase of their external debt in very similar 
conditions: reduced growth, expanding public deficit, ever higher 
inflation, increasing weakness of their national currency with a similar 
increasing outflow of capital. 
According to J.D. Sachs ([27], p. 12) these effects have been 
favoured, towards the end of the 1970s, by expansive fiscal policies 

Saving and External Debt in Latin-American countries 
171 
adopted by the different countries, together with exchange rate 
policies tending to keep the national money overvalued without 
constraints on conversion between domestic and foreign currency. 
The private sector was thus stimulated to convert into dollars its 
financial activities expressed in national money, and to place them in 
the international market, especially in the United States. As a conse-
quence, Central Banks have been forced to run into debt in order to 
attempt to rebuild the level of their reserves. 
Such savings re-allocations, well-known in literature as "capital 
flights", will therefore be at the origin of money disequilibrium in 
these countries and of the many negative consequences which fol-
lowed. 
Various studies have been carried out to quantify this phenom-
enon (E.A. Cardoso- R. Dornbusch [2]; D.R. Lessard and J. William-
son [21]; M. Deppler - M. Williamson [8]; S. Erbe [12]) which, 
according to Deppler-Williamson has been the reason for the outflow 
of 22, 6, 25 and 21 billions of dollars from Argentina, Brazil, Mexico 
and Venezuela respectively during the years 197 6-1982. 
The discussion on the methods by which such evaluations have 
been carried out exceed the purpose of our paper. We can however 
notice that recently, in order to control the "capital flight" in the most 
hard hit countries, the practice of artificial exchange systems which 
had been followed by many until the beginning of the '80s has been 
abandoned, and on the other hand, new policies have been adopted, 
aimed to provide the free competiveness of trade flows and the 
improvement of exports. 
Following the indications in the programs of adjustment sug-
gested by the IMF (M. Khan - M. Knight [IS], [16], 1989), Brazil, 
Mexico, Venezuela and Argentina have in fact let their national money 
devaluate and some active trade balances occur, aiming to partially 
offset the debt service payments. 
1.2 Interest Rates, Exchange Rates and Growth 
As shown by the System of National Accounts, when net exports 
are positive a net transfer of real resources from one country abroad 

172 
Michele Bagella - Martino Lo Cascio 
occurs which influences negatively investments, S -
EX = I. Such 
transfers deteriorate the size of accumulation in developing countries, 
which, on the other hand, should be stimulated with positive net 
imports, S + MX = I. 
Therefore, if the exchange rate re-adjustment policies have 
determined less favourable conditions to capital flight, at the same 
time they determined, in the short run, a slow-down in economic 
growth. 
Moreover, it must be remembered that the 1980s have been years 
of recovery for the industrialized countries. The increased profitability 
of investments in the OECD area, together with the increase of 
current account disequilibria within the area itself, have contributed 
to drastic growth of interest rates. 
Latin-American countries have thus found more difficult and 
demanding to supply the necessary capital to cover the debt service 
for the part exceeding the flow of net exports. 
In addition, high interest rates have made investments so difficult 
(E. Phelps [25]; C. Reynolds [26]), that the investment income rate 
has been progressively declining after 1982. 
If, therefore, the devaluation of national money has helped to 
create balances of trade, counterbalanced by new international finan-
cial conditions, it has not been a good enough incentive to stimulate 
recovery. 
In this respect, we must add that the adjustment programs 
suggested by the IMP or by the World Bank (V. Corbo et AI. [6]; R. 
Dornbusch [10]) have never accepted the idea of a strict relationship 
between stabilization and growth. On the contrary, it has been held 
that stabilization, however economically and socially expensive, must 
be a first necessary step to be taken successfully in the route to 
growth, and it is not by change that "adjustment programs" have 
always included a mix of interventions both on the demand and on the 
supply side (M. Khan and M. Knight, 1989). 
Among the conditions of stabilization, the re-establishment of 
positive real interest rate conditions has always been considered 
essential to facilitate a trend inversion in the creation of saving, and 
through it, of investment. 

Saving and External Debt in Latin-American countries 
173 
According to Dornbusch [10], there is no empirical evidence 
proving that this phenomenon occurred during the 1980s in those 
countries where real interest rates became positive. In fact real saving 
formation to meet investments need rate conditions; but the last ones 
need adequate conditions of profitability to the rates itself. 
To recreate conditions of profitability in those countries which 
have suffered from serious disequilibrium is not easy. History suggests 
that when the situation has particularly deteriorated as a consequence 
of war, destructions or prolonged crisis, to restore those conditions 
means to recreate confidence so that optimistic expectations take the 
place of pessimistic ones to boost investments. But history also teaches 
that such an inversion of tendency may only occur when from an 
international economic cooperation there arise some forms of interven-
tion coherent with the given conditions and capable also, as for the 
institutional novelties, to change the behaviour of entrepreneurs. 
This has been the experience of the Marshall Plan in Europe: and 
this might be in Latin America a resolution of intervention capable to 
stop the capital flight and to encourage the return abroad of Latin-
American capital. 
It is not easy to study this remedy, and maybe not very realistic, 
even though some proposals, as that to assign a GNP quota of the 
industrialized countries to developing countries, are currently being 
taken into consideration by governments and observers (M. Bagella 
[1]). 
The conclusions of this study carry out some further considera-
tions about this particular matter. 
1.3. The New Diagram of the "Vicious Circle" 
of Depression for Latin-American Countries 
Until such conditions are created, high interest rates and low 
profitability will continue therefore to be binding and, together with 
the debt burden, they will make recovery much slower, even in the 
presence of an average inflation rate fall in these countries. 
Thus the depression which characterized the may '80s persist 
during the '90s in Latin America. 

174 
Michele Bagella - Martino Lo Cascio 
We can better emphasize this point by recalling the following 
identities from the national accounts: 
(1.1) 
S =I+ EX 
(1.2) 
EX+ SRF= CU 
where S stands for saving, I for investment, EX for net export, SRF for 
factors' income balance, CU for current balance. 
If, according to (1.2), net exports are positive and the rest of 
income transfers from factors is negative, if there are no unbalances in 
current accounts (CV = 0), we shall have EX = SRF. 
In this case, according to (1. 1 ): 
(1.3) 
S- SRF= I 
investment will be thus influenced not only by saving but also by 
factors income transfer balance (R. Dornbusch [ 1 0]). 
If transfers consist of interest on external debt from (3), we can 
see that the higher the interest outstanding, given saving, the smaller 
the investment. If we divide (3) by the income Y, we get: 
(1.4) 
s 
SRF 
I 
----=-
y 
y 
y 
which indicates how the investment income ratio depends on the 
propensity to save and on the incidence of external debt interest on 
income. 
According to the development theory, developing countries are 
inclined to a low propensity to save following a low growth rate of the 
GOP. This low growth rate is low investment rate not only due to the 
low saving rate, but also due to the debt service payments. 
Therefore, if we suppose that the entire of the income balance 
from factors depends on the international interest rate, the higher the 
rate, the more reduced investment rate and, consequently, growth 
rate will result, other conditions being the same. 

Saving and External Debt in Latin-American countries 
175 
The theory of the vicious circle of depression, based on the 
savings-income relation, may thus be integrated with the following 
diagram: 
International interest rates, IIR, influence all transfers, and that 
of SRFI Y ratio. Such transfers, by taking away resources from 
investments, influence negatively the rate of accumulation II Y which 
in turn influences negatively income growth rate and, consequently, 
the propensity to save SlY. In other words, IIR -
international 
interest rate- increases, SRFIY increases, flY decreases, Y decre-
ases, and therefore SlY does likewise. 
The diagram, emphasizes the role of financial variables, interest 
rate and external debt upon the levels of real variables and their 
relationships for countries -
like Latin American ones -
that have an 
enormous external debt with respect to their activity level. 
1.4 The National Cases 
A first check of the diagram can be perfomed by means of the 
data in the following table. They refer to saving and investment 
propensity, to the quota of factors income balance upon GNP, to 
GNP, growth rate, to the incidence of debt on GNP for 3 periods 
(1970-1974, 1975-1980, 1981-1985) and 11 countries (Argentina, 
Bolivia, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Ecuador, Mexico, Paraguay, Peru, 
Uruguay and Venezuela). 
The data are taken from IMP and expressed in current dollars, 
while GNP growth rate have been estimated by referring to constant 

176 
Michele Bagella - Martino Lo Cascio 
values expressed in national money. The chosen dates find a broad 
correspondence with the 3 phases of development cycle occurred in 
Latin-American economies, that is to say, before, during and after the 
increase in the oil price. 
We did not consider "Latin-American" countries as a whole, since 
we believe that the differences among single countries would have 
reduced it to a meaningless compound. Thus, we dealt with each 
country's situation, showing not only the average of the 3 single 
periods, but also the yearly evolution between 1967 and 1987 in a 
diagram reported in the Appendix including, for each country the 
average propensities to save and invest, and the weight of factors 
income balance. 
The following indicators refer to: SlY, propensity to save; 1/Y, 
propensity to invest; SRF/Y, quota of factors' income balance; Y, 
growth rate of GNP; ED/Y, incidence of external debt over GNP. 
The first 3 relations have been obtained according to the fo-
llowing national accountings identities: 
(1.5) 
SRF 
CU - (E - M) 
y 
y 
where CU is the current balance of the balance of payments; 
(1.6) 
S 
ID +(E-M) 
y 
y 
where ID represents internal investments, E exports, M imports. 
1.4.1 Argentina 
The evolution of Argentinian economy is summed up in the 
synthesis table reported. As we can see, during the periods 1970-1974 
and 197 5-1980 the average propensities to save and invest remained 
high in presence of high growth rates, between 6% and 7%. Transfers 
have been quite low, a little over 1% of the GNP, as well as the debt. 

SUMMARY TABLE 
(percentage variations of some remarkable variables in Latin-American countries) 
Years 
I 
Argentina 1 DOuv•a 1 1uazu 
I 
\,IWe 
1 ... ,Oiomma 1 =uauo.- 1 MeJU<:o 1 r.sr.oguay 1 
re.-u 
1 u.-uguay 1 venezuela 
~ 
~ 
.... 
Y" (GNP annual average percentage-fluctuation-rate at 1980 prices) 
;:$ 
0\1 
1970-1974 .......... I 6,11 I 5.74 I 11.60 I 0.65 I 6.621 
12.85 I 6.781 
6.81 I 6.00 I 0.50 I 4.50 
1:1 
;:$ 
1974-1980 ........ 
1.10 
2.09 
6.60 
3.80 
4.84 
6.35 
6.48 
9.83 
1.79 
4.73 
3.79 
1:1.. 
1980-1985 ........ 
-2.22 
-2.09 
1.70 
-0.39 
2.25 
2.16 
1.62 
2.27 
-0.55 
-2.99 
-1.29 
~ 
.... 
(I> 
SRFIY (rate of net transfer abroad of factor income over GNP) 
~ 
1:1 
1970-1974 ........ 1-1.131-0.041-1.731-1.671 -1.931 -2.771 -0.471-1.591-0.341 -0.041-4.02 -
1974-1980 ........ 
-1.44 
3.05 
-2.58 
-3.58 
-1.62 
-3.91 
-1.55 
2.2 
-0.48 
-1.05 
-0.42 
~ 
1980-1985 
••••• 0 
•• 
-7.34 
6.02 
-5.70 
-8.79 
-4.35 
-6.92 
-5.71 
2.78 
-2.76 
-2.44 
-2.44 
l:r 
.... ... 
SlY (average propensity to save) 
;:$ 
~ 
1970-1974 
• 
• 
• 
0 
0 ••• I 
23.391 
30.30 I 23.341 
14.921 
19.90 I 23.351 
19.031 
17.55 I 18.391 
10.971 42.41 
.... ... 
1974-1980 ........ 
27.56 
23.90 
23.71 
17.26 
22.69 
26.27 
23.20 
22.12 
18.65 
14.48 
26.06 
;:$ 
1980-1985 
•••• 0 ••• 
20.19 
8.29 
23.21 
14.34 
19.53 
25.76 
29.81 
19.11 
28.03 
13.71 
26.32 
;i... 
~ 
(I> 
!DIY (home investment over GNP) 
""I 
~r 
1970-1974 ........ I 
22.241 
27.691 26.491 
16.25 I 21.08 I 23.591 
21.36 I 18.71 I 20.691 
12.00 I 31.39 
;:$ 
1974-1931 
• 
0 
0 ••••• 
26.31 
26.50 
26.08 
19.96 
20.35 
28.59 
25.50 
29.43 
21.38 
18.93 
36.15 
(') 
1980-1985 
0. 
0 
0 
0 
0 
... 
16.61 
6.15 
20.83 
17.51 
21.77 
22.40 
25.19 
27.63 
29.50 
14.40 
20.57 
0 
$: 
;:$ .... 
EDIY (external debt over GNP) 
""I 
~-
1970-1974 ........ 
7.40 I 30.291 
10.95 I 19.61 I 13.361 
9.731 
8.991 
9.541 20.441 
10.141 
4.68 
1974-1980 ........ 
18.35 
52.24 
24.43 
46.38 
20.64 
39.99 
26.20 
19.55 
41.85 
19.62 
27.50 
1980-1985 
........ 0 
78.35 
75.00 
55.11 
114.70 
40.51 
76.98 
63.93 
32.23 
75.13 
59.03 
61.03 -
Source: based on IMF data. 
-..J 
-..J 

178 
Michele Bagella - Martino Lo Cascio 
Years 
SlY 
1970-1974 ...... 
23.39 
1974-1980 ...... 
27.56 
1980-1985 ...... 
20.19 
Legend: 
ARGENTINA 
(percentage values) 
/DIY 
SRFIY 
22.24 
+ 1.13 
26.81 
-1.44 
16.61 
-7.34 
YIY 
= GNP growth rate at 1980 prices 
SlY 
= average propensity to save 
SRFIY = rate of net transfer abroad of factor income over GNP 
/DIY 
= home investment against income 
EDIY = external debt/GNP 
Source: based on IMF data. 
}'"' 
6.1 
1.1 
-3.0 
TABLE 1 
EDIY 
7.4 
18.35 
78.35 
Since 1981 instead, we witnessed an inversion of the tendency: 
GNP growth rate is now negative, the incidence of factors' income 
transfers has increased from 1 to 7% of the GDP, while the propensity 
to invest has lost 10 points in percentage. 
GRAPH 1 
ARGENTINA 
0,35 
0,3 
0,25 
,e. 
-~ 
0,2 . 
~ 
Q. 
0,15 
r 
0,1 
~ 0,05 
ot-~======~~--~==~--------~ 
v...--------.. .... ____ .. 
--.,_ 
-0,05 
D SlY 
Years 
+ /DIY 
o SRF/Y 

Saving and External Debt in Latin-American countries 
179 
The "vicious circle" of depression that has led to explosive 
inflation and the serious capital flight mentioned above has thus 
started. 
This disequilibrium has not yet been overcome also because the 
increase of international -interest rates occurred at the beginning of the 
past ten years does not seem likely to invert its tendency. If we 
consider that the debt weight has reached 78% of the GNP, the 
reduction of the service weight appears as a compulsory means to 
escape from the situation described before. 
1.4.2 Bolivia 
In Bolivia, unlike, Argentina, the negative cycle began in the 
second period. 
In fact, the years of the oil boom have not been absolutely 
negative for Argentina, since the investment rate remained high until 
the end of the 1970s (R. Dornbusch - V. Carlos de Pablo [10]). In 
those years the OECD area was particularly depressed, and the 
profitability rates for investments rathes low. International saving, 
therefore, had to find its location in the developing countries, among 
them in the Latin-American area, and within it also in Argentina. 
The oil boom years have not been positive for Bolivia. Being a 
small country, with few resources and thus not very attractive for 
foreign investments, Bolivia witnessed the fall of its growth rate, 
Years 
SlY 
1970-1974 ...... 
30.3 
1974-1980 
••• 0 
•• 
23.9 
1980-1985 
• 
0 •••• 
8.2 
Source: based on IMF data. 
Legend: see table I. 
BOUVIA 
(percentage values) 
!DIY 
SRFIY 
27.6 
-0.04 
26.5 
-3.05 
6.1 
-6.02 
TABLE 2 
}"' 
EDIY 
5.7 
30.2 
3.0 
52.2 
-2.0 
7.5 

180 
Michele Bagella - Martino Lo Cascio 
increase of interest burden, reduction of both savings and investment 
propensities (J.A. Morales and J.D. Sachs [22]). 
During the 1980s its economy entered the wayward spiral of 
depression with a negative fall of the interest rate similarly to Argent-
ina, and a GNP 7 5% increase of the debt. 
GRAPH 2 
BOUVIA 
0,5,----------------------, 
a SlY 
1.4.3 Brazil 
Years 
+/DIY 
0 SRF!Y 
Like Bolivia, Brazil witnessed a fall of the growth rate in the three 
periods under study, but only during the third one a decrease of the 
investment rate, with a more or less stable propensity to savings, was 
noticed. 
As some pointed out (E. Cardoso and A. Fishlow [2]), the first oil 
shock hit Brazil at its highest growth. Being an industrializing 
country, with thriving transport and automobile industries, it was 
stopped by the increase of the oil price and suffered a serious decline 
in the development rate. Debt reached 55% of the GDP during the 

Years 
1970-1974 
1974-1980 
1980-1985 
Saving and External Debt in Latin-American countries 
181 
SlY 
...... 
23.3 
...... 
23.7 
...... 
23.2 
BRAZIL 
(percentage values) 
/DIY 
SRFIY 
26.4 
-1.73 
26.0 
-2.58 
20.8 
-5.7 
TABLE 3 
Y" 
EDIY 
11.6 
10,9 
6.0 
24.4 
1.7 
55.1 
Source: based on IMP data. 
Legend: see table I. 
1980s and income transfers from factors, SRF/Y, rose to about 6% of 
the GOP. So, the investment rate fall was the natural consequence of 
the disequilibrium caused by the debt increase, and at the same time 
the growth rate dropped to 1. 7%. 
Though relatively less negative than Argentina's, Brazil's cycle 
during the 80s presents similar characteristics to those described for 
its neighbour country. 
GRAPH 3 
BRAZIL 
0,35....-----------------------, 
0,3 
-~p~ 
:. 0,15 
t 
0,1 
.g: 
0,05 
or=~~~==~==~--------~ 
-0,05 
_-r 
------
-0,1+-,--~~-,-r-r-~~,-~~~-,-r-~~,-~~ 
67 68 69 70 71 72 73 74 75 76 77 78 79 80 81 82 83 84 85 86 87 
Years 
o SlY 
-to /DIY 
o SRF/Y 

182 
Michele Bagella - Martino Lo Cascio 
1.4.4 Chile 
Of the countries considered for this study, Chile records the 
lowest growth during the years in question. We must however notice 
that notwithstanding this fact, during the three periods the investment 
rate has been higher than the propensity to save. A possible explan-
ation could be attributed to the control of capital exports carried out 
in this country, which might have helped internal investments (Krug-
man [19]). 
Years 
SlY 
1970-1974 ...... 
14.9 
1974-1980 ...... 
17.2 
1980-1985 ...... 
14.3 
Source: based on IMF data. 
Legend: see table 1. 
0,3 
0,25 
0,2 
·i 
0,15 
c:: i 
0,1 
r 
0,05 
0 
~ 
-0,05 
-0,1 
CHILE 
(percentage values) 
/DIY 
SRFIY 
16.2 
-1.57 
19.9 
-3.58 
17.5 
-8.79 
CHILE 
TABLE 4 
}"' 
EDIY 
0.6 
19.61 
3.8 
46.38 
-0.39 
114.7 
GRAPH 4 
- 0,15 -1-....---.--.-....,..---.---,.---.---,---.--.-.--,.--.,.--..,..--r--r--r--r--r-i 
67 68 69 70 71 72 73 74 75 76 77 78 79 80 81 82 83 84 85 86 87 
a SlY 
Years 
+/DIY 
o SRFIY 

Saving and External Debt in Latin-American countries 
183 
1.4. 5 Colombia 
Among the countries we have considered, Colombia presents a 
relatively more balanced situation. In this case the spiral of depression 
doesn't seem to have caused devastating effects as in Argentina. First 
of all, during the oil boom the growth rate continued to be high, as 
much as during the '80s. 
Savings and investments remained high also during the '80s, even 
though the debt reached 50% of the GOP. 
Years 
SlY 
1970-1974 ...... 
19.9 
1974-1980 ...... 
22.6 
1980-1985 ...... 
19.5 
Source: based on IMF data. 
Legend: see table I. 
! 
•• 
0,05 
:;:: < 
COLOMBIA 
(percentage values) 
/DIY 
SRFIY 
21.0 
-1.9 
20.3 
-1.6 
21.7 
-4.3 
COLOMBIA 
TABLE 5 
yo 
EDIY 
6.5 
13.3 
3.8 
20.6 
2.2 
40.5 
GRAPH 5 
0+-------------------------~----------------4 
~~~,, 
-0,05 
·,.--
- 0,1 +--r--r---.-...,--r--r--r--r--r---..........,.....-r-..---r--r--r--r-"""T"""""'T""-1 
67 68 69 70 71 72 73 74 75 76 77 78 79 80 81 82 83 84 85 86 87 
Year 
g SlY 
... /DIY 
o SRFIY 

184 
Michele Bagella - Martino Lo Cascio 
1.4.6. Ecuador 
The macro-economic picture relative to this country may be read 
by starting to consider the debt which went from a GDP 9% between 
1970-197 4 to nearly 77% after ten years. 
The effects of such growth have been felt especially during the 
1980s through a consistent 7% increase of transfers and the fall of the 
investment rate. During the oil boom, 1975-1980, this country took 
Years 
SlY 
1970-1974 ...... 
23.3 
1974-1980 
•• 0 
0 
•• 
26.2 
1980-1985 ...... 
25.7 
Source: based on IMP data. 
Legend: see table 1. 
ECUADOR 
(percentage values) 
/DIY 
SRFIY 
23.6 
-2.7 
28.5 
-3.9 
22.4 
-6.9 
ECUADOR 
TABLE 6 
Y" 
EDIY 
12.8 
9.7 
6.3 
39.9 
2.1 
76.9 
GRAPH 6 
0,35,....----------------------., 
0,1 
t 
~ 0,05 
a SlY 
Years 
+/DIY 
oSRF!Y 

Saving and External Debt in Latin-American countries 
185 
advantage of the investments carried out until then to start production 
in some fields discovered in its territory. This must certainly have 
contributed to determine larger conditions of profitability for internal 
and international investments where, in that period, the rate has been 
higher than the propensity to save. 
On the other hand, during the '80s another difference arose 
between the two rates; this difference is an indicator of the growth of 
the debt burden over GOP, and it is coherent with the proposed 
outline. 
1.4. 7 Mexico 
Mexico is one of the most indebted countries of Latin America, 
but it is certainly among those that witnessed a very strong acceler-
ation of the debt growth, which went from less than 9% during 
1970-1974 to over 63% during 1981-1985. 
The growth of its propensity to savings during the first five years 
of the 1980s is especially striking, in the presence of a constant 
investment rate and of a drastic fall of the growth rate which during 
this period has lost an average of five points as to the previous one. 
During the oil boom Mexico shared with Venezuela and Ecuador 
the advantages fo a producing country and, as in those countries, the 
investment rate between 1975 and 1980 was higher than the savings 
rate. However, during the '80s, as these investments were strongly 
supported by the international bank system and by dollar financings, 
this country, like all others, was forced into the spiral of debt and 
interests. 
Years 
SlY 
1970-1974 ...... 
19.0 
1974-1980 
• 
0 
0. 0 
0 
23.2 
1980-1985 ...... 
29.8 
Source: based on IMP data. 
Legend: see table 1. 
MEXICO 
(percentage values) 
/DIY 
SRFIY 
21.3 
-0.4 
25.5 
-1.5 
25.1 
-5.7 
TABLE 7 
Y" 
EDIY 
6.7 
8.9 
6,4 
26.2 
1.6 
63.9 

186 
Michele Bagella - Martino Lo Cascio 
GRAPH 7 
MEXICO 
0,35 
0,3 
0,25 
·i 
0,2 
i 
0,15 
t 
0,1 
l 0,05 
0 
I 
/ 
-0,05 
\ 
___-'-
i 
\,,/ 
~ 
- 0,1 +-..,....."'"T"""""T"'--r""""'r......,..._,.--,--,-r--r--r-..,.-"'"T"""-T--r-....--r--r--1 
67 68 69 70 71 72 73 74 75 76 77 78 79 80 81 82 83 84 85 86 87 
a SlY 
1.4 .8 Venezuela 
Years 
i' IDlY 
o SRF/Y 
During the '80s, after the fall of the oil price, this country 
witnessed the growth of its external debt from 4% to over 60% of the 
GDP. The growth rate has become negative, -1.2%, the transfers 
which remained low during the '70s increased again during the '80s, 
Years 
SlY 
1970-1974 ...... 
42.4 
1974-1980 ...... 
36.0 
1980-1985 ...... 
26.8 
Source: based on IMP data. 
Legend: see table 1. 
VENEZUELA 
(percentage values) 
IDlY 
SRF/Y 
31.3 
-4.0 
36.1 
-0.4 
20.6 
-2.4 
TABLE 8 
}"' 
ED/Y 
4.6 
4.5 
27.5 
3.7 
61.0 
-1.2 

Saving and External Debt in Latin-American countries 
187 
GRAPH 8 
VENEZUELA 
0,1 
-0,1+-~~-r~~~--~r-~,--r-r~-,~--r-~~~ 
67 68 69 70 71 72 73 74 75 76 77 78 79 80 81 82 83 84 85 86 87 
Years 
0 SlY 
1' /DIY 
o SRF!Y 
the propensity to savings dropped from 42o/o to 26o/o and the invest-
ment rate lost 11 points in percantage. 
An oil producing country during the '20s, Venezuela enjoyed a 
very low inflation, if compared with the other countries of the area, 
during the '70s. In those years its growth was therefore consistent and 
was the reason for the attraction of this country on the international 
capital (M. Bagella, 1985). 
Like the other countries mentioned above, Venezuela witnessed 
depression in more or less the same way: less growth, more debt, 
fewer investments. 
1.4.9 Paraguay, Uruguay and Peru 
Among the countries considered, Paraguay is the least indebted. 
Moreover, in the years of the oil boom, as well as in the following 
ones, it witnessed a positive growth rate. 

188 
Michele Bagella - Martino Lo Cascio 
Years 
SlY 
1970-1974 ...... 
17.5 
1974-1980 
• 
0 •••• 
22.1 
1980-1985 ...... 
19.1 
Source: based on IMF data. 
Legend: see table 1. 
PARAGUAY 
(percentage values) 
/DIY 
SRFIY 
18.7 
-1.5 
29.4 
-2.0 
27.6 
-2.7 
TABLE 9 
}"' 
EDIY 
6.8 
9.5 
9.8 
19.5 
2.2 
32.2 
In fact, the debt in Paraguay reached 32% in 1981-1985, while it 
was 9010 in 1970-1974, and its growth rate decreased to 2% from 6% 
before the oil boom. 
The propensity to savings during the whole period remained fairly 
close to 20%, while during the last period there was a fall of the 
investment rate. It should be also noted that Paraguay, among the 11 
countries studied, has registered a positive balance of income trans-
·i 
8. 
~ 
~ 
t 
~ 
GRAPH 9 
PARAGUAY 
0,35 
0,3 
0,25 
0,2 
0,15-
0,1 
0,05 
-~05+-~-r~~~~.-r-~~~-r~~--r-~~~-r~~ 
67 68 69 70 71 72 73 74 75 76 77 78 79 
a SlY 
Years 
+/DIY 
80 81 82 83 84 85 86 87 
o SRF!Y 

Saving and External Debt in Latin-American countries 
189 
fers from factors from 1975 to 1980, as well as during the following 
years. 
Uruguay and Peru, during the same periods, have registered 
negative rates in the income balance from factors, due to the growth 
of the external debt. 
Both countries however, notwithstanding the debt, had a higher 
investment debt, albeit slightly higher, than the savings rate during the 
three periods. 
Years 
SlY 
1970-1974 ...... 
10.9 
1974-1980 ...... 
14.4 
1980-1985 ...... 
13.7 
Source: based on IMP data. 
Legend: see table 1. 
1.4.10 Final Remarks 
URUGUAY 
(percentage values) 
IDlY 
SRF/Y 
12.0 
-0.04 
18.9 
-1.05 
14.4 
-2.44 
TABLE 10 
}"' 
ED!Y 
0.5 
20.4 
-4.7 
41.8 
-3.0 
75.1 
With a few exceptions, it seems that all indicators taken into 
account fit well with the model shown in the previous paragraph. 
The quota of factors' income balance appears as the likeliest 
variable to cause the fall of the investment rate in these countries, in a 
circular process which, through the fall of the GNP growth rate, has 
also influenced the savings rate. The latter however, did not suffer 
drastic reductions in the majority of cases. 
We said before that for such an unvirtuous process a remedy can 
be found by either creating conditions to reduce the debt burden or by 
creating the right conditions to foster new profitability and thus 
investments (Plan for Latin America). 
The conclusions of this study will try to make these points clear, 
after showing the long-term consequences as for savings, investment 
and growth in Argentina and Brazil, and after considering some 
alternative development routes for both countries. 

190 
Michele Bagella - Martino Lo Cascio 
2. - Long-Term Problems and Perspectives: 
a Quantitative Outline 
The indebtedness reached by Latin-American countries at the 
beginning of the 1980s constitutes the most preponderant part of the 
debt of non-OECD countries. 
The ongoing debate on the origin of the foreign debt crisis focuses 
on the following question: is the primary cause of this debt to be 
found in the break of trends which characterized the international 
economic picture or in mistakes in the international economic policies 
of various countries? 
The prevailing opinion finds in the international economic shocks 
the primary cause of such a crisis. W.R. Cline [4] estimates at about 
500 billion dollars the debt increase of the developing countries during 
1973-1982. Half of this sum is "charged" to the oil shocks, one third 
to the 1981-1982 international recession, and the rest to the decline of 
the terms of trade and to the increase of interest rates. C. C. Carvounis 
[3] estimates at 150 billions of dollars the debt increase of the 
developing countries between 1982 and 1986, when the real oil price 
was drastically reduced, while the international economic climate was 
giving signs of recovery and most indebted economies were taking 
strong re-entry measures. Practically, therefore, this further increase 
of indebtedness can only be attributed to the persistence of real 
interest rates much above the real growth. 
In the previous paragraph, the various causes of internal 
economic policy contributing to aggravate the crisis in some Latin-
American countries have been indicated. It must be also noted that, 
according to the prevailing opinion, the evolution of the international 
economic picture -
especially in terms of interest rates -
in the 
predominant cause of indebtedness. However, the indebtedness of the 
developing countries, and in particular of Latin-American countries 
during the 1980s is such a peculiar event that it could be referred to as 
a break of past trends, which finds an equivalent only in the '20s and 
'30s. 
When such changes in the evolution of real and monetary 
economy occur, it may be useful to adopt a long-term method of 
analysis, mainly centred on few and unmistakable structural relations: 

Saving and External Debt in Latin-American countries 
191 
formation of saving, accumulation rate, growth, interaction between 
real flow and international financing activities. 
The analysis is limited to Argentina and Brazil, as representa-
tive for all Latin-American countries (except for the oil-producing 
countries), of both the common problems and the different area 
situations. 
2.1 Some Facts 
The indebtedness of Latin-American countries, in particular 
Argentina and Brazil, is not a new fact; the financing of the investment 
process with resources coming from abroad, together with the "capi-
tal flights", determined, before the 1980 shock, indebtedness quotas 
on GOP between 10 and 30%. However, the 1980s have made an 
important division between two thoroughly different trends. Some 
summary data and diagrams will show the main tendencies. 
Table 11 reports, for Argentina and Brazil respectively, the 
growth rate of GOP USA long-term interest rates (taken as a signifi-
cant proxy of the international interest rates), and the differences in 
debt incidence on GOP for some relevant periods of time. 
TABLE 11 
Years 
EVOLUTION OF INTERNATIONAL CONDITIONS 
AND OF THE AVERAGE REAL INTEREST RATES: 
GROWTH RATE OF THE GROSS PRODUCT 
AND DIFFERENCES IN THE DEBT INCIDENCE ON GDP 
FOR ARGENTINA AND BRAZIL 
OCDE 
Argentina 
Brazil 
GDP (1) 
i (2) 
GDP (3) 
D. (DIY) (4) 
GDP (3) 
D. (DIY) (4) 
1970-1974 ........ 
3.7 
-1.8 
6.1 
-18.6 
1974-1980 ........ 
2.7 
-1.9 
1.0 
1980-1985 ........ 
2.5 
7.2 
-2.2 
(I) Annual average growth rate of GDP in OECD countries. 
(2) Long-term real interest rates in the USA. 
18.1 
64.6 
12.2 
6.9 
1.7 
(3) Annual average growth rate of the gross domestic product at 1980 prices. 
5.9 
12.1 
16.8 
(4) Variations of the percentage of debt Don GDP between the final and the initial year of the 
period. 

192 
Michele Bagella - Martino Lo Cascio 
The two periods, 1970-1974 and 1980-1985, clearly show the 
relevance of international macro-economic conditions upon the 
growth rates of GDP and debt of both countries. In the first period, 
high growth rates of OECD economies together with negative real 
interest rates gave rise to a positive growth of Argentina which, during 
these years, even reduced indebtedness, and defined the conditions 
for a real economic boom in Brazil that witnessed only on physio-
logical increase of its indebtedness. 
On the contrary, in the second period, high real interest rates and 
international conditions recovering only after 1983, go with a slack of 
activity level in Argentina and a dramatic reduction of Brazil's growth. 
In the same period the external debt reached two thirds of Argentina's 
GDP and about half of Brazil's. 
The years in between show a relatively smaller incidence of the 
international growth on the growth of the two Latin-American coun-
tries, while the role of the interest rate appears to be crucial. 
In the Graphs 1 a and 1 b time drifts of USA long-term interests 
and the incidence of debt GDP for both countries are compared. If we 
consider the two series on the a positive relation they show between 
USA interest rates /NT and the indebtedness measures DY. This 
situation is much more explicit for Argentina than it is for Brazil. In 
the former case, the correspondence between the two series can be 
verified even in the short run, while for Brazil it is more a long-term 
relation. 
During the period 197 5-1982 considerable differences in the 
current balances of trade and payments occurred among the single 
OECD countries, as well as remarkable fluctuations in time of the 
same balances. 
However, if we consider total balances among great economic 
areas, the net credit of oil surplus countries after 1973 was able to 
reflect the current trajectory deficit in the Rest of the World, rather 
than that of OECD countries considered as a whole. 
This fact bears two implications. One, which will be discussed 
further on, is connected with practical balancing of the current and 
capital account position of most industrialized countries within the 
OECD area. Disequilibria within this area will affect -
through 
financial and economic policies- the activity level, inflation and/or 

~ 
Saving and External Debt in Latin-American countries 
193 
ARGENTINA 
15--------------------------------------~oo 
10 
5 
0 
-5 
-10 
DIY 
-.. -, 
' ' ' ' 
I 
II ·~ ------~-----:--
~,I 
,._, 
1•, 
I 
' 
I 
', 
/ 
80 
I~ 
I 
70 
I 
I 
J 
60 
I 
I 
: 
50 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
40 
30 
20 
10 
-15 
0 
10 11 12 73 74 75 76 n 78 79 80 81 82 83 84 85 
BRAZIL 
15 
60 
10 
50 
I 
I 
I 
5 
I 
' 
I 
I 
40 
, 
I 
' , 
0 
' 
I '• 
' ' 
30 
I 
-
I 
-5 
I r 
I 
I 
-10 DIY/ 
20 
... _ ,..," 
-15 
10 
10 11 12 73 74 75 76 n 78 79 80 81 82 83 84 85 
GRAPH la 
GRAPH lb 
~ 
~ 

194 
Michele Bagella - Martino Lo Cascio 
real interest rates, but not credit or indebtedness positions towards 
non-OECD countries. 
The second implication relates to the fact that in the last few 
years, as in the past, adjustments in capital account of the current 
deficit of the developing countries, which are mainly determined by 
the service cost on accumulated debt, have become different. 
On the grounds of a reasonable expectation of drastic reduction 
in the capital inflow during the years to come for Latin-American 
countries, N.H. Leff and K. Sato [20] show how the question of real 
savings formation is becoming crucial for these countries as well as 
the requirement of internal accumulation necessary for their growth. 
The question of saving formation and of long-term accumulation 
rate has a fundamental importance for Latin-American countries, as 
shown in section 1. 
As for Argentina (Table 12 and Graph 2a), it must be emphasized 
that the difference between investment and savings propensities DIFF 
is positive when the real interest rates are very low (1974-1975) or, 
alternatively, when the growth rates of GDP are strongly negative 
(1980-1981). DIFF is negative, when high interest rates are ac-
companied by a steady GDP, or in case of a strong growth of the GDP 
and a substantial stability of the interest rate i. As for Brazil (Table 13 
and Graph 2b), it must be first of all underlined that DIFF is always 
positive except during the years 1981-1985. During the other three 
sub-periods the propensity to invest is much higher than the propen-
TABLE 12 
DIFFERENCE BETWEEN PROPENSITY TO INVEST 
(IN % OF GDP) AND PROPENSITY TO SAVE (IN % OF GDP) 
DIFF, AND DEBT TO GDP RATIO DIY FOR THE 
AVERAGE REAL INTEREST RATES AND GROWTH RATE OF GDP 
(Argentina) 
INT 
GDP 
Diff 
b. (DIY) 
1970-1973 
••••• 0 ••••• 0 
0 
0 
0.5 
4.7 
-2.5<DIFF< I 
-9.8 
1974·1975 
• 
0 ••••••••• 0 
•• 
-6.2 
-2.3 
>I 
11.7 
1976-1979 
• 0. 0 •••••• 0 ••• 
0.1 
2.7 
-5<DIFF< I 
-4.0 
1980-1981 
•• 0 ••• 0. 0 ••• 0 
0 
1,1 
-6.8 
>I 
12.0 
1982-1985 
•••••• 0. 0. 0. 0. 
10.3 
-0.2 
<0 
-2.3 

Saving and External Debt in Latin-American countries 
195 
GRAPH 2a 
ARGENTINA 
0,075 
15 
0,050 
. 
. 
,-.. ~-
--. --' 
10 
0,025 
II\ 
/NT 
5 
DIFF 
0,000 
. ' . 
\ 
. 
,' 
0 INT. 
-0,025 DIFF 
' 
I 
' 
~-
I 
... _ .... 
I 
I 
-5 
-0,050 
I 
v 
' 
I 
. 
I 
' 
I 
' 
i 
-10 
-O,o75 
'I 
) 
-0,100 
-15 
70 
72 
74 
76 
78 
80 
82 
84 
86 
sity to save, due to a combination of low interest rates and lower 
growth rhythm of GOP than the standard levels (1974-1978). When 
interest rates are much lower and GOP growth more sustained 
( 1979-1980), DIFF takes lower values, still remaining positive. 
The behaviour of both countries may be defined as counterintui-
tive, either in the situation of high real interest rates or in the opposite 
TABLE l3 
DIFFERENCE BETWEEN PROPENSITY TO INVEST IN % ON GOP 
AND PROPENSITY TO SAVE IN % OF GOP DIFF, 
AND DEBT TO GOP RATIO DIY 
FOR AVERAGE REAL INTEREST RATES AND GROWTH RATE OF GOP 
(Brazil) 
i 
GDP 
Ditf 
D. (DIY) 
1970-1973 
•••• 0 ••••••••• 
0.5 
13.0 
O<DIFF<2.5 
4.3 
1974-1978 .............. 
-1.5 
6.2 
>2.5 
10.3 
1979-1980 
••••••• 0 
•••••• 
-2.9 
9.1 
O<DIFF<2.5 
1.4 
1981-1985 
• 
0 ••••••••••• 0 
9.2 
3.0 
<0 
16.8 

196 
DIFF. 
0,075 
0,050 
0,025 
0,000 
-0,025 
-0,050 
Michele Bagella - Martino Lo Cascio 
GRAPH 2b 
BRAZIL 
~------------------------------------~15 
DIFF 
/ 
.......... ,.-',~ ..... _ 10 
' 
'"'.., 
I 
/ 
....... ~ 
' 
0 
I 
I 
' 
I 
I 
I 
,._ X/ 
,, 
, 
' 
' 
\ 
i 
'. 
: \ 
\./ 
·-··· '\ 
\I 
) 
5 
0 INT. 
-5 
-10 
-0,075-+-...,...-r----,r--.,...--r-..,...-r....,.-,ro-.,...--r-..,..."""T'-----f" -15 
70 
72 
74 
76 
78 
80 
82 
84 
86 
GRAPH 2c 
USA 
0,04 
15 
0,03 
!'- .. 
10 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
0,02 
DIFF 
I 
5 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
DIFF. 
0,01 
o INT. 
0,00 
-5 
-0,01 
-10 
-0,02 
-15 
70 
72 
74 
76 
78 
80 
82 
84 
86 

Saving and External Debt in Latin-American countries 
197 
GRAPH 3a 
ARGENTINA 
0,075-r-------------------~ 
90 
0,050 
0,025 
DIFF. 
0,000 
-0,025 
-0,050 
---.,~IY 
-0,075 
' ' 
' 
' 
' 
' 
.......... ~' 
, ............ ,' 
' 
·---....................... ,' . 
' . 
. ', 
' 80 
' 
. . ' 
\ , . 
'• 
70 
60 
50 
40 
30 
20 
10 
-0,100 
0 
70 71 72 73 74 75 76 77 78 79 80 81 82 83 84 85 
DIY 
GRAPH 3b 
BRAZIL 
0,075--------------------,_ 
0,050 
0,025 
D/FF. 
0,000 
-0,025 
-0,050 DIY ,'·-•• ,/ 
. 
I 
...... , 
I 
I 
,•--1 
, ..... 
, 
I 
' .. ' 
I 
' , 
,--··-
-
... · ... , 
-
' 
' 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I , , 
I , 
' 
60 
50 
40 
30 
20 
-0,075 
10 
70 71 72 73 74 75 76 77 78 79 80 81 82 83 84 85 
DIY 

198 
Michele Bagella - Martino Lo Cascio 
one. The difference between investment and savings propensities 
seems very little affected by the internal climate. The diversity of such 
situations is clearly evident if we look at the diagram for the United 
States, which was devised in a similar manner (Graph 2c). 
Those findings are further supported by the comparison of the DY 
and DIFF series. Graphs 3a and 3b show a first phase, ending at the 
beginning of the '80s, where minor swings of indebtedness are 
accompanied by more sensible variations of DIFF, but in the same 
direction. The abrupt rise of DY, occurring since 1981, combines 
instead with a drastic reduction of DIFF (during this period of time 
S/ Y becomes higher than // Y), all this being perfectly coherent with 
the relation already observed between /NT and DY. 
2.2 "Developing Countries" for More than 100 Years 
In 1914 the United States was still one of the most indebted 
countries of the world (more than 15% of the total world indebted-
ness); however, during the same period, the USA was also creditor to 
foreign countries for about 8% of the world indebtedness. 
Between 18 7 5 and 1914 the striking development of factor 
mobility, labour and capital, at international level, counterbalanced 
trade growth. As E.A. Cardoso and R. Dornbusch [2] observe in this 
era the position of the United States was gradually changing; one of 
the biggest importers of foreign capital at that time which became a 
large scale exporter. The financial markets had completely forgotten 
the great insolvency of 1839-1842. 
Less striking occurences, but with periods of radical changes in 
their role on the international market of capitals, characterized other 
non-European nations, like New Zealand, Australia and Canada. 
In 1914 Latin-American countries were absorbing about 20% of 
the world indebtedness and their position as net debtors -
except for 
the second world war period -
continued on very high values, 
compared with their level of production. During the 1930s crisis, the 
insolvency of Latin-American countries reached 70-80% and only the 
re-entry due to exports during the war managed to put these countries 
back into the international financial circuit. 

Saving and External Debt in Latin-American countries 
199 
Today Latin-American countries play a more important role in the 
international financial market than in the system of commercial flows. 
In a long-term historical perspective, the area has always showed 
a model of behaviour, as for the wage-consumption-saving circuit, 
similar to that of the more developed countries, while the real 
accumulation and the effects upon growth have made, and still make, 
its economy similar to that of the developing countries. 
Always keeping in mind the enormous differences among single 
countries, we have been brought by these historical events to use the 
term "developing countries for more than 100 years". 
Such peculiarities of the Latin-American model, the situation of 
the debt as well as medium and long-term perspective of the interna-
tional financial market, determine the importance of the capacity of 
internal accumulation, considered as both saving's formation and 
endogenous expansion of the capital stock. 
Economic theory of development suggests various conditions 
enlarging or reducing the adjustment rate of real saving formation to 
the increase of income in the developing countries. N.H. Leff and K. 
Sato [20], in a study aimed to test on a cross-section sample of 21 
Latin-American countries the variability in time of structural para-
meters of the saving functions in a wide range of borater conditions 
obtained substantially inconclusive results. The nature of the data 
used for this study, as well as its method, find us less pessimistic than 
the authors about the plausibility of the hypotheses in literature, at 
least for the obvious fact that a lack of consistency between data, 
estimate and theory, can always be contradicted by a better model 
specification and improved data. 
Still, the availability of data which can be compared among the 
countries is confined to the main aggregates of the formation and 
employment of resources account (of national source and made 
comparable by the World Bank) and to the items the balances of 
payments (IMF source). 
2.3 Consumption Function and Propensity to Save 
The unreliability of data and the fact that the savings or consump-
tion function (as one of either aggregates is the complement to income 

200 
Michele Bagella - Martino Lo Cascio 
of the other) could show similar characteristics, in the long run, to 
those typical of most industrialized countries, we thought of devising a 
function of the propensity to save starting from the estimate of a 
consumption function with a simple specification, by now con-
solidated in the theoretical and empirical literature of the last ten 
years. 
The function is of the kind: 
(2.1) 
c, = J.l + ex, c,_, + Po Y, + p, Yr-1 + e, 
where Ct and Yt represent, respectively, consumption and GDP at 
constant price. The specification (2.1) is compatible with Modigliani's 
life-cycle hypothesis, provided that we submit the estimate to the 
necessary corrections ( 1 ). 
(2.1) thus indicates a dynamic specification of the relation be-
tween income and consumption which, in the light of the number of 
sample points at hand, appears to be sustainable on the grounds of a 
statistical time-series estimate. 
If the variables appearing in (2.1) are expressed in logarithmic 
form, given the steady-growth typical of the traditional development 
models (not verifiable through data but, as a particular case, in the 
model estimates), we may expect that 13 = B (L) A (L) = 1, that is to 
say that long-term income elasticity equals (5), that is that long-term 
average and marginal propensities to consumption equal each other. 
This implies the restriction: 
(2.2) 
ex1 + 13o + p, = 1 
If we put 'Y = 1 -
ex1, (2.1) can be written as: 
(2.3) 
InC,= J.1 + (1 -
y) In Ct-t + 13o In Y, + p, In Yt-t + e, 
(1) (2.1) On the other hand, it can be thought of as the evaluable specification of a 
relation C* = 11 0 + ~0 Y" where C* and Y" are "non-observable" variables of the 
expected consumption and income levels, or of a relation C = 110 + B (L) Y1 being A (L) 
= I -
~ 1 Land B (L) = ~0 + ~ 1 L two polynomials of the first order pointing out the 
relation between G and ct and between n of Yt according to a hypothesis of distributed 
lops. 

Saving and External Debt in Latin-American countries 
201 
and also: 
(2.4) is the well-known ECM version of the consmption function 
proposed by Hendry and others [ 14]. 
It is hard to verify, upon annual data and series of about 20 
points, the restrictions connected with limiting to the first order the 
distributed laps. 
It is possible, however, to test both the significativity of relation 
(2.1) and its consistency with the data of the stricter specification (2. 4) 
(i.e. of restrictions (2.2) ). 
If the restrictions are accepted, j3o represents the short-term 
elasticity of consumption to income, while 'Y indicates the adjustment 
rate of elasticity to current income to the expected one, yin Yt -
l!Ct 
-
1 the correction factor bringing the growth trajectory of long-term 
consumptions back to its equilibrium route. Equally, in steady-growth 
situations, we shall have: 
(2.5) 
Ct 
dC 
dY 
ln--=-=-
Ct-t 
C 
Y 
so that we can define the parameters: 
(2.6) 
PMC = exp { ( -
~ + (1 -
13o) d :) I 'Y} 
indicating as many values fo constant average and marginal propen-
sities to consumptions, with equal income growth rates, which differ 
when long-term steady growth varies. 
The values PMS = 1 -
PMC represent the correspondent values 
of average and marginal propensity to savings constant with equal 
steady growth rates, but variable according to different long-term 
growth rates. 

202 
Michele Bagella - Martino Lo Cascio 
2.4 Model for the Explanation 
of Long-Term Accumulation Rate 
The adopted model is based upon a simple approach connected 
with the international theory of economic development. Investment is 
considered here as an accumulation process towards the desired level 
of the capitaVoutput ratio. The current quota It N, of investment 
upon GDP is therefore a function of the current growth rate of output 
Y. 
The conditions imposed by the international framework or by the 
economic policy, together with social strictness, may bind the rate at 
which the current propensity to invest adjusts itself at the desired 
level. For these reasons the model can be specified on the grounds of a 
partial adjustment process, by introducing the term. 
The estimated specification is therefore: 
(2.7) 
I, 
A Y, 
Ir-t 
-
= ao + a1 -- + a2 -- + e, 
Y, 
Yr-t 
Yr-t 
where we expect 0 < a2 < 1 and where K = 1 -
a represents the 
adjustment rate of the current propensity to the desired capitaVout-
put ratio. 
In the hypothesis of steady growth: 
(2.8) 
I 
y 
CZo 
at 
---+---
1 -
a2 
1 -
a2 
dY 
y 
The higher the level of K, the lower the growth of investment 
requirement for product unit, when the rate of income increment 
increases. In a consolidated economy, the heavier the weight of 
depreciation with respect to the creation of new productive capacity 
and the smaller the reduction of the marginal efficiency of capital, the 
greater the importance of an internal economic progress of the 
employed factors with respect to the scale economies feasible with a 
higher accumulation volume. 

Saving and External Debt in Latin-American countries 
203 
2.5 Estimates 
The models (2.1), (2.4) and (2. 7) have been estimates by single 
equations with the method ordinary least squares together with the 
method of maximum probability and including, in the latter case, 
closing relations and import-export functions which will be described 
further on. 
The two equations of the estimated model for these analyses are: 
(2.9) 
( 
Y, 
Yr-1) 
C, = Cr-1 exp 
~ + P1 ln-- + 01 ln--
Yr-1 
Cr-1 
TABLE 14 
Argentina 
Brazil 
value 
test t 
value 
test t 
11 . . . . . . . . . . . . 
-0,09 
-2,52 
11 ............ 
-0,08 
-3,92 
Po· · · · · · · · · · · · 
0,71 
3,69 
Po· · · · · · · · · · · · 
0,77 
3,85 
& 
• 
• 
• 
• 
0 •••• 0 
•• 
0,45 
2,61 
& 0. 0 
•• 0 
0 
•• 0 
•• 
0,39 
3,77 
If-
• 
• 
• 
• 
0 ••••• 
0,96 
If-
••••• 0 •••• 
0,99 
D.W. 
0 •••••• 0 
1,42 
D.W. 
0. 0 ••••• 
2,01 
(2.10) 
Yt- Yt-1 
PM!, = a1 
+ a2 PMlt- 1 
Yr-1 
Argentina 
Brazil 
value 
test t 
value 
test t 
a! ............ 
0,25 
2,97 
a! ..•....•.... 
0,32 
3,18 
a2 .........••. 
0,95 
55,4 
a2 ............ 
0,88 
33,1 
If-
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
0 
0,91 
If-
••• 0 •••••• 
0,93 
D.W. . . . . . . . . 
1,70 
D.W. ........ 
2,50 
The LR test performed on the estimate of (2.1) in logarithmic 
form, and of (2.4), confirms the consistency with the data of restric-
tion (2.8), both for Brazil and Argentina. However, the usual caution 
about the quantitative instruments used and the consequent results 
must be put for our findings are aimed at quantifying an argument of 
a mainly qualitative kind. 

204 
Michele Bagella - Martino Lo Cascio 
Tables 15 and 16 show the theoretical values for average propen-
sity to save and long term accumulation rate for different hypothetical 
values of economic growth. 
J1.X.. 
y 
1.5 
2.5 
3.5 
4,5 
5.5 
J1.X.. 
y 
2.5 
4 
5.5 
7 
8.5 
TABLE 15 
AVERAGE PROPENSITY TO SAVE 
AND AVERAGE INVESTMENT REQUIREMENTS 
FOR LONG TERM GROWTH RATES OF INCOME 
(Argentina) 
PMS 
PM/ 
•• 0 •••••••••••• 0. 0 ••• 0 •••••••• 
0.2024 
0.0823 
•••• 0 •••••• 0 ••• 0. 0 
0 
0 ••• 0 •••• 0 
0 
0.2074 
0.1371 
•••• 0 0. 0 ••• 0 •••••••••••••••••• 
0.2124 
0.1920 
••••• 0 
0 •••••••••••• 0. 0. 0 
0 •••• 0 
0.2175 
0.2468 
•• 0 ••• 0 ••••••••••• 0 •••• 0 
•• 0 ••• 
0.2222 
0.3017 
TABLE 16 
AVERAGE PROPENSITY TO SAVE (PMS) 
AND AVERAGE INVESTMENT REQUIREMENTS (PM/) 
FOR TERM GROWTH RATES OF INCOME 
(Brazil) 
PMS 
PM/ 
0. 0 
•• 0 
•• 0 •••••••• 0. 0 
0 
0 •••••••• 
0.2045 
0.665 
••••••• 0 
•• 0 
0 •••••••••••• 0 0. 0 
•• 
0.2086 
0.1064 
0 ••• 0 •••••••••••• 0. 0 ••••• 0 •• 0. 
0.2127 
0.1463 
••••••••••• 0 
••• 0 
•• 0 
•• 0 •••••••• 
0.2167 
0.1862 
••••••• 0 
•• 0. 0 •• 0 
0 ••••••••••••• 
0.2206 
0.2261 
Graphs from 4a to 4d show the continuous of PMS and PMI 
trajectories for the two countries. Argentina, in the absence of 
external debt, shows an equilibrium growth rate equal to 3.8% (with 
this value, accumulation rate equals savings rate and the current 
balance is in equilibrium). Brazil, in the same hypothetical situation, 
has an 8.2% growth rate. 

Saving and External Debt in Latin-American countries 
205 
GRAPH 4a 
ARGENTINA 
0,35 
0,30 
0,25 
0,20 
.,-" 
/ 
,.,"' 
0,15 
;" 
PMS* 
/ 
---·--··--·--
-·-J··--··-----·-----;-;~------··---·--------
0,10 
;"/ 
,"' 
, 
0,05 
.;"' 
/ 
.;"' 
L-"' 
0,()0 
1 
1 
1 
I 
0,25 0,75 1,25 1,75 2,25 2,75 3,25 3,75 4,25 4,75 5,25 5,75 
GRAPH 4b 
ARGENTINA 
~35~------------------------------------------------------------------------~ 
0,30 
0,25 
0,20 
/-
PMS (5,7%) 
~--------------
0,15 --------------/7 
pMS 
(9,~~?__ ••• 
_____ ---··--·-------~-;~~ ~ --·· -·· ·-·· ·--·j,"Ms. --(i-2.6%) 
0,10 ~-----~,.,~,::,_ ________ _ 
.,.-
_.,.-
_,., 
0,05 
,/ 
,/ 
O,OO+::--r---r.-----.-...--r---.~-w-....,......---.,--"""T'-----r-----...--+-
0,25 0,75 1,25 1,75 2,25 2,75 3,25 3,75 4,25 4,75 5,25 5,75 

206 
Michele Bagella - Martino Lo Cascio 
BRAZIL 
0,25().J---------------------, 
0,225 L-------------~p~M~S;_,.;;-"'l 
,.,.-" 
/ 
0,200 
~~\_,./ 
/ 
/ 
./' 
PMS* 
---------------;;,_~:: ______________________ _ 
_____ ............. -..... 
,,/ 
0,175 
0,150 
/, 
,.,. 
,,.,."'"' 
..... 
~,.,.""""" 
0,125 
0,100 _,..,.,"" 
0,075111 
1 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
3,75 
4,25 4,75 
5,25 5,75 6,25 6,75 7,25 
7,75 
8,25 
GRAPH 4c 
GRAPH 4d 
BRAZIL 
0.250----------------------. 
0,225 
0,200 
PMI ,_,.,. 
_,..-
,,.,.-
_..-·pMSj~?_~-
-------------------~~~--
o.115 f--
.....-.....-
~M~_J?!~~L----
------------------;r-·-------
L
-------------------------~~·,.,.:'_,.,._· _____ ~P~M:S~~(l~2~,6-%_) ___ ~ 
0,150 
-
,,.,. 
_,.,. 
0,125 
.,,,.,·"' 
_,· 
0,100 ,~_,-
0,075+-T-,-T---~-r---r-~~--~~~~~~,~ 
3,75 4,25 4,75 5,25 5,75 6,25 6,75 7,25 7,75 8,25 

Saving and External Debt in Latin-American countries 
207 
The characteristics of both curves, that is, the PMI curve having a 
higher slope than the PMS curve, imply that if the structural para-
meters are not altered, the possibility of honouring interests is con-
nected with the reduction of the income trajectory while further 
capital inflows from abroad are ineffective, and even counterintuitive, 
since they will reduce the amount of trade balance needed to pay debt 
services. The two following facts are important: a) the increasing debt 
to GOP ratio and thus of the interests upon debt lowers the rate of 
equilibrium further more; b) the absence of incentives on creditors to 
create capital flows that can raise the income trajectory. 
Given a debt level D, in order to avoid its increase, the trade 
balance must register surplus equal to the burdens from debt interest. 
This means that part of the real savings is reserved for the payment of 
interest on debt. The real savings available for investments will be 
consequently lower and will determine a decrease of the long term 
growth rate of income, the PMI slope being higher than the PMS one. 
This dynamic can be explained, as to the values included in table 17, 
TABLE 17 
GROWTH RATES (dY!Y), AVERAGE PROPENSITIES (PMS), 
AND LONG-TERM INVESTMENT REQUIREMENTS (PM!) 
Argentina 
(a) 
(b) 
(c) 
(d) 
dY 
••••••••••••••• 0 
0. 
3.8 
3.0 
2.25 
1.75 
y 
PMS 
••••••••••••• 0 
0. 
21.4 
21.0 
20.5 
20.4 
PM/ .................. 
21.4 
16.5 
12.5 
9.6 
Brazil 
(a) 
(b) 
(c) 
(d) 
dY 
•••• 0 
0 •••••••••••• 
8.2 
77.0 
6.2 
5.2 
y 
PMS ................ 
22.0 
21.7 
21.5 
21.2 
PM/ .................. 
22.0 
18.6 
16.6 
14.0 
(a) In the absence of external debt. 
(b) In the presence of a current burden for the payment of interest on accumulated debt, with i 
= 5.7%. 
(c) As (b), with i = 9.2%. 
(d) As (b), with i = 12.6%. 

208 
Michele Bagella - Martino Lo Cascio 
by starting to analyse diagrams 4. Number 4a and 4c, for Argentina 
and Brazil respectively, show the effect, upon the real savings avail-
able for investments, of a current burden for the payment of interests 
on accumulated debt, with i = 9.2%. 
If we define a new curve, PMSJ< = PMS- S!Yt. where S!Yt = i 
x D/ Y is the trade balance available for the payment of interests on 
debt, the relation PM! = PMSJ< defines the new equilibrium growth 
rate. 
In the other two diagrams (4b and 4d) different alternatives, as to 
interest rates, are included. With regards to the previous diagrams 
where a 9.2% interest rate was justified by the present level of interest 
rates (see table 3), two other hypotheses are reported, 5.7% and 
12.6%, which highlight the extremes of a realistic fork for these two 
countries. 
It might be interesting to compare: t) elasticity of real savings to 
short term income, it) adjustment ·rate of the current propensity to 
save to the long/term, iit) short-term propensity to invest, iv) adjust-
ment rate of actual accumulation to anticipated levels, as they appear 
in the estimates for Argentina and Brazil. 
TABLE 18 
Adjustment 
Adjustment 
Elasticity of 
rate of 
Short term 
of actual 
saving to short 
elasticity of 
propensity to 
accumulation 
term income 
saving to 
invest 
rate to 
"desired" 
anticipated 
values 
levels 
Argentina ............ 
0.29 
0.55 
0.26 
0.047 
Brazil ................ 
0.22 
0.61 
0.32 
0.117 
USA .................. 
0.34 
0.94 
0.45 
0.404 
Argentina shows a slightly higher savings elasticity in the short 
term than Brazil; while the adjustment rate is less noticeable towards 
the long term "expected" values; on the contrary, Brazil shows a 
higher short term propensity to invest and a higher adjustment rate 
towards the capital! output ratio than Argentina. 

Saving and External Debt in Latin-American countries 
209 
The short term differences within the mechanism of savings 
formation between Argentina and Brazil take place in the long run. 
Different behaviours are to be found in the presence of short- or 
medium-term adjustment of the accumulation rate. Especially Brazil's 
speed of adjustment seems more consistent than Argentina's. 
The differences of the various elasticities and parameters of 
adjustment as to the correspondent values of the USA define the 
peculiarities of the Latin-American model. 
2.6 - The Problem of Debt Reduction and Dynamic Adjustment 
of Brazil's and Argentina's Economies 
The previous considerations do not include: a) problems occur-
ring in the short run in the economies of both countries, which might 
influence the long run trajectories; b) the cruciaVreduction of indebt-
edness. 
The treatment of such issues means, on the one hand, the 
definition of further hypotheses about the evolution of the interna-
tional picture and, on the other, applying these assumptions the 
Brazilian and Argentinian models, including also the data which 
define the relations with the rest of the international economy. 
Even in this case, we must be cautious about the instruments 
used, which have the purpose of quantifying their variables and 
relations, for a mainly qualitative exposition. 
The hypotheses in the evolution of the international picture are 
drawn, for the most part, from international forecasters (DRI, Chase 
Econometrics, Wharton). Such hypotheses, as to the principal vari-
ables, result however congruent with those which describe the appli-
cation of two simplified models of analysis for OECD countries and for 
the USA, whose structure is definitely like the one suggested for 
Argentina and Brazil (2). 
(2) Estimates for the functions of consumption and investment of OECD countries 
and USA. 
( 
Y, 
Y,-t ) 
C, = C,_ 1 e <lt + ~~ln-- + litln--
Y,_t 
c,_l 

210 
Michele Bagella - Martino Lo Cascio 
Apart from these details, the main relations are those defining 
long run paths, in a steady-growth situation, of both propensity to 
save and accumulation requirement. 
Graph Sa reports the PM! and PM! curves for OECO. The 
equilibrium value of GOP growth rate equals about 2.7%, which is 
generally used by the aforementioned international forecasters in their 
base line scenarios. 
It is interesting to observe Graph 5 b relative to the USA. The first 
thing to be noted is that the PMS slope is higher than PMI, and that 
GOP growth rate of equilibrium (propensity to save and long-run 
accumulation rate being equal) reaches 3.8%, creating a totally 
different mechani~m from the Brazilian and Argentinian ones, but 
also, to a smaller extent, to that of the OECO average. 
For lower values than those of equilibrium, equal for instance to 
2.7%, fixed for OECO as coerent with the equilibrium of current 
balance with external areas, at least a fifth of USA investment (3.3% of 
its GNP) is to be "financed" with an indebtedness covered by the 
current surplus of the remaining OECO countries. At 1980s prices, the 
deficit of the balance of goods and services would reach 110 billions of 
dollars, at 1988 prices it would be estimated around 150 billion dollars 
TABLE 19 
OECD 
USA 
value 
test t 
value 
test t 
a •............ 
-0,11 
-2,05 
a •............ 
0 
-
bo ............ 
0,81 
0,13 
bo ............ 
0,66 
6,39 
d ............ 
0,49 
0,21 
d ••••• 0 ••••• 0 
0,06 
3,21 
1(2 
• 
0 •• 0 
0. 0 •• 
0,99 
1(2 
••••• 0 •• 0 
• 
0,99 
D.W. 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
0. 0 
1,78 
D.W. . ....... 
1,61 
Y,_. 
OECD 
USA 
value 
test t 
value 
test t 
ao ............ 
0,04 
2,96 
ao ............ 
0,05 
4,20 
a •............ 
0,46 
7,87 
a •............ 
0,44 
6,49 
a2 ....•.....•. 
0,73 
11,58 
a2 .•......•... 
0,59 
6,18 
1(2 . . . . . . . . . . 
0,99 
1(2 .......... 
0,97 
D.W. 
0 0. 0 
•• 0. 
1,76 
D.W. 
• 
0 
0 ••••• 
2,01 

Saving and External Debt in Latin-American countries 
211 
GRAPH Sa 
OECD 
0,275---------------------.,. 
0,250 
0,225 
,' 
/ 
pMS 
_ 
0.200L-----:-:~--~~ 
' 
0,175 
0,25 0,75 1,25 1,75 2,25 2,75 3,25 3,75 4,25 4,75 5,25 5,75 
GRAPH Sb 
USA 
0.30~--------------------, 
0,25 
0,20 
0,15 
0,10 
0,05 
.--;;-
____ .. --------------------------~.~ 
f~s 
_____ r!':iL---
0,00 "~"-r--"T--.-.-T""""'""'T-.-.,--,.-,, ..,..........,r-""'"-r--...---.~ 
0,25 0,75 1,25 1,75 2,25 2,75 3,25 3,75 4,25 4,75 5,25 5,75 

212 
Michele Bagella - Martino Lo Cascio 
(current deficit, according to the quota of factors' income balances for 
the last ten years, would thus be less than 10%). 
W. Helkie and P. Hooper [13], during the first months of 1989, 
report their estimates and those of DRI, Lawrence, Cline and Bryant on 
the future evolution of the USA balance of current payments. Until the 
middle of the '90s at least, with a growth rate of American economy 
between 2.5% and 3%, the deficit in 1982 constant dollars will range 
between 120 and 200 billion dollars, within the average fo the period; 
the 50% percentile results in a little less than 150 billions of dollars. 
Our analysis confirms, in perspective, the endurance of consistent 
lack of formation of USA savings as to utilization, as well as the 
persistence of high real interest rates, apart from occurences of an 
economic nature. 
However, a certain qualification seems to be arising, deserving 
deeper consideration: the lack of USA savings formation, experienced 
for more than 10 years, is a phenomenon which occurs with a long 
term growth rate lower than 3. 5%. With growth rates higher than 
3. 8%, we might witness an excess of real savings and an advance of 
the balance of goods and services, as well as of the whole current 
balance. 
If one manages to reduce the tension within the OECD area 
determined by the financing in capital account of the American 
current deficit, it is reasonable to hypothesize a decrease of the 
international real rates of interest. 
Such a situation would produce a "high" optimistic scanario, in 
which growth could range between 3.5 and 3. 7% (with a higher 
trajectory of the American economy than the rest of OECD countries), 
real interest rates would fall under 5%, the slight current deficit of the 
OECD area would be counterbalanced by the improvement of the 
terms of trade and by the advances of the current items connected 
with the service burdens upon the debt of developing countries, 
whose net position abroad would progressively improve (3). 
(3) A scenario witnessing, in the long run, OECD averge growth rate around 2.8%, 
with a difference in structural speed between USA (4%) and other countries (2%) seems 
less plausible, even though, in such case, the interest rates would be reduced. In the 
latter case, an accommodating policy will be accompanied in the USA with an 
expansion of the public budget deficit, while in the OECD countries, monetary and 
public policies would become even stricter. 

Saving and External Debt in Latin-American countries 
213 
A "low" scenario, according to the international forecasters, will 
be characterized by strong difficulties of integration for OECD coun-
tries' economic policies, with a divergent behaviour from real and 
monetary variables. In this case, the growth rate of OECD-GDP will be 
around 2%, the USA current deficit on the upper extreme of the band 
indicated above, with real interest rates higher than 12%. The scenario 
is compatible with those of the other OECD countries, capable of 
financing, in capital account, both the American deficit and the 
increasing indebtedness levels of the developing countries. 
By integrating the models for Argentina and Brazil with (i) 
functions of export linked to world trade progress and to OECD 
growth, and (ii) functions of import linked to the progress of domestic 
demand, some examinations of the annual (and not long-term) trajec-
tory of the main macro-economic variables for the two countries have 
been attempted. 
In these explorations we have included some relations binding the 
balance of goods and services or, alternatively, the quota of real 
savings available for the payment of the service upon debt. If the 
surplus in the balance of goods and services exceeds (is lower than) 
the payments for interest on accumulated debt, the indebtedness and 
therefore the variable DY will decrease (increase). 
Graphs from Sa to 6e show the pathes of GDP Y, of investments I 
and indebtedness d, obtained on the grounds of exogenous hypotheses 
described above, and which can be summed up as: 
Argentina: 
Brazil: 
Graph 6a 
Graph 6b 
Graph 6c 
Graph 6d 
Graph 6e 
Graph 7a 
Graph 7b 
Graph 7c 
Graph 7d 
Graph 7e 
i = 8% d(GDP-OECD) = 2. 7% 
i = 8% d(GDP-OECD) = 
2% 
i = 8% d(GDP-OECD) = 3.7% 
i = 5% d(GDP-OECD) = 2. 7% 
i = 11% d(GDP-OECD) = 2.7% 
i = 8% d(GDP-OECD) = 2. 7% 
i = 8% d(GDP-OECD) = 
2% 
i = 8% d(GDP-OECD) = 3.7% 
i = 5% d(GDP-OECD) = 2.7% 
i = 11% d(GDP-OECD) = 2.7% 

214 
Michele Bagella - Martino Lo Cascio 
ARGENTINA 
25000-------------------. 
2000()· 
15000 
10000 
5000 
_____ fl __ _ -..... ______ ..... ---.... .......... 
... ........ 
I 
···---.. 
....._ •••• 
.................................... _................ 
... ______ ................... , 
0 
..... , 
-5000~~--~~~~~~~--~~~--~~ 
M 
M 
~ ~ ~ ~ ~ 00 m ~ ~ ~ W 
GRAPH 6a 
GRAPH 6b 
ARGENTINA 
25000~----------------~ 
20000 
15000 
10000 
D 
5000 
------------------~ .... _ -.... --............ 
'~---
I.................. 
., ... -··-··--...................... •• ~" 
....... --·· 
·-...................... -· 
0~~~~~--~~~~~~--~~--~~ 
M 
M 
~ ~ ~ ~ 98 
00 m 
~ 06 
08 
10 

Saving and External Debt in Latin-American countries 
215 
GRAPH 6c 
ARGENTINA 
~----------------------------------~ 
20000 
15000 
.---·--·· 
10000-~--· -~ 
f----------.. -·. --. ... -.... 
5000 
.. 
I 
.. _ ................ ::.:~"-'= ........................ ..... . 
.. .. --............ ------- ........ -----........ 
... ......... .... 
0 
-5000 
-10000~--~~~-~.-~,~~-~.~~-~,-~,.--~.~-r-,~ 
86 
86 
90 
92 
94 
96 
96 
00 
02 04 
06 
06 
10 
GRAPH 6d 
ARGENTINA 
25000~----------------------------------~ 
5000 
--.,..----!! --------.... 
-· _!.----.--··----------· .-· ••.. :-:-:::-::-~ -;::::::. ---.. -. ·--·· . 
0 
...................... 
..... ... '· 
-50004---r--,--~.~-T--~~r-~--,---~-,-T-r--~ 
86 
86 
90 92 
94 
96 
98 
00 
02 
04 
06 
06 
10 

216 
Michele Bagella - Martino Lo Cascio 
ARGENTINA 
17~------------------------------------, 
15000 
/--~/ 
12500 
~~ 
.. 1 
10000~. D 
~ 
~-----
---------------~~­--
7~ 
--....................... 
5000 
I .. -~--~---.... 
_______ ... 
.. .......... _ ........ 
-----~.... 
...~' 
.,,.. 
................... ... 
0~--~----------~~--~~--~~~--~ 
GRAPH 6e 
~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ oo m ~ ~ ~ ro 
BRAZIL 
~~------------------------------------~ 
70000 
60000 
50000 
40000 
30000 
20000 
10000 
D 
--~---~---------~ 
.:==::.:_:_:::::::::·.:=-~----:.::.::::. ____ _ 
0 
I 
-,, 
-10000~~--~--~--~----~------~--~~ 
GRAPH 1a 
1985 
1990 
1995 
2000 
2005 
2010 

Saving and External Debt in Latin-American countries 
217 
BRAZIL 
&000~--------------------------------~ 
/ 
70000 
60000 
50000 
40000 
,. 
_,.,.,., 
30000 
20000 
y 
,..--,.-' 
/ 
/ 
--
--
, 
,.~'· 
,. / 
,. 
r ,. 
___ :..---
10000 
D 
--------~~~~~~~~~'-
---------------
-------
1 
------
---· 
....... -... .-.-
0+-~~~~----~------~------~----~ 
GRAPH 7b 
1985 
1990 
1995 
2000 
2005 
2010 
GRAPH 7c 
BRAZIL 
70000~-------------------------------------
60000 
50000 
40000 
30000 
20000 
10000 
D 
............. -.. ---
---
-----
1_~::::.:-.-=::=---~-.:.::---------.. -
-------..... _ 
0 
-10000 
.......... ..... 
---..... 
-20000+-----~~---T----~--~--~----~ 
1985 
1990 
1995 
2000 
2005 
2010 

218 
Michele Bagella - Martino Lo Cascio 
BRAZIL 
~~--------------------------------~ 
80000 
70000 
60000 
50000 
40000 
30000 
/' 
/ 
/ 
0~------r-----~~-----r~~--~----~ 
GRAPH 7d 
1985 
1990 
1995 
2000 
2005 
2010 
GRAPH 7e 
BRAZIL 
70000~----------------------------------~ 
60000 
50000 
/ 
40000 
30000 
20000 
10000 
D 
------·-····· 
----------
___ .......... --
... ! ....... _ ....... ----------::::::· .. '":"-<:.:.:-____ -
0 
--------
-10000+-------r-----~------~------~----~ 
1985 
1990 
1995 
2000 
2005 
2010 

Saving and External Debt in Latin-American countries 
219 
INTEREST RATES, INTERNATIONAL CUMATE, 
AND REPAYMENT OF DEBT IN% 
8 
8 
8 
5 
11 
8 
8 
8 
5 
11 
6 (GDP-OECD) 
2 
2.7 
3.7 
2.7 
2.7 
2 
2.7 
3.7 
2.7 
2.7 
in 2010 (*) 
Argentina 
26 
0 in 2010 
0 in 2006 
0 in 2006 
77.4 
Brazil 
99.7 
0 in 2009 
Oin2001 
39.2 
0 in 2005 
(*) Initial debt percentage, to be paid in 2010. 
(**) Initial debt percentage, to be paid in 2000. 
in 2000 (**) 
86.1 
70.9 
50.7 
44.9 
106.4 
135.3 
77.4 
3.4 
121.6 
35.6 
(***) Annual average growth rate of consumption between 1986 and 2000. 
TABLE 20 
6C (***) 
3.56 
3.48 
3.26 
4.05 
1.33 
8.19 
7.68 
6.94 
8.72 
6.40 
Table 21 emphasizes the following results:a)prevaliling incidence 
of OECD trade growth rate performance upon the debt re-entry date 
of Argentina and Brazil, while the influence upon the development of 
these countries is absolutely modest; b) incidence of the international 
interest rates both on the re-entry date and on the GDP growth 
trajectory; c) trade-off between the interest rate level and the risk of 
insolvency; the latter phenomenon is more relevant in Argentina for 
whom, in the case of interest rates located on the higher extreme of 
the fork, we cannot foresee a re-entry for the next twenty years; b) 
impact of the interest rate level upon the increase of the profile of the 
two Latin-American countries' economies, and mainly on Argentina 
(who presents a relation between GDP and indebtedness ranging from 
80% to 90%; this impact, principally determined by the cycle of 
investments, emphasizes the time lag of the Argentinian economy 
compared with the evolution of international economy. 

220 
Michele Bagella - Martino Lo Cascio 
Conclusions 
The analyses carried out above enable us to make some con-
siderations about the most recent proposals of international bodies, 
Latin-American authorities, major industrialized countries, and the 
financial world. 
We believe that a lot has been said, and that several concrete 
measures have been taken, in order to diminish the burden of 
servicing the debt. 
Various models, from the most complex to the simplest ones, like 
those we have proposed, describe and reproduce, more than explain, 
the mechanism of past behaviour. From this concern, it does not seem 
really useful to question the model on the most profitable policies of 
the kind: choice of higher interest rates as opposed to a greater risk of 
insolvency. One conclusion we can draw from the analyses carried out 
is that all suggestions and proposals for the solution of the debt crisis 
are to be pictured within the logic of the model of past trends, while 
the counterintuitive circuits suggested by the model are self-evident. 
A commonplace description might be the following: if the PMS 
curve has a lower slope than the PM! one, the pressure for the debt 
reduction moves the growth trajectory of Latin-American countries 
downwards, as the experience fo the last ten years has clearly shown. 
Apart from the equity and social equilibrium problems peculiar to 
such lower growth rates than those potentially obtainable, the fact is 
that the requilibrium of the debt position, in the medium and long 
run, presents some uncertainties and risks for creditors. But the latter, 
in the absence of several institutional and behavioural mechanisms, 
shall be nonetheless involved, if only indirectly to recover the debt, in 
obtaining a reduction of the level of activity of debtor countries. 
The narrow path along which the fine-tuning of the IMP, World 
Bank and the system of private creditor banks must move, cannot be 
enlarged, if not by modifying the expectations of the operators 
interested in the re-entry. Such modifications can only occur when an 
institutional mechanism is altered, for example, when we establish 
rules according to which repayment can be claimed in case of 
improvement of production, income and propensity to save in the 
debtor countries or, at any rate, proportioned to such improvement, 

Saving and External Debt in Latin-American countries 
221 
and when international aid is conveyed for the coverage of missing 
re-entries for those countries where such improvements do not occur. 
The proposals of international aid to Latin-American countries, such 
as the one by Dornbusch quoted above, could be oriented towards this 
perspective. 
In such a situation, the view according to which re-entry involves 
recession might be inverted, and maybe a "structural relation" 
changed, i.e. the propensity to investment, whose performance in the 
past was strongly influenced by the constraints of international condi-
tions. 

222 
Michele Bagella - Martino Lo Cascio 
REFERENCES 
[1] BAGELLA M.: "The Unified European Market and Trade with Latin America: 
Emargination or Development?" Rivista di politica Economica, Special Issue, 
June 1989. 
[2] CARDOso E.A. - DoRNBUSCH R.: "Foreign Private Capital Flows", in CHENERY H. -
SRINIVASAN J.N.: Handbook of Development Economics, vol. II, 1989. 
[3] CARVOUNIS C.C.: The Foreign Debt/National Development Conflict, New York, 
Quorum Books, 1986. 
[4] CUNE W.K.: International Debt: Systemic Risk and Policy Response, Cambridge, 
MIT, Cambridge University Press, 1984. 
[5] CUNE W.R.: "International Debt: Analysis, Experience and Prospects", Journal of 
Development Planning, no. 16, 1985. 
[6] CoRBO V. - GoLDSTEIN M. - KHAN M.: Growth-Oriented Adjustment Programs, 
Washington (DC), IMF and World Bank, 1987. 
[7] CUNDY R.- LEVICH R.: "On the Definition and Magnitude of Recent Capital Flight", 
in WilliAMSON J.J. - LEssARD D.: Capital Flight: the Problem and Policy 
Responses, Washington (DC), Institute for International Economics, 1987. 
[8] DEPPLER M. - WilliAMSON M.: "Capital Flight: Concepts, Measurement and 
Issues", Staff Studies for the World Economic Outlook, Washington (DC), IMF, 
1987. 
[9] DoRNBUSCH R.: "Debt Problems and the World Macroeconomy", in SACHS J.D.: 
Developing Contry Debt and the World Economy, NBER, Chicago, 1989. 
[10] DoRNBUSCH R. - DE PABLO T.C.: "Debt and Macroeconomic Instability in Argen-
tina", in SACHS J.D.: Developing Country Debt and the World Economy, Chicago, 
NBER, 1989. 
[11] DoRNBUSCH R.: From Stabilization to Growth, (unpublished), 1989. 
[12] ERBE J.: "The Flight of Capital from Developing Countries", Intereconomics, no. 
20, 1985. 
[13] HELKE W.P. - HooPER: "US External Adjustment: Progress and Prospect", Wash-
ington (DC), Brooking Discussion Papers in International Economics, February 
1989. 
[14) HENDRY D. - PAGAN A.R. - SARGAN J.D.: "Dynamic Specification", Handbook of 
Econometrics, vol. II, GRIUCHES Z. - INTRIUGATOR M.D. (eds.) Amsterdam, 1984. 
[15] KHAN M. - KNIGHT M.: "Fund-Supported Adjustment Programs and Economic 
Growth", Washington (DC), IMF, Occasional Papers, no. 41, 1985. 
[16) KHAN M. - KNIGHT M.: "Growth-oriented Adjustment Programs. A Conceptional 
Framework", Washington DC, IMF, Staff Paper, 1985. 
[17] KOTUKOFF L.J.: Determinants of Savings: Theory and Evidence, forth., November 
1989. 
[18] KRUGMAN P.: "International Debt Strategies in an Uncertain World", in SMITH G. -
CUDDINGTON J.: International Debt and the Developing Countries, Washington 
(DC), World Bank, 1985. 
[19] KRUGMAN P.: "Private Capital Flows to Problem Debtors", in SACHS J.D.: 
Developing Country Debt and the World Economy, Chicago, NBER, 1989. 
[20] LEFF N.H. - SATO K.: "The Prospects for Higher Domestic Saving Rates", in Latin 
American Journal of Policy Modeling, no. 9-41, 1987. 

Saving and External Debt in Latin-American countries 
223 
[21] LEssARD D.R. - WILUAMSON J.: Capital Flight and the Third World Debt, Wash-
ington (DC), Institute for International Economics, 1987. 
[22] MORALES J.A.- SACHS J.D.: "Bolivia's Economic Crisis", in SACHS J.D.: Developing 
Country Debt and the World Economy, Chicago, NBER, 1989. 
[23] MUNDELL R.: "Schemi interpretativi della bilancia commerciale nel contesto 
dell'equilibrio generale globale: il diciassettesimo approccio alia bilancia dei 
pagamenti", Rivista di Politic a Economic a, June 1989. 
[24] OCDE: Financement en Debte Exterieure des Pays en Development, Etude 1986, 
Paris, OCDE, 1987. 
[25] PHELPS E.: «Interdipendenza economica intemazionale: squilibri commerciali e 
coordinamento delle politiche economiche», introduction and conclusions', to the 
volume Rivista di Politica Economica, June 1989. 
[26] REYNOLD C.: "L'indebitamento latino-americano, il ruolo degli USA nelle connes-
sioni tra nord e sud ed il commercio mondiale", Rivista di Politica Economica, 
June 1989. 
[27] SACHS J.D.: Developing Country Debt and the World Economy, Chicago, NBER, 
1989. 
[28] TAYWR L.: Structuralist Macroeconomics, New York, Basic Books, 1983. 
[29] THE WoRLD BANK: Brazil Economic Memorandum, Washington (DC), The World 
Bank, 1984. 

Saving, Investment and Growth in the 
Industrialized Countries: 
An Econometric Investigation 
1. - Introduction 
Michael Beenstock (*) 
Hebrew University of Jerusalem 
This paper is concerned with the joint determination of savings, 
investment, interest rates and economic growth in the industrialized 
countries over the last three decades. The key economic variables 
which concern us are plotted on figures 1-4 and are by now familiar to 
students of the world economy. Economic growth was buoyant 
through the 1960s, sluggish and volatile through the 1970s and more 
stable through the 1980s. World interest rates fell during the 1970s, 
but in the 1980s they surpassed their level of the 1960s. Investment 
performed strongly during the 1960s, weakly during the 1970s and 
weaker still during the 1980s. Private sector savings largely mirrored 
investment throughout the entire period. 
(*) I am grateful to Udi Nissan and Laura Bemporad for their excellent research 
assistance. 
The data used for the analysis in sections 3 and 4 were taken from International 
Financial Statistics (IMF) and Supplement 8. Data for central government consump-
tion for 1984-1988 were taken from Main Economic Indicators (OECD) for the OECD 
as whole. The "industrial countries" are represented by code 110. 
The following definitions are used: Inflation = rate of changes in GDP deflator; 
Terms of trade = export unit value index/import unit value index; Interest rate = GDP 
weighted average of Treasury bill rates (60c) for US, UK, West Germany, France, 
Canada, Sweden and Japan; Investment/GOP = world summary tables; Savings/ 
GDP= world summary tables; Fiscal deficit/GOP = world summary tables (1972-
1988). 
Advise: the numbers in square brackets refer to the Bibliography in appendix. 

226 
Michael Beenstock 
The study of the world economy has latterly devolved into three 
broadly separate traditions. The first, in order of chronology, is based 
on the econometric analysis of separate countries and the specifi-
cation of the trade and capital linkages between them. Examples of 
this tradition are the INTERLINK model at the OECD (first version, 
Adams et AI. [1]), the GEM model at NIESR (first version, Beenstock 
and Minford [3]) and Professor Klein's Project UNK. Bryant and 
Portes [ 6] explore the economic interdependence that is implied by a 
number of econometric models developed in this tradition. 
The second tradition treats the industrialized countries as an 
aggregate bloc and makes no attempt to model the individual coun-
tries which comprise it. In the same way it treats the developing 
countries as a whole as a homogeneous bloc. In this tradition no 
serious attempt is made at econometric estimation. Instead the 
model's parameters are "calibrated" in such a way that the model 
broadly mimics observed covariances in the world economy, see e.g. 
McKibbin and Sachs [8]. Elsewhere, Beenstock [4], I have criticized 
this "oracular", anti-econometric approach to modelling in general. 
The third tradition follows the second tradition by aggregating the 
world economy into geopolitical blocs but parametrizes the model by 
traditional econometric methods. Examples of this include van 
Wijnbergen [9] and Beenstock (4]. The efforts reported below are in 
this third tradition. 
The paper has three main components. In the first a number of 
simulations are reported using the model described by Beenstock [5]. 
These simulations are intended to explore the sensitivity of the 
industrialized countries as a whole to various shocks. The model 
focuses on the joint determination of interest rates and output and 
therefore addresses itself to two out of the four key variables 
mentioned in Graphs 1-4. Among other things we discuss the effects of 
world (i.e. industrialized countries, ICs) fiscal and monetary policy on 
world interest rates, the effects of world interest rates on economic 
growth and the effect of oil price shocks on world economic pros-
pects. 
The model that we use implicitly assumes that world savings and 
investment are sensitive to interest rates. In the second component we 
investigate whether these propositions are in fact empirically valid. 

Saving, Investment and Growth etc. 
227 
We show that the personal savings ratio varies directly with interest 
rates and that investment varies inversely with interest rates. This part 
of the discussion relates more directly to Graphs 3 and 4. An 
interesting result is that when real interest rates are very low they 
have no effect on investment; negative real rates of interest are not an 
effective stimulus to investment. 
The final component of the paper is concerned with the aggre-
gation of savings and investment across industrialized countries. A 
model is described in which savings in one country may "crowd out" 
or "crowd in" savings elsewhere in the world economy. Thus savings 
may either be positively or negatively correlated between countries 
because of international capital linkages and the stochastic structure 
of the world economy. The same applies to investment. We also 
estimate factor models for savings and investment (as a proportion of 
GDP) for the individual countries to determine to what extent each 
country's savings or investment behaviour constitutes an independent 
economic phenomenon. It turns out that there is relatively little 
interdependence in savings and investment across the industrialized 
countries suggesting a high, if not perfect degree of international 
capital market integration. 
2. - Simulation Analysis 
2.1 The Model 
Table 1 records the equations of the econometric model for the 
ICs reported in Beestock [5], which will serve as the basis for the 
simulation analysis reported below. The theoretical structure of the 
model has been described elsewhere and will not detain us here. The 
model is based on the interaction between four macro markets; goods 
(GDP), financial assets (bonds), money and non-oil commodities. As 
such the model solves for three independent prices; interest rates, 
inflation and the price of (non-oil) commodities. The price of oil is 
assumed to be exogenous as is the fiscal deficit of the industrialized 
countries, the rate of monetization (k) and the net exports of the 

228 
Michael Beenstock 
industrialized countries. In Beenstock [4] I have discussed how the 
latter might be endogenized. 
The model includes a simple supply side specification in which 
the production function depends implicitly on capital, labour and raw 
materials. Aggregate demand is driven by fiscal and monetary policy 
and inflation is generated by an inverted money demand function. It 
also reflects supply shocks in the short run. 
Real interest rates clear the aggregate capital market of the 
industrialized countries and real commodity prices clear the market in 
non-oil commodities. There is no explicit labour market due to 
absence of the necessary data. Therefore real wages are not explained. 
We now summarize briefly the equations reported in table 1. 
According to equation ( 1) the real rate of interest (weighted average of 
7 major industrialized countries) varies directly with the ratio of net 
indebtedness to the money stock, (B + S -
F1)1 M. This term implies 
that bond-financed fiscal deficits in ICs are likely to raise real rates of 
interest while money-financed deficits will have the opposite effect. 
LDC borrowing tends to raise real rates of interest while net OPEC 
wealth invested in world capital markets has the opposite effect. The 
penultimate term suggests that the risk premium in world capital 
markets varies directly with LDC indebtedness relative to the indebt-
edness of IC governments. The final term indicates that economic 
growth tends to raise world interest rates. 
TABLE 1 
MODEL USTING 
(1) Real Rate of Interest (2SLS, 1962-1984) 
R1 = 0.116 + 0.0897 In [(B + S- F0)!M] 1 + 0.5508 R1-t- 0.0317 (B!S). 
(4.11) 
(4.36) 
(4.54) 
(3.73) 
+ 0.602 AlnQt 
(3.93) 
o = 0.00963. AR1 = 0.095. AR2 = - 0.127. AR3 = 0,234. AJ4 = 0,089 
(2) GDP in Industrialised Countries (OLS. 1959-1984) 

Saving, Investment and Growth etc. 
229 
InQ1 = 0.854 + 0. 739ln0r- I -
0.4975 Aln (MIP>r- I 
(4.54) 
(12.04) 
(6.42) 
- 0.0653ln(Pm/P) 1-I + 0.0099 TIME- 0.477Rr-I 
(3.17) 
(4.42) 
(5.78) 
- 0.0576lnXt+ 0.0618lnXt-t -
0.122 (DEFIP)t+ 0.236 (DEF/P)1-t 
(4.07) 
(2.84) 
(2.52) 
(3.9) 
cr = 0.005521, if-= 0.9997, LM(4.3.18) = 2.36 
(3) Non-oil Commodity Prices (2SLS. 1955-1984) 
In (PmnSIP) 1 = 
-
8.603 + 2.875lnQt -
0.578ln(P0SIP)t- 0.149TIME 
(5.77) 
(6.17) 
(7.86) 
(7.07) 
-1.2635Rt-z -
0.15ln(PmnSIP)t-z-
1.42AlnESt 
(1.52) 
(1.3) 
(4.02) 
cr = 0.05034, 
AR1 = 0.3, AR2 = - 0.19, AR3 = 0.09, AJ4 = - 0.15 
(4) Inflation in Industrialized Countries (OLS. 1952-1984) 
AlnP1 = 0.312 + 0.449AlnM1- 1 -
0.0618lnQ1- 1 + 0.385ln(P!M)1-
1 
(1.46) 
(5.84) 
(1.33) 
(4.02) 
- 0.46ln(PIM)1- 2 + 0.0482AlnPmt + 0.0459alnPmt-I 
(5.85) 
(5.58) 
(4.78) 
cr = 0.00579, f?2 = 0.952, LM (4. 2.8) = 2.56 
Identities 
Legend: 
B 
DEF 
ES 
Fa 
A1 
p 
PmnS 
PaS 
Q 
R s 
TIME 
X 
Pm 
t 
r 
LM(a.b) 
<X! 
M= k 
I: DEF1-; 
i = 0 
InPm = wlnPmn + (1 - w) lnP0 • w = 0.37 
= stock of public sector debt in industrialized countires (ICs); 
= fiscal deficit of ICs; 
= effective exchange rate index of US dollar; 
-
OPEC wealth; 
= quantity of money in ICs; 
= GDP deflator of ICs; 
= S price inde of non-oil primary products; 
= S price index of oil; 
= GDP of ICs; 
= real rate of interest; 
= stock of LDC external debt; 
= time trend; 
= exports of ICs; 
= index of primary product prices (incl. oil); 
= values are shown in parentheses; 
= standard error of estimate (adjusted); 
= Lagrange multiplier statistic for a portmanteau of a order autocorrelation where b is 
the critical value of X2 at p = 0.05 [see BREASCH. PAGAN, 1980]; 
= j'th order autocorrelation coefficient of the residuals. These are reported because LM 
is only valid for OLS - denotes statistical significance. 

230 
Michael Beenstock 
Equation (2) implies that the trend level of GDP in ICs varies 
inversely with the relative price of commodities and the cost of 
capital. There is a positive real balance effect in the short run and 
fiscal deficits tend to be expansionary. However, the impact effect of 
the latter as well as that of net exports appears to be perverse. 
Equation (3) indicates that non-oil commodity prices vary directly 
with IC GDP and inversely with interest rates (reflecting inventory 
costs). They also vary directly with the real price of oil (i.e. 
commodities are energy intensive) and there is a "dollar illusion" 
effect. 
According to equation (4) inflation in ICs varies directly with the 
rate of monetary growth and inversely with economic growth. It also 
varies directly with commodity price inflation (cost push). The model 
is closed by a number of identities listed at the bottom of the table. 
2.2 Simulations 
The properties of the model are summarized by the series of 
simulations reported in table 2 which are given a brief description. 
1) Real oil price shocks spill-over onto non-oil commodity prices, 
and permanently reduce GDP. For a given quantity of money the 
aggregate price level is higher with most of the transitory inflation 
occurring in years 1 and 2. The latter raise nominal interest rates in 
the short run. In the longer run real interest rates are lower reflecting 
lower long run GDP growth. 
2) An autonomous increase in the stock of money is induced by 
raising k. The non-neutral effects on output and interest rates reflect 
the real change in portfolio proportions, (B + S -
F0)! M. Real 
liquidity is increased so that real interest rates fall which permanently 
raises GDP and commodity prices. 
3) This simulation illustrates the effects of "dollar illusion" in 
commodity markets. An appreciation of the US dollar induces an 
increase in real commodity prices (beyond the short run). This harms 
GDP as in the case of simulation 1. 
4) A fiscal expansion raises IC public sector indebtedness which 
eventually raises interest rates. The latter harms aggregate supply so 

TABLE 2 
EFFECTS OF VARIOUS SHOCKS ON GDP, PRICES, AND INTEREST RATE (*) 
$ 
Interest 
$ 
Interest 
$ 
Interest 
Year 
GDP 
Price 
Commodity 
rate 
GDP 
Price 
Commodity 
rate 
GDP 
Price 
Commodity 
rate 
prices 
prices 
prices 
3 .I. 10% rise in real price of oil 
3.2. 10% rise in world money stock 
3.3. 10% rise in$ effective exchange rate 
1 
0 
0.41 
6.09 
6.04 
0 
0 
0 
-0.91 
0 
-0.59 
-15.08 
-0.60 
2 
-0.77 
0.94 
4.46 
5.11 
3.28 
0.99 
17.10 
2.85 
0.38 
-1.04 
-0.03 
-0.27 
3 
-1.04 
1.13 
2.76 
-5.17 
2.07 
1.99 
9.36 
-0.79 
0.12 
-0.94 
1.56 
0.08 
4 
-1.07 
1.20 
3.66 
-2.62 
1.68 
2.68 
2.88 
-1.46 
-0.28 
-0.89 
-0.02 
-0.22 
5 
-1.12 
1.26 
3.76 
-1.95 
1.89 
3.47 
10.39 
1.17 
-0.31 
-0.88 
-2.11 
-0.16 
6 
-1.26 
1.27 
3.12 
-2.10 
1.76 
4.38 
12.59 
-1.15 
-0.35 
-0.79 
-1.27 
-O.o3 
7 
-1.32 
1.27 
2.82 
-2.20 
1.65 
5.16 
11.67 
-1.33 
-0.43 
-0.68 
-1.51 
0.00 
8 
-1.38 
1.26 
2.70 
-2.00 
1.69 
5.80 
12.44 
-1.39 
-0.49 
-0.56 
-1.74 
0.02 
9 
-1.44 
1.25 
2.53 
-1.70 
1.76 
6.36 
13.60 
-1.43 
-0.53 
-0.43 
-1.68 
-0.05 
10 
-1.49 
1.25 
2.36 
-1.30 
1.82 
6.82 
14.70 
-1.50 
-0.57 
-0.31 
-1.62 
1.07 
3.4. 10% rise in public sector debt 
3. 5. 20% rise in LDC debt 
3.6. 10% rise in exports 
1 
-1.34 
-0.07 
-3.87 
-0.37 
0 
0 
0 
0.89 
-0.55 
-0.03 
-1.60 
-0.39 
2 
1.87 
0.09 
5.57 
2.57 
-0.39 
0 
-1.15 
1.04 
-0.15 
-0.02 
-0.45 
-0.07 
3 
0.02 
0.15 
1.20 
0.80 
-0.74 
0 
-3.21 
1.19 
-0.09 
0.04 
0.44 
0.13 
4 
-0.37 
-0.03 
-4.76 
0.55 
-1.00 
0 
-4.03 
1.39 
-0.10 
0.08 
-0.21 
0.08 
5 
0.39 
0.16 
-2.34 
0.86 
-1.25 
0 
-4.54 
1.54 
-0.06 
0.08 
-0.24 
0.05 
6 
-0.62 
-1.31 
-2.00 
1.03 
-1.50 
0 
-5.15 
1.67 
-0.02 
0.09 
0.35 
0.06 
7 
-0.88 
-0.07 
-3.36 
1.02 
-1.74 
0.20 
-5.66 
1.76 
0.00 
0.09 
0.09 
0.04 
8 
-1.04 
0 
-3.81 
1.05 
-1.95 
0.36 
-6.07 
1.86 
0.02 
0.08 
0.10 
0.03 
9 
-1.17 
0.09 
-3.82 
1.12 
-2.15 
0.54 
-6.43 
1.97 
0.04 
0.06 
0.15 
0.02 
10 
-1.29 
0.21 
-3.99 
1.14 
-2.33 
0.74 
-6.75 
2.07 
0.06 
0.05 
0.19 
0.02 
(*) In the case of interest rates percent p.a., otherwise percent changes. 
~ 
~ 
~· 
~ 
~ 
"' 
~ 
(1) 
;:s 
..... 
~ 
;:s 
~ 
~ 
~ 
(1) 
!) 
~ 
...... 

232 
Michael Beenstock 
that GDP is permanently reduced. On the whole bond-financed fiscal 
deficits are recessive apart from in year 2. 
5) LDC indebtedness raises interest rates by inflating risk pre-
miums in world capital markets. The latter adversely affects aggregate 
supply and commodity prices. 
6) Net exports of ICs have a counter-intuitive, deflationary effect 
which most probably reflects model misspecification. 
Some further results are presented in table 3 where the fiscal 
deficit is assumed to expand by 2% of GDP. The fiscal expansion is 
simulated under two separate financing assumptions. In the first we 
assume that the authorities adhere to a monetary target which implies 
that the fiscal deficit is bond-financed and that the money stock is 
fixed. In the second, "balanced finance", we assume that the ratio 
between money and public sector debt is held constant (i.e. k does not 
change). 
Table 3 indicates that bond-financing has a contractionary effect 
(which is consistent with simulation 4 in table 2). This is largely 
because the sustained resort to the capital market by IC governments 
forces up real interest rates over time. This mechanism implies that 
bond-financed fiscal expansions are contractionary when supply side 
effects are taken into consideration. The conventional wisdom is 
reversed. 
THE EFFECTS OF A FISCAL EXPANSION 
(2% of GDP) 
TABLE 3 
GDP (%change) 
Real rate of interest (%) 
Year 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
••••••••••• 0 
•• 
.............. 
.............. 
.............. 
•••••• 0 •• 0 
•• 0. 
Legend: 
I monetary target 
II balanced finance 
I 
0.3 
-3.1 
-4.7 
-5.1 
-5.7 
II 
I 
II 
3 
0.9 
-0.2 
2.1 
-0.1 
0.8 
3.3 
0.8 
0.7 
4.0 
2.4 
0.2 
4.5 
3.8 
-0.4 

Saving, Investment and Growth etc. 
233 
In contrast, when the fiscal deficit is "balance financed", interest 
rates do not rise on the whole and the expansionary effects of fiscal 
policy manifests. However, this largely reflects real balance effects 
triggered by the expansion of the money stock and the failure of the 
price level to adjust sufficiently rapidly. 
3. - Missing Links 
The model described in table 1 does not include explicit analyses 
of savings and investment in ICs. The behaviour of savings and 
investment is implicit; savings implicitly vary directly with interest 
rates and investment implicitly varies inversely with interest rates. 
This is reflected in the "crowding out" mechanism implied by equa-
tion (1) and by the negative long run relationship between interest 
rates and output in equation (2). 
In this section an attempt is made to investigate these rela-
tionships explicitly. In particular we attempt to explain the personal 
savings ratio as represented in Graph 1 and the investment ratio as 
represented in Graph 2. 
The data are extracted from IMF sources, particularly Interna-
tional Financial Statistics (and Supplement 8). The IFS summary 
tables refer to aggregate rather than personal consumption as a 
percentage of GDP. We have subtracted central government con-
sumption to arrive at an aggregate which is closer to private consump-
tion. In the case of investment we made no attempt to disaggregate 
business sector investment. 
The real rate of interest rates, which plays an important part in 
our empirical investigation, is a GOP-weighted average of short term 
interest rates of seven major ICs adjusted for inflation. We represent 
inflation by the rate of change of the GDP deflator. Further details on 
the data may be found in the appendix. 
3.1 Consumption 
Our central objective is to estimate the consumption function that 
lies behind the data in Graph 1. The general theoretical framework 

234 
Michael Beenstock 
PRIVATE SAVINGS (%) 
far industrial countries 
GRAPH 1 
41.00% -r---------------------------, 
40.ocw. 
39.50% -
38.00% 
3UOo/o -
38.00% 
~ 
I\ 
I \ 
' . 
' ' 
.... 
' 
___ .. 
' 
I 
I 
... 
.a 
I 
1 
I 
~ 
~ 
/ 
1 
I 
\ 
I 
I 
.,.., • .1 
\ 
I I 
I 
\ "" 
I I 
, 
" 
I 
I 
\ 
/' 
t 
I 
I 
II 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
,, 
I I 
I 
I 
tl 
I 
I 
f 
\ 
37.50% - ... I 
\ 
/ 
, __ 
37.00% 
I 
I 
' 
I 
I 
I 
1 
' 1 
1 
1982 1984 1988 1988 1970 1972 1974 1978 1978 1980 1982 1984 1988 1988 
25.00% 
24.00% 
23.00% 
21.00% 
20.00% 
INVESTMENT AS % OF GDP 
for industrial countries 
GRAPH 2 
19.00% +.-~,.-,--......,--.--r....,.-r-r--r--r-.--r-,.-,.-r-"',....,--.,.-,. ....... -r-.-.-..,...., 
1980 1982 1984 1986 1986 1970 1972 1974 1978 1978 1980 1982 1984 1988 1988 

Saving, Investment and Growth etc. 
235 
draws on the permanent-income-life-cycle hypothesis and is summa-
rized by equation ( 1 ): 
(1) 
where: 
c 
R 
w 
1t 
T 
G 
= 
= 
+ 
+ -
+ 
C = ( t0.lnGDP, R, W, 1t, T, G ) 
personal consumption as a percentage of GDP 
real rate of interest (Graph 3) 
wealth 
inflation 
terms of trade 
central government consumption as percentage of GDP 
The list of variables included in equation (1) is not intended to be 
exclusive, but reflects data availability for the ICs as an aggregate. No 
doubt an important omission is taxation for which there was no 
accessible data. The signs of partial derivatives are indicated above the 
variables to which they refer. The inclusion of G is to determine 
whether government consumption "crowds out" private consumption 
either directly or via taxation for which we have no data. 
In the absence of data for ICs wealth we use an alternative, quasi 
money plus money. However, this variable was not statistically 
significant. An important missing link in the model described in 
section 2 was the positive effect of interest rates on savings (and 
therefore a negative effect on personal consumption). This effect 
turned out to be quite significant and with the expected sign. We 
report the following representative equation estimated by OLS be-
tween 1962-1987: 
(2) 
C = 55.5- 57.686lnGDP-
0.437R + 
(4.85) 
(5.98) 
(3.84) 
-
9.25T -
34.571t -
31.481t- 1 + 0.36C-l 
(4.12) 
(4.46) 
(3.55) 
(2.54) 
If = 0.849 
cr = 0.356 
LM = 4.378 
s = 4.48 

236 
Michael Beenstock 
't' values are indicated in parentheses, a denotes the standard error of 
the residuals, LM is a lagrange multiplier test for upto third order 
autocorrelation in the residuals and S is the Salkever ( 197 6) test for 
structural stability over 1985-1987. 
The equation implies that bursts of growth lower the proportion 
of GDP that is consumed by persons, supporting the hypothesis that 
the short-term marginal propensity to consume is less than its long 
term counterpart. By symmetry, slowdowns in the rate of growth 
raise the consumption proportion and lower the savings ratio. The 
real rate of interest lowers consumption and raises saving; a one 
percentage point p.a. increase in interest rates lowers the proportion 
of GDP that is consumed by 0.44 of a percentage point in the short 
run (after a year) and by 0.68 percentage points in the long run. 
Inflation exerts an independent adverse effect on consumption which 
is quite powerful both statistically and in magnitude; in the long run a 
one percentage point p.a. increase in inflation lowers the proportion 
of GDP consumed by one percentage point. 
Surprisingly perhaps, improvements in the terms of trade ad-
versely affect consumer sp~nding. Lal and van Wijnbergen [7] find 
that improvements in the terms of trade raise consumer spending in 
ICs, but they also find that consumption varies directly with interest 
rates, although this effect is not statistically significant. 
Equation (2) easily passes the LM test for autocorrelation but it 
fails the structural stability test, largely on account of a large positive 
error in 1985. We were unable to detect any significant effects of 
government consumption on private consumer spending. We there-
fore re-estimated the model defining the dependent variable as private 
consumption as a percentage of GDP minus government consump-
tion. This forces a negative effect of the latter upon the former. 
Following a specification search we arrived at a model similar in 
structure to equation (2): 
(3) 
c = 75.8 
(6.2) 
87.46lnGDP 
(-6.75) 
-
0.523R- 1 + 
(3.6) 
12.91 T -
50.557t -
31.751t- 1 + 0.278C-t 
(4.4) 
(5.1) 
(2.75) 
(2.18) 
R?- = 0.858 
a= 0.505 
DW= 2.1 

Saving, Investment and Growth etc. 
237 
The parameters in the two models differ. However, a simple, 
non-nested test of these two hypotheses suggest that the solution for 
consumption from equation (2), C2, provided a better account of 
consumption than does the solution from equation (3) C3 : 
(4) 
C = 2.68 + 1.61C2 -
0.66C3 
(0.55) 
(3.49) 
(1.4) 
If = 0.875 
0" = 0.32 
In equation (4) the coefficient on C2 is significant while the 
coefficient on C3 is not significant, suggesting that equation (2) is to be 
preferred to equation (3). Consumer spending seems therefore to be 
independent of government consumption. 
Unfortunately, as already noted, we were unable to obtain a 
sufficiently long time series for the fiscal deficit in ICs. However, using 
data for 1972-1988 we found that: 
(5) 
c = 
59.7 
(100.6) 
If= 0.387 
+ 0.5FD 
(3.24) 
0" = 0.778 
Here FD is the fiscal deficit as a percentage of GDP. There is a 
strong positive correlation between the fiscal deficit and consumption. 
This seems to rule out the existence of Ricardian Equivalence, at least 
at the global level for the ICs as a whole. 
3.2 Investment 
Having established that interest rates have a positive effect on 
saving, we now investigate whether they adversely affect investment. 
The data we seek to explain are plotted in Graph 2 (!). 
Our central finding is that a flexible accelerator specification 

238 
Michael Beenstock 
describes the data quite well provided certain constraints are imposed 
as discussed below. Equation (6) is intended to be representative: 
(6) 
I= 5.95 + 0.3786ZnGDP -
0.055R-1 
(2.38) 
(5.32) 
(1.17) 
-
7.896T + 2.59T-1 + 0.67Ll 
(3.18) 
(1.18) 
(6.12) 
Jtl = 0.929 
cr =· 0.41 
DW = 2.33 
The affect of the accelerator is quite pronounced, however, the 
effect of the rate of interest is weak. The level of the terms of trade 
stimulates investment but increases in the terms of trade have the 
opposite effects. The former is consistent with the Lal and van 
Wijnbergen [7] results, but the latter might represent the dynamic 
effects of adverse movements in competitiveness. 
Re-estimating equation (6), but omitting negative real rates of 
interest produces the following result: 
(7) 
I= 8.3 
(3.29) 
+ 0.35b.lnGDP -
0.167R- 1 + 
(5.25) 
(2.42) 
-
6.3b.T + 3.64T + 0.577Ll 
(2.65) 
(1.79) 
(5.36) 
Jtl = 0.936 
cr = 0.386 
LM = 2.6 
S = 2.72 
Equation (7) easily passes the LM and statistical structural tests. 
Moreover, the coefficient on the (lagged) real rate of interest becomes 
statistically significant. The conclusion appears to be that negative real 
rates of interest are ignored by investors; only positive rates count. 
With this restriction in operation we may conclude that interest rates 
adversely affect investment. 
We reran equation (7) by successively lowering the interest rate 
threshold from zero, to minue one percent etc. We found that 
lowering the threshold lowered the goodness-of-fit and therefore 
report equation (7) as our main finding. 
We may contrast our results for investment with those recently 
reported by Barro and Martin [2]. Using data broadly similar to ours 

Saving, Investment and Growth etc. 
239 
(for nine of the ICs) they were unable to find an adverse effect of real 
rates of interest on the investment ratio. Instead they found that 
higher stock market yields stimulated investment and that budget 
deficits "crowd in" investment activity. The former effect is reason-
able but it is difficult to determine the direction of causation -
were 
stock markets simply more bouyant when investment was more 
bouyant? The latter effect is surprising; but it may reflect data 
problems in that the dependent variable includes investment by the 
public sector as does the deficit, and in that the deficit is proxied by 
the change in central government debt. Another disturbing feature of 
their results is that the coefficient of the lagged dependent variable is 
not significantly different form unit suggesting the presence of a 
troublesome unit root. The latter induced them to estimate in first 
differences and they find that the change in the investment ratio is 
adversely affected by the change in real rates of interest. 
They also report that the savings are positively affected by the 
lagged investment ratio, real interest rates, monetary growth (M1) and 
the cyclically adjusted budged deficit, and that they are adversely 
affected by real oil prices and the ratio of central government debt to 
GDP (wealth effect). They further report that real interest rates vary 
directly with stock market returns, oil prices and the lagged invest-
ment ratio and that they vary inversely with monetary growth. 
These findings are similar to ours in spirit but not in detail. They 
are similar in that real rates of interest stimulate savings and dampen 
investment. They are different in that we find that bond-financed fiscal 
deficits raise interest rates but they do not successfully measure this 
effect. There are other differences too; we find that LDC indebtedness 
raises the risk premium in world capital markets, they did not 
investigate this effect. 
4. - World and National Savings and Investment Behaviour 
In Graphs 3-4 the savings and investment ratios of the various 
countries are aggregated and the result inevitably conceals the interac-
tions that might occur between the national components. Even if 
there is no correlation between the components the variance of the 

240 
5.0% 
4.0% 
3.0% 
2.0% 
1.0% 
0.0% 
-1.0% 
-2.0% 
-3.0% 
Michael Beenstock 
REAL INTEREST RATE 
GRAPH 3 
.······· .. 
. . 
.. 
. 
•• 
• 
... 
.. ... 
.. 
. 
•.. 
·'· 
... 
. I . 
. . 
..... ·····•······ .·· ·•. 
. . . . . . . ·. . 
~.._ ··~ : . . . 
• . . . . . 
• . 
• • . 
• . . . . . . . 
• • • • 
.~ 
....... 
. 
:'• l 
• • •• 
• •• 
. . 
. . 
• . 
• • 
•• 
•• . 
-4.0o/o 
1 
1 
' 
7 
5 
4 
3 
2 
0 
1981 1983 1985 1987 1989 1971 1973 1975 19n 1979 1981 1983 1985 1987 
'· 
GDP GROWTH {%) 
far industrial countries 
i\ 
. . •'\ 
.'-
"' "· 
,, 
,· ...; 
~ r ·, 
; i 
~ 
.i\. 
-...; 
~ ! ' 
i . 
GRAPH 4 
,. 
• 
• 
I 
,., 
.,. 
I \ 
\ I 
\ 
I 
• 
• • I \ 
• 
• 
1.• 
•• 
• 
• 
I 
I \• 
• 
I 
\ 
f 
\ 
I 
• 
• 
\ 
• 
• 
\.' 
I 
! 
\ 
i 
'. .' 
. ' 
. 
; 
" 
I 
• 
' 
. 
i ! 
\ 
' 
. ' 
. 
; 
I 
• 
\.•\ 
• 
• 
I 
• I 
' . 
' . 
• I 
• I 
' . 
' . 
. . 
. ' 
~· • 
-1 
I 
I 
I 
I 
11180 1982 1984 1988 1988 1970 1972 1974 1978 1978 1980 1982 1984 1986 1988 

Saving, Investment and Growth etc. 
241 
average must be smaller than the average of the variances. Therefore 
even if national savings and investment behaviour were strictly in-
dependent, the global average would tend to display less volatility than 
the typical national component. We should therefore not be surprised 
by the relative stability of international aggregates. 
If, however, the components are correlated the volatility of the 
aggregate will be intensified if, on the whole, they are positively 
correlated and it will be reduced if they are negatively correlated. In 
this section we consider whether world saving and investment 
behaviour reflects positive or negative correlation between countries. 
If, for example, the latter happened to apply it would imply that world 
savings and investment were in fact more stable than a parochial, 
national analysis would suggest. 
To illustrate the economic issues involved we propose a simple 
two country model of savings and investment where international 
capital markets link the two capital markets. The respective savings 
and investment functions are: 
Si = a.iri + Ui 
Ii = -
~iri + vi 
i = 1.2 
i = 1.2 
where r denotes interest rates and u and v are stochastic disturbances. 
International capital movements are imperfectly elastic and are repre-
sented by: 
where w is a random disturbance. The equilibrium (under balanced 
budgets) conditions in the two capital markets are: 
s1 + z = /1 
s2- z = I2 
The solutions for savings and investments are: 

242 
Michael Beenstock 
where: 
and: 
cf>il 
= ex; (a_; + pj + t) 0 
4>i2 
= [(p; + t)(ex; + P; + t) -
t 2] o 
4>;3 
= OCXit 
q,- 1 = (ex1 + P1 + t)(ex; + P; + t)- t 2 
where: 
J.li1 
= o [(ex; + t) (ex, + P; t) -
t 2] 
~i2 = oP;(t; + P; + t) 
~i3 = -
oP,-t 
In both countries savings and investment have three stochastic 
components, two of which are domestic ( v; and u;) and the third 
imported (v; -
u;). The latter tends to zero as t tends to zero. The 
variance of savings is therefore: 
var(S;) = cf>2ilcr2v; + <f>2i2cr2u; + cf>2i3(cr2v; + cr2u;- 2cru;v;) 
+ 2cf>il cf>i20"U;V; + 2cf>il <f>i3 ( O"V;V; -
O"V;U;) + 2cf>i2cf>i3 ( O"U;V; -
O"U;U;) 
A similar relationship is implied for the covariance of investment. 
The variance of savings and investment varies directly with domestic 
and foreign variances and it depends on the covariances between the 
domestic and foreign stochastic components of saving and invest-
ment. 
We may define aggregate (world) savings as: 
S = wS; + ( 1 - w) S; 
where w denotes the weight of country i in world savings. The 
variance of world savings is therefore: 

Saving, Investment and Growth etc. 
243 
From the previous discussion we may deduce the covariance 
between savings to be: 
COV (S;S;) = <j>it<!>;tO'V;V; + <j>il<j>;20'U;U; + <j>il<j>;3 (0'2V; -
O'V;U;) + 
+ <l>i2<l>;tO'UiVj + <j>i2cili2 O'U;V; + <j>i2<j>i3 (O'U;Vi-
0'2 U;) + 
+ <j>i3<j>il (0'2V;- O'U;V;) + <j>i3<j>j2 (O'V;U; - 0'2U;) + 
+ <j>i3<j>i3 ( O'V;V; + O'U;U; -
O'V;U; -
O'U;V;) 
Clearly, the determination of cov (S;S;) is complicated even in the 
two country case. Moreover, such correlations may be induced by 
shocks transmitted via trade as well as capital transactions. In the N 
country case we may define 
n 
var* (S) = 
:E w; 2var (S;) 
j = 1 
as the theoretical variance that would be observed if there were on 
average no correlation between savings at the country level. If var ( S) 
> var* ( S) we may conclude that there is on the whole positive 
correlation between savings across countries. 
TABU! 4 
THE VARIANCE OF WORLD SAVINGS AND INVESTMENT 
var* (S) 
var(S) 
var* (/) 
var(l) 
21 Countries 
Weighted ...... 
0.512 
0.736 
0.687 
2.216(**) 
Unweighted .... 
0.329 
2.136(**) 
2.177 
3.409 
G7 
Weighted ...... 
0.693 
0.944 
0.932 
2.029(*) 
Unweighted .... 
0.38 
0.507 
1.107 
2.748(*) 
(*) Significant at p = 0.1: (**) at p = 0.05 

244 
Michael Beenstock 
The confidence interval for var ( S) is: 
(n- 1) var(S) 
X2o - p)/2,n- 1 
(n -
1) var (S) 
X2p!2,n- 1 
If var* ( S) lies outside this interval we may conclude that with 
probability p var ( S) differs from the zero correlation variance, var* 
(S). In the case of savings var* (S) always lies within the confidence 
interval at p = 0.05 except in the unweighted case where n = 21. On 
the whole, however, var (S) exceeds var* (S) indicating that: 
Factor 
Savings 
FACTOR MODELS FOR SAVING AND INVESTMENT 
(o/o variance explained) 
1 
2 
3 
4 
........ 
54 
3007 
905 
508 
Investment 0 0 0 0 0 . 
52o2 
20.4 
1401 
2.1 
TABLE 5 
5 
6o2 
Table 5 reports the results of a factor analysis of the savings and 
investment ratios of the 21 industrialized countries in our sample. The 
number of significant factors was determined by the mineigen 
criterion. On this basis a four factor model is sufficient to describe the 
21 non-independent savings ratios. The first factor accounts for 54 
percent of the variance explained, in table 6 we report the factor 
loadings after varimax rotation with the objective of interpreting the 
factors. However, there is unfortunately no clear pattern; there is e.g. 
no apparent European dimension or North American dimension. 
In the case of investment the results reported in table 4 indicate 
that there is significant positive correlation between international 
investment activity. The actual variance of aggregate investment (as a 
percent of GDP) is, on the whole, significantly greater than its zero 

FACTOR LOADINGS 
Savings 
(I) 
(2) 
(3) 
United States ................ 
-0.26419 
0.51759 
-0.70168 
Canada .................... 
0.94696 
-0.10861 
-0.00775 
Australia .................... 
0.89581 
0.31821 
0.12590 
Japan ...................... 
-0.17539 
0.87233 
-0.13954 
New Zealand ................ 
0.59702 
-0.216065 
0.15305 
Austria 
••••••••••••••••••• 0 
0.76988 
0.52791 
0.10602 
Belgium .................... 
0.44956 
0.69483 
-0.26523 
Denmark 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
0 
0 •••••• 
0.94553 
0.10592 
0.23010 
Finland .................... 
0.86974 
-0.04901 
0.41511 
France 
•••••• 0 
0 
0. 0 
0 
0 ••• 0 
0 
•• 
-0.19126 
0.76933 
0.07759 
Germany 
••••••••••••• 0. 0 
•• 
0.11168 
0.88135 
0.15898 
Iceland .................... 
0.33433 
-0.43370 
0.39600 
Ireland 
•••••• 0 
•• 0 
•• 0. 0 
•• 0 
•• 
0.75431 
-0.29083 
0.50559 
Italy ........................ 
0.19799 
-0.06198 
0.83561 
Luxembourg ................ 
0.69064 
0.26461 
0.12159 
Netherlands ................ 
0.08180 
0.88155 
-0.26842 
Norway .................... 
0.83587 
-0.37852 
0.19414 
Spain ...................... 
0.38552 
0.14406 
0.78664 
Sweden .................... 
0.89110 
-0.11538 
0.35755 
Switzerland ••••••••• 0. 0 
•••• 
-0.23204 
0.86211 
-0.07035 
United Kingdom ............ 
0.79405 
-0.42315 
0.08143 
Investment 
(I) 
(2) 
0.11483 
0.25407 
0.55851 
0.50576 
0.45927 
-0.28305 
0.86203 
-0.08644 
0.15557 
0.64365 
0.62005 
-0.39425 
0.91064 
0.19634 
0.82679 
0.01597 
0.57832 
0.34148 
0.90554 
0.23898 
0.77098 
-0.56682 
0.63633 
0.47190 
-0.08961 
0.67833 
0.43253 
0.28840 
0.47554 
-0.56086 
0.84002 
-0.44363 
0.44075 
0.39760 
0.77308 
0.34733 
0.88555 
-0.19611 
0.69592 
-0.54398 
0.71223 
0.35367 
TABLE 6 
(3) 
0.81617 
0.35527 
0.51708 
-0.07528 
-0.32496 
-0.40537 
0.18125 
0.16929 
-0.51747 
0.17692 
0.08673 
-0.01671 
0.33440 
-0.49059 
-0.05608 
0.15280 
-0.52387 
-0.08086 
-0.02848 
-0.12066 
0.26213 
g> 
~ 
~· 
~ 
~ 
~ 
;:$ .... 
$::> s. 
C) 
~ s. 
"' ?i 
~ 

246 
Michael Beenstock 
correlation benchmark, var* (1). This is the case for the sample as a 
whole and for the G7 countries. In the former case the weighted result 
is particularly significant with the actual variance 3, 5 times as large as 
the zero correlation counterpart. 
Table 5 indicates the presence of five statistically significant 
factors in the case of investment. The similarity between the number 
of significant factors in the case of savings and investment is quite 
striking. The factor loadings (after varimax rotation) are reported in 
table 6. However, there is in this case too no clear identification ofthe 
factors. 
5. - Conclusions 
Our main findings may be summarized as follows: 
(i) Bond-financed fiscal expansions in ICs tend to raise interest 
rates and lower investment and consumption. They also lower rather 
than raise output, i.e. in contrast to conventional wisdom. This 
reflects the adverse effects of high interest rates on the capital stock 
and aggregate supply. 
(ii) Money-financed expansions are more inflationary than their 
bond-financed counterparts but they do not raise interest rates. 
(iii) Non-oil commodity prices have a complex relationship with 
events inside the ICs. Higher GDP raises commodity prices but higher 
interest rates have the opposite effect. A fiscal expansion in ICs lowers 
real non-oil commodity prices because it both lowers GDP and raises 
interest rates. There is also evidence of "dollar illusion" in commodity 
prices. 
(iv) Negative real rates of interest adversely affect private savings 
but they do not promote investment. Consequently, the negative real 
rates of interest of the 1970s stimulated consumption without pro-
moting investment. 
(v) There is evidence of positive correlation between saving and 
investment behaviour at the national level. This is particularly true of 
investment. However, further analysis revealed that the ICs comprise 
four to five independent capital markets. 

Saving, Investment and Growth etc. 
247 
BIBUOGRAPHY 
[1) ADAMS F.G.- EUGUCHI H.- MEYER-ZU-SCHLOCHTEN F.: «An Econometric Analysis of 
International Trade», OECD, Occasional Paper, 1969. 
[2] BARRO R.J. -MARTIN X.S.: «World Real Interest Rates», NBER Working Paper, no. 
3317, April 1990. 
[3] BEENSTOCK M.- MINFORD P.: «A Quarterly Econometric Model of World Trade and 
Prices, 1955-71», in PARKIN M. - Zis G. (eds.): Inflation in Open Economies, 
Manchester, Manchester University Press, 1976. 
[4] BEENSTOCK M.: «An Econometric Investigation of North-South Interdependence», 
in CuRRIE D. -VINES D. (eds.): Macroeconomic Interactions between North and 
South, Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, 1988. 
[5] - -: «An Aggregate Model of Output. Inflation and Interest Rates for Indus-
trialized Countries», Weltwirtschaftliches Archiv, no. 124, 1988, pp. 403-19. 
[6] BRYANT R. - PaRTES R. (eds.): Global Macroeconomic Policy, Conflict and 
Cooperation, Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, 1987. 
[7] LAL D. -VAN WIJNBERGEN S.: <<Government Deficits, the Real Rate of Interest and 
LDC Debt», European Economic Review, no. 29, 1985, pp. 157-91. 
[8] SACHS J.- McKIBBIN W.: «Macroeconomic Policies in the OECD and LDC External 
Adjustment», CEPR, Discussion Paper, no. 56, March 1985. 
[9] VAN WIJNBERGEN S.: <<Interdependence Revisited: A Developing Country Perspec-
tive on Macroeconomic Management and Trade Policy in the Industrialized 
World», Economic Policy, November 1985. 

Recent Declines in the Savings Rate: 
a Life Cycle Perspective 
Franco Modigliani (*) 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology 
Introduction 
In the course of the last three decades, the national saving to in-
come ratio, which has traditionally been regarded as fairly stable at 
least in the medium run, has undergone profound changes, especially 
among the industrialized countries. These changes have tended to run 
in the same direction for all countries, namely down. While this devel-
opment has been very negative for the world economy, as it has red-
uced the flow of resources available for investment and generally raised 
interest rates, it offers a unique opportunity for the scientist trying to 
validate -
or reject -
theories of aggregate saving behavior. The main 
purpose of this paper is to rely on this episode to test whether and how 
far it can be explained by the so-called Life Cycle Hypothesis (LCH). 
We propose to show that, relying on that framework, one can account 
fairly well for the unusual behavior of saving in recent decades. 
1. - A Review of Theory and Facts 
1.1 Recent Trends of National Saving 
Table 1 presents the basic statistics on the national and private 
saving ratio for the 21 OECD countries for which the necessary 
(*) I would like to thank Daniel Rodriguez for his assistance in the collection and 
organization of the data, and Michael Gibson and Arun Muralidhar for reading a 
preliminary version of the manuscript and providing constructive criticism. 
Advise: the numbers in square brackets refer to the Bibliography in the appendix. 

REGRESSION VARIABLES: 1960-1970 
NS/NNP 
APSYf 
GROWITI GLAGGED SURPLUS/ jNEWSURP/ SURPYI' 
NETIAX/ 
NEWI'AX 
NNP 
NNP 
NNP 
Canada ...... 1960 
0.113 
0.103 
0.047 
0.047 
0.028 
0.033 
0.044 
0.225 
0.231 
United States 
1960 
0.106 
0.107 
O.o35 
0.026 
0.013 
0.023 
0.030 
0.215 
0.225 
Japan ........ 1960 
0.256 
0.219 
0.095 
0.081 
0.078 
0.075 
0.090 
0.173 
0.170 
Australia ...... 1960 
0.137 
0.093 
0.050 
0.042 
0.053 
0.064 
0.081 
0.203 
0.214 
Austria ...... 1960 
0.182 
0.167 
0.043 
0.094 
0.068 
0.074 
0.113 
0.345 
0.350 
Belgium ...... 1960 
0.144 
0.143 
0.045 
0.031 
0.013 
0.029 
0.036 
0.176 
0.193 
Denmark .... 1960 
0.174 
0.173 
0.048 
0.039 
0.050 
0.044 
0.059 
0.254 
0.249 
Finland ...... 1960 
0.157 
0.101 
0.048 
0.047 
0.086 
0.083 
0.114 
0.275 
0.271 
France ...... 1960 
0.193 
0.192 
0.050 
0.046 
0.045 
0.048 
0.064 
0.245 
0.248 
Germany 
••• 0 
1960 
0.199 
0.190 
0.041 
0.076 
0.064 
0.061 
0.083 
0.276 
0.272 
Greenland .... 1960 
0.153 
0.132 
0.069 
0.059 
0.040 
0.044 
0.054 
0.173 
0.177 
Iceland ...... 1960 
0.137 
0.045 
0.040 
0.054 
0.104 
0.103 
0.137 
0.247 
0.246 
Ireland ...... 1960 
0.122 
0.130 
0.042 
0.015 
0.007 
0.015 
0.019 
0.174 
0.183 
Italy .......... 1960 
0.208 
0.245 
0.052 
0.057 -0.001 
0.010 
0.012 
0.179 
0.190 
Netherlands .. 
1960 
0.199 
0.180 
0.046 
0.053 
0.043 
0.066 
0.089 
0.238 
0.260 
Norway ...... 1960 
0.161 
0.123 
0.038 
0.037 
0.071 
0.076 
0.111 
0.306 
0.311 
Portugal ...... 1960 
0.198 
0.215 
0.058 
0.043 
0.024 
0.020 
O.Q25 
0.179 
0.176 
Spain ........ 1960 
0.167 
0.161 
0.066 
0.036 
0.045 
0.028 
0.033 
0.153 
0.137 
Sweden ...... 1960 
0.166 
0.112 
0.042 
0.034 
0.032 
0.090 
0.134 
0.327 
0.325 
Switzerland .. 
1960 
0.212 
0.201 
0.043 
0.043 
0.047 
0.049 
0.061 
0.189 
0.191 
United Kingdom 1960 
0.112 
0.085 
0.026 
0.031 
0.032 
0.051 
0.071 
0.260 
0.279 
Average of all 
countries 
•••• 0 •• 0 
0. 
0.166 
0.148 
0.049 
0.047 
0.048 
0.052 
0.070 
0.229 
0.233 
--
-····----
-I..... 
UWORK 
DEP 
0.365 
0.552 
0.450 
0.500 
0.571 
0.394 
0.409 
0.478 
0.512 
0.368 
0.385 
0.375 
0.526 
0.371 
0.627 
0.215 
0.466 
0.412 
0.486 
0.344 
0.387 
0.391 
0.386 
0.597 
0.377 
0.538 
0.320 
0.342 
0.283 
0.459 
0.372 
0.395 
0.232 
0.460 
0.263 
0.436 
0.537 
0.322 
0.394 
0.368 
0.507 
0.364 
0.422 
0.413 
TABLE 1 
~ 
DEBI'AD/ 
NNP 
0.006 
0.010 
-0.003 
0.010 
0.006 
0.016 
-0.006 
0.003 
0.004 
-0.003 
0.004 
-0.001 
0.009 
0.011 
0.022 
0.005 
-0.003 
-0.016 
-0.002 
0.002 
0.019 
0.004 
0 
~ 
!::> 
;:$ 8 
[ 
~· -
j;:;• 
=:. 

REGRESSION VARIABLES: 1971-1980 
NS/NNP 
APSYf 
GROWTII GlAGGED SURPLUS/ NEWSURP/ SURPYT 
NEITAX/ 
NNP 
NNP 
NNP 
Canada ...... 1971 
0.133 
0.156 
0.038 
0.047 
0.010 
0.018 
0.024 
0.253 
United States 
1971 
0.089 
0.104 
0.029 
O.o35 -0.012 
0.007 
0.010 
0.195 
Japan ........ 1971 
0.246 
0.243 
0.049 
0.095 
0.046 
0.046 
0.056 
0.176 
Australia ...... 1971 
0.110 
0.089 
0.030 
0.050 
0.015 
0.045 
0.060 
0.233 
Austria ...... 1971 
0.180 
0.162 
O.o35 
0.043 
0.058 
0.073 
0.110 
0.322 
Belgium ...... 1971 
0.139 
0.139 
0.031 
0.045 -0.011 
0.033 
0.044 
0.195 
Denmark .... 1971 
0.133 
0.133 
0.023 
0.048 
0.052 
0.046 
0.071 
0.354 
Finland ...... 1971 
0.142 
0.117 
0.038 
0.048 
0,075 
0.064 
0.095 
0.342 
France ...... 1971 
0.163 
0.161 
0.034 
0.050 
0.036 
0.048 
0.067 
0.274 
Germany .... 1971 
0.143 
0.157 
0.028 
0.041 
0.033 
0.033 
0.048 
0.303 
Greenland .... 1971 
0.207 
0.217 
0.044 
0.069 
0.020 
0.034 
0.043 
0.192 
Iceland ...... 1971 
0.140 
0.080 
0.044 
0.040 
0.083 
0.085 
0.122 
0.305 
Ireland ...... 1971 
0.131 
0.154 
0.046 
0.042 -0.032 
0.020 
0.027 
0.225 
Italy .......... 1971 
0.167 
0.175 
0.037 
0.052 -0.047 
0.034 
0.045 
0.158 
Netherlands .. 1971 
0.164 
0.194 
0.028 
0.046 
0.008 
0.024 
0.033 
0.262 
Norway ...... 1971 
0.140 
0.091 
0.048 
0.038 
0.086 
0.085 
0.142 
0.400 
Portugal ...... 1971 
0.220 
0.269 
0.046 
0.058 -0.007 
0.005 
0.006 
0.188 
Spain ........ 1971 
0.167 
0.159 
0.036 
0.066 
0.026 
0.036 
0.043 
0.166 
Sweden ...... 1971 
0.118 
0.128 
0.021 
0.042 
0.062 
0.038 
0.060 
0.396 
Switzerland .. 
1971 
0.194 
0.186 
0.009 
0.043 
0.041 
0.044 
0.054 
0.189 
United Kingdom 1971 
0.082 -0.015 
0.018 
0.026 
0.005 
0.091 
0.148 
0.295 
Average of all 
countries .......... 
0.153 
0.148 
0.034 
0.049 
0.026 
0.043 
0.062 
0.258 
TABLE 1 continued 
NEWfAX 
LFWORK 
DEP 
DEBTAD/ 
NNP 
0.261 
0.505 
0.403 
0.008 
0.214 
0.541 
0.388 
0.019 
0.176 
0.535 
0.354 
0.000 
0.263 
0.493 
0.424 
0.030 
0.336 
0.484 
0.364 
0.014 
0.239 
0.445 
0.371 
0.044 
0.348 
0.636 
0.347 -0.006 
0.331 
0.662 
0.327 -0.011 
0.286 
0.517 
0.377 
0.012 
0.304 
0.494 
0.325 -0.001 
0.206 
0.327 
0.374 
0.014 
0.307 
0.451 
0.489 
0.002 
0.277 
0.345 
0.530 
0.052 
0.239 
0.374 
0.328 
0.081 
0.278 
0.326 
0.388 
0.016 
0.399 
0.560 
0.375 -0.001 
0.200 
0.427 
0.439 
0.012 
0.175 
0.323 
0.431 
0.009 
0.371 
0.675 
0.318 -O.o25 
0.191 
0.529 
0.331 
0.002 
0.382 
0.550 
0.363 
0.087 
0.275 
0.486 
0.383 
0.017 
----
~ 
~ 
;:$ 
..... 
\:) 
~ 
s· 
~ 
s· 
~ 
(1) 
~ 
~ 
~-
Ill 
::tl 
t::l 
~ 
(1) 
fi 
~ -

REGRESSION VARIABLES: 1981-1987 
NS/NNP 
APSIT 
GROWTH GI.AGGED SURPLUS/ NEWSURP/ SURPIT 
NEITAX/ 
NNP 
NNP 
NNP 
Canada ...... 1981 
0.094 
0.161 
0.031 
O.Q38 -0.043 -0.027 -0.036 
0.234 
United States 
1981 
0.039 
0.086 
0.031 
0.029 -0.042 -0.029 -0.037 
0.191 
Japan ........ 1981 
0.202 
0.189 
0.037 
0.049 
0.043 
0.048 
0.060 
0.182 
Australia ...... 1981 
0.034 
0.034 
0.031 
0.030 -0.012 
0.009 
0.013 
0.256 
Austria ...... 1981 
0.130 
0.145 
0.017 
0.035 
0.021 
0.034 
0.051 
0.325 
Belgium ...... 1981 
0.065 
0.103 
0.014 
0.031 -O.Q78 -0.015 -0.020 
0.154 
Denmark 0. 0. 
1981 
0.060 
0.083 
0.027 
0.023 -0.013 
0.008 
0.013 
0.354 
Finland ...... 1981 
0.107 
0.119 
0.032 
0.038 
0.030 
0.030 
0.046 
0.352 
France ...... 1981 
0.080 
0.080 
0.018 
0.034 
0.009 
0.026 
0.038 
0.306 
Germany .... 1981 
0.107 
0.129 
0.016 
0.028 
0.013 
0.019 
0.028 
0.311 
Greenland .... 1981 
0.085 
0.160 
0.012 
0.044 -0.067 -0.043 -0.054 
0.174 
Iceland ...... 1981 
0.067 
0.094 
0.034 
0.044 
0.001 
0.002 
0.003 
0.311 
Ireland ...... 1981 
0.083 
0.147 
0.022 
0.046 -0.074 -0.024 -0.034 
0.220 
Italy .......... 1981 
0.109 
0.133 
0.019 
0.037 -0.080 
0.010 
0.013 
0.166 
Netherlands .. 
1981 
0.133 
0.187 
0.014 
0.028 -0.016 -0.009 -0.011 
0.234 
Norway ...... 1981 
0.158 
0.039 
0.039 
0.048 
0.097 
0.134 
0.213 
0.335 
Portugal ...... 1981 
0.198 
0.214 
0.020 
0.046 -0.018 
0.037 
0.050 
0.194 
Spain ........ 1981 
0.096 
0.107 
0.026 
0.036 -0.011 
0.012 
0.015 
0.189 
Sweden ...... 1981 
0.060 
0.095 
0.024 
0.021 -0.002 
0.005 
0.008 
0.410 
Switzerland .. 
1981 
0.202 
0.202 
0.017 
0.009 
0.039 
0.041 
0.051 
0.201 
United Kingdom 1981 
0.062 
0.068 
0.032 
0.018 -0.015 
O.ot5 
0.022 
0.282 
Average of all 
countries .......... 
0.103 
0.123 
0.024 
0.034 -0.010 
0.013 
0.021 
0.256 
NEWfAX 
0.250 
0.204 
0.187 
0.278 
0.338 
0.216 
0.376 
0.351 
0.323 
0.317 
0.197 
0.312 
0.270 
0.256 
0.241 
0.372 
0.249 
0.212 
0.417 
0.202 
0.312 
0.280 
TABLE 1 continued 
~ 
LI'WORK 
DEP 
0.617 
0.321 
0.630 
0.330 
0.568 
0.325 
0.539 
0.363 
0.509 
0.280 
0.503 
0.284 
0.742 
0.284 
0.727 
0.288 
0.549 
0.328 
0.502 
0.232 
0.397 
0.329 
0.442 
0.416 
0.374 
0.494 
0.411 
0.267 
0.403 
0.296 
0.678 
0.320 
0.576 
0.364 
0.382 
0.369 
0.771 
0.286 
0.538 
0.262 
0.593 
0.300 
0.545 
0.321 
DEBTAD/ 
NNP 
0.016 
0.013 
0.006 
0.022 
0.013 
0.063 
0.021 
-0.001 
0.017 
0.006 
0.024 
0.001 
0.050 
0.090 
0.007 
0.037 
0.055 
0.022 
0.006 
0.002 
0.030 
0.024 
N 
~ 
I:> ;l 8 
[ 
aQ· -
s· 
:::. 

Recent Declines in the Savings Rate etc. 
253 
information could be gathered, for the period 1960-1987. Since we 
are interested in studying long-run, rather than cyclical, behavior, 
each observation for every variable in each country is an average of 
many years: the years '60 to '70 for the first period (top of Table); '71 
to '80 for the second period (middle section); and '81 to '87 for the 
last period. The row at the bottom of each section gives the average 
for all countries in each period. It is seen that the national saving rate 
declined from an impressive level of 16.6% in the sixties to 15.3% in 
the seventies, and finally crumbled to 10.3% in the eighties, an overall 
decline of some 40% in twenty years and of one-third in the last 
decade. What makes the episode even more impressive is the gen-
eralized nature of the decline in saving. This can be seen from Table 2, 
which reports the change in saving between decades: the top portion 
gives the change between the '60s and the '80s, the lower panel the 
change from the decade of the 1970s to that of the '80s. From the top 
panel we see that saving fell in every single country (except Portugal 
where there was no change). In the final period, from the '70s to the 
'80s, the decline again spread to very nearly all countries, with the 
exception of Switzerland where the change was again near zero, and 
Norway where it reflected unusual circumstances. 
In the case of private saving, the decline, though still notable 
(from 14.8% to 12.3%), is less dramatic and less widespread; over the 
entire period saving declines in 16 countries out of 21, and only one of 
the remaining five has a pronounced rise in saving. As will be shown 
presently, the difference between the national and private saving rate 
reflects of course the large decrease in government surplus, averaging 
nearly 4 percentage points. 
1.2 A Brief Review of the Life Cycle Model 
Relevant ot Aggregate Saving 
The so-called New Theories of the Consumption Function, which 
include the LCH first developed by Modigliani and Brumberg [15], 
and the Permament Income Hypothesis (PY) of Milton Friedman [7], 
are distinguishable from the preexisting Keynesian model, based on 
crude empiricism, because they rest on a choice theoretic framework 

FIRST DIFFERENCES OF 1980s - 1960s 
NS/NNP 
APSYr 
GROWffi GlAGGED SURPLUS/ jNEWSURP/ SURPYT 
NEITAX/ 
NNP 
NNP 
NNP 
Canada ............ -0.019 
0.058 -0.016 -0.009 -0.079 -0.060 -0.073 
0.009 
United States ...... -0.067 -0.021 -0.004 
0.003 -0.055 -0.052 -0.067 -0.024 
Japan .............. -0.054 -0.030 -0.058 -0.032 -0.035 -0.026 -0.030 
0.008 
A~ralia ............ -0.103 -0.059 -0.019 -0.012 -0.065 -0.054 -0.068 
0.053 
Austria ............ -0.052 -0.022 -0.026 -0.059 -0.047 -0.040 -0.062 -0.020 
Belgium ............ -0.079 -0.040 -0.031 
0.000 -0.091 -0.044 -0.055 -0.023 
I>en01ark .......... -0.114 -0.090 -0.021 -0.016 -0.063 -0.036 -0.046 
0.100 
Finland ............ -0.050 
O.ot8 -0.016 -0.009 -0.056 -0.053 -0.069 
0.077 
France 
••••••• 0 ••• 0 
-0.113 -0.112 -0.032 -0.036 -0.036 -0.022 -0.026 
0.061 
Germany 
• 
0 •• 0 
0 •••• -0.092 -0.061 -0.025 -0.048 -0.051 -0.042 -0.055 
0.035 
Greenland .......... -0.068 
0.028 -0.057 -0.015 -0.107 -0.087 -0.108 
0.001 
Iceland ............ -0.070 
0.049 -0.006 -0.010 -0.103 -0.101 -0.134 
0.064 
Ireland ............ -0.039 
0.017 -0.020 
0.031 -0.081 -0.039 -0.052 
0.046 
Italy ................ -0.099 -0.112 -0.033 -0.020 -0.079 
0.000 
0.001 -0.013 
Netherlands ........ -0.066 
0.007 -0.032 -0.025 -0.059 -0.075 -0.100 -0.004 
Norway ............ -0.003 -0.084 
0.001 
0.011 
0.026 
0.058 
0.102 
0.029 
Portugal ............ 
0.000 -0.001 -O.o38 
0.003 -0.042 
0.017 
0.025 
0.014 
Spain .............. -0.071 -0.054 -0.040 
0.000 -0.056 -0.016 -O.ot8 
0.036 
Sweden ............ -0.106 -0.017 -0.018 -0.013 -0.094 -0.085 -0.126 
0.083 
Switzerland ........ -0.010 
0.001 -0.026 -0.034 -0.008 -0.008 -0.010 
0.012 
United Kingdo01 .... -0.050 -0.017 
0.006 -0.013 -0.047 -0.036 -0.049 
0.022 
Average of all 
countries 
•••••• 0 
•• 0 
-0.063 -0.026 -0.024 -0.013 -0.058 -0.038 -0.049 
0.027 
---
NEWfAX 
LFWORK 
DEP 
0.019 
0.252 -0.231 
-0.021 
0.180 -0.170 
0.017 -0.002 -0.069 
0.065 
0.130 -0.115 
-0.012 -0.003 -0.087 
0.024 
0.118 -0.089 
0.127 
0.216 -0.086 
0.080 
0.100 
0.072 
0.074 
0.083 -0.084 
0.045 
0.016 -0.111 
0.021 
0.010 -0.062 
0.066 
0.056 -0.181 
0.087 -0.003 -0.044 
0.066 
0.091 -0.075 
-0.019 
0.120 -0.162 
0.061 
0.305 -0.075 
0.073 
0.344 -0.097 
O.G75 
0.120 -0.067 
0.091 
0.234 -0.036 
0.012 
0.145 -0.105 
0.032 
0.087 -0.063 
0.047 
0.124 -0.092 
TABLE 2 
DEBT AD/ 
NNP 
0.010 
0.003 
0.009 
0.011 
0.007 
0.047 
0.027 
0.002 
0.013 
0.010 
0.020 
0.003 
0.041 
0.079 
-0.015 
0.032 
0.058 
0.039 
0.008 
0.000 
0.011 
0.020 
~ 
~ 
~ 
;:s. 
8 
~ 
a:Q· -
s· 
;:s .... 

TABLE 2 continued 
FIRST DIFFERENCES OF 1980s - 1970s 
NS/NNP 
AI'S IT 
GROWTH GLAGGED SURPLUS/ jNEWSURP/ SURPIT 
NETIAX/ 
NEWTAX 
LFWORK 
DEP 
DEBTAD/ 
NNP 
NNP 
NNP 
NNP 
Canada ............ -0.039 
0.005 -0.007 -0.009 -0.053 -0.045 -0.060 -0.019 -0.011 
0.112 -0.082 
0.008 
United States ...... -0.050 -0.018 
0.002 -0.006 -0.030 -0.036 -0.047 -0.004 -0.010 
0.089 -0.058 -0.006 
Japan .............. -0.044 -0.054 -0.012 -0.046 -0.003 
0.002 
0.004 
0.006 
0.011 
0.033 -0.029 
0.006 
Australia ............ -0.076 -0.055 
0.001 -0.020 -0.027 -0.036 -0.047 
0.023 
0.015 
0.046 -0.061 -0.008 
Austria 
•• 0 
0 
0 
0 •••••• -0.050 -0.017 -0.018 -0.008 -0.037 -0.039 -0.059 
0.003 
0.002 
0.025 -0.084 -0.001 
Belgium ............ -0.074 -0.036 -0.017 -0.014 -0.067 -0.048 -0.064 -0.041 -0.023 
0.058 -0.087 
0.019 
Denmark .......... -0.073 -0.050 
0.004 -0.025 -0.065 -0.038 -0.058 
0.000 
0.028 
0.106 -0.063 
0.027 
Finland ............ -0.035 
0.002 -0.006 -0.010 -0.045 -0.034 -0.049 
0.010 
0.020 
0.065 -0.039 
0.010 
France 
••• 0 •••••••• -0.083 -0.081 -0.016 -0.016 -0.027 -0.022 -0.029 
0.032 
0.037 
0.032 -0.049 
0.005 
Germany 
••••• 0 •••• -0.036 -0.028 -0.012 -0.013 -0.020 -0.014 -0.020 
0.008 
0.013 
0.008 -0.093 
0.005 
Greenland .......... -0.122 -0.057 -0.032 -0.025 -0.087 -0.077 -0.037 -0.018 -0.009 
0.070 -0.045 
0.010 
Iceland ............ -0.073 
0.014 -0.010 
0.004 -0.082 -0.083 -0.119 
0.006 
0.005 -0.009 -0.073 -0.001 
Ireland ............ 
-0.48 -0.007 -0.024 
0.004 -0.042 -0.044 -0.061 -0.005 -0.007 
0.029 -0.036 -0.002 
Italy ................ -0.058 -0.042 -0.018 -0.015 -0.033 -0.024 -0.032 
0.008 
0.017 
0.037 -0.061 
0.009 
Netherlands ........ -0.031 -0.007 -0.014 -0.018 -0.024 -0.033 -0.044 -0.028 -0.037 
0.077 -0.092 -0.009 
Norway ............ 
0.018 -0.052 -0.009 
0.010 
0.011 
0.049 
0.071 -0.065 -0.027 
0.118 -0.055 
O.o38 
Portugal ............ -0.022 -0.055 -0.026 -0.012 -0.011 
0.032 
0.044 
0.005 
0.049 
0.149 -0.075 
0.043 
Spain .............. -0.071 -0.052 -0.010 -0.030 -0.037 -0.024 -0.028 
0.023 
0.037 
0.059 -0.062 
0.013 
Sweden ............ -0.058 -0.033 
0.003 -0.021 -0.064 -0.033 -0.052 
0.014 
0.046 
0.096 -0.032 
0.031 
Switzerland ........ 
0.008 
0.016 
0.008 -0.034 -0.002 -0.003 -0.003 
0.012 
0.011 
0.009 -0.069 
0.000 
United Kingdom .... 
0.020 
0.083 
0.014 -0.008 -0.020 -0.076 -0.126 -0.013 -0.070 
0.043 -0.063 -0.057 
Average of all 
countries .......... -0.049 -0.025 -0.009 -0.015 -0.036 -0.030 -0.042 -0.002 
0.005 
0.060 -0.062 
0.007 
Legend for variable abbreviation: 
NS/NNP 
= net national saving as a percentage of national income. 
APSYT 
= private saving corrected for inflation as a percentage of national income less net taxes corrected for inflation. 
GROWTH 
= the current period's average annual rate of real GOP growth. 
GLAGGEO 
= the previous time period's average annual rate of real GOP growth. 
SURPLUS/NNP 
= the average of aggregate general government current receipts less current disbursements as a percentage of national income. 
NEWSURP/NNP = average inflation-adjusted surplus as a percentage of national income. 
NETIAX/NNP 
= total general government net taxes as a percentage of national income, where net taxes are defined as current receipts less net 
transfers less net interest payments on the public debt. 
NEWT AX 
LFWORK 
OEP 
OEBTAO/NNP 
NETIAX/NNP corrected for inflation. 
the average of the annual labor force participation ratio for females aged 25-54. 
the ratio of population under 1 5 to the entire population. 
the inflation correction calculated as: (net public debt/nnp) x (cpi). 
~ 
~ 
;::: 
...... 
~ 
~ 
~-
(1) 
"' 
~-
...... 
;::--
(1) 
~ 
-.::: 
~-
::tl 
~ 
~ 
(1) 
~ 
~ 
Ul 

256 
Franco Modigliani 
and more precisely on the theory of optimum allocation of "income" 
between alternative "commodities" (theory of consumers' choice). 
Following the pioneering work of Irving Fisher, the commodities 
between which the consumer chooses can be identified as consump-
tion at various points of life, and income with the (present value of) 
resources accruing over life. This formulation has the basic impli-
cation that, contrary to the prevailing view, consumption at any point 
in time, as well as over the lifetime, depends on life resources and not 
on income at the time of consumption. Thus saving represents the 
residual between the consumption optimally allocated to a period and 
whatever the income happens to be in that period. 
The essential difference between PY and LCH is that Friedman 
relies on the approximation that life is infinite and therefore uniform. 
Friedman's permanent income is the present value of resources over 
the infinite life times the rate of return, and his main concern is the 
effect, on the saving of individuals or groups, of random shocks to 
income away from permanent income, his so-called transitory in-
come. The LCH on the other hand takes explicitly into account that 
life is finite and structured, and that, therefore, income and consump-
tion exhibit in addition to random shocks also systematic variations 
arising from the life cycle characterized by the succession of a 
preworking, a working, and a retired phase. LCH is thus in a position 
to explore the implications not only of random shocks, which are 
basically the same as for PY, but also of systematic life cycle variations 
of saving and wealth. These tum out to be crucial for an understand-
ing of aggregate saving whereas the variations of transitory income 
are not too relevant since under aggregation they tend to cancel out. 
Not surprisingly therefore, PY, in contrast to LCH, has little to say 
about aggregate consumption and saving. In what follows we concen-
trate on the aggregate implications of LCH, since they are the ones 
that are relevant for the study of the recent drying up of saving. 
1.3 The Aggregative Implications of LCH: 
the Basic Model 
To understand the implications of LCH it is useful to rely on two 
successive approximations. In the first approximation, or basic model, 

Recent Declines in the Savings Rate etc. 
257 
it is assumed that there are no bequests and there is no government -
or at least no unbalanced budget. In addition, we rely on one basic 
assumption about the nature of allocation preferences, namely that 
behavior can be described as though the representative agent had a 
homothetic preference map, stable over time (meaning that the ratio 
of preferred consumption at any age to life resources is independent of 
the size of life resources). 
1. 3.1 The Role of Income Growth 
From these assumptions one can establish the following proposi-
tions (Modigliani- Bromberg [15]): 1) the saving rate of a country is 
independent of its per capita income; 2) two countries may have 
different rates of saving even though individuals are equally thrifty, in 
the sense of having the same life path saving and wealth; 3) the saving 
rate depends critically on the rate of growth in the following sense: (i) 
with zero growth, the saving will be zero, regardless of income or 
thrift habits; (ii) there can be saving only when there is growth and 
between economies with equal thrift, the one with the fastest growth 
can be expected to save the most; 4) an economy can accumulate a 
very substantial stock of wealth relative to income, even in the 
absence of bequests. 
These propositions can be verified by relying on the most elemen-
tary example, life cycle, in which income is constant through the 
earning span, zero thereafter, and consumption is constant through 
life and national income is stationary. In this case there will be saving 
till retirement, and dissaving after retirement equal to the amount 
accumulated till then. It should be clear that, in this economy, the 
wealth-income ratio is independent of income, national or per capita; 
it can also be readily shown that it is equal to half the number of 
retired years. For this simple economy, Proposition 1) is a direct 
implication of homothetic maps. Since each household consumes all 
his accumulation over his life, Proposition 3) (i) can be established by 
noting that in the absence of growth, i.e. stationary population and no 
other source growth, national saving must be zero as the saving of the 
young is offset by the dissaving of the old. But if population is growing 

258 
Franco Modigliani 
steadily, that will mean an increase in the relative number of the 
young who save, relative to the old who dissave; thus the saving will 
be positive and increase with population growth. Similarly if income 
grows through rising productivity, even if population is stationary, 
saving will be positive (at least for growth rates in the relevant range) 
because the young who are in their saving phase enjoy higher lifetime 
resources than do the old who dissave (Proposition 3) (ii) ). 
The nature of the relation between saving and trend growth can 
be confirmed also by making use of the fundamental dynamic relation 
that must hold, in steady state, between the saving ratio, s, the wealth 
income ratio w, and the rate of growth g, namely, s = gw (which is 
the equivalent of the well-known Harrod-Domar proposition for 
investment and the capital stock). 
This equation directly confirms Proposition 3) (i) ),ass ~ 0 if g ~ 
0. For positive values of s we found that the slope of the relation 
between s and growth, g, is given by: 
ds/ dg = w + g(dw! dg) 
Thus, if w were not a function of growth, or dw!dg = 0, s would 
be proportional to growth and with slope equal to the wealth income 
ratio w, which, as noted earlier, could be a rather large number, say 
on the order of five. However, in general w will depend on g. In fact 
there are reasons to believe that it decreases with g, which means that 
the second term in the above expression will become more and more 
negative. Thus the slope declines as g rises, or the relation between s 
and g is concave to the g axis. However, the slope must be positive at 
the origin and by continuity, in a neighborhood thereof, which may be 
expected to include the relevant range of g which is empirically 
small- seldom more than 10%. 
One can throw some light on the relation between the wealth-in-
come ratio and growth by a different route. It was shown by 
Modigliani and Bromberg [ 1 5] that under the assumption stated at 
the beginning of this section, aggregate consumption can be expressed 
as a linear function of wealth and labor income, or: 
(1) 
C =ex· YL + 15 W 
where: YL is labor income. 

Recent Declines in the Savings Rate etc. 
259 
Since personal income is Y = YL + r W, where r is the rate of 
return on wealth, saving can be expressed as: 
S = YL + rW- C = (1 -
ex) Y + (o -
exr) W 
or: 
(2) 
s = (1 -
ex) -
(o -
ex r) w 
where: s =SlY and w = W/Y. 
But with steady growths= gw, implying: 
(3) 
(1 -
ex) - (o -
ex r) w = gw 
or: 
(3a) 
w = (1 - ex)/(g + o - ex r) 
(3b) 
s = g(1 - ex)/(g + o - ex r) 
It is apparent from (3a) that the wealth-income ratio will tend to 
decline with g while the saving ratio will be an increasing function of g 
for any finite value of g, at least as long as the parameters ex and o are 
not very sensitive to g, which is consistent with simulation reported in 
Modigliani and Bromberg [15]. 
A comparison of equations (2) and (3b) shows that there are two 
alternative ways to express the saving ratio, s; first, in terms of 
wealth-income ratio (as in (2) ), and second in terms of the growth 
rate, g, as in (3b). The formulation of equation (2) has some advan-
tages in that it may be expected to hold reasonably well even in the 
short run. The drawback is the very limited availability of data on 
wealth, whereas g is available as long as there exist national income 
accounts. For this reason in our test we have used a linear approxim-
ation to equation (3b). 

260 
Franco Modigliani 
1.3.2 Other Factors Affecting the Saving Rate 
Besides depending on growth, swill also be affected by any factor 
which affects the wealth-income ratio. Equation (3) suggests that one 
such factor is the interest rate, and that a rise in rwill then raise wand 
s. However the second inference is not warranted because the 
parameters ex and especially o are generally themselves a function of r. 
Results presented in Modigliani and Brumberg [15] suggest that o 
rises with r and may rise even faster, in which case s and w will 
decline with r. 
Other factors at work include, in addition to length of retirement, 
the timing and size of other major expenditures for which provisions 
must be made, such as for the purchase of a house, children's 
education, or other major durables. The need for accumulation will be 
increased in the presence of credit rationing. Another reason for the 
accumulation of assets is the precautionary motive (Keynes [10], p. 
1 07) which in turn interacts with the availability of public and private 
insurance against various events and of life annuities. While precau-
tion and liquidity constraints make for higher saving, there may be 
another factor making for smaller saving, namely myopia or the 
failure to make adequate preparations for retirement. But there is so 
far little evidence of myopia being a widespread phenomenon. 
Finally, the saving rate will be affected by socio-demographic 
variables. To begin with, population growth is expected to affect the 
saving rate through the age structure of the population. But in 
addition, several other variables have been suggested, e.g., life ex-
pectancy, the proportion of retired people, retirement habits (the 
extent to which people retire and the prevailing age at which they to), 
and the incidence of female participation in the labor force. 
Of all these variables in our empirical test we will limit ourselves 
to two: first, the proportion of the population below working age 
(which we take to be 15); we expect this variable to have a negative 
effect on s, because of the extra load imposed on parents through a 
larger family size. Second, female participation, which we measure as 
the ratio of working women aged 25-54 to the total number of women 
in the same age group. This variable is expected to have a negative 
sign, on the grounds that when a second spouse enters employment, 

Recent Declines in the Savings Rate etc. 
261 
expenditures will rise proportionately more than income because of 
the need to replace, for a price, some of the activities that the working 
spouse can no longer perform. Recently, Jappelli and Guiso [8] have 
stressed a second reason, namely that, when both spouses work, there 
is less need to accumulate a precautionary balance. The other vari-
ables will be omitted because they are more questionable or are not 
readily measurable, like retirement habits. 
1.4 The General Model 
1.4 .1 The Role of Bequests 
We can now move to the second approximation, or general 
model, by allowing first for the presence of bequests. One must 
distinguish between bequests resulting from the precautionary motive 
and those resulting from a true bequest motive. The former arise 
because of uncertainty as to the time of death. Since such bequests 
may be expected to be proportional to life resources, they may be 
lumped with life cycle saving and will not affect the properties of the 
basic model though they imply a somewhat larger wealth-to-income 
ratio. As for inheritances resulting from a true bequest motive, they 
can also be incorporated in the model without affecting its basic 
properties by postulating that bequest behavior is such that the flow of 
true inheritances is proportional to the flow of life cycle saving, or 
equivalently, the stock of inherited wealth at any point in time is 
proportional to total wealth; this of course implies that for any given 
growth trend, inherited wealth is also proportional to income. The 
evidence appears consistent with this assumption at least for the US 
where the information is available. In fact if inherited wealth rose 
systematically faster or slower than income, then we should expect 
that the wealth-income ratio itself would rise or fall over time, 
whereas the observed ratio appears to have remained remarkably 
stable for many decades (at least since the beginning of the century). 
But why should bequests, like life cycle saving, be a constant 
fraction of income? It was shown in Modigliani and Brumberg [15] 
that for the proportionality to hold it is sufficient that the following 

262 
Franco Modigliani 
two conditions be satisfied. First, even though "richer" people may 
tend to leave a larger fraction of their resources than "poor" people 
(who may leave none), the proportion left should depend on relative 
not absolute, life cycle resources. Second, the size distribution of life 
resources should be reasonably stable over time. There is some 
empirical evidence that appears consistent with these assumptions. 
We can conclude that under the conditions stated above, the 
presence of bequests, whether precautionary (and therefore unin-
tended) or intended, does not change the basic conclusions: the 
general model still implies that saving depends on growth and not on 
income. Of course the ratio of bequests to life cycle saving may reflect 
differential bequest behavior; and, other things equal, the larger 
bequeathed wealth, the larger the wealth-income ratio and hence the 
larger the saving ratio, for given growth (even though it should be 
realized that bequests can, to some extent, have a depressing effect on 
life cycle wealth). 
This raises the question of how important is bequeathed wealth 
relative to life cycle wealth. I have concluded from a good deal of 
evidence that, for the US, the ratio of bequeathed to total wealth can 
be placed at between 1/4 and 1/5, though this estimate has been hotly 
debated (Kotlikoff [11]). However, this issue is irrelevant for our tests, 
since our concern is with the widespread fall in the overall saving 
ratio. In any event information on the share of wealth that is inherited 
is not available at present for almost any country. But this is not likely 
to be too serious, since there are no grounds for thinking that the 
phenomenon under investigation could be, to any significant extent, 
the result of a worldwide reduction in true bequests whether due to 
legislation or to a spontaneous change in preferences. And second, 
bequests or not, the growth rate and the other variables mentioned 
remain major determinants of the saving ratio. 
1.4.2 The Role of Government 
In the traditional Keynesian model, introducing a government 
requires distinguishing between national income and disposable in-
come (income minus taxes) and recognizing that national saving is the 

Recent Declines in the Savings Rate etc. 
263 
sum of government saving and private saving. Private saving is defined 
as disposable income less private consumption, and it is taken to be a 
function of disposable income. 
In an LCH framework instead, private saving will be affected not 
only by private income but also by deficits. For if consumers are 
rational and base their consumption on life resources, they should 
realize that a current deficit increases the national debt which must 
eventually increase future interest and thus taxes. If life were infinitely 
lasting, then the additional burden due to the deficit, the present value 
of the resulting interest forever, would be just equal to the deficit. 
But then, in order to maintain a smooth consumption path, the 
rational agent must prevent the future taxes from cutting into his 
future consumption by setting aside currently (saving) an additional 
amount equal to the deficit for which he will have to pay. Thus 
national saving is unaffected by the deficit (expenditure constant) as 
the government dissaving is completely offset by additional private 
saving. If the rise in the deficit is due to governemnt expenditure 
rather than taxes, the effect on national saving is not zero, but still 
small, namely equal to the marginal propensity to save (see equation 
(6) below). This is because while resources are not changed by taxes, 
they are reduced the government preempts their use. 
But in LCH, life is very much finite. Therefore the burden arising 
from the future service of the debt is equal to the present value of the 
future taxes that will be levied on those currently present and only as 
long as they live, and pay taxes. This is clearly but a fraction of the 
deficit. How large a fraction depends on such things as the (real) 
interest rate, the distribution of life expect~cy of those present, and 
the rate of growth of income. Sterling [ 18] has estimated the fraction 
of the deficit that will finally be borne, through future taxes, by the 
current generation. He reports a range of values depending on the 
interest rate, growth and life expectancy. A typical result is around 
30%. To see the implication of this generalization for the impact of 
fiscal policy on saving, we first note that, once we allow for the 
Sterling effect in the LCH framework, the consumption function can 
be written as: 
(4) 
C = (1 - f (g) ) ( Y -
T + 'AGS) 

264 
Franco Modigliani 
where Y is NNP, Tis total net taxes (i.e. net of transfers), f(g) is a 
function expressing the impact of growth on the saving ratio (equation 
(3b)), GS is government surplus and A. is Sterling's fraction of the 
deficit falling on the current generation. 
From (4) we can derive the private saving function: 
(5) 
PS= (Y- T)- C= f(g)(Y- T)- (1- f(g))A.GS 
and the national saving function, by adding GS to both sides of the 
equation, thus: 
(6) 
NS = f(g)(Y- T) + [1 -
(1 -{(g)) A.] GS 
To avoid nonlinear estimation we approximate f(g) by a linear 
function and write the private saving rate in the form: 
(Sa) 
PS!(Y- 1) =a+ bg + cGS!(Y- 1) 
where c = - (1 - flY) A. and [1 - f(g)] can be approximated by a 
constant. This approximation is somewhat crude since 1 - f (g) is the 
conswnption ratio which varies appreciably in our sample, between 
0.75 and 1. 
In the case of the national saving ratio, which should be 
(Sb) 
NS/Y = f (g) (1 -
TIY) + d (GSIY) = 
=a+ bg- cT/Y + d(GSIY) d = 1 - (1 - f(g))A. 
Recently Barro [ 4] has proposed an extension of LCH accord-
ing to which the Sterling coefficient, A., must be unity. Clearly this 
conclusion would be consistent with LCH if and only if life were 
of infinite duration. But he manages to reconcile his claim with a 
finite life by postulating that the agent is so concerned with the 
nature of his heirs that the life cycle relevant for the allocation of 
resources extends beyond his own life to encompass that of his 

Recent Declines in the Savings Rate etc. 
265 
heirs, heirs of heirs, etc. to infinity. Under these conditions the 
gain from a tax cut financed by a deficit has to be totally saved in 
order to prevent the government from bringing about a reshuffling 
of resources from the future lineage to the current generation. 
This means that consumption and national saving will be totally 
unaffected by the deficit. 
There have been criticisms of Barro's hypothesis or "Ricardian 
equivalence" (because the hypothesis was first proposed, but also 
rejected, by Ricardo), a few of which will be mentioned here. 
(i) When the maximization of utility over all future generations 
calls for transferring resources from future generations to the present, 
there is no way of enforcing it. The actual allocation will then 
represent a comer solution, and a deficit will provide the means for 
raising the utility of the current generation by increasing current 
consumption at the expense of future consumption. 
(ii) Similarly, with a comer solution due to credit rationing, a tax 
cut will be utilized, at least in part, to increase consumption. 
(iii) Asymmetries: a tax cut cannot have neutral effects as Barro 
supposes because it redistributes wealth current and prospective large 
families, who are made worse off, to small families. 
(iv) Implausibility: the evidence suggests that relatively few peop-
le at the top of the distribution of wealth are concerned with bequests. 
My own estimate (1988) is that the wealth received by bequest is only 
about 1/4 of the total. Also no evidence has been found that different 
generations of one family live on anything like the same scale (Altonji, 
Hayashi, and Kotlikoff [2]). 
All this points, to the conclusion that Barro-like behavior cannot 
by any means be universal, but is at best limited to a small minority. 
We therefore expect the coefficient 'A to be below unity, contrary to 
Barro's view. It should instead be somewhere around Sterling's 
estimate of 0.3; it could be somewhat smaller in that not all con-
sumers are likely to be rational enough to save now in view of future 
taxes, but it could also be somewhat higher in so far as some portion 
of those present may be responding to the higher taxes that will fall on 
later generations by saving even more than called for by the Sterling 
estimate. Fortunately these contrasting views can be tested by relying 
on the estimate of the coefficient c of GS! ( Y -
T) in equation (Sa). 

266 
Franco Modigliani 
Using the definition of c we find: 
(7) 
A.= - c/[1 -/(g)] 
and f(g) can be approximated by the mean saving ratio (0.14 in our 
sample). 
2. - Empirical Tests for the OECD Countries 
2.1 Nature of Tests 
The battery of tests reported below covers the last three decades: 
the sixties, the seventies, and the eighties as far as available, namely 
1987. For each country and for each variable we compute an average 
value for each decade. Since there are 21 countries and three decades, 
we have a total of 63 observations on each variable. We have 
performed three types of test: the first is based on a cross-section 
time-series of the 63 observations; the next test is based on a cross 
section of the 21 countries for each decade separately; the third relies 
on a cross section of first differences. We present two versions of this 
test. In one the observations are the change in the value of each 
variable between the '60s and '80s; in the other the changes are 
between the '70s and '80s. 
2.2 Results - Level Tests 
Table 3 reports the results of a number of tests of the life cycle 
and of the role of fiscal variables. The first two rows test the variable 
that is the distinctive feature of the life cycle model, namely income 
growth g. It is seen that the coefficient of this variable is highly 
significant, as measured by the t-ratio. In line 1 of Table 3, the 
estimated coefficient of g is somewhat lower than in line 2, but one 
may suspect some downward bias in the former estimate because in 
our sample we find a positive association between growth and govern-
ment saving, and the government saving in turn should reduce to 

Surplus 
Period & estimation technique 
Constant 
g 
g_, 
(GS/Y) 
1 
1960-1987 
0.08 
1.20 
OLS 
(4.1) 
(3.1) 
2 
1960-1987 
0.06 
1.81 
OLS 
(4.2) 
(6.1) 
national savings 
3 
1960-1987 
0.08 
1.76 
-0.53 
OLS 
(5.1) 
(4.9) 
(4.5) 
4 
1960-1987 
0.29 
1.41 
-0.40 
OLS 
(5.4) 
(4.3) 
(3.7) 
5 
1960-1987 
0.27 
1.73 
-0.27 
WLS (pop.) 
(5.3) 
(6.5) 
(2.4) 
6 
1960-1987 
0.27 
1.08 
0.77 
OLS 
(6.7) 
(4.6) 
(6.0) 
national savings 
7 
1960-1970 
0.22 
2.24 
-0.77 
WLS (pop.) 
(3.3) 
(5.0) 
(2.3) 
8 
1971-1980 
0.33 
1.81 
-0.41 
WLS (pop.) 
(3.2) 
(5.9) 
(1.9) 
9 
1981-1987 
0.20 
3.9 
-0.04 
WLS (pop.) 
(2.3) 
(4.0) 
(0.2) 
10 
1st diff 
no 
0.72 
0.52 
national savings 
constant 
(2.1) 
(2.5) 
OLS 
1980s - 1960s 
Tax 
Dep. 
effect 
LFWORK 
ratio 
-0.68 
(5.8) 
-0.55 
-0.19 
-0.26 
(5.1) 
(3.6) 
(3.1) 
-0.42 
-0.23 
-0.22 
(3.7) 
(4.5) 
(2.7) 
-0.46 
-0.10 
-0.19 
(3.4) 
(2.2) 
(3.1) 
-0.92 
-0.08 
-0.20 
(2.7) 
(0.9) 
(1. 7) 
-0.56 
-0.22 
-0.43 
(2.6) 
(2.7) 
(2.1) 
-0.19 
-0.10 
-0.47 
(1.0) 
(1.0) 
(2.2) 
0.03 
0.05 
0.08 
(0.7) 
(0.62) 
(0.64) 
TABLE 3 
Inflation 
Adj. 
correction 
If& 
S.E. 
0.12 
0.053 
0.37 
0.041 
0.33 
0.046 
-0.56 
0.49 
(3.4) 
0.040 
-0.72 
0.67 
(4.4) 
0.035 
-0.38 
0.67 
(2.2) 
0.029 
-0.55 
0.75 
(0.9) 
0.027 
-0.54 
0.87 
(2.4) 
0.026 
-0.35 
0.55 
(1.4) 
0.031 
-0.43 
0.83 
(1.2) 
0.029 
~ 
(") 
"' 
;::: .... 
[ 
;i• 
~ 
;i" 
So 
"' 
~ 
-.:: 
;i" 
~ 
::tl 
$::) 
~ 
"' ?i 
~ 
-....) 

TABLE 3 continued 
~ 
Surplus 
Tax 
Dep. 
Inflation 
Adj. 
Period & estimation technique 
Constant 
g 
g-1 
(GS!Y) 
effect 
LFWORK 
ratio 
correction 
R'-& 
S.E. 
II 
1st cliff 
no 
0.78 
0.60 
0.18 
-0.48 
0.85 
national savings 
constant 
(2.6) 
(3.8) 
(0.65) 
(1.6) 
0.028 
1980s - 1960s 
OLS 
12 
1st cliff 
no 
0.59 
0.98 
0.71 
-0.02 
0.06 
-0.64 
0.88 
national savings 
constant 
(1.6) 
(6.1) 
(2.3) 
(0.19) 
(0.39) 
(1.6) 
0.020 
1980s - 1970s 
OLS 
13 
1st cliff 
no 
0.93 
0.64 
0.90 
0.61 
-0.37 
0.92 
national savings 
constant 
(2.8) 
(2.7) 
(7.9) 
3.2) 
(1.4) 
0.016 
1980s - 1970s 
OLS 
Legend: 
Absolute values of /-ratios arc in parentheses. All regressions were run on period average private savings out of disposable income corrected for 
inflation except where noted. The data used for the regressions in this table was obtained from the OECD National Income Accounts, OECD Economic 
Outlook, and International Financial Statistics. 
The explanatory variables used in these regression are defined as follows: g(g- 1) = current (lagged) real GDP growth taken as the average rate of 
growth for all years from the previous period surplus and taxes = surplus of the general government defined as "net taxes" -
current receipts less 
transfers less interest on the debt, corrected for inflation -
less government expenditures on goods and services tax effect = see note # 4 LFWORK = the 
labor participation ratio for women aged 25-54 dep. ratio = the percentage of the population below the age of 15 inflation correction = consumer price 
deflator · net public debt. For those countries with incomplete net public debt data, 
the following approximation was used: (plr) ·net where 
p = consumer price deflator; r = yield on long term government bonds; net = net interest paid on the public debt/nnp. 
The tax effect for the equations in which the dependent variable is adjusted private savings is computed from the following formula; tax effect = 
surplus coefficient -0.15. For the regressions with national savings as the dependent variable, which include a specific tax term, the tax effect is the sum 
of the coefficients on the surplus and tax variables. 
00 
~ 
s:::. g 
~ 
~--
i5' 
;:$ .... 

Recent Declines in the Savings Rate etc. 
269 
some extent private saving (equation (5)). This suspicion is confirmed 
by the results in line 3, in which we add the fiscal variable, govern-
ment surplus. In line 3, the growth coefficient rises to 1. 7 6, a value 
close to that of line 1. These estimates of g are of interest for several 
reasons. First, in the estimate, lines 2 and 3 are broadly confirmed by 
all the other results presented in Table 3. The estimates fall predomin-
antly between 1.5 and 1.8 with very few, usually explainable, excep-
tions, as indicated below. Second, it is consistent with the results 
reported in various other contributions beginning with my 1970 
paper. Third, this estimate is broadly consistent with the value 
suggested by the LCH. As we have seen in equation (3b), the LCH 
implies a non-linear relation between the saving ratio and g. In our 
tests we have approximated (3b) linearly: 
s = f (g) ~ a + bg 
The slope b of this approximation might be expected close to 
f' (g), the slope of (3b) computed around the mean. By differentiation 
of (3b), the slope at any value of g is found to be: 
r (g) = o' o - <X)/(o' + g)2 
where: 
o' = 0 - r (l 
Modigliani and Brumberg, using simulation, found that ( 1 -
<X) 
could be placed in the neighborhood of 0.3, and 8' at around 0.07. 
The estimates have since been broadly supported by direct time series 
estimated, e.g. for the US (Ando and Modigliani [3]; Modigliani and 
Sterling [17]), and for Italy (Modigliani and Jappelli [16]), though the 
estimates of o have sometimes been on the low side. Hence the slope 
of (3b) at the mean value of g, which is around 4%, can be placed at 
1.7 foro' = 0.07 (1.8 if o' = 0.06), quite consistent with our estimates 
of the slope. 
In line 3 of Table 3 the government surplus, GS, appears with a 
significant negative sign, implying that private saving is affected by 
government saving. This result is consistent with Barro and LCH, 
though it rejects the traditional Keynesian formulation. The difference 

270 
Franco Modigliani 
between LCH and Ricardian equivalence is in the magnitude of the 
coefficient. If A. were 1 as asserted by Barro, then from (Sa) the 
absolute value of the coefficient of GS should be 1 - f (g) = 0.86 in 
the sample, which measures the long-run propensity to save, or 
somewhat less, if we adjusted for the effect of deficit on private 
saving. The actual coefficient of GS is only 0.40. With a standard error 
of the coefficient of 0.11, the actual coefficient is seen to be four 
standard deviations below the value that should hold if Barro were 
correct! On the other hand, for the LCH model with Sterling's 
estimate of 0.3, the coefficient should be 0.26. This is somewhat lower 
than the observed coefficient but only by one standard deviation. An 
alternative way of stating the result is to calculate from ( 6a) and line 6 
of Table 3. We find that A. is below 0.4, as compared with the 
prediction of LCH of 0.3, and of 1 under the Barro hypothesis. 
Line 4 adds the remaining variables. The coefficients of g and GS 
are not appreciably changed though the latter coefficient gets a bit 
more negative. The coefficients of demographic variables have the 
expected sign and are significant, especially the labor force participa-
tion. 
Unfortunately we have no prior value to assess conformity with 
the estimate coefficient. But the estimate is certainly large considering 
that between the '60s and '80s labor force participation increased on 
average by 12.4%. With our coefficient estimate of 0.2, this implies 
that the variable woulc:,l account for a decline in saving of some 2.3% 
out of a total decline of 2.6%. The most striking result in this equation, 
however, is the strong showing of the inflation correction. It implies 
that a very high fraction of the inflation correction component of 
interest income is treated, by the private sector, as though it were 
ordinary income available for consumption. That fraction can be 
estimated by dividing the coefficient in the last column by the 
propensity to consume: to obtain 0.56/0,85 = 0.66. Since I have long 
been convinced that inflation illusion is widespread, I do not find this 
figure shocking or incredible, though others might. It is worth noting 
that the only other estimate of the role of the inflation adjustment of 
which we are aware, based on a time series analysis for Italy for the 
years 1962-1988, yields a similar, but even higher result (Modigliani 
[13], Tables 3 and 4). Taking that estimate at face value, and 

Recent Declines in the Savings Rate etc. 
271 
considering that the inflation adjustment (divided by NNP) rose 
between the '60s and '80s by an estimated 2.0 percentage points, 
would suggest that inflation illusion could account for a decline in 
saving of 1.1 percentage points. 
line 5 is a rerun of line 4, except that the observations are 
weighted by population. This is a procedure that has been frequently 
followed before since the early work of Houthacker [9] and Modiglia-
ni [12], on the grounds that there are enormous variations in the size 
of the countries in the sample, from a few millions to hundreds of 
millions, and one would expect the observations from a larger country 
to be more representative and more reliable because they are based on 
a larger sample. The results present no major surprise -
indeed, both 
the coefficient of g and that of GS are right on the nose of LCH 
predications. In line 6 the dependent variable is national saving. Here 
the coefficient of g is somewhat low, but the coefficient of GS nearly 
coincides with LCH prediction, as it implies a value of A of just about 
0.3, and that one dollar of government deficit reduces national saving 
by 77 cents, when according to Barro [4] the effect should be no more 
than some 15 cents. The coefficient of the other variables are some-
what reduced, especially that of labor force participation, which is 
nearly halved. 
The next battery of tests presents results for cross-section tests for 
each of the decades. In these tests, the results are broadly consistent 
with those reported above, but, presumably because of the much 
smaller samples, and apparent multicollinearity, the estimates are less 
stable and tend to be a good deal less significant. We report one single 
equation corresponding to line 5, i.e. with all the variables and 
population weighted. Line 7 of Table 3 is based on the first decade. 
The problem of instability, and multicollinearity, is clearly visible in 
the results. 
The point estimates of the coefficients other than that of GS are 
not very different from those of line 5 but the last three variables are 
all insignificant, despite the high R 2 , and insignificantly different from 
the coefficients in line 5. The coefficient of GS is the one that is 
appreciably more negative and thus less consistent with LCH. It 
implies that a one dollar increase in government deficit would be 
offset to the extent of 77 cents by higher private saving. However, this 

272 
Franco Modigliani 
result is not a serious challenge to LCH. In the first place it is unique 
in the battery of tests, and in the second place the estimate is not very 
reliable: it has a standard error of 0.33. Thus while it is not 
significantly different from the value of 0.85 called for by Barra, it is 
also not significantly different (even at the 10% level) from the value 
implied by LCH of around 0,25. The coefficient estimate is just too 
unreliable to permit a sound conclusion. 
In line 8, covering the '70s, most coefficients, including that of 
GS, are back at a level close to those of line 5, expect possibly fior that 
of Dependency. The remaining regression for the '80s is the least 
satisfactory. All the coefficients are generally different from (5), but 
the estimates are subject to such large error that the differences from 
the estimates of line 5 are not significant. 
2.3 First Difference Tests 
The purpose of the tests reported in the last four lines of Table 3 is 
to inquire how well the LCH can account for the large changes in 
saving that occurred between the '60s and '80s. In this case there are 
no solid grounds for expecting that the coefficients will be very close 
to those obtained from the level cross section like lines 5 and 6 
because of the different structure of errors; in particular one can 
expect that the difference in a given variability between countries will 
tend to correspond more nearly to a permanent difference than might 
be the case with differences for one country, between two relatively 
close points in time. 
We found in fact systematic differences between the coefficients 
of a magnitude that was rather surprising. In particular the coefficien-
ts of the two demographic variables were never significant in accoun-
ting for the change between the '60s and the '80s, or between the '70s 
and the '80s. This can be illustrated by means of line 10. Only the 
coefficient of GS is consistent with earlier results and has a respectable 
t-ratio. These disappointing results seem to reflect multicollinearity 
since in both lines 10 and 12, R 2 is rather high. Dropping the 
demographic variables in line 11, makes relatively little difference. 
Line 12, where the variables are first differences between the '70s and 

Recent Declines in the Savings Rate etc. 
273 
'80s, is even more surprising as the only coefficient significant at the 
one percent level is that of GS, and that coefficient is too large even 
for LCH. However, dropping from line 12 the insignificant variables 
and allowing for a faster response to growth by adding the current, in 
addition to the lagged, rate of growth, appears to eliminate or reduces 
appreciably the unsatisfactory aspects of line 12: the growth effect 
(the sum of the two growth coefficients) more than doubles to 1. 6 and 
thus returns to the prevailing range; the coeficient of government 
surplus declines, though remaining somewhat high for LCH and a 
fortiori for the Barro hypothesis. The coefficient of taxes agrees with 
LCH, and only the coefficient of the inflation correction declines in 
value and reliability. 
In Table 4, we have utilized the equation of line 13 to examine 
how well the model can account for the large decline in the saving 
rate between the '70s and '80s, both for the average of all countries 
and for each individual country. Each column in the table gives the 
contribution to the change in saving of the variable indicated in the 
top row. The last row gives, for each variable, the average of all 
countries. Column 6 reports the change computed from the equation 
(the sum of the entries in columns 2 to 5, and 7 gives the actual 
change. It is seen from column 7 (bottom row) that saving declined 
almost universally in this period, with an average decline of nearly 5 
percentage points. It is also apparent, from column 6, that the 
equation accounts quite accurately for this average fall. 
Column 2 shows the contribution to the change in saving attribu-
table to the change in the rate of growth. It brings out the fact that the 
almost universal decline in this variable is a major factor in the fall of 
saving, accounting for some 40% of the total. The other major 
component is the nearly as widespread decline in surplus, accounting 
on the average for 3% of N NP, which is responsible for over half of the 
decline. The remaining two variables, taxes and inflation correction, 
also contributed to the fall but to a minor extent (about 10%). This 
reflects the fact that these variables had very little change on the 
average over the period under review, though they contributed 
substantially to the changes in saving of a number of countries. 
Indeed, from the individual rates one can discern a considerable 
variety of experience, though negative signs predominate in every 

THE ROLE OF MAJOR VARIABLES AFFECTING THE CHANGE 
IN THE SAVINGS RATE, 1970s- 1980s 
(based on regression equation) 
dns -0.93 x dgrowth +0.64 x dlag +0.90 x dsurp -0.28 x dtax -0.37 x ddebtad 
Growth(*) 
Surplus 
Net tax 
Inflation 
Estimated 
Actual 
Country 
correction 
change 
change 
(%) 
(%) 
(%) 
(%) 
(%) 
(%) 
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
(4) 
(5) 
(6) 
(7) 
Canada .......................... 
-1.22 
-4.02 
0.31 
-0.29 
-
5.22 
-
3.90 
United States .................... 
-1.18 
-3.31 
0.29 
0.25 
-
2.06 
-
5.00 
Japan ............................ 
-4.02 
0.24 
-0.33 
-0.20 
-
4.31 
-
4.40 
Australia .......................... 
-1.17 
-3.16 
-0.44 
0.29 
-
4.47 
-
7.60 
Austria 
•••• 0 ••••••••• 0 ••• 0 •••• 0 
0. 
-2.17 
-3.49 
-0.05 
0.05 
-
5.66 
-
5.00 
Belgium .......................... 
-2.46 
-4.37 
0.64 
-0.71 
-
6.89 
-
7.40 
Denmark 
••• 0 ..... 0 ••••••• 0 ••••• 0. 
-1.20 
-3.42 
-0.77 
-1.02 
-
6.41 
-
7.30 
Finland .......................... 
-1.22 
-3.08 
-0.57 
-0.37 
-
5.24 
-
3.50 
France 
••••••••••• 0 
0 ••••••••••••• 
-2.54 
-1.94 
-1.05 
-0.18 
-
5.73 
-
8.25 
Germany 
•••••••• 0. 0 
0 •••• 0 ••••••• 
-1.94 
-1.29 
-0.38 
-0.21 
-
3.82 
-
3.60 
Greenland ........................ 
-4.58 
-6.96 
0.24 
-0.36 
-11.67 
-12.20 
Iceland .......................... 
-0.67 
-7.41 
-0.15 
0.02 
-
8.20 
-
7.31 
Ireland 
•• 0 •••••••••• 0 
0 ••••••••••• 
-2.00 
-3.96 
0.21 
0.08 
-
5.67 
-
4.80 
Italy .............................. 
-2.62 
-2.17 
-0.47 
-0.33 
-
5.59 
-
5.80 
Netherlands ..........•........... 
-2.45 
-2.93 
1.06 
0.34 
-
3.97 
-
3.10 
Norway .......................... 
-0.21 
4.33 
0.78 
-1.41 
3.49 
1.80 
Portugal .......................... 
-3.17 
2.89 
-1.38 
-1.61 
-
3.27 
-
2.20 
Spain ............................ 
-2.87 
-2.14 
-1.05 
-0.49 
-
6.55 
-
7.10 
Sweden .......................... 
-1.06 
-2.96 
-1.29 
-1.15 
-
6.45 
-
5.80 
Switzerland ...................... 
-1.40 
-0.29 
-0.31 
0.03 
-
1.97 
0.80 
United Kingdom .................. 
0.83 
-6.86 
1.98 
2.13 
-
1.92 
-
2.00 
Average of all countries ............ 
-1.82 
-2.68 
-0.13 
-0.25 
-
4.88 
-
4.94 
--·-
Legend: dns 
= change in inflation-adjusted national savings as a percentage of national income; 
dgrowth = change in the growth rate from 1970s to 1980s; 
dlag 
= change in the growth rate from 1960s to 1970s; 
dsurp 
= change in inflation-adjusted general government surplus as a percentage of national income; 
dtax 
= change in inflation-adjusted general government net taxes as a percentage of national income; 
ddebtad = change in the inflation correction, calculated as: (net public debt/ nnp) * ( cf11). 
(*) Sum of the effects of the change in current and lagged growth. 
TABLE 4 
Difference 
(%) 
(8) 
-1.32 
2.04 
0.09 
3.13 
-0.66 
0.51 
0.89 
-1.74 
2.53 
0.22 
0.53 
-0.89 
-0.87 
0.21 
-0.87 
1.69 
-1.07 
0.55 
-0.65 
-2.77 
0.08 
0.06 
~ 
~ 
$::> 
;:$ 
8 
[ 
&Q· s: 
;:$ .... 

Recent Declines in the Savings Rate etc. 
275 
column. Thus, the UK experienced a rather small decline in saving, 
despite the appreciable deterioration in the fiscal stance, due mostly to 
higher expenditure, because of a favorable growth experience (it was 
the only country with positive growth in the period), and because a 
reduction in inflation, coupled with a large debt, produced a large 
reduction in the inflation adjustment. On the other hand, Greece 
suffered the largest decline in saving ( - 12.2%), well accounted for by 
the equation, as resulting from the largest decline in growth and the 
second-largest rise in deficit. And Japan had an about average decline 
in saving, mostly because of a slowdown in growth. 
In general, the equation accounts well for the behavior of saving, 
though there are exceptions. In the case of France, e.g. with the 
second-largest contraction in saving (- 8.2%), the equation estimates 
a large decline, but not large enough. Even for the US, where, 
somewhat surprisingly, the decline in saving is not more than average, 
the only significant explanation offered by the equation is the rise in 
the budget deficit, reflecting both lower expenditure and lower taxes, 
which however turns out to be inadequate to account for the decline. 
On the whole, the evidence appears to be reasonably consistent 
with the LCH, supporting its implications of a major role for income 
growth and fiscal policy. 
3. - A Brief Digression on the Role of Income 
and Other Variables 
3.1 Income 
In summarizing the foundations and aggregative implications of 
LCH, it was pointed out that one of the significant and unusual 
consequences of that theory is the independence of the aggregate 
saving ratio from the level of economic wellbeing of the economy as 
measured, say, by per capita real income. This independence is an 
implication of the postulate of homothetic preference. It was also 
indicated that it has been supported by a number of tests, including 
some carried out with the data used in the tests reported above. As a 

276 
Franco Modigliani 
result, some recent studies have not felt it necessary to test the 
possible role of that variable. 
It should be noted, however, that the tests have typically relied on 
samples heavily weighted with developed countries enjoying relatively 
high income, simply because these are the countries for which reliable 
data are most likely to be available. 
But one may well question whether these results can be extra-
polated to very low income countries. For at least that portion of the 
population that lives at, or near, the starvation level may find it 
impossible or too burdensome to set aside resources now in order to 
provide for later consumption. People in that predicament may tend 
to live more from hand-to-mouth, skipping retirement or being sup-
ported by the extended family. It is thus conceivable that, for a 
sufficiently low value of per capita income, the wealth-income ratio 
may tend to rise with income; if so, the saving-income ratio for given 
growth would also tend to rise with income. There have been some 
tests of this hypothesis based on good-sized samples of developing 
countries, beginning from a much debated paper by Leff (1) based on 
a sample of the countries, to the recent contribution of Ram (2) 
analyzing a sample of 121. All of these studies present results which 
are consistent with the above hypothesis; for the poor developing 
countries the saving ratio tends to rise with income, while for 
developed countries, there is no significant systematic income effect. 
These results can be checked using newly available information 
assembled by the International Monetary Fund has assembled in-
formation for a large sample of developing countries (85) which was 
utilized in an article by Aghevli et AI. [1]. The underlying data have 
generously been made available to us in the form of averages of each 
variable in each country for the years 1982-1988. 
The variables available include, besides the ratio of national 
saving to national income and income growth, several variables that 
the authors deemed especially relevant to underdeveloped countries: 
(l) See LEFF NATHANIEL H.: «Dependency Rates and Savings Rates», American 
Economic Review, Vol. UX, 1969, pp. 886-96. 
(2) See RAM R.: «Dependency Rates and Aggregate Savings: A New International 
Cross-Section Study», American Economic Review, n. 72, 1982, pp. 537-44. 

ESTIMATES FOR DEVELOPING COUNTRIES (l) 
Sample size & 
National 
Terms of 
estimation 
Constant 
g 
income 
CPI 
trade 
Active 
Dummy for 
technique 
debt 
1 
85 
10.7 
0.275 
9.7 X 10- 3 
2 x 10- 3 
-0.53 
0.40 
5.02 
Ol..S (2) 
(1.2) 
(2.0) 
(1.52) 
(1.2) 
(3.1) 
(2.3) 
(3.05) 
2 
85 
2.7 
1.32 
1.5 X 10- 3 
2.35 X 10- 3 
-0.56 
0.16 
2.73 
Ol..S 
(0.3) 
(5.2) 
(2.8) 
( -0.8) 
(-3.9) 
(1.0) 
(1.7) 
3 
85 
6.8 
1.30 
-1557 
-0.60 
0.17 
4.2 
Ol..S 
(0.9) 
(5.5) 
( -4.5) 
( -4.5) 
(1.3) 
(2.9) 
4 
82 
-16.8 
1.30 
-894 
-0.51 
0.58 
4.5 
Wl..S 
(- 1.7) 
(6.5) 
(- 2.6) 
( -4.3) 
(3.3) 
(3.1) 
(pop.) 
Sa 
24 
22.3 
2.0 
11688 
-0.91 
-0.13 
2.2 
Ol..S (3) 
(1.2) 
(3.9) 
(1.0) 
(- 3.2) 
(-0.5) 
(0.8) 
(high) 
Sb 
61 
6.2 
1.33 
-1090 
-0.50 
0.14 
4.0 
Ol..S (3) 
(0.7) 
(5.2) 
(- 3.1) 
(- 3.4) 
(0.8) 
(2.4) 
(low) 
6a 
42 
2.9 
1.67 
-1494 
-0.63 
0.20 
4.3 
Ol..S (4) 
(0.3) 
(4.7) 
(- 3.0) 
( -2.6) 
(1.2) 
(1.9) 
(positive) 
6b 
43 
3.6 
1.37 
-1426 
-0.57 
0.23 
5.5 
Ol..S (4) 
(0.3) 
(1.9) 
(- 2.6) 
(- 3.3) 
(0.9) 
(2.3) 
(negative) 
(I) The data used for the regressions in this table were obtained from the IMF and are defined as follows: 
g 
= real annual GOP per capita growth over the period 1982-1988; 
national income = per capita national income except in regressions 3-6 where the reciprocal of per capita national income is used; 
cpi 
= consumer price index; 
terms of trade 
= measure of a country's trade balance; 
active 
= the proportion of the population aged 15-64; 
dummy for debt = indicator variable establishing whether or not a country has debt servicing problems. 
(2) This regression is the one reported on page 59 of the IMF paper cited as the source for the data in this table. 
TABLE 5 
Adj. 
R2 & 
S.E. 
0.43 
6.83 
0.53 
5.89 
0.59 
(5.49) 
0.84 
3.73 
0.44 
5.81 
0.56 
4.96 
0.58 
5.65 
0.40 
5.60 
~ 
~ 
;::$ .... 
~ 
(") ..... s· 
~ 
s· 
s. 
(I> 
~ 
-<: s· 
~ 
£' 
;;; 
(I> 
!) 
(3) This pair of regressions was fitted to the data after the observations were partitioned into two groups: I) high income countries with per capita 
tv 
national income greater than $1650, and 2) low income countries with per capita national income less than $1650. 
:j 
( 4) This pair of regressions was fitted to the data after the observations were partitioned into two groups: 1) those with positive growth and 2) those 
with negative growth. 

278 
Franco Modigliani 
per capita real income, inflation measured by a consumer's price 
index, terms of trade, population structure as measured by the 
proportion of "active" population, and a 0.1 dummy for whether the 
country experiencedd a debt crisis. Unfortunately no information is 
available on fiscal variables. 
The data were used by the authors to estimate an equation which 
is reported on page 59 of the aforementioned publication, and is 
reproduced on line 1 of Table 5. The results appear rather disappoin-
ting: (i) the coefficient of growth is very small, less than 1/5 as large as 
for the OECD sample, and it is on the borderline of significance: (ii) 
the root mean square error of the estimated regression is some twice 
as large as the typical error in Table 3; (iii) income appears to have a 
positive effect on saving though not significant, even at the 1 Oo/o level; 
(iv) the effect of inflation is positive but quantitatively negligible and 
insignificant; (v) the positive coefficient for the variable "Active" is 
consistent with a negative coefficient for the variable Dep In Table 3, 
since the two variables move in opposite directions. 
However, after the article was published, the identification of an 
inconsistency between the IMF and our OECD data led the authors of 
the IMF article to the realization that the series they had used for the 
rate of growth of output was faulty and should be replaced by a 
different series that they kindly made available to us. The complete 
data set used for the Table 5 regressions is reproduced in Table 6. 
Substituting the revised for the erroneous growth series produces 
a number of significant changes, including some in the expected 
direction, as can be seen from line 2. The standard error of the 
equation falls sharply and the growth coefficient increases over four 
times to a level close to that found for the OECD sample. The 
coefficient of income nearly doubnles and becomes significant. At the 
same time the inflation coefficient becomes negative but entirely 
insignificant. Accordingly, in line 3, we have dropped that variable. At 
the same time we have replaced the hypothesis that the saving ratio is 
a linear function of income with the more appropriate one that to a 
first approximation saving itself is a linear function of income, but 
with a negative intercept. The original specification specifies that 
saving is a quadratic function of income, so that the marginal 
propensity to save rises with income, which is the opposite of what 

Recent Declines in the Savings Rate etc. 
279 
TABLE 6 
Savings 
Growth 
National Change in Change in %of pop 
Debt 
Name 
rate 
rate 
CPI 
terms of 
(in%) 
(in%) 
income 
(in%) 
trade 
active 
crisis 
Algeria ...... 
34.7 
-
1 
2.388.3 
8.7 
-14.3 
49 
1 
Argentina .... 
12.7 
-0.9 
3.189.6 
338.9 
-
6.2 
61 
0 
Bangladesh .. 
9.1 
0.8 
140.2 
10.9 
2.4 
52 
1 
Barbados .... 
16.5 
1.5 
4.691.3 
4.8 
-
3.6 
62 
1 
Benin ........ 
3.9 
-1.4 
274 
6.7 
-
1.1 
52 
0 
Bolivia 
•••• 0. 
3.5 
-3.5 
693.1 
1.961.3 
0.1 
52 
0 
Botswana .... 
35.3 
10.9 
1.233.7 
9.4 
4.7 
47 
1 
Brazil ........ 
16.9 
1.1 
2.337.8 
249.6 
4.5 
58 
0 
Burkina Faso 
13.9 
2.7 
168.5 
4.3 
-
2.9 
49 
0 
Burma ...... 
12.7 
1.8 
191.7 
11 
-
7.1 
54 
0 
Burundi ...... 
9.7 
0.9 
253.6 
6.6 
5.6 
52 
1 
Cameroon .... 
28.4 
0.2 
890.7 
11.7 
-12.4 
51 
0 
Cape Verde .. 
25.8 
4.1 
501.7 
11.7 
-
0.2 
55 
0 
Cent. Afr. Rep. 
2 
-0.4 
242.6 
5.2 
0 
54 
0 
Chile 
••••• 0 •• 
7.7 
0.1 
144.3 
20.2 
1.1 
63 
0 
China ........ 
34.7 
9.8 
281.6 
6.8 
-
1.5 
62 
1 
Colombia .... 
15.3 
1.6 
1.149.2 
21.8 
2.6 
58 
1 
Comoros .... 
6.2 
-0.2 
378 
6.7 
-
2.8 
49 
0 
Costa Rica .... 
20.5 
-0.3 
3.781.6 
28.4 
1.1 
56 
0 
Cote d'Ivoire .. 
8 
-3.3 
767.7 
5.6 
-
1.5 
56 
0 
Cyprus 
••••• 0 
24.6 
5.2 
4.479.9 
4.3 
1.6 
64 
1 
Dominican Rep. 
16.6 
-0.4 
880.8 
19.7 
3.8 
56 
0 
Ecuador ...... 
14.6 
-
1 
949 
33.5 
-
9.6 
52 
0 
Egypt ........ 
10.8 
2.3 
472.5 
19.8 
-8.7 
56 
0 
El Salvador .. 
11.8 
-0.8 
902.3 
19.4 
-
1.4 
51 
0 
Ethiopia ...... 
7.8 
-2.8 
128.6 
6 
-
1.4 
so 
1 
Fiji .......... 
17.2 
-2.6 
1.823.5 
6.3 
3.2 
58 
1 
Gabon ........ 
29.3 
-1.6 
2.673.2 
6.2 
-
8.5 
55 
0 
Gambia ...... 
14.8 
-0.7 
360.3 
21.2 
-
3.2 
56 
0 
Ghana ........ 
7.3 
-0.4 
1.219.8 
40.2 
-
0.3 
48 
0 
Greece ...... 
15.4 
1 
4.211.5 
19 
1.3 
64 
1 
Guatemala .... 
8.4 
-2.6 
1.158.2 
13.5 
-
0.3 
53 
0 
Haiti 
• 
0 •••••• 
11.5 
-2.1 
406.5 
6.8 
1.7 
54 
0 
Honduras .... 
9.3 
-
1 
746.9 
5.2 
0.5 
49 
0 
Hong Kong .. 
27.5 
6.3 
5.453.3 
6.6 
-
0.4 
68 
1 
India 
0 ••••••• 
22 
3.6 
293 
8.4 
2.8 
57 
1 
Indonesia .... 
23.7 
1.1 
448.7 
8.5 
-
6 
56 
1 
Israel 
•• 0 ••••• 
16.6 
0.4 
7.251.4 
147.1 
1.8 
58 
1 
Jamaica ...... 
14.3 
-0.1 
1.185.8 
14.7 
-
6 
55 
0 
Jordan ...... 
20 
0.2 
1.798.4 
2.9 
6.7 
47 
1 
Kenya ........ 
19.8 
-0.3 
335.8 
10.4 
-
4.2 
45 
1 
Korea ........ 
31.9 
8.2 
2.290.4 
4 
3 
64 
1 
Lao P.D.R. .. 
4.2 
2.5 
131.5 
48.7 
-
1.7 
52 
1 
Lesotho 
••• 0 
•• 
21.9 
1.1 
269 
13.9 
-
8.6 
54 
1 

280 
Franco Modigliani 
TABLE 6 continued 
Savings 
Growth 
National Change in Change in %of pop 
Debt 
Name 
rate 
rate 
CPI 
terms of 
(in%) 
(in%) 
income 
(in%) 
trade 
active 
crisis 
Uberia ...... 
17 
-3.6 
411.1 
3.5 
-
1.4 
53 
0 
Madagascar .. 
5.8 
-1.6 
238.4 
18.2 
-
2.9 
51 
0 
Malawi ...... 
8.7 
-0.3 
180.1 
17.6 
-
0.9 
50 
0 
Malaysia ...... 
28.9 
2 
1.784.8 
2.6 
-
0.5 
58 
1 
Maldives ...... 
23 
6.5 
392.7 
7 
-
1.1 
53 
1 
Mali. ......... 
4.7 
1.3 
167.2 
3.5 
0.1 
49 
0 
Malta ........ 
24.6 
1.9 
4.192.3 
1.1 
1.9 
71 
1 
Mauritania .... 
5.7 
-1.3 
417.8 
8.3 
-
0.8 
50 
0 
Mauritius .... 
20.7 
5.7 
1.179.5 
6.2 
3.4 
61 
1 
Mexico 
0 •••• 0 
21.3 
-2.4 
2.175.6 
88 
-
6.8 
53 
0 
Morocco ...... 
15 
1.4 
654.8 
7.3 
-
0.5 
52 
0 
Nepal ........ 
13.8 
' 2.1 
153.9 
10.7 
4.5 
52 
1 
Niger 
• 
0 
•• 0 ••• 
6.5 
-3.2 
273.8 
1.3 
5.2 
49 
0 
Nigeria 
••• 0 
•• 
5.6 
-2.5 
792.2 
17.8 
-10.1 
48 
0 
Pakistan ...... 
13.4 
3.2 
351.9 
5.9 
2.9 
53 
1 
Panama ...... 
15.7 
-3.4 
1.918.2 
1.9 
0.4 
57 
0 
P. N. Guinea 
15.2 
1.3 
782 
5.5 
1 
56 
1 
Peru ........ 
18.6 
-1.9 
1.079.2 
182.8 
0.2 
55 
0 
Philippines .... 
15.8 
-1.4 
638.5 
15.2 
4.4 
57 
0 
Portugal ...... 
22.9 
1.8 
2.831. 7 
18.2 
1 
64 
1 
Rwanda ...... 
11.5 
0.4 
309.3 
5 
4.1 
so 
1 
Senegal ...... 
4.7 
1.3 
465.9 
7.8 
-
1.2 
52 
0 
Sierra Leone .. 
5.2 
-2.9 
277.3 
76.5 
-
1 
58 
0 
Singapore .... 
42.5 
4.9 
7.213.6 
1.3 
-
2.5 
67 
1 
Somalia ...... 
12.2 
-0.2 
174.4 
47.9 
-
2.3 
49 
0 
South Africa .. 
24.1 
-0.8 
2.309.1 
14.9 
-
1.7 
55 
0 
Sri Lanka 
0. 0 
0 
17.2 
2.6 
399 
9.1 
2.9 
60 
1 
Syrian A.R. .. 
17.7 
-3.1 
1.649.2 
28.9 
-14.8 
49 
0 
Tanzania .... 
12.1 
-0.9 
268 
30.4 
-
1.7 
51 
0 
Thailand ...... 
21.8 
4.1 
812.8 
3.1 
0 
58 
1 
Togo 
•• 0 ••••• 
15.8 
-2.1 
324.6 
3.1 
-
1.5 
50 
0 
Trin. & Tobago 
16.1 
-5.3 
5.514.7 
11.1 
-10.3 
61 
1 
Tunisia •••• 0. 
20.3 
3.4 
1.230.6 
8.6 
0.2 
55 
1 
Turkey ...... 
19.4 
3.5 
1.213.5 
41.6 
3.1 
58 
1 
Uruguay ...... 
7.6 
-1.3 
1.896.4 
56.8 
0.6 
61 
0 
Vanuatu ...... 
5.3 
-1.3 
1.094.7 
7.3 
14.1 
53 
1 
Venezuela .... 
19.3 
-1.6 
2.931.6 
15.4 
-
7.4 
55 
0 
Yemen A. Rep. 
10.9 
5 
1.021.3 
16.6 
-
0.2 
47 
0 
Yugoslavia .... 
27.6 
0.3 
2.179.6 
87.1 
-
2.7 
67 
0 
Zambia ...... 
1.8 
-3.3 
321.1 
36.8 
2.2 
47 
0 
Zimbabwe .... 
17.8 
-0.7 
1.313.3 
13.8 
-
4.4 
46 
1 

Recent Declines in the Savings Rate etc. 
281 
our hypothesis suggests. Our specification instead results in the saving 
ratio being a linear function of the reciprocal of Y: 
SlY= a/Y+ b; 
a< 0, b > 0 
and implies a constant marginal propensity to save but a saving ratio 
rising with income and approaching an asymptote. 
It appears from line 3 that replacing income with its reciprocal 
produces an appreciable improvement in fit. Also the coefficient of the 
reciprocal, reported in column 3, has a t-ratio (4.5) which is distinctly 
higher than that of the income coefficient in line 2, and is larger in 
absolute terms. This result might be considered as bad news for LCH, 
[as well as inconsistent with well established earlier results]. But we 
suggest that in reality there is no inconsistency and that the result 
should be more appropriately considered as a generalization of the 
LCH which helps to clarify the limits within which the standard model 
may be expected to hold. 
There is no contradiction because the older results were based 
primarily on high income countries whereas the results cited here rely 
on samples which include much poorer countries. The poorest 
country in our sample, Ethiopia, has an estimated real per capita 
income of $130, and the average income for the sample is $1,650, 
whereas the poorest country in the OECD sample, Portugal, has an 
income of $2,830. At the same time the results in line 3 can be shown 
to be consistent with the older ones because they imply that, for 
countries as well off as those in the OECD sample, the impact of 
income is negligible. To establish this inclusion we may note that the 
estimate of the coefficients of the reciprocal of income ( 1 ,560) implies 
that, for any country whose income is in the range above 1 ,560, the 
effect of income on the saving ratio is less than one percentage point, 
and tending to zero as income grows -
in other words, it is of 
negligible magnitude. But that range is well below even the poorest 
country in the OECD sample. 
Line 3 of Table 5 has been re-estimated weighing observations by 
population, in line 4.The standard error of the regression is greatly 
reduced while the coefficient estimates are substantially the same 

282 
Franco Modigliani 
though the role of income is somewhat downgraded, in both magni-
tude and significance. 
As a further test of the approximate independence of saving ratio 
from income above some low level, we have estimated separate 
equations for countries below and above a cut-off represented by 
mean per capita income ($1,650). The results, given in lines Sa and Sb 
confirm that income is unimportant above the cut-off. Indeed, the 
point estimate of the coefficient of the reciprocal becomes positive, 
which would imply that the saving ratio declines with income, except 
that it is insignificant. On the other hand, for countries below the 
mean, the effect is positive, and quantitatively important. For instan-
ce, the coefficient implies that for a poor country such as Ethiopia 
with per capita income of $130, the saving ratio might be 8 percent-
age points below what it would be with an average income. 
lines 6 a and 6 b report the results of one more test suggested by 
the observation that the sample contains a surprisingly large number 
of countries that report a decline in income, namely 42, or just about 
half. Now the implications of the life cycle are supposed to hold in 
steady state. Negative growth is unlikely to represent a steady state 
but more likely to reflect transitory development. This should weaken 
the association between growth and saving ratio for countries with 
declining income. To carry out the test we have broken up the sample 
into two corresponding subsamples, one consisting of the growing 
countries (6a) and the other of the declining ones (6b). As expected, 
for the growing countries the coefficient of income growth is larger, 
highly significant, and of the same magnitude as for the OECD 
sample. For the declining countries the significance of the coefficient 
is borderline and the whole fit is poorer than in line 6a. 
In conclusion, it would appear that the LCH proposition that the 
saving ratio does not depend on per capita income is supported, but 
only above some threshold that included all the OECD countries in 
our sample. However for poorer countries the saving ratio may be 
expected to respond significantly to per capita income. 
But note that in the generalized LCH, the effect of income on 
saving, even for poor countries, is not a direct one as in the Keynesian 
formulation; rather, per capita resources affect the wealth income 
ratio which, multiplied by the saving rate of growth determines the 

Recent Declines in the Savings Rate etc. 
283 
saving ratio; in particular; it is still true that with zero growth there 
should be no saving, no matter what the rate of growth. 
3.2 Interest Rate and Inflation 
There are two further variables that we have barely mentioned in 
reviewing the LCH, namely the (real) interest rate and inflation, that 
are frequently regarded as playing a major role in saving decisions 
though, paradoxically, there is a lot of disagreement about the 
direction of the effect. We have not included them in the tests of Table 
3 because we do not regard these variables as quantitatively important 
and we were eager to conserve degrees of freedom. We do not expect 
the interest rate to be very important because we believe in a strong 
income effect, reflecting the high wealth income ratio. As for the 
inflation, aside from the role of the inflation adjustment on govern-
ment interest which has been included, its effect is the uncertain 
outcome of two opposing effects. On the one hand inflation typically 
increases uncertainty and that generally makes for more saving. But 
on the other the uncertainty of the return from saving discourages 
saving; and inflation illusion, other than through government interest 
or some other variables might also make for lower saving. Neverthe-
less, before concluding, we will summarize the results of some 
rudimentary tests whose purpose is to make sure that the inclusion of 
those variables would not prove to be of major significance or 
radically change the results of Table 3. 
In the first test we added interest rate and inflation to line 4 of 
Table 3. In the case of inflation the coefficient is fairly significant 
(t-ratio of 2.4), but rather small; an increase in inflation by one 
percentage point would decrease the saving rate by 0.3 points. For the 
interest rate the estimate is even more negative (- 0. 7). This is 
puzzling, considering that this coefficient should measure the substit-
ution effect since the income effect is included in the income term. 
Now the substitution effect should, without question, be positive. 
However the coefficient of interest is not significant (at the 1% level). 
Furthermore, when the same variables are added to line 5, in which 
all variables are weighted by population, the coefficient falls sharply, 

284 
Franco Modigliani 
down to near zero. On the other hand, the coefficient of inflation 
becomes more negative (- 0.60) and more significant (t-ratio = 2.9). 
The other coefficients of the equation are largely unaffected. Similar 
results are obtained in tests using one variable at a time. The inflation 
effect is always negative, and become especially significant in the 
weighted form (- 0.6, t-ratio of 3). However, the interest effect 
remains negative in the unweighted form but in the weighted form it 
turns positive, though not significant. 
This admittedly crude experiment supports the conclusion that 
neither the interest rate nor the inflation are to be regarded as 
important contributors to the determination of saving, although 
inflation appears to have but a mildly negative impact, but mild at 
best. As for interest rate, though we cannot reject the hypothesis that 
the substitution effect has the expected sign we can say that, in any 
event, it appears to be small enough so that the total effect of a rise in 
interest is positive on consumption and negative on saving. 
In concluding it may be useful to summarize our results by 
comparing them briefly with those reported in a recent study by 
Bosworth (1988). He has tested a model similar to the one underlying 
our Table 3 but using time series data for 12 different OECD countries 
for the period 1969 to 1986. His variables are the same or analogous 
to ours, except for not allowing for the possibility of consumption out 
of the inflation correction, and for the inclusion of a time trend which 
unfortunately turns out to be high (and negative) for a number of 
countries. This is disturbing, for a trend is a non-explanation. 
Income growth is highly significant, generally the most significant 
(except possibly for trend), with but one exception, though the 
coefficient is typically smaller than in Table 1 (range 1.5 to O.S).The 
estimated effects of government surplus are consistent in the two 
studies and therefore reject pure Barro in favor of a partial Barro 
effect (3). The interest rate was included for the eight larger countries. 
For the four countries with the highest t-ratios, 2 have positive and 2 
negative coefficients. For the remaining countries, 3 are positive and 
(3) There is only one country for which the deficit effect is estimated to be quite 
large- Italy, with a coefficient of -0.67 (!·ratio = 4). But in a detailed study of that 
country (Modigliani [13]) I found that the effect was quite small, no more than -0.19. 

Recent Declines in the Savings Rate etc. 
285 
one negative, but none are significant. On the whole, these results do 
not make a strong case for a clear positive effect. 
In the case of inflation, his estimated effect on saving is prevail-
ingly positive (in 9 cases out of 12), and the coefficients are pretty 
stable across countries (around 0.3). This is contrary to our results, 
which however are not reliable enough to offer a challenge to the time 
series estimates. 

286 
Franco Modigliani 
BIBUOGRAPHY 
[1] AGHEVU B. - BoUGHTON JAMES M. - MONTIEL PETER J. - VILLANUEVA DELANO -
WOGLOM GEOFFREY: «The Role of National Saving in the World Economy», 
Washington (DC), International Monetary Fund, Occasional Paper, no. 67, 1990. 
[2] ALTONJI J. - HAYASHI F. - KOTUKOFF L.: «Is the Extended Family Altruistically 
linked?», NBER, Working Paper, no. 3046, 1989. 
[3] ANDO A. - MoDIGUANI F.: «The Life Cycle Hypothesis of Saving - Aggregate 
Implications of Tests», American Economic Review, vol. 1, no. 53, 1963. 
[4] BARRO R.J.: «Are Government Bonds Net Wealth?», Journal of Political Economy, 
no. 82, November-December 1974. 
[5] BoswoRTH B.: The Global Decline in Saving: Some International Comparisons, 
Washington (DC), Brookings Institution, 1990. 
[6] FISHER IRVING: The Theory of Interest, New York, Macmillan, 1930. 
[7] FRIEDMAR MILTON: A Theory of the Consumption Function, Princeton, Princeton 
University Press, 1957. 
[8] Gmso L. - JAPPELLI T.: Labor Supply, Risk Sharing and Precautionary Saving, 
Roma, Banca d'Italia, 1990. 
[9] HouTHAKKER H.: «On Some Determinants of Saving in Developed and Under-
developed Countries», in ROBINSON E.A.C. (ed.): Problems in Economic Develop-
ment, London, Macmillan, 1965. 
[10] KEYNES J.M.: The General Theory of Employment, Interest and Money, New 
York, Harcourt Brace 1986. 
[11] KoTLIKOFF J.L.: «lntergenerational Transfer of Saving», The Journal of Economic 
Perspectives, vol. 2, no. 2, 1988. 
[12] MoDIGUANI F.: «The Life Cycle Hypothesis of Saving and Intercountry Differences 
in the Saving Ratio», in Ems W. - Scorr M. - WoLFE I. (eds.): Induction Growth 
and Trade, Oxford, Clarendon Press, 1970. 
[13] --: «Perche e diminuito il saggio di risparmio in Italia?», in BlASCO s. -
RoNCAGLIA A. -
SALVATI M. (eds.): Instituzione e mercato sullo sviluppo 
economico, Rome, Laterza, 1990. 
[14] MoDIGUANI F. -ANno A.: «Some Reflections on Describing Structures of Finance 
Sectors», and with SHELL KARL: «Appendix», in FROMM G. - KLEIN R. (eds.): The 
Brookings Model: Perspective and Recent Developments, Amsterdam, North 
Holland, American Elsevier, 1975. 
[15] MODIGUANI E. - BLUMBERG R.: «Utility Analysis and the Aggregate Consumption 
Function: An Attempt at Integration», unpublished manuscript, 1954, published in 
The Collected Papers of Franco Modigliani, vol. 2, Cambridge, MIT Press, 1980. 
[16] MomGUANI F. - JAPPELLI T.: «Fiscal Policy and Saving in Italy since 1860», in 
PosKIN T. -FLEMMING T. - GoRINI S. (eds.): Private Saving and Public Debt, New 
York, Blackwell, 1987. 
[17] MODIGUANI F. - STERUNG A.: «Government Debt, Government Spending and 
Private Sector Behavior Comment», American Economic Review, vol. 76, no. 5, 
1986. 
[ 18] STERUNG A.: An Investigation of the Determinants of the Long Run Savings Ratio, 
Submitted in partial fulfillment of the requirements for the degree of Bachelor of 
Science, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 1977. 

Global Effects of East European 
Rebuilding and the Adequacy of Western 
Saving: an Issue for the 1990s 
Jean Paul Fitoussi -
Edmund S. Phelps (*) 
OFCE 
Colwnbia University 
What effects will the investment needed to rebuild several of the 
economies of eastern Europe have on the rest of the world -
in 
particular, on western Europe, on North America and the Pacific 
Basin, and on the less developed areas? What effect will such in-
creases in public indebtedness as may occur to finance this extensive 
renovation have on those same regions? Of course we are not under a 
misapprehension that we will be able to say what, in the expected 
value sense, the effects upon the West of the redevelopment in eastern 
Europe will truly be -
let alone what the net resultant of all forces 
affecting the West over the next decade will be. But we suppose there 
is a widespread interest among economists in an attempt to figure out 
the implications of economic theory with regard to this question. 
One reason for this interest, of course, is the concern over what 
the rest of the world should do, if anything, in response to the shocks 
coming from eastern Europe. There is now a lively debate going on 
between Japan and the United States in this regard which we will 
address. 
Two other forces that may tum out to be of great importance for 
the degree of world prosperity in the new decade are the prospective 
(*) The authors are grateful to Sandrine Cazes (OFCE) for her excellent research 
assistance. 

288 
Jean Paul Fitoussi - Edmund S. Phelps 
scaling back of military expenditure by a number of governments 
around the world and the prospective maturation of a number of 
countries in the Pacific Basin from low-wage export surplus countries 
into high-wage economies with negligible or negative trade surpluses. 
However the East European question will be enough to occupy us in 
the present paper. 
The potential empirical importance of the prospective redevelop-
ment of several of the East European countries is reason enough for a 
paper on that subject ( 1 ). There is a theoretical motive as well, 
however. In some previous work, particulary the Fitoussi-Phelps 
monograph [2] and Phelps [3], and several closed-economy papers of 
which Phelps (forthcoming, [5]) is closest to the models here, one 
finds the anti-Keynesian contention that a decline of the propensity to 
save (whether autonomous or instead induced by fiscal policy) is 
contractionary for employment -
not expansonary as monetary 
models are apt to imply in the interim between impact and full return 
to the "natural rate". In our monograph the theme was, to be more 
accurate, that a decline in the propensity to save, while it could 
expand employment in the country of the shock's origin, would 
assuredly contract employment in the rest of the world; it could have 
been shown, though, that world employment (the total in the two 
countries or unions) was unambiguously contracted (under the full 
assumption set). The theoretical question therefore arises: If saving is 
good for employment, contrary to Keynes, is it also implied that, 
likewise contrary to Keynes, investment is bad for employment? 
In the two-region context, if increased demand for the consumer 
good in one country causes "crowding out at a distance" in the rest of 
the world, choking off non-tradeable capital-goods demand and thus 
employment there, does increased investment (or capital) demand in a 
country cause a similar crowding out and tendency to slump in the 
rest of the world? There is also some question as to how other 
prospective events related to Eastern Europe can be appropriately fit 
into our kind of non-monetary saving-investment-public sector model. 
(1) In an appendix to this paper, we try to measure, albeit crudely, the order of 
magnitude of the investment needed for this prospective redevelopment. 
Advise: the numbers in square brackets refer to the Bibliography in the appendix. 

Global Effects of East European etc. 
1. - A Neoclassical View: 
Perfect National Labor Markets in a World United 
by Instant Tradeability of Capital 
289 
Let us adopt as our first approximation a rather simple view 
taken from some pages of neoclassical growth theory. Here the real 
wage rate in every country darts up and down so as to clear the labor 
market continuously. To simplify the exposition we will suppose, 
unless indicated otherwise, that the labor force in each country is a 
constant, independent of the wage and other variables, and is station-
ary over the indefinte future. It will be necessary to proceed in a 
highly aggregative way by imagining that there is a single consumer 
good and a single capital good. These products are made with labor 
and capital alone, land being unneeded. We make the usual two-sec-
tor model assumptions that the capital stock is freely shiftable ex post 
installation from one sector to the other, and that the sector pro-
ducing the capital good uses more labor-intensive methods of produc-
tion than the sector producing the consumer good. 
While labor is taken to be immobile, we now suppose that all 
capital goods can be picked up and shipped costlessly to other 
countries even ex post installation. Later we will abolish this last 
feature. 
What happens with the discovery, so to speak, that there are in 
eastem Europe, on the other side of the wall tribes of men and women 
apparently able to use capital with more or less the same productivity 
as people to the West? If capital markets function with neoclassical 
perfection and govemments stay out of the way, an amount of capital 
will be instantly reallocated from what was the world economy before 
the discovery of the Eastem Frontier to those parts of the East 
desiring and seen to be credit-worthy of possession of such capital. 
A consequence is that there will be an immediate drop in the 
capital-labor ratio within the pre-East world economy. The global 
capital stock, which has taken more than two millenia to accumulate 
to its present level, must now be spread more thinly to accommodate 
the increase in the effective size of the globe's labor force. From the 
point of view on matters that we are now taking, the abrupt increase 
in the number of workers available to work with the existing capital 

290 
Jean Paul Fitoussi - Edmund S. Phelps 
stock has effects on real prices like an earthquake, which decreases 
the capital-labor ratio by decreasing the numerator rather than by 
increasing the denominator. 
If we were to take a one-sector view of the world, the effect of 
that on real prices, the real interest rate and the real wage, in this 
case, would be trivial to see. The real rate of interest would jump in 
response to the similar jump in the rental on capital goods, the 
marginal products of capital in once forbidden terminology, and the 
real wage would drop in reflection of a reduced marginal product of 
labor. 
The same results obtain in our two-sector neoclassical world. The 
removal of some of the capital stock has the effect of lowering the 
relative price, or real price, of the capital good, which we whall 
denote by p. Since that is the labor intensive good a consequence is a 
similar lowering of the aggregate demand for labor and hence of the 
real wage rate, to be denoted by v. Hence the real rental per unit of 
capital, denoted by R, goes up. Since the real price p will be 
expectably on its way to recovering to its normal value as additional 
capital accumulation is set in motion, the rate of capital gain to 
holders of capital -
that is, the proportionate rate of increase of p -
also jumps (from the level of zero to which it had been equal in the 
antecedent situation which we take to be a stationary state). Since 
both the rental rate and the capital gain rate are up, there is an 
unambiguous rise in the real rate of interest. So nothing is qualitat-
ively different in our two-sector world. 
To state the welfare economics of the matter somewhat baldly, it 
is a theorem that potentially the welfare of everyone in the West as 
well as the East is thereby increased, in the stipulated neoclassical 
world. This is a doctrine of the global efficiency gain from free 
movement of capital. The West's potential welfare is not impaired 
because it has not lost ownership of capital -
no real earthquake has 
occurred -
and with this capital the West shares in the increased 
world output (2). 
(2) There is however in this two-sector framework another possible outcome if, 
contrary to the assumption in the text, the East has a comparative advantage in 
producing capital and both regions are seeking the benefits from the division of labour. 
This may be achieved if eastern Europe specialises in the production of the labour-in-

Global Effects of East European etc. 
291 
The rest of the neoclassical story is familiar enough. After the 
spreading of the capital stock among a larger number of workers, the 
growth rate of output, which had been zero if, as we shall assume, the 
economy was initially in a stationary state, will suddenly jump to a 
positive number and thereupon subside asymptotically back to zero. 
In per worker terms, gross investment is reduced but depreciation is 
down more, so net investment is up. There will be a gradual recovery 
of the capital-labor and output-labor ratios to their pre-shock levels. 
2. - A "Modern" Labor Market Introduced 
Now, while keeping all the other neoclassical paraphenalia, we 
substitute for the perfect labor market of neoclassical theory, with its 
characteristic of market clearing, the modern notion of a labor market 
in which wages are set by firms with an eye to providing their 
employes with incentives not to shirk, not to quit, not to be absentees, 
and so forth. The consequence of this consideration is that wages 
hang above the level that would clear the market, even under 
equilibrium conditions (meaning a state of correct expectations). In 
short there is a positive natural rate of (involuntary) unemployment. 
(The origins are the series of papers by Phelps, Stiglitz and Salop on 
turnover, and the series by Calvo, Bowles, Shapiro and Stiglitz on 
supervision and so-called shirking). 
In the past decade a useful clarification and extension has arisen, 
due to Solow and to Stiglitz among others: there is, at least over an 
interval of unemployment rates, an equilibrium level to which the 
wage will rise at a given unemployment rate, and the equilibrium 
wage dictated by incentive considerations is a decreasing function of 
the given unemployment rate. If we invert that function we have the 
interesting proposition that the natural, or equilibrium, unemploy-
ment rate depends upon the real wage and shifts up when the real 
wage that firms can afford to pay shifts down. If we let L denote the 
tensive good, namely capital, while the westem region specialises in the production of 
the consumer good. It may well be that some reallocation of the capital stock occurs, 
but on a much smaller scale than in the example we were considering. So the case can 
be made that benefits from trade may compete with the benefits of the reallocation of 
capital, if the world behaves as Ricardo would like it to behave. 

292 
Jean Paul Fitoussi - Edmund S. Phelps 
perfectly inelastic labor force and E denote the level of employment, 
we may say that the equilibrium level of the unemployment rate (L -
E)! L is a decreasing function of the real wage. (In fact this view is 
oversimple in leaving out wealth from the picture, but it will not be 
convenient to use the full-blown formulation here). In this modem 
set-up, then, there is a sort of surrogate labor supply curve, or 
labor-market equilibrium locus, E ( v), that makes the natural level of 
employment an increasing function of the real wage, v. 
In most respects nothing changes with the introduction of this 
modem feature. When the capital is spread over the larger number of 
employed persons the real price of the capital good and the real wage 
drop as before (and the real rate of interest rises as before). But now 
the drop of the real wage immediately implies an upward jump in the 
rate of unemployment within the borders of what was the world 
economy before the opening to the East. Once again, the decreased 
capital labor-ratio will set in motion a process of recovery, ac-
companied by gratifying reports of rapid growth, in which all the real 
prices and the "great ratios" will gradually and asymptotically subside 
back to their pre-shock (old-stationary-state) levels. That implies that 
the unemployment rate too will gradually recover to its old level. 
Some readers will be curious about the formal analysis behind the 
latter findings. They can be easily shown to hold in a simple case of 
the two-sector model, that in which the capital good producing sector 
uses no capital at all, only labor; so all capital is for the other sector. In 
such a case the dynamics are those shown in Graph 1 and the pair of 
equations in the caption underneath. 
The polar case of the two-sector model is depicted where capital 
is not used to produce capital and the output labor ratio in the 
capital-producing sector is a positive constant a. On the condition that 
the real price of the capital good p is always high enough that the real 
wage is bid up to ap, which means employment is positive in that 
sector as well as the other one, the rental R, the output-capital ratio o, 
and the labor-capital ratio I can all be viewed as decreasing functions 
of ap alone. Then the first of the pair of differential equations captured 
in the Graph is: 
(dp!dt)/p = r- R (ap)/p- o 

Global Effects of East European etc. 
293 
where we use the Blanchard formula: 
r = p + (dC!dt)/C + J.l p/o (ap) + J.l D/o (ap)K 
specializing to the case in which D = 0, and we also use 
(dC!dt)!C = (o' (ap) ap/o(ap)) (dp/dt)!p + (dK!dt)/K 
We also have: 
dK!dt= a [E (ap) -
I (ap) K)] - o K 
both to substitute into the previous equation and to use as the second 
in our pair of differential equations. In this equation the function E ( v) 
is the equilibrium locus or surrogate labor supply curve, not to be 
confused with the labor force L which we take to be a constant. We 
take E to be an increasing function. 
This simple system can be shown to display saddle-path stability, 
hence to generate a unique path in the (K, p) plane. Graph 1 illustrates 
GRAPH 1 
p 
K=O 
p=O 
Po 
----------------------------------------K 
0 

294 
Jean Paul Fitoussi - Edmund S. Phelps 
an important property of this path -
that in makes p an increasing 
function of K. Thus when K drops with the physical export of capital 
to the East p and v likewise drop. Hence the unemployment rate, (L 
-
E ( v) )/ L jumps upward. 
There is one more aspect of the problem that needs to be 
considered. As noted above, in our scenario the West does not donate 
the capital, it lends it or sells it in return for real obligations to repay in 
consumer goods. Suppose that East European governments borrow to 
pay for public investments. Alongside the shift of the capital stock is 
the creation of a net liability in the East and a counterpart paper asset 
held in the West. How does that affect the solution? One might think 
the answer is that such a transfer of wealth in our model will not 
affect the solution if the people in the two regions have the same tastes 
and technology, as we have already assumed. That would be correct 
in a Ricardo-Barro world, but not in the Blanchard-Yaari framework 
in which new taxpayers are anticipated to arrive. The increase of the 
world public debt drives up the world real interest rate, which is 
contractionary. 
3. · Western Subsidies to Eastern Investment 
and Ex Post Non-Tradeability 
A rather important aspect of the prospective developments in the 
East is that much of the investment there will be subsidized by the 
governments of the West both directly and multilaterally through such 
institutions as the newly created BERD. How will that affect things? 
If governments offer a prize, or bounty, for the purchase of the 
capital good and its installation in eastern Europe, the intuitively 
obvious consequence is a rise in the level to which investors bid up the 
real price of the capital good. (In terms of the diagram in Graph 1 
there is an upward shift of the locus of points along which (dp!dt)/p 
= 0). 
But the question arises of how to fit this observation into the 
framework of the preceding section II. It would seem to make little 
sense to imagine that the governments of the West hit upon the idea of 

Global Effects of East European etc. 
295 
subsidies after seeing that private markets have brilliantly (in one 
stroke) reallocated their capital to the East, so that the latter is already 
as capital-abundant as the West. The subsidies, we suppose, are 
intended to encourage private investors to make investments in the 
East which they would otherwise undertake only in a trickle if at all. 
Moreover it is much too heroic to suppose that all the existing capital 
could be picked up and moved costlessly to the East if that were 
desired. These observations suggest that we bear in mind an alterna-
tive model of the opening to the East. 
In the alternative model there is non-tradeability of capital ex 
post (but only ex post, not ex ante): all capital once installed in a 
country cannot leave that country, it can only shift from one sector 
to another within its country of installation. (How so? Well, each 
firm might be able to adapt its capital goods to the production of 
either good while these structures and machines are too heavy or 
complex to move to another spot). With the opening to the East the 
demand price of capital goods to be installed or already installed in 
the West abruptly falls owing to the rise in the real interest rate 
caused by the new developments, while the prospect of higher 
rentals (because of lower wage rates) in the East and subsidies in 
addition induces a rise in the demand price of capital goods for 
installation in the East. Since what counts under equilibrium condi-
tions is the maximum of these prices, we conclude that the real price 
p at which newly produced capital is sold will jump. As a conse-
quence there will initially be a sudden boom in the West, which we 
are still viewing as an integrated community of not very dissimilar 
countries. The boom will occur in the production of capital-goods, 
specifically in their production for export. Investment expenditure by 
firms in the West will drop to zero since their demand price is now 
below the cost of production. (Supplying firms will supply nothing to 
the low-bidding set of customers). Hence there is a gradual decline of 
the capital stock in the West instead of the abrupt decline pictured in 
the previous models, and with this gradual decline the boom in the 
West will tum into the slump that was realized suddenly in the 
previous story with ex post tradeability of capital. then, in the last 
phase, this delayed slump will usher in the recovery that was shown 
to result in the previous story. 

296 
Jean Paul Fitoussi - Edmund S. Phelps 
4. - Capital Non-Tradeability between Europe 
and the Rest of the World 
It is time now to stop viewing the world economy before the 
opening to the East as rather like the European Community. Instead 
we adopt a view like the two-sector two-country model in our mono-
graph: there the two-sector two-country model in our monograph: 
there is Europe, which we now interpret as including the reborn 
countries of eastern Europe, and there is America. But now the 
shocks are in Europe, not America, so Canada and Latin America and 
Asia and so forth become honorary parts of America rather than of 
Europe as in the monograph. There is no tradeability of capital 
between these two regions. 
From the standpoint of the model in Part II the quantum increase 
in the effective labor force of greater Europe drives up the real rate of 
interest in Europe. Extending that model to its two-country 
generalization leads to the implication that this shock propagates and 
"imported" rise in the real interest rate in the other country, America. 
It follows that pA, the real price of the non-tradeable capital good 
produced and used in America, is necessarily driven down as future 
prospective rentals are discounted more heavily. (It is an interesting 
detail that the analysis in Part II showed the real price of the capital 
good in Europe, pE, also declined even though that is where the 
investment boom occurs). This drop of pA entails a drop of employ-
ment in America, E (vA; A), and as drop of both employment and 
output in the capital-good producing sector there. By degrees, there-
fore, the capital stock shrinks in America, which is how the world's 
capital market responds to the need of western Europe to rebuild its 
capital after parting of a one-sector model, this decline of the capital 
stock does not have further repercussions for employments in 
America. As new capital is constructed in Europe the real interest rate 
subsides and both pE asnd pA tend to rise from their depressed levels. 
Note however that there must be a new final phase in this two-country 
model. Once Europe has reattained its old capital-labor ratio, so that 
the real rate of interest on this account could be back to its pre-shock 
level, the American stock of capital is clearly below its old level, 
having steadily declined as a result of the depression of pA. So there 

Global Effects of East European etc. 
297 
must ensue a further phase in which the American capital-employ-
ment level, wage, and so forth all recover to their pre-shock levels. 
Obviously the long-term dynamics are vastly more complicated than 
in what was effectively a one-country model with a single state 
variable, that country's stock of capital. 
From the standpoint of the model in Part III the rise of the rental 
available to newly produced capital shipped to the East and the 
availability of subsidies for such investment again leads to a rise in the 
real interest rate in Europe. There is again the implication that pA 
drops, leading to a slump of employment in America and a slowdown 
of investment (which will be made up in the distant future). 
5. - A Case for Greater Global Saving 
Even in Trade-Surplus Nations 
The classical virtues of a capital market in the context of a closed 
economy are standard fare for readers of this paper, and the analogy 
to the international market for capital is also familiar ground. 
An advantage of a world capital market over more primitive 
arrangements is that the investment done by a country may exceed, 
equal, or fall short of that country's saving. The market achieves the 
necessary reconciliation of aggregate investment and saving by in-
ducements working through real prices. When there is an an excess of 
global investment demand over the global supply of saving, an 
increase of saving may be induced thorugh effects upon interest and 
wealth; at the same time, the deficiency of saving induces a curtail-
ment of investment. Every close student of economics can imagine the 
kind of classical arguments why, under certain conditions, the opera-
tions of such a market are conducive to the internationally Pareto-
optimal allocation of capital and to the efficent allocation of resources 
more generally. 
The dissent of Keynes, which so disturbed the economics profes-
sions for decades, was the objection that an efficient result would not 
obtain if the companion labor market did not behave in the classical 
(full information) way. Keynes and subsequent Keynesians went on to 
espouse a locomotive theory of interdependence: if investment de-

298 
Jean Paul Fitoussi - Edmund S. Phelps 
mand somewhere in the world increased, there would be a positive 
impact on employment in the country or countries supplying the 
capital goods involved -
the home country most of all, let us assume 
-
and through multiplier effects, there would be some increase of 
employment everywhere. (In John Kennedy's memorable aphorism, 
"A rising tide lifts all boats". How? By raising the worlwide nominal 
interest rate and thus quickening the velocity of money everywhere). 
It was then argued that the home and foreign countries have a 
responsibility to react to their employment and trade-balance levels 
depending upon the kind of international system they are operating 
within. Under a fluctuating exchange rate system, the home country 
might tighten monetary policy, thus to counter the swollen employ-
ment level and burgeoning trade deficit caused by the boom in its 
investment; fiscal policy might remain natural. Under a fixed ex-
change rate system, the home country would be obliged to tighten 
fiscal policy to curb employment and the trade deficit. If the rule 
makes fiscal stimulus sensitive to the trade deficit as well as employ-
ment, the foreign countries in our example could be asked for some 
fiscal stimulus; the rationale here was that, in the spirit of insurance, 
there should be some sharing of the pain of closing the trade 
imbalance. (In both systems, the key currency country might ease 
monetary policy if the gold price falls because of increased real 
interest rates -
tighten monetary policy if the gold price rises because 
of expectations of increased inflation). So far as we know, the 
codification of duties and rights here has remained incomplete and 
exact -
which is not necessarily a handicap for survival. 
Clearly we also dissent from the classical position, and in a way 
that is parallel to Keynes' objection, but the pathology we point to in 
the labor market is real wage rigidity (or real-wage stickiness) rather 
than the malfunctioning of the equilibration mechanism (which is 
describable in terms of relative wages or nominal wages). Even those 
economists who are not prepared to go along with such a postulate 
regarding the labor market are inclined to agree with one of the 
implications of our analysis: Under non-tradeability the increase of the 
world real interest rate consequent upon the increase of investment 
demand somewhere in the world- in the present context, eastern 
Europe- is in some respects "bad news" in the rest of the world. 

Global Effects of East European etc. 
299 
These neoclassical economists implicitly recognize that the welfare 
benefit from the increased real interest rate on saving that the rest of 
the world will enjoy are more than offset by the welfare burden from 
the decreased real wage consequent upon the increased real interest 
rate. But we cannot in this paper attempt to expound a neoclassical 
analysis of the matter when we have the implications of our own point 
of view to analyze. 
From the point of view of our "structuralist" theory, bearing in 
mind particularly the Europe/non-Europe model of intercontinental 
non-tradeability of capital goods in section IV above and the two 
Europes model of section III, what responsibilities devolve upon the 
various kinds of nation-participants? Let us first consider the Europe/ 
non-Europe model of section IV. 
It is easier to say what countries should not do than to say exactly 
what they should do. For example, it is easy to argue that East Europe 
is not obliged to finance the whole of its increased investment with its 
own increased saving. To go back to a kind of international financial 
autarchy would undoubtedly be too extreme a measure to be plausible 
as the optimal solution. We want the classical benefits of a globally 
integrated capital market up to a point, to the point, to be more 
precise, where the extra benefits begin to be outweighted by the extra 
burdens. Pending a full scale analysis, it is a reasonable guess that a 
global social optimum calls for some increase in the rate of saving in 
the region where the shock increasing rate of investment is occuring. 
It would make no sense for the nations of non-Europe, in 
response to their improved trade surpluses resulting from increased 
exports (of consumer goods) to greater Europe, to increase their 
consumption spending through shifts in their fiscal or institutional 
structure with the objective to reducing those trade surpluses. That 
would be recipe for magnifying the rise of real interest rates caused by 
increased investment in Europe and, according to our theory, its net 
global effect on employment would be negative. In our theory, there is 
nothing inherently contractionary for the world in a country's running 
a trade surplus, and measures to reduce a trade surplus are not 
inherently expansionary; they may, as in the example just given, be 
contractionary for the world as a whole. 
Similarly, it would not appear to make sense for countries outside 

300 
Jean Paul Fitoussi - Edmund S. Phelps 
Europe to respond to their increased trade surpluses (or reduced trade 
deficits) by widening or intensifying subsidies for private investment 
inside or outside their own borders. That too would drive up after 
subsidy rates of return available to investors in the qualified projects 
and thus drive up further the world real interest rate. Countries that 
did not pursue this use of scarce tax revenues would see their capital 
goods industries sink further. Clearly these two types of fiscal 
responses have ia kind of beggar-my-neighbor flavor to them and 
should be opposed. 
On these matters the Finance Ministry of Japan seems to have 
taken a page from our book, perhaps literally. A report by a Finance 
Ministry Advisory panel issued at the end of May concludes that 
Japan's current account surpluses are beneficial on balance to the 
world economy, citing in particular their function in providing aid to 
developing countries and support for investment in the world as a 
whole (International Herald Tribune). On the surface, at least, the 
response of the US Treasury Secretary Nicholas T. Brady seems to 
have missed the point. The need for capital in eastern Europe, he said: 
«Should not be confused with the need of surplus countries to 
continue to bring down their external surluses by increasing invest-
ment relative to saving». 
In one respect, the reality of the differences between the United 
States and Japan on this issue is more complex. The United States has 
been seeking from Japan an agreement to increase public investment 
in the infrastructure of the Japanese economy for the most part. The 
sort of structuralist model we have been working with here has the 
property that, in a closed-economy version, an increase in the steady 
rate of government purchase of the capital good (for disposal, say) 
actually has a negative (though ultimately vanishing) effect on the real 
rate of interest: In raising the price of the capital good, it reduces the 
rental-price ratio both by increasing the denominator and (since the 
real wage is an increasing function of the price) by decreasing the 
numerator; moreover, since the price must steadily recede back to 
normal, it can be shown, the prospect is for continuous capital losses 
after the initial jump of the price. (The stepped-up rate of capital good 
expenditure by the government has only a transient effect upon the 
real price of the capital good and thus upon the real wage and the real 

Global Effects of East European etc. 
301 
rate of interest: crowding out of private investment occurs, and the 
shrinkage of the capital stock "lets the air out of' the inflated real 
price of capital). 
Does this observation on the effects of (tax financed) public 
investment serve to vindicate the American demand for more such 
investment by Japan as a means to reduce its trade surplus? Would 
increased public investment by Japan (even if on non-tradeable capital 
goods) have only benign effects on other countries in non-Europe, 
such as the less developed countries, because (were Japan closed) it 
would lower the real rate of interest? We are not at all sure that the 
American position can be rescued along these lines. If the increased 
investment tended to reduce the rate of return to private investment in 
Japan in relation to that in the rest of the world, there would be a 
tendency toward a capital outflow and thus an intensification of the 
trade surplus in Iapan, not the reduction of the trade surplus sought 
by the American government. If the increased public investment is 
assumed to reduce Japan's trade surplus, it seems impossible to 
escape the implication that in so doing it would increase (not de-
crease) the world real rate of interest at the wrong time when East 
Europe and a number of developing countries are putting in claims for 
a larger chunk of the world's capital. 
However we have still not got to the bottom of the issue. The 
American government is asking the Japanese government to agree to 
make a substantial number of its capital good expenditures on 
(tradeable) capital goods produced by American firms. On that 
account, taken by itself, the Japanese trade surplus presumably will 
show the reduction desired by the American government. Yet, if our 
thinking here is correct, there will result an increased outflow for 
these two countries as a whole, as if America were part of Japan. So 
Japan and the US governments can say: «We are engaging in some 
internal transactions between us that will have the effect of reducing 
our real rate of interest and increasing our aggregate (algebraic) trade 
surplus with respect to the rest of the world to just the point where the 
real interest rate there is reduced equally». One is not sure how 
important such foreign purchases of capital will be, though. 
The main conclusion we are led to is that Japanese public 
investment that is tax financed will not do the damage to the real 

302 
Jean Paul Fitoussi - Edmund S. Phelps 
interest rate that a consumption binge or subsidies to private invest-
ment would have done, but they avoid this harm, and do some good, 
only by increasing the supply of foreign saving made available to 
eastern Europe, Latin America, and most of the rest of the world 
(leaving aside the United States as a somewhat special case). 
6. - Conclusions 
We have explored a number of models, building on a unified 
theoretical pespective, with which to answer two questions: what are 
the effects on the rest of the world of increased investment and 
decreased public saving in Eastern Europe? 
We have argued along the lines of our 1988 monograph that the 
rest of the world as a whole will suffer a rise in the real rate of interest 
and a decline in the real price offered for its capital-goods output (if a 
large part of that output is not internationally tradeable), and hence a 
drop of employment in the capital goods producing industry. Coun-
tries that can manage to export capital goods to eastern Europe in 
significant quantities, as may be true of some neighboring countries in 
western Europe, can expect to gain improved prices for their capital 
goods output though suffering crowding out of their domestic capital 
investment nevertheless. (West German capital goods can go up in 
price while American capital goods prices go down because they are 
not eqully tradeable to the new market in eastern Europe). Thus 
employment there may be expected to go up before coming back 
down and even receeding for a while to below its previous level. 
Ultimately the whole world gets back its old capital-labor ratio and 
real rate of interest, and thus its old real wage and rates of employ-
ment. 
We then turned to the controversial question of how the coun-
tries to the West should respond to this disturbance. We argued that 
the nations of the world, not excluding those countries already the 
proud bearers of large trade surplus figures, should try to increse their 
saving in order to cushion the real rate of interest from the elevation 
that our models predict to result from the rebuilding of eastern 
Europe in the 1990s. Many of the developing countries are not in a 

Global Effects of East European etc. 
303 
political or economic condition to do very much in this regard, so it 
seems especially important that the most economically and politically 
comfortable countries in the world- all of Europe, the United States 
and Japan, for example -
shift significantly toward greater fiscal 
austerity so as to contribute to an increased supply of foreign saving 
for the less developed parts of the world and to the redeveloping parts 
of eastern Europe. 
We made the further point that, insofar as Japan is persuaded by 
the American government to undertake increased public investments 
that are fully tax financed and that have no direct favorable impact 
upon the rentals earned by private capital (i.e., no positive impact on 
the maginal productivity of private capital in Japan), such as improve-
ments in housing and the environment or simply pyramid building, 
the consequence will not be another regrettable upward push on the 
world real rate of interest, but, insofar as the capital goods purchases 
are nontradeable Japanese outputs, there will not be a reduction of 
the Japanese trade surplus either. There will be a further improve-
ment of Japan's trade surplus and through that mechanism the same 
downward push on the real rate of interest that will be felt in Japan. 

304 
Jean Paul Fitoussi - Edmund S. Phelps 
Investment Needs in Eastern Europe: 
an Empirical Evaluation 
APPENDIX 
What is the order of magnitude of the investment needed to 
rebuild several of the economies of eastern Europe? We will consider 
only the following eastern countries: Bulgaria, East Germany, Hun-
gary, Poland, Czechoslovakia, Romania. For obvious reasons we will 
not deal with the case of the USSR. The prospects of development of 
this latter country are very uncertain and the complexities associated 
with them are such that it is even difficult to decide at the conceptual 
level what kind of reforms should be undertaken to resume growth in 
this country, let alone what kind of reforms are feasible. 
A possible source of overestimation of the investment needed to 
rebuild the eastern economies lies in the evaluation of "equilibrium" 
employment in these countries. The transition to a market economy 
will most probably lead to the appearance of (involuntary) unemploy-
ment, and the changing structure of social benefits may lead to a 
decrease in the participation rate of the working-age population. 
Hence as a rough approximation, we have assumed that the employ-
ment-total population ratio in eastern countries in the same than in 
France and Germany (about 40%). 
The six countries considered are populated by 113 million in-
habitants. Under our assumption, 45 million of them would be 
employed. Total employment in the 12 countries of the EEC is 126 
million. Hence employment in the six eastern countries amounts to 
35.8% of employment in the EEC. 
What should be the capital stock needed to bring in the eastern 
countries the average productivity of labour to the level of French or 
West German productivity? We know that this reference level is very 
high, but we have chosen it as a benchmark, a maximum toward 
which the capital stock should tend. 
The calculation is straightforward: the gross stock of fixed capital 
(not including housing) by employed worker was on average in France 

Global Effects of East European etc. 
305 
TABLE 1 
POPULATION AND EMPLOYMENT IN EASTERN COUNTRIES 
AND THE EEC IN 1987 
(in millions) 
Bulgaria ............................... . 
East Germany ......................... . 
Hungary ............................... . 
Poland ............................... . 
Romania ............................... . 
Czechoslovakia ......................... . 
Total of the above countries ............. . 
EEC ................................... . 
Population 
9 
16.6 
10.6 
37.9 
15.6 
15.6 
112.70 
324.00 
Employment 
3.60 
6.64 
4.24 
15.20 
6.24 
6.24 
45.12 
126.00 
and West Germany over the period 1980-1986, of 54,595 ECU. (This 
evaluation refers to the price level of 1980). If we consider the net 
stock of fixed capital the corresponding figure is 34.046 ECU. Hence, 
the gross and net figures for the capital stock of the eastern countries 
are respectively: 2,217, 377 and 1,536, 159 million ECU (at 1980 
prices). 
How should one interpret these figures? 
In terms of the GNP or of gross fixed investment , of the whole 
EEC they are quite sizeable. 
Even if we assume that the catching-up of eastern Europe will 
take ten years, investment there should be equal to one third of the 
investment in the EEC for these economies to reach in the year 2000, 
the average capital stock that western Europe enjoyed during the 
period 1980-1986! 
But these figures are perhaps somewhat exaggerated. First, the 
initial level of the capital stock in the six countries we have considered 
is certainly not nil. Second, the capital stock per worker should not be 
the same as in France and/or Germany: it is already not the same in 
each of the country member of the EEC. It has long been known that 
trade may occur between countries with different labour productivity, 
especially when one allows for different structures of the economy, 
and hence for different specialisation. Furthermore inside one 
country, the capital-labor ratio differs between regions. Hence each of 
the figures in Table II may safely be halved. 

306 
Jean Paul Fitoussi - Edmund S. Phelps 
TABLE 2 
CAPITAL NEED OF THE EASTERN COUNTRIES 
In ECU (1980) ......................... . 
In percent of 
EEC's GDP (1986) 
One year ............................. . 
Five years ............................. . 
Ten years ............................. . 
In percent of 
EEC's gross fixed 
investment (1986) 
One year ............................. . 
Five years ............................. . 
Ten years ............................. . 
Gross stock of 
fixed capital 
2,217.377 mil 
89.00% 
17.80% 
17.80% 
473.00010 
94.60010 
47.30% 
Net stock of 
fixed capital 
1,536.159 mil 
62.00% 
12.40010 
12.40% 
328.00% 
65.60% 
32.8% 
Even if one agrees with this latter convention the resulting figure 
should not be considered as measuring the extra levy on world saving 
due to the recapitalisation of eastern economies. These economies 
have not a zero saving rate, and they may well be in a position of 
financing a great part of their investment. What appears however 
probable is that in the first years of their rebuilding they draw 
extensively on foreign saving and investment. This is all the more 
likely given that the capital stock we have estimated does not include 
public investment in non-marketable goods. 

Global Effects of East European etc. 
307 
BIBLIOGRAPHY 
[l] Fnoussi JEAN PAUL: «Japan Reconsiders Role of Trade Surplus», International 
Herald Tribune, June 1990. 
(2] FITOUSSI JEAN-PAUL - PHELPS EDMUND S.: The Slump in Europe: Open Economy 
Macroeconomics Reconstructed, Oxford, Blackwell, 1988. 
[3] PHELPS EDMUNDS.: «A Working Model of Slump and Recovery from Disturbances 
to Capital-Goods Demand in an Open Non-Monetary Economy», American 
Economic Review, no. 78, May 1998. 
[ 4] - -: «A working Model of Slump and Recovery from Disturbances to Capital 
Goods Demand in a Closed Non-Monetary Economy», International Monetary 
Fund, Research Department, Working Paper, no. 82-88, August 1988; forthcoming 
in NELL E.J. - SEMMLER W. (eds.): Nicholas Kaldor and Mainstream Economics. 
[5] - -: The Pro-Keynesian and Counter-Keynesian Conclusions of the "Structur-
alist" Theory of Unemployment and Interest Using the Familiar Two-Sector 
Apparatus, draft, for Barcelona 1990. 

III - THE EFFECTS OF THE CHANGES 
IN THE PROPENSITY TO SAVE 

Savings and Growth in an 
Interdependent World 
Warwick J. McKibbin(*) 
Brookings Institution, Washington 
l. - Introduction 
A major feature of the 1980s has been the large changes in 
current account balances in the world economy, reflecting changes in 
saving and investment balances in the major industrialized economies. 
The events of the 1980s raise a number of important questions: What 
are the implications of these current account developments and 
associated changes in government and private saving and investment 
behavior for world growth and the distribution of future consumption 
possibilities across countries?; What effects do changes in fiscal 
policies in different economies have on these outcomes?; How do the 
short run adjustments in the face of changes in policy assumptions 
compare to the long run outcomes under different assumptions about 
wage adjustment in the short run? 
The goal of this paper is to provide some insights into these 
questions. The analysis focusses on the links between private saving 
and investment and changed in fiscal policy and how these spill over 
between countries. 
(*) The author thanks a number of colleagues at Brookings for helpful discussions, 
especially Barry Bosworth, Ralph Bryant and Robert Lawrence. The views in this paper 
are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views any of the institutions 
with which the author is affiliated. 

312 
Warwick J. McKibbin 
The issues are first explored in a theoretical framework which 
relies on standard neoclassical growth theory and rational optimizing 
agents with perfect foresight. In practice, this approach only acts as a 
benchmark for comparing more empirically relevant hypotheses 
about behavior. Unfortunately, attempting to extend the analysis 
quickly becomes analytically intractable except for steady-state 
comparisons. Yet dynamics are very important for policy. The analysis 
is then extended by using a dynamic general equilibrium multi-coun-
try model called the McK.ibbin-Sachs Global (MSG) Model (1). 
A number of important features make the MSG model useful for 
considering growth issues and the linkage between economies. First, 
the long run of the world economy is driven by a Solow-Swan 
neoclassical growth model (2), with exogenous technical progress and 
population growth in different economies. In the long run, households 
behave according to intertemporal utility maximization which gives a 
familiar life cycle model of consumption (3). Firms are also neoclas-
sical in the long run, in that they base investment decisions on real 
rates of return and the marginal productivity of capital (4). 
In the short run, however, the dynamics of the global economy 
towards this growth path are determined by three key adjustments to 
the standard growth model. 
Consumption (and therefore saving) is assumed to be determined 
by a weighted average of far-sighted intertemporal optimizing con-
sumers with perfect foresight, and short-sighted consumers who 
consume their current income (both labor and capital) (5). These 
short-sighted consumers are also life cyclers but without rational 
expectations. In the steady state the two types of consumers are 
identical. In the short term the interaction of the two types of 
behavior produces some interesting dynamics which are shown below 
(1) For a description see McKIBBIN and SACHS [19] and McKIBBIN and SACHS [20] 
for a variety of applications. 
Advise: the numbers in square brackets refer to the Bibliography in the appendix. 
(2) See SoLOW (23] and SWAN [24]. 
(3) See ANDO and MODIGUANI [1] and TOBIN [26]. 
( 4) The additional assumption that households and firms discount future income 
streams at a higher rate than the real rate on government debt also means that even in 
the long run, the consumers are not completely Ricardian. 
(5) Empirical evidence on the role of both types of behavior can be found in 
HAYASHI [11] and CAMPBELL and MANKIW (5]. 

Savings and Growth in an Interdependent World 
313 
to be more consistent with empirical evidence than can be generated 
by the life cycle model alone (6). 
The second crucial modification is that firm behavior is also 
assumed to be a weighted average of far-sighted firms investing based 
on Tobin's q (7) and short-sighted firms investing out of current 
profits. 
The final crucial assumption is a varying degree of short-run 
nominal wage stickiness in different countries implemented as an 
overlapping contract model (8). The degree of forward-looking 
behavior and wage stickiness varies between countries consistent with 
the empirical evidence on wage setting. In the long run, all regions 
have labor market clearing based on neoclassical marginal produc-
tivity considerations, but in the short run, unemployment can result. 
Important stock-flow relations are observed in the model. Invest-
ment leads to physical capital accumulation, fiscal deficits lead to 
accumulation of government debt, current account deficits lead to the 
accumulation of foreign claims against domestic production. Inter-
temporal budget constraints are imposed so that all oustanding stocks 
of assets must be ultimately serviced. 
Another important feature of the model is that asset markets are 
efficient in the sense that asset prices are determined by a combin-
ation of intertemporal arbitrage conditions and rational expectations 
(9). Asset prices are directly tied down by the imposition of intertem-
poral budget constraints in the model. The long run behavior of the 
model depends on stock equilibrium; asset prices stabilize in real 
terms, once desired ratios of asset stocks to GDP are reached (10). 
Under the assumption of flexible exchange rates and high capital 
mobility, the short run of the model can be understood using the 
intuition provided by the basic Mundell-Fleming model (11). The key 
( 6) The behaviour of savings in this model of multiple agents is explored in detail in 
McKIBBIN [18]. 
(7) See TOBIN [27]. The q theory is implemented as a cost of adjustment model 
following HAYASID [11], [12]. 
(8) See TAYLOR [25]. 
(9) The assumption of wage stickiness and perfectly flexible asset prices gives 
exchange rate overshooting as in DoRNBUSCH [8]. 
(10) The importance of wealth effects in trade equations and the imposition of 
stock equilibrium rather than flow equilibrium, for calculating equilibrium exchange 
rates is shown in McKIBBIN [ 17]. 
(11) See MUNDELL [21) and FLEMING [9]. 

314 
Warwick J. McKibbin 
difference is that the future paths of the global economy are important 
in the short run because of the forward-looking behavior in asset and 
goods markets. 
In essence, the model is a large theoretical model incorporating a 
number of theoretical insights, but it is too complicated to solve 
analytically. Hence it is solved using numerical simulation techniques 
for models containing rational expectations. To get the quantitative 
results, parameters are based on empirical evidence or, where para-
meters are based on shares (given an assumption about technology or 
utility functions), a 1986 data set is used (12). It is shown in McKibbin 
[15] that this model does surprisingly well in accounting for the global 
experience of the 1980s. 
The McKibbin-Sachs Global Model is introduced in section 3. In 
section 4 the full model used to generate a baseline from 1989 to 2049 
under the assumption that fiscal deficits as a proportion of potential 
GOP in 1989 in each of the regions are maintained forever. A number 
of alternative assumptions about fiscal policy and the impact on 
private saving and investment in the initiating country and spillovers 
into other countries are then considered. Specifically I consider a U.S. 
fiscal contraction, a fiscal expansion in Japan, and a fiscal expansion 
in Germany. The German example can be considered a possible 
outcome of German unification. 
A conclusion and suggestions for future research are presented in 
section 5. 
2. · Some Theoretical Considerations 
This section develops a minimal theoretical model which deals with 
the issue of saving, debt and capital accumulation in a two country 
framework. It is based on the model in Upton and Sachs [13] with a few 
modifications. Even through it covers the minimum requirements to 
capture the international and intertemporal interdependencies, it cannot 
be solved analytically for the dynamic path of adjustment. Instead I will 
(12) For example, production is described by a 4 factor Cobb-Douglas production 
function and therefore factor demand equations have unitary price and income 
elasticities. 

Savings and Growth in an Interdependent World 
315 
concentrate on steady state relations between variables highlighting 
short run responses to several shocks without explicitly solving the 
model. The next section will deal with the dynamics in a richer model 
than that presented here. The goal of this section is to illustrate the link-
age between saving, investment and growth in a model which provides 
some insight into the results of the empirical exercise in section 4. 
Suppose there are two identical economies (apart from initial 
endowments) which each produce a good which is an imperfect 
substitute in the consumption bundle of residents of both countries. In 
each country there are firms, households and governments. I assume 
free trade in goods and assets between the two economies. The 
behavior of each of the three economic actors in each economy will be 
developed in turn. 
2.1 Firms 
First consider the supply side of the model. Output is produced by 
a representative firm which maximizes its value by producing a single 
output Q at price P, subject to a two-input production function. All 
variables are written in terms of efficiency units. Potential growth is 
assumed to be equal to the constant and exogenous rate n. Assuming 
a Cobb-Douglas technology, aggregate production Y, in efficiency 
units, is given as: 
(1) 
L is labor supply in hours per efficiency unit. The capital stock K 
changes according to the rate of fixed capital formation J and the rate 
of geometric depreciation &: 
(2) 
dK / dt = lr- (& + n) Kr 
Following the cost of adjustment models of Lucas (12bis) and 
Treadway (12ter), it is assumed that the investment process is subject to 
(12bis) LucAs R.E.: «Adjustment Costs and the Theory of Supply», Journal of 
Political Economy, vol. 75, n. 4, 1967, pp. 321-34. 
(12ter) TREADWAY A.: <<On Rational Entreprensurial Behavior and the Demand for 
Investment», Review of Economic Studies, vol. 36, n. 106, 1969, pp. 227-39. 

316 
Warwick!. McKibbin 
rising marginal costs of installation, with total real investment expen-
ditures I equal to the value of direct purchases of investment J, plus the 
per unit costs of installation. These per unit costs, in turn, are assumed 
to be a linear functrion of the rate of investment J/ K, so that adjustment 
costs are J [(<j>o/2) (J!K)]. Total investment expenditure is therefore: 
(3) 
I= [1 + (<j>0 /2) (J/ K)] J 
The goal of the firm is to choose inputs of L and K to maximize 
intertemporal net-of-tax profits. There are several key points from the 
solution of the firm's optimization problem. 
First, inputs of L are hired to the point where the marginal 
productivity of labor is equal to the real wage w: 
(4) 
L = (1 -
ct) y I w 
Given an inelastic supply of labor, equation (4) determines the 
real wage. 
Secondly, gross fixed capital formation can be written in terms of 
Tobin's "marginal" q: 
(5) 
J = [(q -
1) I <!>o] K 
where q is defined: 
00 
(6) 
q1 = J [MPKs + <I>KJ e-<RsH>s ds 
Here ri is the period i short-term real interest rate, MPK is 
the marginal product of capital in the production function, and 
<!>K( = 0.5 Jfs <Po [/5/K5]Z) is the marginal product of capital in reducing 
adjustment costs in investment. q is therefore the increment to the 
value of the firm from a unit increase in investment. 

Savings and Growth in an Interdependent World 
317 
2.2. Households 
Households are assumed to consume domestically produced 
private and public goods (13), and the foreign good. They receive 
income to purchase the goods through providing labor services for 
production and receiving a return from holding financial assets. 
Aggregate consumption of private goods C consists of consump-
tion of the domestic good Cd and consumption of the imported good 
em. The decision on how consumption expenditure is allocated 
between the different goods across time is based on a representative 
consumer who maximizes an intertemporal utility function ( 14) of the 
form: 
00 
(7) 
J [U(Cs) + v(Gs)] e-<e-n)s ds 
subject to a wealth constraint. Utility in any period is written as an 
additively separable function of consumption of the private good C 
and a public good G. In discounting the future stream of per capita 
consumption, the rate of time preference e adjusted by the real 
growth rate n is used. 
The result of this problem in the case where U ( .. ) is log utility is 
the standard linear relation between consumption and wealth: 
(8) 
ct = (9 -
n) {Ht + q K + B -
F} I p'j 
p~ is the relative price of the consumption bundle in terms of the 
domestic good. Total real wealth consists of human wealth H, the 
value of equity qK, and government bonds Bless net foreign claims 
against home residents F. Human wealth is the present discounted 
value of the entire future stream of real, after tax labor income: 
00 
(9) 
Ht = J WsLs(l- "C!)e-(R,-n)sds 
( 13) Governments in each economy purchase part of domestic and foreign produc-
tion which is converted into a public good which households consume independently of 
their private consumption choice. 
( 14) For notational convenience we will present all derivations assuming perfect 
foresight. 

318 
Wa1Wick J. McKibbin 
Given total consumption, the allocation between domestic and 
foreign goods will be simply a function of total expenditure and the 
relative price of foreign to domestic goods (A = EP *I P) where E is 
defined as the nominal exchange rate in units of domestic currency 
per foreign currency. 
2.3 Government 
The government in each country divides its real spending G 
among the final goods in the same proportion as does the private 
sector. The government finances this spending through personal 
income taxes and by issuing government debt. The government 
budget constraint, in real terms, can be written: 
(10) 
i.e. 
dB I dt = (r- n) B + G- t w L 
Assuming a transversality condition that debt has value: 
lim Bs e-<Rs- n) s = 0 
S-+00 
equation (9) can be solved forB, and written as: 
00 
(11) 
Be= J 
(t Ws- Gs) e-<Rs-n)s ds 
The current level of debt to GDP is the present value of future 
primary budget surpluses. With an outstanding stock of debt, if a 
government runs a budget deficit today, it must run a budget surplus 
at some point in the future; otherwise the debt will have no value. 
2. 3.1 Balance of Payments 
The final part of the model is the linkage between the two 
economies. The cumulation equation for the home country's real net 

Savings and Growth in an Interdependent World 
319 
external debt which is assumed to be short term and denominated in 
the home country currency is: 
dF!dt = Crt -
n) Ft + CM -
X) 
Total real imports M consist of private and government demand 
for foreign goods. M = A cern + em). Total exports X are the foreign 
economy's equivalently defined total imports. 
2.3.2 Asset Markets 
All assets are assumed to be perfect substitutes. We assume that 
foreigners only hold an asset F which is a claim against domestic 
output. Because of arbitrage between bond markets, share markets 
and foreign exchange markets, this F claim is equivalent to holding 
domestic government debt or domestic shares. The assumption im-
plies that the real return to assets, expressed in equivalent currency, 
will be equalized. 
rt = r't + (d A I dt) I At 
Note also that the real return to equity will also be equated to the 
real return to government debt. 
2.3.3 Steady State 
The solution of the model in the short run depends on the steady 
state of the model given the assumption of perfect foresight. The 
steady state solution for the model is contained in Table 1. This table 
only contains results for the home country. A corresponding set of 
equation holds for the foreign economy. 
Several observations can made about the steady state. It can be 
seen from (2.1) that human wealth is positive if r > n. For positive 
holdings of government debt in the steady state, taxes must be greater 
than government spending. This implies that an increase in the steady 

320 
Warwick J. McKibbin 
TABLE 1 
STEADY STATE SOLUTION 
(2.1) 
H 
= wL(l- t)l(r- n) 
(2.2) 
B 
= (wLt- G)l(r- n) 
(2.3) 
F 
= - (M- X) I (r- n) 
(2.4) 
c 
= (9 - n){H + q K + B -
F} I p< 
(2.5) 
qK =(Y-wL-1)/(r-n) 
(2.6) 
IIK=o+n 
(2.7) 
I I K = [1 + (cPo I 2) (o + n)](o + n) 
(2.8) 
q 
= 1 + q, (o + n) 
(2.9) 
q 
= (Fk + cl>> I (r + o) 
(2.10) 
r 
=r* 
state stock of debt must be serviced by higher taxes. For the same 
reason, a positive stock of foreign debt F implies a trade balance 
surplus. The excess of exports over imports represents the real 
transfer of resources from the domestic to foreign economy required 
to service the foreign debt. 
The value of the firm in the steady state is given by equation (2.5). 
The steady state solutions for qK, H, B, and F can be substituted into 
equation (2.4) to find: 
pc C = (0- n) (Y- I- G- X+ M)!(r- n) 
Market clearing in the steady state implies that 9 = r. When this 
condition is substituted into the Euler equation resulting from the 
consumer's optimization problem, consumption per efficiency unit is 
constant. 
From equation (2.6), net investment (J- o K) must be equal to 
the real growth rate to stabilize the capital stock in efficiency units. 
Gross investment therefore needs to grow at this rate plus the rate of 
depreciation. q is then greater than 1 to ensure that gross investment 
grows at this rate adjusted by the costs of installing capital (shown in 

Savings and Growth in an Interdependent World 
321 
(2.4)). From equation (2. 9), it is clear that for a given q that is required 
to sustain an investment rate, and given rand the rate of depreciation 
and adjustment costs, the marginal product of capital is determined. 
Given the assumption of Cobb-Douglas technology, we then have the 
level of the steady state capital stock and output, given full employ-
ment of the inelastically supplied labor. Given the capital stock, we 
have also determined the necessary rates of investment. 
In this economy, the real rate of return is determined by the rate 
of time preference of households. The real rates of return on all other 
assets are then tied to that rate by arbitrage. Note we have assumed 
equality in the rates of time preference in both economies. This is 
essential given the simplified structure of the model. Saving is then 
determined by the future income stream from· labor and capital 
income, relative to the current stream of income. 
Now consider the results of introducing a number of asymmetries 
in the model. First consider the effect of a rise in government 
spending in the home economy financed by issuing government debt. 
The result will be a fall in consumption in the home economy exactly 
equal to the rise in government spending. With the infinite horizon of 
consumers and perfect foresight, the model yields the familiar Ricar-
dian result. The government budget constraint is internalized by the 
consumers. The fall in government saving will be match by a rise in 
household saving. The households will willingly hold the government 
debt issued by the government to finance the higher spending without 
leading to a rise in the real return on bonds. This can be seen from 
comparing steady state human wealth with steady state debt. The sum 
of these in calculating total wealth cancel. As long as the government 
consumes the same composition of imports as the consumers, there 
will be no spillover effects. If the government did not consume foreign 
goods then the relative price of domestic goods would rise and there 
would be a terms of trade improvement. 
Suppose next there is an anticipation of a future rise in govern-
ment spending in the home economy. The new steady state will be the 
same as in the previous example. In the short run, before the spending 
increase has taken place, households will reduce consumption and 
increase their saving. Because government saving has not initially 
changed, the current account will improve (reflecting the increase in 

322 
Warwick J. McKibbin 
national saving) and the relative price of the domestic good will fall. 
The domestic short term real interest rate will fall, reflecting a 
temporary excess supply of current goods relative to future goods, 
which will have a small effect in raising investment and consumption. 
The real exchange rate will depreciate on impact and then gradually 
appreciate until the fiscal expansion takes place. The change in the 
real exchange rate must be consistent with zero arbitrage opportuni-
ties from the differential in real interest rates between the two 
economies. In the long run there will be a small relative real appreci-
ation of the home currency consistent with a small trade account 
surplus resulting from the temporaru build up of claims against 
foreign output. 
Note that in neither type of shock does the long term real interest 
rate change, because it is tied down by the rate of time preference of 
households. The marginal product of capital and therefore the capital-
output ratio is also unaffected by the change in fiscal policy. 
3. - The McKibbin - Sachs Global Model (15) 
The previous section has outlined the main linkages between 
short run savings and investment and the long run position of the 
world economy. In this section the intuition from the above model is 
applied in the context of the MSG multi-country model. The analysis 
builds on the basic model just outlined, but introduces short run 
rigidities and long run deviations from the pure neoclassical model. 
The MSG2 multi-country model is a dynamic general equilibrium 
model with careful treatment of stock-flow relations such as the 
cumulation of investment into capital stocks and the cumulation of 
fiscal deficits into net asset stocks. In addition, these domestic cumul-
ation relations are tied explicitly into the accumulation of fiscal 
deficits into net asset stocks. In addition, these domestic cumulation 
relations are tied explicitly into the accumulation of foreign assets that 
occur through persistent current account imbalances. The explicit 
( 15) See McKIBBIN and SACHS [20] for the specification and properties of the 
version of the MSG2 model used in this paper and McKIBBIN ( 1989) for an analysis of 
the tracking performance of the model during over the 1 980s. 

Savings and Growth in an Interdependent World 
323 
treatment of intertemporal budget constraints in determining long run 
behavior as well as influencing short run behavior through forward-
looking asset markets and in some private sector decisions, presents a 
clear framework for exploring the meaning of equilibrium in the short 
run and long run. 
In addition to these features. the MSG model contains both the 
short run demand and supply sides of the major economies. In the 
long run, supply is determined by neoclassical growth theory. 
The model incorporates a number of financial markets such as 
share markets and markets for short and long bonds in each of the 
industrial regions; prices in these markets are determined by intertem-
poral arbitrage relations and by long run sustainability conditions on 
fiscal deficits and current account positions. In addition, the assump-
tion of rational expectations in these financial markets as well as some 
forward-looking behavior in real spending decisions means the effects 
of anticipated policy changes are well handled by this model. 
In the version used in this paper, the model consists of the United 
States, Japan, Germany, the Rest of the EMS (denoted REMS) (16), 
the Rest of the OECD (denoted ROECD) (17), non-oil developing 
countries (denoted LDCs) (18) and oil exporting countries (denoted 
OPEC) (19). 
Each of the regions in the model produces a good which is an 
imperfect substitute in the production and spending decisions of the 
other regions. Each industrialized region produces one final good 
which is used for investment and consumption purposes in that region 
and in all of the other regions. The LDC and OPEC regions each 
produce one good which is a primary input in the production 
processes of the industrial regions. Demands for the outputs of the 
LDC and OPEC regions are therefore derived demands for the produc-
tion inputs. 
(16) This block consists of Belgium, Denmark, France, Ireland, Italy and Luxem· 
bourg. 
( 17) This group of countries consists of Australia, Austria, Canada, Finland, 
Iceland, Norway, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, United Kingdom and New Zealand. 
(18) Non-oil developing countries are based on the grouping in the IMF Direction 
of Trade Statistics. 
( 19) Oil exporting countries are based on the grouping in the IMF Direction of 
Trade Statistics. 

324 
Warwick J. McKibbin 
To understand the model, it is best to consider one bloc of the 
model, that for the United States, and to indicate where necessary any 
differences in the modelling of the other OECD regions. Within each 
economy the decisions of households firms and governments are 
modelled. The model follows the simple model developed above 
except for a number of key differences highlighted below. 
The major deviations from the above model are: 
a) aggregate consumption is a weighted average of the consump-
tion of life cycle consumers with perfect foresight, and life cycle 
consumers who consume a proportion of current income from all 
sources; 
b) forward-looking households discount their future labor in-
come at a higher rate than the government real interest rate; 
c) wealth is defined to include real money balances, claims to 
domestic firms producing oil and claims to importing firms; 
d) output is produced using domestic factors (capital and labor) 
and intermediate imported goods. Imported intermediate goods are 
from OPEC and the developing countries; 
e) money is also nationally introduced as a factor of production 
being combined with the finished goods before being consumed (this 
gives money a role in the model) resulting in a demand for money 
which is a function of output and the nominal interest rate; 
f) the investment good is produced using the domestic good and 
final goods from each of the industrialized regions; 
g) aggregate investment is a weighted average of investment by 
firms using the q theory and firms investing out of current profit; 
h) wages are assumed to be sticky in the short run by using a 
Taylor overlapping contract model with varying degree of overlap 
across countries. Specifically the nominal wage change is a function of 
past consumer price changes (rt~- 1(, rationally expected future price 
changes (rt~). and the level of unemployment in the economy (labor 
demand, L, relative to full employment, Lf), according to a standard 
Phillips curve mechanism: 
(12) 
d log WI dt = 1322 rtf + ( 1 -
1322) rtf- t + 0.2 (1 -
fl) 
where 1 I represents the inelastically supplied full-employment stock 
of labor (inlogs). The parameter 1322 determines how much weight is 

Savings and Growth in an Interdependent World 
325 
given to backward-looking versus forward-looking price expectations. 
As already noted, we allow for differences in the wage dynamics of 
the different regions. In the ROECD we also use equation ( 12). In 
Japan, we specify that wages are set one period ahead at their 
expected market clearing levels. Thus, let (,w,+ 1)' be the wage 
expected to clear the labor market at time t + 1, in the sense that 
rLr+ 1 = I!. Then: 
Following Blanchard and Summers (19bis) and Sachs (19ter), we 
build "hysteresis" into the labor markets in Germany and the REMS. 
For each of these regions we modify the wage equation in the 
following way: 
d log WI dt = ~22 1t~ + ( 1 -
~22) 1t~- 1 + 0.1 (L I L * -
1) 
L* = IJ + 0,2(Lf-l- L') + 0.7(Lr-t- L0 
In this equation, wages respond to the difference between labor 
demand and the short-run natural rate L*. The short-run natural rate 
adjusts slowly to the long-run natural, rate and it can deviate from the 
full employment level for a substantial period. 
2) The government finances spending through company taxes, 
personal income taxes and issuing government debt. In simulating 
fiscal policy in this paper we assume the fiscal deficit is set exogen-
ously. In the case of an exogenous change in fiscal policy, it is 
important that tax and spending policies be consistent with the 
intertemporal budget constraint of the public sector. In particular, as 
already mentioned, starting from any initial stock of public debt, the 
discounted value of current and future taxes must equal the discoun-
ted value of government spending plus the initial value of outstanding 
public debt. If the tax schedule were not subsequently altered, the 
(19bis) BLANCHARD 0.-SUMMERS L.: «Hysteresis and the European Unemployment 
Problem», NBER Macroeconomics Annual, n. 1, 1988 
(19ter) SACHS J.: «High Unemployment in Europe: Diagnosis and Policy Implica-
tions», National Bureau of Economic Research, Working Paper, n. 1850, 1986. 

326 
Warwick J. McKibbin 
stock of public debt would eventually rise without bounds, at an 
explosive geometric rate. To prevent this, we assume that a lump sum 
tax on labor is imposed each year by enough to cover the increasing 
interest costs on the rising stock of public debt. 
3) Any trade imbalances are financed by flows of assets between 
countries. To determine net asset positions we make several sim-
plifying assumptions. All new OPEC loans are assumed to be made 
proportionally to each region and new loans to the LDCs are also fixed 
in historical proportions. All other net flows are restricted to be 
consistent by imposing the constraint that current account balances 
and trade account balances sum to zero across all regions. For each 
region (except the developing countries) the current account is 
determined under the assumption that domestic agents have free 
un-rationed access to international borrowing and lending at the 
international interest rate. It is assumed for simplicity that all interna-
tional borrowing and lending takes place in dollar-denominated assets. 
For the LDCs, in contrast, the scale of borrowing is set exogenously, 
under the assumption that the amount of loans available to the LDCs 
is rationed by country risk considerations. 
4) The OPEC current account is assumed to be adjusted by OPEC 
to reach a desired ratio of wealth to income. 
For the goods of OPEC and the LDCs which feed into the 
production process of the industrialized regions, there is a single 
uniform world price of goods which applies in all markets at all times 
(i.e. the law of one price holds). 
5) Short term nominal interest rates adjust to clear the money 
market where the supply of money is set exogenously. 
4. - Alternative Paths for the World Economy 
4.1 The Procedure 
Generating a baseline path for a model with rational expectations 
is not a straightforward exercise. The path for each variable in the 
model will depend on the model structure (including arbitrage condi-
tions); the initial values of all state variables (such as capital stocks, 

Savings and Growth in an Interdependent World 
327 
asset stocks, and nominal wages); terminal values of jumping values 
given by sustainability conditions (such as Tobin's q, human wealth, 
exchange rates); and the entire future paths of exogenous variables in 
the model. The exogenous variables in the model are labor force 
growth, technical progress, money stocks, and fiscal deficits (20) in 
each industrial region, and OPEC oil supply and lending to developing 
countries. 
The model as presently constructed is calibrated based on 1986 
data. To explore global paths from 1989, all asset stocks and relevant 
flows are re-initialized to 1989 values. I then use an intertemporal 
version of a technique followed by Computable General Equilibrium 
modelers; it is standard in CGE modelling to calibrate a model such 
that the base year of the database generates an equilibrium of the CGE 
model (21 ). In the case of the MSG model, this procedure is more 
difficult because the solution for the base year of 1989 will be 
conditional on assumptions about the future paths of all exogenous 
variables in the model. For example, the calculation of investment in 
1989 requires a calculation of q, which in turn depends on the 
expected future path of firm profitability. Similarly calculation of 
consumption requires a value for human wealth, which depends in 
the future path of after-tax labor income. 
The way this problem is resolved in the current study is to 
calculate a vector of constant terms (the same dimension as the 
number of jumping variables) such that when the model is solved for 
1989, all variables in 1989 are exactly equal to their database values in 
1989. This is a way of normalizing the jumping variables to be equal to 
their database values. To give the constants some economic meaning 
they are restricted to equations containing jumping variables. For 
example, one constant appears in the consumption equation for each 
country (relating to an adjustment for human wealth), another ap-
pears in the investment equation in each country (as an adjustment 
for q). For real exhange rates, wherever they appear in the model, 
(20) In the usual version of the MSG2 model, we assume exogenous government 
spending on goods and services and determine the budget deficit endogenously. For the 
exercises in this paper where I focus on the consequence of a given fiscal deficit, it is 
convenient to make the overall deficit an instrument of policy. 
(21) See WHALLEY (28). 

328 
Warwick J. McKibbin 
except in the arbitrage equations (22), the model solution is replaced 
by the model solution plus a normalizing constant. To impose that 
expected inflation in 1989 equals the assumed value, so that simulated 
real and nominal interest rates match the database, a constant is 
added to the wage equation which effectively changes the gap be-
tween current employment and full employment in that equation. 
In total, 18 constants need to be found. Calculating these cons-
tants is a non-trivial exercise. The calculation of each constant is 
conditional on the model, the future paths of all variables, as well as 
the values of each other constants added. The exact solution to this 
problem is not developed further here. It involves an iterative proce-
dure which includes numerically calculating partial derivative of all 
variables in the model with respect to small changes in each constant 
and then solving a set of simultaneous equations, linking constants to 
actual and simulated values of all variables in an intertemporal setting. 
Once the constants are calculated they are then added to the model 
for all periods in all simulations. 
The above procedure reproduces the database for 1989. The path 
of variables from 1990 (without any revisions to expectations) will be 
determined by the inherited dynamics from 1988 and 1989 and the 
paths of exogenous variables from 1990 onwards. 
It is worth considering one particular example to further clarify 
the technique. Suppose that the state variables in the database were 
not changing from 1988 to 1989 and the exogenous variable were a 
constant share of GDP from 1989 onwards. In this case, the technique 
would generate a solution for 1990 in which real variables (scaled by 
GDP) would be identical to their 1989 values and nominal variables 
would be changing at the inflation rate in the model that is implied by 
the monetary growth rate. Essentially, in this particular example, 
1989 would be a steady state solution of the model. By introducing 
initial dynamics into the simulation it is explicit that the data cannot 
represent a steady state of the model, but it is assumed to be on the 
unique stable path towards a steady state. 
As already mentioned above, for the exercise here, the original 
MSG2 model based on 1986 data is used but the initial conditions for 
(22) Note that a constant is purposely not added to arbitrage equations as this 
would fundamentally affect the steady state of the model. 

Savings and Growth in an Interdependent World 
329 
fiscal and current account deficits are updated to the 1989 data as 
specified in the December 1989 OECD Economic Outlook. The model 
is linearized around these initial conditions (23). New constants were 
calculated for each equation to make the exercise compatible with 
these assumptions. 
To summarize, constants are added to relevant equations to 
replicate 1989, given the future paths of all exogenous variables in the 
model and initial dynamics. The model is then solved forward for 60 
years to generate a baseline. For the alternative scenarios considered 
below, the model is solved for 1990 assuming that the new informa-
tion on the alternative scenarios is not available until 1990. The 
constant adjustments calculated for each equation are always the 
baseline constants. The solution for 1989 is therefore the same under 
each scenario. 
4.2 Baseline 1989 to 2049 
The key assumptions imposed in generating the baseline from 
1989 to 2049 are the following: a) each region maintains its fiscal 
deficit at the same share of GDP as in 1989; b) the nominal stock of 
money in each region grows at the rate of inflation in 1989; c) the real 
price of oil is unchanging from 1989; d) the current account of 
developing countries remains fixed in terms of US GDP at its 1989 
ratio to US GDP; e) Harrod neutral technical change plus population 
growth is assumed to be 3% in each industrial region, forever. 
Note that the effects of demographic change in different econ-
omies is not incorporated in this projection (24 ). It is unclear whether 
this will play an important role in changing future saving rates. 
Evidence for Japan summarized in Bosworth [ 4] suggests that the 
saving rate of different age cohorts in Japan is very similar. Therefore 
the effect on total Japanese saving of demographic change in Japan 
may not be as large as usually interpreted from time series evidence. 
(23) Experiments with earlier non-linear and non-linear approximations of the 
model suggested that for small shocks the linearization was not important for the short 
run properties. It will of course affect the comparison of steady states. 
(24) See MASSON and TYRON [14] for a study of possible demographic effects on 
current account balances. 

330 
Warwick J. McKibbin 
The results for the baseline are shown in each graph for 
comparison with alternative scenarios. Consider Graph 1 where the 
baseline for the United States is summarized (path given by the square 
symbol). The path for real output in the United States (top left panel) 
cycles for about a decade until, given initial conditions, the conse-
quence of Keynesian rigidities diminish. Real output then grows at the 
steady state rate of 3% per year thereafter. Gross investment (bottom. 
left panel) also rises slightly during the first few years due to initial 
conditions, but then declines over time due to the high US real interest 
rate built into 1989. The marginal product of capital rises and the 
capital stock falls over time. Private saving also falls by almost 1% of 
GOP by 2050. This together with the decline in US consumption of 2% 
of potential output reflects the degree of short-sighted behavior 
assumed by households. Total consumption rises over the 60 years, but 
it rises less quickly than real putput. This pattern reflects the cost of 
servicing a growing external debt. The US current account gradually 
deteriorates from a deficit equal to 2.3% of GOP in 1989 to a deficit of 
3.3% of GOP by 2050. As a result, net external debt builds up from 10% 
of GOP to 45% of GOP by 2050. Part of this reflects the build-up in 
government debt from 30% of GOP to 60% of GOP. Consumers do not 
reduce consumption sufficiently in the earlier year to cover the extra 
government borrowing. I assume that the additional servicing costs of 
the cumulating government debt are met by a lump sum tax on 
households. The gradually rising tax on households is partly paid by 
households reducing consumption, in anticipation of the future tax 
implications of the build-up of government debt. However, households 
do not cut consumption sufficiently to prevent a decline in economy-
wide saving. Private consumption is partyly maintained in the short 
run by borrowing overseas. The resulting build-up of external debt is 
sustainable as can be seen by the path of the trade balance towards 
surplus (lower left panel). Consistent with this turnaround in the trade 
account are the paths for the real exchange rate shown in Graph 2 
(bilateral with Japan) and Graph 3 (bilateral with Germany). The real 
exchange rate of the US depreciates by about 0.6% a year relative to 
Japan and a little less relative to Germany. Given the initial stock and 
flow positions, this baseline shows that the situation in 1989 is a long 
way from the ultimate steady state. 

... •.. ... ... ... 
• 
... ... ... 
1.1 ... ... ... ... 
1.1 
I ... 
U.t 
u.3 
...• 
U.l .. 
U.t 
.... 
.... .... 
IU 
"·' 
.... 
.... 
13.1 
.. 
lf.t 
.... 
U.7 
, ... 
IU 
Savings and Growth in an Interdependent World 
331 
GRAPH 1 
EFFECTS ON THE UNITED STATES 
OF A US FISCAL CONTRACTION 
[\_ 
US Output Growth 
("u change) 
......... IQM ....... 1011 -· ......... 10M ... 
DBase 
+ Alternative 
US Gross Private Saving 
(% potential output) 
IM 119f I'" ICIIIf IOCit IOU tall ICII't nn taM lflft IOU ICMI 
D Base 
+ Alternative 
US Gross Investment 
(% potential output) 
... 1114 Jwt lOIN ICID9 1014 IOit ICRt I'CRt Nit IGft JOlt toft 
__; Base 
+ Alternative 
US Consumption 
( 0·o potential output) 
•.. ~-----------------, 
. 
.. .. . . 
.. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .... .. . 
.. .. .. 
.... ... 
1.. 1... 1 .. aGIH ICIII 1014 lOll fth IQtt ICDt ICDI IOU lOft 
DBase 
+ Alternative 
US Current Account 
(% potential output) 
_.., -o-~-----~----------, 
-u . 
...... 
-· 
-u 
-u 
-1.1 
...... 
-u 
-u 
... .. , 
-u 
..... 
-· 
-u 
. ... 
. ... 
-u 
lwt lth lilt ICIM Ia tts....-.oat ICRt I'CM IO:It laJI IOU !Ott 
DBase 
+ Alternative 
L'S Tr:~d" Balance 
(oo potential output 1 
•• awt 1111 not .., tolt aa11 aar• ,.. n:u "" •• 1011 
0 Base 
+ Alternative 

3J2 
Warwick J. McKibbin 
4.3 US Fiscal Contraction 
In the first alternative scenario, it is assumed that the US fiscal 
deficit is cut by 1% of GOP permanently from 1990. This policy is not 
announced until 1990 and therefore all variables in 1989 are un-
changed from the baseline values. The implications of this alternative 
assumption for US fiscal policy are shown in Graph 1 for the United 
States and Graphs 2 and 3 for Japan and Germany respectively. The 
US real growth rate drops initially in 1990 to below 2%. At the same 
time US private saving also falls. This positive correlation between the 
growth rate of output and private saving is consistently robust in the 
empirical literature (25). It is difficult to get this correlation in a 
standard life cycle model with forward-looking behavior, without 
appealing to strong demographic effects; a point which is frequently 
misunderstood and is worth stressing. The are two factors at work in 
calculating the consequences of a change in the rate of growth of 
output on the saving rate in a life-cycle model. The first is that with 
forward-looking consumers, a rise in the growth rate of income 
would, on impact, lead to a decline in the saving of each working age 
person, because existing households perceiving higher future income 
would raise consumption by more than the initial increase in income 
(remembering again that it is an increase in the rate of growth of 
income). The second effect is more technical in nature. As more 
generations are born and these enter the working population, the 
average saving rate of the economy will rise because proportionately 
more people will be in the high saving cohort. This latter effect is 
likely to take at least two decades to show up in the aggregate data, 
whereas the anticipation effect which reduces the saving rate is likely 
to dominate for a number of years. In this paper the positive 
correlation between saving and growth is driven by the interaction of 
forward- and backward-looking life cyclers rather than any longer 
term demographic effect. 
The rise in government saving leads to a fall in real interest rates 
in the short run and the long run. This implies a lower long run 
marginal product of capital and therefore a higher capital stock in the 
United States. Investment responds and ultimately the result is a 
(25) See BoswoRTH [23]. 

Savings and Growth in an Interdependent World 
333 
GRAPH 2 
EFFECTS ON JAPAN OF A US 
FISCAL CONTRACTION 
Japanese Output Growth 
(%change) 
•.• -r------------------, 
... •.. 
... 
u ... 
u 
u 
•.. 
... 
u ... 
u 
... 
. 
.. 
... 
·-.......... ..,. -· -· -· ............... , 
-· 
D Base 
+ Alternative 
Japanese Consumption 
(% potential output) 
1Wf 1 .. ''" aaM ICDt 1016 IOJI ~4 ICitt IQ)t toM 1l014 1011 
.... 
.... 
.... ... 
.... . 
._. 
.... 
.... .. 
··-· 
IU 
IU ... 
Ll Base 
+ Alternative 
Japanese Gross Investment 
(% potential output) 
$ .. l'ft6 t"' I'CII:t ftrl't ftlll IIDl' I'CI!4 tort 1GH l'OW !Ott teNt 
"J Base 
+ Alternative 
... 
u 
u ... 
·-· .. 
... 
u ... 
u 
,. 
• .. • • .. .. .. .. 
II .. .. 
10 
Japanese Trade Balance 
( 01> potential output) 
1 .. IlK IWI 111M ' at -· IOit IQI6 _, IOU 10)1 IOU ICMI 
D Base 
+ Alternative 
Japanese Current Account 
(% potential output) 
D Base 
+ Alternative 
Real Exchange Rate $/Yen 
(% potential output) 
• .. t•• ltll aaDt 1CD1 IOlt 1011 lar4 tart ~4 :rcat ~~ 1'0&1 
n
Basc 
+ Alternative 

334 
Warwick J. McKibbin 
EFFECTS ON GERMANY OF US 
FISCAL CONTRACTION 
German Output Growth 
(%change) 
-· 
German Trade Balance 
(% potential output) 
GRAPH 3 
tWIItM ............... - ........... .... 
·- ... ·- .. _, -· -· -· ... liN -
...... 
, 
.. .. .. .. 
II 
II .. .. .. 
., 
.. .. 
.... 
... 
ou .... 
-~ 
.... .. 
.... 
.... .... 
IU 
0 Base 
+ Alternative 
German Consumption 
(% potential output) 
IWI '"' J"' laM IIIDI lilt IDII ....... ICIN IIIII IOU .., 
0 Base 
+ Alternative 
German Gross Investment 
(% potential output) 
... ''" ''" ............. -· .............. .... 
0 Base 
+ Alternative 
u 
... 
... 
,. 
... 
.... . 
.. 
II 
" .. 
II .. 
" 
II 
II .. 
-· 
0 Base 
+ Alternative 
German Current Account 
(% potential output) 
• ......... taN ... IOtt 1'01.1 -· ... ..,. ....... lOti 
0 Base 
+ Alternative 
Real E~change Rate: S; Dm 
(% change of index irom ba-;e) 
•• IWt awt -.. 1M nu 10.11 .. 
, ftll't .e~t "" ltOit "" 
0 Base 
+ Alternative 

Savings and Growth in an Interdependent World 
335 
higher rate of investment to maintain a higher capital stock. The rise 
in government saving is not offset by a fall in private saving. Higher 
investment is not sufficient to offset the effect of the increase in 
government saving in improving the current account by 0.6% of GDP. 
The resulting smaller build-up of external debt associated with this 
smaller current account deficit implies a higher sustainable level of 
consumption. The real exchange rate depreciates on impact and then 
continue to depreciate although at a slower rate than experienced in 
the baseline (see for examples, lower right panel of Graphs 2 and 3). 
The consequences of the change in US fiscal policy for Japan and 
Germany are summarized in Graphs 2 and 3. The immediate effect of 
the policy change is a reduced capital inflow into the United States 
and corresponding reduced capital outflows (or greater capital inflow) 
to the foreign economies, with a resulting fall in real interest rate in 
these economies (given the assumption of fixed money growth). 
Output growth slows in the first year in both Japan and Germany 
because the stimulus to domestic demand from lower real interest 
rates in these economies is offset by the direct demand effects of lower 
demand for exports. Exports fall due to the income effect in the 
United States of lower demand but also because these goods become 
relatively expensive in the US market due to the depreciation of the 
US dollar (both the income absorption and the expenditure switching 
effects work to reduce the foreign economies surpluses). Lower real 
interest rates in each economy raise world investment, because they 
raise the long run desired capital stock. The distribution of consump-
tion is changed with both German and Japanese consumption under 
the baseline and US consumption accounting for a higher share of 
world output growth after 5 years. 
Employment in the US falls for a number of years after the 
change in policy because real wages rise as prices fall faster than 
wages (relative to base). Over time the higher real wage is in line with 
the higher long run marginal product of labor; the demand for labor is 
higher after the third year. 
4.4 Japanese Fiscal Expansion 
The results for a Japanese fiscal expansion of 1% of Japanese 
potential GDP are shown in Graph 4. The assumption of a quickly 

336 
Warwick J. McKibbin 
GRAPH 4 
EFFECTS ON JAPAN ON A 
JAPANESE FISCAL EXPANSION 
" ... 
... ... 
,_, 
u 
" ... 
~· 
u 
>.I • 
... ... .. 
Japanese Output Growth 
( 0 o change) 
.,...._ 
::: .U'-.-~_,,.........,.._,.......,.._,.... ..... _~...,..-~..,.J 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
" .. 
.. 
... .t.fH J"' ICI)t ... JOlt "''' ICII:t ... .,. ..,. ..... 1041 
D Base 
+ Alternative 
Japanese Consumption 
(% potential output) 
1.-.. 1 t~t J'" rau 1001 10u 1011 •• .., •• "" IOt4 104t 
.... 
.... 
.... 
IU 
.... 
.. 
.... 
.... 
.... 
D Base 
+ Alternative 
Japanese Gross I nvcstment 
( 0·o potential output) 
D Base 
+ Alternative 
. . 
lA 
.. .. 
'.I! .. . 
u ... 
~· 
u . 
.. . 
.. .. 
u 
u 
u ... 
It 
Japanese Trade Balance 
(% potential output) 
1 .. l .. 
f 
. ... IQk 11»1 IOU 1011 tcltt 1C1tt lmt IQ3II IOU 104.1 
:::J Ba.se 
+ Alternative 
·-D 
Japanese Current Account 
( 0'o potential output) 
lft4 I"' 1004 toOt IOH Milt ICIIt IQtt taU 1att :IOU I'Oet 
Base 
+ Alternative 
Real Exchange Rate S/ Ycn 
(''o potential output) 
D Base 
+ Alternative 

... ... 
••• 
..., 
.... ... 
..... ... 
... 
... ... ... ... ... . 
,. 
Ut .. 
,.. 
..... 
-t.t 
_, .. 
--··· 
-u 
-u 
-1.7 
-o.a 
- l .t 
-· 
•J,J 
_,.. 
_,.. 
.. ,. 
D Base 
D Base 
Savings and Growth in an Interdependent World 
337 
GRAPH 5 
EFFECTS ON OTHER COUNTRIES 
OF A JAPANESE EXPANSION 
US Output Growth 
(% change) 
+ Alternative 
US Gross Investment 
(% potential output) 
+ Alternative 
US Current Account 
(% potential output) 
German Output Growth 
(%change) 
1-• ,.-----------------~ 
. 
.. 
... 
... 
D Base 
+ Alternative 
German Gross Investment 
(o/o potential output) 
D Base 
+ Alternative 
German Current Account 
(o/o potential output) 
tM 1W4 ''" 1mt ICDI IOU ftllt tau 1C1tt to:H ""' IOU "'' 
D Base 
+ Alternative 
D Base 
+ Alternative 

338 
Warwick J. McKibbin 
adjusting labor market in Japan shows in these results. Output growth 
rises in the first year as the real wage temporarily falls but is quickly 
reversed as full employment emerges from 1991. The fall in govern-
ment saving raises Japanese real interest rates which reduces invest-
ment over time. The yen appreciates in real and nominal terms which 
together with the initial rise in consumption and investment, worsens 
the trade and current account balance. Over time, the consequences 
of changes in asset stocks dominate the results. 
Again the shock is transmitted to other economies via both the 
goods and asset markets (Graph 5). Interest rates rise in the United 
States (by 40 points at the long end) and Germany because capital 
flows to Japan. The rise in interest rates tends to dampen domestic 
demand in the United States and Germany; but in the first year, the 
effect of higher Japanese demand for imports and lower US demand 
for Japanese goods via the exchange rate change improves the US 
trade balance. Again higher world interest rates reduces the global 
capital stock and hence the global investment rate. Change in the 
flows quickly appears as changes in the trend cumulation of asset 
stocks. 
4. 5 German Fiscal Expansion 
A similar pattern emerges for a German fiscal expansion shown in 
Graph 6 and 7. The stickiness of real wages in Germany can be seen in 
the results for real output growth. Output deviates from the baseline 
growth rate for a number of years following the fiscal expansion. Real 
interest rates again rise in all economies (by 22 basis points in the US) 
due to the flows of assets across national borders. This leads to a fall in 
long run desired capital stock and hence lower global investment 
rates. The real exchange rate appreciates and the trade balance 
deteriorates. 
These results are suggestive of the impact of a fiscal expansion in 
a unified Germany (26). Note that we have importantly assumed no 
EMS realignment. This has the effect of dampening demand in the 
(26) See McKIBBIN [16] for results considering the fiscal, monetary and supply side 
impacts of German unification. 

Savings and Growth in an Interdependent World 
339 
GRAPH 6 
EFFECTS ON GERMANY OF A 
GERMAN FISCAL EXPANSION 
German Output Growth 
(% change) 
... .,... _____ .:._ __ 
_.:::::._..:.,_ ______ _, 
•.. 
..................... IO.at -· .............. 
. 
D Base 
+ Alternative 
German Consumption 
(% potential output) 
....... ,.. ICDt .. -· lOll -· ...... "" at4 -· 
.... .. 
.... 
... , 
ou 
•... 
D Base 
+ Alternative 
German Gross Investment 
(% potential output) 
iwt :IIH 1 ... ...... ltlt ICIIf -· at 111M IIDI 11M "*' 
D Base 
+ Alternative 
- I 
German Trade Balance 
(% potential output) 
....... ''" let .. fill&t 1011 ..... f'Cift I'CD6 rftJ' *' ~· 
D Base 
+ Alternative 
German Current AccOWlt 
(% potential output) 
1 .. ltiN twt IGt4 ... IOU lOti let IOtt IOU f<D'I IOU 1'041 
D Base 
+ Alternative 
Real Exchange Rate S/ Dm 
(% change of index from base) 
II ------~-----------~ 
" 
II .. .. 
" .. 
II 
II • • 
-· IM ltH '"' _. 1GD1 1111• .. It 1Wt ICif'l IGSit tQM 1014 1011 
D Base 
+ Alternative 

340 
Warwick J. McKibbin 
GRAPH 7 
EFFECTS ON OTHER COUNTRIES 
OF A GERMAN FISCAL EXPANSION 
US Output Growth 
(%change) 
·~ ~--------~~----~~-------------, 
... 
... •.. ·v.......------4 
... 
... 
lA .................... , ............. ... 
D Base 
+ Alternative 
US Gross Investment 
(% potential output) 
, .. ,.,. -r--------------------=------ -----....., 
.. .,.. 
14.1' .... 
.... 
..... 
..... 
IU 
.... 
.... 
..... 
..... 
...• 
""' 
..... 
..... 
··~ 4-~~~-T--~-r~--~~~~~~~~ 
-1.1 
-··· 
-t.t 
-1.1 
-1.7 
-u 
-··· -· 
-1.1 
•OA 
... , .• 
1 .. liN &Itt 1C11H 1001 IIU 1011 ... at 1134 lUll ... 1011 
D Base 
+ Alternative 
US Current Account 
(% potential output) 
.................. ,_. _ 
_. .......... 
0 Base 
+ Alternative 
Japanese Output Growth 
•• ~--------~(~%_c_h_an~ge~)~---------, 
. .. 
u .... 
.. .. 
a.u .... ... . 
.. . 
.. 
.... 
·-
lwt ... IM Df tcllt IID16 -· aet ... IDt _. IDU 1011 
0 Base 
+ Alternative 
Japanese Gross Investment 
(% potential output) 
... 
,-----~~~~~~~~~--------~ 
l!l.o 
.. .. 
n 
lUI 
U .l 
IU . 
... 
tM ttM lfllll ICID4 tall'l IOU lOaf -· ICitt 111M laJII IOU 1041 
D Base 
+ Alternative 
Japanese Current Account 
(% potential output) 
._. ,---------------------------------....., 
u 
u ... • 
u ... 
... ... ... ... ... 
u 
u • ... 
... ... ... ... ... 
... ... 
IWI IW4 1- ... liaDIIOU •at ....... 
\II Nit IOU ICMt 
0 Base 
+ Alternative 

Savings and Growth in an Interdependent World 
341 
rest of Europe through higher real interest rates reflecting a tightening 
of European monetary policy to maintain parity with the Deut-
schmark. 
5. - Conclusions 
This paper has explored the links between saving, investment and 
growth in the world economy. It has attempted to place some 
empirical magnitudes on the cost of current policy stances in three of 
the largest industrial economies, as well as indicating the possible 
magnitude resulting from altered fiscal policies. Incorporating demo-
graphic changes and changes and differentials in reates of technical 
progress across countries could substantially affect these results. At 
least in a general equilibrium framework, such as the one presented in 
this paper, these issues could be usefully explored. 
The other area where this work will be extended is in using the 
full non-linear model rather than a linearized version around the initial 
conditions. The non-linearities in the cumulation equations are poten-
tially quite important for the short run behavior for low rates of 
discount and large shocks. 

342 
Warwick J. McKibbin 
BIBUOGRAPHY 
[1) ANDO A. · MODIGUANI F.: «The life Cycle Hypothesis of Saving: Aggregate 
Implications and Tests», American Economic Review, vol. 53, May 1963, pp. 
55-84. 
[2) BAILY M.N. - SCHULTZE C.: «The Productivity of Capital in a Period of Slower 
Growth», Brooking Papers on Economic Activity, 1990. 
[3) BoswoRTH B.: «International Differences in Saving», American Economic Review, 
Papers and Proceedings, 1989. 
[4) --: «The Global Decline in Saving: Some International Comparisons», Paper 
prepared for the conference on Saving, Economic Policy and Growth, Canberra 
(Australia), July 1990. 
[5] CAMPBELL J.- MANKIW N.G.: «Permanent Income, Current Income and Consump-
tion», NBER, Working Paper, no. 2436, 1987. 
[6) DEAN A. - DURAND M. - FALLON J. · HOELLER P.: «Saving Trends and Behavior in 
OECD Countries», OECD, Working Paper, no. 67, 1989. 
[7] DENISON E.: Trends in American Economic Growth 1929-1982, Brookings Institu-
tions, 1985. 
[8] DoRNBUSCH R.: «Expectations and Exchange Rate Dynamics», Journal of Political 
Economy, no. 84, 1976, pp. ll61-76. 
[9) FLEMING J.M.: «Domestic Financial Policies Under Fixed and Floating Exchange 
Rates», International Monetary Fund, Staff Papers vol. 9, no. 3, 1962, pp. 369-79. 
[10] FRENKEL J. · RAziN A.: Fiscal Policies in the World Economy, London, MIT Press, 
1988. 
[11] HAYASHI F.: «Tobin's Marginal q and Average q: A Neoclassical Interpretation», 
Econometrica, no. SO, 1982, pp. 213-24. 
[12] --: «The Permanent Income Hypothesis: Estimation and Testing By Instru-
mental Variables», Journal of Political Economy, vol. 90, no. 4, 1982, pp. 
895-916. 
[13) LIPTON D. 
SACHS J.: «Accumulation and Growth in a Two-Country Model», 
Journal of International Economics, no. 15, 1983, pp. 135-59. 
[14) MASSON P.- TYRON R.: «Macroeconomic Effects of Projected Population Aging in 
Industrial Economies», IMF, Working Paper, vol. 90, no. 5, 1990. 
[15] McKIBBIN W.: <<Can Macroeconomic Theory Explain the 1980s?», latest version: 
«The World Economy 1978 to 1988: Results from the MSG2 Model», Brookings 
Discussion Paper in International Economics, no. 72, 1990. 
[16] --: «Some Global Macroeconomic Implications of German Unification», 
Brookings Discussion Paper in International Economics, no. 81, 1990. 
[17] --: On Fundamental Equilibrium Exchange Rates, prepared for the Institute 
of International Economics Workshop on calculating Feer's, 16 May 1990. 
[18] --: «Saving and Growth with Multiple Agents», The Brookings Institution, 
forthcoming 1990. 
[19] McKIBBIN W.- SACHS J.: «The McKibbin-Sachs Global Model», Brookings Discus-
sion Paper in International Economics, no. 78, 1989. 
[20] -- - -: Macroeconomic Interdependence and Cooperation in the World 
Economy, draft, 1990. 

Savings and Growth in an Interdependent World 
343 
[21] MUNDELL R.: «Capital Mobility and Stabilization Policy Under Fixed and Flexible 
Exchange Rates», Canadian Journal of Economic and Political Sciences, vol. 29, 
no. 4, 1963, pp. 475·85. 
[22] PHELPS E. - Frroussi J.P.: «Causes of the 1980s Slump in Europe», Brookings 
Paper_ on Economic Activity, no. 2, 1986, pp. 487-520. 
[23] SoLOW R.: Growth Theory: An Exposition, Oxford, Oxford University Press, 1970. 
[24] SwAN T.: «Economic Growth and Capital Accumulation», Economic Record, 
1956. 
[25] TAYLOR J.: «Aggregate Dynamics and Staggered Contracts», Journal of Political 
Economy, no. 88, 1980, pp. 1-23. 
(26] TOBIN J.: «Life Cycle Saving and Balanced Growth», in FELLNER et AL.: Ten 
Economic studies on the Tradition of Irving Fisher, London, John Wiley and 
Sons, 1967. 
[27] - -: «A General Equilibrium Approach to Monetary Theory», Journal of Money 
Credit and Banking, 1969. 
[28] WHALLEY: Trade Liberalization Among the Major World Trading Areas, London, 
MIT Press, 1985. 

World Savings and Growth 
in Developing Countries 
Deepak Lal ( 1) 
University College, London 
I. - Introduction 
In its recent World Economic Outlook, the IMF supports the 
view that on current demographic trends particularly in Japan and 
Germany, and assuming unchanged public policies in other countries, 
there is likely to be an emerging shortage of world savings. This view 
was first propounded (to the best of my knowledge) in the World 
Bank's World Development Report 1984, with which I was associ-
ated, and set out in detail together with the supporting evidence in the 
background papers prepared for the report and published in Lal and 
Wolf [17] (2). 
As part of the same exercise Sweder van Wijnbergen and I had 
developed a simple framework of North-South interactions focussing 
on the global balance between the demand and supply of savings, and 
which emphasised the interactions of the public sectors in developed 
and developing countries as major determinants of world interest 
rates and the terms of trade between the North and South, in an 
(l) Parts of this paper are based on Ch. 4 of the draft synthesis volume (by LAL D. 
and MYINT H. of a multi-country comparative study of 21 developing countries financed 
by the World Bank, of The Political Economy of Poverty, Equity and Growth. The 
author, however, is responsible for the views expressed which must not be ascribed to 
the World Bank in any form. 
(2) This priority is of course not acknowledged by the IMF, or the various other 
authors who have taken up this same theme more recently! 
Advise: the numbers in square brackets refer to the Bibliography in the appendix. 

346 
Deepak Lal 
integrated world economy constrained by the overall availability of 
world savings. This simple model was calibrated with the relevant 
data for the 1970s and early 1980s and the estimated time path of 
world interest rates and LDC/OECD terms of trade seemed to track 
the actual outcomes fairly closely (Lal and van Wijnbergen [16]). The 
model can be used to provide simple qualitative answers to the 
question of the likely effects of the increased demands on the pool of 
world savings flowing from the reconstruction of East European 
economies. This is an important question concerning the medium run. 
But we ignore it in this paper, which is concerned more with the long 
run. 
The important long run question concerns the effects on 
developing country growth rates of the projected decline in the OECD 
countries savings into the next century. We survey the answers that 
are provided by conventional theory in Section I before outlining the 
answers provided by a new growth model due to Scott, in section II. 
In section III, we provide some rough orders of magnitude of the 
likely decline in world savings flowing from the ageing of OECD 
populations and its effects on growth rates in the Scott framework. 
1. 
The savings rates in developed, developing and OPEC coun-
tries in the past are shown in Table I. Most of the decline in the OECD 
savings rate is accounted for by a fall in public savings. This, as was 
argued in Lal and Wolf [17] and as is confirmed by various OECD 
studies (Dean et AI. [3], Dean [2]), is due to the expansion of social 
expenditures on helath and pensions, whose coverage increased 
dramatically in the 1960s and 1970s. In the early part of the next 
century, because of the ageing of the population, particularly in 
Germany and Japan (two of the highest savers currently in OECD 
countries), demographic pressures are likely to further reduce OECD 
savings rates. 
Future trends in savings rates in developing countries are difficult 
to discern. First, it should be noted that for many Asian developing 
countries, savings rates have already reached unprecedentedly high 
rates. Second, the collapse of savings in Africa in the 1970s, after 
having risen quite markedly in the previous decade, may be reversed 
as the basic economic framework (consisting of stable systems of law 

World Savings and Growth in Developing Countries 
347 
GROSS SAVINGS RATIOS 
(A) 
Non-OPEC LDCS 
OECD 
1966-1970 ............ 
na(*) 
23.3 (**) 
1971-1980 ............ 
18.0 (*) 
23.5 
1981-1988 ............ 
na 
20.2 
DEVELOPING COUNTRIES 
(B)(***) 
All developing 
Africa 
countries 
1976-1981 ........ 
26.9 
24.1 
1982-1988 ........ 
22.5 
17.7 
(*) 
From i..AL and WOLF [17], Table 7 .4. 
(**) From DEAN [2], Table I. 
(***) From AGHEVU, et AL. [!], Table 2. 
Asia 
Europe 
27.9 
25.8 
27.5 
25.3 
TABLE 1 
OPEC 
na (***) 
56.8 (*) 
na 
ME 
W. Hem 
39.1 
20.8 
23.1 
17.0 
and order, stable money and non-extortionary fiscal regimes) which 
aids thrift and productivity is re-established. Similarly, once Latin 
America emerges from its debt-related bust, its savings rates may also 
recover to their average 1960-1970s levels. Aggregate non-OPEC 
developing countries savings may, therefore, revert to th"cir average 
levels in the 1960s and 1970s. At least we shall assume this is so, and 
examine the likely effects on them of the shrinking in the supply of 
world savings as a result of the projected demographically led decline 
in savings in OECD countries early into the next century. 
The common sense conclusion would be that this incipient 
decline in world savings is ceteris paribus likely to lower developing 
country growth rates and hence their future welfare. Surprisingly, 
conventional theory would deny this conclusion. There are two types 
of reasons for the counter-intuitive conclusions. The first derives from 
the so-called habitat view of savings-investment interactions in the 
world economy due to Feldstein-Horioka [8]. The second follows 
from the conventional Solow-Swan model of neo-classical equilibrtttm 
growth. We deal with both in turn. 

34_8 
Deepak Lal 
The "habitat" view questions the conventional neo-classical view 
of the determinants of capital flows between countries: namely that in 
an integrated world economy where capital (but not labour) is mobile, 
it will flow from regions where rates of return to capital are low to 
these where they are high until a common rate of return ( = world 
interest rate) is established (3). An empirical prediction of this stand-
ard neo-classical model is that national savings and investment rates 
need not move closely together. Feldstein and Horioka [8] and 
Feldstein [7], however, provided empirical evidence that, contrary to 
the neoclassical view, national investment moves closely with national 
savings. This could be taken to be a sign that world capital markets 
are very far from being integrated as assumed in the neoclassical view. 
In which case there would be little impact on investment and hence 
(on the common sense view) on growth in developing countries from 
the prospective fall in savings in OECD countries. Each developing 
country's investment and growth rate would depend upon its own 
savings propensity and if this did not change, their growth prospects 
would be unaltered. The subsequent controversy about the degree of 
international capital mobility which can be deduced from Feldstein-
Horioka type regressions is discussed in Dooley, Frankel and Mathie-
son [6]. For our purpose, however, the conclusions of the recent IMP 
study by Aghevli et AI. ( [ 1], p. 26) are more relevant. They state on 
the OECD countries: «More recent studies suggest that the close 
correlation between investment and savings that had prevailed during 
the 1960s and 1970s began to break down in the early 1980s. This 
breakdown may be attributed to two coincidental events. One is that 
the pace of financial reforms was intensified in the industrial countries 
in the 1980s, particularly in the high savings countries such as Japan 
and the Federal Republic of Germany. As a result, a substantial source 
of savings was made available in the international capital markets. At 
the same time, a widening of budget deficits in a number of low saving 
countries, particularly the US, created excess demand for savings and 
attracted foreign savings through higher interest rates». 
Whilst for LDCs they found (Table 2) that as a whole there 
(3) See McDouGALL [19]. KEMP [II], JONES [10]. Also see LAL [14] for a survey of 
international capital flows and economic development. 

World Savings and Growth in Developing Countries 
349 
SAVING-INVESTMENT CORRELATIONS 
IN DEVELOPING COUNTRIES (*) 
1976-1988 
1976-1981 
Developing countries 
••••••••••••••••••• 0 
0_68 
0.60 
Countries with debt-servicing problems 
• 
0 0. 
0.73 
0.72 
Countries without debt-servicing problems 
0.88 
0.84 
High-inflation countries .................. 
0.80 
0.78 
Low-inflation countries 
0 ••••••••••• 0 ••• 0. 
0.63 
0.51 
High-income countries .................. 
0.55 
0.44 
Low-income countries .................... 
0.78 
0.69 
Africa ••••••••••••••••••••• 0 •••••••••••• 
0.74 
0.66 
Asia .................................... 
0.84 
0.91 
Europe 
••••••••••••••••••• 0 
0 •••••••••• 0 
0.88 
0.80 
Middle East 
0 •••• 0. 0. 0. 0 ••• 0 •••••••••• 0. 
0.31 
0.11 
Western Hemisphere 
•••••••••• 0 ••••••••• 
0.63 
0.71 
TABLE 2 
1982-1988 
0.70 
0.74 
0.71 
0.76 
0.65 
0.61 
0.76 
0.75 
0.57 
0.94 
0.44 
0.65 
(*) High-inflation countries: average annual inflation rate of I 0 percent or higher in 1982-1988; 
low-inflation countries: average annual inflation rate of below 10%; high-income countries: average 
per capita nominal income of US $1,000 or above in 1982-1988; low-income countries: average per 
capita nominal income of less than US $1,000. 
Source: Fund staff estimaters, AGHEVLI et AL. [I]. Table 4. 
remains a close correlation between national savings and investment_ 
Moreover, for the debt problem countries (as would be expected) this 
correlation strengthened somewhat- However, for countries in Asia 
and those which avoided a debt crisis, the correlation has weakened 
substantially since 1982, suggesting that they are increasingly 
becoming integrated into the world capital market- As the problems of 
the "debt crisis" countries gets resolved, they too can be expected to 
be re-integrated into the world capital market. Hence, for both LDCs 
and OECD countries, the assumption of worldwide capital market 
integration may not be too farfetched in the future. 
This would then restore differential expected rates of return as 
the major motive for capital flows between countries. A worldwide 
shortage of savings would imply a rise in world interest rates and 
hence the labour intensity of production (following from the required 
rise in the marginal productivity of capital) in both developed and 
developing countries. But what of the consequences for the growth 
rates of income and per capita consumption in the South? As is well 

350 
y= 
y 
L 
k 
Deepak Lal 
Is* -- s'y 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
k* 
GRAPH 1 
y 
nk 
k = K/L 
With y as output per capita and k as the capital per capita, this figure shows the standard 
neo-classical growth model. The natural rate of growth is given exogenously by the rate of technical 
progress n. With a savings rate s, the economy will converge to a steady state capital labour rate of 
k, and per capita output of y. If savings were raised to s' (the Golden Rule level), consumption per 
capita (s*y*) would be at a maximum, as the slope of the tangent at y* ( = marginal product of 
capital) will be the same as the slope of the nk line (the natural rate of growth). Assuming savings 
higher than s would clearly be sub-optimal, as it would reduce the steady state per capita 
consumption level. 
known, in the Solow-Swam neo-classical model, this reduction in the 
world savings rate would have no effect on the steady state growth 
rate which would continue to be determined by the exogenously given 
rates of population growth and Harrod neutral technical progress in 
the respective countries and regions. The new steady state per capita 
output and consumption would be lower (assuming as is plausible that 
the previous steady state capital-labour ratio was below the Golden 

World Savings and Growth in Developing Countries 
351 
Rule level (Graph 1) (4). In the transition to the new steady state, the 
growth rate of capital and output would decline (as the lower steady 
state capital-labour ratio is established), but there would be a tem-
porary rise in per capita consumption levels till they fell back to the 
lower steady state levels. 
This is as much as can be said within the standard neo-classical 
growth model about the likely effects on developing countries of the 
incipient fall in the world savings rate. There is, however, another 
puzzle within this framework which is relevant for our purpose, and 
which has recently been noted by Lucas [18]. He argues on the basis 
of estimates of the parameters of the standard neo-classical produc-
tion function, that it appears the marginal product of capital in India 
is about 58 times the marginal product of capital in the US (5). If this 
were true, and there was world capital mobility we should observe 
massive capital flows to India. 
He argues that the obvious discrepancy between predictions and 
outcomes can be repaired in a model where there are increasing 
returns to human capital. After making suitable adjustments for these, 
the ratio of the differential in rates of return between India and the US 
is reduced to 1.04 (6). 
(4) It is well-known (PHELPS [21]) that any savings rate above the Golden Rule level 
reduces steady per capita consumption and hence cannot be optimal. The Golden Rule 
of Accumulation is that the marginal product of capital equals the natural rate of 
growth, or equivalently that the ratio of savings and investment to output equals the 
rate of profit. Of course, the Golden Rule rate of savings is also likely to be too high on 
an optimal growth path for well known reasons (DIXIT [5]). 
(5) For a standard neo-classical production function y = Axb, where y is income 
(output) per worker, xis capital per worker, and b the share of capital in value added, 
the marginal product of capital in terms of output per worker is: 
,. = b A lib y<b-l)!b 
substituting a value of b = 0.4 «an average of US and Indian capital shares», and using 
SUMMERS and HESTON [24] estimates that US output per worker is roughly 15 times that 
in India <<implies that the marginal product of capital in India must be (15)1.5 = 58 
times the marginal product of capital in the US" (LUCAS [18], p. 92). 
(6) Lucas estimates this as follows. With increasing returns (due to externalities) to 
human capital formation, and denoting y as income per effective worker, x as capital 
per effective worker, and h as human capital per worker, his production function is 
y = Axbha where the term ha is the external effect of human capital formation. This 
implies that the marginal productivity of capital (r) is: r = b A lib y<b-1)/b halb 
He uses KRUEGER [ 13] estimate of the relative human capital stocks in India and the 
US. He derives <<a ratio of y in the US to y in India of 3». From Dennison ( 1962) he 

352 
Deepak La/ 
But this Lucas (and the other "new growth") method of repairing 
the Solow-Swan growth model in order to eliminate some of its 
implausible predictions does not seem too plausible either. Thus 
Maddison ( [20], p. 111) summing up the historical evidence on 
productivity he has put together for the OECD countries concluded: 
«<t does not seem that the post-war acceleration of productivity 
growth was matched by an acceleration in the growth of educational 
capital. Similarly it is clear that the slackening in productivity growth 
since 1 97 3 is in no way due to a slowing down in the pace of growth of 
educational capital. Indeed, the evidence available shows more rapid 
growth in the educational stock in the 1970s than in the 1960s or 
1950s». 
Also consider the comparison of the diverse historical growth 
performance of the US and Argentina. As Waelbroeck ([27], p. 2 
noted: «Nor is human capital the key to the productivity mystery. The 
United States and Argentina were equally prosperous at the beginning 
of the century. Their intellectual achievements were broadly compar-
able; today, Argentina is a developing country that for scores of years 
has not been able to take control of its destiny. Yet, the physical 
capital was not destroyed by wars, nor its human capital depleted by a 
mass exodus of highly skilled elements of the population; other 
explanations must be found». 
These other explanations of course, as a large amount of 
empirical research on the divergent outcomes in developing coun-
tries have emphasised, must include differences in the efficiency of 
investment. These are subsumed in the Solow-Swan framework in 
the exogenously determined black box of technical progress. But 
this as Scott [22] has recently emphasised in a brilliant book 
means: «Orthodox theories of economic growth make its main 
determinants non-economic» Scott ([22), p. 100) has constructed a 
new neo-classical growth model in which «the determinants of the 
volume and efficiency of investment are restored to the centre of 
attention». We turn to this model, as it provides more plausible and 
derives an estimate of a = 0.36. The ratio of h in the US to India from Krueger is 5. 
Taking b = 0.25, this gives the «rate of return ratio between India and the US of (3) 
1.5 X 5-l = 1.04» (LUCAS [18], p. 92). 

World Savings and Growth in Developing Countries 
353 
commonsensical answers to the question of the likely effects of a 
decrease in world savings on the growth performance of developing 
countries. 
2. - Scott's steady state growth model is neo-classical in so far as 
it assumes profit and utility maximisation. But there are three impor-
tant departures from the Solow-Swan framework. 
First, Scott ([22]- p. 92) argues that: «for all practical purposes, 
depreciation in a progressive economy should be regarded as essen-
tially a transfer of income from capitalists to workers. The latter 
benefit from rising wages which result in appreciation which is 
omitted from the conventional accounts. Were it included, it would 
offset depreciation on capital assets. It would then be clear that net 
investment for society as a whole is (approximately) equal to gross 
investment as conventionally measured, and not to gross investment 
minus depreciation». 
Second, Scott argues that there are no diminishing returns to 
cumulative gross investment (that is the capital stock measured as the 
sum of all past gross investment), but there could be diminishing 
returns to the rate of investment. 
Third, he maintains that there is no need to evoke any indepen-
dent or exogenous technical progress to explain growth. He argues 
that: «investment is ... by definition ... the cost of change, and so will 
cover all activities associated with growth» (p. 137) and that «growth 
due to capital and technical progress are both the result of invest-
ment» (p. 330) in the sense of «the cost, in terms of consumption 
forgone, of propelling the economy forward instead of leaving it in a 
stationary state» (p. 138). «Incurring capital expenditure leads to a 
rearrangement of the things of this world. It does not lead to there 
being any more of some substance "capital". There is then simply 
change which is due to investment, and to population growth. We 
cannot separate change which is "more capital" from change which is 
"technical progress". We must abandon the attempt to distinguish 
between movements along a production function whose arguments 
are labour, land and all capital, and a shift in that function due to 
technical progress" (p. 331). Within his proposed framework «the rate 
of increase of static income is a function of only two variables: total 

354 
Deepak Lal 
savings and labour force growth. There is no independent technical 
progress» (p. 331). 
Instead of the usual production function, Scott argues that the 
economy's technology is best depicted by a set of inexhaustible 
investment opportunities which relate exponential rates of change of 
output q and employment 1 per unit of investment expenditure (which 
is given by the ratio of gross investment (savings) to output S (7). 
Scott envisages the investment opportunities available as a cake, 
which can be depicted by what he calls investment opportunity 
contour (IOCS's) (of different height) in a diagram which has output 
per unit of investment q and employment per unit of investment 1 as 
its two axes. The height of the contours is the density of projects 
(Graph 2a). «The shape of the cake is shown ... by the contoursjoining 
points of equal height ... The contours increase in height, as we move 
from the north and west towards the origin. They cross the 1-axis to 
the left of the origin and go off to the north and east. This is because 
projects which (per unit of investment) do not increase output must 
save labour, and the more they increase output, the more labour they 
require (given their frequency). Finally, the contours are concave to 
the origin because of diminishing returns to labour. For a given 
frequency of projects, and a given amount of investment, adding 
further doses of labour increases output by successively smaller 
amounts» (p. 156-7). 
Each IOC corresponds to a particular rate of (gross) investmentS. 
For that rate of ivnestment, one can envisage an equal profits contour 
(EPC) argues Scott, which is like a knife cutting off the investment 
opportunities (lying to the north-west of the knife) which yield returns 
greater, than the expected minimum (or cut off) rate of return for the 
economy. The latter being determined by rates of time preferences. 
The slope of the EPC is defined as: 
(1) 
Aq 
n 
J.l=-=--
A 1 
1 - s 
(7) Term as defined below, if g is the growth rate of output and KL that of 
employment, g = g/s and 1 = g1js. 

D 
World Savings and Growth in Developing Countries 
355 
GRAPH 2A 
INVESTMENT OPPORTUNITY CONTOUR MAP 
w 
FPU 
Investment 
Opportunities 
Contours 
GRAPH 2B 
INVESTMENT PROGRAMME CONTOUR MAP 
Investment 
Programme 
Contour 

356 
Deepak Lal 
where: J.l is output per unit of investment, 1 is employment per unit of 
investment, Q is the share of wages in output and s is the rate of 
investment. 
Scott asssumes that «the cake of investment opportunities is 
continually remade, and has the same shape in the dimensions 
relevant to the diagram» when there is steady state growth. 
But there are two qualifications to this assumption of a constant 
set of investment opportunities which may be relevant. First, is the 
possibility of catch up: «What may happen in such cases is that both 
the favourable stream of new inventions, etc. and the adverse stream 
of competitive pressures are shut off from a particular country for 
various reasons. Subsequently, the country is opened up to such 
influences. Investors in that country then reap the benefits of access to 
the new inventions, etc. Since competition will not have forced up 
wage rates, investment opportunities will on balance be enhanced, 
although the lack of investment in the past will limit this enhance-
ment. Ass investment proceeds, and the country catches up, wage 
rates will be bid up and eventually the set of opportunities will become 
normal» (p. 161). 
The second is that the set can shrink or expand. There is no law 
that requires a constant set. «Some have claimed to be able to detect 
long waves of invention which should show up as expansions and 
contractions in the set of opportunities. My own investigation suggests 
a movement in one direction only -
happily that of expansion» (p. 
162). 
But as a working hypothesis, an inexhaustible constant set of 
investment opportunities seems plausible. This then lets him derive 
what he calls an investment program contour (IPC) (Graph 2b). This is 
the locus of the centre of gravity ( C in Graph 2a) as J.l (the slope of the 
IPC) varies for any given rate of investment s. 
In steady state growth, for a given rate of investment S, and rato 
of growth of employment l, Scott shews that, there will be a unique 
best point C in Graph 2b, where the IPC is tangential to the relevant 
IPC. 
The characteristics of investment qc and q1 will remain constant, 
and as by definitions: 
(2) 
qc = gls 

World Savings and Growth in Developing Countries 
357 
(3) 
where: g is the growth of output;, g1 is the growth rate of the (quality 
adjusted) labour force. 
The growth rates of output g, of employment g1 and the rate of 
investment S, will all be constant, as will the share of wages in output 
A., and hence from ( 1) will Jl. Scott also assumes that along a ray such 
as OC, the slope of successive IPC's is the same. The distance of any 
IPC from the origin is then measured by a parameter which he labels 
Q, and which is an index of the efficiency of investment. For any given 
rate of investment the further away is the relevant IPC from the 
origin, the greater, ceteris paribus, are the returns to ivnestment. The 
parameter Q thus measures two effects. First, the effects of dimin-
ishing returns to the rate of investment. As the knife moves towards 
the origin, inferior and less profitable investments are added to the 
firm's investment programme. «The speed with which Q declines asS 
increases, measures the extent to which returns diminish as the rate 
of investment is increased». This explains why "big push" investment 
programmes have been so unsuccessful in most developing countries 
contrary to some of the models recently coming out of Chicago. The 
second, «effect measured by Q is the expansion or contraction of 
investment opportunities generally arising from factors outside the 
model». This includes "catch up". For the same Sin both countries, Q 
was probably greater in Japan than US after World War II, as the 
Japanese had far lower output/worker and wage rates and could 
imitate America fairly easily. This should also apply to the East 
European economies as they are integrated into the European and 
world economy. 
Scott's model then leads to a simple linear equation to explain 
growth: 
(4) 
g = aQs + gt 
By contrast, the standard neo-classical model in which growth 
depends only upon the exogenous growth of quality adjusted employ-
mem and technical progress, the relevant growth equation would be, 
in Scott's notation: 
(5) 
g =a+ bgt 

358 
Deepak Lal 
Scott then tests his model against the standard neo-classical one 
on data for 10 countries over a number of sub-periods from the 19th 
century to 1973. He finds the results are close to the predictions of the 
model. The investment-outut ratio and the growth of quality adjusted 
labour each explain about half of the growth of output. The term 
which would capture exogenous technical progress is statistically 
insignificant and not different from zero. 
Moreover, he finds a "catch up" variable (in a disaggregation of 
Q) explains a small but significant portion of growth performance 
since World War II. Scott also finds that the efficiency of investment 
increased significantly after the World War II (the value of Q in-
creased). It is this changed efficiency of investment which requires 
explanation (8). 
Thus as Scott concludes unlike the Solow-Swan model, which 
says «no technical change no growth», his model reasserts the impor-
tance of the economic aspects of economic growth. «The determin-
ants of the volume and efficiency of investment are restored to the 
centre of attention, and both have long been the concern of econo-
mists. We can, with renewed confidence in their importance, study 
the behaviour of firms, project appraisal, the working of capital 
markets, the determinants of saving, systems of taxation, and their 
impact on savings and the volume and pattern of investment, all of 
which are very relevant to economic growth in the long run. We do 
not have to abdicate to scientists and engineers or even to those 
economists who specialise in the study of technical change. I do not 
deny for a moment their interest and importance but I do assert the 
importance of the economic aspects of economic growth». 
As part of a multi-country comparative study for the World Bank 
on poverty and growth, I have applied the Scott test to our sample of 
21 developing countries for the period 1950-1985. Given the un-
reliability of the underlying data and as the assumption of equilibrium 
growth for all these countries is difficult to justify what surprised me 
were the results. The Scott equation explained about growth 95% of 
(8) As 
McCOMBIE J. in his review of Scott's book (in The Economic Journal, 
March 1990 p. 273 notes: «<t is also found that the efficiency of investment increased 
substantially in the post war period, and this becomes in fact the new residual that 
requires explanation». 

World Savings and Growth in Developing Countries 
359 
the variance in growth rates as compared with the neo-classical one 
(of 46%) (all as measured by adjusted fil). (Lal and Myint [15]). 
3. - To put the Scott model to work to see what answer it 
provides to the question: How will the prospective decline in world 
savings affect LDC growth prospects, a simplification of Graph 2b is 
useful. We now assume that there are no diminishing returns to the 
rate of investment. Then there will be only one investment pro-
gramme contour (IPC) as in Graph 3, «which simply traces the edge of 
the cake on the plate» (Scott [22], p. 168). If the given rate of savings 
(investment is s, then a shrunken version of IPC can be derived whose 
co-ordinates are those of the IPC multiplied by s. This is the curve GG 
GRAPH 3 
q 
FUP 
g 
q 
B 
B' 
--+A 
L 
I 

360 
Deepak Lal 
(s/PC) in Graph 3 and the pointE on it has co-ordinates which are s 
times the co-ordinates of C. Now, suppose f.hat the exogenously given 
rate of growth of the labour force ins gL = OA. The the vertical 
through A which intersects the S/PC curve at E, gives the steady state 
equilibrium rate of growth of output g, whilst the point Con the IPC, 
gives the investment characteristics q (output per unit of investment) 
and 1 (employment per unit of investment) of the steady state invest-
ment programme which yields these steady state growth rates. 
Now assuming that there is no change in the overal efficiency of 
the investment programme (so that Q, the radius of the IPC, the ray 
OC for instance is unchanged), say the savings/investment rates falls. 
This will mean that the curve GG will shift downward (ass' < s (1), 
the decrease in s will lead to a further shrinking of the s/PC curve) to 
G G'. For the unchanged growth rate of the labour force GL, the new 
equilibrium point on the G G' curve will lie at E', vertically above A 
and below E. The growth rate of output g will fall. 
The characteristics of the new steady state investment pro-
gramme are given by the intersection of the ray OE' with the 
unchanged ICC at C. This shows that both q and !will rise. Moreover, 
the rate of return to investment (9) in the steady state will also be 
constant. This rate of return is given by: 
r=q-'Al 
It is the marginal profit per unit of investment (gross of depreci-
ation) (Scott [22], p. 167 and Ch. 7). The slope of the tangent at C 
gives u, whilst the ratio RQ/QC = 'A, and hence the distance OR 
equals 1 (9). Hence the movement from C to C implies that r will 
rise. In the steady state, the growth rate of wages gw must equal the 
rate of growth of productivity g- gL. Hence if a 45• line is drawn 
from 
E 
(on 
GG) 
to 
the 
horizontal 
axis, 
the 
distance 
OB = AB -
OA = AE -
OA = g -
gL = gw. With the reduction in 
the savings (investment) rate, at the new equilibrium point E', on 
(9) For as u = UQIQC; A = u (1 - s); and UR/UQ = US!UC = OE/OC = s. 
Thence (1 - s) = UR/UQ = RQ! UQ and hence A = (UQ/QC) (RQ/UQ) = RQ!QC 
and r = q -
AI = OQ -
A QC = OQ -
RQ = OR. (See Scorr [22], p. 169-70 for 
details). 

World Savings and Growth in Developing Countries 
361 
G G, the new "wage line" intersects the horizontal axis as B', and 
hence gw falls (as OB' > OB). 
All these results seem eminently sensible and in line with our 
commonsensical economic intuition, namely (in summary), the reduc-
tion in world savings, and the accompanying rise in real world interest 
rates, will lower steady state growth rates in the world economy (of 
both developed and developing countries), raise their rates of profit 
(real return to investment), increase the labour intensity of output and 
lower the growth rate of real wages. 
Moreover, given Scott's estimated growth equation for the OECD 
countries, and ours for developing countries, we can provide some 
rough quantitative assessment of the likely fall in steady state growth 
rates, assuming that the investment programme countours in both 
"regions" remain unchanged. First, we need some estimate of the 
likely decrease in world savings from the demographic changes which 
will occur in OECD countries. The IMF World Economic Outlook, 
May 1990 («Supplementary Note 3») has estimated that ceteris pari-
bus in industrial economies there is «a 1 percentage point decline in 
private savings rates in the long run in response to a 1 percentage 
point increase in the dependency ratio». They have also estimated the 
likely changes in the dependency ratio for the 7 major industrial 
countries between 1985 and 2025. Using the data on the gross savings 
rate in these 7 countries between 1981-1987 (given in Dean et al. [3], 
Table 1), and the shares of each country in the total's GOP (in 1980 
Kravis dollars in 1983) from Summers and Heston [24], we have 
estimated the average savings rate of this group of 7 in 1981-1987, and 
that in 2025, (Table 3). Two estimates are given for the US. The first 
assumes that there will be no reversal in the low current gross US 
savings rate of 16.3%, in the near future. The other assumes that this 
will in the near term revert to its average 1971-1980 value of 19.5% 
(Dean et al. [3]). Table 3 thus shows that ceteris paribus, there is 
likely to be about a 9 percentage point reduction in the savings rate of 
the Group of 7 due to the ageing of OECD population. 
Let us assume this is also roughly the order of magnitude of the 
reduction in aggregate world savings. What will be the likely reduc-
tion in the growth rates of output in the OECD and LDCs within the 

362 
Deepak Lal 
TABLE 3 
ESTIMATED GROSS SAVINGS RATE IN GROUP OF 7 
INDUSTRIAL COUNTRIES 
1981-1987 and 2025 
(Percentages) 
Country 
Gross 
Share in 
Change in 
Estimated 
savings 
group 7 
dependency 
savings 
rate 
real GDP 
ratio 
rate 
1981-1987 
1987 
1995-2025 
2025 
(A)(*) 
(I) 
(2) 
(3) 
(4) 
1) USA 
0 ••••••••••••• 
16.3 (19.5) (**) 
45.6 
7 
9.3 (12.5) (**) 
2) Japan .............. 
31.1 
17.4 
15 
16.1 
3) Germany 
•• 0 ••••••• 
21.8 
10.0 
13 
8.8 
4) France 
• 
0 
0 •• 0 ••••• 0 
19.6 
8.3 
8 
11.6 
5) UK ................ 
17.5 
7.5 
5 
12.5 
6) Italy 
•• 0 ••••••••••• 
15.6 
6.5 
8 
7.6 
7) Canada ............ 
20.3 
4.7 
13 
7.3 
(B)(***) 
1. Savings Rate of Group of Seven 1981-1987 = 19.92 (21.38) 
2. Savings Rate of Group of Seven 2025 = 10.65 (12.11) 
(*) Column (I): From DEAN et AL. [3], Table I; Column (2): derived from data on real GDP per 
capita and population in 1987, in SUMMERS-HESTON [24], Table 3; Column (3): derived from lMF: 
World Economic Outlook, May 1990, Table 24; Column (4): estimated by subtracting column (3) 
from column (1). 
(**) This is the US gross savings rate for 1971-1980. 
(***) These savings rates have been estimated as weighted averages of columns (I) and (4) 
respectively where weights are those in column (2). 
Scott framework. First consider industrial countries. Scott's estimate 
of his growth equation g = ulf + aQs for the OECD countries yields 
values of u = 0.9119 and aQ = 0.13635. From the definition of u (see 
equation) and the estimate of s of about 0.20 derived in Table 3, we 
get a implicit estimate of the share of wages J... = 0. 9119 x 0. 8 = 0. 7 3. 
Assuming this remains unchanged (10), then the projected fall of 9 
percentage points in the savings ratio in the long run and hence a new 
long run savings ratio s1 = 0.11 will lead to a new steady state value 
of u 1 = 0.73/[(1-0.11)] = 0.82. With no change in the OECD coun-
( 1 0) From the discussion of the Scott model above, we would of course expect A. to 
fall with the decline in the savings rate. This will further lower the new steady state 
growth rate by lowering the new steady state value of u. 

World Savings and Growth in Developing Countries 
363 
TABLE 4 
ESTIMATED STEADY STATE GROWTH RATES OF OUTPUT 
IN THE SCOTT FRAMEWORK(*) 
s 
KL 
aQ 
A. 
u 
(A) OECD Countries 
(I) 
(2) 
(3) 
(4) 
(S) 
1970s-1980s 
•••••• 0 ••• 
0.200 
0.100 
0.136 
0.73 
0.912 
2000 -2025 
0 ••••••••• 
0.110 
0.010 
0.136 
0.73 
0.820 
(B) LDCs 
1970s-1980s •..••••. 0. 
0.203 
0.026 
0.143 
0.60 
0.754 
2000 -2025 .......... 
0.113 
0.026 
0.143 
0.60 
0.676 
g 
(6) 
0.036 
0.015 
0.049 
0.034 
(*) Column (I): The OECD estimates have been derived as described in the text and Table I. 
The 1970s 1980s estimate for LDCs arc the average investment rates for the 21 countries in 
l..At.-MYINT [IS]. The 202S figures assume a 9 percentage cut in savings rates; Column (2): The OECD 
figures are from the LDC figures from l..At.-MYINT [IS]; Column (3): The OECD figures are the 
estimates from ScOTT [22] and the LDC figures are from l..At.-MYINT [IS]; Column (4): Derived from 
column (S) and (3) for the 1980s data from iJ = u (1-s); Column (S): The 1970s-1980s estimates 
are from ScOTT [22] for OECD, l..At.-MYINT [IS] for LDCs. The 2000-2S figures have been derived 
from the figures in column (1) and (4), using u = ~tl (1- s); Column (6): This is estimated from 
columns (1), (2), (3) and (S) by g = ugL + aQs. 
tries, IPC and assuming the same growth of the labour force as in the 
past (11), this yields the steady state growth rates of output, with 
current savings rate g and with the projected lower savings rates g1 
shown in Table 2. 
A similar exercise based on our estimated growth equation for 
our 21 developing countries yields the estimates for the growth rates 
of output at current and projected lower world savings rates of g and 
g1 also shown in Table 2. Output growth slows to about 1.5% p.a. in 
OECD and to 3.4% in developing countries. With population growing 
at roughly 2.2% p.a. in LDCs and at 0.8% in industrial economies 
(Table 2 of World Banlc Social Indicators of Development 1988), 
these rates imply very modest per capital growth rates of income in 
both regions. 
For the reasons given in the previous footnotes, our assumption 
(11) With the demographic changes being postulated, in fact the growth of labour 
force will be lower. Thus the new steady state growth rates are likely to be lower than 
our estimates based on this assumption. 

364 
Deepak La[ 
that the share of wages remains unchanged, as does the growth of 
labour in the OECD countries, is likely to provide an upward bias to 
these estimates. Furthermore, if the additional social expenditures 
associated with the ageing of OECD population cannot or are not 
financed by increased taxation (or fully funded social security sys-
tems), there could be structural fiscal deficits in OECD countries (see 
Lal and Wolf [17] for a fuller discussion). If Ricardian equivalence 
does not hold, these structural fiscal deficits could further depress 
future OECD savings rates, and thus lower the new steady state 
growth rates of both LDCs and industrial countries even further. 
Against this, the rise in real returns to investment and hence in real 
world interest rates could increase savings, though the evidence on 
this remains equivocal (Kotlikoff [12], Deaton [4]). 
The picture thus appears fairly gloomy. For many developing 
countries, however, there is some glimmer of hope. For the estimates 
we have made based on the growth equations for our 21 developing 
countries provides an implicit estimate of the "average" rate of return 
to investment in our sample of countries. But there is a large 
divergence in relative efficiency in these countries and hence in their 
rates of return. We were able to calculate average rates of returns for 
some of our sample countries (for which data on the share of wages 
was available) in Lal and Myint [15]. These estimates are given in 
Table 5. This table also shows similar estimates of rates of return for 
some other countries that I made in the context of shadow pricing 
exercises in the 1970s. One of these countries was India. These rates 
of return are also given in Table 5. Finally this table also shows the 
rates of return to investment that Scott has estimated for various 
OECD countries in the post-war period. 
Two points stand out. First, for many developing countries, 
growth rates could be increased even if investment rates fall, if the 
efficiency of investment could be improved. As is now a common-
place, this improvement in efficiency requires a reversal of various 
irrational dirigiste policies that most developing countries have fol-
lowed in the past, particularly with regard to foreign trade and foreign 
investment. The growing realisation that developing countries have to 
compete for a dimished pool of world savings in an increasingly 
interdependent world economy, may hopefully strengthen the move-

World Savings and Growth in Developing Countries 
365 
RATES OF RETURN TO INVESTMENT(*) 
Developing countries 
l. Thailand ................................... . 
2. Brazil ..................................... . 
3. Mexico ................................... . 
4. Turkey ................................... . 
5. Costa Rica ................................. . 
6. Colombia ................................. . 
7. Nigeria ................................... . 
8. Ghana ..................................... . 
9. Uruguay ................................... . 
10. Egypt ................................ .-.... . 
11. Sri Lanka ................................. . 
12. Malawi ................................... . 
13. India ..................................... . 
14. South Korea ............................... . 
Developed countries 
UK ........................................... . 
us ············································ 
Japan ......................................... . 
Germany ..................................... . 
France ....................................... . 
Year 
1980-1985 
1968 
1964-1973 
1948-1973 
1961-1973 
1955-1962 
1955-1962 
TABLE 5 
r 
% 
22.2 
21.0 
18.7 
24.0 
13.0 
17.8 
13.1 
-10.9 
6.8 
22.7 
18.1 
13.0 
10.0 
18.6 
15.6 
21.2 
22.0 
21.3 
(*) These rates of return have all been calculated from the formula r= q- A. I (as explained in 
the text). 
Source: Developing countries 1-12 are from I...AL-MYINT [15], Table 4.5. The other countries in 
the sample of the growth equation but for which data on A. was not available, are Hong Kong, 
Singapore, Malta, Malaysia, Peru, Jamaica, Mauritius and Madagascar. The estimate for India is 
from I...AL D.: Prices for Planning, London Heinemann Educational Books, 1980, Table 1.3, and that 
for Korea from I...AL D. The estimates for the developed countries are from Scorr [22], Table 7 .1. 
ment towards the liberalisation of hitherto repressed economic 
regimes which seem to be a growing worldwide phenomenon. That 
should help to bolster growth in many countries in the Third World. 
Second, Table 5, resolves the purported puzzle for whose resolu-
tion Lucas and the other "new growth" theorists seem to have got 
involved in various contortions within the Solow-Swan neo-classical 
growth framework. There is no need to bring in increasing returns to 
human capital etc. to explain why foreign capital (in particular from 
the US) does not flood into India. The figures in Table 5 speak for 
themselves! 

366 
Deepak Lal 
Beginning with Keynes' paradox of thrift which seemingly over-
turned one of the classical virtues explaining the wealth of nations, the 
Solow-Swan model further de-emphasised the role of savings in 
explaining divergent growth performance. In this paper I have 
attempted to show how Scott's new growth model can resurrect the 
importance of savings in explaining relative economic performance 
and why, as common sense tells us, a decline in thrift is to be 
deplored. For though as Keynes said "in the long run we are all dead", 
some of us have children! 

World Savings and Growth in Developing Countries 
367 
BIBUOGRAPHY 
[1] AGHEVU B.- BoUGHTON J.M. ·MONTIEL J.P.· VILLAMERZ D.· WOGLOM G.: «The Role 
of National Savings in the World Economy», Washington (DC}, IMF, Occasional 
Papers, no. 67, March 1990. 
[2] DEAN A.: «Changes in International Saving Behaviour, Kiel Institute of World 
Economics», Paper for conference Capital Flows in the World Economy, June 
1990. 
[3] DEAN A. - DURAND M. - HOELLER P.: «Saving Trends and Behaviour in OECD 
Countries», Paris, OECD, Department of Economics and Statistics, Working 
Paper, no. 67, June 1989. 
[4] DEATON A.: «Savings in Developing Countries: Theory and Review», Proceedings of 
the World Bank Annual Conference on Development Economics, 1989. 
[5] DIXIT A.: The Theory of Equilibrium Growth, Oxford University Press, 1976. 
[6] DooLEY M.- FRANKEL J.A.- MATHIESON D.J.: «International Capital Mobility: What 
do Saving-Investment Correlations Tell Us?», IMF, Staff Papers, vol. 34, no. 3, 
September 1987. 
[7] FELDSTEIN M.: «Domestic Saving and International Capital Movements in the Long 
Run and the Short Run», European Economic Review, vol. 21, no. 1/2, March-
April 1983. 
[8] FELDSTEIN M. - HORIOKA C.: «Domestic Saving and International Capital Flows», 
Economic Journal, vol. 90, June 1980. 
[9] HAMADA K. - IWATA K.: «On the International Capital Ownership Pattern at the 
Turn of the Twenty-First Century», European Economic Review, vol. 33, no. 5, 
May 1989. 
[10] JoNES R.W.: «International Capital Movements and the Theory of Tariffs and 
Trade», Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol. 81, no. 1, February 1967. 
[11] KEMP M.C.: «The Gain from International Trade and Investment: a Neo-Heck-
scher-Ohlin Approach», American Economic Review, vol. 56, September 1966. 
[12] KOTUKOFF L.J.: What Determines Savings?, Cambridge (Mass.) MIT Press, 1989. 
[13] KRUEGER A.O.: «Factor Endowments and Per Capita Income Differences among 
Countries», Economic Journal, vol. 78, September 1968. 
[14] LAL D.: «International Capital Flows and Economic Development», in ScoTT M. 
FG.- LAL D. (eds.): Public Policy and Economic Development, Oxford, Clarendon 
Press, 1990. 
[15] LAL D. - MYINT H.: The Political Economy of Poverty, Equity and Growth. A 
Comparative Study, London, University College, Mimeo, February 1990. 
[16] LAL D. - VAN WIJNBERGEN S.: «Government Deficits, the Real Interest Rate and 
LDC Debt: On Global Crowding Out», European Economic Review, vol. 29, no. 2, 
December 1985, reprinted in LAL- WoLF [17]. 
[17] LAL D. -WOLF M. (ed.): Stagflation, Savings and the State, New York, Oxford 
University Press, 1986. 
[18] LucAs Jr. R.E.: <<Why Doesn't Capital Flow From Rich to Poor Countries?», 
American Economic Review, vol. 80, no. 2, May 1990. 
[19] McDouGALL G.D.A.: «The Benefits and Costs of Private Investment from Abroad: 
A Theoretical Approach», Economic Record, vol. 36, special issue, March 1960; 
also published in Bulletin of the Oxford University Institute of Statistics, vol. 22, 
no. 3, August 1960. 

368 
Deepak Lal 
[20] MADDISON A.: Phases of Capitalist Development, Oxford, Oxford University Press, 
1982. 
[21] PHELPS E.: «The Golden Rule of Accumulation: A Fable for Growthmen», 
American Economic Review, vol. 51, no. 4, September 1961. 
[22] Scorr M. FG: A New View of Economic Growth, Oxford, Clarendon Press, 1989. 
[23] SoLOw R.: «A Contribution to the Theory of Economic Growth», Quarterly 
Journal of Economics, vol. 70, no. 1, February 1956. 
[24] SUMMERS R. - HESTON A.: «A New Set of International Comparisons of Real 
Product and Price Levels: Estimates for 130 Countries, 1950-1985», Review of 
Income and Wealth, March 1988. 
[25] SWAN T.: «Economic Growth and Capital Accumulation», Economic Record, vol. 
32, no. 2, November 1956. 
[26] VAN WIJNBERGER S.: «Interdependence Revisited: A Developing Countries Perspec-
tive on Macroeconomic Management and Trade Policy in the Industrial World», 
Economic Policy, no. 1, November 1985. 
[27] WAELBROECK J.: «1992: Are the Figures Right? Reflections of a Thirty Per Cent 
Policy Maker», in SIEBERT H. (ed.): The Completion of the Internal Market, 
Tubingen, J.C.B. Mohr, 1990. 

Savings, Credit and Investment: 
The Case of Southern Italy 
Carlo Pace 
Universita •La Sapienza•, Roma 
The difficulty in defining the role of regional savings and the 
function of lending in capital accumulation in southern Italy is largely 
due to a lack of basic information. Thanks to the breakdown by region 
of macroeconomic accounts, data regarding GDP, consumption and 
investment are readily available. However, no information on savings 
or income is provided, and it seems superfluous to point out that the 
comparison of regional accounts within one country brings the 
difference between GDP and disposable income into sharp relief. 
The prospect of reversing negative trends has been impaired by 
legislative changes designed to foster capital accumulation in the 
southern Italian economy. Between 1980 and 1986, special interven-
tion programmes were continually being extended. With stopgap 
legislation offering a variety of new incentive schemes to applicants 
already in the system, investor uncertainty concerning the advanta-
geousness of such schemes often caused delays in carrying out 
investment decisions. In addition, alternative incentive programmes 
and special intervention began to overlap. One of these programmes 
-
limited to selected areas and offering substantially larger relief 
packages -
was implemented in connection with legislation issued 
after the 1980 earthquake. 
Under similar conditions, an analysis of savings, investment 
financing and the role of credit may only be attempted if the frag-
ments of information obtained from various observations, whose 
homogeneity cannot be systematically verified, are rearranged to form 

370 
Carlo Pace 
a coherent whole. This report will be based principally on the themes 
which recur in these accounts, assuming that these represent char-
acteristic traits and are not a consequence of the conditions of 
observation. It follows, then, that the analysis attempted here may be 
more justifiable because of its usefulness in making an inventory of the 
problems involved and developing a plan for research than because of 
its strictly informational content. It was considered appropriate to 
focus on several structural and institutional aspects which may affect 
the process of capital accumulation, or more specifically, aspects 
related to the role of credit. 
The fundamental recurrent piece of information is that the 
amount of available resources devoted to consumption and invest-
ment within the southern Italian economy is greater than the amount 
of income produced. This fact is highlighted by autohors such as 
Giusso [8] (*), Alessandrini [1] and Del Prete [5], who examines the 
deficit adjustment process. The negative balance of goods and services 
produced almost matches that of investment, while consumption, of 
course, almost matches GDP. This cannot be interpreted as a wide 
disparity between the behaviour of southern operators, especially 
households, and operators in the rest of the country. Similarly, illation 
concerning the undue fluctuation of GDP and disposable income from 
on area to another is inadmissible. Nonetheless, the consistently 
negative trade balance of the Mezzogiorno stands in stark contrast to 
a consistently high flow of funds which is the consequence of a series 
of net inflows (and outflows). The channels which may conduct net 
flows are as follows: 1) the Italian public sector, which transfers 
resources southward if expenditure in this area exceeds taxes by an 
amount greater than total post office deposits and government secur-
ities. If we take into account the fact that central government revenue 
is calculated at cost, then we can focus our attention on the transfer of 
government resources to households and firms, net of increase in post 
office deposits and in government securities. However, it is necessary 
to consider whether the deficits recorded by regional governments 
and local agencies for southern Italy would be financed using internal 
(*) Advise: the numbers in square brackets refer to the Bibliography in the 
appendix. 

Savings, Credit and Investment etc. 
371 
resources, as in the case of recourse to the Deposits and Loans Fund; 
2) the creation of monetary base by means of central bank operations 
to finance the regional banking system, such as advances, bill 
discounting, fluctuations in reserve requirements. In the search for 
the methods used to finance the balance of allocated resources and 
GDP in this area, changes in monetary base linked to foreign-sector 
operations and to monetary financing of the public debt are generally 
overlooked; 3) the credit system, by means of positive balances of the 
changes in total lending and investment in the area compared with 
deposits; 4) the balance of private-sector investment inflows to the 
area and outflows from the area; 5) changes in the various operators' 
net external positions; 6) the balance of losses of real wealth within 
the area as opposed to gains in real wealth achieved elsewhere. 
Add to these the net flows linked to the factor distribution of 
Income outside ot the area In which 1t was generated, and emigrant-
generated inflows. It should be pointed out that inflows from this 
source are on the decline in the long run as families become "natur-
alized" and distance themselves from their places of origin. This is 
especially true in the case of families emigrating from one region to 
another, since this permits complete assimilation in the new environ-
ment. Output being equal, the reduction to zero of emigrant-
generated inflow levels recorded the Mezzogiorno has translated into 
a lower propensity to save. Another reason for the disparity in 
propensity to save compared with the rest of Italy may encompass the 
divergent distribution of savings in the southern financial market and 
the consequent yields, a consequence of the greater fragmentation of 
these savings and lower awareness of the available choice. That these 
differences may have produced a cumulative effect on the propensity 
to save over the last decade should not be ruled out. The over-
whelming preference for more traditional uses of savings -
the result 
of a less diversified mix of financial services in the South -
was 
epitomized in the delayed and less dramatic effects of reduced bank 
intermediation, and may have inhibited the self-sustaining mechanism 
of savings. Throughout the rest of Italy, this mechanism took the form 
of high yields on financial assets, and was of great importance. The 
lower interest rates placed on deposits by the southern Italian banking 
system underscore the differences in structural organization and the 

372 
Carlo Pace 
marked inferiority of the financial services market in this region. 
Other factors inhibiting the propensity to save, such as the lower 
average age of firms and lower productivity rates, will be dealt with 
below. 
Government and banks may thus be considered to be the major 
financing channels -
and the principal direct and indirect sources of 
capital accumulation -
in the South. Not only does the public sector 
provide supplements to household income in the form of transfer 
payments, thereby fueling savings, but it also generates flows of direct 
investment to state holdings and partially finances subsidized private-
sector investment. 
Before beginning to examine the role and the workings of credit, 
it should be noted that net flows of investment from outside the 
Mezzogiorno vary with yield differentials, as shown in the study by 
Martucci, and with the policy adopted by state-owned industry. Less 
direct external investment has taken place during the current phase, 
has witnessed a halt in industrial decentralization, the re-emergence of 
contrasting trends in the labour productivity of small- and medium-
sized enterprises vis-a-vis larger firms, and a prevailing tendency 
toward capital deepening investment among multiregional companies. 
Several key aspects regarding the role and the workings of credit 
are worthy of attention. The scope of intercompany lending (involving 
suppliers or clients) is appreciably smaller in the South than in the rest 
of Italy (Ruozi, Alberici, and Forestieri [ 17]). This is a function of the 
distribution by sector of industrial activity and the lower average age 
of southern firms, which tend less toward consolidation and are less 
adept at targeting new customers and identifying alternative sources 
of credit. Other contributory factors are the smaller average size of 
companies, which negatively affects bargaining power, and the lack of 
clearly distinct functions -
such as sales and marketing -
typical. of 
smaller firms. Banks thus play a more central role in the lives of 
southern firms. Also fueling this trend are the widespread diffusion of 
firms headed by individuals, and the small number of corporations. As 
a result, households savings and indebtedness incurred with the 
banking system are primarily used to meet the start-up costs of firms. 
Subsequent development of these companies depends either on the 
level of before-tax profits or on further indebtedness. It therefore 

Savings, Credit and Investment etc. 
373 
seems justifiable to conclude that the banking system plays a crucial 
role in the financing of capital accumulation in the southern economy. 
On the other hand, banking activity in the Mezzogiorno is 
conditioned by the dualism inherent in the economy. Deposits and 
lending -
by employee or by unit -
of southern banks are lower than 
those of banks located elsewhere in the country. In the case of 
national banks, these figures are lower in branches located in the 
South. Shift-share analysis has revealed the existence of an appre-
ciable territorial effect, as mentioned in a previous paper (Pace [5]). 
Furthermore, differing levels of productivity cause divergent inter-
mediation costs. In general, these differences can be attributed to the 
following factors: a) the degree of concentration resulting from steps 
taken to influence competitiveness and efficiency, and because of 
market control; b) internal factors of inefficiency, such as the scale of 
production; c) territorial factors, epitomized in market power. As 
regards the latter, it does not seem that differences in productivity 
may be attributed to divergences in per capita income, as the analysis 
carried out by Bagella [2] points out. Factors related to size are of 
importance. Loan volumes being equal, then, the cost of gathering 
and processing information varies with the number of employees; the 
same holds true concerning the "operating" costs (such as updating 
and accounts, asset management, related services, collection pro-
cedures) of loans and deposits. Given the higher poportion of small-
sized businesses in southern Italy, disadvantages related to size trans-
late into comparative disadvantages. 
The differences observed by the various institutions also reflect 
the asymmetry in their sphere of activity and in their ability to directly 
carry out payments; as DiNardi [6] points out, the number of issuing 
institutions in existence as a conseguence of these phenomena led to 
regulation of the payment system. This may help to explain why small 
banks, which have access to an extensive network of correspondents 
with links simplified by the intervention of related central institutions, 
show smaller disparities in efficiency compared with larger banks. 
However, this phenomenon may also be explained by the changes in 
structural, organization and in economic conditions referred to by 
Onado [12]. 
It has also been observed that bank loans granted in the Mez-

374 
Carlo Pace 
zogiorno are riskier than those granted in the rest of the country. This 
phenomenon may be explained by several factors, such as: a) the 
lower rate of yield on investments in the Mezzogiorno; b) the lower 
average age of southern firms, mirrored by the scarcity of financial 
resources (reserves, allocations to provisions) and by the banks' lack 
of awareness of company financial positions; c) the smallness of the 
financial base in the case of firms run by individuals or corporations 
with few partners; d) the non-structuring of the financial function, 
which makes it impossible to optimize the structuring of liabilities. 
The latter three factors lead one to believe that some of the manage-
ment difficulties are not necessarily a consequence of economic 
imbalances; rather, they derive from poor planning and one-sided 
financial management (Pace [13], Ventriglia [19)). The result is a 
company mortality rate -
more specifically, an "infant" mortality 
rate -
that is higher than the national average, as shown by Contini 
and Revelli [ 4]. 
Conditions of objectively higher risk and simple shortages of 
liquidity both determine the amount of loan losses (Ventriglia [ 19]). 
This amount negatively affects bank profitability, because it implies 
more frequent recourse to collection procedures, and because of the 
effects of raising asset ratios. The comparative disadvantage of 
banking activity in the Mezzogiorno cannot help but affect the 
treatment of market participants. The most widespread aspects, 
encountered repeatedly, involve a broader margin of intermediation 
as a result of higher lending rates and of lower deposit rates, and more 
difficulty in obtaining credit. As regards this second aspect, I do not 
support the theory that the southern banking sector is governed by a 
rationing mechanism. It would be more appropriate to refer to a 
segmented market, in which demand for each segment is char-
acterized by a higher degree of risk, and is thus considered less 
appetizing, while supply grown increasingly rigid. 
In spite of the disparate conditions, the theory according to 
which the banking system drains savings from the South and distri-
butes them in the form of loans to the rest of the country misses the 
point (Pace [3], Alessandrini [1]). The study carried out by Alessan-
drini and December 1986 levels both reveal that the difference 
between deposits received by continental southern Italy from the 

Savings, Credit and Investment etc. 
375 
other regions and deposits transferred to these regions is positive 
(equal to 25.5% of total deposits received and transferred), while the 
southern islands show a negative difference (of 14.5%). The same 
calculation applied to loans reveals a positive difference for both 
continental southern Italy and for the southern islands (with percent-
ages of 52.8 and 9.1 respectively). What remains to be verified is the 
progress of flows over time. In a study limited to one southern region 
(Pace [13]), we discovered not only a higher variability in the 
loan/ deposit ratio compared with the national value -
attributable at 
least in part to the difference in size of the two areas -
but also an 
even higher variability of the difference between the ratios established 
for each area. This may be interpreted as a symptom of procyclical 
behaviour with more accentuated (or rapid) reduction of the ratio 
during the downturn phase and less (or delayed) increase in the ratio 
during the expansion of banking activity. It thus becomes possible to 
ascertain the responsiveness and the comparative structure of the 
delays in the transmission mechanism of banking policy, while observ-
ing the behaviour of intervention instruments. Although we have no 
observations in that area, it seems probable that the system of ceilings 
on smaller loans may not have produced the same adverse affects as 
the other instruments. Even though the banking system plays a crucial 
role in the financing of capital accumulation in the southern Italian 
economy and, comparatively speaking, penalizes investment in the 
Mezzogiorno as far as the conditions of entry are concerned, the 
investment process seems to defy the laws of economics, since the 
rates of yield on invested capital in this area are lower on average 
compared with those in the rest of the country. In fact, however, the 
capital accumulation process in the southern Italian economy is 
fuelled and rendered convenient by means of a steady stream of 
financial incentives. Capital account contributions and subsidized 
financing significantly reduce the yield differential. One of our esti-
mates (Pace [14]), based on figures from the old series of territorial 
profit-and-loss accounts, revealed a 65% differential in yields on 
invested capital within the southern Italian private sector as a whole. 
According to one theoretical analysis carried out a priori based on 
existing levels of financial incentives to industry and assuming a 
two-year delay in the payment of incentives, the internal rate of yield 

376 
Carlo Pace 
on investment aided by financial incentives more than doubled, 
assuming a reference rate of 7 .13%, and quadrupled in the case of 
a reference rate of 2.1%, compared with the reference rate 
calculated without taking incentives into account (Brancati [3]). 
There would thus be an ample cushion for the effects of discri-
minatory practices associated with ordinary lending and its higher 
financial requirement. Nonetheless, it should be borne in mind that 
the effects of incentives can be analyzed more realistically if we 
consider the difference between the amount of investment eligible 
for subsidies and the actual amount subsidized, and the real delays 
in payment which arose. 
The link between financial incentives and subsidized credit 
caused the latter to play a key role in the fuelling of capital accumul-
ation and in investment decisionmaking in the Mezzogiorno. This role 
is underscored by the large number of southern Italian businesses 
granted subsidized financing by the Ministry of Industry (under Law 
623/59). It should be remembered that from 1962 onward, the 
southern regions «absorbed a portion of the total grant equivalent to 
approximately 54% over a five-year period . . . and which remained 
above 36% during the subsequent period 1968-70». After a marked 
decline, the upturn which began in 1981 caused the portion of the 
grant received by southern Italy to reach approximately 32% in 1984 
(Pergolesi [ 16 ]). 
On the supply side, it should be noted that the delayed and 
weaker manifestation of reduced intermediation within the southern 
Italian banking system led to the financing of institutions by means of 
dual intermediation. Beyond transitory phenomena which also 
affected the capital accumulation process, such as the delay in 
adjusting the rate of yield to rises in the actual cost of fund raising 
during the periods with the highest inflation, and the possible effect of 
the misdirection of resources as a consequence of government indebt-
edness- a phenomenon of minimal importance (Ventriglia [18])-
lies the problem of the fund raising of special credit institutions 
located in the Mezzogiorno. This problem is becoming increasingly 
important in the light of the development processes under way 
throughout the rest of the system, and it now seems necessary to 
explore new avenues in search of a solution. One of these may be to 

Savings, Credit and Investment etc. 
377 
ensure that each institute is endowed with its own collection struc-
ture, as proposed by the president of ISVEIMER. 
In spite of its brevity, this study led to the emergence of other 
concepts which we consider to be of importance in this context. 
Foremost is the strategic direction of the southern Italian banking 
system. Two contrasting assumptions exist. On the one hand, there is 
the assumption of a system prepared to make use of its "niches", 
which up to now have guaranteed enough .competitive advantage to 
offset -
at least partially -
the efficiency disadvantages linked to the 
disparate conditions under which banks operate in the Mezzogiorno 
because of territorial diseconomies. On the other hand, there is the 
assumption of a system that is supraregional in scope and thus able to 
use activity outside of the area of origin to dilute territorial disadvan-
tages. This activity may be carried out directly or indirectly, as in the 
case of smaller banks operating outside of the area, through the 
appropriate central institution. 
A second concept involves adjustments to the structure of the 
financial system. The intriguing thesis of the adjustment of the 
financial system to suit the requirements of the real system (Ger-
schenkron [9]) does not seem fully applicable to a dualistic economy. 
Within the confines of the laws in effect, the financial system is 
probably well suited to the requirements of the real system within the 
stronger area, but the same cannot be said of the economically 
weaker area. In this regard, and despite its unquestionable merits, the 
granting of subsidized credit accentuated some of the major areas of 
weakness in the financial situation of southern Italian firms. We refer 
in particular to the liabilities structure and to the difficulty in ex-
panding encountered by these firms in conjunction with the negative 
effects of subsidized credit in different forms (mortgages, constraints 
linked directly to the granting of public funds to lower interest rates) 
on the ability to locate additional resources, regardless of whether 
they are destined to satisfy capital requirements for the budget year, 
or whether they are necessary for the growth of the firm. An overall 
comparison has been made by Fazio [7] of production distribution 
and bank lending. To sum it up, although subsidized credit has 
fostered a process of capital accumulation in the Mezzogiorno 
economy, which would otherwise have been fully exposed to the 

378 
Carlo Pace 
negative impact of the emphasis placed on credit and of discrimina-
tory treatment, it has nonetheless increased the difficulty in gaining 
access to ordinary lending operations and the degree of risk associated 
with them. Furthermore, dysfunctions in the incentives system have 
resulted in widespread recourse to ordinary credit during the invest-
ment process because of delays in the payment of grants and finan-
cing. Taken as a whole, these conditions probably hampered the true 
structural adjustment of this financial subsystem to the requirements 
of the real subsystem. The inadequacy risks becoming even greater 
within the broad context of supranational financial integration. The 
innovations recently put in place in the financial system, especially as 
regards merchant banking and new means of financing, are a step in 
the right direction, but up to now have not played a significant role. 
The factor which had the greatest negative impact has been the 
unfavourable stock-market cycle of the last three years. One consis-
tently inhibitory factor has been the limited range of opportunities, 
aggravated by the difficulty in evaluating the probability of success of 
initiatives launched very recently. A better understanding of organiz-
ational behaviour will enable banks to make an important contri-
bution, in order to increase the range of financial services offered to 
firms, providing them with better cash management, for example, and 
in order to increase their direct contact with the market, perhaps 
through the use of monitoring and rating services before actually 
entering the market. However, it is necessary to avoid undue illusion 
regarding the automatic effects of supranational financial integration 
and to consider the opportunity of making the necessary adjustments 
to the southern Italian financial subsystem in order to satisfy the 
specific requirements of the real Mezzogiomo economy. 

Savings, Credit and Investment etc. 
379 
BIBUOGRAPHY 
[1] ALESSANDRINI P.: «I flussi finanziari interregionali, interdipendenze funzionali e 
indirizzi empirici sulla realta italiana», in N1ccou A. (ed.): Credito e sviluppo, 
Milano, Giuffre, 1989. 
[2) BAGELLA M.: «II divario nord-sud nella attivita bancaria: una verifica attraverso Ia 
produttivita della "unita operativa" di un campione di banche locali», forth-
coming, Rassegna economica. 
[3) BRANCATI R.: «Gli incentivi aile attivita produttive», Delta, no. 40, 1990. 
[4) CONTINI B. - REVELU L.: «Le banche dati Inps come strumento per conoscere, 
programmare, decidere», Rapporto all'omonimo convegno lnps, Roma, June 
1990. 
[5) DEL PRETE F.: Aree dipendenti, sviluppo autosostenuto integrazione della strut-
lura produttiva, Bari, Cacucci, 1979. 
[6) DINARDI C.: Le banche di emissione in ltalia nel secolo X, Torino, Utet, 1953. 
[7) FAZIO A.: «Credito e attivita produttiva nel mezzogiomo», Roma, Banca d'Italia, 
Bollettino economico, no. 6, 1985. 
[8) GIUsso L.: Teoria delle unioni monetarie e integrazione europea, Napoli, Es-
i, 1974. 
[9) GERSCHENKRON A.: Economic Backwardness in Historical Perspective, Cam-
bridge, Harvard University Press, 1962. 
[10) MARTUCCI M: «II processo di accumulazione nel mezzogiorno modelli di economia 
dualistica», Rassegna Economica, no. 3, 19. 
[II) OccHIUTO A. - SARCINELU M.: «Flussi monetari tra Nord e Sud», Roma, Banca 
d'Italia, Bollettino, no. 5, 1962. 
[12) ONADO M.: «Evoluzione dei mercati bancari e ruolo delle piccole banche», in 
FEDERAZIONE CAMPANA CASSE RURAU ARTIGIANE: Mercato europeo e sistema delle 
casse rurali artigiane: strategie ed assetto, Papers presented at the S'h regional 
seminar, Maiori, 8 April 1989. 
[13) PACE C.: «II finanziamento dello sviluppo economico pugliese», Rassegna 
Economica, no. I, 1970. 
[14] --:«II saggio di sconto nell'analisi economica, progetti», in AccADEMIA NAZIONA-
LE DI AGRICOLTURA: Contributi italiani alla economia della progettazione irrigua, 
Bologna, 1976. 
(15) - -: «Ambiente economico e attivita bancarie», in FEDERAZIONE CAMPANA CASSE 
RURAU ARTIGIANE: Mercato europeo e sistema delle casse rurali artigiane: strate-
gie ed assetto, Papers presented at the 51h regional seminar, Maiori, 8 April 1989. 
[16] PERGOLESI S.: II Credito agevolato aile imprese industriali. Le incentivazioni 
gestite dal Ministero dell'industria, Ia ed. 1984, Milano, F. Angeli, 1988. 
[17) Ruozi R. - ALBERICI A. - FORESTIERI G.: 11 costo effettivo del credito nelle piccole e 
medie industrie, Roma, Confindustria, Comitato nazionale piccola industria, 
1983. 
[18] VENTRIGUA F.: «Sull'evoluzione a breve del mercato del risparmio», Rassegna 
Economica, no. 5, 1979. 
[19] - -· «I crediti in sofferenza nel mezzogiorno», Rassegna Economica, no. 3, 
1986. 

IV - CONCLUSIONS 

EdmundS. Phelps 
Columbia University 
The early 1930s saw the titanic clash between Hayek, who saw 
the cessation of forced saving as the cause of economic depression, 
and Keynes, who saw the waning of the animal spirits behind 
investment demand as the source of most slumps. In the view of the 
former, recovery in the 1930s would have been fostered by a more 
generous supply of saving, while for the latter such a development 
would have made the depression worse. Victory in the debate was 
awarded to Keynes, of course. Yet the truth of the matter remains far 
from clear. The evidence that expected real rates of interest were 
elevated in the early 1930s, certainly not depressed, favors Hayek 
rather than Keynes. (To set right his account Keynes would need to 
add a liquidity-preference story to the animal-spirits story). The 
economics profession has instead sided with Friedman and the mon-
etarists, who have pointed to a decline of the money supply relative to 
the level of money wages early in the decade. 
The long slump experienced in the 1980s over much of the world, 
not only Europe, looks clearly unKeynesian, however. Once again, 
global saving -
and global investment, to which it is equal -
were 
down. But this time expected real interest rates were unquestionably 
at record-high levels. Neither does this slump appear to be largely 
monetarist in origin. The deceleration of the national money supply 
may have been pronunced in many countries but it was not prolonged 
enough to account for so protracted a slump in most countries. The 
puzzle of the 1980s stimulated the invention of a genuinely new 
theoretical paradigm based upon either real wage rigidity or else 

384 
Edmund S. Phelps 
stickiness on the supply side of the labor market and, on the demand 
side, upon various notions of how derived demand for labor shifts (at 
once or by an adjustment process) with real demand and supply 
shocks. 
Now the 1990s threaten new sorts of disturbances that will put to 
the test once again the old ideas and, as well, the new ideas stimulated 
by the previous decade. There is now the prospect that the countries 
of eastern Europe, and perhaps the Soviet Union too, encouraged and 
materially aided by the West, will set out to transform their economies 
into market systems and, in the process, add substantially to world 
investment demand. From the Keynesian perspective such an even-
tuality is seen as floating employment in all economies to higher levels 
on a tide of higher "aggregate demand". From the sort of non-
Keynesian perspective inspired by the 1980s, though, the prospect of 
a decade of renewed upward pressure on real interest rate from 
"other" countries is seen as just as contractionary -
just as stagfl-
ationary -
as the disturbances to real interest rates that occurred in 
the previous decade. 
Apparently now is a time of reflection and change in regard to the 
theoretical paradigms that the profession uses to understand the long 
swings in economic activity in the world economy. This conference is 
aimed at bringing about a presentation and evaluation of the new 
theoretical perspective in which saving and investment are coming to 
be viewed by theoretical and applied macroeconomists working on 
open economies and the (closed) global economy. With these com-
ments I hope to identify and elaborate the thread that runs through 
the bulk of the papers presented in this volume (It has not proved 
possible to read and digest all of these papers in time for this essay). 
The scope of this volume was suggested in broad outline by the 
opening session. The paper by Andrew Dean documented the striking 
decline in the ratio of saving to output that has occurred in the OECD 
countries over the past couple of decades. The sharp rise of real 
interest rates is also recorded. 
Dean shows that between the 1960s and the 1980s the saving 
ratio, as a decadal average, fell by about 3% of output while the 
investment ratio, as a similar average, fell by less- by about 2%. That 
is precisely what we would expect if the driving force is a decline of 

Conclusions 
385 
"home" saving, S, in this case, OECD saving, which in turn brings 
about a lesser induced decline in home investment, /, and a decline in 
foreign investment, r. If a decline of investment were driving the 
variables, I would have fallen by more than S, and r would possibly 
have increased. 
The paper by Jean-Paul Fitoussi and myself serves to recall our 
thesis about the slump in Europe in the 1980s: the increase in public 
debt outside Europe and the ongoing public deficits, in stimulating an 
excess demand by overseas consumers, caused a rise in world real 
interest rates which operated to depress real currency and real asset 
prices and thus to depress production in Europe, the supply of output 
being generally an increasing function of these prices. 
The main aim of the Fitoussi-Phelps paper, however, is the 
application of our theoretical perspective to the East European shock 
to the world economy that we envision in the 1990s. The starting 
point of the analysis is the premise that the tremendous rebuilding 
postulated in eastern Europe over the present decade will generate an 
upward jump in the world real rate of interest and a decline of the 
capital-labor force ratio in the rest of the world, in the "West", that 
will be gradual owing to the non-shiftability across national borders of 
most installed capital goods in most countries. The implications are a 
correspondingly gradual decline of real wage rates (relative to the 
trend, or baseline path), which will be followed by a prospective 
recovery of the capital-labor force ratio through the stimulus to the 
net saving-net output ratio from the temporarily elevated real rates of 
interest and temporarily depressed real wage rates. 
This gradual and temporary dip of real wage rates (relative to 
trend) would not be particularly noteworthy in a neoclassical world-
wealthowners could compensate the owners of human capital, though 
they might not be made to do so -
but in a modem world of 
"incentive wages" made familiar by the so-called efficiency-wage 
theory of the natural rate of unemployment such a decline of real 
wages portends a temporary decline in the equilibrium level of 
employment -
a bulge in the natural rate of unemployment. 
In the short run, however, countries in the West that can export 
capital goods will find that the real prices they can get for their capital 
goods output are temporarily better before they later become worse. 

386 
Edmund S. Phelps 
The end result is a sort of locational model in which the countries well 
enough situated for exporting capital goods to the countries of eastern 
Europe, such as West Germany and France, will enjoy an expanded 
level of employment before sliding into the medium-term slump 
resulting from disinvestment; countries not so situated, such as 
Canada and Brazil, will see little or no boom before their slump. 
An important section of the conference took up the question: 
What is behind the virtually worldwide decline in the supply of saving? 
As· all observers of macroeconomic events know, this decline is not 
simply the outbreak of public-sector dissaving associated with "Rea-
ganomics". In fact, the full-employment budget surpluses -
the 
algebraic surpluses, as Samuelson calls them -
have been climbing 
out of the red in several countries in the past five years. In the 1980s 
there has been a significant decline in the private supply of saving 
relative to national output in Scandinavia, Italy, the United Kingdom, 
the United States and recently Japan; most of the poorer of the 
developing countries, struck by debt problems and stagnation, have 
added their part to this new development. This has occurred despite 
the increase in after-tax income provided by tax cuts in some of these 
countries, which by themselves would have offered an opportunity 
and a motive for the private sector to save more. Indeed, a fanatic of 
the neoRicardian equivalence doctrine would say that the supply of 
public-sector saving is irrelevant for the total supply of national saving, 
since private saving will always adjust to offset it, so that the only true 
source of shifts in the national supply are shifts in private thrift. 
Whatever the degree to which the world conforms to that extreme 
doctrine, the conference found itself focusing on the decline of 
national saving "as if' that shift was ultimately attributable at least in 
major part to shifts in the propensity to save of the private sector. 
Franco Modigliani's paper was one of those trying to explain the 
postulated decline in the supply of private saving. His hypothesis 
appeals to a property of the celebrated life-cycle model of aggregate 
sa"ing the development of which he directed: Aggregate saving 
reflects the excess of the saving of the workers over the dissaving of 
the ex-workers living in retirement; and the size of this surplus is a 
function of the excess of the real wage earned by workers over the 
real wage that thew ex workers earned when they worked. That is 

Conclusions 
387 
because the dissaving of the old is a function of their wealth which is 
in tum a function of what they earned as workers. Had real wage 
growth held up in the past ten or fifteen years, Modigliani reasons, 
worker saving would have held up in relation to ex-workers dissaving. 
In fact, real wages have failed to grow as usual, so net aggregate 
saving has declined in consequence. 
The paper by Robert Mundell is pointed instead toward a demo-
graphic explanation of reduced saving in the countries where his 
hypothesis is applicable. He suggests that there was a bulge in 
consumer spending in the 1980s as a result of the arrival of the large 
cohort of post-war babies into the stage of life at which there are 
unusual needs for consumer durables. With the passing through that 
stage of this large cohort, aggregate consumption spending will revert 
to its relationship to aggregate income. 
The paper by L. Paganetto, B. Quintieri and F. Rosati provides a 
projection of the effects of recent demographic developments in Italy. 
In the medium-term future it predicts an increased private saving ratio 
and a flat profile of public saving (or dissaving). For the far future it 
predicts a decline of the private saving ratio coupled with a decline of 
public saving. 
The papers in the next section lie at the heart of this volume. 
They deal with the question of how employment (or unemployment) 
is affected by the supply of saving, at home and overseas. In this 
connection one may wish to distinguish (and to treat separately) 
autonomous changes in the supply of private saving -
what we once 
called the rate of pure time preference -
and induced changes 
stemming from shocks to the quantity of public debt or the mix of tax 
rates. The former are not observable -
we cannot observe the 
disturbance terms -
while we can observe the debt, for example. 
Then there is the supply of public-sector saving, equivalently, the 
negative of the public budgetary deficit. We can suppose that it is 
largely exogenous and measure it as the estimate of the full-employ-
ment budgetary surplus. Inevitably empirical investigators are drawn 
first to the most operational questions: What are the effects of a 
change in the maintained level of the government deficit and of a 
change in the steady level of the government debt? 
The new 1980s family of essentially non-monetary macro models 

388 
Edmund S. Phelps 
such as the one that Lal and van Wijnbergen were moving toward in 
their 1985 discussion of the world slump, the three models that 
Fitoussi and I developed in order to explain the 1980s slump in 
Europe, and the one that Newell and Symonds experiented with 
econometrically to understand the 1930s slump in Europe gave a clear 
and distinctive answer to the question of the effects of public debts 
and other fiscal stimulants to consumption demand. This king of 
theory, I call it the structuralist theory for some good reasons 
operates in the following way (as I have shown in a recent series of 
dynamic models). 
The stimulus to consumption demand will force up the real rate 
of interest at any given level of aggregate employment until the 
market at any given level of aggregate employment until the market 
for the consumption good clears once again; and thus disturbance, in 
increasing the discount factor, drives down certain real asset prices of 
which the supply of output (hence the derived demand for labor) is an 
increasing funcrtion. For example, the real demand price for labor 
might be represented by the function V(N; L, q, A) where q is the 
vector of these asset prices, A is a scalar indicating the level of the 
technology, N is the level of employment, and Lis the size of the labor 
force. One of these asset prices, of course, is the real price of the 
capital good in the usual two-sector model of capital; another is the 
shadow price of customers in a customer market model; a third asset 
price is the shadow price of trained employees needing firm-specific 
knowledge to function. 
The consequences depend on the other blade of the scissors: 
Firms, as depicted in the efficiency wage theory of unemployment, are 
faced with the problem of motivating -
I have seen the word 
"incentivate"! -
their employees not to quit, not to shirk, not to be 
absent, not to be drunk, and so forth. To provide such inducements 
each firm hits upon the policy of attempting to raise its relative wage 
by raising its absolute wage -
to just the point that will minimize its 
unit costs in view of its cost and benefits. Given the unemployment 
rate, there may exist a corresponding economy-wide level of the real 
wage sufficiently high that firms give up their mutual and foredoomed 
attempt to gain such an advantage over one another. This is the 
(equilibrium level of the) real supply price of labor. For example, it 

Conclusions 
389 
GRAPH 1 
v 
S(N, L, J) 
L 
~------------------------------~N 
0 
Employment 
L 
might be given by S (N; L, J), where j is the average "potential" 
non-labor income of employees. 
By setting the demand wage equal to the supply wage, hence 
equating V(N; L, q, A) to S (N: L, J), one obtains the equilibrium level 
of employment and, corresponding to it, the natural rate of unemploy-
ment. As the rise of real interest rates drives down the asset prices 
represented by q, the negatively sloped demand-wage schedule drops. 
So if the supply-wage schedule is positively sloped, the result is a drop 
of the equilibrium real wage and a concomitant decline of the 
equilibrium employment level. Thus the employment rate, N/ L, is is 
an increasing function of q, and under attractive restrictions it is a 
decreasing function of the ratio j/ A. The extension to the open 
economy leads to the further result that the natural employment level 
is also an increasing function of (1/e), where e is the so-called real 
exchange rate, the number of representative units of our national 
product the home country would pay to buy a unit of the rest of the 
world's national product. 

390 
Edmund S. Phelps 
The paper by Warwick McKibbin leads us through the impli-
cations of the McKibbin-Sachs Global Model (MSG Model) of the 
world economy considered as the interaction of a few large groups of 
countries. In this model most of the parameters are not estimated but 
are rather calibrated on the basis of various empirical studies and 
plausible assumptions. The disturbance receiving the major attention 
in McKibbin's presentation is a one percentage point drop in the 
American budgetary deficit as a ratio to the American GNP. He shows 
that such a shock ultimately crowds out capital everywhere in the 
world and in so doing it causes a general decline in real wage rates 
and in income per capita. In the short run, however, there are 
monetary effects that lift output and employment over a few years in 
the rest of the world and for a longer time in the United States. But as 
reduced investment takes its toll on the capital stock, these boom 
conditions disappear and could be followed by a slump before the final 
approach to the new steady state. 
In the paper it was noted that in his modelling of the international 
transmission mechanism McKibbin had excluded the contemporan-
eous q effects that were explained above, which has appeared in 
Fitoussi-Phelps, and instead relied solely on the gradually-working 
effects transmitted through the capital stock (which were included in 
Fitoussi-Phelps, of course). It was also noted that McKibbin had 
apparently deserted the hypothesis of real wage rigidity, which his 
collaborator Sachs is celebrated for having forcefully introduced into 
macroeconomic modeling, in favor of a New Keynesian staggered-
wage model of money wage stickiness. 
The paper by Lal, while echoing the theme of the negative 
external effect that the decline in a region's saving has for the rest of 
the world, has a somewhat different flavor in that it focuses on the 
effects felt by the less developed countries (the WCs)- particularly 
the effect on their long-run growth rather than on their short-term 
and medium-term employment. Lal expounds a rather novel model in 
which the saving-income ratio of an we has a permanent influence 
on the rate of growth of its domestic product. (Evidently there is some 
capital immobility here, otherwise, to cite the point that Scandizzo's 
paper builds upon, any increased saving by the country might largely 
flow abroad). In this model the supply of saving in the rest of the 

Conclusions 
391 
world likewise has a non-vanishing influence on the LDC's growth 
rate. The author then adduces empirical evidence suggesting that both 
saving rates, internal and external, in fact have a permanent influence 
on the growth rates of almost all LDCs. 
Another model of growth in the LDCs and its relation to influ-
ences in the developed countries is presented in the paper by Michele 
Bagella and Martino LoCascio. They refer to a relationship between 
the saving ratio and the growth rate, and a distinct relationship 
between the investment demand ratio and the growth rate. They find 
that the slopes of both relationships are positive. In the stylized model 
of Argentina and Brazil that is estimated, the slope of the saving ratio 
curve is smaller than that of the investment curve. Increased debt 
burdens there, in shifting down the saving curve, cause a fall of the 
growth rate. In the estimated model of the United States, on the other 
hand, the comparative slopes of the curves are reversed. 
What is the policy stance -
or "tilt" -
to which one might be led 
by the contentions heard at this volume regarding the decline of the 
supply of saving and the forthcoming insurgence of investment de-
mand? 
If some or all countries were like a closed economy having no 
effects on other countries, the citizenry of each such country would 
want to know if the saving or dissaving of the public sector was unjust 
to future generations or unjust to the resent generation or unjust to 
both (as in the case of dynamically inefficient oversaving beyond the 
Golden Rule benchmark). However the proposition that reduced 
national saving, by increasing real interest rates and thus shifting 
down the demand for labor, causes an increased equilibrium volume 
of unemployment introduces an "externality" into the analysis. If, 
when governments engage in sharply increased dissaving, increased 
unemployment results most importantly in the years before any 
adjustment mechanism has achieved whatever downward adjustment 
of real wage rates it tend to bring about, there is a new layer of costs 
(net of benefits) to take into account. It is plausible to guess that, 
whatever the rate of national saving that would be optimal on some 
social criterion before account is taken of this unemployment effect, 
weighing that effect in the balance would cause us to calculate a 
higher optimum rate of national saving. 

392 
Edmund S. Phelps 
In any case, no country is a closed island economy. Increased 
dissaving by one government drives up the world real interest rate 
and, on the hypothesis we are entertaining, though it has little of no 
contractionary effect on its own employment thereby, being small in 
relation to the world economy, it thus causes a sag in world employ-
ment levels (at least over some medium term, whether or not in the 
short run and in the very far long run). So there is an international 
externality to bring into the welfare analysis. It is a plausible that the 
global aggregate of the supplies of saving that would (on some social 
criterion) be calculated as just from the selfish standpoint of each 
country's national interest must be viewed (on the same criterion) as 
undersaving from the standpoint of the world as a whole. The 
countries of the world should enter into a pact whereby all will save 
more than they would choose to do unilaterally. 
All this is terribly hypothetical, of course. Yet our own animal 
spirits, if we have any, require us to do something- or, rather, to say 
something -
not just stand there. We might take the position, I 
suggest, that the governments of the world should be asked to justify 
their dissaving when substantial and prolonged. If over a part of their 
journeys at any rate they are "in the same boat", countries should not 
have the right to "rock the boat" without showing that they are not 
thus depriving the other countries of some or all of their just rewards 
from their participation in the international economy. It will not be 
disputed, however, that there is as yet no coherent formulation of 
international justice in the choice of national policy toward the 
budgetary deficit and the current-account deficit. The subject awaits 
serious thinking. 

Index 
adjustment programs 172 
Africa 80-1, 346-7, 349 
see also developing countries; specific 
countries 
Algeria 279 
Argentina 
debt 169, 191-8 
reduction 209-19 
growth 191-209, 391 
propensity to save and invest 170-1, 
175-9, 181, 183, 194-8,203-9, 
279,352 
Asia 59, 80-2, 346-7, 349 
see also specific countries 
Australia 60, 64, 65, 78n, 198, 245, 
249-53,323n 
decline in saving 249-55, 274 
household saving 70, 73 
imported savings 74 
private sector saving 69 
Austria 60, 63, 65, 245, 249-53, 323n 
decline in saving 249-55, 274 
household saving 72 
private sector saving 67-9 
balance of payments 5, 35, 49, 83, 169, 
176,318-19 
Bangladesh 279 
Barbados 279 
Belgium 59-60, 245, 323n 
decline in saving 249-55, 274 
government saving 66-8 
household saving 72 
private sector saving 67-9 
Benin 279 
Bolivia 
propensity to save and invest 170, 
175-7,179-80,279 
Botswana 279 
Brazil 
debt 169, 191-8 
reduction 209-19 
growth 191-209,391 
propensity to save and invest 170-1, 
175-7,180-1,194-8,203-9,279, 
365 
Bretton Woods system II 
Bulgaria 304-6 
Burkina Faso 279 
Burma 279 
Burundi 279 
Cameroon 279 
Canada 13,60,62,65, 72, 74,78n, 
85, 198,245,296,323n,362 
decline in saving 249-55, 274 
government saving 66-7 
private sector 67-9 
Cape Verde 279 
capital flight 170-3, 179, 191 
capital flows 76-9,82-4,88,91-111,348, 
351 
careers 116, 118n, 120-37, 140 
Central African Republic 279 
Central Europe 57 
see also specific countries 
Chile 
propensity to save and invest 170, 
175-7,182,279 
China 279 
closed economy 17-19,24,27-9,34 
Colombia 
propensity to save and invest 170, 
175-7,183,279,365 
Comoros 279 
consumption 8-11, 14-32, 36, 39-44, 
49-52, 143, 146, 149-52, 165, 
253,256-7,312,317-18,321-2 
consumption function and propensity to 
save 199-201,233-7,263-4 
effect of ageing population on 
156-63, 166-7 
under uncertainty 119-20, 138 
Costa Rica 279, 365 
394 

Index 
395 
Cote d'Ivoire 279 
current account balances 57-8, 75-8, 82-4, 
91-III, 172,311,322-6,329-41 
Cyprus 279 
Czechoslovakia 304-6 
debt 
origin of (Latin America) 190-1 
propensity to save, external debt and 
growth (Latin America) 169-89 
220-1 
see also developing countries; specific 
countries 
demographic trends see population 
Denmark 59-60,63,65,74, 78n, 245, 
323n 
decline in saving 249-55, 274 
private sector saving 68-9 
developing countries 75, 79, 140-1, 173-4, 
198-9,228,323-6,346,390 
debt80-3, 169,190,232,349,386 
decline in saving rates 58, 80 
effect of decline in OECD saving 
346-66 
investment in 80-2, 88, 354-61, 364-5, 
390 
saving-income ratio 276-85 
see also specific countries 
Dominican Republic 279 
East Germany 76, 87, 304-6 
Eastern Europe 57-8, 75-6, 88, 287-306, 
346,384-5 
see also specific countries 
Ecuador 
propensity to save and invest 175-7, 
184-5,279 
education 116-41,260 
Egypt 279,365 
El Salvador 279 
employment 9, 94, 120, 138, 140-1, 
288,304-6,354-7,388-90 
Ethiopia 279, 281 
Europe II, 83, 173,244,287,349 
see also specific countries 
European Economic Community (EEC) 
304-6 
European Monetary System 323-6, 338 
exchange rates 8, 171-5 
Fiji 279 
Finland 60, 63, 65, 72, 245, 323n 
decline in saving 249-55, 274 
government saving 66-7 
private sector saving 67-9 
fiscal deficits 10, 228-33, 237, 322, 
325-41,364 
fiscal policy 15-32, 170-1,266-75, 
288,311,325,329-41 
Fisher, Irving 8, II, 13, 119, 256 
fixed production 16-26, 31-2 
France 13, 60, 62, 65, 69, 245, 304-5, 
323n,362,365,386 
decline in saving 249-55, 274-5 
government saving 66-7 
household saving 70-1 
saving ratios and interest rates 85 
G7 countries 244 
see also specific countries 
Gabon 279 
Gambia 279 
Germany 13, 25, 52-3, 60, 62, 65, 78n, 
245,249-53,323-6,329,345-6,362, 
365 
current account position 57-8, 75-7 
decline in saving 249-55, 274 
effect of Japanese expansion 337-8 
effect of US contraction 332, 334-5 
fiscal expansion 338-41 
government saving 66-7 
household saving 71, 87-8 
private sector saving 67-9 
saving ratios and interest rates 85 
Ghana 279, 365 
gold exchange standard II n, 79 
government saving 66-8, 106, 167,262-3, 
266,269,321-2 
government spending 16-32, 143, 318, 321 
Greece 60, 63, 65, 69, 72, 74, 275, 279 
Greenland 249-55, 274 
growth 311-15 
and saving behaviour 93-111, 199-20 I, 
257-62 

396 
Index 
in developing countries 346-66 
in OECD countries 209-13,219 
interest rates, exchange rates and 171-5 
saving, investment and 315-22 
in industrialized countries 225-46 
see also Latin America; specific 
countries 
Guatemala 279 
Haiti 279 
Honduras 279 
Hong Kong 279,365 
household saving 70--4, 86-7, 106,321-2 
human capital 
investment in 115-40 
Hungary 304-6 
Iceland 63, 245, 249-53, 274, 323n 
IMF 12,80-1, 171, 172, 199,220-1, 
233,276,278,345,348,361 
India 279, 351, 352n, 364, 365 
Indonesia 279 
industrialized countries 
saving, investment and growth in 
225-46 
see also specific countries 
inflation 10, 12, 70, 86, 94, 170, 173, 179, 
187,192,227-33,283-5,349 
interest rate 16-32, 35n, 76, 116, 179, 190, 
191-2,194-6,212,225,249,322, 
326,392 
ageing, saving and 163-7 
and growth 171-5 
and investment 237-9 
and savings 84-6, 225-37, 260, 283-5 
international aid 221 
intertemporal budget constraints 20-2, 36, 
50-1,105-6,323 
investment 8-10, 34, 36, 49-52, 68, 84, 
172,174-5,225,288,385 
in developing countries 80-2, 88, 
354-61,364-5,390 
interest rates and 237-9 
saving, investment and growth 315-22 
in industrialized countries 225-46 
saving-investment gaps 74-9, 91-2, 
94-111 
see also specific countries 
Ireland 60, 63, 65, 70, 74, 245, 323n 
decline in saving 249-53, 274 
Israel279 
Italy 13, 60, 62, 65, 69-70, 78n, 85, 245, 
284,323n,362,386 
decline in saving 249-55, 274 
government saving 66-8 
population 143-4 
demographic trends 144-8 
effect of ageing population on 
savings 156-67 
life-cycle model 146-56, 158-64, 387 
savings as proportion of GNP I 09-11 
see also Southern Italy 
Jamaica 279, 365 
Japan II, 13, 25,52-3,59-62,65,83,85, 
245,287,300-3,323-6,329,345-6, 
348,357,362,365,386 
current account balance 57-8, 75-7 
decline in saving 249-55, 274-5 
effect of German expansion 340-1 
effect of US contraction 332-3, 335 
fiscal expansion 335-8 
household saving 70--4, 87-8 
private sector saving 67-9 
Jordan 279 
Kenya 279 
Keynes and Keynesianism 7n, 8-12, 
110-11,253,262-3,269,288, 
297-8,366,383-4,390 
Korea 279, 365 
labour markets 289-94 
labour supply 143, 146, 149-56, 165 
effect of an ageing population on 
156-63, 166-7 
Laos 279 
Latin America 169, 296, 302, 347 
origin of foreign debt 190-1 
propensity to save, external debt 
and growth 170-91 , 220-1 
see also specific countries 
LDCs see developing countries 
Lesotho 279 
Liberia 280 

Index 
397 
life--cyclehypothesis(LCH) 11,115-16,119, 
138,208,249,253,256,386-7 
aggregative implications of LCH. 
The basic model 256-61 
empirical tests for OECD countries 266-75 
general model 261-6 
income and other variables 275-85 
life cycle incomes under uncertainty 121-36 
life cycle path of income 116-37 
Luxembourg 245, 323n 
Madagascar 280, 365 
Malawi 280, 365 
Malaysia 280, 365 
Maldives 280 
Mali 280 
Malta 280, 365 
Mauritania 280 
Mauritius 280, 365 
McKibbin-Sachs Global (MSG) Model 
312-14,322-41,390 
Mexico 280, 365 
propensity to save and invest 
169-71, 175-7, 185-6 
Middle East 59, 80-2, 349 
see also specific countries 
Morocco 280 
Nepal280 
Netherlands 60, 63, 65, 245 
decline in saving 249-53, 274 
household saving 72 
private sector savings 69 
New Zealand 60, 64, 65, 74, 198,245, 323n 
Niger 280 
Nigeria 280, 365 
Norway 13n, 59-61, 64, 65, 78n, 82,245, 323n 
decline in saving 249-55, 274 
government saving 66-7 
household saving 73, 86 
private sector saving 66-9 
OECD 13, 192, 209n, 323-6 
allocation of savings 57-79 
current account position 82-4, 172 
decline in savings 13, 266-75, 
278,281,282,284,346-7,384-5 
and growth in developing 
countries 347-66 
growth 209-13, 219 
see also specific countries 
oil II, 59, 61, 70, 74, 80,82-3,86, 179, 180, 
184-7,190,191,192,226,227-30 
OPEC61, 70,74-5,82-3,228,323-7,346-7 
open economy 20-2, 24, 30-2, 34-5 
Pacific Basin 287-8 
Pakistan 280 
Panama 280 
Papua New Guinea 280 
Paraguay 
propensity to save and invest I 70, 
175-7, 187-9 
Permanent Income Hypothesis (PY) 8, 
11,235,253,256 
Peru 280, 365 
propensity to save and invest 170, 
175-7, 187-9 
Philippines 280 
Poland 304-6 
population 
and future saving 86-8 
and savings rates 136-9, 257-8,260-1 
and the trade balance 32-44, 52-3 
baby-boomers 46-9, 157, 166-7 
baby-busters 44-6 
life-extension phenomenon 49-52 
in Italy 143-4 
demographic trends 144-8, 387 
effects of ageing population on 
savings I 56-67 
life-cycle model 146-56, 158-64 
Portugal60,64,65,280,281 
decline in saving 249-55, 274 
household saving 73 
poverty 116, 140,358-9 
private sector 10, 12, 17-26,29-30,52,58, 
66-9,95,171,225 
see also specific countries 
propensity to save 
and consumption function 199-20 I 
Latin America 170-89, 220-1 
see also specific countries 
public sector 19, 22-6 

398 
retirement 6, 117, 143,257,260-1,276 
Ricardo and Ricardian equivalence 12n, 
17,66-7,237,265,276,291n,386 
Romania 304--6 
Rwanda 280 
saving 
Index 
and investment and growth in industrial-
ized countries 225-37, 239-46 
and possible growth rates 95-111 
concept of 6-15 
debt and capital accumulation 314-22 
fiscal policy and 15-32 
global allocation 59-79 
developing countries 79-82 
overall world position 82-4 
interest rates and 84-6, 225-37, 260, 283-5 
prospects for 86-8 
saving-investment gaps 74-9, 91-2, 
94-111 
see also life-cycle hypothesis (LCH); 
specific countries; specific savings 

