WORLD
POPULATION
A Reference Handbook

Other Titles in ABC-CLIO’s
CONTEMPORARY 
WORLD ISSUES
Series
Cults, James R. Lewis
Forest Fires, Philip N. Omi
Hate Crimes, Donald Altschiller
Hurricanes, Patrick J. Fitzpatrick
Illicit Trafﬁcking, Robert J. Kelly, Jess Maghan, Joseph DiSerio
International Environmental Disputes, Aaron Schwabach
Invasion of Privacy, Kevin M. Keenan
Juvenile Justice, Donald J. Shoemaker and Timothy W. Wolfe
Native American Issues, William N. Thompson
New Slavery, Kevin Bales
Punishment in America, Cyndi Banks
U.S. Homeland Security, Howard Ball
United Nations System, The, Chadwick F. Alger
Violence in the Media, Nancy Signorielli
Upcoming Titles
Genetic Engineering, Harry LeVine, III
Gun Control in the United States, Gregg Lee Carter
Human Rights Worldwide, Zehra F. Kabasakal Arat

Books in the Contemporary World Issues series address vital
issues in today’s society such as genetic engineering, pollution,
and biodiversity. Written by professional writers, scholars, and
nonacademic experts, these books are authoritative, clearly
written, up-to-date, and objective. They provide a good starting
point for research by high school and college students, scholars,
and general readers as well as by legislators, businesspeople,
activists, and others.
Each book, carefully organized and easy to use, contains an
overview of the subject, a detailed chronology, biographical
sketches, facts and data and/or documents and other primary-
source material, a directory of organizations and agencies,
annotated lists of print and nonprint resources, and an index.
Readers of books in the Contemporary World Issues series will
ﬁnd the information they need in order to have a better
understanding of the social, political, environmental, and
economic issues facing the world today.


WORLD
POPULATION
A Reference Handbook
SECOND EDITION
Geoffrey Gilbert
CONTEMPORARY
WORLD ISSUES
Santa Barbara, California 
Denver, Colorado 
Oxford, England

Copyright © 2005 by ABC-CLIO
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced,
stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any
means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise,
except for the inclusion of brief quotations in a review, without prior
permission in writing from the publishers.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
World population : a reference handbook / Geoffrey Gilbert.— 2nd ed.
p.
cm. —  (Contemporary world issues)
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 1-85109-927-1 (hardback : alk. paper) — ISBN 1-85109-928-X
(ebook)
1. Population—Handbooks, manuals, etc.
2. Population—
Statistics.
3. Demography—Handbooks, manuals, etc.
I. Title. 
HB871.G47 2006
304.6—dc22
2006007473
10 09 08 07 06 / 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1
This book is also available on the World Wide Web as an eBook. 
Visit abc-clio.com for details.
ABC-CLIO, Inc.
130 Cremona Drive, P.O. Box 1911
Santa Barbara, California 93116-1911
This book is printed on acid-free paper
.
Manufactured in the United States of America.

For Emily and Anna


Contents
Preface, xiii
1
World Population: An Overview, 1
Population Growth Rates, 3
Fertility, 4
Mortality, 7
World Population—Past, 9
World Population—Present, 11
World Population—Future, 13
Migration, 16
Urbanization, 18
Carrying Capacity, 20
Population Policies: Pronatalist, 20
Population Policies: Antinatalist, 22
Population Policy: China and India, 24
Global Population Policy,26
References, 28
2
Problems and Controversies, 31
Malthus and Overpopulation Fears, 31
Modern Malthusians, 33
Population Optimists, 34
Problems of Population Density, 35
Population and the Environment, 37
Optimum Population, 40
The Great Population Slowdown, 41
Depopulation Worries, 44
ix

Older and Older, 46
Problems of a Graying Population, 48
Pronatal Policies: Can They Work?, 49
References, 51
3
Special U.S. Issues, 55
Is the United States an Exceptional Nation, 
Demographically Speaking?, 55
What Makes American Fertility Different?, 58
The Graying of America, 60
Threat to Social Security Pensions, 61
Social Security Fixes, 62
Medicare and Medicaid, 65
International Family Planning: Early U.S. Support, 67
”Mexico City” and Abortion Politics, 69
Principle and Practice, 70
Fewer People, Declining Inﬂuence?, 72
Human Numbers—Not the Whole Story, 74
References, 76
4
Chronology, 79
References, 101
5
Biographical Sketches, 105
John Bongaarts (1945–), 105
Norman Borlaug (1914–), 106
Ester Boserup (1910–1999), 108
Lester R. Brown (1934–), 109
Joel E. Cohen (1944–), 110
Paul Demeny (1932–), 111
Nicholas Eberstadt (1955–), 112
Paul R. Ehrlich (1932–), 113
Werner Fornos (1933–), 114
He Kang (1923–), 115
Thomas Homer-Dixon (1956–), 116
Richard Jackson (1955–), 117
Wolfgang Lutz (1956–), 118
Carolyn B. Maloney (1948–), 119
x
Contents

Thomas Robert Malthus (1766–1834), 119
Thoraya Obaid (1946–), 121
Walter Plowright (1923–), 121
Margaret Sanger (1879–1966), 123
Amartya K. Sen (1933–), 124
Julian L. Simon (1932–1998), 125
Steven W. Sinding (1943–), 126
Christopher H. Smith (1953–), 127
Marie Stopes (1880–1958), 129
M. S. Swaminathan (1925–), 129
Ben Wattenberg (1933–), 133
6
Statistics and Graphs, 133
7
Documents, 159
Essay on Population (1798), 159
Population Growth, Resource Consumption, and a
Sustainable World: Joint Statement by the Royal Society
of London and the U.S. National Academy of Sciences
(February 1992), 164
Warning to Humanity, November 18, 1992, 169
National Security Study Memorandum 200 (December 10,
1974), 174
World Population Prospects: The 2004 Revision—
Highlights, 180
Census Bureau Projects Doubling of Nation’s Population
by 2100, 185
World Population to 2300, 187
Program of Action of the International Conference on
Population and Development, Cairo, 1994, 191
World Population Policies 2003, 198
United Nations Principles for Older Persons, 202
Madrid International Plan of Action on Ageing, 
2002, 204
References, 209
8
Directory of Organizations, 211
Contents
xi

9 
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources,  231
Monographs, 231
Handbooks, Yearbooks, and Data Sheets, 248
Nonprint Resources, 251
Contact Information for Video Distributors and 
Vendors, 270
Glossary, 273
Index, 279
About the Author, 299
xii
Contents

Preface
I
n the years since this handbook was ﬁrst published (2001), im-
portant population trends noted but not stressed in the first
edition have been conﬁrmed beyond a doubt. World popula-
tion is now growing more slowly than at any time in more than
half a century, and the slowdown will continue for many years to
come. Some demographers are beginning to predict the year—or
at least the decade—when global numbers will reach their all-
time peak before starting to decline. The United Nations says this
peak will be reached around the year 2075. In addition, UN ex-
perts now see a tendency for fertility rates everywhere to move
toward the level of 1.85 children per woman. This represents a
significant reduction from the previous assumption of 2.1 chil-
dren per woman as the global norm and bolsters the idea that an
end to global population growth is now in sight.
The new emphasis on slower growth, and for some coun-
tries actual shrinkage, in population comes after decades of
“population bomb” worries. For centuries it had been believed
that a large and growing population was a good thing, mainly
for economic reasons. Then in the 1950s and 1960s, the tide of in-
formed opinion began running in the opposite direction: plum-
meting death rates and persistently high fertility rates, especially
on the poorer continents, aroused deep concerns about a popula-
tion “explosion.” Whether it was environmentalists worried
about human numbers breaching the planet’s carrying capacity,
economists worried about the adverse impact of rapid popula-
tion increases on developing countries, or national security ana-
lysts worried about political instability arising from increased
population densities, everyone shared a sense of apprehension—
bordering, in some cases, on panic—about global trends in popu-
xiii

lation. Right into the 1970s the doomsayers appeared to have
both the facts and the weight of public opinion on their side.
By the 1980s and 1990s, however, many had come to believe
that overpopulation worries were greatly exaggerated. In part,
this was due to the solid arguments made by Julian Simon and
other population optimists, sometimes known as cornucopians,
who pointed to the real beneﬁts that could result from a larger
population. In part, too, it was due to the successes of the Green
Revolution, which seemed to deprive the doomsayers of their
most potent issue—the possibility of famine caused by too many
mouths to feed. Mainly, however, it was the actual, measured,
and nearly universal decline of fertility rates in the late twentieth
century that shifted attention away from scenarios of population
explosion to scenarios of population implosion. No one can yet
foresee the full consequences of this development, but clearly it
introduces both a new paradigm and a new set of population
worries into the realm of public debate.
It seems a safe bet that population concerns will be with us
for years to come and that there will therefore be a continuing
need for a handbook like this one, designed to serve as a conve-
nient one-volume reference for those who want to know more
about various global population problems and issues. The sim-
plest questions about population can be answered with data,
graphs, and facts, all of which are included here. When issues are
more complex, we usually need a guide to reliable sources of in-
formation. This book will provide such guidance. It can be a
starting point for research on a variety of population topics,
whether they be historical, environmental, or policy-oriented.
One of its primary aims is to give the reader an appreciation of
the controversial aspects of population. From the publication of
Malthus’s classic 1798 population essay to the more recent battles
between the doomsayers, led by Paul Ehrlich, and the cornucopi-
ans, led by Julian Simon, population has been discussed in raised
voices, if not shouts. That of course makes it a far livelier subject
to study than if it were entirely a matter of actuarial tables and
scholarly monographs!
The best way to use this book is to start with the overview of
world population offered in the ﬁrst chapter. This chapter deﬁnes
a number of important terms and explains the basic demographic
processes. Chapter 2, Problems and Controversies, examines
some of the critical debates that have arisen over population and
some of the current policy issues we face regarding population
xiv
Preface

density, environmental impacts, depopulation, and aging. Chap-
ter 3, Special U.S. Issues, looks into the pressures that are build-
ing on Social Security, Medicare, and Medicaid as the U.S. popu-
lation gets “grayer”; asks whether the United States (and other
Western countries) may lose inﬂuence in the future as the devel-
oping nations claim an ever-growing share of world population;
and examines the politicization of U.S. policy on international
family planning. Chapter 4, Chronology, presents some high-
lights of the history of world population: first census counts,
plagues, famines, key breakthroughs in disease control and birth
control, major commissions and publications in the ﬁeld of popu-
lation, conferences, landmark judicial decisions, and billion-
people milestones dating back to the ﬁrst billion in 1804. Chapter
5, Biographical Sketches, presents short biographies of twenty-
ﬁve individuals—most still living—who have worked to advance
our understanding of population, to expand the world’s food
supplies, or to shape population policy.
The statistical heart of the book is Chapter 6, Statistics and
Graphs, which gives tables of data on world population, broken
down in a variety of ways. The reader can go there for answers to
factual questions such as: what is the current population of In-
donesia, the birth rate in Mali, the AIDS prevalence rate in sub-
Saharan Africa, the ranking of the largest cities in the world, and
the projected world population in 2050? Chapter 7, Documents,
presents eleven key documents relating to world population
(most in the form of excerpts). These include the ﬁrst two chap-
ters of Malthus’s Essay on Population, warnings about population
trends from top scientific organizations, the program of action
from the world population conference in 1994, international
statements of principles on aging, and a fundamental document
underpinning U.S. foreign policy regarding population.
Chapter 8, Directory of Organizations, lists important orga-
nizations that gather and publish demographic data, advocate
policy in this area, or simply study certain aspects of population.
The data-gathering and information-dispensing services ren-
dered by the U.S. Census Bureau in Washington, D.C., make it a
population resource second to none. Another organization in the
nation’s capital, the Population Reference Bureau, also merits
special mention for its longstanding commitment to objective,
timely research on population matters. Chapter 9, Selected Print
and Nonprint Resources, offers a list of recently published or
classic (and still in print) works on various aspects of population.
Preface
xv

These are mainly monographs, but several population hand-
books are also listed. The reader should be aware that the hand-
books or yearbooks are periodically revised, sometimes annually.
The chapter also provides reviews of over twenty videos dealing
with population, all of them suitable for classroom use (though
for different ages, as noted). Another key nonprint resource, one
that grows in importance all the time, is the Internet; therefore, an
up-to-date listing of valuable websites for the study of popula-
tion rounds out the chapter. The volume as a whole is completed
by a glossary of technical terms and an index of subjects and
names.
I am pleased to acknowledge the support and encourage-
ment of my editors at ABC-CLIO, Mildred Vasan and Dayle
Dermatis. Special thanks go, as well, to the students in two
courses I regularly teach at Hobart and William Smith, “Popula-
tion and Society” and “Seminar on Population Issues,” for the
many things I have learned from them over the years, in class-
room discussions, office conversations, and a steady flow of re-
search papers.
Geoffrey Gilbert
xvi
Preface

1
World Population: 
An Overview
O
n October 12, 1999, history of a symbolic kind was made in
the maternity ward of Sarajevo’s University Clinical Center.
At his birth just after midnight, a Bosnian baby was offi-
cially declared Earth’s six billionth inhabitant. Much fanfare
marked the occasion, including a ceremonial visit by the secre-
tary-general of the United Nations, Kofi Annan, who smiled
broadly for the cameras as he held the baby in his arms. Of
course, no one could say that this particular newborn was truly
No. 6 billion or that precisely the right day of the week or even
the right month of the year had been picked for the momentous
event. Most demographers were confident, however, that 1999
was indeed “Y6B”—the year when Homo sapiens solidified its
standing as one of the world’s most impressive biological suc-
cess stories by reaching the 6 billion mark. Nor was this the end
of the story. World population kept right on climbing by about 75
million per year, equivalent to the combined populations of Aus-
tralia, Chile, Cambodia, Saudi Arabia, and Honduras.
Did Y6B deserve to be celebrated, like the Millennium
(“Y2K”) that arrived a few months later? Or would a more cau-
tious and sober reaction to the fact of ever-increasing human
numbers have been more appropriate? To be sure, a number of
commentators pointed out that natural resource and environ-
mental concerns made the planet’s population growth, at best, a
mixed blessing. Some of these concerns will be examined in de-
tail in Chapters 2 and 3.
1

It took most of human history for population to reach the 1
billion mark, around 1800. Further increments of a billion people
came much faster: 130 years, then 30 years, then 14, 13, and most
recently, 12 years. The pattern of shortening intervals might eas-
ily create the impression that global population is speeding, like
a runaway train, toward some sort of demographic crash, and
several well-known population theorists have suggested that
possibility. Fortunately, however, current trends are taking us in
a much less ominous direction. Demographers at both the U.S.
Census Bureau and the UN Population Division expect it will
take fourteen years to get from 6 to 7 billion and the same to get
from 7 to 8 billion; after that it may be eighteen to twenty-one ad-
ditional years before global population reaches 9 billion. Interest-
ingly, some experts now believe humanity will never reach 10 bil-
lion. The United Nations, for example, now projects that world
population will top out at 9.22 billion in the year 2075 (see World
Population to 2300 in Chapter 7).
Global population trends can mask considerable variation at
the local or national level. In 2005, the world’s population was
growing at an annual rate of about 1.15 percent, but in many
countries the rate was much higher, and in other countries much
lower—even negative. The fastest-growing countries tend to be
among the world’s poorest, and they are mainly in Africa.
Women in some of these countries bear six, seven, or even eight
children on average. No wonder that in parts of Africa popula-
tion growth is well above twice the global average. By contrast,
some nations, mainly in Europe and East Asia, are growing so
slowly that they are headed toward depopulation, or shrinking
numbers. Italy is an often-cited member of this group. Its popu-
lation growth has come to a halt, and as early as 2008 Italy will be
losing people. Italy is one of many wealthy nations exhibiting a
pattern of slow growth verging on outright contraction of popu-
lation. One country that does not conform to this pattern is the
United States, a rich country with a population that is growing at
a healthy clip and expected to continue that way through the
twenty-ﬁrst century.
When populations grow too rapidly or too slowly, a host of
policy issues are raised. Government planners, demographers,
and ordinary citizens have been confronting some of these is-
sues in recent decades, but the challenges are serious and in
many cases becoming more so with every passing year. We will
lay out a number of those issues in the next two chapters. To be
2
World Population: An Overview

well equipped to tackle these matters, however, the reader must
acquire some basic knowledge of demographic terms and prin-
ciples.
Population Growth Rates
Populations grow and decline; they rarely stand still. In a closed
system—an isolated country, for example, or the world as a
whole—population will increase when births outnumber deaths
and shrink when deaths outnumber births. A country of 100 mil-
lion that had 3 million births and 1 million deaths during the
year would record a 2 percent increase in population. With birth
and death numbers reversed, the outcome would be a grim 2
percent decline in population. (Migration into or out of a country
complicates things, of course. Immigrants, or those moving into a
country on a permanent basis, add to its population; emigrants,
or those moving out of a country, reduce it.) Continued over
many years, even a low rate of growth can produce large
changes in population. Demographers speak of the doubling
time of a population—that is, the period of time in which the
population, increasing at a constant rate, will double in size.
Consider the implications of various rates of growth. At a 2
percent growth rate, as in our example above, population would
double in about thirty-ﬁve years. That is how fast population is
currently growing in Nicaragua and the Philippines. (Unless oth-
erwise noted, current demographic data presented in this chap-
ter are taken from the highly useful International Data Base, or
IDB, found at the International Programs Center of the U.S. Cen-
sus Bureau website.) At a growth rate of 3 percent a year, popula-
tion would double even faster, in about twenty-three years. Four
African nations are currently growing at a 3 percent rate: Burkina
Faso, Congo (Brazzaville), Madagascar, and Niger. When growth
proceeds at a 4 percent pace, population doubles in about eigh-
teen years. It is virtually impossible to ﬁnd a nation in the world
today experiencing a rate of natural increase that high. The two
that come closest, at 3.5 percent, are Uganda and Yemen. If
growth were to continue at that rate, Uganda and Yemen would
see their populations double in twenty years.
In many parts of the world, the population growth rate has
dropped below 2 percent, to 1 percent, 0.5 percent, even, in a few
Population Growth Rates
3

cases, to negative rates. If a population were growing 1 percent a
year, as is currently the case in a number of small island nations
as well as Chile, Tunisia, and Albania, it would take about sev-
enty years for it to double. In countries that have fractional
growth rates, the doubling time can rise above 100 years.
Canada, for example, with a current annual growth rate of 0.3
percent, would need well over 200 years to double its popula-
tion. And of course countries with negative growth rates can for-
get about doubling times; “halving times” are more relevant to
them. Ukraine, with a growth rate of negative 0.6 percent, could
see its population cut in half in a little over a century. The halv-
ing of population would not take much longer for Russia, Bul-
garia, and Latvia, with their negative 0.5 percent rates of depop-
ulation. Obviously, these scenarios are strictly hypothetical
because we know that no country will proceed for any consider-
able length of time at a constant annual rate of population in-
crease or decrease.
Fertility
The population growth rates cited above are rates of natural in-
crease (birth rate minus death rate), uncomplicated by migration.
Most countries have little immigration or emigration anyway, the
United States being a major exception, as will be discussed below.
The birth and death rates that determine the rate of natural in-
crease are usually given in numbers of births/deaths per thou-
sand and are sometimes called crude birth rate and crude death
rate. The crude birth rate (CBR) for the United States has recently
been 14—a relatively low number compared to other countries
around the world. The CBR for the Philippines is 25, for Pakistan,
30, and for Nigeria, 41. The average CBR for sub-Saharan Africa is
39. For the world as a whole, it is 20. The only region of the world
with broadly lower CBRs than the United States is Europe, where,
for example, the CBR for Denmark, the United Kingdom, France,
and the Netherlands is 11 or 12, and for Austria, the Czech Re-
public, Germany, Italy, and Latvia it is 8 or 9.
The “crude” aspect of the CBR can best be shown by con-
sidering a very simple example of two countries, A and B, with
populations of 1,000 each. In Country A there are 300 women of
childbearing age, and 10 percent of them have babies in a given
4
World Population: An Overview

year. Thus the CBR in this country is 30. In Country B, there are
only 150 women of childbearing age, yet 20 percent of them give
birth in the same year. Because there are 30 births in Country B,
just as in Country A, demographers will record exactly the same
CBR in both countries. Yet the underlying fertility rates of the
two countries are markedly different. The women of Country B
have a much higher rate of childbearing, for which there may be
various social, historical, religious or other reasons, and if every-
thing else about the two countries is the same, Country B will
certainly end up more populous than Country A in the future.
More reﬁned measures of fertility than the crude birth rate
are needed if we want to make meaningful comparisons be-
tween countries or regions of the world, or between different
historical periods. One useful measure is the age-speciﬁc fertil-
ity rate (ASFR). Here we look at rates of childbearing by age
group, for example, women aged 20–24 or women aged 25–29.
The ASFR is generally given in numbers of live births per thou-
sand women in the speciﬁed age range, usually a ﬁve-year inter-
val. For example, the ASFR in the United States for women in
the age group 20–24 was 110 in the year 1995: for every 1,000
women in that age range, there were 110 live births in 1995.
Some very interesting things can be learned from a table of
ASFR data such as the one for the United States presented in
Table 1.1. We see some noteworthy changes in the timing and
rates of childbearing between 1955 and 1995. American women
dramatically reduced their overall fertility in the second half of
the twentieth century. This was true for each age group, most
notably for those in their early twenties. There was also a clear
shift to later childbearing. For example, in 1955 births to women
in their early thirties were less than half as numerous as to
women in their early twenties; by 1995 the proportion had
climbed to three-quarters.
TABLE 1.1
Live Births per 1,000 U.S. Women Ages 20–34
by Age Group, 1955–1995
Year
Ages 20–24
Ages 25–29
Ages 30–34
1955
241.6
190.2
116.0
1975
113.0
108.2
52.3
1995
109.8
112.2
82.5
Source: Haupt and Kane 1998, 15.
Fertility
5

One other measure of fertility is considered by demogra-
phers to be the most useful single number for projecting future
levels of population. This is the total fertility rate, which is often
shortened to simply fertility rate or TFR. This measure is some-
what complicated to calculate and even to explain, but it is so im-
portant that we will take a moment to lay out the basic idea. No
one can say, at the present time, how men and women in coming
decades will approach the vital question of family size. All we
have to rely on are the data collected up to the present. But if our
current data are complete enough to tell us, for a particular year,
the age-speciﬁc fertility rates of women in a given country, we
can compute its TFR. All we do is imagine—or “synthesize”—a
“typical woman” who passes through her reproductive years
bearing the same number of children in each subperiod of her
life (usually ﬁve-year spans) as the women currently in that age
range are bearing. Thus, when we say that the TFR in the small
southern African nation of Malawi in the year 2005 was 6.0, we
mean that as of that time the average Malawian infant girl could
be expected, during her adult years, to give birth to six children
on the assumption that in each subperiod of her reproductive
span she would bear children with the same frequency as
Malawian women in those age ranges currently were doing.
Needless to say, Malawi’s TFR of 6.0 is extremely high—
among the highest in the world. This should not, however, be
taken as proof that Malawian women possess a greater capacity
for childbearing than women elsewhere in the world. Demogra-
phers use the term fecundity to describe the actual capacity to
bear children. Fecundity and fertility are often confused with
each other. Fertility refers to actual childbearing, whereas fecun-
dity indicates the ability or potential to bear children. There is no
evidence that the women of Botswana, another southern African
nation, where the TFR is 2.9, are only half as fecund as the
women of Malawi, with their TFR of 6.0. Nor is there any reason
to think that women in the nations of Europe and eastern Asia
that are headed toward population decline have suffered any im-
pairment of fecundity. Reduced fertility can be explained by
many factors other than reduced fecundity, as will be discussed
below.
The total fertility rate is a closely watched indicator of future
population trends. In a society with low child mortality rates, a
TFR of about 2.1 will keep population stable—neither growing
nor shrinking. Obviously, if the average woman is producing two
6
World Population: An Overview

children who survive to adulthood, the current generation can
eventually be replaced by a new generation of the same size
(hence the term replacement-level fertility). A TFR above replace-
ment level suggests future increases in population, and a TFR be-
low replacement level, just the opposite. On this basis, demogra-
phers are predicting that the fastest future growth in the world
will occur in Africa, since the TFRs for dozens of African nations
are in the range of 5 to 7. At the other extreme, Western Europe’s
TFR is 1.5, while Eastern Europe’s is even lower at 1.35. Euro-
peans today are not bearing enough children to replace them-
selves! The United States has no such problem since its TFR is 2.1
and large additional gains to population come from immigration.
Mortality
Everyone dies eventually. But in some countries and regions of
the world, people on average die younger—in some cases much
younger—than in others. One way to see this is through data on
life expectancy at birth. As with the TFR, life expectancy is a hy-
pothetical measure: it tells us how many years the average new-
born could expect to live if he or she passed through life facing
the same mortality rates as people currently are experiencing in
each age group. Life expectancies vary widely between conti-
nents, countries, and often among different areas of the same
country. For example, the life expectancy at birth for all of Africa
is 52, while for North America it is 78. For all of Europe it is 75,
although Northern and Western Europe have life expectancies
equal to that of North America. The highest life expectancy in the
world, 82, is seen in Japan (Population Reference Bureau 2005,
hereafter PRB 2005).
Differences in life expectancy correlate, statistically, with a
number of factors, such as occupation, education, marital status
(married folks live longer), race in those countries that are mul-
tiracial, and gender. Gender matters when it comes to life ex-
pectancy: women live longer than men almost everywhere, and
sometimes by a wide margin. In the former Soviet republic of
Kazakhstan, for example, female life expectancy at birth is 72,
whereas male life expectancy is only 61. In Russia itself the gap is
even wider, with female and male life expectancies of 72 and 59,
respectively. In most countries, the gender gap is less dramatic: in
Mortality
7

the United States, ﬁve years, in Japan, seven years, in China, four
years. There is no measured gap at all in Uganda or Namibia.
Truly anomalous are the countries where male life expectancy ac-
tually exceeds female life expectancy. There were three such
countries in 2005: Kenya, Zambia, and Lesotho (PRB 2005).
Wherever life expectancies are short, one is sure to ﬁnd high
rates of mortality for infants and children. Consider two coun-
tries at opposite ends of the spectrum: Mali, in western Africa,
and Israel, in the Middle East. In Mali, the life expectancy is 48,
and the infant mortality rate (number of infant deaths annually
per thousand live births) is 133. In Israel, by contrast, the life ex-
pectancy is 80, and the infant mortality rate is 5.1. It is tempting
to go a step further and explain these differences in terms of per
capita gross domestic product (GDP); that is, one might argue
that the grim statistics for Mali as compared with Israel are fully
accounted for by the fact that Israel has a per capita GDP about
twenty-four times higher than that of Mali. But this would be
simplistic. Economic development helps make healthier, longer
lives possible, but, as Amartya Sen has shown, even some fairly
“poor” nations or regions (China, Sri Lanka, the Indian state of
Kerala) have achieved much more impressive life expectancies
for their citizens than some “richer” nations (Brazil, Namibia,
South Africa, Gabon). The more extensive public provision of
health and education in the former group, Sen argues, makes a
critical difference (Sen 1999, 46–49).
As noted in the previous section, rates of natural increase
are calculated from crude birth and death rates. The crude death
rate (CDR) is defined as the number of deaths per thousand
people in a given year. In the United States, the CDR is currently
8. It may at first appear surprising that a rich nation like the
United States, with clean water, high vaccination rates, and few
endemic diseases, has a higher death rate than some very poor
countries. For example, the Middle Eastern nation of Syria has a
remarkably low CDR of 5. Since Syria is much less economically
advanced than the United States—its per capita GDP is less than
one-tenth that of the United States—what could explain this dif-
ference in death rates? The answer lies in the “crudeness” of the
CDR, which takes no account of national age structures. If a
country has a large proportion of older people, subject to heart
disease, cancer, diabetes, and other debilitating conditions, then,
other things being equal, it will have a higher CDR than a coun-
try with a smaller proportion of older people. Syria is a “young”
8
World Population: An Overview

nation, with two out of every ﬁve Syrians under the age of 15.
The United States is not so young, with only one out of every ﬁve
under the age of 15. On the other hand, over 12 percent of Amer-
icans are 65 or older, whereas only 3 percent of Syrians are that
old (PRB 2005). The greater youthfulness of Syria’s population is
the main factor accounting for its lower death rate.
World Population—Past
Anthropologists believe that our species, Homo sapiens, made its
ﬁrst appearance perhaps two or three hundred thousand years
ago in Africa. The population of these hunter-gatherers could
never have been growing at a rapid and sustained rate, given
their primitive mode of subsistence. In fact, it appears that until
the agricultural revolution began, around 8000 B.C., the world-
wide population of humans languished in the range of a few mil-
lion. The annual growth rate of population for many millennia
before 8000 B.C. was probably under 0.01 percent, with a dou-
bling time in the range of 6,500 to 7,500 years. With the begin-
nings of settled agriculture, however, this situation changed.
There is no expert consensus on whether faster world population
growth was the cause or the effect of the practice of agriculture,
but a stepped-up rate of population growth evidently began
around 10,000 years ago. From then until the start of the Chris-
tian era, the annual growth rate probably accelerated gradually
from 0.01 to the much higher rate of 0.15 percent. Actual yearly
additions to the global population also rose, from fewer than 400
per year in 5000 B.C. to something over 300,000 per year in the era
of A.D. 1. By the latter date, world population had reached a total
of 200–300 million (Cohen 1995, 34–36; Livi-Bacci 2001, 31–36;
Weeks 2005, 34–36).
Over the next 2,000 years, global population growth rates
varied substantially from year to year, and even century to cen-
tury, owing mainly to swings in the death rate. Wars, plagues,
and famines all made major dents in what would otherwise have
been a steadier climb in population. Particularly notable was the
bubonic plague (or “Black Death”) of the fourteenth century,
which reduced the populations of Europe and China by one-
third. It has been estimated that Europe’s population did not re-
cover to its pre-plague levels of 1340 until the mid-1500s. Be-
World Population—Past
9

tween 1650 and 1850, however, various forces combined to lift
world population to permanently higher levels and faster
growth rates. Among these forces were the global dissemination
of New World crops such as maize (Indian corn), potatoes, and
manioc; the discovery and exploitation of fossil fuels; and the in-
troduction of better hygiene and public sanitation. The combined
effect of these developments was an improved level of nutrition
and reduced rates of disease for many of the world’s people.
Mortality rates declined, particularly in the younger age range,
and life expectancies rose ever higher. By 1850, population was
growing faster than 0.5 percent annually, for a net gain of 6 to 7
million people per year (Cohen 1995, 42–45; Livi-Bacci 2001,
57–62; Weeks 2005, 36–37).
The largest increase of world population in history, both in
percentage terms and in absolute numbers, occurred during the
twentieth century. Total population rose from 1.65 billion in 1900
to over 6 billion by 2000, with the peak annual rate of increase—
around 2.2 percent—occurring in the early 1960s. The doubling
time fell to as little as thirty-two years, probably the shortest we
will ever experience on a global basis. The century-long expan-
sion (or, as some have called it, “explosion”) of population was,
once again, largely a matter of declining mortality. Science
played an ever-increasing role in this development, both directly,
through improvements in the prevention and treatment of dis-
ease, and indirectly, through the improved nutrition made possi-
ble by agricultural research (chemical fertilizers, pesticides, plant
and animal breeding, etc.), research that in fact was well under
way by the latter part of the nineteenth century. The mechaniza-
tion of agriculture ﬁrst seen in America and Europe also played a
signiﬁcant role in raising agricultural productivity and lowering
the cost of food (Evans 1998, chs. 6–7; Weeks 2005, ch. 5).
By the early twentieth century, most economically advanced
nations had begun to lower their fertility rates; that is, couples in
those nations had begun consciously to limit family size through
the practice of contraception. This behavioral shift is fundamen-
tal to the demographic transition model featured in many popu-
lation textbooks and discussions. According to this model, coun-
tries normally begin in a stage characterized by high levels of
mortality and fertility. Population stays constant or fluctuates
within narrow limits. In the second stage, death rates move
downward (for reasons mentioned above), but since birth rates
remain high, population increases rapidly. In the third stage,
10
World Population: An Overview

birth rates also decline as contraceptive practice becomes more
widespread; population growth continues but less rapidly. In the
final stage, birth rates descend to levels low enough to match
death rates, bringing population growth to an end at a total pop-
ulation much larger than had been seen before the transition. At
the risk of overgeneralizing, we can say that most developed na-
tions entered the twentieth century already in the third stage of
the model, with fertility declining, and finished the century in
the final stage, at (or below) replacement levels of fertility.
Poorer, less developed countries, mainly in Africa, Asia, and
Latin America, started the century in the first stage, got to the
second stage by mid-century, and by the last few decades were
passing through the stage of declining fertility. It remains unclear
how many of these nations will complete their demographic
transition in the twenty-ﬁrst century.
World Population—Present
As we move through the ﬁrst decade of the twenty-ﬁrst century,
world population is mounting steadily toward 7 billion, a ﬁgure
that should be reached by 2013. One assertion that is sometimes
made to dramatize the enormity of our current global population
is that more people are alive today than have lived and died in
all previous history. This is quite startling—and also completely
false! One respected demographer has calculated that over the
past 200,000 years, about 60 billion humans have been born. That
would indicate that only about 11 percent of all the humans who
have ever lived are living today (Weeks 2005, 44).
Although our present numbers are but a fraction of the total
number of humans who have ever lived, we remain an almost in-
comprehensibly numerous species. To appreciate just how nu-
merous, an example may be useful. Let us assume the planet has
6.5 billion people. If we could have every man, woman, and
child in the world hold hands 4 feet apart from one another
along a “skyway” extending from the Earth toward the Moon,
the line would easily reach the lunar surface. In fact, the human
chain could be stretched to the Moon and back to the Earth ten
times over.
On the regional level, certain demographic indicators are
fairly well correlated with economic status, as seen in Table 1.2.
World Population—Present
11

The United Nations classiﬁes all of Europe and North America,
as well as Japan, Australia, and New Zealand, as “more devel-
oped” nations; all other countries are categorized as “less devel-
oped.” A survey of the two groups in terms of per capita GDP
would give us ample reason to call the ﬁrst group “rich” and the
second “poor,” at least relative to each other. As we see in Table
1.2, the total population of the rich countries today is less than a
quarter that of the poor ones. Although the crude death rates of
the two groups are rather similar, the birth rates are not. The poor
nations, as noted earlier, have not brought down their fertility
rates to the low levels reached by the rich. Indeed, the total fertil-
ity rates of the two groups are poles apart: for the rich countries,
TFR has dropped below replacement level; for the poor coun-
tries, it remains well above that level. As a result, the future pop-
ulations of poorer nations will be much larger than they are to-
day, while the richer nations will lose people. Populations of
both rich and poor regions will continue to age in the future, but
already the rich countries are much older than the poor with
three times the relative proportion of elderly (over age sixty-
four). Life expectancy is a decade longer among the more devel-
oped nations than it is among the less developed.
TABLE 1.2
Demographic Differences between
More Developed and Less Developed Nations
More developed
Less developed 
nations
nations
Population (millions)
1,211
5,266
Crude birthrate
11
24
Crude death rate
10
8
Natural increase
0.1%
1.5%
Total fertility rate
1.6
3.0
Life expectancy
76
65
Under age 15
17%
32% 
Over age 64
15%
5%
Source: PRB 2005.
If we turn our attention to an entire continent that is consid-
ered less developed, Africa, we ﬁnd that the demographic indi-
cators take on some extreme values relative to the rest of the
world. The African death rate (15) is higher than that for the less
developed countries as a group (8)—partly because AIDS has
12
World Population: An Overview

struck Africa far harder than any other continent—and the
African crude birth rate is also much higher (38 compared to 24).
Thus the rate of natural increase for Africa is 2.3 percent. If
African living standards are to improve, the growth of GDP will
have to be consistently higher than 2.3 percent—a major chal-
lenge. The infant mortality rate in Africa is 88 per thousand live
births, compared to 59 for the less developed countries as a
group and 6 for the more developed. The African TFR of 5.1 is far
above that for the less developed regions as a whole, and life ex-
pectancy is only 52. In some AIDS-ravaged countries of southern
Africa, life expectancies have fallen into the 30s, an alarming de-
velopment in the twenty-first century. The last demographic
measure to report should come as no surprise, given several of
the others: while 68 percent of women in the rich regions use
some form of contraception and 58 percent in the poor regions
do the same, only 28 percent of women in Africa currently use
any form of birth control (PRB 2005).
World Population—Future
How large will the world’s population grow in the future? It’s an
easy question to ask, yet no one, expert or prophet, can answer it
with any certainty. In the near term, of course, we know that
population will continue to grow. At present, the worldwide
birth rate of 21 per thousand stands well above the death rate of
9 per thousand, yielding a 1.2 percent (or 12 per thousand) rate
of natural increase. The rate of natural increase has been trending
downward since the mid-1960s when it peaked at about 2.2 per-
cent annually. By 1980, it had fallen to 1.7 percent, and by 1990, to
around 1.5 percent. As long as the growth rate remains above
zero, population will keep on growing. And as long as the total
fertility rate stays as high as its current level of 2.7, the world will
be on course not merely to replace its existing population but to
expand it (PRB 2005).
When demographers make projections of future population
levels, they are careful to specify that such projections are only as
good as the assumptions on which they are based. At the United
Nations, the Population Division issues long-term projections
every two years. These are perhaps the most “ofﬁcial” estimates
of future population available and also the most frequently cited
World Population—Future
13

by governments and the media. The most critical assumptions
are those made about fertility rates, which tend to be more vari-
able than mortality rates. UN demographers assume that fertility
will continue to decline over the next several decades; mortality
decreases will also occur but will be smaller. As Table 1.3 shows,
the United Nations offers three variants of its global population
projections, based on high, medium, and low future paths of fer-
tility rates. It should be noted that all three paths, even the high-
fertility variant, track fertility downward from current levels. Note
also that the lowest fertility assumption made by the United Na-
tions is a level well below replacement. This possibility should
be taken seriously, given the fact that demographers have been
consistently caught off guard by the rapid decline of fertility
rates in recent decades. Most attention, however, usually centers
on the medium-fertility assumption, which in the 2004 revision
results in a world population of 9.1 billion by the middle of this
century.
TABLE 1.3
UN World Population Projections for 2050
Total fertility rate
World population (billions)
High-fertility variant
2.53
10.6
Medium-fertility variant
2.05
9.1
Low-fertility variant
1.56
7.6
Source: Population Division 2005, vi, 6.
UN demographers now expect ﬁve countries to contribute
the most to population growth in the coming half-century: India,
Pakistan, Nigeria, the Democratic Republic of Congo, and
Bangladesh. India’s contribution alone will be equal to the com-
bined total of the next four nations. Note that none of the top ﬁve
is presently considered a “more developed” nation—nor is No. 6,
Uganda. Only when you reach No. 7 on the list, the United
States, do you have a more developed country contributing in a
major way to world population growth. China, with its current
1.4 billion people, is only eighth on the list and will not add as
many people to the world’s population as Ethiopia between now
and 2050.
Virtually all of the net population gains of the coming half-
century will come from the less developed nations. As a result,
their share of the world’s population will rise from 81 percent to-
14
World Population: An Overview

day to 86 percent in the year 2050. The richer nations, with their
much smaller family sizes, will recede in demographic impor-
tance. For example, Europe and North America, which together
represented 28.5 percent of world population in 1950, are pro-
jected to represent a mere 12 percent by 2050. Of course, we do
not know how many nations or which nations presently catego-
rized as less developed will cross into more-developed status in
coming decades, or whether some nations may be recategorized
downward from more to less developed. But UN experts study-
ing global demographic trends are making a remarkable predic-
tion: by the middle of the century, the more developed regions
will be losing 1 million people annually, while the less developed
regions will be gaining 35 million (Population Division 2005, vi, 1).
Do we have any idea what the world’s population might be
in the distant future, say, 300 years from now, and is there really
any point in trying to determine it? The answers coming from
the United Nations Population Division are yes to both ques-
tions. These UN analysts believe that policymakers and environ-
mental scientists, among others, may find some value in truly
long-range projections of global population. Accordingly, they
produced such projections for the ﬁrst time in 2004 (see World
Population in 2300 in Chapter 7). As is true of all such exercises,
the results depend entirely on the assumptions made. In this
case, the key assumptions are (1) that life expectancies will con-
tinue to rise without limit and (2) that fertility rates around the
world will continue to fall for many decades, eventually recover-
ing to replacement levels everywhere. No catastrophic events—
collisions with asteroids, global military conﬂicts, uncontrollable
epidemics, or devastating climatic changes—are incorporated
into this demographic exercise. The medium-fertility projection
for world population in 2300 turns out to be very close to what
the United Nations anticipates for 2050, that is, 9.0 billion as
compared to 9.1 billion. But if fertility were lower by 0.2 children,
total population would end up a mere 2.3 billion. If it were
higher by 0.3 children, total population would reach the almost
unthinkable 36.4 billion (Population Division 2004a, 2005).
In a future measured by decades rather than centuries, one
of the most troubling factors affecting population is AIDS. This
twentieth-century plague now carried into the twenty-ﬁrst cen-
tury has already claimed millions of lives and will certainly
claim many more. How substantial will the AIDS effect be on
world population? Experts say the largest impact will continue
World Population—Future
15

to be felt in sub-Saharan Africa, which has far and away the
highest HIV prevalence rate of any region in the world. Of the
roughly 39 million persons living with HIV/AIDS worldwide in
2004, over 25 million were in sub-Saharan Africa. The most seri-
ously affected countries, with adult prevalence rates of 20 per-
cent or more, were Swaziland, Botswana, Lesotho, Zimbabwe,
South Africa, and Namibia, all in southern Africa. All of these
countries and a number of others in the region will experience
slower population growth for the next several decades as a result
of AIDS (UNAIDS 2004, 191).
One of the grim demographic results of AIDS has been
lower life expectancies in some countries. Until the mid-1990s,
most African nations, like the rest of the world, were experienc-
ing a rising trend in life expectancy, but AIDS cut short and in
some cases reversed that trend. Between 1990 and 2002, accord-
ing to UN data, thirteen sub-Saharan African countries suffered
severe declines in life expectancies. In seven of those countries,
life expectancy fell below 40 years. The worst case of all was
Zimbabwe, which saw its life expectancy drop from 56.6 to 33.9
years, making lives briefer in that country, statistically speaking,
than they were 250 years ago in England and Sweden (Livi Bacci
2000, 135). Given the high fertility rates in most of these coun-
tries, it remains unclear whether there will be any absolute popu-
lation declines because of the disease. Experts foresee declines in
Botswana, Lesotho, Namibia, and Swaziland between now and
2050 but acknowledge that there is considerable uncertainty
about population developments in Africa. Much depends on
what governments there do with AIDS awareness programs and
what donor countries offer in the way of technical and ﬁnancial
assistance (United Nations Development Program 2004; PRB
2005; Dugger 2004).
Migration
So far, we have sidestepped the topic of migration. Migratory
ﬂows have no direct impact on total world population because
one country’s loss is another’s gain. If migration involves move-
ment within a country, that country’s total population is likewise
unaffected. Migration does redistribute some people across na-
tional borders, however, thereby affecting population growth
16
World Population: An Overview

rates in the sending and receiving countries just as surely as fer-
tility and mortality do. Demographers use a “balancing equa-
tion” to make all of this clear: for any individual country, births
minus deaths, plus immigrants minus emigrants, or (B - D) + (I -
E), equals the yearly change in population. Using the United
States as an example, we ﬁnd that the respective numbers from
July 1, 2001, to July 1, 2002, in millions, were: (4.0 - 2.4) + (1.7 -
0.2) = 3.1. Thus population change for the year was a positive 3.1
million. Note that the natural increase of births minus deaths ac-
counted for a little over half the overall population gain. Net im-
migration, legal and illegal, provided the rest (McFalls 2003, 20).
There are roughly 190 million migrants in the world today
(mid-2005), representing about 2.9 percent of the global popula-
tion. For almost half a century, the level of international migra-
tion has been on the increase. It has grown decade by decade
since 1960. Because people normally migrate for economic rea-
sons, the direction of migration has tended to be from less devel-
oped to more developed regions, where higher incomes may be
earned—at least in theory. A secondary but sadly frequent moti-
vation for migrating is to seek asylum or refuge, and this also
tends to take people from less developed to more developed re-
gions. The rate of migration into richer areas for the last ﬁfteen to
twenty years has been so heavy, and birth rates have fallen so
low in these areas, that the more developed regions have experi-
enced a remarkably swift turnaround in the sources of popula-
tion growth. In 1960, these regions got most of their population
growth from natural increase, not immigration; today the reverse
is true. Indeed, Europe, where more international migrants have
settled than anywhere else, would have experienced a net popu-
lation loss in 1995–2000 had it not been for immigration (IOM
2005, 13; DESA 2004, viii–x).
Although the greatest number of global migrants has settled
in Europe, at least for now, migrants have had their largest pro-
portional impact in Oceania, where in Australia and New Zealand
they represented over 20 percent of the population in the year
2000. Comparable figures for Canada and the United States in
2000 were 19 percent and just over 12 percent, respectively. Mi-
grants are becoming more diversiﬁed in terms of destination: the
number of countries where immigrants are over 10 percent of the
population has risen from 43 in 1960 to 70 at the start of this
decade. Distances traveled by migrants are getting shorter on av-
erage than they were 100 years ago. At that time, the heaviest
Migration
17

ﬂow of migration was from Europe across oceans to either North
America or Oceania. More recently, the largest numbers of mi-
grants have been moving from Latin America to North America;
from North Africa and Eastern Europe to Western Europe; and
from former republics of the USSR back to the central Russian
state (DESA 2004, vii–viii).
The United States remains, year in and year out, the world’s
highest-volume destination for migrants. When considering the
total number of immigrants received over the past one, three, or
ﬁve decades—or even the past 200 years—no country comes close
to the United States. The immigrant ﬂow of the 1990s, legal and il-
legal, was in the range of 1 million per year, and the number is
undoubtedly higher now. High rates of immigration are expected
to continue. Most immigrants today are admitted on the basis of
family ties to U.S. residents—a preference system that dates back
to 1965. This system has changed the regional origin of immi-
grants from mainly European to mainly Latin American and
Asian. Because of the changing immigrant pattern, by 2050 His-
panics are projected to represent 24 percent of U.S. population,
and Asians 8 percent, compared with 11 and 4 percent, respec-
tively, in 2000 (Martin and Midgley 1999, 23). Without immigra-
tion, the United States would much more closely resemble the
other more developed nations in its TFR and population growth
rate, with total population likely to stabilize much earlier.
Urbanization
As the world grows more populous, it also grows more urban-
ized. One underlying reason is that as agriculture becomes more
intensive and productive, demand for labor in rural areas de-
clines. Worsening job prospects loosen people’s ties to the coun-
tryside. At the same time, the economic opportunities that cities
are perceived to offer exert a “pull” on rural populations. Differ-
ent countries deﬁne “urban” in different ways, but according to
one common criterion, populations living in towns of at least
2,000 are considered to be urban. (In the United States, the cutoff
line is 2,500.) The extent of urbanization varies considerably
from nation to nation. At one extreme is the 100 percent urban-
ization of certain small nations such as Guadeloupe, Monaco,
and Singapore. Australia and Uruguay, with above 90 percent ur-
18
World Population: An Overview

banization, and Argentina, United Kingdom, Libya, Saudi Ara-
bia, Germany, and Lebanon, in the 85–90 percent range, would
also have to be considered highly urbanized. At the other ex-
treme is a handful of nations with less than 15 percent urbaniza-
tion: Burundi, Malawi, Nepal, and Uganda. The two population
giants, China and India, appear to be urbanizing at different
rates: China, with surging internal migration toward coastal
cities, has already reached 37 percent urbanization, whereas In-
dia is holding steady at 28 percent. Not surprisingly, Africa and
Asia are the least urbanized continents, while North America,
South America, and Europe are the most urbanized (PRB 2005).
Although cities have existed for many centuries, the urban
transition that is redistributing so much of the world’s population
from rural to urban areas is relatively recent. In 1950, the world’s
three largest cities, New York, London, and Tokyo, had a com-
bined population of about 28 million. By 2005, the three largest
cities—now Tokyo, São Paulo, and Mexico City—numbered
about 65 million. In the late 1990s, about 45 percent of the
world’s people lived in urban places. This figure continues its
steady climb; by one estimate, the world should be more than
half urban by 2007 and over 60 percent urban by 2030 (Popula-
tion Division 2004c). According to UN demographers, the major
part of global population growth during the next few decades
will occur in urban areas of less developed countries. The more
developed regions will see urbanization rise from 74 to 82 per-
cent between 2003 and 2030, while urbanization of less devel-
oped regions will increase from 42 to 57 percent (Weeks 2005,
471; Population Division 2004c).
The effects of the continuing global trend toward urbaniza-
tion have been both good and bad. On the positive side, urban
residents achieve higher levels of health and education; they also
have smaller families. (The so-called urban transition seems to be
an integral part of the demographic transition discussed earlier.)
The economic well-being of urban dwellers often exceeds that of
the rural population. On the other hand, living conditions in
many Third World cities are appalling, in part because the rapid-
ity of urban growth has made it impossible for governments to
provide an adequate infrastructure of streets, schools, housing,
hospitals, and sanitation. A broader concern, and one that relates
to both developed and developing nations, is that urban growth
(or “sprawl”) is encroaching ever more deeply on lands needed
for agriculture or valued for natural habitat.
Urbanizaiton
19

Carrying Capacity
Is there an upper limit to the population of humans that the Earth
can sustain? Joel Cohen presents an exhaustive analysis of this
question in his 1995 book How Many People Can the Earth Support?
One might wonder why Cohen needs over 500 pages to answer
such a simple question, but in fact the question is not simple at
all. There are many possible constraints on population: ecological,
biological, social, and technological. There are also many ways to
deﬁne carrying capacity because there are many different views of
what constitutes an acceptable standard of living for human be-
ings. If everyone must live at the U.S. standard of consumption,
global carrying capacity will be lower than if everyone is living at,
say, the Bolivian standard, or the Ethiopian standard.
Estimates of global carrying capacity have ranged from less
than 1 billion to more than 1 trillion (or 1,000 billion)! The earliest
estimate cited by Cohen, that of the Dutch scientist Anton van
Leeuwenhoek in 1679, is 13.4 billion people. The four most recent
estimates, all from 1994, vary between 3 and 44 billion people.
Before we despair of such wild diversity of opinion on carrying
capacity, it is worth pointing out that the majority of the over
sixty separate estimates gathered by Cohen cluster in a much
narrower range, between 7.7 and 12 billion. This raises some con-
cern for Cohen, who notes that the planet’s current population
has “entered the zone” that the majority of scholars believe rep-
resents the sustainable upper limit. As he puts it, “the possibility
must be considered seriously that the number of people on earth
has reached, or will reach within half a century, the maximum
number the Earth can support” at an acceptable living standard
(Cohen 1995, 367). When one considers the ongoing trend to-
ward urbanization and the view of one expert that “cities tend to
grow on the best agricultural land” (Evans 1998, 201), the level of
concern about carrying capacity is raised even higher. Still, there
is at present nothing approaching consensus among scholars as
to the true upper limit of the Earth’s population.
Population Policies: Pronatalist
Throughout history, governments have attempted to modify the
direction of population change, both upward and downward.
20
World Population: An Overview

Pronatalist polices, aiming for more births and faster population
growth, have been pursued in times and places where national
well-being has been equated with population size. People have
sometimes believed that military power would be enhanced
with a larger population base—more recruits for the army and
navy. Likewise, economic prosperity has sometimes been
thought to depend on a good-sized population—lots of workers,
lots of consumers, and so on. And of course a bigger population
constitutes a bigger potential tax base, yielding more tax rev-
enues to be spent on whatever the government, or sovereign,
considers worthwhile. At times pronatalist efforts have been dri-
ven by the fear of depopulation, with consequent loss of national
power and inﬂuence. France is an example of a nation given to
worrying about the size of its population (Spengler 1938). On the
other hand, antinatalist policies—those policies that aim for
fewer births and slower population growth—have been favored
in some places out of concern about the economic and social
costs of rapid population growth. Typically, this policy perspec-
tive has been applied to less developed countries, though some
environmentalists have claimed that richer nations, with their
high per capita consumption rates, are in some ways as overpop-
ulated as the poorer, high-fertility countries of Africa, south Asia,
and Latin America.
Through surveys conducted by UN agencies we now have
data on how governments around the world regard their current
levels of fertility. Among the more developed countries, mainly
in Europe, North America, and East Asia, three-fifths consider
their current fertility rates too low. This view should come as no
surprise, since most of the forty-four countries belonging to this
group have fertility rates well below the replacement level of two
children per woman. Low TFRs are bound to raise concerns
about labor shortages, tax revenues, long-term capacity to sup-
port a growing elderly population, and so on. Forty percent of
these governments have adopted policies aimed at raising the
birth rate. In Europe and Japan, especially, where attitudes to-
ward immigration have historically been more hostile than in the
United States, higher birth rates offer an appealing means of
halting an eventual decline in population. Sweden’s array of
pronatalist policies has garnered a lot of attention since the
1970s. Family beneﬁts were made quite generous, in the form of
cash payments, tax incentives, and extended maternity leaves.
The effort seemed to pay off during the 1980s, as the Swedish fer-
Population Policies: Pronatalist
21

tility rate (TFR) rose from 1.7 to 2.1, but during the 1990s fertility
slumped to its lowest rate ever (1.5), perhaps due to adverse eco-
nomic conditions (Population Division 2004b; Kent 1999, 4–5). At
this point, no one really knows how to effectively promote
higher birth rates—a point we pursue further in the next chapter.
Although in recent years the United States has seen its fertil-
ity rate drop to approximately replacement level, and even
brieﬂy below that level, there is little chance of U.S. depopulation
in this century. Hence one hears few calls for a pronatalist policy
in the United States. The Census Bureau actually projects a more
than doubling of the U.S. population, to 571 million, by the end
of the century (see Chapter 7). What differentiates the United
States from most other developed nations is a heavy and contin-
uous rate of net immigration. Without immigration, as noted be-
fore, the United States’ demographic future would much more
closely resemble that of the other industrialized countries. With
it, the nation will see population expand signiﬁcantly, owing to
the number of immigrants themselves, their relative youthful-
ness, and their high rates of fertility. If immigration policy can be
thought of as a form of population policy, then the United States
has accepted (if only implicitly) a policy strongly favoring a
larger national population.
Population Policies:
Antinatalist
For over half a century, policies aimed at slowing population
growth in the developing countries have been discussed, de-
bated, and, with wide variations, implemented. An influential
rationale for antinatalist policies was provided in a 1958 study by
Ansley Coale and Edgar Hoover, who argued that high rates of
population growth jeopardized long-term economic develop-
ment by diverting resources from growth-enhancing invest-
ments to the mere maintenance of population. Reduced fertility,
on the other hand, could speed economic development by free-
ing more resources for investment in productivity-enhancing ac-
tivities (Coale and Hoover, 1958). On the basis of this kind of
thinking, the industrialized nations began funding population
programs for the less developed countries (LDCs) in the 1960s
and 1970s, with the United States playing a leading role.
22
World Population: An Overview

In 2003, three-fifths of the world’s less developed, poorer
countries were on record as considering their fertility rates too
high. For Africa that ﬁgure rises to three-quarters. Some obvious
responses to the perception of too-high fertility are: postpone-
ment of marriage, abstinence, and birth control. At this point, the
ﬁrst two options have not yet become the bases for national pop-
ulation policy (although the Bush administration has heavily
promoted abstinence at home and abroad, as we discuss further
in Chapter 3). Birth control, on the other hand, is widely ac-
cepted, though the term itself has gone out of favor—even the
expression “family planning” is now avoided in some quarters.
About 90 percent of governments around the world support
the provision of contraceptive services to their citizens. Some-
what different approaches to the distribution of such services are
taken in the more developed as compared to the less developed
regions. In richer countries, contraceptives are obtained primar-
ily through private health networks and the private market. In
poorer countries, people depend more on subsidized provision
of contraceptives by the government or nongovernmental orga-
nizations (NGOs) (Population Division 2004b). The developing
countries have received considerable ﬁnancial and technical sup-
port for family planning from the United Nations Population
Fund (UNFPA), the United States Agency for International De-
velopment (USAID), NGOs such as International Planned Par-
enthood, and private foundations, such as the Ford and Rocke-
feller Foundations. On one principle all sides agree: no single
family-planning model ﬁts every country. Each country’s efforts
must be tailored to its own traditions, culture, and perceptions of
what needs to be done. In addition to providing information
about contraceptive choices and actually delivering contracep-
tive services to clients, some family-planning programs offer
more general health services to women and children, and some
engage in efforts to change attitudes about family size. (Radio
and television soap operas delivering messages about the bene-
fits of smaller families seem to have been quite effective in
changing attitudes and behavior in some countries.) In recent
years, the trend has been away from placing a narrow emphasis
on birth control per se. Policymakers have come to understand
that fertility is inextricably linked to women’s status in society,
and that higher levels of education and opportunity for women
usually result in later childbearing and smaller completed fami-
lies. A study by the Alan Guttmacher Institute found that in
Population Policies: Antinatalist
23

countries as diverse as Peru, Egypt, and Indonesia teenage child-
bearing was far more prevalent among women who had less
than seven years of schooling than among those who had more
than seven years. Maternal education has also been shown to be
correlated with lower mortality rates for children in most soci-
eties—another beneﬁt of expanding educational opportunity for
girls (Gelbard, Haub, and Kent 1999, 21–24).
Population Policy: 
China and India
What population policies have the world’s two population gi-
ants, China and India, followed? China, with approximately 1.3
billion people in 2005 and a TFR now below replacement level at
1.7, has pursued a forceful national program of slower popula-
tion growth for more than two and a half decades. India, with
around 1.1 billion people and a TFR of 2.8, has followed a more
decentralized system of family planning in the years since India
became the ﬁrst developing nation to offer family-planning ser-
vices in 1951. A comparison of the two cases will be instructive.
China’s fertility rate began falling ﬁrst in its cities during the
1960s. There was no explicit national policy aiming for smaller
families until 1971, when the wan xi shao campaign began. The
translation of this expression is: later (marriage), longer (intervals
between births), fewer (children). This program evolved into the
“one-child policy” of 1979 that has become the focus of much in-
ternational attention. Under the one-child policy, couples are
given incentives and disincentives to limit themselves to a single
child. Urban couples with one child who pledge not to have any
more children receive monthly child-support allowances until
the child reaches the age of fourteen. They are also promised
more spacious housing and higher pensions when they retire.
The child receives preferential treatment in applying to schools
and for jobs. In rural areas, a modiﬁed policy offers couples who
pledge to stop at one child added monthly payments in cash and
kind. One-child families also get the same grain ration and the
same size plots for private cultivation as larger families, thus
reaping an indirect advantage. The Chinese provinces may im-
plement additional policies on an individual basis, and some of
these policies have included higher taxes on families who have
24
World Population: An Overview

more than two children, and even imposition on the parents of
full maternity costs and medical and educational costs for such
children (Weeks 2005, 258–259; Attane 2002).
Whether the one-child policy has been a success is debat-
able. China once set a goal of capping national population at 1.2
billion by the year 2000. The goal was not met, and while China’s
TFR has fallen below replacement level, its current population is
so youthful, with so many young adults entering their childbear-
ing years, that the total population is bound to increase for a few
more decades at least. Some observers also question how much
of the fall in fertility has been due to the one-child policy. Much
of the extraordinary drop from a TFR of 7.5 in 1963 to 2.5 in 1983
occurred before the new policy was announced in 1979. And
much of China’s fertility decline might have occurred even in the
absence of a strict antinatalist policy. But criticism of the one-
child policy has been directed less at its efﬁcacy than at its “coer-
cive” features. When incentives and disincentives become strong
enough, the policy looks like compulsory birth control. One of
the policy’s worst side effects, in a culture that values male chil-
dren above female, can be seen in the neglect of infant girls and
sex-selective abortion of female fetuses (Weeks 2005, 62, 258–260;
Sen 1999, 220–221).
The world’s most populous democracy, India, has been
seeking slower population growth ever since its first five-year
plan (for 1951–1956) called for the creation of family-planning
centers throughout the country. At that time, the Indian TFR
stood at 6.0. Early efforts were focused on information, educa-
tion, and research into contraceptive methods. Results, however,
were disappointing, with fertility declines seen mainly in a few
states, in the upper classes, and in cities. Determined to do better,
Indira Gandhi’s government in 1976 revamped the program, in-
creased the monetary incentives to participants, and suggested
that state legislatures consider passing laws that ordered com-
pulsory sterilization after the birth of a couple’s third child.
(Only one state actually did so.) Controversy and violence en-
sued, and Gandhi’s party was defeated in elections a year later.
Her return to ofﬁce in 1980 brought a renewed commitment to
the national family-planning effort, as did her son’s rise to power
in 1984. Rajiv Gandhi promised a broader, higher-quality na-
tional program, with more generous rewards to women who lim-
ited their family sizes. But demographic results at the national
level were, and have continued to be, less than impressive. Ac-
Population Policy: China and India
25

cording to some observers, the program has been overly bureau-
cratic, inconsistent, and inflexible. Too much reliance has been
placed on sterilization (ﬁrst male, later female) rather than on of-
fering couples an array of contraceptive choices (Livi-Bacci 2001,
154–157; Weeks 2005, 565–567; Jain 1998, ch. 3).
Fertility has declined in India but not nearly as quickly as
policymakers once anticipated. Although at one time they hoped
to achieve replacement-level fertility by the end of the twentieth
century, the revised official goal is to reach that mark by 2010.
This looks increasingly unlikely to happen. Even if India’s TFR
moved downward to replacement level by 2010, as called for in
the National Population Policy of 2000, it would not prevent con-
tinued population growth for decades to come. Demographers
expect an increase of over 500 million between 2005 and 2050
owing to the “demographic momentum” of large numbers of In-
dians about to enter or already in their reproductive years.
As with China, it is unclear how much of India’s fertility de-
cline so far should be attributed to its population policy and how
much to general modernization trends. Rates of fertility reduc-
tion vary widely across the states of India. It has been observed
that where fertility is highest, for example, in the northern states
of Uttar Pradesh, Bihar, and Rajasthan, educational levels, espe-
cially for females, are low. By contrast, in the southern states of
Kerala and Tamil Nadu, fertility is low (TFRs of 1.7 and 2.2, re-
spectively) while education levels and literacy rates are high.
Women are accorded more economic rights and opportunities
here than in other Indian states, and family-planning programs
are less heavy-handed than they are in states with much higher
fertility rates (Sen 1999, 221–224; Jain 1998, 73).
Global Population Policy
The world has no super-government with the authority to im-
pose population policies on sovereign states around the globe,
nor is anyone seriously suggesting the desirability of such a
thing. But the views of the international community on popula-
tion matters can have an impact on the deliberations of national
policymakers and on the academic, media, and political elites
who shape the policies. Over the years, the most important fo-
rum for debating population policy has been a series of decen-
26
World Population: An Overview

nial, UN-sponsored world population conferences. The ﬁrst was
held in Bucharest (1974), the second in Mexico City (1984), and
what may turn out to be the last, the International Conference on
Population and Development, in Cairo (1994). Most nations sent
ofﬁcial delegations to these conferences.
Each conference generated a distinct political atmosphere.
At Bucharest, ideology dominated the proceedings. Some dele-
gates attacked the rich countries’ financial support of family-
planning programs in the poorer ones as self-serving, if not im-
perialistic. A number of national delegations made clear their
opposition to policies aimed at lowering population growth
rates. “Economic development is the best contraceptive,” in the
words of one slogan voiced at the conference. Acrimony aside,
the Bucharest meetings did put the nations assembled there on
record as approving, for the ﬁrst time, an international popula-
tion “plan of action.” The plan included a numerical target for re-
duced birth rates in the developing countries, a statement of the
basic human right of all couples to make their own decisions
about family size, and support for full gender equality in educa-
tion, politics, and economic life (Weeks 2005, 550–551; Livi-Bacci
2001, 149).
In Mexico City ten years later, delegates were startled by the
announcement of a new U.S. position that population was a
“neutral phenomenon” that was neither helpful nor harmful to
economic advancement. Many developing nations had come to
the conclusion since 1974 that rapid population growth could in-
deed pose a threat to their chances for social and economic
progress. The new, less activist U.S. position could be traced to
anti-abortion politics in the United States and to the intellectual
inﬂuence of Julian Simon (see Chapters 2 and 5) in the Reagan
administration. Population experts saw the main signiﬁcance of
the conference in the unanimous acceptance of the idea that pop-
ulation growth was a matter of concern apart from economic de-
velopment.
The most recent conference (Cairo, 1994) drew delegates
from 183 nations. The program of action that emerged from this
meeting was lengthier than previous plans of action; it was also
more ambitious and wide-ranging. Topics addressed include the
empowerment of women, internal and international migration,
the environment, technology, NGOs, education, and more. No
numerical goals were set for fertility or population growth rates,
although goals were set for life expectancies and (reduced) child
Global Population Policy
27

mortality rates. One expert concluded that Cairo produced three
major accomplishments: it firmly removed the taboo against
public discussion of family planning and birth control; it ele-
vated the concerns and rights of women in the control of fertility;
and it saw the return of the United States to a position of shared
leadership on issues of world population (Cohen 1995, 71–72).
The last accomplishment was short-lived: almost no one sees the
United States, as led by the Bush administration, as a leader on
world population issues. As of now, there are no plans for more
UN-sponsored population conferences.
References
Attane, Isabell. 2002. “China’s Family-Planning Policy: An Overview of
Its Past and Future.” Studies in Family Planning 33:1, 103–113.
Coale, Ansley J., and Edgar M. Hoover. 1958. Population Growth and Eco-
nomic Development in Low-Income Countries: A Case Study of India’s
Prospects. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Cohen, Joel E. 1995. How Many People Can the Earth Support? New York:
W. W. Norton.
Department of Economic and Social Affairs (DESA), United Nations
Secretariat. 2004. World Economic and Social Survey 2004: International Mi-
gration. New York: United Nations.
Dugger, Celia W. 2004, July 16. “Devastated by AIDS, Africa Sees Life
Expectancy Plunge.” New York Times, A3.
Evans, L. T. 1998. Feeding the Ten Billion: Plants and Population Growth.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Gelbard, Alene, Carl Haub, and Mary M. Kent. 1999. “World Population
beyond Six Billion.” Population Bulletin 54:1, 1–44.
Haupt, Arthur, and Thomas T. Kane. 1998. The Population Handbook, 3rd
ed. Washington, DC: Population Reference Bureau.
International Organization for Migration (IOM). 2005. World Migration
2005: Costs and Beneﬁts of International Migration. Geneva: IOM.
International Programs Center of the U.S. Census Bureau. 2005. Interna-
tional Data Base. Accessed 7/05 at http://www.census.gov/ipc/www/
idbnew.html.
Jain, Anrudh (ed.). 1998. Do Population Policies Matter? Fertility and Poli-
tics in Egypt, India, Kenya, and Mexico. New York: Population Council.
28
World Population: An Overview

Kent, Mary Mederios. 1999. “Shrinking Societies Favor Procreation.”
Population Today 27:12, 4–5.
Livi-Bacci, Massimo. 2000. The Population of Europe. Malden, MA.: Basil
Blackwell.
Livi-Bacci, Massimo. 2001. A Concise History of World Population, 3rd ed.
Malden, MA: Basil Blackwell.
Martin, Philip, and Elizabeth Midgley. 1999. “Immigration to the United
States.” Population Bulletin 54:2, 1–44.
McFalls, Joseph A., Jr. 2003. Population: A Lively Introduction, 4th ed.
Washington, DC: Population Reference Bureau.
Population Division of the Department of Economic and Social Affairs,
United Nations Secretariat. 2004a. World Population in 2300: Proceedings
of the United Nations Expert Meeting on World Population in 2300. New
York: United Nations.
Population Division of the Department of Economic and Social Affairs,
United Nations Secretariat. 2004b. World Population Policies 2003. New
York: United Nations.
Population Division of the Department of Economic and Social Affairs,
United Nations Secretariat. 2004c. World Urbanization Prospects: The 2003
Revision. Highlights. New York: United Nations.
Population Division of the Department of Economic and Social Affairs,
United Nations Secretariat. 2005. World Population Prospects: The 2004 Re-
vision. Highlights. New York: United Nations.
Population Reference Bureau (PRB). 2005. 2005 World Population Data
Sheet. Washington, DC.
Sen, Amartya. 1999. Development as Freedom. New York: Alfred A. Knopf.
Spengler, Joseph J. 1938. France Faces Depopulation. Durham, NC: Duke
University Press.
UNAIDS. 2004. 2004 Report on the Global AIDS Epidemic: 4th Global Re-
port. Geneva: Joint United Nations/World Health Organization Pro-
gram on HIV/AIDS.
United Nations Development Program. 2004. “HIV/AIDS Crisis Drives
Down Life Expectancy, Human Development Rankings in Sub-Saharan
Africa.” July 14 press release.
Weeks, John R. 2005. Population: An Introduction to Concepts and Issues,
9th ed. Belmont, CA: Wadsworth.
References
29


2
Problems and Controversies
C
ontroversies about population began long before we had
even the roughest idea of the true size of the human race. A
famous British debate of the mid-eighteenth century, for ex-
ample, involved the question of how many people there had
been in “ancient times,” with one side believing there had been
many fewer people than at present and the other believing there
had been many more. In the absence of demographic data, each
side had free rein to speculate at will, and there was no reluc-
tance to do so! Most modern population controversies still begin
at the numerical level: Is the present population the right size for
a society (or the world)? Too large? Too small? Growing too fast?
Too slowly? Once the facts or assumptions about population are
settled, it quickly becomes apparent that the really interesting is-
sues are those relating to the political, economic, and environ-
mental consequences of population. Disagreements tend to
hinge on people’s personal values, politics, and attitudes about
the future.
Malthus and Overpopulation Fears
One of the most widespread opinions people hold about world
population is that it is just too large. Those who express anxiety
about population size ﬁnd justiﬁcation in the writings of the En-
glish clergyman and economist Thomas Malthus (1766–1834), in
particular, his 1798 Essay on the Principle of Population. Malthus
did offer some gloomy, even scary, thoughts about population—
31

see the excerpt from the Essay in Chapter 7—but what he said
has often been misunderstood or misrepresented. His basic po-
sition was that population tends to increase at a “geometric”
rate, such as 1, 2, 4, 8, 16, whereas food production, at best, can
only increase at an “arithmetic” rate, such as 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. This
suggests an ever-present threat of a gap opening up between the
actual food supply and the food requirements of a growing pop-
ulation. Hasty readers might conclude from this that Malthus
foresaw such a gap actually materializing in his own country or
perhaps for the world as a whole. Indeed, the most common
misconception about Malthus is that he predicted mass famine.
He did not. Malthus identiﬁed a variety of “checks” on popula-
tion, such as disease, hunger, war, infanticide, and even the
simple act of postponing marriage. He made clear that he ap-
proved of only one of the checks—the last. The point he stressed
repeatedly was that population must be restrained by checks of
some kind, and if the milder ones are insufficiently effective,
then the harsher ones, like starvation and war, will be called into
operation.
In two ways Malthusian analysis now appears out of date.
First, Malthus adamantly rejected the most obvious means of re-
straining population—artiﬁcial birth control—on moral grounds.
The only acceptable way to achieve smaller families and thus
slower population growth, he said, was through the postpone-
ment of marriage. Malthus’s position on this issue was not un-
usual either for his time or for a clergyman of the Church of En-
gland, which he was. But clearly he was on the wrong side of
history in this regard. While some religious fundamentalists still
do not fully accept contraception in principle, in practice most
people do. Italy, for example, is one of the world’s most Catholic
countries, yet Italians are clearly defying (or ignoring) Roman
Catholic dogma against contraception, since the country has one
of the world’s lowest birth rates.
The second way in which Malthus seems premodern to us
today concerns his view of the environment. We can discuss this
in a very few words—he had no view at all! Environmental con-
cerns were completely absent from the original Malthusian
framework. For Malthus the consequences of a population grow-
ing too rapidly took the form of depressed wages, urban crowd-
ing, infectious diseases, stunted growth among children, and
other conventional miseries—never pollution, ecological degra-
dation, or the loss of open space. Had he lived a century later,
32
Problems and Controversies

Malthus still would not have been an environmentalist because
modern environmentalism only dates from the 1960s.
Modern Malthusians
In the 100 years following Malthus’s death, it seemed that the
Malthusian specter of overpopulation had been banished. Agri-
cultural production grew at a remarkable rate and appeared fully
capable of keeping pace with rising population. Famines were
increasingly infrequent and conﬁned to parts of Asia and Africa.
But in the 1950s and 1960s, as public health improvements in the
less developed nations sent mortality rates dramatically down-
ward with no corresponding decrease in fertility rates, concerns
about unsustainable population growth were voiced once again.
The loudest Malthusian “echo,” though hardly the first of the
postwar era, was Paul Ehrlich’s The Population Bomb, published
in 1968. “The battle to feed all of humanity is over,” warned the
Stanford biologist. “In the 1970s the world will undergo
famines—hundreds of millions of people are going to starve to
death” (Ehrlich 1968, xi). Just as grim a message had been deliv-
ered the previous year in William and Paul Paddock’s starkly ti-
tled Famine 1975! At the same time, Malthusian fears about the
possible destabilizing effects of rapid population growth in
Third World countries were having an impact on American for-
eign policy—hence the support for family-planning efforts in the
U.S. foreign aid program (Ross 1998, ch. 4; see also National Se-
curity Study Memorandum 200 in Chapter 7 of this volume).
For Ehrlich, unlike Malthus, the concern about population
has been environmental, global, and immediate. His Population
Bomb gave a powerful added boost to the environmental move-
ment launched by Rachel Carson’s Silent Spring (1962). The ﬁrst
Earth Day, in 1970, was inspired largely by the messages in these
two books. Since then, Ehrlich has continued to voice concerns
about the depletion of renewable and nonrenewable resources,
the degradation of the environment, and the international ten-
sions that can be attributed, often directly, to population growth.
He warns that current population trends will lead not just to
poverty and misery, as depicted by Malthus, but to ecological
disaster. Given the Earth’s ﬁnite carrying capacity, human popu-
lation can grow only so large. At the limit there can be only two
Modern Malthusians
33

possible solutions (short of migration to other planets): lower
birth rates or higher death rates. Although Ehrlich sees the sec-
ond solution as more likely, he takes every opportunity to advo-
cate those personal and public actions that could lower birth
rates. He was an enthusiastic co-founder of the advocacy group
Zero Population Growth, or ZPG, in 1968.
Hard on the heels of The Population Bomb came the sensa-
tional Limits to Growth (1972), a report by a team of M.I.T. scien-
tists who used computer modeling to simulate the future direc-
tion of the global economy, environment, and population. The
scholars began, reasonably enough, by assuming that population
growth, agricultural production, resource depletion, industrial
production, and pollution were interdependent processes, each
affecting the others through “feedback loops.” The computer
model, with its capacity for sorting out the complex connections
among a large number of variables and projecting current trends
far into the future, signaled a series of crises ahead. Global popu-
lation was already so large and fast-growing, nonrenewable re-
sources were being exploited so rapidly, and pollution rates were
likely to increase so substantially in coming decades that by the
year 2100 economic growth would have halted. Worse yet, popu-
lation would have gone into worldwide decline owing to “food
crises” and rising death rates. The future depicted in Limits to
Growth was alarming indeed.
Population Optimists
Gloomy views about population growth have undoubtedly been
inﬂuential in recent times, and those espousing them are some-
times called gloomsters, doomsters, or simply Malthusians. But
their views have not gone unchallenged. On the opposing side
are the boomsters or cornucopians. Two of the strongest anti-
Malthusian voices have been those of Ester Boserup (1910–1999),
a Danish development economist, and Julian Simon (1932–1998),
an American demographic thinker. Boserup, in her classic study,
The Conditions of Agricultural Growth (1965), noted that Malthus
and his followers saw population change as dependent on agri-
cultural conditions. Population would grow if land was abun-
dant or crop yields were generous, but not otherwise. Her own
research, however, convinced Boserup that the direction of cau-
34
Problems and Controversies

sation frequently ran the other way: population change could
lead to changes in agricultural practices. In particular, by putting
pressure on resources, rapid population growth could induce
changes in agricultural techniques, such as shifts from slash-and-
burn methods to settled cultivation, or innovations in plant vari-
eties, more systematic crop rotations, or improvements in farm
tools (Boserup 1965). In short, population pressure could be a
force for dynamic, positive change.
Julian Simon offers a broader and an even more optimistic
view of world population trends than Boserup. A growing popu-
lation, he argues, tends to raise, not lower, the standard of living.
Why? Because the most critical resource for improving human
welfare is, quite simply, human ingenuity and imagination. And
the way to have more of this resource is to expand population.
(That is the “message” behind the title of Simon’s controversial
1981 book, The Ultimate Resource.) Simon disputes many of the
pessimistic claims made by the neo-Malthusians regarding the
impact of population. He asserts, for example, that contrary to
the warnings of environmentalists like Ehrlich, natural resources
and energy are not becoming scarcer, or more expensive in con-
stant-dollar terms, as population continues to grow. Advances in
technology have brought down the extraction costs, in labor
hours per unit, for most resources and thereby have actually in-
creased the known and available reserves of those resources.
Similarly, pollution in the United States has abated in recent
decades, despite a growing population. Meanwhile, the world’s
per capita food production has been on the rise for many years,
and famines have become less frequent. Hence population
growth ought to be seen, according to Simon, more as a means
for solving problems than as a problem in itself.
Problems of Population Density
Growth of population almost always leads to rising population
density, that is, more people per unit of physical space. Only if
growing numbers were matched by increased land availability,
through reclamation or conquest, would this not be true. De-
pending on your perspective, rising population density can be
either a bad or a good thing. It will be bad if it causes over-
crowded housing, trafﬁc congestion, inadequate sanitation facili-
Problems of Population Density
35

ties, antisocial behavior, and so on. It will be good if it creates
larger markets, higher levels of business interaction, more intel-
lectual exchange, division of labor, and other economies of scale.
Population pessimists tend to emphasize the negative aspects of
density; population optimists, like Julian Simon, emphasize the
positive. There are no simple patterns when it comes to evaluat-
ing population densities. High densities may be found in coun-
tries as afﬂuent as the Netherlands (1,033 people per square mile)
and as poor as Bangladesh (2,542). Low densities may be seen in
countries as rich as Canada (8 people per square mile) and as
poor as Angola (28) in southern Africa. The Netherlands is more
than 100 times as densely settled as Canada but neither richer
nor poorer than Canada; likewise, Bangladesh is almost 100
times as densely populated as Angola but not much different in
per capita income (PRB 2005).
Concerns about rising global population densities relate
mainly to cities in the developing world. Here an ongoing rural-
to-urban migration of workers and families is putting enormous
strains on urban centers that are ill-equipped to accommodate
the inﬂux. Squatter settlements ring nearly every big city in the
Third World. Living conditions in these favelas, colonias, and
shantytowns can be grim, with no running water, sewage treat-
ment, or electricity. Public transportation is often scattered and
minimal, making for exhausting daily treks to places of employ-
ment. Historically, health and mortality indicators in such places
have been very poor—contagious diseases, after all, spread most
quickly where people are living at close quarters. Where all of
the conditions just listed are found, it is easy to conclude, as pop-
ulation pessimists generally do, that we are faced with an “over-
population” problem. And whatever the scale of the problem to-
day, it seems all too likely that it will grow in the coming
half-century, when nearly all the net gain in the world’s popula-
tion is slated to occur in the urban parts of the developing world.
Before we allow the gloom to settle too ﬁrmly on our think-
ing about the rising population densities of the Third World,
however, we need to remind ourselves of a simple fact: when
people move from rural to urban places, it is generally by
choice. Cities offer the rural migrant hope of a better life. Urban
living conditions may be abysmal and still an improvement on
the village left behind. A UN study in 1997 found that 96 percent
of urban dwellers in the developing countries had access to
health care, while only 76 percent of rural residents did. Other
36
Problems and Controversies

comparisons were equally in the cities’ favor: urban dwellers
had better access to water by an 87 to 60 percent margin and a
huge advantage in access to sanitation services—72 percent
compared to 20 percent (Weeks 2005, 487). This is not to say that
the poorest, most recently arrived migrants into cities invariably
improve their living standards. Many do not. In any case, it may
take time for real improvement to be seen, perhaps decades or
generations. But there is undoubtedly some truth to what de-
mographer John Weeks has to say about such migrants into
cities: “[T]hey bring their poverty with them to a place where it
is exposed to public view and, as a consequence, is more likely
to be acted upon by governments and NGOs (non-governmen-
tal organizations)” (487).
Population and the Environment
These days it is beyond dispute that human population has an
effect on the natural environment. Everything that we do—in-
deed every breath we take—has an impact, big or small, on the
planet’s biosphere. Some regard the human impact as large and
harmful. They tend to be in the “gloomster” camp described
above, and because they see human activity as tending to dam-
age the environment, they favor slower population growth.
Some would like to see an outright reduction in world population
from current levels. The well-known nature writer Bill McKibben
and his wife chose to have only one child out of concern for the
impact human beings, including the McKibbens, are having on
the natural world (1998). At the other end of the spectrum,
“boomsters” are more sanguine, believing that nature is resilient,
always in flux, and not affected by human activity in an espe-
cially pernicious way. They see no need to restrain population.
The disagreement between the worried environmentalist side
and the unperturbed, frequently pro-business, if not pro-corpo-
rate, side of this debate plays out on a number of issues, from
global warming to endangered species to urban and suburban
sprawl.
Hundreds of pages would be required to detail the various
ways that human population growth has been implicated in the
degradation of our environment, and hundreds more to summa-
rize the vast literature on issues relating to population, develop-
Population and the Environment
37

ment, and sustainability. It would probably be more useful at this
point to outline a way of thinking about the population–environ-
ment linkage. The most inﬂuential simple framework for analyz-
ing this issue is the IPAT equation presented originally (in
slightly different notation) by John Holdren and Paul Ehrlich in
1971. The equation I = PAT captures the idea that the impact on
the environment, I, is equal to the human population, P, times the
average consumption level or afﬂuence, A, times a technical fac-
tor, T, that expresses the average pollution effects from consump-
tion activities. Things will go badly for the environment if popu-
lation increases, if people consume more on average, or if a
certain type of technological change occurs. The technology fac-
tor is a bit tricky, since it can work either for or against the envi-
ronment. If a technological breakthrough allows for more effi-
cient (or “cleaner”) production, using fewer resources, T goes
down—a good thing. But if technology changes in a wasteful,
more heavily resource-consuming direction, T goes up—a bad
thing.
Several interesting scenarios can be sketched from the IPAT
equation. For example, if a society feels it needs to reduce its im-
pact on the environment over time, it faces a hard choice: reduce
population, reduce consumption, improve technology, or ﬁnd an
acceptable combination of the three factors. A coordinated policy
might permit one or more of the factors to increase, as long as an-
other factor fell by a sufficient amount. Alternatively, a society
that believed it had reached a tolerable (“sustainable”) degree of
impact on the environment and did not foresee any net change in
the technology term, T, might debate the future courses open to it
with respect to the remaining variables, P and A. One course
might be to enjoy more individual afﬂuence (higher A) but with
smaller families (lower P). Another might be to pursue a more
frugal lifestyle (lower A), with the compensating pleasures of
larger families (higher P). A third mental exercise: if we feel that
we cannot permit I to go any higher and that P will continue in-
creasing for some time into the future, then it becomes clear that
either there must be retrenching on consumption (lower A) or a
favorable development of technology (lower T). By manipulat-
ing the IPAT equation in this manner, one gains a deeper under-
standing of the environmental, demographic, and economic con-
straints Ehrlich and Holdren were trying to model.
The IPAT equation has always lent itself more to general the-
orizing and policy “brainstorming” than to speciﬁc applications.
38
Problems and Controversies

At the general level, it can provide some insights into the global
impacts that the more developed regions (MDRs) and the less
developed regions (LDRs) are having on the environment, and it
can give some hints of what the future may bring. As we saw in
Chapter 1, the less developed countries today represent about 81
percent of the world’s population, and the more developed,
around 19 percent. If all else were equal, this would mean that
the world’s poor had about four times the global environmental
impact that the world’s rich have. Yet we know they do not. The
per capita consumption levels of the LDRs are far lower than
those of the MDRs. In 2003, the World Bank listed sixty-six coun-
tries with per capita incomes of $745 or less, while the ﬁfty-two
wealthiest nations enjoyed per capita incomes at least twelve
times higher and generally twenty-five to forty times higher
(Gilbert 2004, 132–134). So while the world’s poor greatly out-
number the world’s rich, their environmental impact may well
be less than that of the rich.
In coming decades the picture will change. Between now
and 2050, the LDR population will grow much more rapidly than
the MDR population. That demographic fact in itself would lead
us, by the logic of IPAT, to believe the world’s environment may
take a “heavier hit” from the LDRs than from the MDRs. What
about consumption, or A? At present the richer countries far out-
distance the poorer when it comes to ownership and use of auto-
mobiles, computers, cell phones, air travel, housing, and the like.
We can see the gap clearly, but we do not yet know whether or
how much it will be closed in the next half-century. One clue:
China and India have both experienced far more rapid economic
advancement over the past decade and a half than the developed
nations, and by every indication they will continue their eco-
nomic surge. On the other hand, Africa’s economic progress has
lagged; its consumption levels may rise very little in the years
ahead. But its population will climb rapidly, to almost 2 billion
by 2050.
What conclusion are we led to? Although we have no ﬁrm
knowledge of what will happen to any of the four variables in
the IPAT equation at the global level, we are reasonably certain
that population will increase, especially—and overwhelm-
ingly—in the less developed countries. Consumption levels (A)
in those countries have the potential to rise substantially also, at
least among the over 2.4 billion residents of economically dy-
namic India and China, and perhaps in many other countries.
Population and the Environment
39

Thus P times A seems sure to increase among the less developed
nations. For the more developed nations as a group, environ-
mental impact may be smaller. Population is expected to grow
hardly at all. But it would be surprising if per capita consump-
tion did not continue to rise, at least slowly, as it has for well over
a century. Hence P times A should also rise among the rich na-
tions. All of this puts a clear burden on technology: unless we see
big technological improvements (lowering T), the rising values
of P and A around the world will give environmental pes-
simists—and everybody else—much to worry about.
Optimum Population
The idea of an optimum population—the best population size for
a given society or for the planet—has been a subject of specula-
tion by thinkers as ancient as Plato and as current as Paul
Ehrlich. Until recent times it was mainly philosophers and econ-
omists who debated the issue of optimum population. Political
philosophers have wondered what size of society would best
support a democratic model of governance; economists have
wondered how large a population would maximize per capita
output or income. With the advent of ecological thinking and the
modern environmentalist movement there has been some re-
newed interest in the question of the optimum size of popula-
tion, especially at the global level.
Note the difference between optimum and maximum popula-
tion. We have already seen in Chapter 1 that the question of how
many people the Earth could possibly support has been ana-
lyzed at length by Joel Cohen. He notes that the maximum popu-
lation estimates of the most prominent scientists in the past seem
to converge on a range of 7.7 to 12 billion (Cohen 1995, 368–369).
By current UN projections, the world will enter this central esti-
mated range of maximum population between 2020 and 2025.
But that leaves unanswered the question of whether a popula-
tion of 7.7 billion plus is the best one for the Earth.
In the mid-1990s, Paul and Anne Ehrlich and Gretchen Daily
offered some preliminary thoughts on optimum human popula-
tion (Daily, Ehrlich, and Ehrlich 1994). They argued that the opti-
mum would have to lie somewhere between the “minimum vi-
able size” and the “biophysical carrying capacity of the
40
Problems and Controversies

planet”—and then asserted that the current world population
“clearly exceeded the capacity of Earth to sustain it” (469).
(World population has increased another billion since they made
that assertion!) They proceeded to lay out a number of criteria
that would have to be met in order for the global population to
be considered optimal. For example, it would not exceed the
level needed to guarantee a decent standard of living to every
person, nor be too large to make it possible for everyone to enjoy
freedom from sexism, racism, religious intolerance, and so on. It
would be large enough to allow a good distribution of popula-
tion centers, with a “critical mass” of people in each—one might
call this the “cultural diversity” criterion. Importantly, an opti-
mum human population would have to be small enough to as-
sure the continuation of biodiversity. (The scholars did not spec-
ify any acceptable rate of species loss, but then exercises of this
kind rarely descend into messy details.) In the end they stated a
range of populations they believed would represent the current
optimum: 1.5 to 2 billion. Two billion would, of course, be less
than one-third of the world’s current population and less than
one-quarter of the number projected for mid-century.
One might expect the Ehrlichs to be troubled by the growing
gap between the actual world population and their sense of the
optimal level. Indeed, the tone of pessimistic alarm first dis-
played in Paul Ehrlich’s 1968 best-seller, The Population Bomb, is
still much in evidence in the population chapter of the Ehrlichs’
latest book, One with Ninevah: Politics, Consumption, and the Hu-
man Future (2004). Yet they are able to find some glimmers of
hope in present demographic trends. How so? Because the im-
pending shrinkage of population in Europe and Japan, generally
regarded as bad news in those areas, is considered “an incredibly
positive trend” by the Ehrlichs, who see the world’s most afﬂu-
ent nations as overconsumers of resources (Ehrlich and Ehrlich
2004, 99). Hence, the fewer Germans, Italians, Belgians, and Japa-
nese, the better for global equity and for environmental sustain-
ability.
The Great Population Slowdown
Almost as extraordinary as the explosion of human numbers
during the past two centuries is the current slowdown in world
The Great Population Slowdown
41

population growth. We saw in the last chapter that the world’s
population reached its fastest rate of growth ever, about 2.2 per-
cent annually, in the mid-1960s. From there the rate has declined
almost continuously to the present rate of 1.15 percent, and most
projections have it continuing to slide, dropping below 0.5 per-
cent by mid-century. Considering the three basic demographic
variables—fertility, mortality, and migration—only the ﬁrst one
could possibly account for a steady deceleration of population
growth. Favorable trends in mortality—that is, longer life ex-
pectancies—would tend to raise the population growth rate, and
migration, on a global level, has no direct effect on the growth
rate. So the focus is on changes in fertility, the childbearing pref-
erences and practices of the world’s reproductive couples.
As we see in Table 2.1, total fertility rates have fallen sub-
stantially during the past half-century. For the world as a whole,
the TFR has dropped by nearly one-half since 1950, from 5.02 to
2.65. If girls born today went through their reproductive years
bearing children at the same age-speciﬁc rates that the world’s
women of all ages are now bearing children, they would have,
on average, 2.65 children each. This would keep the global popu-
lation growing, of course, since 2.65 is well above the 2.1 TFR
that is needed to maintain a stable population. Although fertility
has declined in every region of the world, it has fallen farthest in
Asia and Latin America (including the Caribbean)—by over half
in both areas. This is a quite signiﬁcant drop, but since the TFR
was so high to start with, it doesn’t yet reach the replacement
level in either area. Europe and North America have experienced
smaller relative declines in their TFRs, but given their lower
starting point, both areas have ended up below replacement
level. Europe is well below that level. Africa, with the highest ini-
tial TFR of any region, has seen the smallest fertility reduction
during the past fifty years and continues to have remarkably
high fertility, about ﬁve children per woman.
Going forward, we can expect some interesting develop-
ments in fertility trends around the world, if the United Nations’
demographic experts are right. For the world as a whole, fertility
should reach replacement level around 2040 (see Table 2.2).
Every continent except Africa will have fallen below replacement
level, though not very far below. African fertility will be diver-
gent from, but moving gradually into line with, the rest of the
world. Note the bold assumption that Europe in 2005 has already
reached its lowest level of fertility and will be registering in-
42
Problems and Controversies

creases in its TFR from now on. It would be well to regard that
assumption with some skepticism, since there is little evidence
that any country or region of the world has ever staged such a
sustained demographic “comeback” in the past, except from cat-
astrophes like wars, plagues, and famines.
Since it is ordinarily nations that formulate policies to ad-
dress problems relating to population, we look next at the fertil-
ity experiences, past and future, of seven individual countries
(Table 2.3). The seven are chosen somewhat arbitrarily, but note
that the list includes the world’s three most populous countries,
as well as Latin America’s biggest country, Africa’s biggest, and a
two-nation sample of Europe. The data presented in Table 2.3
will be useful in subsequent sections of the chapter. Reductions
in fertility have been recorded by all seven countries over the
forty years from 1965 to 2005, but with big variations. China and
Brazil stand out, with reductions of around 70 and 60 percent, re-
spectively. Nigeria’s modest drop of 23 percent is typical of sub-
Saharan Africa during this period. Russia and Italy have fallen to
such low fertility rates that they face depopulation. The similar-
ity of TFRs across the bottom of the table simply reﬂects a deci-
sion by the UN demographic team to make a simplifying as-
sumption that global fertility rates will converge on 1.85 by the
middle of the century. No one should place any bets that such a
global identity of childbearing behavior will actually occur.
The Great Population Slowdown
43
TABLE 2.1
Total Fertility Rates, Global and Regional, 1950–2005
Latin America/
North 
World
Africa
Asia
Europe
Carib.
America
1950–1955
5.02
6.72
5.89
2.66
5.89
3.47
1955–1960
4.96
6.79
5.64
2.66
5.94
3.72
1960–1965
4.97
6.86
5.64
2.58
5.97
3.34
1965–1970
4.91
6.81
5.69
2.36
5.55
2.54
1970–1975
4.49
6.72
5.08
2.16
5.05
2.01
1975–1980
3.92
6.60
4.18
1.97
4.50
1.78
1980–1985
3.58
6.45
3.67
1.88
3.93
1.81
1985–1990
3.38
6.11
3.40
1.83
3.43
1.90
1990–1995
3.04
5.67
2.96
1.57
3.03
1.99
1995–2000
2.79
5.26
2.67
1.40
2.75
1.95
2000–2005
2.65
4.97
2.47
1.40
2.55
1.99
Source: United Nations Population Division, World Population Prospects: The 2004 Revision, accessed online at
http://esa.un.org/unpp/p2k0data.asp. 

Depopulation Worries
In this era of population slowdown, the most immediate worry
for countries with below-replacement fertility is the actual loss of
population. No country wants to go out of business. National
pride rests in part on national numbers. Fewer people means
fewer customers, fewer investors, fewer taxpayers, a smaller
workforce, and a smaller pool of military recruits. It has to be
deeply disquieting to a nation like Russia to be losing around
750,000 people per year. President Vladimir Putin calls it a na-
tional crisis, and that does not seem an exaggeration. U.S. Cen-
sus Bureau demographers now project Russia’s 2050 population
44
Problems and Controversies
TABLE 2.2
Total Fertility Rates, Global and Regional, 2000–2050
Latin America/
North 
World
Africa
Asia
Europe
Carib.
America
2000–2005
2.65
4.97
2.47
1.40
2.55
1.99
2005–2010
2.55
4.68
2.35
1.43
2.38
1.98
2010–2015
2.46
4.35
2.26
1.47
2.26
1.93
2015–2020
2.38
4.00
2.17
1.53
2.15
1.87
2020–2025
2.31
3.68
2.09
1.59
2.06
1.83
2025–2030
2.23
3.39
2.02
1.65
1.99
1.83
2030–2035
2.17
3.13
1.97
1.71
1.93
1.84
2035–2040
2.12
2.90
1.95
1.76
1.89
1.85
2040–2045
2.09
2.69
1.93
1.81
1.87
1.85
2045–2050
2.05
2.52
1.91
1.83
1.86
1.85
Source: United Nations Population Division, World Population Prospects: The 2004 Revision, accessed online at
http://esa.un.org/unpp/p2k0data.asp.
TABLE 2.3
Total Fertility Rates for Seven Selected Countries, 1965–2050
Russian 
United 
China
India 
Nigeria
Federation
Italy
Brazil
States
1965–1970
6.06
5.69
6.90
2.02
2.49
5.38
2.55
1985–1990
2.46
4.15
6.83
2.13
1.35
3.10
1.92
2005–2010
1.74
2.76
5.32
1.40
1.38
2.25
2.04
2025–2030
1.85
1.95
3.24
1.65
1.59
1.92
1.85
2045–2050
1.85
1.85
2.40
1.85
1.85
1.85
1.85
Source: United Nations Population Division, World Population Prospects: The 2004 Revision, accessed online at
http://esa.un.org/unpp/p2k0data.asp.

to be one-quarter below its 2005 level. This would be a loss of 33
million people. Japan faces a slightly smaller decline of 27 mil-
lion between 2005 and 2050, but again that represents a shrink-
age of more than 20 percent. Ukraine’s projected loss comes
closer to 30 percent, and a similar drop is expected in the Baltic
states (Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania) by mid-century. Were the
United States to experience the same proportional loss of popu-
lation as Russia, it would be 67 million people. It is difﬁcult to
imagine the economic and social consequences of such a con-
traction.
Here is an apparent paradox: most countries with below-re-
placement fertility are not yet losing population as Russia is. The
explanation is not terribly complicated. Population in any coun-
try keeps growing as long as births exceed deaths (ignoring mi-
gration). Even if the TFR is below 2.1, births can be numerous if
there is a large enough cohort of young people coming into their
reproductive years. When this happens, demographers call it mo-
mentum. There is a lot of positive momentum in the world at pre-
sent. In many if not most countries, birth rates a generation ago
were higher than today (see Tables 2.1 and 2.3), and those new-
borns have grown up to be today’s young adults forming unions
and having children. This kind of positive momentum offers a
buffer against outright depopulation, but eventually it erodes
and disappears if fertility rates remain low.
Just as there can be momentum in the upward direction,
there can be momentum downward as well. With many nations
spending years and even decades at subreplacement levels of
fertility, their future cohorts of potential parents are getting
smaller. As time passes and national populations begin to de-
cline, it will become progressively more difﬁcult to turn things
around. Even if attitudes about childbearing changed in the fu-
ture and the TFR rose above 2.1—and bear in mind that it is now
below that level in scores of countries—population might con-
tinue to decline for many years for lack of enough reproductive-
age parents. This is not merely an abstract possibility: a leading
demographer, Wolfgang Lutz, and two colleagues have pub-
lished a paper indicating that Europe’s positive population mo-
mentum turned negative around the year 2000 (Lutz, O’Neill, and
Scherbov 2003). Europe, it appears, is on a demographic slippery
slope.
Population and economic prospects are, of course, inter-
twined. In a variety of ways, things go well for business when
Depopulation Worries
45

the population is expanding—and badly when the population is
contracting. Ben Wattenberg has discussed this phenomenon in a
recent book where he contrasts the easy successes of American
CEOs “riding high on a mighty demographic wave,” their ex-
panding sales anchored in a steadily growing customer base,
with the gloomy experience awaiting European businesspersons
in coming decades. The latter will face declining sales, revenues,
and proﬁts as Europe’s population declines—by 100 million, ac-
cording to Wattenberg. Real estate will be hard hit. Fewer people
means lower demand for housing and lower prices. As property
values decline, the loans that so often are collateralized by real
estate will have to shrink as well, and that may force a drop in in-
vestment. (Consider what happened in Japan during the 1990s.)
A falling population will also bring slumping sales and proﬁts
for Europe’s furniture- and carpet-makers and auto mechanics
(Wattenberg 2004, 136–138). There have to be some economic ben-
eﬁts from population declines, but they are much harder to iden-
tify than the costs—and surely much smaller.
Older and Older
There’s no getting around it: the world’s population is growing
older. When this development is expressed in terms of rising life
expectancies, we see it as a thoroughly positive thing, a sign of
economic and medical progress. When it is seen as enlarging the
group of dependents in society who, like those too young to
work, must be supported by the adult working population, it’s a
different story—we tend to grumble and worry. However we
view it, the rising median age of our species is an established
fact, not just in the rich nations but nearly everywhere. We will
have to adjust to it, however painful that adjustment may prove
to be.
The aging of humanity is linked to fertility trends. When fer-
tility rates fall as low as they have for as long as they have in
most of the developed nations, it strongly affects the age struc-
ture of the population. The proportion of children and adoles-
cents in the population recedes, while the proportion of elderly
expands. With age-adjusted mortality rates also declining, life
expectancy has to rise. You get an older, “grayer” population on
average. These trends, while affecting most of the world’s poorer
46
Problems and Controversies

nations to some degree, are most clearly seen at present in the
richer ones. In many of the developed nations, 15 percent of the
population is over the age of 64, while in the less developed na-
tions a more common ﬁgure is 5 percent or less in the senior cate-
gory. Table 2.4 provides examples of age structures in some more
developed and less developed countries. The countries were not
randomly chosen: the first section displays a nearly complete
listing of the more developed countries in which the over–64
population in 2004 outnumbered the youth under age 15. (As
time goes on, more and more countries will be added to the list.)
The second section lists half a dozen less developed countries
chosen from all points of the compass. Note the extreme youth-
fulness of these populations by comparison with the ﬁrst section.
TABLE 2.4
Age Structures of Twelve Selected Countries, 2004
COUNTRIES
Percent < 15
Percent > 64
More developed
Germany
15
18
Greece
15
18
Italy
14
19
Japan
14
20
Portugal 
16
17
Spain
15
17
Less developed
Colombia
32
5
Ethiopia
44
3
Ghana
40
3
Indonesia
30
5
Pakistan
42
4
Yemen
46
4
Source: PRB (2005).
The very long-run prospect for world aging has been
touched upon in Chapter 1. UN demographic experts now esti-
mate that by 2100 life expectancies around the world will rise to
a range of 66 to 97 years, depending on the country. Given that
the world’s longest-living people today, the Japanese, have a life
expectancy of only 82, it is remarkable to think that an entire
country could have a life expectancy approaching 100 in less
than ten decades. But even more amazing is the prospect held out
by the United Nations that in the year 2300 life expectancies will
Older and Older
47

range from 87 to 106! Less dramatic, but signiﬁcant nevertheless,
are the projections on median age of the world’s population:
from 26 in the year 2000 to 44 by the year 2100 and 48 by 2300
(Population Division 2004).
Problems of a Graying Population
An obvious concern with aging populations is how to support
the growing number of citizens who are no longer active in the
labor force. Many national pension systems, including Social Se-
curity in the United States, were established long ago, when life
expectancies were much shorter than they are today. Pay-as-you-
go systems, under which the taxes paid by current workers are
used to fund current benefits to retirees, function well when
there are many workers per retired person but less well when the
worker/retiree ratio falls. If that ratio falls far enough—it is now
below two to one in Austria and Belgium, and headed toward
one to one by 2030—the system may collapse.
Of course, pension systems of any kind are almost never
found in the developing world, and that poses a different kind of
problem: how can the elderly be assured of support in a future of
lower fertility, fewer adult children to lean on, and no govern-
ment pension system? This is a huge concern because the largest
increases in elderly populations over the coming half-century
will be found among the developing countries. By mid-century,
three-quarters of the world’s elderly will live in such countries.
Yet these are precisely the societies least able to bear the ﬁnancial
burden of a growing senior citizenry. The issue is often expressed
as follows: the world’s developed countries got rich before they
grew old, while the developing countries are in danger of grow-
ing old before they get rich.
Besides the demographic problem of a shrinking number of
children per aging parent in the developing world, there is the
added problem of weakening kinship ties and growing physical
distances between generations. It is young adults who generally
migrate from rural to urban areas seeking employment. Aging
parents are left behind. The traditional patterns of intergenera-
tional support are disrupted or at least attenuated. Call it part of
modernization, but unless new support structures are found to
replace the traditional practice of elders being looked after by
48
Problems and Controversies

their children, the outlook for the aged in the developing nations
will be worrisome at best.
Finally, aging populations raise difﬁcult issues of fairness in
the allocation of a society’s resources. As the elderly population
continues to expand, requiring increased amounts of social ser-
vices, there will inevitably be strains on private and public
sources of funding to provide those services. Some believe that a
shift of social resources away from the young and toward the
older generations has been under way for years. If this continues,
intergenerational conﬂicts of interest may prove hard to avoid.
The political process will be put to the test. It has been clear for
some time in the Western democracies that senior citizens, by
virtue of their high participation rates in the electoral process,
wield enormous inﬂuence over legislation that affects their well-
being. Such political clout can only increase in the coming
decades as the so-called gray lobby increases in size. With the
“senior” voice growing louder, who will speak for the young?
Pronatal Policies: 
Can They Work?
In Chapter 1 we considered a few of the ways that governments
may try to inﬂuence population in an upward or a downward di-
rection through the encouragement of births (pronatal policies)
or the discouragement of births (antinatal policies). In today’s
demographic environment, some countries, particularly those
with fertility rates well below replacement level, are shifting
from pronatalist theory to practice in an effort to boost their birth
rates. The options available to them are several. Governments
may ban abortion and contraception, as Romania did forty years
ago under the dictator Nicolae Ceausescu—a policy that in-
creased births almost immediately. They may outlaw divorce.
They may coerce young women to conceive by, for example, im-
posing a tax on those who don’t. And they may forbid or discon-
tinue sex education in the schools (Levitt and Dubner 2005, ch.
4). Although such policies might prove marginally effective in
raising the birth rate, they are not what we would expect any
democratic government to propose, and it is highly doubtful
they would be accepted in the societies that are currently trying
to lift fertility rates back to replacement levels.
Prenatal Policies: Can They Work?
49

When it comes to encouraging more births, governments in
recent decades have favored the carrot over the stick. The most
obvious carrot is a monetary payment to women for having a
baby. To some this may sound crude, even insulting, but it has
been tried. In 1988, the Canadian province of Quebec, which had
long worried about the size of the Francophone population rela-
tive to English-speakers in Canada, offered cash payments for
births: $500 for the ﬁrst birth, $1,000 for the second, and $8,000
for a third and every subsequent birth (Canadian dollars). Addi-
tional beneﬁts were offered under the program, such as cash al-
lowances and housing subsidies, all of which contributed to a
very high price tag. Did it work? Initial results were favorable:
the TFR rose from 1.49 in 1988 to 1.72 in 1990—still below the re-
placement level of 2.1 but an encouraging turnaround. After
1990, however, fertility fell back again to lower levels. It appears
that Quebecois women altered the timing of their births rather
than the ultimate number of births. In 1997 the program was dis-
continued, replaced by a cheaper and less pronatally focused
program (Krull 2001).
Australia recently offered a cash bonus for births—$3,000
for a birth during 2004 or 2005, rising to $4,000 in mid-2006 (Aus-
tralian dollars). Again, as in Quebec, there was a positive short-
term response. The TFR in 2004 increased significantly for the
ﬁrst time since 1961. It is much too early to call the program a
success, since women “down under” may simply be speeding up
the conception and birth of children they were going to have
anyway, without bonuses, at a later time. The clock is still run-
ning on this pronatalist experiment (Lalasz 2005).
Sweden and France are two European nations that have
had policies in place for several decades to ease the burdens on
mothers. These pronatalist policies, in fact if not in name, in-
clude paid maternal leave, day care allowances, and family cash
allowances. As it happens, Sweden and France today have
among the highest total fertility rates in Europe—1.7 and 1.9, re-
spectively. While they still fall short of replacement fertility, they
are doing much better than countries such as Spain and Italy
that lack such policies. One expert, Phillip Longman, argues that
the failure of even a highly pronatalist country like France to
stabilize its population on a long-term basis demonstrates that
the incentives held out for motherhood are not yet sufficiently
attractive (2004, 177–178). The cost to a woman of having a child
goes far beyond diapers and formula. If she leaves the labor
50
Problems and Controversies

force, the “opportunity cost” of lost wages will be steep. Indeed,
that cost has been rising for many years as women have ad-
vanced educationally and professionally. If a European woman
wants to combine motherhood and work in the paid labor force,
there is the further problem of rigid labor market practices. The
lack of ﬂexible hours and part-time jobs, according to Longman,
may well be preventing some would-be mothers from having
children (2004, 178).
It is gradually becoming clear, as the evidence outlined
above suggests, that pronatal policies have only a limited effec-
tiveness. When their introduction is followed by a rise in the TFR,
typically the change is relatively small and short-lived. No coun-
try has yet found a policy that can bring its fertility rate back up
to replacement level on a long-term basis. That does not mean
such a policy cannot be found or that it is not worth trying to ﬁnd
one. As nations continue to experience low fertility and, one by
one, begin to actually depopulate (initially at a slow pace, then
faster)—and this now appears almost inevitable—policymakers
will surely return to the question of how to make parenthood
more attractive. In the meantime, it is worth noting that many of
the policies that have been tried so far are defensible on their own
terms, regardless of whether they have raised the fertility rate.
References
Boserup, Ester. 1993 (1965). The Conditions of Agricultural Growth: The
Economics of Agrarian Change under Population Pressure. London: Earth-
scan Publications.
Cohen, Joel E. 1995. How Many People Can the Earth Support? New York:
W. W. Norton.
Daily, Gretchen C., Anne H. Ehrlich, and Paul R. Ehrlich. 1994. “Opti-
mum Human Population Size.” Population and Environment: A Journal of
Interdisciplinary Studies 15:6, 469–475.
Ehrlich, Paul. 1968. The Population Bomb. New York: Ballantine.
Ehrlich, Paul, and Anne Ehrlich. 2004. One with Ninevah: Politics, Con-
sumption, and the Human Future. Washington, DC: Island Press.
Gilbert, Geoffrey. 2004. World Poverty: A Reference Handbook. Santa Bar-
bara, CA: ABC-CLIO.
Holdren, John P., and Paul R. Ehrlich. 1971. “Impact of Population
Growth.” Science 171:1212–1217.
References
51

Krull, Catherine. 2001, November/December. “Quebec’s Alternative to
Pronatalism.” Population Today 29:8, 3–4. Available at PRB’s website,
www.prb.org.
Lalasz, Robert. 2005. “Baby Bonus Credited with Boosting Australia’s
Fertility Rate.” Web news, July 2005, from PRB at www.prb.org.
Levitt, Steven D., and Stephen J. Dubner. 2005. Freakonomics: A Rogue
Economist Explores the Hidden Side of Everything. New York: William
Morrow.
Longman, Phillip. 2004. The Empty Cradle: How Falling Birthrates Threaten
World Prosperity and What to Do about It. New York: Basic Books.
Lutz, Wolfgang, Brian C. O’Neill, and Sergei Scherbov. 2003, March 28.
“Europe’s Population at a Turning Point.” Science 299:5615.
Malthus, Thomas Robert. 1993 (1798). An Essay on the Principle of Popula-
tion. Edited by Geoffrey Gilbert. New York: Oxford University Press.
McKibben, Bill. 1998. Maybe One: A Personal and Environmental Argument
for Single Child Families. New York: Simon & Schuster.
Meadows, Donella H., et al. 1974 (1972). The Limits to Growth. New York:
Universe Books.
Meyer, Michael. 2004, September 27. “Birth Dearth.” Newsweek Interna-
tional, 56.
Paddock, William, and Paul Paddock. 1967. Famine 1975! London: Wei-
denfeld & Nicholson.
Population Division of the Department of Economic and Social Affairs,
United Nations Secretariat. 2004. World Population in 2300: Proceedings of
the United Nations Expert Meeting on World Population in 2300. New York:
United Nations.
Population Reference Bureau (PRB). 2005. 2005 World Population Data
Sheet. Washington, DC: PRB.
Ross, Eric B. 1998. The Malthus Factor: Poverty, Politics and Population in
Capitalist Development. New York: Zed Books.
Simon, Julian. 1981. The Ultimate Resource. Princeton, NJ: Princeton Uni-
versity Press.
Simon, Julian. 1996. The Ultimate Resource 2. Princeton, NJ: Princeton
University Press.
Specter, Michael. 1998, July 10. “The Baby Bust: A Special Report; Popu-
lation Implosion Worries a Graying Europe.” New York Times, A1.
Wattenberg, Ben. 2004. Fewer: How the New Demography of Depopulation
Will Shape Our Future. Chicago: Ivan R. Dee.
52
Problems and Controversies

Weeks, John R. 2005. Population: An Introduction to Concepts and Issues,
9th ed. Belmont, CA: Wadsworth.
Yaukey, David, and Douglas L. Anderton. 2001. Demography: The Study
of Human Population, 2nd ed. Prospect Heights, IL: Waveland Press.
References
53


3
Special U.S. Issues
E
ach country faces its own population issues, which vary accord-
ing to its size, location, history, and position vis-à-vis the rest of
the world. Some of the population questions that interest
people in the United States ﬂow from the fact that the United States
is currently the world’s sole superpower. Thus the question can
arise: will U.S. population levels in the future sustain America’s
global inﬂuence, or will they undermine it? (A well-known com-
mentator on politics and demography, Ben Wattenberg, among
others, has raised serious concerns on this point.) Partly because of
its wealth and superpower status, the United States has long been a
leader in the funding of international family-planning efforts. How
long can this be expected to continue, given the current state of
American politics? The answer could well depend on the outcome
of the next election—or the one after that. Another set of popula-
tion questions for Americans is actually not so different from what
various other industrial democracies must confront, for example: Is
the birth rate high enough? Will the labor force grow at a rate sufﬁ-
cient to keep the economy strong? Will low fertility and the aging
of the population jeopardize the public and private pension sys-
tems now in place? Will the nation be able to provide health care to
its elderly as their numbers continue to increase? These are several
of the questions addressed in the present chapter.
Is the United States an Exceptional Nation,
Demographically Speaking?
We saw in Chapter 2 that nearly every modern industrialized na-
tion has a total fertility rate that is below replacement level. Ex-
55

amples are Germany (1.39), Italy (1.28), United Kingdom (1.66),
France (1.85), Spain (1.28), Taiwan (1.57), and South Korea (1.26).
A quick reminder: the total fertility rate, or TFR, is the number of
children a girl born today would bear during her lifetime if she
ended up having children at the same rate that women in each
age category are having them right now. Thus girls born in Tai-
wan today would average, over the course of their reproductive
years, slightly more than one and a half children each if their
childbearing experiences in future decades mirrored those of Tai-
wanese women in the present period. Clearly, however, a TFR of
1.57 would not replenish the island’s population through natural
means. In fact, the next generation could end up roughly one-
quarter smaller than the current one. Shrinkage of each new gen-
eration will be the long-run fate of every country whose TFR re-
mains below 2.1 unless it receives enough immigrants to make up
the population loss caused by low birth rates.
What about the United States? With respect to its birth rate,
the United States is a notable exception to the rule of below-re-
placement fertility for the world’s most advanced economies. For
more than a decade now, the U.S. total fertility rate has ﬂuctu-
ated between 2.0 and 2.1; in other words, it has stayed consis-
tently at, or just shy of, replacement level. At the height of the
famed “baby boom,” in the late 1950s, America’s TFR rose above
3.7—higher than the average for all developing nations of the
world today. But after the end of the boom in 1964, the fertility
rate dropped to as low as 1.8 in the mid-1970s and remained at
that level until the late 1980s, after which it moved gradually to
its current level. Two features of the American TFR that emerge
clearly are: (1) it has become less volatile with the passage of
time, and (2) it is now higher than the rates seen in all other ma-
jor high-income nations and appears likely to remain that way
(Downs 2003).
Details of the U.S. fertility picture can be gleaned from data
published by the Census Bureau. The age category in which
American women bear the most children is 25–29, followed in
descending order by ages 20–24, 30–34, 15–19, 35–39, and 40–44.
In spite of much publicity about high-profile older women
achieving pregnancies, the fertility rate per thousand women in
the 40–44 age category is really quite low—only about one-
eighth the rate for women in the 25–29 age range. Teen pregnan-
cies, once a source of much comment and concern in the United
States, have declined by 28 percent since 1990. Experts credit the
56
Special U.S. Issues

drop to better contraception and possibly a reduction in the riski-
est types of sexual activity (Bernstein 2004).
Fertility variations by race and ethnicity in the United States
are smaller than variations by age, with non-Hispanic Whites
and Asians/Pacific Islanders having the lowest fertility rates.
Blacks have about 15 percent higher fertility, and Hispanics,
about 46 percent higher than Whites. Only Hispanic women in
the United States currently bear children at an above-replace-
ment rate. National origin also makes a difference. Foreign-born
women have more births per thousand than native-born women,
and among both foreign-born and native-born women it is His-
panic women who currently bear the most children, by a wide
margin (Downs 2003).
European fertility patterns are in some ways similar to U.S.
patterns and in other ways quite dissimilar. Foreign-born women
have higher birth rates than native-born women in European
countries, as in the United States. Fertility is higher for women in
their 20s than in their 30s and 40s in Europe, as in the United
States. Three-quarters of married women aged 15–49 in Western
Europe use some form of contraception, the same proportion as
in the United States. (In Northern Europe contraceptive use is
somewhat higher than in the United States, and in Eastern and
Southern Europe it is somewhat lower.) But overall fertility rates
are much lower in Europe than in the United States. Only three
small European countries, Iceland, Ireland, and Albania, have
TFRs as high as 2.0, and their combined populations were less
than eight million people in 2005. For all of Europe, the TFR as of
2005 was a mere 1.4. Little wonder that the population of that
continent is expected to drop by at least 50 million people be-
tween now and 2050 (PRB 2005).
Although the United States is most often compared, eco-
nomically and demographically, to Europe, it would be almost as
relevant to compare it to East Asia given the rapidly rising posi-
tion of China in the global economy and the already solid
“wealthy nation” status of Japan. Here, too, the contrast reveals
the United States as quite exceptional among the economically
most successful nations. Whereas American women are just
about at replacement-level TFR, those of East Asia (China, Japan,
the Koreas, Mongolia, and Taiwan) have a composite TFR of only
1.6. The East Asian rate of contraceptive use actually exceeds that
of the United States. As might be expected, East Asia’s popula-
tion is projected to shrink by almost 70 million between 2025 and
Is the United States an Exceptional Nation, Demographically Speaking?
57

2050—an amount that is nearly identical to the gain in popula-
tion expected for the United States during the same time period
(PRB 2005).
What Makes 
American Fertility Different?
We have established that the United States is indeed different
from other modern, economically advanced nations in having a
fertility rate that very nearly replaces the population. This, in
combination with a robust rate of net immigration, ensures that
American population is growing now and will continue to grow
for a long time to come, as best we can foresee. High U.S. fertility
is a somewhat puzzling phenomenon. Most observers see Amer-
icans and Canadians, for example, as relatively alike on a per-
sonal level and can find no easy explanation for the fact that
Canadian women tend to have, on average, 0.5 fewer children
than American women. Similarly, the broad comparability of liv-
ing conditions, democratic politics, and capitalist economic sys-
tems in the United States and much of Europe makes the TFR
gap of at least 0.6 between the two areas hard to understand.
What special circumstances might explain the high U.S. fertility?
Two preliminary comments are in order. First, Americans
have always been noted for their high fertility. Benjamin Franklin
wrote about high colonial fertility in 1751. The British demogra-
pher Thomas Malthus, who wrote the famous Essay on Population
(1798) mentioned in Chapter 2, believed that the growth rate of
population in the British North American colonies had been
“probably without parallel in history”—a judgment with which
modern demographers concur (Malthus 1993, 47). In the late
colonial period and even as late as 1800, American women were
having about eight children each. Perhaps only one nation in the
world today, the sub-Saharan African country of Niger, matches
that lofty rate. The long-term fertility trend in the United States,
however, was downward from the early nineteenth century on-
ward and particularly after the Civil War ended in 1865. Second,
in any period of human history before about 1980, it would have
been considered quite odd to ask what accounted for a fertility
rate as high as 2.0 or 2.1. Only in the context of recent decades
and by comparison with Europe and parts of East Asia does it
58
Special U.S. Issues

make any sense to ask how the American TFR can be as “high”
as the replacement level.
There is no easy answer to the question. One line of
thought—perhaps speculation is a better word here—centers on
the optimism that has long been considered a deﬁning character-
istic of the American people. Other things being equal, if Ameri-
cans tend for whatever reasons to be more optimistic than Euro-
peans, one way in which they might demonstrate that optimism
is through decisions to marry, to have children, to have more chil-
dren, and the like. Virginia Abernethy (1994) has developed this
line of thinking in a cogent way, but it has not been systemati-
cally applied to the issue of relatively high U.S. fertility in recent
years. Another hypothesis, perhaps related to the one just pro-
posed, would make religion a key factor in explaining fertility
differences between the United States and Europe. If more reli-
gious people tend to have bigger families, and if Americans are
more religious in the early twenty-ﬁrst century than Europeans,
both of which assumptions appear to be true, then we may have
at least a partial explanation for the fertility gap. Phillip Long-
man, in his recent book The Empty Cradle (2004), offers some sup-
port to this line of thought. He notes that regular churchgoers,
when polled, are 20 percent more likely than non-churchgoers to
say that three or more children would be an ideal family size,
and he cites the state of Utah, where 69 percent of residents are
Mormon, as having the highest fertility rate of any state in the
country (34).
One of the central forces at work in buoying up the U.S. fer-
tility rate is ethnicity. As mentioned in the previous section, His-
panics in the United States have a much higher fertility rate than
other groups. Those of Mexican origin have the highest rate of
fertility. They also dominate current immigrant flows into the
United States. Over half of the births in both Texas and Califor-
nia now are to women of Mexican origin. Researchers have
asked whether high Mexican-origin fertility might be due to
cost considerations. Contraception has a financial cost, and
therefore groups with below-average incomes, such as recent
immigrants from Mexico, might be expected to make less use of
it and thus experience higher birth rates. Recent research, how-
ever, suggests that even more important than ﬁnancial consider-
ations are the cultural factors at work among Mexican immi-
grants. Women’s use of English, for example, along with their
youthfulness when they entered the United States have been
What Makes American Fertility Different?
59

found to be key predictors of contraceptive use. When Mexican-
origin women are engaged in English-speaking networks, it
gives an indication of weakened ties to traditional Mexican cul-
ture, which values fertility more highly than contemporary U.S.
culture does. Similarly, when women enter the United States
from Mexico at a young age (under 18), it appears they may as-
similate more quickly into the dominant American culture,
causing, again, a lowering of fertility toward the U.S. norm
(Weeks 2005, 266; Faulkner 2004, 26–32).
The Graying of America
We noted in Chapter 1 that the world is getting older, or, as jour-
nalists often like to say, “grayer.” According to UN projections,
the global median age will rise to about 38 by the middle of this
century, which is 14 years above the median age at the middle of
the last century. When the United Nations extends its projections
all the way to the year 2300—an intriguing if perilous ﬂight of
speculation—it arrives at a global median age of almost 50. Life
expectancy at birth for the world as a whole is also increasing.
From the current level of 66, ﬁve years should be added by 2025
and another ﬁve years by 2050. Humans will be older on aver-
age, and living longer, in 2050 than ever before.
Is the United States in step with these global aging trends? It
is. The United Nations estimates the median age of Americans in
1950, 2005, and 2050 (projected) at 30, 36, and 41, respectively.
The fastest-growing age bracket will be those over 85, whose
numbers in the United States will more than quadruple by mid-
century to over 20 million. The number of people in the age
range of 65 to 84 will more than double, while in all younger age
ranges the numbers will grow much more slowly (U.S. Census
Bureau 2004). By the middle of the century, more than one-ﬁfth
of all Americans will be over the age of 65, a fact that leads one
author to characterize the nation in 2050 as being like “ﬁfty Flori-
das,” since America as a whole will be much older than the pop-
ulation of Florida is today (Longman 2004, 18).
UN projections of life expectancy at birth in the United States
are consistent with the rising median age and other demographic
data cited above. U.S. life expectancy should rise by roughly two
years between now and 2025, and another three years by 2050.
60
Special U.S. Issues

One reason demographers believe there is a good chance of
longevity increasing in the United States is that people in at least
twenty other developed countries, including the United King-
dom, France, and Japan, already live longer than Americans by
up to four years. Rising life expectancy in the United States could
be derailed, however, or even thrown into reverse, by a public
health condition that is receiving increased attention: rising rates
of obesity. That is the subject of important research done by Dr.
S. J. Olshansky and others (2005), which links the rise in child-
hood and young-adult obesity to health problems later in life that
could pare years off the average lifespan.
Threat to Social Security Pensions
The increasing number and proportion of elderly in the Ameri-
can population would make Social Security a prominent political
issue in the United States even if President George W. Bush had
not chosen to make the “reform” of the system a key item in his
second-term domestic agenda. Millions of words have been writ-
ten about the Bush proposal, both for and against. We will put
that entire controversy aside, however, since the question of pri-
vate retirement accounts is fundamentally separate from the de-
mographic problems confronting the system. (Even the president
has admitted as much.) The basic issue is simple. Social Security
was designed to be a pay-as-you-go system, with taxes paid by
current workers going to ﬁnance monthly pension checks to the
nation’s retirees. In such a system, if there are plenty of worker-
taxpayers and not many retirees, everything works well. Beneﬁts
can be ample; tax rates can be low. On the other hand, if there are
declining numbers of workers paying taxes and growing num-
bers of retirees drawing benefits, we may run into a problem.
That is precisely what is projected for the coming decades,
largely due to the impending retirement of the so-called baby
boom generation, the huge cohort of Americans born between
1946 and 1964. The youngest of the “boomers” will reach age 65
and begin drawing full beneﬁts in the year 2011.
Speciﬁc numbers will be helpful in understanding the issue.
In 1950 there were about 16 workers for every retiree in the
United States. The ratio declined over time as more and more
Americans reached retirement age. Today the worker-to-retiree
Threat to Social Security Pensions
61

ratio is about 3.3 to 1 and projected to fall to about 2 to 1 by 2040.
Simply put, each taxpaying American now supports more el-
derly than ever before through the Social Security system. The
burden is certain to increase in coming years. It is ironic that the
demographic “good news” of more people surviving to retire-
ment age, and then living a longer time in retirement (collecting
Social Security), translates to “bad news” for the younger gener-
ation that must pay the taxes to support their retired parents and
grandparents.
Strains on the Social Security system will begin to appear in
2018. Before then, tax payments ﬂowing into the system will be
more than adequate to cover payouts to recipients, with surplus
tax revenues being accumulated in something called the Social
Security Trust Fund. Money in the trust fund is actually invested
in U.S. Treasury securities, which means in effect that the current
Social Security surpluses are being used to ﬁnance other kinds of
government spending. (Critics of the system consider this a ﬁscal
shell game, and they have a point.) In 2018 current tax revenues
will, for the ﬁrst time, be insufﬁcient to pay the beneﬁts due to
retirees, so it will become necessary to start liquidating the Trea-
sury securities held in the trust fund. This will place immediate
pressure on federal finances. The government will have little
choice but to cut spending on other programs, raise taxes, or bor-
row more funds to cover the emerging Social Security deﬁcits. In
2042, by current projections, the trust fund will be exhausted.
This does not mean that Social Security recipients will suddenly
stop getting their monthly checks, only that if Congress does
nothing, those checks will have to be reduced, probably by
around 25 percent.
Social Security Fixes
To recap: The United States faces a serious challenge in funding
its public pension system. Retirees are living longer and collect-
ing beneﬁts longer than ever before, and lower rates of fertility
are restraining the growth of the working-age population who
pay Social Security taxes. But there is much debate about when
the crunch will occur (if ever), how severe it will be, and even
what words are most appropriate to use in describing the prob-
lem. One side depicts an impending “crisis” for Social Security
62
Special U.S. Issues

and argues that the system will go “flat broke” in 2042. These
tend to be the people who would like to see big changes in the
traditional Social Security program, notably the introduction of
private or personal accounts. Others are less worried about So-
cial Security’s prospects—or do not approve of the big changes
advocated by the ﬁrst group—and see only stresses on the sys-
tem that can be managed in various ways.
If current projections prove correct and Social Security be-
gins going into deficit in 2018, policymakers will have several
options to consider. Beneﬁts could be cut. Such a step would be
fiercely resisted by the “gray lobby”—AARP and others—and
appears highly unlikely to happen, given the voting power of the
elderly. It should also be kept in mind that Social Security has
been one of the government’s most effective antipoverty pro-
grams, and that large cuts in pension payments would almost
certainly raise the poverty rate among older Americans. Perhaps
more feasible would be a modification of the current methods
used to establish initial Social Security beneﬁt levels. At present,
the level of payments to each new group of retirees depends on
wage trends in the U.S. economy. Some complex plans have been
put forward that would alter the formula used in determining
these payments in a way that would save the government money
but over the course of time deliver lower benefits to retirees.
Cash beneﬁts would not actually be cut; they simply would grow
more slowly in the future than would otherwise be the case.
An alternative approach to shoring up Social Security’s ﬁ-
nances would be to leave beneﬁts alone but raise taxes on work-
ers. There is precedent for this approach; indeed, it has been
taken repeatedly in the past. The current tax rate for the old-age-
pension part of Social Security is 10.6 percent on annual wages
up to, and not beyond, $90,000 (in 2005). This is the combined
contributory rate of employee and employer. On top of that,
there is a 2.9 percent tax for Medicare and a 1.8 percent tax for
the disability portion of Social Security, bringing the total FICA
tax rate to 15.3 percent. One economist has argued that a tax ap-
proach to maintaining the solvency of the Social Security pen-
sion system would require that the payroll tax rate be raised by
a hefty 7.1 percent (Feldstein 2005, 36). But higher taxes on labor
have an adverse effect on the labor market as well as introduc-
ing other distortions into the economy. Hence there is little en-
thusiasm for the idea of big tax increases to keep Social Security
aﬂoat.
Social Security Fixes
63

We have not quite exhausted the possible ways of keeping the
system solvent. Aside from cutting beneﬁts or raising taxes, there
is the option of increasing the eligibility age for receiving Social Se-
curity. By keeping workers contributing for a longer time and
shortening the period during which they receive beneﬁts, such a
policy change would doubly strengthen Social Security’s balance
sheet. It also appears to be an entirely reasonable change given the
greatly increased life expectancy in recent years as compared with
1935 when the system was established. But much of the increased
U.S. life expectancy has been the result of lowered infant mortality,
not people living a lot longer after they reach retirement age. As
Table 3.1 shows, men reaching age 65 in 1990 had a remaining life
expectancy of about ﬁfteen years, a gain of less than three years
compared to 1940. Women had a gain of about ﬁve years.
TABLE 3.1
Demographic Statistics on Social Security, 1940–1990
Percentage of 
Average Remaining Life
Year Cohort 
Population Surviving
Expectancy for Those
Turned 65
from Age 21 to Age 65
Surviving to Age 65
Male 
Female 
Male 
Female 
1940
53.9
60.6
12.7
14.7
1950
56.2
65.5
13.1
16.2
1960
60.1
71.3
13.2
17.4
1970
63.7
76.9
13.8
18.6
1980
67.8
80.9
14.6
19.1
1990 
72.3
83.6
15.3
19.6
Source: Social Security online, at http://www.ssa.gov/history/lifeexpect.html, accessed 9/05.
Perhaps in the end a grand compromise, forged by a non-
partisan, blue-ribbon commission, will have to be struck to keep
the system solvent. The compromise might allow for an adjust-
ment to the formula for initial pension payments in the future,
producing some reduction in beneﬁt growth; the FICA tax rate
might be raised a bit; and the retirement age might be bumped
up. A small adjustment to the retirement age could be politically
acceptable if U.S. life expectancies continue to rise, something
that is widely anticipated, though at a much slower rate than in
the twentieth century. Keep in mind, however, that the age for
regular Social Security eligibility has already been increased from
65 to 67, a change that will be fully in effect by the year 2025.
64
Special U.S. Issues

Medicare and Medicaid
As the population of the United States grows older, not only do
its Social Security pension costs escalate, but so do its medical
bills for elder care. Since 1965, Americans over the age of 65 have
had a federal program, Medicare, to help them meet their med-
ical expenses. As mentioned in the previous section, the program
is ﬁnanced through a payroll tax of 2.9 percent split evenly be-
tween employees and employers. (There is no upper limit to the
income subject to the Medicare tax, unlike the old-age portion of
FICA.) In early 2005, about 42 million people were covered by
Medicare, and program ﬁnances were solidly in the black. In the
long run, however, the black ink turns to red—in fact, the pro-
gram will begin running deficits years before Social Security
will!
Medicare’s problems stem from two sources: the rising
number of enrollees and the rapidly climbing costs of medical
treatment. The expansion of the elder population would not in it-
self be a problem if the number of workers paying into the pro-
gram were growing at an equally rapid pace. Unfortunately, the
labor force will be growing much more slowly than the retiree
population for decades after 2010. It all comes back to the baby
boom phenomenon. The enormous cohort of babies born be-
tween 1946 and 1964 grew up to become the biggest labor force
the United States had ever seen, and in the not too distant future
they will be transformed into the biggest retired generation in
history. But because the boomers were less proliﬁc than their par-
ents, the working population available to pay their Medicare ex-
penses will be heavily burdened. The other half of Medicare’s
funding problem is the cost of medical care itself, which for
many years has consistently risen faster than the general cost of
living. One expert has estimated that Medicare’s bite out of the
national GDP will rise from 2.5 percent in 2002 to 9.2 percent in
2075. Roughly one-third of the increase will be due to the aging
of the population; the other two-thirds will be due to rising
health care costs (Holtz-Eakin 2003).
In some sense, the looming Social Security deﬁcits present a
simpler problem to grapple with than the Medicare deﬁcits we
will soon be facing. With pension payments, getting ﬁscal control
is a matter of ratcheting certain formulas upward or downward
in order to get the dollar ﬂows in the system into balance. With
Medicare, on the other hand, real goods and services must be
Medicare and Medicaid
65

provided under law to a vast beneﬁt-entitled population, and the
pricing of those services is both difﬁcult to predict and difﬁcult
to control. Who could have predicted, for example, that in 2003
the president would propose, and Congress would approve, a
generous new prescription drug benefit for the elderly? The
White House, which originally estimated the new program’s cost
at $400 billion for the ﬁrst ten years, now puts the cost at about
$720 billion! It should come as no surprise, then, that Medicare’s
annual costs are on track to surpass those of Social Security itself
by 2024. Very few people are aware that Medicare’s cumulative
deﬁcit between now and 2075 is twice as large as the cumulative
Social Security deﬁcit (Lazarus 2005).
If Medicare’s ﬁscal woes do not provide a stiff enough chal-
lenge to the wisdom and ingenuity of U.S. policymakers as they
try to cope with the aging population, there is another program
to which they can turn their attention: Medicaid. Passed by Con-
gress in 1965 and beneﬁting some 53 million persons in 2005, this
is a state-federal government partnership to ensure that medical
care is available to the nation’s low-income individuals and fam-
ilies. One might at ﬁrst wonder what the connection is between a
low-income program and the over–65 population, since, broadly
speaking, U.S. elders have improved their economic standing rela-
tive to younger age groups over the past three decades. (This is
most clearly the case when comparing the welfare of seniors to
that of children.) The explanation lies in a key feature of Medi-
caid—its coverage of the costs of long-term care for low-income
seniors. About two-thirds of the folks in nursing homes have
their bills paid by Medicaid.
Nursing-home care is extremely expensive, with annual
costs in 2004 averaging about $70,000 per year and rising
steadily. In their 70s, 80s, and 90s, most Americans lack the pri-
vate resources to cover a lengthy stay in a managed-care facility.
If they end up in such a place, they must pay the tab out of their
own pockets until they have essentially burned through all their
financial assets, at which point Medicaid takes over. The high
and rising costs of nursing-home care are one of the main rea-
sons why the elderly, constituting only about one-quarter of the
Medicaid beneﬁciary population, absorb more than 70 percent of
the program’s budget. Unlike Medicare and Social Security,
Medicaid gets no support from a payroll tax. It is funded by gen-
eral state and federal revenues. That means that when Medicaid
costs rise year after year at rates well above the growth rate of tax
66
Special U.S. Issues

revenues, states—and in some cases counties—are put under in-
creasingly severe ﬁscal stress. Some states are beginning to look
for ways to ration health care among their Medicaid recipients.
Every state is thinking about ways to implement cost controls in
this program.
Medicaid’s ﬁnancial problems are not solely attributable to
the aging of the U.S. population. Rising health care costs and
growing numbers of uninsured people are two other factors
worsening the situation. When all these factors are combined,
you have a policy challenge almost without precedent. And
when you stand back and consider that all three foundational
programs of the U.S. welfare state, namely, Social Security,
Medicare, and Medicaid, face severe ﬁnancial pressures in com-
ing years as the population ages, you can only wonder whether
the American political system will be able to contain those pres-
sures. To date there has not been much vision, leadership, or dis-
cussion of hard choices on these questions from elected politi-
cians. They have had the luxury of waiting until a real crisis
arrives. At some point they will no longer have that luxury.
International Family Planning: 
Early U.S. Support
The politics of U.S. government support for international family
planning has become so controversial in recent years that it is
hard to believe how noncontroversial this issue once was. Back in
the 1960s and 1970s, Democrats and Republicans alike supported
what were then called “population control” efforts in the devel-
oping countries. President John F. Kennedy expressed concern
about population growth occurring most rapidly in those parts
of the world where hunger was already most prevalent. In 1965,
under Kennedy’s successor, Lyndon Johnson, the United States
Agency for International Development (USAID) began support-
ing international family planning on a regular basis. Three years
later, USAID funds were used for the ﬁrst time to purchase con-
traceptive supplies for distribution in developing nations. Con-
gressional support for the effort was bipartisan (USAID time-
line).
In 1968, the year Paul Erhlich’s Population Bomb put an ex-
clamation point on rising public worries about global popula-
International Family Planning: Early U.S. Support
67

tion growth, Richard Nixon was elected president. Like his pre-
decessors, Nixon viewed the population issue as one that af-
fected U.S. national security in real and potentially critical
ways. In his first year in office, he sent to Congress a “special
message” on world population in which he declared that popu-
lation growth was “one of the most serious challenges to hu-
man destiny in the last third of this century” (Nixon 1969, 530).
Nixon’s interest in population continued into his second term.
In 1974, he ordered a group of top administration officials to
carry out a study of the impact of world population growth on
American interests abroad, with a time frame extending to at
least the year 2000. The classified report they produced in De-
cember 1974, “National Security Study Memorandum 200”—or,
more briefly, “NSSM 200”—was delivered to Nixon’s post-Wa-
tergate successor, Gerald Ford, though it was not released to the
public for another fifteen years. One of the alarming conclu-
sions of the report—excerpted in our Documents chapter—was
that population pressures might destabilize countries that sup-
plied strategic minerals and fuels to the United States (USAID
timeline).
President Ford considered the population issue important
enough to justify personally attending the 1974 world popula-
tion conference held in Bucharest. There he declared population
growth trends to be “vital to the future of mankind.” At this
conference, population policies and programs came under
heavy attack by some delegates, journalists, and activists as a
veiled assault on the Third World, undertaken to advance the in-
terests and hegemony of the capitalist, neocolonialist First
World. Needless to say, such rhetoric was rarely heard in the
chambers of the U.S. Congress, but the opening salvo of a long-
running campaign against international family planning had al-
ready been ﬁred on Capitol Hill in 1973, and it came not from
the left but from the right. This was the Helms amendment to
the foreign aid program, sponsored by North Carolina Senator
Jesse Helms. The amendment prohibited U.S. funds from being
used by foreign NGOs to perform abortions or even to counsel
clients on abortion as a means of family planning. It is not clear
what impact the Helms amendment had on NGOs such as Inter-
national Planned Parenthood. In some cases, they were proba-
bly able to engage in “creative accounting” to avoid any explicit
violation of the new rule while continuing to offer the same ser-
vices as before.
68
Special U.S. Issues

”Mexico City” and Abortion Politics
The Reagan administration announced a much tougher U.S. anti-
abortion stance at the world population conference held in Mex-
ico City in 1984. Henceforth no U.S. aid funds would go to any
international agency that performed abortions, offered counsel-
ing on abortion, or advocated for legalized access to abortion in
any country in the world—even if these activities were carried
out with non-U.S. funds. The new policy ran counter to expert
opinion within government agencies. It was opposed by most
NGOs and by the reproductive health community, and it was
universally regarded as a political concession to religious conser-
vatives within the Republican Party. (The new policy had been
foreshadowed by provisions the religious right had insisted be
included in the party’s 1980 platform.) With “Mexico City,” as
the policy came to be known, bipartisanship on international
family planning came to an end. George H. W. Bush continued
the policy during his single term as president, but when a Demo-
crat, Bill Clinton, was elected to the White House in 1992, one of
his ﬁrst acts in ofﬁce was to rescind the policy. Eight years later,
George Bush reinstated the policy on his ﬁrst day in ofﬁce.
Critics of “Mexico City” are particularly disturbed by the
prohibition of any counseling on the abortion option, even in
places where abortion is legal. Nowhere in the United States it-
self are health professionals barred by the government from dis-
cussing any medical option with their patients, including abor-
tion. This provision of the policy seems (to many) out of keeping
with the value Americans place on free speech. Given the pol-
icy’s added ban on any political advocacy in favor of legalizing,
or improving access to, abortion in foreign countries, the term
global gag rule comes as no surprise. Several major international
family-planning agencies, including the International Planned
Parenthood Federation (IFFP) and Marie Stopes International,
have refused to accept the terms of “Mexico City” and thus have
lost U.S. government funding. In the case of the IPPF, this
brought an end to seventeen years of continuous ﬁnancial sup-
port from the United States.
Of a piece with the Mexico City policy implemented by the
Reagan administration was another action taken by that admin-
istration: the denial of U.S. funding to the United Nations Popu-
lation Fund (UNFPA) in 1986. The UNFPA, currently supported
by 166 nations, is the world’s largest provider of population as-
“Mexico City” and Abortion Politics
69

sistance, with an annual budget of around $500 million. Prior to
1986, the United States had been a regular ﬁnancial supporter of
the UNFPA—indeed it had been instrumental in the creation of
that agency in 1967. But in 1985 Congress passed the Kemp-Kas-
ten amendment disallowing U.S. funding to any organization
that participated in coercive abortions or involuntary steriliza-
tions. The one-child policy adopted by China in 1979 has been
administered coercively at times, almost all observers agree, and
the UNFPA has worked on projects in China. Through a kind of
guilt-by-association logic, the Reagan administration decided
that Kemp-Kasten required a cutoff of U.S. funding to the
UNFPA itself. The ban on UNFPA funding continued through
the remaining Reagan–Bush years, 1986–1992. Funding was par-
tially restored under President Clinton, but the ban was put back
in place under the younger President Bush in 2002.
The role of politics in the UNFPA de-funding decision is al-
most beyond dispute. During its ﬁrst year and a half, the Bush
administration supported the UN agency without objection.
Then an obscure organization called the Population Research In-
stitute leveled charges that the UNFPA was complicit in Chinese
coercive practices. A delegation of British MPs made a visit to
China in early 2002 to investigate the charges and concluded that
the UNFPA did not condone, fund, or participate in coercive ac-
tivities. The Bush administration’s own State Department sent a
three-person team of experts to China on a similar mission in
May 2002, and it came to similar conclusions. But in the end the
White House yielded to domestic pro-life political pressures.
U.S. funding for the UNFPA was halted in July 2002. The irony
here is that outside observers have actually credited the UNFPA
with pushing China away from coercion and toward more volun-
tary, client-centered family-planning and reproductive health
services. For more on the politics and arguments on both sides of
this issue, see the biographical sketches of Representatives Chris
Smith (R-NJ) and Carolyn Maloney (D-NY) in Chapter 5.
Principle and Practice
The United States still supports international family planning
both in principle and in practice. Polls have consistently shown
that Americans favor aid to population programs in developing
70
Special U.S. Issues

nations. USAID remains the world’s biggest governmental fund-
ing source for family-planning programs (as well as programs to
combat AIDS). And Congress, although mainly controlled by Re-
publicans since 1994, has not stopped appropriating funds for
the UNFPA. As recently as November 2004, Congress approved
$34 million for that UN agency. But the money will not go where
Congress wants it to go. President Bush will almost certainly
continue withholding such funds until he leaves ofﬁce. Whether
U.S. support for the UNFPA is restored in 2009 or not will proba-
bly depend on whether the next president is a Democrat or a Re-
publican.
Those who deﬁne and support the current administration’s
positions on population policy take their stand on one overrid-
ing moral principle: preserving the lives of the unborn. They op-
pose abortion within the United States—seeking, for example, to
overturn the Supreme Court’s 1973 Roe v. Wade decision—and
with equal vehemence they oppose abortion overseas. Both do-
mestically and on the international scene, they get powerful sup-
port from the hierarchy (if not always the laity) of the Roman
Catholic Church. Vatican diplomats have worked energetically,
and with considerable success, at world population conferences
to weaken, or even eliminate, the language afﬁrming women’s
reproductive rights in the official documents emerging from
such meetings. For pro-lifers, there can be no compromise on the
issue of the unborn. They believe life begins at conception, so
abortion is—not to mince words—murder. Holding such beliefs,
pro-lifers naturally ﬁnd it absolutely unacceptable for U.S. funds
to support in any way agencies or organizations that condone,
offer counseling on, or perform abortions.
On the other side of the argument are those who disagree in
principle with the pro-life position. Although everyone can stip-
ulate that biological “life” begins at conception, it is much less
clear at what point the fetus becomes “viable,” or at what point it
acquires the status of a human being—a soul. (Even Thomas
Aquinas puzzled over this question.) Those on the pro-choice
side consider the fetus’s right to life to be potentially in conﬂict
with the right of a woman to control her own body. Which right
takes precedence? That is a legal, philosophical, and theological
debate that is unlikely to be settled anytime soon, with an impact
sure to be felt in U.S. politics for years to come.
One of the moral conundrums that pro-lifers must face is
that when you deprive family-planning NGOs of funding on the
Principle and Practice
71

grounds that they are involved with abortion, the actual result
may be an increased number of abortions! Organizations such 
as the IPPF and Marie Stopes International offer a full array of
family-planning options, so if their funding is cut, they are less
able to provide, among other things, the ordinary kinds of con-
traceptives that would make unintended pregnancies less likely.
If they experience funding cutbacks, their clients’ risk of becom-
ing pregnant rises. With more unplanned pregnancies comes, in-
evitably, a greater number of abortions. In 2002, the UNFPA pro-
jected that the loss of U.S. funding to its various programs could
cause an additional 2 million pregnancies and 800,000 abortions
around the world, with accompanying increases in maternal and
child mortality (Crossette 2004/2005, 59). In its own defense, the
Bush administration can claim that the funds it withholds from
the UNFPA are redirected into USAID programs to, among other
things, reduce infant mortality. But that “compromise” is un-
likely to satisfy either side. Why? Because on the one hand it
probably does not reduce (and for reasons just given, may in-
crease) the number of abortions, and on the other, it deprives
many women of the full range of family-planning choices they
might otherwise have had.
Fewer People, Declining Inﬂuence?
A final population question of special interest to Americans is
whether current population trends threaten the global power
and influence of their country. The more interesting version of
this question is not whether the United States will remain the
world’s sole superpower, capable of getting its way on every is-
sue, but whether the core values of Western civilization, pro-
claimed and promoted by the United States, will have less co-
gency, less influence, in a world with shrunken Western
populations. The political-demographic commentator Ben Wat-
tenberg has voiced this concern repeatedly. In his 1987 book The
Birth Dearth: What Happens When People in Free Countries Don’t
Have Enough Babies, and again in his recent Fewer: How the New
Demography of Depopulation Will Shape Our Future (2004), Watten-
berg has worried about the geopolitical implications of low
Western birth rates. He is by no means the only person to have
raised an alarm on this point, but because his comments have
72
Special U.S. Issues

been bracingly direct and free of “political correctness,” we focus
mainly on him in the following discussion.
In the late 1980s the United States was still engaged in a
deadly serious Cold War with a formidable adversary, the Soviet
Union. The U.S. fertility rate had languished below replacement
level for a number of years—it was about 1.8 in 1987—while in
the Soviet Union the TFR was 2.5. As Wattenberg noted in Birth
Dearth, the U.S. and Soviet populations were roughly on a par at
that time, with the Soviets ahead by only 15 percent. But current
demographic trends, if projected into the future, would raise So-
viet numbers to 365 million and rising by 2065, while the U.S.
population in that year would be only 278 million and falling
(Wattenberg 1987, 90). Changes in the two superpowers’ age
structures would widen the gap even further: the Soviet labor
force was headed for a 50 percent advantage over the Americans
by 2065. From a global perspective, with Western numbers
viewed as a proportion of world population, things looked just
as bad. The industrial democracies, which had accounted for 22
percent of world population in 1950, were down to 15 percent in
1985 and shrinking toward a 5 percent share in 2100 (Wattenberg
1987, 47). Western values would be under challenge if “our num-
bers go down, and down, and down [and] if our economic and
military power go down, and down, and down” (Wattenberg
1987, 98).
Much has changed in the world since 1987, as Wattenberg
would be the ﬁrst to admit. The Soviet Union has disintegrated,
Russia’s population is in absolute decline, and the United States
now stands apart from the other industrial democracies, with a
fertility rate that remains at replacement level (just barely). But
the challenge to the West continues. “In the next half century or
so,” Wattenberg warns, “Western civilization will become an
ever-smaller fraction of total world population” (Wattenberg
2004, 160). Modern democratic nations, as he calls them, will
post little if any net growth in numbers between now and 2050,
with a U.S. gain of 100 million neutralized by a roughly equal
loss among the rest of the group (Wattenberg 2004, 175). Mean-
while, the nondemocratic, non-Western countries will increase
their global numbers and their proportion of the world popula-
tion. Equating Western civilization with the countries designated
by the United Nations as “more developed,” Wattenberg fore-
sees a diminution of the West’s global share from 32 percent in
1950 to a mere 14 percent in 2050 (Wattenberg 2004, 161).
Fewer People, Declining Inﬂuence?
73

A variation on Wattenberg’s theme—still very much in the
minor key!—is the scenario sketched by Peter G. Peterson in his
1999 book Gray Dawn: How the Coming Age Wave Will Transform
America—and the World. As every demographer knows, a slower-
growing population tends quickly to become an older popula-
tion. With a rising number of seniors in the developed world,
and with mounting health and pension costs for those seniors,
the resulting calls on the public purse may force cutbacks in
spending on defense and other international priorities, as Peter-
son sees it. In places like Japan and Europe, labor forces may ac-
tually decline, leading to proportional declines in GDP. Under
these circumstances it will be very difﬁcult for governments to
maintain their combat forces and other instruments of global in-
ﬂuence. The older, richer countries will have a hard time retain-
ing their “leadership roles” on the world stage (Peterson 1999,
17, 20–21).
Human Numbers—
Not the Whole Story
It is hard to quarrel with the numbers cited by Peterson and Wat-
tenberg (2004). They are in line with the most recent UN projec-
tions. The more developed, “Western” countries are indeed
growing older, and their share of the world’s population is all
but certain to continue shrinking for decades to come. Whether
this will mean diminished power for the United States and its al-
lies, or diminished inﬂuence for Western ideas, is less clear. Mili-
tary power is built to some degree on a demographic base. An
army of one makes a nice slogan for the U.S. Army, but it takes
more than one soldier to win a ﬁreﬁght on the battleﬁeld. Num-
bers matter when it comes to projecting military power. With
that acknowledged, it is also true that human numbers can be
leveraged with technology. One of the key strategic principles
adopted by the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) dur-
ing the Cold War was to develop and deploy enough high-tech
weaponry to offset the superior numbers of Red Army troops.
The nation of Israel has adopted much the same strategy in the
decades since it was founded, so far successfully.
It does not appear that the United States, in the next few
decades, will be crippled militarily by insufficient numbers of
74
Special U.S. Issues

personnel in its armed forces. (If it becomes involved in more
conﬂicts like Iraq and Afghanistan, however, all bets are off.) The
United States will remain the world’s third most populous coun-
try in 2050, after India and China, with a mid-century population
of 420 million. Although it will be an older population than at
present, there should not be any undue difficulty in recruiting
adequate numbers to meet the country’s national defense needs
as well as its international commitments.
What about Peter Peterson’s concern that ﬁscal constraints
on the military will loom larger in a graying America? If
Medicare, Medicaid, and Social Security for an aging U.S. popu-
lation eat up too much of the federal budget in coming years,
there may not be much left for the Pentagon. So goes the argu-
ment. Those for whom this is a genuine worry should be reas-
sured by this reality: through cycles of war and peace, economic
upturns and downturns, and rotations of national administra-
tion between the two major political parties, the Pentagon al-
ways seems to receive a healthy share of the federal budget. By
some respectable estimates, the United States spends about as
much on its military as all other countries in the world combined.
Thus, if a conﬂict emerges between the needs of the elderly and
the needs of the Pentagon, it’s probably the elderly who should
worry.
On the broader question of Western values and their sur-
vival in a world with diminished numbers of Westerners, one
need not be a neoconservative like Ben Wattenberg to feel in-
vested in this issue. Western democracies proclaim high ideals:
freedom of speech, freedom of the press, freedom of assembly,
freedom of religion, freedom of workers to organize, and so on.
Sometimes the Western nations (including the United States) live
up to these ideals, sometimes not. Wattenberg believes it is im-
portant for the global spread of liberty that there be an “exem-
plar nation,” a democratic nation that is successful both econom-
ically and demographically. He sees the United States as the
exemplar nation of our time and doubts it would fulﬁll that role
if it were losing population. Doubters might ask how a gradual
stabilization or even a modest decline in population would ren-
der the United States less “exemplary.” Foreigners probably rate
the exemplariness of the United States on several criteria weight-
ier than its current demographic status.
One of those criteria undoubtedly is the extent to which the
United States is perceived to conform its own policies and con-
Human Numbers—Not the Whole Story
75

duct to its stated democratic ideals. American history offers a
mixed record in this regard. The American rhetoric of liberty has
been lofty and inspiring from the start; the performance has of-
ten lagged behind. When people in the “Less Developed Coun-
tries” (as Wattenberg calls them) believe the United States is lec-
turing them on principles of democracy that it is failing to meet
within its own borders—or in its international dealings—then
the “exemplar nation” ends up looking hypocritical. In any case,
the ideals of Western civilization have long since become uni-
versal ideals, overwhelmingly accepted by national leaders
from every part of the world, at least in their public declara-
tions. The United Nations has been the scene and sponsor of a
whole range of declarations on human rights, not all of which
have been endorsed by the United States. The real task ahead,
for the United States as for all nations, is to close the gap be-
tween the principles of freedom we proclaim and those we truly
attain.
References
Abernethy, Virginia. 1994. “Optimism and Overpopulation.” The At-
lantic Monthly 274:6, 84–91.
Bernstein, Nina. 2004, February 20. “Teenage Rate of Pregnancy Drops
in U.S.” New York Times, A22.
Crossette, Barbara. 2004/2005. “Hurting the World’s Poor in Morality’s
Name.” World Policy Journal 21:4 (Winter), 57–62.
Downs, Barbara. 2003. “Fertility of American Women: June 2002.” Cur-
rent Population Reports, P20–548. Washington, DC: U.S. Census Bureau.
Faulkner, Caroline L. 2004. “Understanding Minority Fertility: Contra-
ceptive Use among First Generation Mexican Immigrant Couples in
Houston, Texas, and San Diego, California.” Paper presented at Popula-
tion Association of America meetings.
Feldstein, Martin. 2005. “Structural Reform of Social Security.” The Jour-
nal of Economic Perspectives 19:2, 33–55.
Holtz-Eakin, Douglas. 2003, April 10. “Medicare’s Long-Term Financial
Condition.” Testimony by the CBO director before the Joint Economic
Committee.
Lazarus, David. 2005, February 18. “Medicare Facing Fiscal Ills.” San
Francisco Chronicle, C1.
76
Special U.S. Issues

Longman, Phillip. 2004. The Empty Cradle: How Falling Birthrates Threaten
World Prosperity [and What to Do about It]. New York: New America
Books.
Malthus, Thomas Robert. 1993 [1798]. An Essay on the Principle of Popula-
tion. Edited by Geoffrey Gilbert for Oxford World’s Classics. New York:
Oxford University Press.
Nixon, Richard. 1969, July 18. “Special Message to the Congress on
Problems of Population Growth,” in Public Papers of the Presidents of the
United States: Richard Nixon. Washington, DC: Ofﬁce of the Federal Reg-
ister, National Archives,. pp. 521–530.
Olshansky, S.J., et al. 2005. “A Potential Decline in Life Expectancy in the
United States in the 21st Century.” New England Journal of Medicine
352:11, 1138–1145.
Peterson, Peter G. 1999. Gray Dawn: How the Coming Age Wave Will Trans-
form America—and the World. New York: Times Books.
Population Reference Bureau. (PRB). 2005. 2005 World Population Data
Sheet. Washington, DC: PRB.
United States Agency for International Development (USAID). n.d.
“USAID’s Family Planning Program Timeline: Before 1965 to the Pre-
sent.” Accessed at http://www.usaid.gov/our_work/global_health/
pop/timeline.html
United States Census Bureau. 2004, March. “U.S. Interim Projections 
by Age, Sex, Race, and Hispanic Origin.” Accessed at http://www.
census.gov/ipc/www/usinterimproj/natprojtab02a.pdf
Wattenberg, Ben J. 1987. The Birth Dearth: What Happens When People in
Free Countries Don’t Have Enough Babies. New York: Pharos Books.
Wattenberg, Ben J. 2004. Fewer: How the New Demography of Depopulation
Will Shape Our Future. Chicago: Ivan R. Dee.
Weeks, John R. 2005. Population: An Introduction to Concepts and Issues,
9th ed. Belmont, CA: Wadsworth.
References
77


4
Chronology
O
ne of the best ways to get one’s footing on a topic like world
population is to scan a listing of key events that have con-
tributed to our understanding of it. An “event” might be an
international conference, the publication of an inﬂuential book,
the passage of a law, the conduct of a national census, or the oc-
currence of a lethal epidemic. This chapter presents just such a
timeline of events that have either affected world population or
shaped the way we look at it. Sources for the chronology are
given at the end of the chapter. Obviously, there is no single place
to find a complete history of world population. Three books,
however, by Cohen (1995), Livi-Bacci (2001), and Weeks (2004),
are especially informative not only on the history of population
but on many other aspects of the subject.
8000 B.C.
The agricultural revolution begins, with about 4 mil-
lion humans on Earth; hunter-gatherers shift to more
settled patterns of living, which include livestock-
herding and the cultivation of grains; population be-
gins growing more rapidly.
1000 B.C.
Egyptians are using a primitive form of contraception
(condoms).
5 B.C.
Caesar Augustus orders a census of the entire Roman
Empire.
A.D. 1
World population stands at about 210 million.
79

A.D. 2
Under the Han Dynasty, China counts the number of
households, that is, conducts a primitive census.
A.D. 100 The city of Rome’s population of 650,000 is unrivaled
by any other city in the world.
1086
William the Conqueror orders a survey of English lands
and landholdings, from which modern historians have
derived a population estimate for England of around
1.5 million.
1347
The bubonic plague, or “Black Death,” returns to Eu-
rope after an absence of six or seven centuries, appear-
ing ﬁrst in Sicily and spreading rapidly in the following
years. Its cause is the bacillus Yersinia pestis, spread by
rodent-borne fleas. By 1400 the plague has wiped out
nearly one-third of Europe’s population.
1492
Christopher Columbus’s arrival in the West Indies
marks the opening stage of a long-term population cat-
astrophe for the indigenous American peoples as a re-
sult of their vulnerability to the pathogens carried by
Europeans. The population of Aztecs in central Mexico,
for example, falls from about 6.3 million in 1548 to 1.9
million in 1580.
1500
The population of Europe, battered by periodic returns
of the plague, still has not recovered to the level it
reached in 1300.
1666
The ﬁrst census in Canada, known to contemporaries as
“New France,” is conducted by Jean Talon, intendant of
Quebec City; the count is 3,918 persons.
1679
Dutch scientist A. van Leeuwenhoek offers an early
quantitative estimate of Earth’s maximum population,
or carrying capacity: 13.4 billion
1721
Japan conducts a nationwide count of population;
scholars believe population surveys were undertaken
in Japan as early as the ninth century A.D.
80
Chronology

The practice of inoculating people against smallpox is in-
troduced in rural England: a small extract from a small-
pox pustule is transferred from an infected individual to
one who has not previously been infected. A mild case of
the disease results, but thereafter the inoculee enjoys a
natural immunity to smallpox.
1749
Sweden is among the ﬁrst nations in Europe to establish
a population register and census, conducted locally by
clergymen.
1771
An outbreak of bubonic plague in Moscow takes 57,000
lives in one season.
1774
With the death of Louis XV from smallpox, popular op-
position to smallpox inoculation in France crumbles.
1776
George Washington orders smallpox inoculation for all
troops in the Continental Army.
1787
The kingdom of Spain, in its ﬁrst census, counts 10.4 mil-
lion people.
1790
The ﬁrst U.S. census, mandated by the just-ratiﬁed Con-
stitution, finds a total national population of about 3.9
million.
1797
Edward Jenner, an English country doctor, notices that
milkmaids rarely contract smallpox. He assumes that by
getting cowpox, milkmaids acquire immunity to the
more deadly smallpox. Jenner develops a vaccine for hu-
mans based on cowpox that proves to be fully protective
against smallpox. Thus, vaccination replaces inoculation
in the prevention of smallpox.
1798
The publication of Thomas Robert Malthus’s Essay on the
Principle of Population marks a milestone in the study of
human population and the social, economic, and moral
implications of population size. Malthus warns that pop-
Chronology
81

ulation tends to increase more rapidly than the means of
subsistence and that in the absence of other checks,
famine and disease will act as the ultimate checks.
1800
Only one city in the world has 1 million people—Lon-
don; two centuries later there will be 325 additional
cities of that size or larger.
1801
The United Kingdom conducts its first census and
counts a total of 16.3 million persons living in England,
Scotland, Wales, and Ireland. The count for England
alone is 8.9 million, or less than double the U.S. total for
1800 (5.3 million). The British census is repeated every
ten years with the exception of the war year, 1941.
1804
There are 1 billion people on Earth.
1817
An outbreak of cholera in Calcutta spreads beyond its
usual bounds; British colonial troops pass the disease to
Nepalese and Afghan foes. Within a few years, ships’
crews carry it even further, to Ceylon, Indonesia, China,
and Japan, as well as into the Middle East and down the
east African coast.
1831
An outbreak of cholera at Mecca during the annual Mus-
lim pilgrimage leads to a widespread epidemic through-
out the Islamic world. In many subsequent years,
cholera outbreaks accompany the annual pilgrimage—
for a ﬁnal time in 1912.
1843
Vulcanization of rubber opens the way to mass produc-
tion of inexpensive condoms.
1846
Failure of the potato crop initiates a great famine in Ire-
land; within a few years, over a million Irish die, and
over a million emigrate from the island.
1854
English physician John Snow discovers, during a cholera
outbreak in London, that the disease is caused not by
“miasma,” or “bad air,” but rather by the presence of fe-
cal waste in drinking water. Snow publishes his ﬁnding
82
Chronology
1798,
cont.

in 1855; not until 1883 is the actual bacterium, Vibrio
cholerae, observed under the microscope by Robert Koch.
The Dutch establish plantations of quinchona trees in
Java; an extract from the trees’ bark, quinine, is effective
in treating malaria.
1873
Congress passes the Comstock Act banning the distribu-
tion of contraceptive devices or birth-control informa-
tion across state lines.
1882
Robert Koch announces his discovery of the bacillus re-
sponsible for tuberculosis.
1883
Francis Galton, English statistician and amateur scientist
and cousin of Charles Darwin, proposes a new word,
“eugenics,” to denote the conscious improvement of hu-
man populations through selective breeding. The idea
spreads quickly in England, Europe, and the United
States—its enthusiasts include Teddy Roosevelt, Mar-
garet Sanger, and economist John Maynard Keynes—but
falls into disrepute after the 1930s.
1891
E. G. Ravenstein, a well-known British scholar, publishes
a carefully calculated estimate of the world’s current
population as well as its future supportable population;
his ﬁrst estimate is later judged to have been remarkably
accurate, but not his figure for the Earth’s maximum
population, 5.99 billion (surpassed in 1999).
1909
The International Ofﬁce of Public Hygiene is established
in Paris to monitor worldwide outbreaks of such dis-
eases as cholera, typhus, yellow fever, and smallpox.
1915
The newly established Rockefeller Foundation under-
takes to study and bring under control the deadly mos-
quito-borne “yellow fever,” sending teams of scientists to
Latin America and Africa. By 1935, an effective vaccine
for prevention of the disease has been developed in the
Rockefeller Foundation laboratories; in 1950 Max Theiler
is awarded the Nobel Prize in medicine for this work.
Chronology
83

1916
Margaret Sanger opens the ﬁrst U.S. birth-control clinic
in Brooklyn.
1918–
Global inﬂuenza pandemic takes an estimated 25–40
1919  
million lives. U.S. servicemen heading to war in Europe
take the virus with them on troop ships. Returning
home, they bring the ﬂu back to its country of origin. To-
tal deaths from the so-called Spanish flu in the United
States are estimated at 550,000.
1921
The ﬁrst family-planning clinic in the United Kingdom is
opened by Marie Stopes, English feminist, birth-control
activist, and author of the pioneering sex manual Mar-
ried Love (1919).
The first vaccine effective against tuberculosis is pro-
duced.
1927
World population reaches 2 billion.
1928
Alexander Fleming’s discovery of penicillin opens the
way to control of pneumonia, toxic shock syndrome, and
other bacterial illnesses.
1929
Population Reference Bureau (PRB) is founded in Wash-
ington, D.C., eventually becoming the most respected in-
dependent source of unbiased, accurate information on
population in the United States.
1930
At a conference in Lambeth (London), the worldwide
Anglican communion resolves that contraception, under
appropriate circumstances, is morally acceptable.
In reaction to the Anglican decision earlier in the year,
Pope Pius XI issues the encyclical Casti Connubii, re-
asserting the traditional Roman Catholic position that
contraception is contrary to the purpose of the conjugal
act and therefore immoral.
1931
Population Association of America is founded by Alfred
Lotka and others; it becomes the leading professional so-
ciety of demographers in the United States.
84
Chronology

1943
The Great Bengal (India) Famine claims roughly 3 mil-
lion lives, mostly due to lowered resistance to disease.
1944
Norman Borlaug arrives at the Mexican research center
later known as Centro Internacional de Mejoramiento de
Mais y Trigo (CIMMYT), or International Maize and
Wheat Improvement Center. Borlaug leads efforts to de-
velop high-yield wheat and maize, with major funding
from the Rockefeller Foundation.
1945
Demographer Frank Notestein formulates the theory of
“demographic transition”; it soon becomes an inﬂuential
framework for analyzing national trends in mortality,
fertility, and population growth.
1946
The U.S. baby boom (also experienced in several other
countries heavily involved in World War II) begins; the
peak year of the boom in the United States is 1957.
United Nations Population Division is established, with
Frank Notestein, an architect of the modern science of
demography, as its ﬁrst director.
1948
The publication of Our Plundered Planet, by Fairﬁeld Os-
born, raises the issue of a correlation between rapid pop-
ulation increase and environmental degradation;
William Vogt’s Road to Survival warns of the impact of a
population explosion among the “backward billion” of
the world.
The passage of the Eugenics Protection Act in postwar
Japan legalizes abortion; an already declining Japanese
birthrate falls even faster.
The World Health Organization is established.
1951
The draft outline of India’s ﬁrst Five-Year Plan calls for a
national population policy that includes family planning,
and speciﬁcally the provision of facilities for sterilization.
The ﬁnal draft of the plan, released in 1952, states that a
reduction in the country’s birthrate would benefit the
economy as well as the health of mothers and children.
Chronology
85

1952
Population Council is founded in New York at the
instigation and under the sponsorship of John D. Rocke-
feller III.
India launches its Family Planning Program, the first
such national effort in the world. The program is part of
the country’s First Five-Year Plan. It envisions family
planning as part of a broader health program to be
funded by the central government.
International Planned Parenthood Federation (IPPF) is
established, with headquarters in London and birth-con-
trol pioneer Margaret Sanger as its first president. Its
original members are from India, the United States, the
United Kingdom, the Netherlands, Sweden, West Ger-
many, Singapore, and Hong Kong. By 2005, the IPPF has
149 member organizations working in 166 countries. It is
active in sixteen additional countries where it does not
currently have a member association.
1955
A vaccine against polio, developed by Dr. Jonas Salk of
the University of Pittsburgh Medical School, is proved
effective in human trials.
1958
Coale and Hoover’s book Population Growth and Eco-
nomic Development in Low-Income Countries argues that
population growth hinders poor countries’ prospects for
economic growth; the view becomes highly inﬂuential in
government and academic circles.
1958–
Mao Zedong’s crash industrialization program in China,
1961
known as the Great Leap Forward, leads to famine
deaths in the range of 30 million. The estimate of 30 mil-
lion is based on the difference between expected Chinese
mortality in those years and actual mortality. Experts
consider this the worst famine in history.
1960
There are 3 billion people on Earth.
International Rice Research Institute (IRRI) is established
by the Rockefeller and Ford Foundations in the Philip-
pines to develop high-yield varieties of rice.
86
Chronology

U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) approves
oral contraceptives, or “the pill”; by 1965, it is the most
common form of birth control in the United States.
1961
United States Agency for International Development
(USAID) is established within the U.S. State Department;
within a few years it becomes the main conduit for U.S.
ﬁnancial assistance to global family-planning efforts.
1962
The release of dwarf, high-yield wheat inaugurates the
so-called Green Revolution, raising hopes that rapid in-
creases in world food supplies will match the high rate of
population increase, especially in the developing nations.
Serious research begins on oral rehydration therapy
(ORT) to combat the devastating mortality effects of di-
arrhea, especially for children in the poorer countries;
clinical trials are conducted by the International Centre
for Diarrhoeal Diseases Research in Bangladesh from
1964 to 1968. Successful results are announced in a Lancet
journal article in 1968. ORT now offers a safe, effective,
and inexpensive treatment for cholera.
1963
The growth rate of world population reaches its all-time
high of about 2.2 percent annually; by 2005 it will fall to
about 1.15 percent.
1964
This year marks the close of the U.S. baby boom that be-
gan in 1946.
1965
The Supreme Court, in Griswold v. Connecticut, gives
married couples the right to practice birth control; a later
decision (1972) extends the right to unmarried couples.
President Johnson declares, in his State of the Union ad-
dress: “I will seek new ways to use our knowledge to
help deal with the explosion in world population and
the growing scarcity in world resources” (Green 1993,
305). Senate hearings are held, and USAID prepares to
get involved in family-planning efforts abroad. U.S.
funding of such efforts rises during LBJ’s term from $2
million to $35 million annually.
Chronology
87

1966
IRRI releases its ﬁrst high-yield rice.
1967
The United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA) is autho-
rized.
The best-selling book Famine, 1975! by William and Paul
Paddock advocates a harsh policy of “triage” in dealing
with anticipated famines: provide aid only to those
countries that have a reasonable chance of bringing their
population growth under control.
1968
The publication by the Sierra Club of Paul Ehrlich’s The
Population Bomb builds public awareness of the effects of
rapid population increase. The book eventually sells mil-
lions of copies.
Zero Population Growth (ZPG) is founded by Paul
Ehrlich and others.
Pope Paul VI issues the encyclical Humanae Vitae, restat-
ing traditional Catholic opposition to all forms of birth
control except the “rhythm method.” Polls later indicate
that Catholic couples in the United States practice birth
control at the same rate as the rest of the population.
UN conference on human rights held in Iran results in
the Teheran Proclamation; article 16 identiﬁes the control
of one’s own fertility, and access to the means of achiev-
ing this, as a basic human right.
1969
UNFPA begins operations as the major international
source of family-planning assistance.
A United Nations General Assembly resolution calls on
governments to provide their citizens with the knowl-
edge and means necessary to control their fertility.
President Nixon declares in a message to Congress: “The
experience of this decade has . . . shown that lower rates
of population growth can be critical for speeding up eco-
nomic development and social progress” (Green 1993,
308).
88
Chronology

1970
The Nobel Peace Prize is awarded to Norman Borlaug
for his work in advancing the Green Revolution, by
which food crop yields have been greatly increased in
many developing countries.
Global population growth is a major concern voiced on
the ﬁrst Earth Day, on April 22.
1972
Publication of The Limits to Growth, sponsored by the
Club of Rome, renews worries about an unsustainable
growth of world population.
The Nixon-appointed Commission on Population
Growth and the American Future, chaired by John D.
Rockefeller III, recommends stabilized domestic popula-
tion, an end to illegal immigration, liberalized state laws
on abortion, and other measures. Nixon declines to en-
dorse the report.
1973
Roe v. Wade decision by the Supreme Court legalizes
abortion in the United States.
1973–
Famine in Ethiopia claims more than 100,000 lives, re-
1974
playing on a smaller scale the terrible Ethiopian famine
of 1888–1892, in which one-third of the country’s popu-
lation died.
1974
Famine in Bangladesh claims 26,000 lives, according to
the government, but unofﬁcial estimates place the toll at
100,000 or more.
There are 4 billion people on Earth.
The ﬁrst international conference on population to be at-
tended by ofﬁcial government representatives is held in
Bucharest. The conference is highly contentious and politi-
cized, but a world population plan of action is adopted.
“Economic development is the best contraceptive” be-
comes the most quoted phrase from the conference.
President Echeverria of Mexico reverses his previous op-
position to family planning. The country’s General Law
Chronology
89

of Population is altered to permit the sale and purchase
of contraceptives. The Catholic Church refrains from ac-
tively opposing the change of policy.
Worldwatch Institute founded in Washington, D.C.
A National Security Council memorandum, ordered by
President Nixon, details the possible adverse effects on
U.S. national interests from rapidly rising world popula-
tion; contents are classiﬁed (declassiﬁed in 1989).
1975
At the World Conference of the International Women’s
Year, a “world plan of action” points to ways that im-
proved education, status, and employment for women
would affect age at marriage, as well as the spacing and
number of children.
1976
India’s national government, under Prime Minister In-
dira Gandhi, authorizes state legislatures to enact poli-
cies of compulsory sterilization to limit birthrates; the
ensuing period of “national emergency” culminates in
Gandhi being voted out of ofﬁce.
The government of East Germany (GDR) introduces a
package of pronatal measures, consisting mainly of more
generous maternity leaves. The country’s TFR rises from
1.64 to 1.94 by 1980, a level more than 0.4 higher than
that in West Germany. A decade after implementation of
the policy, the TFR continues to be signiﬁcantly above its
original rate. By 2005, East and West Germany are a
united nation with a TFR of only 1.4, well below replace-
ment level.
1979
China implements the one-child policy; its previous fam-
ily-planning programs of the 1960s and 1970s had al-
ready lowered fertility rates substantially. In 2005, Chi-
nese women average more than one child each, but their
total fertility rate (TFR) of 1.7 is still below replacement
level.
Upon taking power in Iran, the new Islamic government
discontinues the nation’s family-planning program,
90
Chronology
1974,
cont.

viewing it as a Western imposition. A decade later the
government reverses course and reestablishes a national
program of family planning, soon judged to be one of
the world’s most successful.
1980
Upon concluding its global smallpox eradication and
vaccination project, the World Health Organization de-
clares smallpox eradicated, the ﬁrst such total elimination
of an infectious disease in human history. During the
twentieth century, smallpox took an estimated 300 to 500
million lives.
A government interagency report solicited by President
Carter in 1977 and issued in 1980 as The Global 2000 Re-
port to the President: Entering the Twenty-First Century
warns that “if present trends continue, the world in 2000
will be more crowded, more polluted, less stable ecologi-
cally, and more vulnerable to disruption than the world
we live in now” (Barney 1980, 1). Population trends are
identiﬁed as a worrisome variable. In response to Global
2000, President Carter requests that Congress double its
funding of international population assistance; it de-
clines to do so.
1981
The ﬁrst diagnosis of AIDS is made in the United States.
The Ofﬁce of Management and Budget proposes elimi-
nating U.S. funding for population assistance from the
first Reagan budget, a move quashed by Secretary of
State Alexander Haig and Vice-President George H. W.
Bush.
1982
The first World Assembly on Aging is held in Vienna.
Delegates take note of the world population’s changing
age structure and, specifically, the growing proportion
over age 60. They adopt—and the UN General Assembly
subsequently endorses—a plan of action that includes
sixty-two recommendations. Recommendation 36 states:
“Governments should take appropriate action to ensure
to all older persons an appropriate minimum income,
and should develop their economies to benefit all the
population.” To satisfy this recommendation, they
Chronology
91

should “develop social security schemes based on the
principle of universal coverage for older people” (World
Assembly on Aging 1983, 34–35).
1984
The second UN-sponsored world population confer-
ence is held in Mexico City; it reaffirms the plan of ac-
tion adopted at Bucharest ten years earlier. The U.S.
delegation asserts the Reagan administration position
that population growth is not a significant obstacle to
economic development. It also announces that hence-
forth no U.S. funds will go to foreign NGOs that offer
clients abortion information or services, even if they 
do so at their own expense. Observers see a clear de-
parture from previous U.S. leadership on population
policy.
The International Planned Parenthood Federation, after
seventeen years of U.S. financial support, loses that
funding after it refuses to accept new U.S. conditions on
abortion provision and counseling (the so-called Mexico
City policy).
The European Parliament passes a resolution calling on
member nations to follow pronatalist policies to head off
a crisis of low birthrates.
1986
The Reagan and Bush administrations withhold U.S.
funds from UNFPA through 1992, on grounds that some
UNFPA monies help fund coercive population practices
in China (denied by UNFPA). Some of the funds are real-
located to other family-planning programs abroad.
The National Research Council publishes Population
Growth and Economic Development: Policy Questions,
which argues that population growth in less developed
countries can be advantageous if it triggers certain kinds
of “market reactions,” such as more clearly defined
property rights. The study ﬁnds “little support for either
the most alarmist or the most complacent views concern-
ing the economic effects of population growth” (Work-
ing Group 1986, vii).
92
Chronology
1982,
cont.

1987
World population reaches 5 billion; “Day of Five Billion”
observed on July 11.
The Governing Council of the U.N. Development Fund
recommends, and the United Nations ofﬁcially declares,
July 11 as a permanent World Population Day, with
themes to be chosen annually to highlight important is-
sues (for example, in 2000, saving women’s lives; and in
2005, equality empowers).
Naﬁs Sadik, a Pakistani obstetrician, is appointed execu-
tive director of the UNFPA; she is the ﬁrst woman to be
appointed the head of a UN agency.
Singapore, concerned about the slow growth of its labor
force and rapid aging of its population, becomes one of
the ﬁrst nations to adopt pronatalist policies. While the
old, antinatalist policy was encapsulated in the slogan
“Boy or Girl: Two Is Enough,” the new primary slogan is:
“Have Three or More Children If You Can Afford It.” The
pronatal campaign is not successful: in 2005, the TFR has
fallen to 1.0, barely half the replacement level of fertility.
Ben Wattenberg is one of the ﬁrst commentators on pop-
ulation to warn about falling birth rates in the industrial-
ized world, particularly the United States, in his book
The Birth Dearth. He argues that declining fertility in the
West portends declining global influence for Western
ideas and values.
1988
Mifepristone, or RU 486, developed by a French pharma-
ceutical company in the early 1980s, is approved for use
in France (in Great Britain, 1991; in Sweden, 1992). It is
the first reliable chemical agent for inducing abortion
early in pregnancy.
The United Nations General Assembly endorses a deci-
sion by the World Health Organization that December 1
be declared World AIDS Day; the occasion is marked
every year afterward, on December 1, in hopes of raising
awareness about the disease.
Chronology
93

Quebec province, having experienced a plunge in its fer-
tility rate between 1961 and 1971, adopts the Allowance
for Newborn Children, a system of ﬁnancial incentives
for having children. The value of the “baby bonus” by
1992 is 500 Canadian dollars, tax-free, for a first birth,
1,000 for a second, and 8,000 for a third and any subse-
quent birth. In addition to the birth bonus, a regular al-
lowance is to be paid to families with children. One
study ﬁnds that the pronatal policy can be credited with
93,000 extra births in Quebec between 1989 and 1996, at
an estimated cost of $15,000 per birth (Milligan 2002, 2).
The policy is canceled in 1997.
1989
President Bush vetoes a foreign aid bill that includes $15
million for the UNFPA but later signs a revised bill that
increases the population aid budget by $20 million (with
no money for UNFPA).
1990
The FDA approves Norplant, a contraceptive implant for
women.
1992
The FDA approves the use of an injectable contraceptive
for women, Depo-Provera (previously used in eighty
other countries).
In an unprecedented step, the Royal Society of London
and the U.S. National Academy of Sciences issue a joint
statement urging a “more rapid stabilization of world
population” as a partial remedy for environmental
degradation that threatens to become irreversible (see
Chapter 7).
Another statement by scientists, this one signed by over
1,500, including half the living Nobel laureates in sci-
ence, calls for stabilization of world population. This
“Warning to Humanity” stresses the damage suffered by
the environment from overconsumption by the devel-
oped nations and rapidly expanding populations among
the developing nations (see Chapter 7).
At Rio de Janeiro, the United Nations Conference on En-
vironment and Development, popularly known as the
94
Chronology
1988,
cont.

Earth Summit, approves a report that includes this state-
ment: “The growth of world population and production,
combined with unsustainable consumption patterns,
places increasingly severe stress on the life-supporting
capacities of our planet” (United Nations Conference on
Environment and Development 1992, sec. 5.3).
1993
President Clinton issues an executive order, two days af-
ter his inauguration, rescinding the Mexico City policy
of 1984 and indicating an intention to restore U.S. ﬁnan-
cial support for UNFPA.
A UN-sponsored Conference on Human Rights con-
venes in Vienna and issues, at its conclusion, the Vienna
Declaration and Programme of Action; part II, para. 41,
states: “The World Conference on Human Rights reaf-
ﬁrms, on the basis of equality between women and men,
a woman’s right to accessible and adequate health care
and the widest range of family planning services, as well
as equal access to education at all levels” (World Confer-
ence on Human Rights 1993, II, item 41).
At an international science summit on world population
held in New Delhi, representatives from ﬁfty-eight sci-
entiﬁc academies endorse a statement that reads in part:
“In our judgment, humanity’s ability to deal successfully
with its social, economic, and environmental problems
will require the achievement of zero population growth
within the lifetime of our children” (“Science Summit”
1994, 236).
The World Health Organization declares tuberculosis
(TB) to be a global emergency; at century’s end, the dis-
ease is claiming 2 million lives each year, with 1 billion
new TB infections expected between 2000 and 2020, re-
sulting in 35 million deaths.
Genocidal tribal conﬂict in Burundi takes 100,000 lives.
1994
The third UN-sponsored world population conference,
now titled International Conference on Population and
Development (ICPD), is held in Cairo; it adopts a Pro-
Chronology
95

gram of Action to be followed by all participating na-
tions.
Genocidal tribal conﬂict in Rwanda takes an estimated 
1 million lives.
The Zapatista uprising in Chiapas, Mexico, is attributed
by some observers, in part, to population pressures on
the available land; land scarcity in Chiapas is exacer-
bated by concentrated landholding patterns.
Three environmental scientists, including Paul Ehrlich,
estimate the world’s optimal population to be around 2
billion; this assumes consumption patterns that are more
frugal, and energy and resource use more efﬁcient, than
are seen in the United States presently.
1995
According to a report issued by the United Nations’ In-
tergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), “The
balance of evidence suggests that there is a discernible
human inﬂuence on global climate.”
1995–
Famine in North Korea, caused by natural disasters and
1999 
economic mismanagement, takes the lives of 2 million
(by U.S. estimate).
1996
At the UN World Food Summit, held in Rome, delegates
from 173 nations sign a Plan of Action calling for
progress toward world population stabilization, as well
as wiser management of natural resources and less ex-
cessive consumption. More concretely, the conference
calls for a 50 percent reduction in the number of mal-
nourished people in the world by 2015.
1997
Media mogul Ted Turner donates $1 billion to the United
Nations in support of its efforts in the areas of popula-
tion, health, and environment.
A U.S. Department of State Strategic Plan asserts 
that “stabilizing population growth is vital to U.S.
interests. . . . Not only will early stabilization of the
world’s population promote environmentally sustain-
96
Chronology
1944,
cont.

able economic development in other countries, but it
will benefit the U.S. by improving trade opportunities
and mitigating future global crises” (Lasher 1998, 19).
1998
The bicentennial of Malthus’s Essay on the Principle of
Population (1798) is widely noted, with commentators
debating the merits, realism, and relevance of the
Malthusian theory in the contemporary world.
The United Nations issues new, lower projections of
world population for the year 2050; its medium (most
likely) estimate is 8.9 billion.
1999
The ICPD + 5 forum held at the Hague (February 8–12)
reviews progress toward the goals set at the 1994 UN
population conference in Cairo, in an atmosphere of gen-
eral disappointment; many goals have not been met.
Ofﬁcially on October 12, Earth has 6 billion people.
In Japan, Masahiro Yamada’s book Parasaito Shinguru no
Jidai (The Era of Parasite Singles) becomes a best-seller. Ya-
mada calls attention to the increasing tendency of Ja-
pan’s young adults to get jobs and achieve ﬁnancial in-
dependence, yet continue to live in their parents’ home
and not marry. The average age at marriage for men in
Japan is almost 31, and for women, 28.5. These data im-
ply that as many as 25 percent of men and 19 percent of
women will still be single at the age of 50.
2000
The United States conducts its twenty-second decennial
census. Total population is found to be 281,421,906, a 13
percent increase from 1990. Separately, the Census Bu-
reau issues its ﬁrst-ever projection of U.S. population to
the end of the twenty-ﬁrst century, putting the number
in the year 2100 at 571 million, or about double its cur-
rent level.
The FDA grants approval for the abortion drug mifepris-
tone, or RU-486, to be marketed under the name
Mifeprex; 620,000 European women have already used
the drug.
Chronology
97

The United Nations predicts, in a report issued June 27,
that in those African nations with the worst AIDS infec-
tion rates, between one-half and two-thirds of all current
15-year-olds will eventually die of the disease.
Naﬁs Sadik, executive director of the UNFPA, retires af-
ter fourteen years, to be replaced on January 1, 2001, by
Thoraya Obaid of Saudi Arabia. Obaid had been in
charge of the UNFPA division for Europe and the Arab
States; she holds a Ph.D. in literature from Wayne State
University in Detroit and has long experience in interna-
tional civil service.
India becomes the second nation, after China, to reach a
population of 1 billion. The country adopts a National
Population Policy that envisions achievement of replace-
ment-level fertility by 2010. Other goals include reduc-
tion to zero in the number of girls marrying before the
age of 18 and sharp reductions in the infant and mater-
nal mortality rates.
In a much ﬁrmer statement than the one issued in 1995,
the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change now
concludes that man-made gases have “contributed sub-
stantially to the observed warming over the last 50
years” (Revkin 2000, A22) and warns that by the year
2100 temperatures may be as much as 11 degrees Fahren-
heit above their 1990 levels, far higher than previously
estimated. The full report is unanimously approved by
150 scientists at a meeting of the IPCC in Shanghai in
January 2001.
2001
Immediately upon taking office, President George W.
Bush reinstates the Mexico City policy banning U.S.
funds to international family-planning agencies that
counsel or provide abortions. Some observers anticipate
an ironic result—an increase in abortions from the agen-
cies’ reduced ability to provide contraceptives to their
clients.
Reacting to the Bush announcement of nonsupport for
the UNFPA and the International Planned Parenthood
98
Chronology
2000,
cont.

Association, the European Union’s Development and
Humanitarian Aid commissioner, Poul Nielson, pledges
that the European Union will ﬁll any “decency gap” cre-
ated by the U.S. funding loss. Nielson states, “The losers
from this [U.S.] decision will be some of the most vulner-
able people on this planet. Reproductive health services
are crucial elements in the ﬁght against poverty, and the
UNFPA and the IPPF deserve strong support to continue
their activities” (EuropaWorld 2002, 1).
2002
The UN Population Division lowers from 2.1 to 1.85 its
baseline assumption of the TFR toward which all na-
tions, developing and developed, are headed. High-fer-
tility nations will fall toward a 1.85 TFR, and low-fertility
nations will rise toward it. This high-level recognition of
the global trend toward lower fertility is described by
some as “momentous.” The lower TFR number is built
into the long-term projections in the 2002 and 2004 World
Population Prospects issued by the United Nations.
Russia conducts its ﬁrst census in thirteen years during
one week in October. Final results are scheduled for re-
lease in 2005, but a mid-2004 estimate by the Russian
government puts the total population at about 144 mil-
lion. This represents a loss of some 5 million people since
the collapse of the Soviet Union in late 1991.
A report on demographic developments in Europe ﬁnds
that the nation with the lowest fertility is Armenia, with
a TFR of only 1.02. Other low-fertility nations include
Czech Republic (1.14), Slovak Republic (1.20), Slovenia
(1.21), and Latvia (1.21). Only one country, Turkey, has a
TFR above replacement level, at 2.51 (Council of Europe
2002).
The second World Assembly on Aging (Madrid), with
representatives from 159 nations, issues a political decla-
ration that includes this assertion: “We commit ourselves
to provide older persons with universal and equal access
to healthcare and services, including physical and men-
tal health services, and we recognize that the growing
needs of an ageing population require additional poli-
Chronology
99

cies, in particular care and treatment, the promotion of
healthy lifestyles and supportive environments. We shall
promote independence, accessibility and the empower-
ment of older persons to participate fully in all aspects of
society” (Second World Assembly 2002, art. 14).
In its ﬁrst International Migration Report, the United Na-
tions ﬁnds that nearly 10 percent of the population resid-
ing in the world’s more developed regions are migrants.
About 2.3 million people migrate annually from the less
to the more developed regions. Over half of them (1.4
million) migrate to North America. Roughly one-quarter
of the world’s governments regard the current immigra-
tion rate as too high.
2003
In testimony before Congress, Alan Greenspan, chair-
man of the Federal Reserve, warns that the rapid aging
of the populations of Europe and Japan may lead to
lower savings rates in those areas. This, in the future,
could cause global capital ﬂows that have sustained U.S.
investment to be diverted to Europe and Japan.
China’s population reaches 1.3 billion, the highest of any
nation in history.
The Census Bureau announces that Latinos now surpass
African Americans as the largest minority ethnic group
in the United States.
2004
Despite the Bush administration’s refusal to give U.S. ﬁ-
nancial support to the UNFPA, a record total of $326 mil-
lion is contributed to the Population Fund by European
and other governments.
2005
The United Nations releases its biennial World Population
Prospects: The 2004 Revision, with a medium-variant pro-
jection for global population of 9.1 billion in 2050. The
high-variant projection, which assumes higher fertility
(by one-half child per woman), is 10.6 billion; the low-
variant projection (one-half fewer children per woman)
is 7.7 billion.
100
Chronology
2002,
cont.

2007
The majority of the world’s population is now urban for
the ﬁrst time in history, according to a UN projection is-
sued in 2004. The trend toward urbanization is expected
to continue. By 2020, three-fifths of the world’s people
will be urban dwellers.
2013
World population is set to pass the 7 billion mark accord-
ing to UN projections.
2028
World population is set to pass 8 billion.
2050
The world’s developed regions will have about the same
population, 1.2 billion, as in 2005, according to United
Nations projections; the less developed regions will have
7.8 billion, far more than their 5.3 billion in 2005.
The number of people aged 60 years or older (2 billion)
will be greater than the number aged 14 years or
younger, according to the United Nations. Over half the
elderly population will live in Asia.
2300
UN demographers offered, in 2003, their ﬁrst world pop-
ulation projections for the distant future, three centuries
hence. The estimates range from 2.3 billion, if global fertil-
ity rates settle at 1.85 children per woman, to 36.4 billion,
if fertility stabilizes at 2.35 children per woman. The
medium estimate, based on fertility of 2 children per
woman, is about 9 billion people. For illustrative pur-
poses, demographers also projected the consequences of
global fertility rates remaining exactly as they are now. By
2150, world population would grow to 244 billion, and by
2300, it would reach the unimaginable level of 134 trillion!
References
Barney, Gerald O. 1980. Global 2000 Report to the President—Entering the
Twenty-First Century. Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Ofﬁce.
Brown, Lester, et al. 1999. Beyond Malthus: Nineteen Dimensions of the Pop-
ulation Challenge. New York: W. W. Norton.
References
101

Buttner, Thomas, and Wolfgang Lutz. 1990, September. “Estimating Fer-
tility Responses to Policy Measures in the German Democratic Repub-
lic.” Population and Development Review 16:3, 539–555.
Coale, A., and E. Hoover. 1958. Population Growth and Economic Develop-
ment in Low-Income Countries. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University 
Press.
Cohen, Joel. 1995. How Many People Can the Earth Support? New York:
W. W. Norton.
Council of Europe. 2002. Recent Demographic Developments in Europe,
2002. Strasbourg, France: Council of Europe Publishing.
Daily, G. C., A. H. Ehrlich, and P. R. Ehrlich. 1994, July. “Optimum Hu-
man Population Size.” Population and Environment 15:6, 469–475.
Eberstadt, Nicholas. 2005, Winter. “Russia: The Sick Man of Europe.”
The Public Interest 158, 3–20.
Ehrlich, Paul. 1968. The Population Bomb. New York: Ballantine.
EuropaWorld. 2002, July 26. “Commission Grants EUR 32 Million To-
wards Reproductive Health in Developing Countries.” EuropaWorld. Ac-
cessed at http://www.europaworld.org/week92/commissiongrants
26702.htm
Evans, L. T. 1998. Feeding the Ten Billion: Plants and Population Growth.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Green, Marshall. 1993. “The Evolution of US International Population
Policy, 1965–92: A Chronological Account.” Population and Development
Review 19:2, 303–321.
Himes, N. E. 1976. Medical History of Contraception. New York: Schocken
Books.
Hinde, T. 1995. The Domesday Book: England’s Heritage, Then & Now. Lon-
don: Tiger Books International.
Holloway, Marguerite. 2001, April. “Aborted Thinking: Reenacting the
Global Gag Rule Threatens Public Health.” Scientific American 284:4,
19–21.
Lasher, Craig. 1998. “U.S. Population Policy Since the Cairo Confer-
ence.” ECSP Report, Issue 4, 16–23. Washington, DC: Woodrow Wilson
Center, Environmental Change and Security Project.
Livi-Bacci, Massimo. 2001. A Concise History of World Population, 3rd ed.
Malden, MA: Basil Blackwell.
Malthus, Thomas Robert. 1798. An Essay on the Principle of Population.
Edited by Geoffrey Gilbert. New York: Oxford University Press.
McNeill, William H. 1976. Plagues and Peoples. New York: Anchor Press.
102
Chronology

Meadows, Donella H., et al. 1972. The Limits to Growth: A Report for the
Club of Rome’s Project on the Predicament of Mankind. New York: Universe
Books.
Milligan, Kevin. 2002, January 24. “Quebec’s Baby Bonus: Can Public
Policy Raise Fertility?” C. D. Howe Institute Backgrounder.
Noonan, John T. 1986. Contraception: A History of Its Treatment by the
Catholic Theologians and Canonists. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Press.
Paddock, William, and Paul Paddock. 1967. Famine—1975! America’s De-
cision: Who Will Survive? Boston: Little, Brown.
Population Division of the Department of Economic and Social Affairs
of the United Nations Secretariat. 2005. World Population Prospects: The
2004 Revision. New York: United Nations.
Retherford, Robert, and Naohiro Ogawa. 2005. “Japan’s Baby Bust:
Causes, Implications, and Policy Responses.” East-West Center Working
Papers, Population Series No. 118.
Revkin, Andrew C. 2000, October 26. “A Shift in Stance on Global
Warming Theory,” New York Times, A22.
“Science Summit” on World Population: A Joint Statement by 58 of the
World’s Scientiﬁc Academies. 1994, March. Reprinted in Population and De-
velopment Review 20:1, 233–238.
Second World Assembly on Aging. 2002. Political Declaration. New York:
United Nations. Accessible at http://www.un.org/esa/socdev/
ageing/waa/a-conf–197–9a.htm
Sen, Amartya K. 1981. Poverty and Famines: An Essay on Entitlement and
Deprivation. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
United States Census Bureau. 2005. International Data Base, accessible
at http://www.census.gov/ipc/www/idbnew.html
United Nations. 2002. Political Declaration [Second World Assembly on Ag-
ing]. New York: United Nations.
United Nations Conference on Environment and Development. 1992.
Agenda 21. Rio de Janeiro: UN Secretariat.
United Nations Population Division. 2002. International Migration Report
2002. New York: United Nations.
Wattenberg, Ben J. 1987. The Birth Dearth. New York: Pharos Books.
Weeks, John R. 2004. Population: An Introduction to Concepts and Issues,
8th ed. Belmont, CA: Wadsworth.
Working Group on Population Growth and Economic Development.
1986. Population Growth and Economic Development: Policy Questions.
Washington, DC: National Academy Press.
References
103

World Assembly on Aging. 1983. Vienna International Plan of Action on
Aging. New York: United Nations. Accessible at http://www.un.org/
esa/socdev/ageing/ageipaa3.htm#A
World Conference on Human Rights. 1993. Vienna Declaration and Pro-
gramme of Action. New York: UN General Assembly.
Yamada, Masahiro. 1999. Parasaito Shinguru no Jidai. Tokyo: Chikuma
Shobo.
104
Chronology

5
Biographical Sketches
P
opulation has been the subject of speculation and debate for
hundreds of years. Even the so-called father of population
studies, Thomas Malthus (1766–1834), had numerous intel-
lectual forebears. In this chapter, we get to know some of the
main actors and thinkers in the field of population. Some, like
Malthus, Paul Ehrlich, and Julian Simon, have forged the basic
theoretical and policy frameworks within which population is-
sues are addressed. Others, like John Bongaarts and Paul De-
meny, have refined our understanding of key demographic
processes. More practical-minded individuals, like Margaret
Sanger and Thoraya Obaid, have helped shape new population
policies at the national and international levels. And scientists
like Norman Borlaug, Walter Plowright, and M. S. Swaminathan
have led the research efforts that are making it possible to con-
tinue balancing the world’s population with its food supply.
There is no master list of the “right” people to include in a bio-
graphical gallery like this. Many more individuals could have
been featured. For example, Margaret Sanger and Maria Stopes,
birth-control pioneers in the United States and Britain, respec-
tively, had courageous counterparts in many other countries. The
scientists, activists, theorists, and leaders singled out in this
chapter have, as the saying goes, “stood on the shoulders of gi-
ants.”
John Bongaarts (1945–)
Will the world’s population eventually peak? One answer to that
question is: it has to, sooner or later. Just how soon (or late) will
105

depend, to an important degree, on how quickly the worldwide
fertility rate—currently around three children per woman—falls
to the replacement level of about two. As we know, such a decline
in fertility has already occurred in the developed nations but not
yet in most of the developing nations. Demographer John Bon-
gaarts has presented an inﬂuential model of fertility, according to
which there are four basic determinants of a society’s fertility
rate: the proportion of women married, the proportion who are
physically unable to bear children (infecund), the rate of abor-
tion, and the proportion of women using contraception. These
four variables account for almost all observed differences in fer-
tility among nations. At the global level, therefore, we will have
to see further change in one or more of the variables before fertil-
ity, which has been declining for years, settles at (or below) re-
placement level. The most likely variable to change: the propor-
tion of women using contraception.
Dutch by birth and citizenship, Dr. Bongaarts wrote his doc-
toral thesis on the “demographic transition” (University of Illi-
nois, 1972). He has long been associated with the Population
Council in New York City, where he is currently vice-president in
the policy research division. He has served on many panels, com-
mittees, and boards, and has briefed the U.S. vice-president and
secretary of state on population matters.
Further Reading.
J. Bongaarts and A. Bulatao (eds.), Beyond Six
Billion: Forecasting the World’s Population (Washington, DC: Na-
tional Academy Press, 2000); “Staff Biographies,” Population
Council website at http://www.popcouncil.org/staff/bios/
jbongaarts.html
Norman Borlaug (1914–)
His admirers see in Norman Borlaug’s lifework a decisive refuta-
tion of Malthus. The famed eighteenth-century English parson
had worried about the danger of human numbers outpacing any
possible increase in food production, with famine the ultimate
control. As the populations of the developing nations shot up-
ward in the second half of the twentieth century, a Malthusian
crisis appeared imminent in Asia and Africa. The occurrence of
widespread famines was taken almost for granted in the West.
But the so-called Green Revolution of the 1960s, for which Bor-
106
Biographical Sketches

laug was principally responsible, helped keep food supplies
growing as fast as, and in many cases faster than, the population.
Knowledgeable observers credit the agricultural innovations of
Borlaug and his colleagues with saving millions of lives, espe-
cially in the developing world.
An Iowa native, Borlaug earned his bachelor’s degree in for-
est management and his Ph.D. in plant pathology (University of
Minnesota, 1942). In 1944, he accepted the invitation of the Rock-
efeller Foundation to lead a research effort in Mexico aimed at
improving that country’s wheat production. Over many years of
patient experimentation, he and his team developed the dwarf,
high-yielding wheat varieties that, in combination with chemical
fertilizers and irrigation, allowed Mexico to greatly increase its
grain output and reduce its dependency on food imports. The
Mexican research center that evolved out of the original research
program—known by its acronym CIMMYT—soon achieved
worldwide renown. Borlaug was invited to develop similar crop
varieties in India and Pakistan; his remarkable success in doing
so helped move the subcontinent from famines in the 1960s to
much greater food security in subsequent decades. His plant-
breeding practices were also emulated at the International Rice
Research Institute (IRRI) in the Philippines, and today most
Asian rice bowls are ﬁlled with hybridized rice.
In 1970, Borlaug was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize for his
efforts to reduce world hunger through agricultural science. He
has not rested on his laurels, however. First at Cornell University,
then at Texas A & M, he has held Distinguished Professorships.
He continues to mentor young scientists at the CIMMYT in Mex-
ico. And in recent years he has turned his attention to the food sit-
uation in sub-Saharan Africa. Working with Japanese philan-
thropist Ryoichi Sasakawa and former president Jimmy Carter,
Borlaug, under the auspices of the Sasakawa–Global 2000 Foun-
dation, initiated ﬁeld trials of new varieties of wheat, sorghum,
cassava, and cow peas in several African countries. As with his
earlier efforts, these projects have produced startling increases in
crop yields. Borlaug is the ﬁrst to admit, however, that long-term
success in Africa will be a challenge, given the lack of physical in-
frastructure, the extraordinary levels of poverty, the lack of social
cohesion, and the high rates of population increase. He continues
to worry about global population, in spite of all he has done to
banish the Malthusian specter.
Biographical Sketches
107

Further Reading.
G. Easterbrook, “The Forgotten Benefactor of
Humanity,” The Atlantic Monthly 279:1 (January 1997); “Visit of
Dr. Norman Borlaug to MSU [Michigan State University],” March
2003, at http://www.iia.msu.edu/absp/borlaugvisit.html
Ester Boserup (1910–1999)
One of the most notable demographic thinkers of the twentieth
century was the Danish economist Ester Boserup. In her classic
study The Conditions of Agricultural Growth (1965), she turned
Malthusian theory on its head and in the process gave valuable
ammunition to the “cornucopian” side of the population de-
bate. Under simple Malthusian theory, population levels were
thought to depend on available food supplies. Thus an im-
provement in agricultural techniques could pave the way to a
rapid increase in population. But what if the relationship
worked in a reverse direction, with faster population growth
the cause, rather than the effect, of improved methods of agricul-
tural production? That, in essence, was Boserup’s contention in
her 1965 book. Her empirical research convinced her that agri-
cultural advances were spurred by population pressure, and not
the other way around. In particular, the pressure of more people
on the land (that is, rising population density) had led to such
historic innovations as the plow, crop rotations, irrigation, and
the use of fertilizers. These notions clearly ran counter to the
neo-Malthusian orthodoxy of the 1950s, 1960s, and 1970s, which
regarded population growth as likely to jeopardize economic
development.
Boserup was educated at the University of Copenhagen,
where she studied economic theory, sociology, and agriculture.
She began her career as an economic planner in the Danish gov-
ernment during World War II. Later she spent a decade—much of
it in the study of European agriculture—at the United Nations
Economic Commission for Europe in Geneva, Switzerland. In
1957 she moved to India to assist Gunnar Myrdal (a future Nobel
laureate in economics) in his research on Asian economic devel-
opment. Her extensive travel as part of this project and a subse-
quent period of research in Africa in 1964–1965 gave Boserup a
firsthand grasp of development issues and an impatience with
purely theoretical approaches to development. Her interest in the
way modernization affected the status of women led her to write
Woman’s Role in Economic Development (1970).
108
Biographical Sketches

Population optimists like Julian Simon were delighted to
welcome Boserup to their ranks. As they saw it, her work demon-
strated that population growth need not have any negative im-
pact on human well-being; indeed, it could be highly beneﬁcial.
Although the environmentalist camp remained skeptical, they re-
spected the empirical and multidisciplinary qualities of
Boserup’s scholarship.
Further Reading.
E. Boserup, “The Impact of Scarcity and 
Plenty on Development,” in R. I. Rotberg and T. K. Rabb (eds.),
Hunger and History (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
1985).
Lester R. Brown (1934–)
Few public-interest organizations have been as closely identiﬁed
with their founder as the Worldwatch Institute has been with
Lester Brown. For over a quarter of a century, beginning in 1974,
Brown led the Institute. In a sense Worldwatch supported, and
was supported by, the environmental movement. Its annual State
of the World report, always co-authored by Brown, assumed the
status of a semiofﬁcial document; it is now translated into all of
the world’s major languages and used in hundreds of college and
university courses in the United States and abroad. Brown has
demonstrated a ﬂair for “getting out the word” in a variety of for-
mats: Vital Signs and State of the World annuals, monographs (the
Environmental Alert series), the bimonthly magazine World
Watch, interviews, and speeches. Consistently throughout his ca-
reer, Brown has expressed concern about world population, most
notably in his 1994 book Full House: Reassessing the Earth’s Popula-
tion Carrying Capacity (with H. Kane) and his 1999 book Beyond
Malthus: Nineteen Dimensions of the Population Challenge (with G.
Gardner and B. Halweil).
Educational credentials in agriculture and public adminis-
tration—along with firsthand experience both in farming
(tomato-growing in New Jersey) and in the federal government—
may help explain Lester Brown’s willingness to view environ-
mental issues broadly. He sees the problems of the environment
as complex and interrelated. Solutions will not come from spe-
cialists working only within their narrow fields of expertise.
Hence the useful role of organizations like Worldwatch that can
supply government officials, the media, and the public with
Biographical Sketches
109

analysis that is readable and broad-gauged rather than narrowly
technical.
In 2001, the year after he gave up the presidency of World-
watch, Lester Brown founded the Earth Policy Institute (EPI). The
mission of EPI is to develop and disseminate a “vision of what an
environmentally sustainable economy” would look like and to
provide a “roadmap” of how to get there. Brown has been receiv-
ing honorary degrees, prizes, and fellowships for decades,
among them, the MacArthur Fellow award (1986), the United
Nations Environment Prize (1987), the Blue Planet Prize (1994),
and an honorary professorship in the Chinese Academy of Sci-
ences (2005). His board memberships include the Council on For-
eign Relations and Zero Population Growth.
Further Reading.
L. Brown, Outgrowing the Earth: The Food
Security Challenge in an Age of Falling Water Tables and Rising
Temperatures (New York: W. W. Norton, 2005); “World in the
Balance: Voices of Concern,” NOVA program broadcast on PBS,
April 20, 2004, transcribed at http://www.pbs.org/wgbh/nova/
worldbalance/voic-brow.html
Joel E. Cohen (1944–)
Curious people through the centuries have asked the simple
question: how high can our planet’s population rise? Their an-
swers, and a fascinating review of the entire subject, may be
found in Joel Cohen’s 1995 book How Many People Can the Earth
Support? With doctoral training in applied mathematics, popula-
tion sciences, and tropical public health at Harvard, and as head
of the Laboratory of Populations at Rockefeller University and
Columbia University, Cohen is well qualiﬁed to tackle the issue.
He carefully notes a host of difficulties and complications that
must be overcome before one can estimate the Earth’s carrying
capacity. Surprisingly, the middle value (or median) of past max-
imum-population estimates turns out to be quite close to actual
UN projections of world population by the middle of the
twenty-first century. Indeed, Cohen’s survey of previous esti-
mates of maximum global population—back to 1679—strongly
suggests that the world is approaching what many demographic
thinkers have deemed to be the upper limits of sustainable pop-
ulation.
110
Biographical Sketches

Formerly a member of Harvard’s Society of Fellows, Cohen
has been elected to the American Academy of Arts and Sciences,
the American Philosophical Society, and the National Academy
of Sciences. He has won the Tyler Prize for Environmental
Achievement (1999) and a MacArthur Foundation award. His
writings have ranged across demography, ecology, epidemiology,
and mathematics.
Further Reading.
J. Cohen, “Human Population: The Next Half
Century,” Science 302:5648 (November 2003); J. Cohen, “The
Future of Population,” in R. N. Cooper and R. Layard (eds.), What
the Future Holds: Insights from Social Science (Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press, 2002).
Paul Demeny (1932–)
No one will insist—with the possible exception of economists—
that our most personal decisions are based on economics. Still,
the demographer Paul Demeny, a Distinguished Scholar at the
Population Council in New York, believes that the timing of a
country’s “fertility transition”—the all-important move to
smaller families—is mainly determined by four economic fac-
tors. They are (1) the direct cost to parents of rearing and edu-
cating their children; (2) the indirect costs in lost earnings when
a parent, usually the mother, is kept out of the job market by
childrearing activities; (3) the earnings that children can bring
home to their families; and (4) the contribution children can
make to their parents’ old-age security relative to other systems
of economic support, such as state pensions. All of this suggests
that government policies to speed the transition to lower fertil-
ity should be simple to devise, though perhaps not as easy to
implement. For example, policies discouraging child labor and
requiring children to remain in school, encouraging women to
enter or reenter the labor force, or providing for old-age assis-
tance will all tend to raise the costs and lower the benefits of
childbearing.
A widely respected figure in the demographic profession,
Paul Demeny immigrated to the United States from Hungary in
1956, earned his Ph.D. in economics from Princeton University in
1961, and founded the journal Population and Development Review
(PDR) in 1974. He remains the journal’s editor to this day, and
Biographical Sketches
111

PDR remains a refreshingly readable source of population infor-
mation and perspective. In 2003, Demeny was named Laureate of
the International Union for the Scientiﬁc Study of Population.
Further Reading.
P. Demeny, “Policies Seeking a Reduction of
High Fertility: A Case for the Demand Side,” Population and
Development Review 18:2 (June 1992).
Nicholas Eberstadt (1955–)
At the various councils, foundations, and government agencies
concerned with population matters, there has long been a domi-
nant view about the world’s population: it is growing too fast,
damaging the environment, and dampening the economic
prospects of poorer nations. But for years there has also been a
vigorous dissent from the neo-Malthusian orthodoxy. Julian Si-
mon, Peter Bauer, Ester Boserup, and two resident scholars at the
American Enterprise Institute, Ben Wattenberg and Nicholas
Eberstadt, have challenged the mainstream view. In a widely
noted article in The Public Interest (Fall 1997), Eberstadt explored
the possibility that a population “implosion” was under way
nearly everywhere in the world. Fertility rates were declining on
every continent, and in Europe and parts of East Asia the drop
was so severe that populations might well shrink in the foresee-
able future. The social and economic implications were immense.
On its current path, Italy, for example, would become, within two
generations, a place where most children had no siblings, aunts,
uncles, or cousins. (China was moving in the same direction.) The
concept of family would be fundamentally altered. Europe
would face massive immigration pressures. Some Asian societies
would have to cope with a “bride shortage” due to abortion prac-
tices that favored male offspring.
Because he does not share the view that population growth
needs to be curbed, Eberstadt is not favorably impressed by the
ﬁnancial support that U.S. charitable foundations have given to
international family planning—or “population control,” as he
prefers to call it. He has written about the crucial role of the Rock-
efeller and Ford Foundations in launching these efforts in the
1950s and 1960s, and the renewed interest shown in such activi-
ties by a more recent generation of American philanthropists,
such as Ted Turner, Bill Gates, and Warren Buffett. Eberstadt be-
lieves that ordinary American taxpayers have become less sup-
112
Biographical Sketches

portive of aid to international population programs and that
wealthy philanthropists are stepping in to make up the difference
out of their own pockets.
Eberstadt presents his provocative ideas on television and
radio programs, in the pages of leading public-affairs journals
and newspapers, and before congressional committees. He has
been a consultant to the Departments of State and Defense, the
World Bank, and the Census Bureau. Holding three degrees from
Harvard and one from the London School of Economics, Eber-
stadt has been for many years a visiting fellow at Harvard’s Cen-
ter for Population and Development Studies. His books include
Prosperous Paupers and Other Population Problems (2000).
Further Reading.
N. Eberstadt, “Rethinking the Population
Problem,” The Public Interest 159 (Spring 2005); N. Eberstadt, “The
World Population ‘Crisis’: American Philanthropy’s Long,
Fruitless Affair with Population Control,” The Philanthropy
Roundtable (November–December 1998).
Paul R. Ehrlich (1932–)
In recent decades, the individual most responsible for sounding
the alarm over the impact of human population on the natural
environment has been Paul Ehrlich. His 1968 book The Population
Bomb was an international best-seller. It has been credited, along
with Rachel Carson’s Silent Spring, with helping to launch the en-
vironmentalist movement. The urgent tone (and premature pes-
simism) of this work is evident in its much-quoted opening lines:
“The battle to feed all of humanity is over. In the 1970s and 1980s
hundreds of millions of people will starve to death in spite of any
crash programs embarked upon now.” Ehrlich’s powerful and
persuasive prose echoes the original population warning of
Malthus in 1798. But while Malthus analyzed population mainly
in economic terms, Ehrlich stresses the ecological costs of overpop-
ulation. He points to things like pollution, depletion of the ozone
layer, and species extinction as potential costs of too rapid popu-
lation growth. His simple equation, I = P x A x T, makes the im-
pact (I) on the environment depend directly on population (P),
the average level of consumption or afﬂuence (A), and the level
of technology (T). Obviously, a rising population has harmful ef-
fects on the environment unless offset by lower consumption
rates or more beneﬁcent kinds of technology.
Biographical Sketches
113

The clear role of population (P) in his formula helps account
for Ehrlich’s persistent emphasis, in books, articles, and television
appearances, on limiting human numbers. He believes families
should aim for two children at most, preferably one. Not surpris-
ingly, he was a co-founder of the organization Zero Population
Growth, later renamed Population Connection. But a broadening
of Ehrlich’s environmental concerns is evident in The Stork and the
Plow (1995) and One with Ninevah: Politics, Consumption, and the
Human Future (2004), co-authored with Anne Ehrlich, with their
advocacy of less wasteful lifestyles in the developed world, a re-
duction of the income gap between rich and poor nations, and
better education and improved status for women. Ehrlich has not
hesitated to support strong government measures to achieve the
limits on population and consumption that he considers impera-
tive. This is one of several areas in which he differs sharply with
the population optimists, led by Julian Simon (until the latter’s
death in 1998).
Ehrlich earned his Ph.D. in biology from the University of
Kansas and has been for many years on the faculty at Stanford
University, where he is Bing Professor of Population Studies. His
special research interest has been the genetics, ecology, and popu-
lation dynamics of checkerspot butterﬂies. His many honors in-
clude prizes from the Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences, the
United Nations, the World Wildlife Fund, and the MacArthur
Foundation. His writings include hundreds of articles, The Popu-
lation Explosion (1990, with A. H. Ehrlich), Betrayal of Science and
Reason: How Anti-Environmental Rhetoric Threatens Our Future
(1996, with A. H. Ehrlich), and the books cited above.
Further Reading.
B. Wattenberg, “How Should Humanity
Prosper?” [interview with Ehrlich], PBS, March 17, 2005,
transcribed at http://www.pbs.org/thinktank/show_1150.html;
“Paul and Anne Ehrlich, 1998 Tyler Laureates,” at http://www.
usc.edu/dept/LAS/tylerprize/tyler98.html
Werner Fornos (1933–)
For the past quarter-century, Werner Fornos has been the Paul
Revere of the population-awareness community, sounding the
alarm about overpopulation to every kind of audience, attending
population conferences all over the world, and serving as presi-
dent of the Population Institute. As with most neo-Malthusians,
114
Biographical Sketches

Fornos stresses the environmental degradation caused by exces-
sive population growth. But what is distinctive in his approach to
overpopulation is a clear focus on the downward trend in the
quality of life as human numbers continue to climb. He worries
about the squalor and misery experienced by millions around the
world as they crowd into super-large cities. He points to the
poverty, illiteracy, and disease rates found in those parts of the
world where 95 to 99 percent of future population growth is ex-
pected to take place. When he looks at his adopted country—the
German native was granted U.S. citizenship in 1953—Fornos sees
a need for greater action on two fronts. First, the United States
needs to support international family-planning programs more
generously. Second, it needs to establish its own population pol-
icy. The United States has faster population growth than any
other industrialized nation, with serious consequences for global
warming and other environmental problems.
A graduate of the University of Maryland, Fornos served for
four years as a Maryland state legislator before joining the Popu-
lation Institute. In February 2000, he received the Order of Merit,
the highest award granted by the German government to a non-
citizen. He was co-winner of the United Nations Population
Award in 2003.
Further Reading.
C. N. McDaniel, Wisdom for a Livable Planet (San
Antonio, TX: Trinity University Press, 2005).
He Kang (1923–)
To be China’s minister of agriculture is to shoulder the ultimate
Malthusian responsibility: keeping food supplies growing fast
enough to feed the world’s most populous nation. Superﬁcially, it
might not seem a difficult task, since China several years ago
reached below-replacement fertility (fewer than two children per
woman) as a result of its one-child policy. But the relative youth-
fulness of China’s population gives it what demographers call
momentum. With millions of Chinese entering their childbearing
years, population—and the demand for food—will continue to
increase for many years to come. He Kang, the Chinese minister
of agriculture from 1983 to 1990 and a key agricultural planner
from as early as 1979, seems never to have been daunted by the
challenge. His rise to a position of high inﬂuence in the agricul-
tural bureaucracy coincided with the similar rise to paramount
Biographical Sketches
115

political inﬂuence in China by Deng Xiaoping, a pragmatist de-
termined to lead the country away from the deadening effects of
government controls and central planning. Deng wanted peasant
farmers to have more decision-making authority and a chance to
make proﬁts by their hard work.
Implementation of the new approach, under He Kang’s in-
spired guidance, led to quick results: grain output rose from 305
million tons in 1978 to a record 407 million tons in 1984. Other
types of agricultural production—meat, sugar, ﬁsh catches, cot-
ton—also showed impressive gains. By 1986, He Kang could
boast that China had achieved basic self-sufﬁciency in food and
clothing, a welcome refutation of the gloomier predictions of
some Western writers in the 1960s. He Kang was awarded the
World Food Prize in 1993.
Further Reading.
“He Kang: 1993 World Food Prize Laureate,”
accessed at http://www.worldfoodprize.org/Laureates/Past/
1993.htm
Thomas Homer-Dixon (1956–)
Some neo-Malthusians have warned of famine as the logical re-
sult to be expected from the population explosion that the world
has experienced since about the mid-twentieth century. But
Malthus himself believed the toll taken by excessive population
growth could be measured in moral degradation and political re-
pression as often as it was in shrinking portions of food on
people’s plates. Thomas Homer-Dixon, director of the Trudeau
Centre for Peace and Conflict Studies at the University of
Toronto, has for some years now been contributing to a still more
complex way of understanding what may lie ahead for poor but
populous regions of the world. He argues that in many places
rapid population growth is depleting and degrading the avail-
able supplies of renewable resources such as cropland, forests,
and fresh water. The supplies that remain are often under the
control of powerful, privileged interests who exploit them with-
out regard for the long-term effects on the majority of the popula-
tion. Growing environmental scarcities can contribute, in Homer-
Dixon’s view, to outbreaks of “ecoviolence.” Indeed, he believes
we have already seen ecoviolence occur in Chiapas (Mexico), the
116
Biographical Sketches

Gaza Strip, South Africa, and Pakistan, and are likely to see more
of it in the future.
A native and citizen of Canada, Homer-Dixon earned his
Ph.D. in political science at M.I.T. (1989). He has presented his re-
search at the World Economic Forum in Davos, Switzerland, and
has twice briefed the vice-president of the United States. His
most recent book is The Ingenuity Gap (New York: Alfred A.
Knopf, 2000).
Further Reading.
T. Homer-Dixon, Environment, Scarcity and
Violence (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1999); 
T. Homer-Dixon home page at http://www.homerdixon.com/
Richard Jackson (1955–)
The world’s population is rapidly growing older. In 1950, the me-
dian global age was about 24 years. By 2050, the United Nations
predicts, it will be around 38. For some countries, the “graying”
will be more dramatic: Spain’s median age may reach 51 as early
as 2035. Italy and Japan could be that old even sooner. Among the
experts pondering the consequences of such unprecedented
global aging, one of the most prominent is Richard Jackson, direc-
tor of the Global Aging Initiative at Georgetown University’s
Center for Strategic and International Studies. Jackson has devel-
oped an “aging vulnerability index” the purpose of which is to
assess national capacities to withstand the financial burdens of
rapidly aging populations. Of the twelve developed countries ex-
amined, the three most vulnerable turn out to be France, Italy,
and Spain; the least vulnerable are Australia, the United King-
dom, and the United States. In separate policy studies, Dr. Jack-
son has explored the economic impact of aging in the United
States, Germany, and China. A senior advisor to the Concord
Coalition, he is particularly concerned about future entitlement
program costs and the ﬁscal implications of those rapidly rising
costs. Jackson brings an uncommon historical perspective to his
current research with an undergraduate degree in classics from
SUNY-Albany and a Ph.D. in economic history from Yale.
Further Reading.
R. Jackson and N. Howe, “The Graying of 
the Middle Kingdom: The Demographics and Economics of
Biographical Sketches
117

Retirement Policy in China” (Washington, DC: CSIS Global
Aging Initiative Program, 2004); R. Jackson and N. Howe, “The
2003 Aging Vulnerability Index: An Assessment of the Capacity
of Twelve Developed Countries to Meet the Aging Challenge”
(Washington, DC: CSIS, 2003). Both studies are available online.
Wolfgang Lutz (1956–)
When low rates of childbirth prevail for a long enough time, pop-
ulation acquires something called “negative momentum.” In sim-
plest terms, this means that even if women now decide to start
having more children, there are so many fewer women of child-
bearing age that the total population will continue to trend
downward for years. Wolfgang Lutz, one of Europe’s leading de-
mographers, startled readers of the journal Science in 2003 by an-
nouncing that Europe had crossed over from positive to negative
momentum around the year 2000. Europe’s population today,
therefore, has a built-in tendency to decline. If governments are
concerned with the economic and other pressures likely to result
from this tendency, they will need to design policies encouraging
women either to have more children or to have them earlier. The
only other way to bolster population in the long run would be
through immigration.
Lutz is one of the most actively engaged demographers in
the world. Holder of a Ph.D. in demography from the University
of Pennsylvania (1983), he is currently leader of the World Popu-
lation Program at the International Institute for Applied Systems
Analysis in Laxenburg, Austria; director of the Vienna Institute of
Demography at the Austrian Academy of Sciences; and principal
investigator at the Asian MetaCentre for Population and Sustain-
able Development, headquartered at the National University of
Singapore. Lutz’s research centers on demographic forecasting
and on the connections between population and the environ-
ment. He is the author of numerous books and scientiﬁc papers
on population.
Further Reading.
W. Lutz, B. C. O’Neill, and S. Scherbov,
“Europe’s Population at a Turning Point,” Science 299:5615 (March
28, 2003); W. Lutz, Future Population of the World: What Can We
Assume Today? 2nd ed. (London: Earthscan Publications, 1997).
118
Biographical Sketches

Carolyn B. Maloney (1948–)
When Carolyn Maloney first got into electoral politics in 1982
with a successful run for the New York City Council, family plan-
ning was not a “hot button” issue at the local, state, or national
level. That changed quickly. In 1984, the Reagan administration
announced that the United States would no longer provide fund-
ing to foreign NGOs (nongovernmental organizations) that en-
gaged in the provision of abortions or abortion counseling. In
what came to be called the global gag rule, the Reagan adminis-
tration also disallowed any foreign organization receiving U.S.
funds from advocating for an easing of its country’s legal restric-
tions on abortion. In addition, the U.S. contribution to the United
Nations Population Fund, or UNFPA, was held back under Rea-
gan and not restored until the election of Bill Clinton in 1992. On
the day Clinton won the presidency, Maloney won a House seat
representing part of New York City; she has held that seat ever
since. For a number of years now, Maloney has been the most vo-
cal Democrat on Capitol Hill in supporting the restoration of U.S.
funding to the UNFPA—funding that President George W. Bush
halted once again in 2002. Maloney has also spoken out strongly
against the global gag rule. Global women’s issues have been an
ongoing concern for her. She was a member of the U.S. delegation
to the Fourth World Conference on Women in Beijing (1995) and
to the ﬁve- and ten-year follow-ups to the historic 1994 Interna-
tional Conference on Population and Development in Cairo. Mal-
oney was born in Greensboro, North Carolina, graduated from
Greensboro College (1970), and was a teacher and school admin-
istrator in New York before entering politics.
Further Reading.
S. Cohen, “Global Gag Rule Threatens
International Family Planning Programs,” The Guttmacher Report
on Public Policy, 3:1 (February 2000); “Biography” link at
http://www.house.gov/maloney/
Thomas Robert Malthus (1766–1834)
The most commonly cited name in the history of population
studies (and controversies) is Malthus. The adjective “Malthu-
sian” has entered the English language as a term suggestive of
Biographical Sketches
119

the frightening possibilities of overpopulation. Thomas Robert
Malthus came from a middle-class family in the south of En-
gland. Shortly after graduation from Cambridge University in
1788, he was ordained a clergyman in the Church of England. In
1805, he was appointed professor of history and political econ-
omy at the East India College, where he taught for the rest of his
life. His Essay on the Principle of Population was published anony-
mously in 1798, with signiﬁcant revisions incorporated into later
editions. Malthus was an economist who shared many of the free-
market views of his great classical predecessor, Adam Smith.
In his population theory, Malthus argued that human num-
bers tend to increase more rapidly than the food supply needed
for subsistence. He pointed to the explosive rates of population
growth observed under favorable conditions, for example, in the
American colonies, and to the ﬁnite amount of land available for
the production of food. Although it is commonly asserted that
Malthus predicted famine for the human race, this is quite un-
true. Malthus merely stated that population must be restrained
by some combination of “checks,” and that if all other checks
failed to limit population, famine would do the grim job. He be-
lieved that some checks were more benign in their operation than
others, and he particularly favored what he called moral re-
straint—the delay of marriage until a couple could afford chil-
dren, with chastity in the interim.
Malthus became one of the most controversial public ﬁgures
of his day, and even now the evaluations of his ideas range from
highly critical to warmly appreciative. Environmentalists ap-
plaud his attention to the impact of rapid population growth and
believe his concerns are even more pertinent in a world of 6.5 bil-
lion people than in a world of 1 billion. Critics, on the other hand,
argue that Malthus underestimated the potential of technological
progress in agriculture; that he wrongly blamed the poor for their
own misery; and that, by rejecting birth control (on moral
grounds), he failed to grasp the most effective and humane
means of avoiding overpopulation. His Essay remains available
in many editions and continues to invite new generations of read-
ers to confront difﬁcult issues.
Further Reading.
T. R. Malthus, An Essay on the Principle of
Population (1798), G. Gilbert (ed.) (Oxford: Oxford World’s
Classics, 1993).
120
Biographical Sketches

Thoraya Obaid (1946–)
Half a million women in the developing world die each year
from pregnancy-related complications. That the giving of new
life continues to cost so many women their own lives is one rea-
son the United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA) needs the best
leadership it can get. On January 1, 2001, Thoraya Obaid was pro-
moted from within UNFPA ranks to succeed Dr. Naﬁs Sadik as
executive director. Dr. Obaid is the ﬁrst Saudi Arabian national to
head any UN agency. What she brings to the position is a quarter-
century’s experience of working with governments, mainly in
western Asia, to develop programs to empower women and pro-
mote gender equality. Although a veteran practitioner of diplo-
matic niceties, Obaid can be blunt. When President Bush held
back the funds that Congress had appropriated for the UNFPA in
2002, her response came quickly: “These $34 million could pre-
vent two million unwanted pregnancies and 77,000 cases of in-
fant mortality. Mr. President, women and children will die as a re-
sult of your decision.”
Dr. Obaid was the ﬁrst Saudi woman to receive a scholarship
from her government to study at an American university. She
earned her B.A. degree (1966) from Mills College in Oakland, Cal-
ifornia, with a major in English literature, and went on to earn a
doctorate in the same subject at Wayne State University in 1974.
The next year she began her long career at the United Nations
that culminated in the announcement by Secretary-General Koﬁ
Annan, in late 2000, that she was “the ideal candidate” to be the
next head of the UNFPA.
Further Reading.
S. Lohoff and R. Bernhard, “Thoraya Obaid—
Working for Women,” Deutsche Welle, July 29, 2003, transcribed at
http://www.qantara.de/webcom/show_article.php/_c-307/
_nr-16/_p-1/i.html; Executive Director page at UNFPA website,
www.unfpa.org
Walter Plowright (1923–)
The awarding of the 1999 World Food Prize to Dr. Walter
Plowright put the spotlight on a resourceful scientist and a costly
disease, neither well known to the public. The disease, rinderpest,
Biographical Sketches
121

has plagued humankind since the era of the Roman Empire. It is
a highly infectious viral disease that is nearly always fatal to cat-
tle and other hoofed animals, and thus devastating in its impact
on those who depend on livestock herds. In the eighteenth cen-
tury, outbreaks of rinderpest killed 200 million cattle in Western
Europe, wreaking such havoc that one result was the founding of
the world’s ﬁrst veterinary school in Lyon, France, where veteri-
nary science was born. An outbreak during the 1890s wiped out
between 80 and 90 percent of the cattle in sub-Saharan Africa,
causing untold human suffering. As recently as the 1980s, an out-
break of rinderpest in Nigeria brought losses estimated in the bil-
lions of dollars.
Walter Plowright, an English-born and -trained veterinary
scientist, devoted much of his career to developing an effective
vaccine against rinderpest. He did most of the research at the
Mugaga Laboratory of the East African Veterinary Research
Organization in Kenya, from 1956 to 1971. Ultimately, he was
able to produce a vaccine known as TCRV (tissue culture
rinderpest vaccine) that proved to be safe, effective, cheap to
produce, and stable even in tropical climates. The resulting
gains in food security and, indirectly, economic security for mil-
lions of people in Africa and Asia have been enormous. One es-
timate puts the value of the Plowright vaccine to the economy
of India during the period 1965–1998 at close to $300 billion. So
effective is the vaccine that only a few pockets of rinderpest re-
main in Somalia, Sudan, and Pakistan. The Food and Agricul-
ture Organization (FAO) of the United Nations hopes to eradi-
cate the disease from the entire world by the year 2010, a
scientific accomplishment that would be on a par with the erad-
ication of smallpox.
The World Food Prize, known unofﬁcially as the Nobel Prize
for food research, was created in 1987 to honor those who have
made vital contributions to improving the quantity, quality, or
availability of food in the world. The foundation that administers
the prize (currently $250,000) in Des Moines, Iowa, has on its
council of advisors the Nobel Peace laureate Norman Borlaug,
who was instrumental in creating the prize, as well as former
presidents Jimmy Carter and George H. W. Bush.
Further Reading.
“Food Prize for Cattle Saviour (Extract from
BBC News),” Empres Transboundary Animal Diseases Bulletin 11
(September 1999), available online at FAO Document Depository.
122
Biographical Sketches

Margaret Sanger (1879–1966)
The career of Margaret Sanger, American birth-control pioneer,
demands a full-length biography to be told properly. Born in
Corning, New York, the sixth of eleven children, Sanger saw her
mother die at the age of 50, worn out by eighteen pregnancies. (It
happens that Francis Place, the great nineteenth-century advo-
cate of birth control, also was born into a very large family.) As a
young woman, Sanger trained to be a nurse. Following marriage
and an early association with New York intellectuals and anar-
chists, as well as participation in several hard-fought labor dis-
putes on the eve of World War I, she began working with women
in some of New York’s poorest neighborhoods. The plight of
these women, lacking the most basic health services and sexual
information, angered the young midwife. When she tried to pub-
lish an article on venereal disease in 1912, the censors suppressed
it. Two years later, her advocacy of contraception in her feminist
magazine, The Woman Rebel, earned her an indictment for break-
ing the postal obscenity laws. Sanger ﬂed to Europe but returned
the following year. Charges against her were dropped.
In 1916, Sanger opened the ﬁrst American birth-control clinic
in a Brooklyn tenement. It was modeled on a Dutch facility she
had visited while in Europe. Nine days after the clinic’s opening,
Sanger and her colleagues were arrested for distributing contra-
ceptive information. She served thirty days in jail but won a par-
tial victory on appeal: the court ruled that contraception could be
prescribed, for “medical reasons,” by a doctor but not by a nurse
as Sanger wanted. This cleared the way for Sanger to open a doc-
tor-operated clinic in 1923. With all the publicity she had re-
ceived, and a wealthy second husband willing to bankroll her
cause, Sanger assumed leadership of the international birth-con-
trol movement. An overseas lecture tour took her as far away as
Japan and India, where she helped found organizations that still
exist today. She sponsored the ﬁrst world population conference
in Geneva, Switzerland, in 1927, an event that led to the establish-
ment, the following year, of the International Union for the Scien-
tiﬁc Study of Population.
Sanger was instrumental in the founding of Planned Parent-
hood in the United States and later the International Planned Par-
enthood Federation, of which she was the first president from
1952 to 1959. She had a lifelong interest in seeing more effective,
less costly forms of birth control developed. In the early 1950s,
Biographical Sketches
123

she persuaded a wealthy friend to fund the biological research
that led to the development of oral contraceptives. Today, popu-
lation agencies around the world, including UNFPA, have shifted
away from an emphasis on population quotas and targets, and
back toward Sanger’s original vision of family planning as a
means of giving women, through improved health care, more
control over their own lives.
Further Reading.
The Margaret Sanger Papers Project website at
http://www.nyu.edu/projects/sanger/index.html
Amartya K. Sen (1933–)
From Malthus’s time down to the present, concerns about the
size and growth rate of population have centered on the dire pos-
sibility of famine. The Malthusian way of thinking emphasizes the
tendency toward an imbalance between total population and the
means of subsistence, with people under the worst circumstances
literally running out of food. Famine is seen as an issue of food
availability. It arrives in the wake of drought, devastating cy-
clones, ravaging floods. But this is not the only way to think
about famine, according to economist Amartya K. Sen. People
can starve for the simple reason that they lack the ﬁnancial means
(or “entitlements”) to purchase food, even though adequate
stocks of food may be well within their reach. A shortage of pur-
chasing power can be as lethal as an actual shortage of food. In
his important 1981 study, Poverty and Famines: An Essay on Entitle-
ment and Deprivation, Sen developed this line of thought not only
theoretically but empirically. A careful examination of several
twentieth-century famines led him to conclude that starvation
had occurred in Bengal (1943), Ethiopia (1972–1974), and
Bangladesh (1974) not because of a sharp drop in the supply of
food available in those countries but because large numbers of
people, for reasons such as inﬂation and unemployment, lacked
sufﬁcient monetary entitlements to purchase food. A shortage of
entitlements also contributed to famine in the Sahel of Africa in
the early 1970s.
This analysis points to a view of famine that makes it more
the product of human institutions relating to markets and prop-
erty rights than of any “natural” forces. For famine to be averted,
exchange entitlements in countries prone to food insecurity must
124
Biographical Sketches

be more equally distributed than they have (often) been in the
past. That is because the workings of an exchange economy can-
not ensure that food will be any more equally distributed than in-
comes are. Absent conscious intervention, a minimal or zero in-
come will translate to inadequate portions of food.
Born in West Bengal, India, a region hit by famine during
World War II, Amartya Sen was educated at Presidency College,
Calcutta, and at Trinity College, Cambridge (Ph.D., 1959). He has
taught at universities in India, the United States, and Britain. In
1998, the year he won the Nobel Prize in Economics, he resigned
a professorship at Harvard to return to Trinity College as its Mas-
ter. Sen is a leading authority in the technical ﬁeld of welfare eco-
nomics, but he is better known to the public for his studies of
poverty, hunger, and inequality. Beyond the 1981 book cited ear-
lier, two notable works he co-authored with Jean Dreze are
Hunger and Public Action (1989) and The Political Economy of
Hunger (1990–1991, 3 vols.).
Further 
Reading.
A. 
Sen, 
“Autobiography,” 
at 
http://
nobelprize.org/economics/laureates/1998/sen-autobio.html; 
A. Sen, “Public Action to Remedy Hunger,” Tanco Memorial
Lecture, London, August 2, 1990, at http://www.thp.org/
reports/sen/sen890.htm#n1
Julian L. Simon (1932–1998)
Discussions of world population are often tinged with apprehen-
sion, gloom, and pessimism, for which the writings of T. R.
Malthus are partly to blame. The strongest antidote to neo-
Malthusian gloom may be found in the writings of Julian Simon,
who proved to be the foremost anti-Malthusian of the twentieth
century. In scores of articles, several books, and many television
interviews and newspaper columns, Simon tried to take the curse
off population growth, arguing that increased human numbers
should be viewed in a positive light, not just as a liability but as a
long-term asset. The liability came in the form of increased short-
run demands on existing stocks of resources. The asset took the
form of human inventiveness: more human beings meant more
minds capable of innovative thinking and technological advances
that could stretch the stocks of resources. For Simon, the evidence
that population growth had in fact had a benign impact was to be
Biographical Sketches
125

seen in falling resource prices, rising life expectancies, and a host
of other indicators of environmental and material well-being. For
good reason he was labeled a “cornucopian.”
Simon’s optimism on population posed a vigorous challenge
to the more sober views of environmentalists. His main opponent
in the arena of demographic controversy was biologist Paul
Ehrlich, author of the 1968 best-seller The Population Bomb. In that
book and in many other forums, Ehrlich had warned of impend-
ing famines, natural resource shortages, and dangerous rates of
pollution—all attributable, more or less, to excessive population
growth. Simon countered with reams of data pointing to trend
lines that were positive, not negative. History demonstrated that
whenever a particular resource became scarce and costly, human
ingenuity found ways to conserve it or substitute around it. Al-
ways Simon emphasized human creativity and adaptability,
which he believed the doomsayers either ignored or underesti-
mated. His position on immigration was fully consistent with his
population optimism: he advocated an open immigration policy
for the United States.
For a demographic thinker, Simon had a rather unconven-
tional academic career. His graduate degrees were in business
economics (University of Chicago), as were his early research in-
terests. His ﬁnal academic position was professor of business ad-
ministration at the University of Maryland. He was also a senior
fellow at the Cato Institute—which gives an indication of the
free-market orientation of much of his writing. His main books
were The Economics of Population Growth (1977), The Ultimate Re-
source (1981; revised in 1996 as The Ultimate Resource 2), and The
Economic Consequences of Immigration (1989).
Further Reading.
S. Moore, “Julian Simon Remembered: It’s a
Wonderful Life,” Cato Online Policy Report, 20:2 (March–April
1998).
Steven W. Sinding (1943–)
The world’s leading NGO in the ﬁeld of family planning, the In-
ternational Planned Parenthood Federation, or IPPF, got a new
director-general in 2002—Dr. Steven Sinding. The IPPF, founded
in 1952 with the legendary Margaret Sanger as its ﬁrst president,
coordinates the activities of 150 national member associations
working in 180 countries. Dr. Sinding’s path to the leadership of
126
Biographical Sketches

the IPPF began with undergraduate studies at Oberlin College
(1965) and a Ph.D. in political science from the University of
North Carolina at Chapel Hill (1970). Ironically for one who is
now publicly at odds with his own government, Sinding worked
for years in the United States Agency for International Develop-
ment, ﬁrst as its director for population and then as head of the
AID mission in Kenya. He went on to serve as the population ad-
visor to the World Bank and then to direct the population sci-
ences program at the Rockefeller Foundation from 1991 to 1999.
In 1994, he was a member of the U.S. delegation to the ICPD con-
ference in Cairo. More recently he has been a professor at Colum-
bia University’s Mailman School of Public Health. His publica-
tions on population-related topics are extensive.
Dr. Sinding took an early opportunity following his appoint-
ment at the IPPF to attack the Bush administration for trying to
undermine the program of action adopted at the Cairo conference
in 1994. A key element of that program was the idea that all cou-
ples should have access to reproductive health information and
services. In Dr. Sinding’s view, this Cairo commitment had been
simply a reafﬁrmation of the 1968 Teheran Proclamation on Hu-
man Rights, which included the right of married couples to de-
termine “freely and responsibly” the number and spacing of their
offspring. Sinding dismisses the current U.S. administration’s
push for a no-condoms, abstinence-only policy on international
family planning as based on “pseudo-science” and “absurd.” His
organization has lost millions of dollars in U.S. ﬁnancial support
by refusing to accept the Reagan-era Mexico City policy (also
known as the “global gag rule”)—reinstated by President Bush in
2001—which cuts off U.S. funding to any foreign NGO that of-
fers, counsels, or advocates for legal abortion.
Further Reading.
N. Birdsall, A. C. Kelley, and S. Sinding,
Population Matters: Demographic Change, Economic Growth, and
Poverty in the Developing World (Oxford: Oxford University Press,
2001); S. Sinding, “Why the Cairo Programme of Action Is So
Important,” International Parliamentarians’ Conference (Ottawa,
2002), at http://www.unfpa.org/ipci/index.htm
Christopher H. Smith (1953–)
Shortly after President Bush took ofﬁce in January 2001, he sent a
supportive message to the 28th annual March for Life on the Mall
Biographical Sketches
127

in Washington, D.C. It was read to over 100,000 marchers by a
conservative Republican congressman from New Jersey, Christo-
pher Smith. Appropriately so, since Rep. Smith had gained by
then, as he continues to have, a reputation as perhaps the
strongest opponent of abortion in the U.S. Congress. In the late
1990s, he was closely involved in political maneuvering to get the
so-called Mexico City policy reinstated. Under that policy, U.S.
funding was denied to any foreign NGO that engaged in abor-
tion-related activities, even with its own money. Presidents Rea-
gan and George H. W. Bush followed the policy from 1984 to
1992, but President Clinton reversed it immediately upon taking
ofﬁce in 1993. Clinton also restored the annual U.S. contribution
to the United Nations Population Fund that had been withheld
under Reagan and the older Bush on grounds that the UNFPA
implicitly supported China’s coercive one-child population pol-
icy. (The UNFPA vigorously denies the allegation.)
Although it may appear that U.S. backing for international
family-planning programs has become a political football, with
Democrats in favor and Republicans opposed, the truth is more
complicated. Democrats in Congress and the White House typi-
cally favor generous funding of the programs, with few restric-
tions. Republicans in Congress and the White House will fund
family planning abroad—President Bush, for example, pro-
posed USAID spending of $425 million for population assis-
tance in fiscal year 2005—but with “pro-life” restrictions. They
prefer to steer the money, even in programs intended to combat
the global AIDS epidemic, toward faith-based and abstinence
programs. Many experts in the field, it should be noted, ques-
tion whether abstinence programs have a proven track record of
effectiveness.
Congressman Smith is a New Jersey native. His B.A. degree
in business (1975) is from Trenton State College, now called the
College of New Jersey. He was the executive director of the New
Jersey Right to Life Committee from 1976 to 1978 and won his
seat in New Jersey’s Fourth District in 1980, which means he be-
came a congressman at the youthful age of 27. For many years
Smith has chaired or co-chaired the House Pro-Life Caucus; his
voting record has consistently earned 100 percent ratings from
the National Right to Life Committee. Smith’s other legislative in-
terests include veterans’ affairs, the ﬁght against human trafﬁck-
ing, and autism education.
128
Biographical Sketches

Further Reading.
C. Smith, “An Urgent Appeal to Get Involved in
Politics . . .” (November 2000), accessed at http://www.
priestsforlife.org/government/chrissmithspeech.htm; “About
Chris” webpage at http://www.house.gov/chrissmith/
Marie Stopes (1880–1958)
Much like her contemporary Margaret Sanger on the other side of
the Atlantic, Marie Stopes fought for the reproductive rights of
women in Britain in the early decades of the twentieth century. In
1921, she opened the ﬁrst birth-control clinic in the United King-
dom. Located in north London, the “Mothers’ Clinic” employed
only female nurses and doctors and had a clientele of mainly
poor women. In the face of much opposition, Stopes opened
other clinics around Britain, including a horse-drawn caravan.
Like Sanger, Stopes took an interest in the varieties of contracep-
tive techniques and even designed a cervical cap that was dis-
pensed at her clinics. She wanted family-planning clinics to be
opened in every country in the world. (The international organi-
zation that today bears her name, Marie Stopes International, op-
erates in more than thirty countries.)
Born in Edinburgh, Stopes graduated with honors from Uni-
versity College London and then earned her doctorate at the Uni-
versity of Munich. Her ﬁrst marriage was a personal ﬁasco that
prompted her to write Married Love (1918), a sex manual that be-
came a best-seller. Stopes received thousands of letters from
grateful readers of the book; her other book, Wise Parenthood
(1918), dealt with the specifics of birth control. Stopes’s second
marriage, to Humphrey Roe, was much more successful than her
ﬁrst. Roe shared her commitment to the cause of birth control and
helped ﬁnance the publication of her books and the operation of
her clinics. The couple had one child, Harry, born in 1924.
Further Reading.
M. Stopes, Married Love, Ross McKibbin (ed.)
(Oxford: Oxford World’s Classics, 2004).
M. S. Swaminathan (1925–)
In the 1950s and 1960s, India was perceived by many as a demo-
graphic train wreck waiting to happen. Its population was grow-
ing far more rapidly than its agricultural output. In some years,
Biographical Sketches
129

the only thing standing between the Indian masses and famine
was the ﬂotilla of U.S. grain ships arriving at the nation’s ports.
Yet the worst did not happen, and much of the credit for averting
Malthusian disaster in India goes to Dr. M. S. Swaminathan. Born
in the southern Indian state of Tamil Nadu and educated ﬁrst in
India and then at Cambridge University (Ph.D. in genetics, 1952),
Swaminathan went on to the University of Wisconsin for post-
graduate study. He was offered a professorship there but declined
it: “I asked myself, why did I study genetics? It was to produce
enough food in India. So I came back.” At the Indian Agricultural
Research Institute in New Delhi, of which he was the director by
1966, Swaminathan became the architect of India’s Green Revolu-
tion, leading the efforts to adapt high-yield wheat varieties from
Mexico to conditions in India. This involved the cross-breeding of
Mexican semi-dwarf plants developed by Norman Borlaug with
Japanese and local strains to create a superior wheat for Indian
agriculture. But it also involved big administrative challenges, like
persuading the Indian government to import sufﬁcient quantities
of wheat seeds, and getting farmers to adopt new seed varieties,
chemical fertilizers, and pesticides. The success of Swaminathan’s
efforts is evident in a simple statistic: from a wheat output of 12
million tons in the early 1960s, India has now reached 70 million
tons and is virtually self-sufﬁcient in basic foodstuffs.
For the achievements outlined above, and for his leadership
both nationally and internationally in trying to develop more
eco-friendly and sustainable agricultural practices, Dr. Swami-
nathan has received numerous honors. These include the World
Food Prize (1987), the Tyler Environment Award (1991), the
Honda Award (1991), the United Nations Environment Pro-
gram’s Sasakawa Prize (1994), and the Volvo Environment Prize
(1999). The money that came with these awards helped their re-
cipient establish and sustain the M. S. Swaminathan Research
Foundation and, under its aegis, the Centre for Research on Sus-
tainable Agricultural Development, in Chennai, Madras. The
purpose of the Centre, which has a staff of 150, is to advance the
cause of environmentally sound and socially equitable agricul-
ture. Dr. Swaminathan was named the UNESCO-Cousteau Pro-
fessor in Ecotechnology for Asia in 1996.
Further Reading.
S. Kapoor, “M. S. Swaminathan: Brain Food for
the Poor,” AsiaWeek.com (June 29, 2001); M. Ganguly, “M. S.
Swaminathan,” Time, 154:7/8 (August 23–30, 1999).
130
Biographical Sketches

Ben Wattenberg (1933–)
Everyone who ever managed to draw the public’s attention to the
issue of population had a knack for turning a phrase, and Ben
Wattenberg is no exception. In his new book Fewer (2004), Wat-
tenberg declares on the ﬁrst page, “[N]ever have birth and fertility
rates fallen so far, so fast, so low, for so long, in so many places, so sur-
prisingly” (italics in the original). Wattenberg, a senior fellow at
the American Enterprise Institute in Washington, D.C., has long
been concerned about falling fertility rates in the United States
and in the Western world more generally. He ﬁrst sounded the
alarm in 1987 with The Birth Dearth. A decade later, in “The
Grandchild Gap,” a one-hour television special for PBS, he ex-
plored the demographic and psychological issues related to low
fertility in the industrialized countries. So confident is Watten-
berg that the global trend toward smaller families is permanent
that he dismisses the United Nations’ medium-variant projection
of mid-century population in favor of its low-variant projection.
Thus he sees global population topping out at around 8 billion.
Wattenberg does not call himself a demographer but rather
an admirer of demographers. His real stock-in-trade is political
and intellectual dialogue, which he enters—briskly, un-
abashedly—from the conservative side, even though his resumé
includes a stint as aide and speechwriter to President Lyndon
Johnson in the 1960s and campaign advisor to two prominent
Democratic senators in the 1970s. Since 1994, he has moderated
“Think Tank with Ben Wattenberg” for PBS. He is the author of
nine books and for many years was a syndicated columnist. His
B.A. is from Hobart and William Smith Colleges (1955), from
which he received an honorary degree in 1975.
Further Reading.
B. Wattenberg, Fewer: How the New Demography
of Depopulation Will Shape Our Future (Chicago: Ivan Dee, 2004); B.
Wattenberg, “It Will Be a Smaller World After All,” New York
Times, March 8, 2003; “About Ben Wattenberg” at http://www.
pbs.org/thinktank/about_ben.html
Biographical Sketches
131


6
Statistics and Graphs
N
owadays anyone with a question about some aspect of
world population stands an excellent chance of being able
to ﬁnd an answer. Demographers are at work all the time to
produce reliable data for policymakers and the public. Two or-
ganizations, the U.S. Census Bureau and the UN Population Di-
vision, issue some of the most comprehensive population esti-
mates, allowing us to satisfy our curiosity on any number of
issues. For example, how many people currently live on our
planet? In what parts of the world is population expanding
most rapidly, and where is it actually shrinking? How much of a
slowdown in global population growth is expected to take place
in the next 50 to 100 years? How many people are born and die
every minute, every day, or every year, at current rates? What
are the world’s most populous cities and countries, and how
might the rankings change over the next few decades? The ta-
bles and graphs in this chapter answer these and many other
questions. We begin with Table 6.1, which shows the number of
births and deaths for various time spans, from years down to
seconds.
Table 6.2 presents the U.S. Census Bureau’s estimates of
world population, year by year, back to 1950 and forward to the
middle of the current century. It also provides information on the
annual percentage rates of population growth and the actual
numbers of people added each year. Note that the annual growth
rate peaked in 1962–1963 at 2.19 percent, while the actual num-
bers added to global population peaked more than two decades
later, in 1989, at about 88 million. Demographers expect never
again to see that large an increase in one year.
133

TABLE 6.1
World Vital Events per Time Unit, 2005
Natural
Time unit
Births
Deaths
Increase
Year
130,013,274
56,130,242
73,883,032 
Month
10,834,440
4,677,520
6,156,919 
Day
356,201
153,781
202,419 
Hour
14,842
6,408
8,434 
Minute
247
107
141 
Second
4.1
1.8
2.3 
Source: U.S. Census Bureau, International Data Base; updated 4/26/05. 
TABLE 6.2
Total Midyear Population for the World: 1950–2050 
Average annual
Average annual
Population
growth rate (%)
population change
1950 
2,556,517,137 
1.47 
37,798,160
1951 
2,594,315,297 
1.61 
42,072,962
1952 
2,636,388,259 
1.71 
45,350,197
1953 
2,681,738,456 
1.77 
47,979,452
1954 
2,729,717,908 
1.87 
51,465,740
1955 
2,781,183,648 
1.89 
52,974,870
1956 
2,834,158,518 
1.95 
55,842,882
1957 
2,890,001,400 
1.94 
56,522,767
1958 
2,946,524,167 
1.76 
52,351,768
1959 
2,998,875,935 
1.39 
42,090,531
1960 
3,040,966,466 
1.33 
40,782,196
1961 
3,081,748,662 
1.80 
55,995,030
1962 
3,137,743,692 
2.19 
69,519,033
1963 
3,207,262,725 
2.19 
71,119,386
1964 
3,278,382,111 
2.08 
68,979,816
1965 
3,347,361,927 
2.07 
70,182,601
1966 
3,417,544,528 
2.02 
69,689,877
1967 
3,487,234,405 
2.04 
71,794,577
1968 
3,559,028,982 
2.07 
74,579,864
1969 
3,633,608,846 
2.05 
75,142,514
1970 
3,708,751,360 
2.07 
77,391,102
1971 
3,786,142,462 
2.00 
76,476,397
1972 
3,862,618,859 
1.95 
75,970,556
1973 
3,938,589,415 
1.88 
74,885,210
1974 
4,013,474,625 
1.80 
72,998,197
1975 
4,086,472,822 
1.73 
71,516,414
134
Statistics and Graphs

1976 
4,157,989,236 
1.72 
72,098,269
1977 
4,230,087,505 
1.69 
72,025,391
1978 
4,302,112,896 
1.72 
74,827,692
1979 
4,376,940,588 
1.71 
75,704,974
1980 
4,452,645,562 
1.69 
76,038,009
1981 
4,528,683,571 
1.75 
79,722,408
1982 
4,608,405,979 
1.75 
81,441,019
1983 
4,689,846,998 
1.70 
80,257,445
1984 
4,770,104,443 
1.70 
81,750,075
1985 
4,851,854,518 
1.70 
83,362,927
1986 
4,935,217,445 
1.73 
86,023,275
1987 
5,021,240,720 
1.71 
86,724,868
1988 
5,107,965,588 
1.68 
86,758,510
1989 
5,194,724,098 
1.68 
88,041,729
1990 
5,282,765,827 
1.58 
84,050,074
1991 
5,366,815,901 
1.55 
84,045,822
1992 
5,450,861,723 
1.49 
81,716,293
1993 
5,532,578,016 
1.45 
80,846,508
1994 
5,613,424,524 
1.38 
79,045,988
1996 
5,773,464,448 
1.36 
78,896,320
1997 
5,852,360,768 
1.31 
77,375,209
1998 
5,929,735,977 
1.28 
76,427,042
1999 
6,006,163,019 
1.25 
75,364,877
2000 
6,081,527,896 
1.22 
74,414,630
2001 
6,155,942,526 
1.19 
73,686,642
2002 
6,229,629,168 
1.17 
73,483,285
2003 
6,303,112,453 
1.16 
73,750,665
2004 
6,376,863,118 
1.16 
74,195,672
2005 
6,451,058,790 
1.15 
74,427,813
2006 
6,525,486,603 
1.14 
74,629,207
2007 
6,600,115,810 
1.13 
74,940,532
2008 
6,675,056,342 
1.12 
75,228,043
2009 
6,750,284,385 
1.11 
75,466,071
2010 
6,825,750,456 
1.10 
75,688,866
2011 
6,901,439,322 
1.09 
75,802,963
2012 
6,977,242,285 
1.08 
75,615,963
2013 
7,052,858,248 
1.06 
75,167,390
2014 
7,128,025,638 
1.04 
74,490,498
2015 
7,202,516,136 
1.02 
73,766,792
2016 
7,276,282,928 
1.00 
73,055,605
2017 
7,349,338,533 
0.98 
72,230,253
Statistics and Graphs
135
TABLE 6.2, continued
Average annual
Average annual
Population
growth rate (%)
population change
(continues)

2018 
7,421,568,786 
0.96 
71,289,623
2019 
7,492,858,409 
0.93 
70,235,773
2020 
7,563,094,182 
0.91 
69,180,831
2021 
7,632,275,013 
0.89 
68,144,353
2022 
7,700,419,366 
0.87 
67,028,250
2023 
7,767,447,616 
0.84 
65,862,519
2024 
7,833,310,135 
0.82 
64,679,285
2025 
7,897,989,420 
0.80 
63,596,858
2026 
7,961,586,278 
0.78 
62,635,490
2027 
8,024,221,768 
0.77 
61,689,308
2028 
8,085,911,076 
0.75 
60,746,079
2029 
8,146,657,155 
0.73 
59,800,227
2030 
8,206,457,382 
0.72 
58,925,303
2031 
8,265,382,685 
0.70 
58,132,001
2032 
8,323,514,686 
0.69 
57,333,600
2033 
8,380,848,286 
0.67 
56,512,857
2034 
8,437,361,143 
0.66 
55,666,984
2035 
8,493,028,127 
0.64 
54,846,652
2036 
8,547,874,779 
0.63 
54,058,633
2037 
8,601,933,412 
0.62 
53,249,683
2038 
8,655,183,095 
0.60 
52,414,904
2039 
8,707,597,999 
0.59 
51,542,658
2040 
8,759,140,657 
0.58 
50,686,755
2041 
8,809,827,412 
0.56 
49,847,392
2042 
8,859,674,804 
0.55 
48,957,732
2043 
8,908,632,536 
0.54 
48,019,825
2044 
8,956,652,361 
0.52 
47,040,969
2045 
9,003,693,330 
0.51 
46,074,635
2046 
9,049,767,965 
0.50 
45,123,225
2047 
9,094,891,190 
0.48 
44,148,176
2048 
9,139,039,366 
0.47 
43,161,841
2049 
9,182,201,207 
0.46 
42,174,749
2050 
9,224,375,956 
Source: U.S. Census Bureau, International Data Base; updated April 2005.
In Table 6.3 the United Nations offers its first truly long-
range population projections—to the year 2300! Demographers
understand that more things could happen over the course of the
next three centuries than any model could possibly incorporate.
136
Statistics and Graphs
TABLE 6.2, continued
Average annual
Average annual
Population
growth rate (%)
population change

Hence the model they use ignores potential ecological, political,
and economic discontinuities of the kind experts worried about
in the 1960s and 1970s and simply rolls forward the number of
people at the starting point on the basis of low-, medium-, and
high-growth rate assumptions. One particular assumption the
United Nations makes is that the AIDS epidemic will not run
completely out of control. (How reassuring it would be to know
this and not merely assume it!) Note the vast difference in the 2300
global population depending on whether a low- or high-growth
rate is assumed. The world could have as few as 2.3 billion
people—a fraction of the present population—or as many as 36
billion, more than ﬁve times the current level. But the most likely
ﬁgure is about 9 billion, which is quite close to the population we
expect to see in 2050. Under all assumptions, the share of the
more developed (rich) nations in the world’s total population is
expected to decline, while the share of the less developed nations
expands.
Table 6.4 presents the United Nations’ most recent popula-
tion projections, by continent, to the middle of the twenty-first
Statistics and Graphs
137
TABLE 6.3
UN Long-Range World Population Projections:
Various Growth Scenarios, 2000–2300 (in millions)
More developed
Less developed
World
regions
regions
Year
Medium
High
Low
Medium
High
Low
Medium
High
Low
2000
6,071
6,071
6,071
1,194
1,194
1,194
4,877
4,877
4,877
2025
7,851
8,365
7,334
1,241
1,282
1,199
6,610
7,082
6,135
2050
8,919
10,633
7,409
1,220
1,370
1,084
7,699
9,263
6,325
2075
9,221
12,494
6,601
1,153
1,467
904
8,068
11,027
5,696
2100
9,064
14,018
5,491
1.131
1,651
766
7,933
12,367
4,726
2125
8,734
15,296
4,556
1,137
1,885
679
7,597
13,411
3,877
2150
8,494
16,722
3,921
1,161
2,152
633
7,333
14,571
3,288
2175
8,434
18,696
3,481
1,185
2,454
593
7,249
16,242
2,889
2200
8,499
21,236
3,165
1,207
2,795
554
7,291
18,441
2,612
2225
8,622
24,301
2,920
1,228
3,179
517
7,395
21,122
2,403
2250
8,752
27,842
2,704
1,246
3,612
482
7,506
24,230
2,223
2275
8,868
31,868
2,501
1,263
4,100
448
7,605
27,768
2,053
2300
8,972
36,444
2,310
1,278
4,650
416
7,694
31,793
1,894
Source: United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs, Population Division, World Population to 2300
(New York: United Nations, 2004), p. 28.

century. These projections are revised and reissued every two
years, in even-numbered years. The table gives only the
medium-variant projections, which assume that fertility rates
everywhere are trending toward the level of 1.85 children per
woman. Demographers consider the medium-variant estimates
more realistic than either the high- or low-variant versions. What
most journalists took away from the table upon its release was
the ﬁgure of 9.1 billion people on Earth by the year 2050. At mid-
century nearly three out of every ﬁve humans will live in Asia—
a slight proportional decrease from today. Europe will decline
from about 11 percent to 7 percent of world population. The big
gainer will be Africa, rising from 14 percent currently to 21 per-
cent by 2050.
TABLE 6.4
World Population Projections to 2050 by Region (in millions)
Latin America
and 
North 
Year
World
Africa
Asia
Europe
Caribbean
America
Oceania
2000 
6,086
812
3,676
728
523
315
31
2005 
6,465
906
3,905
728
561
331
33
2010 
6,843
1,007
4,130
726
599
346
35
2015 
7,219
1,115
4,351
721
634
361
37
2020 
7,578
1,228
4,554
715
667
375
39
2025 
7,905
1,344
4,728
707
697  
388 
41
2030 
8,199
1,463
4,872
698
722
400
43
2035 
8,463
1,584
4,992
688
744
411
44
2040 
8,701
1,705
5,092
677
761
421
45
2045 
8,907
1,823
5,168
666
774
430
47
2050 
9,076
1,937
5,217
653
783
438
48
Source: Population Division of the Department of Economic and Social Affairs of the United Nations Secretariat, 
World Population Prospects: The 2004 Revision and World Urbanization Prospects: The 2003 Revision,
http://esa.un.org/unpp.
In Table 6.5 we see the anticipated urban-rural breakdown of
world population over the next several decades. The balance will
tip—irreversibly, we think—in the urban direction by 2010, when
for the ﬁrst time over half (51.3 percent) of the world’s population
will live in cities. The urban proportion will continue to increase,
reaching about 61 percent by 2030. This trend toward higher rates
of city-dwelling is one of the factors leading demographers to be-
138
Statistics and Graphs

lieve strongly that global fertility rates will continue to decline,
since children tend to be more costly and inconvenient in an ur-
ban setting than in a rural one.
Table 6.6 provides a range of essential demographic data for
all the regions and countries in the world as of 2005. For ease of
use, individual countries are listed alphabetically. If we look at
the big picture revealed in the regional data, what stands out
most clearly is the special status of sub-Saharan Africa. That re-
gion has the highest birth rate, highest death rate, highest rate of
natural increase, highest infant mortality rate, and highest total
fertility rate in the world—by a wide margin in most cases.
TABLE 6.6
Key Demographic Data for the Regions
and Countries of the World, 2005
Population
Births
Deaths
Rate of natural
Infant
Total
2005
per 1,000
per 1,000
increase
mortality
fertility
Country or area
(millions) 
population
population
(percent)
rate
rate 
WORLD
6,451
20
9
1.2
50.0
2.61
Less developed
5,242
22
8
1.4
54.9
2.84
More developed
1,210
11
10
0.1  
7.5
1.59
Sub-Saharan Africa
733
39
16
2.3
89.7
5.29
Northern Africa
159
22
5
1.6
33.5
2.60
Near East
191
26
5
2.0
37.3
3.41
Asia (excluding
Near East)
3,648
19
8
1.1
46.3
2.35
Statistics and Graphs
139
TABLE 6.5
Projected Urban-Rural Breakdown of World Population, 2000–2030
Urban Population 
Percent 
Rural Population 
Percent 
Year
(millions)
Urban
(millions)
Rural
2000
2,864
47.1
3,222
52.9
2005
3,177
49.2
3,287
50.8
2010
3,512
51.3
3,331 
48.7
2015
3,868
53.6
3,352
46.4
2020
4,236
55.9
3,341 
44.1
2025
4,611
58.3
3,295
41.7
2030
4,987
60.8
3,212 
39.2
Source: Population Division of the Department of Economic and Social Affairs of the United Nations Secretariat,
World Population Prospects: The 2004 Revision and World Urbanization Prospects: The 2003 Revision,
http://esa.un.org/unpp,

Latin America and 
the Caribbean  
555
20
6
1.4
26.5
2.36
Western Europe
396
10
10
0.0
4.7
1.52
Eastern Europe
121
10
11
0.0
12.9
1.35
Commonwealth of 
Independent States
280
13
13
0.0
38.7
1.63
Northern America   
329
14
8
0.6
6.4
2.04
Oceania
33
17
7
0.9 
21.2 
2.25
Afghanistan
29.9
47
21
2.6
163.1
6.75
Albania
3.6
15
5
1.0
21.5
2.04
Algeria
32.5
17
5
1.3 
31.0
1.92
American Samoa
0.06
23
3
2.0
9.3  
3.25
Andorra
0.07
9
6
0.3
4.0
1.29
Angola
11.8
46
25
2.1
187.5 
6.42
Anguilla
0.01
14
5
0.9
21.0   
1.73
Antigua and Barbuda
0.07
17
5
1.2
19.5
2.26
Argentina
39.5
17
8
0.9
15.2 
2.19
Armenia
3.0
12
8
0.4
23.3
1.32
Aruba
0.07
11
7
0.5
5.9
1.79
Australia
20.1
12
7
0.5
4.7 
1.76
Austria
8.2
9
10
-0.1
4.7   
1.36
Azerbaijan
7.9
20
10
1.1
81.7
2.44
Bahamas, The
0.3
18
9
0.9
25.2 
2.20
Bahrain
0.7
18
4
1.4
17.3  
2.63
Bangladesh
144.3
30
8
2.2
62.6
3.13
Barbados
0.3
13
9
0.4
11.7 
1.64
Belarus
10.3
11
14
-0.3
13.4
1.39
Belgium
10.4
10
10
0.0
4.7
1.64
Belize
0.3
29
6
2.4
25.4
3.68
Benin
7.6
40
12
2.7
81.3
5.32
Bermuda
0.07
12
8
0.4
8.5
1.89
Bhutan
2.2
34
13
2.1
100.4
4.81
Bolivia
8.9
24
8
1.6
53.1
2.94
Bosnia and Herzegovenia
4.4
9
8
0.1
10.1
1.21
Botswana
1.6
23
29
-0.6
54.6
2.85
Brazil
186.1
17
6
1.1
29.6
1.93
Brunei
0.4
19
3
1.6
12.6
2.30
Bulgaria
7.5
10
14
-0.5
20.6
1.38
Burkina Faso
13.5
46
16
3.0
92.9
6.54
Burma
47.0
18
10
0.8
63.6
2.01
Burundi
7.8
42
14
2.9
64.4
6.63
140
Statistics and Graphs
TABLE 6.6, continued
Population
Births
Deaths
Rate of natural
Infant
Total
2005
per 1,000
per 1,000
increase
mortality
fertility
Country or area
(millions) 
population
population
(percent)
rate
rate 

Cambodia
13.6
27
9
1.8
70.9
3.44
Cameroon
17.0
34
14
2.1
64.9
4.47
Canada
32.8
11
8
0.3
4.8
1.61
Cape Verde
0.4
25
7
1.9
47.8
3.48
Cayman Islands
0.04
13
5
0.8
8.2
1.90
Central African Republic
4.2
34
19
1.6
87.3
4.50
Chad
9.7
46
17
2.9
93.1
6.32
Chile
16.0
15
6
1.0
8.8
2.02
China
1,306.3
13
7
0.6
24.2
1.72
Colombia
43.0
21
6
1.5
21.0
2.56
Comoros
0.7
38
8
2.9
74.9
5.09
Congo (Brazzaville)  
3.6
43
13
3.0
87.4   
6.14
Congo (Kinshasa)
60.8
44
14
3.1
90.7
6.54
Cook Islands
0.02
22
5
1.7
NA
NA
Costa Rica
4.0
19
4
1.4
9.9
2.28
Cote d’Ivoire
17.3
36
15
2.1
90.8
4.58
Croatia
4.5
10
11
-0.2
6.8
1.39
Cuba
11.3
12
7
0.5
6.3
1.66
Cyprus
0.8
13
8
0.5
7.2
1.83
Czech Republic
10.2
9
11
-0.1
3.9
1.20
Denmark
5.4
11
10
0.1
4.6  
1.74
Djibouti
0.5
40
19
2.1
104.1
5.40
Dominica
0.07
16
7
0.9
14.2
1.96
Dominican Republic
9.0
24
6
1.8
29.4
2.86
East Timor
1.0
27
6
2.1
47.4
3.61
Ecuador
13.4
23
4
1.8
23.7
2.72
Egypt
77.5
23
5
1.8
32.6
2.88
El Salvador
6.7
27
6
2.1
25.1
3.16
Equatorial Guinea
0.5
36
15
2.1
91.2
4.62
Eritrea
4.7
35
10
2.5
47.4 
5.20
Estonia
1.3
10
13
-0.3
7.9
1.39
Ethiopia
73.1
39
15
2.4
95.3
5.33
Faroe Islands
0.05
14
9
0.5
6.2
2.20
Fiji
0.9
23
5
1.7
12.6
2.75
Finland
5.2
11
10
0.1
3.6
1.73
France
60.7
12
9
0.3
4.3   
1.85
French Guiana
0.2
21
5
1.6
12.1
3.01
French Polynesia
0.3
17
5
1.2
8.4
2.04
Statistics and Graphs
141
(continues)
TABLE 6.6, continued
Population
Births
Deaths
Rate of natural
Infant
Total
2005
per 1,000
per 1,000
increase
mortality
fertility
Country or area
(millions) 
population
population
(percent)
rate
rate 

Gabon
1.4
36
12
2.4
55.4
4.77
Gambia, The
1.6
40
13
2.7
73.1
5.38
Gaza Strip
1.4
40
4
3.6
22.9
5.91
Georgia
4.7
10
9
0.1
18.6
1.41
Germany
82.4
8
11
-0.2
4.2
1.39
Ghana
21.9
31
10
2.1
56.4
4.10
Gibraltar
0.03
11
9
0.2
5.1
1.65
Greece
10.7
10
10
0.0
5.5
1.33
Greenland
0.06
16
8
0.8
15.8
2.41
Grenada
0.09
22
7
1.5
14.6
2.37
Guadeloupe
0.4
15
6
0.9
8.6
1.91
Guam
0.2
19
4
1.5
6.9
2.60
Guatemala
12.0
31
5
2.5
32.0
3.93
Guernsey
0.07
9
10
-0.1
4.7
1.38
Guinea
9.5
42
16
2.6
91.5
5.83
Guinea-Bissau
1.4
38
17
2.1
107.2
4.93
Guyana
0.8
18
8
1.0
33.3
2.05
Haiti
8.1
37
12
2.4
73.5
5.02
Honduras
7.2
29
5
2.4
26.5 
3.69
Hong Kong S.A.R.
6.9
7
6
0.1
3.0
0.93
Hungary
10.0
10
13
-0.3
8.6
1.31
Iceland
0.3
14
7
0.7
3.3
1.92
India
1,080.3
22
8
1.4
56.3
2.78
Indonesia
242.0
21
6
1.4
35.6
2.44
Iran
68.0
17
6
1.1
41.6
1.82
Iraq
26.1
33
5
2.7
50.2
4.28
Ireland
4.0
14
8
0.7
5.4
1.87
Israel
6.3
18
6
1.2
7.0
2.44
Italy
58.1
9
10
-0.1
5.9
1.28
Jamaica
2.7
21
6
1.5
16.3
2.47
Japan
127.4
9
9
0.1
3.3
1.39
Jersey
0.09
10
9
0.0
5.2
1.57
Jordan
5.8
22
3
1.9
17.4 
2.71
Kazakhstan
15.2
16
9
0.6
29.2
1.89
Kenya
33.8
40
15
2.5
61.5
4.96
Kiribati
0.1
31
8
2.2
48.5
4.20
Korea, North
22.9
16
7
0.9
24.0
2.15
Korea, South
48.6
10
6
0.4
6.3
1.26
Kuwait
2.3
22
2
1.9
9.9
2.97
Kyrgyzstan
5.1
22
7
1.5
35.6
2.70
142
Statistics and Graphs
TABLE 6.6, continued
Population
Births
Deaths
Rate of natural
Infant
Total
2005
per 1,000
per 1,000
increase
mortality
fertility
Country or area
(millions) 
population
population
(percent)
rate
rate 

Laos
6.2
36
12
2.4
85.2
4.77
Latvia
2.3
9
14
-0.5
9.6
1.26
Lebanon
3.8
19
6
1.3
24.5
1.92
Lesotho
2.0
25
29
-0.4
88.8
3.35
Liberia
2.9
46
24
2.2
162.0
6.09
Libya
5.8
27
3
2.3
24.6
3.34
Liechtenstein
0.03
10
7
0.3
4.7
1.51
Lithuania
3.6
9
11
-0.2
6.9
1.19
Luxembourg
0.5
12
8
0.4
4.8
1.79
Macau S.A.R.
0.4
8
4
0.4
4.4
1.00
Macedonia
2.0
12
9
0.3
10.1
1.57
Madagascar
18.0
42
11
3.0
76.8
5.66
Malawi
12.7
43
20
2.4
96.1
5.98
Malaysia
24.0
23
5
1.8
17.7
3.07
Maldives
0.3
35
7
2.8
56.5
5.02
Mali
11.4
50
17
3.3
109.5
7.47
Malta
0.4
10
8
0.2
3.9
1.50
Man, Isle of
0.08
11
11
0.0
5.9
1.65
Marshall Islands
0.06
34
5
2.9
29.4
3.93
Martinique
0.4
14
6
0.8
7.1
1.79
Mauritania
3.1
41
12
2.9
70.9
5.94
Mauritius
1.2
16
7
0.9
15.0
1.96
Mayotte
0.2
42
8
3.4
62.4
5.89
Mexico
106.2
21
5
1.6
20.9
2.45
Micronesia, 
Federated States of
0.1
25
5
2.0
30.2
3.25
Moldova
4.5
15
13
0.2
40.4
1.81
Monaco
0.03
9
13
-0.3
5.4
1.76
Mongolia
2.8
22
7
1.4
53.8
2.26
Montserrat
0.01
18
7
1.0
7.3 
1.78
Morocco
32.7
22
6
1.7
41.6
2.73
Mozambique
19.4
36
21
1.5
130.8
4.70
Namibia
2.0
25
18
0.7
49.0
3.18
Nauru
0.01
25
7
1.8
9.9
3.19
Nepal
27.7
31
9
2.2
67.0
4.19
Netherlands
16.4
11
9
0.2
5.0
1.66
Netherlands Antilles
0.2
15
6
0.9
10.0
2.00
New Caledonia
0.2
18
6
1.3
7.7
2.31
New Zealand
4.0
14
8
0.6
5.8
1.79
Nicaragua
5.5
25
4
2.0
29.1
2.81
Niger
12.2
51
21
3.0
119.7
7.55
Statistics and Graphs
143
(continues)
TABLE 6.6, continued
Population
Births
Deaths
Rate of natural
Infant
Total
2005
per 1,000
per 1,000
increase
mortality
fertility
Country or area
(millions) 
population
population
(percent)
rate
rate 

Nigeria
128.8
41
17
2.3
98.8
5.53
Northern Mariana Islands
0.08
20
2
1.7
7.1
1.27
Norway
4.6
12
9
0.2
3.7
1.78
Oman
3.0
37
4
3.3
19.5
5.84
Pakistan
162.4
30
8
2.2
72.4
4.14
Palau
0.02
18
7
1.2
14.8
2.46
Panama
3.1
22
5
1.7
16.7
2.70
Papua New Guinea
5.5
30
7
2.3
51.5
3.96
Paraguay
6.3
29
5
2.5
25.6
3.93
Peru
27.9
21
6
1.5
31.9
2.56
Philippines
87.9
25
5
2.0
23.5
3.16
Poland
38.6
10
10
0.0
7.4
1.24
Portugal
10.6
11
10
0.0
5.0
1.47
Puerto Rico
3.9
13
8
0.5
9.3
1.75
Qatar
0.9
16
5
1.1
18.6
2.87
Reunion
0.8
19
5
1.4
7.8
2.47
Romania
22.3
11
12
-0.1
26.4
1.36
Russia
143.4
10
15
-0.5
15.4
1.27
Rwanda
8.4
41
16
2.4
91.2
5.49
Saint Helena
0.01
12
6
0.6
19.0
1.54
Saint Kitts and Nevis
0.04
18
8
1.0
14.5
2.33
Saint Lucia
0.2
20
5
1.5
13.5
2.21
Saint Pierre and Miquelon
0.01
14
7
0.7
7.5
2.03
Saint Vincent and 
the Grenadines
0.1
16
6
1.0
14.8
1.85
Samoa
0.2
16
7
0.9
27.7
3.01
San Marino
0.03
10
8
0.2
5.7
1.33
Sao Tome and Principe 
0.2
41
7
3.4
43.1
5.71
Saudi Arabia
26.4
30
3
2.7
13.2
4.05
Senegal
11.7
33
10
2.4
54.1
4.50
Serbia and Montenegro
10.8
12
10
0.2
12.9
1.67
Seychelles
0.08
16
6
1.0
15.5
1.75
Sierra Leone
5.9
46
23
2.3
162.6
6.15
Singapore
4.4
9
4
0.5
2.3
1.05
Slovakia
5.4
11
9
0.1
7.4
1.32
Slovenia
2.0
9
10
-0.1
4.5
1.24
Solomon Islands
0.5
31
4
2.7
21.3
4.04
Somalia
8.6
46
17
2.9
116.7
6.84
South Africa
44.3
18
21
-0.3
61.8
2.24
Spain
40.3
10
10
0.0
4.4
1.28
144
Statistics and Graphs
TABLE 6.6, continued
Population
Births
Deaths
Rate of natural
Infant
Total
2005
per 1,000
per 1,000
increase
mortality
fertility
Country or area
(millions) 
population
population
(percent)
rate
rate 

Sri Lanka
20.1
16
6
0.9
14.3
1.85
Sudan
40.2
35
9
2.6
62.5
4.85
Suriname
0.4
18
7
1.1
23.6
2.34
Swaziland
1.1
28
29
-0.1
72.9
3.62
Sweden
9.0
10
10
0.0
2.8
1.66
Switzerland
7.5
10
8
0.1
4.4
1.43
Syria
18.4
28
5
2.3
29.5
3.50
Taiwan
22.9
13
6
0.6
6.4
1.57
Tajikistan
7.2
33
8
2.4
110.8
4.05
Tanzania
36.8
38
17
2.1
98.5
5.06
Thailand
64.2
14
7
0.7
20.2
1.63
Togo
5.4
37
10
2.7
62.2
5.01
Tonga
0.1
25
5
2.0
12.6
3.00
Trinidad and Tobago
1.1
13
10
0.2
25.8 
1.75
Tunisia
10.1
16
5
1.0
24.8
1.75
Turkey
69.7
17
6
1.1
41.0
1.94
Turkmenistan
5.0
28
9
1.9
73.1
3.41
Turks and Caicos Islands
0.02
22
4
1.8
15.7   
3.08
Tuvalu
0.01
22
7
1.5
20.0
3.00
Uganda
27.3
47
13
3.5
67.8
6.74
Ukraine
47.0
9
14
-0.6
10.1
1.16
United ArabEmirates
2.6
19
4
1.5
14.5
2.94
United Kingdom
60.4
11
10
0.1
5.2
1.66
United States
295.7
14
8
0.6
6.5
2.08
Uruguay
3.4
14
9
0.5
11.9
1.91
Uzbekistan
26.9
26
8
1.8
71.1
2.94
Vanuatu
0.2
23
8
1.5
55.2
2.77
Venezuela
25.4
19
5
1.4
22.2
2.26
Vietnam
83.5
17
6
1.1
25.9
1.94
Virgin Islands
0.1
14
6
0.8
8.0
2.19
Virgin Islands, British
0.02
15
4
1.0
17.3
1.72
Wallis and Futuna
0.02
22
5
1.7
NA
NA
West Bank
2.4
32
4
2.8
19.6
4.40
Western Sahara
0.3
45
16
2.9
NA
NA
Yemen
20.7
43
9
3.5
61.5
6.67
Zambia
11.3
41
20
2.1
88.3
5.47
Zimbabwe
12.2
28
22
0.6
52.3
3.18
Source: U.S. Census Bureau, International Data Base; updated April 2005.
Statistics and Graphs
145
TABLE 6.6, continued
Population
Births
Deaths
Rate of natural
Infant
Total
2005
per 1,000
per 1,000
increase
mortality
fertility
Country or area
(millions) 
population
population
(percent)
rate
rate 

TABLE 6.7
Projected Population of the World’s Three Most Populous Countries,
2000–2050 (in millions)
China
India
United States 
2000
1,269
1,003
282
2005
1,306
1,080
296
2010
1,348
1,155
309
2015
1,393
1,227
323 
2020
1,431
1,297
336
2025
1,453
1,362
350
2030
1,462
1,421
364
2035
1,461
1,474
378
2040
1,455
1,522
392
2045
1,443
1,565
406
2050
1,424
1,601
420
Source: U.S. Census Bureau, International Data Base; updated in April 2005.
Table 6.7 puts the focus on the world’s three most populous
nations, China, India, and the United States, and their projected
population trends over the next half-century. Those trends are
sharply divergent, with India expected to grow 60 percent, the
United States almost 50 percent, and China a meager 12 percent,
between 2000 and 2050. The rapid pace of growth in India is set to
push that nation ahead of China as the world’s most populous
country by 2035. The United States will never be a contender for
the top spot, but, unlike all the other currently industrialized na-
tions, at least it will keep growing.
Table 6.8 gives the rankings of the top twenty nations by
population for 1950 and 2000, and then—with the inevitable un-
certainty that goes with demographic projections into the fu-
ture—Table 6.9 gives the rankings for 2025 and 2050. These
changing lists reveal the gradual displacement of the so-called
developed nations by the developing nations. For example, in
1950 Pakistan was No. 13 and Nigeria was No. 15 in the list; by
2050 Pakistan will have climbed to No. 6 in the world and Nige-
ria will be No. 4! Meanwhile, Japan will have tumbled from ﬁfth
place in 1950 to seventeenth place a century later. Interestingly,
the only country that retains the very same ranking throughout
the entire period is the United States, at No. 3.
In Table 6.10 we have the 2005 and 2015 listings of the
world’s thirty largest urban agglomerations—a term that means,
essentially, metropolitan areas. A city’s ranking in such a list can
146
Statistics and Graphs

change over time, depending not only on birth and death rates in
that city but also on the rate at which people are migrating into it.
The same pattern seen in Tables 6.8 and 6.9 where the more de-
veloped countries are being overtaken by the less developed
countries is mirrored, to some extent, at the urban level. New
York, for example, was second-ranked in the world back in 1990;
by 2015, it will have fallen to sixth place. Similarly, Osaka-Kobe,
eighth-ranked in 1990, is projected to fall to eighteenth place by
2015. Meanwhile, Mumbai will rise from sixth-ranked to second
by 2015. Another fact of our urban future to be noted in the table
is the near-universal growth in the size of individual urban ag-
glomerations. The growth rate of some cities will be phenomenal.
Lagos, Nigeria, for example, is expected to mushroom from 11.1
million in 2005 to 17.0 million in 2015. The only urban area of
2005 that will actually lose population in the next decade, if the
estimates are correct, is Seoul, South Korea.
Table 6.11 documents the global extent and death toll of the
HIV/AIDS epidemic, with data from the World Health Organiza-
Statistics and Graphs
147
TABLE 6.8
Top Twenty Countries Ranked by Population, 1950 and 2000
1950
2000
1 China
562,579,779
1 China
1,268,853,362
2 India
369,880,000
2 India
1,002,708,291
3 United States
152,271,000
3 United States
282,338,631
4 Russia
101,936,816
4 Indonesia
224,138,438
5 Japan
83,805,000
5 Brazil
175,552,771
6 Indonesia
82,978,392
6 Russia
146,731,774
7 Germany
68,374,572
7 Pakistan
146,342,958
8 Brazil
53,443,075
8 Bangladesh
130,406,594
9 United Kingdom
50,127,000
9 Japan
126,699,784
10 Italy
47,105,000
10 Nigeria
114,306,700
11 Bangladesh
45,645,964
11 Mexico
99,926,620
12 France
41,828,673
12 Germany
82,187,909
13 Pakistan
39,448,232
13 Philippines
79,739,825
14 Ukraine
36,774,854
14 Vietnam
79,060,410
15 Nigeria
31,796,939
15 Egypt
70,492,342
16 Mexico
28,485,180
16 Turkey
65,666,677
17 Spain
28,062,963
17 Iran
65,660,289
18 Vietnam
25,348,144
18 Ethiopia
64,690,052
19 Poland
24,824,000
19 Thailand
61,862,928
20 Egypt
21,197,691
20 United Kingdom
59,522,468
Source: U.S. Census Bureau, International Data Base; updated in April 2005.

tion’s annual report on this disease. As noted elsewhere in this
book, AIDS has taken its most devastating toll in sub-Saharan
Africa, where the adult prevalence rate is twelve times greater
than in North America and about twenty-ﬁve times greater than
in Western and Central Europe. AIDS deaths in Africa numbered
over 2 million in 2004, while an additional 3 million people be-
came infected.
As birthrates fall and life expectancies rise, populations al-
most everywhere are growing grayer. The aging of the world’s
population can be easily grasped in Tables 6.12 and 6.13. In Table
6.12, we have the breakdown of population by age category and
region for the years 2005, 2025, and 2050; in Table 6.13, the me-
dian ages are given. Conventionally, those aged 15 to 64 are
judged to be “working-age”; those younger than 15 or older than
64 are considered economically dependent. Table 6.12 shows that
by midcentury the old-age category will have increased from 7.3
percent to 16.4 percent of global population. The dependent frac-
tion of population will not have changed greatly, but a much big-
ger part of it will consist of the elderly. The more developed na-
148
Statistics and Graphs
TABLE 6.9
Top Twenty Countries Ranked by Population, 2025 and 2050
2025
2050
1 China
1,453,123,817
1 India
1,601,004,572
2 India
1,361,625,090
2 China
1,424,161,948
3 United States
349,666,199
3 United States
420,080,587
4 Indonesia
300,277,490
4 Nigeria
356,523,597
5 Pakistan
228,822,199
5 Indonesia
336,247,428
6 Brazil
217,825,222
6 Pakistan
294,995,104
7 Nigeria
206,165,946
7 Bangladesh
279,955,405
8 Bangladesh
204,538,715
8 Brazil
228,426,737
9 Russia
130,534,651
9 Congo (Kinshasa)
183,177,415
10 Mexico
130,198,692
10 Mexico
147,907,650
11 Japan
120,001,048
11 Philippines
147,630,852
12 Philippines
118,685,776
12 Ethiopia
144,716,331
13 Congo (Kinshasa)
107,981,867
13 Uganda
132,699,173
14 Ethiopia
107,804,235
14 Egypt
126,920,512
15 Egypt
103,352,882
15 Russia
110,763,998
16 Vietnam
99,977,731
16 Vietnam
107,772,641
17 Iran
83,186,886
17 Japan
99,886,568
18 Turkey
82,204,623
18 Iran
89,691,431
19 Germany
80,637,451
19 Turkey
86,473,786
20 Thailand
70,523,958
20 Sudan
84,192,309
Source: U.S. Census Bureau, International Data Base; updated in April 2005.

tions will have much older populations than the less developed
in 2050, just as they do today. But because of their greater wealth,
they may ﬁnd it less problematic (though still a challenge) to sup-
port their elders than the less developed world will.
Table 6.13 indicates that half of the world’s population is
presently older than 27.6 years and half is younger. Regional
Statistics and Graphs
149
TABLE 6.10
World’s Thirty Largest Urban Agglomerations, 
2005 and 2015 (projected)
2005 population
2015 population
(millions)
(millions)
1 Tokyo, Japan
35.3
1 Tokyo, Japan
36.2
2 Mexico City, Mexico
19.0
2 Mumbai (Bombay), India
22.6
3 New York–Newark, USA
18.5
3 Delhi, India
20.9
4 Mumbai (Bombay), India
18.3
4 Mexico City, Mexico
20.6
5 Sao Paulo, Brazil
18.3 
5 Sao Paulo, Brazil
20.0
6 Delhi, India
15.3
6 New York–Newark, USA
19.7
7 Calcutta, India
14.3
7 Dhaka, Bangladesh
17.9
8 Buenos Aires, Argentina
13.3
8 Jakarta, Indonesia
17.5
9 Jakarta, Indonesia
13.2 
9 Lagos, Nigeria
17.0
10  Shanghai, China
12.7
10 Calcutta, India
16.8
11  Dhaka, Bangladesh
12.6
11 Karachi, Pakistan
16.2
12 Los Angeles–Long Beach–
12 Buenos Aires, Argentina
14.6
Santa Ana, USA
12.1
13 Cairo, Egypt
13.1
13 Karachi, Pakistan
11.8
14 Los Angeles–Long 
14 Rio de Janeiro, Brazil
11.5
Beach–Santa Ana, USA
12.9
15 Osaka-Kobe, Japan
11.3
15 Shanghai, China
12.7
16 Cairo, Egypt
11.1
16 Metro Manila, Philippines
12.6
17 Lagos, Nigeria
11.1
17 Rio de Janeiro, Brazil
12.4
18 Beijing, China
10.8
18 Osaka-Kobe, Japan
11.4
19 Metro Manila, Philippines
10.7
19 Istanbul, Turkey
11.3
20 Moscow, Russian Federation
10.7
20 Beijing, China
11.1
21 Paris, France
9.9
21 Moscow, Russian Federation
10.9
22 Istanbul, Turkey
9.8
22 Paris, France
10.0
23 Seoul, Republic of Korea
9.6
23 Tianjin, China
9.9
24 Tianjin, China
9.3
24 Chicago, USA
9.4
25 Chicago, USA
8.7
25 Lima, Peru
9.4
26 Lima, Peru
8.2
26 Seoul, Republic of Korea
9.2
27 London, United Kingdom
7.6
27 Santa Fe de Bogota, Colombia
8.9
28 Santa Fe de Bogota, Colombia
7.6
28 Lahore, Pakistan
8.7
29 Tehran, Iran
7.4
29 Kinshasa, Dem. Republic of the Congo
8.7
30 Hong Kong, China, Hong Kong SAR
7.2
30 Tehran, Iran
8.5
Source: UN Department of Economic and Social Affairs, Population Division, World Urbanization Prospects: 
The 2003 Revision (New York: United Nations, 2004), pp. 122–123.

150
Statistics and Graphs
TABLE 6.11
The Worldwide HIV/AIDS Epidemic (2004)
People newly
People living with
Adult 
infected with
AIDS deaths
Region
HIV/AIDS, 2004
prevalence (%)
HIV
2004
Sub-Saharan Africa
25,400,000
7.4
3,100,000 
2,300,000
North Africa, Middle East
540,000
0.3
92,000
28,000
South and Southeast Asia
7,100,000
0.6
890,000
490,000
East Asia
1,100,000
0.1
290,000
51,000
Oceania
35,000
0.2
5,000
700 
Latin America
1,700,000
0.6
240,000
95,000 
Caribbean
440,000
2.3
53,000
36,000
Eastern Europe,Central Asia
1,400,000
0.8
210,000
60,000
Western and Central Europe
610,000
0.3
21,000
6,500
North America
1,000,000
0.6
44,000
16,000
TOTAL
39,400,000
1.1
4,900,000
3,100,000
Source: UNAIDS and World Health Organization, AIDS Epidemic Update: December 2004 (Geneva, Switzerland:
UNAIDS, 2004), pp. 76–79. 
TABLE 6.12
Age Distribution of the World’s Population
by Region, 2005, 2025, and 2050
2005
2025
2050
population
population
population
(millions)
%
(millions)
%
(millions)
%
World, total
6,451
100.0
7,898
100.0
9,224
100.0
Age 0–14
1,790
27.7
1,901
24.1
1,936
21.0
Age 15–64
4,188
64.9
5,158
65.3
5,774
62.6
Age 65+
472
7.3
838
10.6
1,514
16.4
Less developed
countries, total  
5,241
100.0
6,650
100.0
7,988
100.0
Age 0–14
1,585
30.2
1,705
25.6
1,742
21.8
Age 15–64
3,369
64.3
4,371
65.7
5,059
63.3
Age 65+
287
5.5
574
8.6
1,187
14.9
More developed 
countries, total  
1,210
100.0
1,247
100.0
1,235
100.0
Age 0–14
205
16.9
196
15.7
194
15.7
Age 15–64
819
67.7
787
63.1
715
57.9
Age 65+
186
15.3
264
21.2
327
26.4

Statistics and Graphs
151
Sub-Saharan Africa, total
733
100.0
1,121
100.0
1,735
100.0
Age 0–14
315
43.1
434
38.7
563
32.4
Age 15–64
396
54.0  
649
57.9
1,083
62.4
Age 65+
22
2.9
38
3.4
89
5.2
Northern Africa, total
159
100.0
206
100.0
245
100.0
Age 0–14
50
31.5
49
24.0
46
18.9
Age 15–64
101
63.7
141
68.2
158
64.3
Age 65+
7
4.7
16
7.9
41
16.8
Near East, total
191
100.0
267
100.0
355
100.0
Age 0–14
65
33.8
76
28.4
80
22.6
Age 15–64  
118
61.5
173
64.9
228
64.4
Age 65+
9
4.6
18
6.7
46
13.0
Asia, excl. Near East, total
3,648
100.0
4,391
100.0
4,862
100.0
Age 0–14
985
27.0
980
22.3
898
18.5
Age 15–64
2,428
66.6
2,954
67.3
3,079
63.3
Age 65+  
235
6.4
458
10.4
885
18.2
Latin America and 
Caribbean, total
555
100.0
678
100.0
760
100.0
Age 0–14
162
29.3
152
22.5
138
18.1
Age 15–64
359
64.6
456
67.3
481
63.2
Age 65+  
34
6.1
69
10.2
142
18.7
Western Europe, total
396
100.0
401
100.0
378
100.0
Age 0–14
64 
16.1 
57
14.2
52
13.8
Age 15–64
263
66.6
253
63.1
216
57.1
Age 65+
68
17.3
91
22.7
110
29.1
Eastern Europe, total
121
100.0
117
100.0
102
100.0
Age 0–14
20
16.4
17
14.2
13
13.1
Age 15–64
84
69.5
76
65.0
58
56.4
Age 65+
17
14.1
24
20.8
31
30.5
Baltics, total
7.2
100.0
6.5  
100.0
5.2  
100.0
Age 0–14
1.1   
15.5
0.9   
14.0
0.7   
12.8
Age 15–64
5.0
68.7
4.2   
64.8
2.9   
55.4
Age 65+
1.1
15.8
1.4   
21.2
1.6   
31.8
(continues)
TABLE 6.12, continued
2005
2025
2050
population
population
population
(millions)
%
(millions)
%
(millions)
%

152
Statistics and Graphs
TABLE 6.12, continued
2005
2025
2050
population
population
population
(millions)
%
(millions)
%
(millions)
%
Commonwealth of
Independent States, total
280
100.0
282
100.0
275
100.0
Age 0–14
53
18.8
52
18.5
47
17.2
Age 15–64
193
68.8
185
65.7
166
60.5
Age 65+
35
12.5
45
15.8
61
22.4
North America, total
329
100.0
388
100.0
462
100.0
Age 0–14
67
20.3
76
19.5
89
19.2
Age 15–64
221
67.2
241
62.1
276
59.7
Age 65+
41
12.5
71
18.4
97
21.0
Oceania, total
33
100.0
40
100.0
44
100.0
Age 0–14
8
24.3
8
20.6
8
17.7
Age 15–64
21
65.2
26
64.4
28
62.2
Age 65+
3
10.4
6
15.1
9
20.1
Source: U.S. Census Bureau, International Data Base; updated April 2005.
TABLE 6.13
Global Median Ages, 2005, 2025, and 2050
2005
2025
2050
World
27.6
32.5
36.5
Less developed countries
25.4
30.6
35.3
More developed countries
38.8
43.5
45.4
Sub-Saharan Africa
18.1
20.2
24.3
Northern Africa
24.0
31.4
38.8
Near East
23.1
27.7
33.7
Asia, excluding Near East
27.8
34.0
39.6
Latin America and the Caribbean
26.2
33.0
40.1
Western Europe
40.3
45.9
48.1
Eastern Europe
37.1
44.3
50.4
Baltics
38.4
44.6
52.8
Commonwealth of Independent States
34.2
39.1
42.4
North America
36.5
38.9
39.6
Oceania
32.0
36.1
40.6
Source: U.S. Census Bureau, International Data Base; updated April 2005.

Statistics and Graphs
153
variations are striking. In sub-Saharan Africa, the median age
today is an extremely youthful 18.1, while in Western Europe
the median age is over twice that figure. For each region, de-
mographers expect higher median ages by 2025 and higher
again by 2050. In all of human history, the world’s median ages
have never reached the levels seen and projected in this table. It
is remarkable to think that by the middle of the century Eastern
Europe and the Baltics will have as many people over the age of
50 as under the age of 50!
Like tables of data, graphs can be useful in presenting some
important features of the global population picture as it stands to-
day and as it has developed over the centuries and millennia. Fig-
ure 6.1 depicts world population over the past 7,000 years. Given
the graph’s vertical scale (billions), world population barely regis-
ters at all before about 2000 B.C. At that time it begins a slow as-
cent, so slow that in 1500—500 years ago—it remains under one-
half billion. Since that time, however, there has been an
astonishing acceleration. By 2000, population crosses the 6 billion
line, and it is now expected to reach 9 billion by midcentury. The
growth of our species has been truly explosive in recent times.
Figure 6.2 shows not only the rising curve of total world pop-
ulation, projected to 2050, but also the actual increments of popu-
lation beginning in 1750. These increments are given on a per-
decade basis. They allow us to see that the gains in population
were relatively small in the eighteenth century, visibly larger in
the nineteenth, and simply enormous during the twentieth cen-
tury—and into the twenty-ﬁrst. For those who feel some uneasi-
ness about the magnitude of global population, the only reassur-
ing aspect of Figure 6.2 is the decrease in decadal growth after the
1980s. Each subsequent decade adds, or will add, less to world
population than the previous decade; the 2040s will give the
smallest numerical boost to global population since the 1940s.
The actual and projected year-by-year growth rate of world
population during the period 1950–2050 may be seen in Figure
6.3. This graph shows that the fastest population growth in his-
tory occurred in the early 1960s, at around 2.2 percent annually;
growth has been slowing down ever since. The downward trend
will continue steadily to the middle of this century, demogra-
phers believe. By 2050, the growth rate is expected to have fallen
quite dramatically—to less than half of 1 percent annually. That
will be the slowest growth rate in well over a century. (And of

154
Statistics and Graphs
course the absolute populations of several countries, mainly in
Europe, will be shrinking long before 2050.)
Figures 6.4 and 6.5 illustrate the theory and reality of demo-
graphic transition, as outlined in Chapter 1. In Figure 6.4, we see
high birth- and death rates before the transition begins (Stage I).
Then the death rate begins to decline (Stage II). The birthrate may
remain high for a period of time, but eventually it, too, starts to
decline (Stage III). Finally, both rates stabilize at new lower levels
(Stage IV). Actual population growth is slow or zero in Stage I,
rapid in Stages II and III, and again slow or zero in Stage IV.
The demographic reality corresponding to the theory de-
picted in Figure 6.4 can be seen in Figure 6.5, which tracks crude
birth- and death rates for a group of thirteen European countries
from 1850 to 1990 and for a group of 106 less developed countries
from 1950 to 1990. (Data for less developed countries were not
Population (billions)
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
5000
B.C.
4000
B.C.
3000
B.C.
2000
B.C.
1000
B.C.
0
1000
A.D.
2000
A.D.
Year
FIGURE 6.1
Estimated Human Population from 5000 BC to the Present
Source: Based on data given in Colin McEvedy and Richard Jones, Atlas of World Population History (New York:
Viking Penguin, 1978).

recorded as early as for the European countries.) The graph
makes two things immediately evident: first, the downward
trends in birth- and death rates in Europe have not been smooth,
but they have been long-lasting and have clearly brought the con-
tinent to Stage IV of the demographic transition; and second, the
less developed countries began their own mortality and fertility
transitions at significantly higher death and birthrates, at mid-
twentieth century, than was seen in Europe a century earlier. Al-
though both rates have declined, birthrates remain far above
death rates—more so than was ever the case in Europe—and con-
sequently, population continues to grow rapidly in the develop-
ing world.
Finally, Figures 6.6 and 6.7 are examples of “population
pyramids.” Demographers use such pyramids to graphically rep-
resent age structures. A pyramid with the classic shape, broaden-
Statistics and Graphs
155
Annual increments
Population size
80
100
60
40
4
2
0
6
10
8
20
0
1750
1800
1850
1900
1950
2000
2050
Millions
Billions
Population increment
Population size
Year
FIGURE 6.2
Long-Term World Population Growth, 1750–2050
Source: U.N. Population Division, The World at Six Billion (1999). Reprinted by permission.

156
Statistics and Graphs
Percent growth
Time
I
II
III
VI
Birth rate
Death rate
FIGURE 6.3
World Population Growth Rate, 1950–2050
Source: U.S. Census Bureau, International Data Base (April 2005) at http://www.census.gov/ipc/www/img/
worldgr.gif
Growth rate (percent)
Year
0.0
0.5
1.5
2.5
1.0
2.0
1950
1960
1970
1980
1990
2000
2010
2020
2030
2040
2050
FIGURE 6.4
Demographic Transition Model
Source: Author’s illustration

Statistics and Graphs
157
Rate (percent)
Year
Crude birth rate (percent)
Crude death rate (percent)
Europe
Less
developed
countries
0
1
2
3
4
5
1850
1870
1890
1910
1930
1950
1970
1990
FIGURE 6.5
Crude Birth and Death Rates in Developed and Developing Countries 
Source: Alan C. Kelley, “Economic Consequences of Population Change in the Third World,” Journal of Economic
Literature, 26:4 (1988), p. 1688. Reprinted with permission.
ing out from a narrow top to a wide bottom, indicates a popula-
tion in which the fertility rate is high and the total number of
people is growing, especially at the young end (base) of the pyra-
mid. Male and female populations are shown on the left- and
right-hand sides of the graph, respectively. Figure 6.6 is the pop-
ulation pyramid for Nigeria in 2005, and it is typical of a devel-
oping country with high fertility, one that is far from having
completed its demographic transition. Many nations of Africa,
Asia, and Latin America have similar population pyramids.
Figure 6.7 is the population pyramid for Sweden in 2005
and typifies many European and East Asian nations. Because
fertility has been declining for some time in Sweden, the
youngest cohort, those in the age range of 0 to 4, is not the
largest—far from it. The largest cohort actually consists of
Swedes born between forty and forty-four years ago. As fertility
rates decline around the world in coming decades, the global
age structure will gradually come to resemble Sweden’s more
than Nigeria’s. (Even Nigeria’s population pyramid will evolve
away from its current shape and more toward the barrel shape
of the developed nations.)

158
Statistics and Graphs
Nigeria 2005
80+
Population (in millions)
75–79
70–74
65–69
60–64
55–59
50–54
45–49
40–44
35–39
30–34
25–29
20–24
15–19
10–14
5–9
0–4
25
20
15
10
5
5
10
15
20
25
0
0
Male
Female
100+
95-99
90-94
85-89
80-84
75-79
70-74
65-69
60-64
55-59
50-54
45-49
40-44
35-39
30-34
25-29
20-24
15-19
10-14
5-9
0-4
Population (in thousands)
350
300
250
250
300
200
200
150
150
100
100
50
50
0
0
350
Male
Female
Sweden 2005
FIGURE 6.6
Population pyramid for Nigeria, 2005
Source: U.S. Census Bureau, International Data Base at http://www.census.gov/
cgi-bin/ipc/idbpyry.pl?cty=NI&maxp=23957602&maxa=80&ymax=250&yr=2005&.submit=
FIGURE 6.7
Population pyramid for Sweden, 2005
Source: U.S. Census Bureau, International Data Base at http://www.census.gov/
cgi-bin/ipc/idbpyry.pl?cty=SW&maxp=343714&maxa=100&ymax=250&yr=2005&.submit=

7
Documents
C
ertain books, declarations, and reports on the subject of world popu-
lation have garnered a great deal of attention, either at the time of
their publication or retrospectively. Some of these important docu-
ments are presented in this chapter, mainly in excerpts. The oldest by
far is the famous 1798 Essay on the Principle of Population (often
abbreviated to Essay on Population) by the Reverend T. R. Malthus,
from which a vast array of theoretical ideas, worries, and misconcep-
tions about population were drawn in the subsequent two centuries.
The core of Malthus’s demographic argument is presented in the ﬁrst
two chapters of his work.
Essay on Population (1798)
Chapter I
. . . I think I may fairly make two postulata.
First, That food is necessary to the existence of man.
Secondly, That the passion between the sexes is necessary,
and will remain nearly in its present state.
These two laws, ever since we have had any knowledge of
mankind, appear to have been ﬁxed laws of our nature, and, as
we have not hitherto seen any alteration in them, we have no
right to conclude that they will ever cease to be what they now
are, without an immediate act of power in that Being who ﬁrst
arranged the system of the universe, and for the advantage of his
159

creatures, still executes, according to ﬁxed laws, all its various op-
erations. . . .
Assuming then my postulata as granted, I say, that the
power of population is indeﬁnitely greater than the power in the
earth to produce subsistence for man.
Population, when unchecked, increases in a geometrical ra-
tio. Subsistence increases only in an arithmetical ratio. A slight ac-
quaintance with numbers will show the immensity of the first
power in comparison of the second.
By that law of our nature which makes food necessary to the
life of man, the effects of these two unequal powers must be kept
equal.
This implies a strong and constantly operating check on pop-
ulation from the difﬁculty of subsistence. This difﬁculty must fall
somewhere and must necessarily be severely felt by a large por-
tion of mankind.
Through the animal and vegetable kingdoms, nature has
scattered the seeds of life abroad with the most profuse and lib-
eral hand. She has been comparatively sparing in the room and
the nourishment necessary to rear them. The germs of existence
contained in this spot of earth, with ample food and ample room
to expand in, would ﬁll millions of worlds in the course of a few
thousand years. Necessity, that imperious all pervading law of
nature, restrains them within the prescribed bounds. The race of
plants and the race of animals shrink under this great restrictive
law. And the race of man cannot, by any efforts of reason, escape
from it. Among plants and animals its effects are waste of seed,
sickness, and premature death. Among mankind, misery and
vice. The former, misery, is an absolutely necessary consequence
of it. Vice is a highly probable consequence, and we therefore see
it abundantly prevail; but it ought not, perhaps, to be called an
absolutely necessary consequence. The ordeal of virtue is to resist
all temptation to evil.
This natural inequality of the two powers of population and
of production in the earth, and that great law of our nature which
must constantly keep their effects equal, form the great difﬁculty
that to me appears insurmountable in the way to the perfectibil-
ity of society. All other arguments are of slight and subordinate
consideration in comparison of this. I see no way by which man
can escape from the weight of this law which pervades all ani-
mated nature. No fancied equality, no agrarian regulations in
their utmost extent, could remove the pressure of it even for a
160
Documents

single century. And it appears, therefore, to be decisive against
the possible existence of a society, all the members of which
should live in ease, happiness, and comparative leisure, and feel
no anxiety about providing the means of subsistence for them-
selves and families.
Consequently, if the premises are just, the argument is con-
clusive against the perfectibility of the mass of mankind.
I have thus sketched the general outline of the argument, but
I will examine it more particularly, and I think it will be found
that experience, the true source and foundation of all knowledge,
invariably conﬁrms its truth.
Chapter 2
I said that population, when unchecked, increased in a geometri-
cal ratio, and subsistence for man in an arithmetical ratio.
Let us examine whether this position be just.
I think it will be allowed, that no state has hitherto existed
(at least that we have any account of) where the manners were
so pure and simple, and the means of subsistence so abundant,
that no check whatever has existed to early marriages; among
the lower classes, from a fear of not providing well for their
families; or among the higher classes, from a fear of lowering
their condition in life. Consequently in no state that we have yet
known has the power of population been left to exert itself with
perfect freedom.
Whether the law of marriage be instituted or not, the dictate
of nature and virtue seems to be an early attachment to one
woman. Supposing a liberty of changing in the case of an unfor-
tunate choice, this liberty would not affect population till it arose
to a height greatly vicious; and we are now supposing the exis-
tence of a society where vice is scarcely known.
In a state therefore of great equality and virtue, where pure
and simple manners prevailed, and where the means of subsis-
tence were so abundant that no part of the society could have any
fears about providing amply for a family, the power of popula-
tion being left to exert itself unchecked, the increase of the human
species would evidently be much greater than any increase that
has been hitherto known.
In the United States of America, where the means of subsis-
tence have been more ample, the manners of the people more
pure, and consequently the checks to early marriages fewer, than
Documents
161

in any of the modern states of Europe, the population has been
found to double itself in twenty-ﬁve years.
This ratio of increase, though short of the utmost power of
population, yet as the result of actual experience, we will take as
our rule; and say,
That population, when unchecked, goes on doubling itself
every twenty-ﬁve years, or increases in a geometrical ratio.
Let us now take any spot of earth, this Island for instance,
and see in what ratio the subsistence it affords can be supposed
to increase. We will begin with it under its present state of culti-
vation.
If I allow that by the best possible policy, by breaking up
more land, and by great encouragements to agriculture, the pro-
duce of this Island may be doubled in the ﬁrst twenty-ﬁve years, I
think it will be allowing as much as any person can well demand.
In the next twenty-five years, it is impossible to suppose
that the produce could be quadrupled. It would be contrary to
all our knowledge of the qualities of land. The very utmost that
we can conceive is that the increase in the second twenty-five
years might equal the present produce. Let us then take this for
our rule, though certainly far beyond the truth, and allow that
by great exertion, the whole produce of the Island might be in-
creased every twenty-five years, by a quantity of subsistence
equal to what it at present produces. The most enthusiastic
speculator cannot suppose a greater increase than this. In a few
centuries it would make every acre of land in the Island like a
garden.
Yet this ratio of increase is evidently arithmetical.
It may be fairly said, therefore, that the means of subsistence
increase in an arithmetical ratio.
Let us now bring the effects of these two ratios together.
The population of the Island is computed to be about seven
millions; and we will suppose the present produce equal to the
support of such a number. In the ﬁrst twenty-ﬁve years the popu-
lation would be fourteen millions, and the food being also dou-
bled, the means of subsistence would be equal to this increase. In
the next twenty-ﬁve years the population would be twenty-eight
millions, and the means of subsistence only equal to the support
of twenty-one millions. In the next period, the population would
be ﬁfty-six millions, and the means of subsistence just sufﬁcient
for half that number. And at the conclusion of the ﬁrst century the
population would be one hundred and twelve millions and the
162
Documents

means of subsistence only equal to the support of thirty-ﬁve mil-
lions, which would leave a population of seventy-seven millions
totally unprovided for.
A great emigration necessarily implies unhappiness of some
kind or other in the country that is deserted. For few persons will
leave their families, connections, friends, and native land, to seek
a settlement in untried foreign climes, without some strong sub-
sisting causes of uneasiness where they are, or the hope of some
great advantages in the place to which they are going.
But to make the argument more general, and less inter-
rupted by the partial views of emigration, let us take the whole
earth, instead of one spot, and suppose that the restraints to pop-
ulation were universally removed. If the subsistence for man
that the earth affords was to be increased every twenty-five
years by a quantity equal to what the whole world at present
produces, this would allow the power of production in the earth
to be absolutely unlimited, and its ratio of increase much greater
than we can conceive that any possible exertions of mankind
could make it.
Taking the population of the world at any number, a thou-
sand millions, for instance, the human species would increase in
the ratio of—1, 2, 4, 8, 16, 32, 64, 128, 256, 512, etc. and subsistence
as—1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, etc. In two centuries and a quarter,
the population would be to the means of subsistence as 512 to 10;
in three centuries as 4,096 to 13; and in two thousand years the
difference would be almost incalculable, though the produce in
that time would have increased to an immense extent.
No limits whatever are placed to the productions of the
earth; they may increase forever and be greater than any assigna-
ble quantity; yet still the power of population being a power of a
superior order, the increase of the human species can only be kept
commensurate to the increase of the means of subsistence by the
constant operation of the strong law of necessity acting as a check
upon the greater power.
The effects of this check remain now to be considered.
Among plants and animals the view of the subject is simple.
They are all impelled by a powerful instinct to the increase of
their species, and this instinct is interrupted by no reasoning or
doubts about providing for their offspring. Wherever therefore
there is liberty, the power of increase is exerted; and the super-
abundant effects are repressed afterwards by want of room and
Documents
163

nourishment, which is common to animals and plants, and
among animals, by becoming the prey of others.
The effects of this check on man are more complicated.
Impelled to the increase of his species by an equally power-
ful instinct, reason interrupts his career and asks him whether he
may not bring beings into the world for whom he cannot provide
the means of subsistence. In a state of equality, this would be the
simple question. In the present state of society, other considera-
tions occur. Will he not lower his rank in life? Will he not subject
himself to greater difﬁculties than he at present feels? Will he not
be obliged to labour harder? And if he has a large family, will his
utmost exertions enable him to support them? May he not see his
offspring in rags and misery, and clamouring for bread that he
cannot give them? And may he not be reduced to the grating ne-
cessity of forfeiting his independence, and of being obliged to the
sparing hand of charity for support? . . .
The theory on which the truth of this position depends ap-
pears to me so extremely clear that I feel at a loss to conjecture
what part of it can be denied.
That population cannot increase without the means of sub-
sistence is a proposition so evident that it needs no illustration.
That population does invariably increase where there are the
means of subsistence, the history of every people that have ever
existed will abundantly prove.
And that the superior power of population cannot be
checked without producing misery or vice, the ample portion of
these too bitter ingredients in the cup of human life and the con-
tinuance of the physical causes that seem to have produced them
bear too convincing a testimony.
Population Growth, Resource Consumption,
and a Sustainable World: Joint Statement by
the Royal Society of London and the U.S.
National Academy of Sciences (February 1992)
This statement was issued in advance of the UN conference on the envi-
ronment held in Rio de Janeiro in June 1992. It points to the environ-
mental burden imposed on the Earth by “each additional human being,”
164
Documents

and the indisputable fact that “the recent expansion of the human popu-
lation” has accelerated the “pace of environmental change.” Science and
technology have a role to play in meeting the challenges posed by this
change, but equally important are global policies to promote, among
other things, a “more rapid stabilization of world population.”
World population is growing at the unprecedented rate of al-
most 100 million people every year, and human activities are pro-
ducing major changes in the global environment. If current pre-
dictions of population prove accurate and patterns of human
activity on the planet remain unchanged, science and technology
may not be able to prevent either irreversible degradation of the
environment or continued poverty for much of the world. The
following joint statement, prepared by the Ofﬁcers of the Royal
Society of London and the U.S. National Academy of Sciences, re-
ﬂects the judgment of a group of scientists knowledgeable about
the historic contributions of science and technology to economic
growth and environmental protection. It also reﬂects the shared
view that sustainable development implies a future in which life
is improved worldwide through economic development, where
local environments and the biosphere are protected, and science
is mobilized to create new opportunities for human progress . . . .
World Population
In its 1991 report on world population, the United Nations Popu-
lation Fund (UNFPA) states that population growth is even faster
than forecast in its report of 1984. Assuming nevertheless that
there will in the future be substantial and sustained falls in fertil-
ity rates, the global population is expected in the UN’s mid-range
projection to rise from 5.4 billion in 1991 to 10 billion in 2050. This
rapid rise may be unavoidable; considerably larger rises must be
expected if fertility rates do not stabilize at the replacement level
of about 2.1 children per woman. At present, about 95 percent of
this growth is in the less developed countries (LDCs); the per-
centage of global population that live in the LDCs is projected to
increase from 77 percent in 1990 to 84 percent in 2020.
The Environment
Although there is a relationship between population, economic
activity, and the environment, it is not simple. Most of the envi-
Documents
165

ronmental changes during the twentieth century have been a
product of the efforts of humans to secure improved standards of
food, clothing, shelter, comfort, and recreation. Both developed
and developing countries have contributed to environmental
degradation. Developed countries, with 85 percent of the world’s
gross national product and 23 percent of its population, account
for the majority of mineral and fossil-fuel consumption. One issue
alone, the increases in atmospheric carbon dioxide, has the poten-
tial for altering global climate with signiﬁcant consequences for all
countries. The prosperity and technology of the developed coun-
tries, however, give them the greater possibilities and the greater
responsibility for addressing environmental problems.
In the developing countries the resource consumption per
capita is lower, but the rapidly growing population and the pres-
sure to develop their economies are leading to substantial and in-
creasing damage to the local environment. This damage comes by
direct pollution from energy use and other industrial activities, as
well as by activities such as clearing forests and inappropriate
agricultural practices.
The Reality of the Problem
Scientific and technological innovations, such as in agriculture,
have been able to overcome many pessimistic predictions about
resource constraints affecting human welfare. Nevertheless, the
present patterns of human activity accentuated by population
growth should make even those most optimistic about future sci-
entific progress pause and reconsider the wisdom of ignoring
these threats to our planet. Unrestrained resource consumption
for energy production and other uses, especially if the develop-
ing world strives to achieve living standards based on the same
levels of consumption as the developed world, could lead to cata-
strophic outcomes for the global environment.
Some of the environmental changes may produce irre-
versible damage to the earth’s capacity to sustain life. Many
species have already disappeared, and many more are destined
to do so. Man’s own prospects for achieving satisfactory living
standards are threatened by environmental deterioration, espe-
cially in the poorest countries where economic activities are most
heavily dependent upon the quality of natural resources.
If they are forced to deal with their environmental and re-
source problems alone, the LDCs face overwhelming challenges.
166
Documents

They generate only 15 percent of the world’s GNP, and have a net
cash outﬂow of tens of billions of dollars per year. Over 1 billion
people live in absolute poverty, and 600 million on the margin of
starvation. And the LDCs have only 6–7 percent of the world’s
active scientists and engineers, a situation that makes it very difﬁ-
cult for them to participate fully in global or regional schemes to
manage their own environment.
In places where resources are administered effectively, popu-
lation growth does not inevitably imply deterioration in the qual-
ity of the environment. Nevertheless, each additional human be-
ing requires natural resources for sustenance, each produces
by-products that become part of the ecosystem, and each pursues
economic and other activities that affect the natural world. While
the impact of population growth varies from place to place and
from one environmental domain to another, the overall pace of
environmental changes has unquestionably been accelerated by
the recent expansion of the human population.
International Action
There is an urgent need to address economic activity, population
growth, and environmental protection as interrelated issues. The
forthcoming UN Conference on Environment and Development,
to be held in Brazil, should consider human activities and popu-
lation growth, in both the developing and developed worlds, as
crucial components affecting the sustainability of human society.
Effective family planning, combined with continued economic
and social development in the LDCs, will help stabilize fertility
rates at lower levels and reduce stresses to the global environ-
ment. At the same time, greater attention in the developed coun-
tries to conservation, recycling, substitution and efﬁcient use of
energy, and a concerted program to start mitigating further
buildup of greenhouse gases will help to ease the threat to the
global environment.
Unlike many other steps that could be taken to reduce the
rate of environmental changes, reductions in rates of population
growth can be accomplished through voluntary measures. Sur-
veys in the developing world repeatedly reveal large amounts of
unwanted childbearing. By providing people with the means to
control their own fertility, family planning programs have major
possibilities to reduce rates of population growth and hence to
arrest environmental degradation. Also, unlike many other po-
Documents
167

tential interventions that are typically specific to a particular
problem, a reduction in the rate of population growth would af-
fect many dimensions of environmental changes. Its importance
is easily underestimated if attention is focused on one problem at
a time.
The Contributions of Science
What are the relevant topics to which scientiﬁc research can make
mitigating contributions? These include: development of new
generations of safe, easy to use, and effective contraceptive
agents and devices; development of environmentally benign al-
ternative energy sources; improvements in agricultural produc-
tion and food processing; further research in plant and animal ge-
netic varieties; further research in biotechnology relating to
plants, animals, and preservation of the environment; and im-
provements in public health, especially through development of
effective drugs and vaccines for malaria, hepatitis, AIDS, and
other infectious diseases causing immense human burdens. Also
needed is research on topics such as: improved land-use practices
to prevent ecological degradation, loss of topsoil, and desertiﬁca-
tion of grasslands; better institutional measures to protect water-
sheds and groundwater; new technologies for waste disposal, en-
vironmental remediation, and pollution control; new materials
that reduce pollution and the use of hazardous substances during
their life cycle; and more effective regulatory tools that use mar-
ket forces to protect the environment.
Greater attention also needs to be given to understanding
the nature and dimension of the world’s biodiversity. Although
we depend directly on biodiversity for sustainable productivity,
we cannot even estimate the numbers of species of organisms—
plants, animals, fungi, and microorganisms—to an order of mag-
nitude. We do know, however, that the current rate of reduction
in biodiversity is unparalleled over the past 65 million years. The
loss of biodiversity is one of the fastest moving aspects of global
change, is irreversible, and has serious consequences for the hu-
man prospect in the future.
What are the limits of scientiﬁc contributions to the solution
of resource and environmental problems? Scientiﬁc research and
technological innovation can undoubtedly mitigate these stresses
and facilitate a less destructive adaptation of a growing popula-
tion to its environment. Yet, it is not prudent to rely on science
168
Documents

and technology alone to solve problems created by rapid popula-
tion growth, wasteful resource consumption, and harmful hu-
man practices.
Conclusions
The application of science and technology to global problems is a
key component of providing a decent standard of living for a ma-
jority of the human race. Science and technology have an espe-
cially important role to play in developing countries in helping
them to manage their resources effectively and to participate
fully in worldwide initiatives for common beneﬁt. Capabilities in
science and technology must be strengthened in LDCs as a matter
of urgency through joint initiatives from the developed and de-
veloping worlds. But science and technology alone are not
enough. Global policies are urgently needed to promote more
rapid economic development throughout the world, more envi-
ronmentally benign patterns of human activity, and a more rapid
stabilization of world population.
The future of our planet is in the balance. Sustainable devel-
opment can be achieved, but only if irreversible degradation of
the environment can be halted in time. The next 30 years may be
crucial.
Warning to Humanity,
November 18, 1992
Later in the same year as the joint statement from the Royal Society and
the National Academy of Sciences (see previous item), the Union of
Concerned Scientists issued its own statement. It was more ominous in
tone and content than the earlier statement, cautioning that if there
were not a “great change in our stewardship of the earth,” the unavoid-
able consequence would be “vast human misery” and a planet “irre-
trievably mutilated.” Blunt language was used to warn developed coun-
tries of the harmful effects of their “overconsumption” and pollution,
and to warn the developing countries of the environmental damage,
poverty, and unrest that they will experience if their populations “go
unchecked.” The statement was signed by over 1,500 scientists, includ-
ing half of the living Nobel laureates in the sciences.
Documents
169

Introduction 
Human beings and the natural world are on a collision course.
Human activities inﬂict harsh and often irreversible damage on
the environment and on critical resources. If not checked, many
of our current practices put at serious risk the future that we wish
for human society and the plant and animal kingdoms, and may
so alter the living world that it will be unable to sustain life in the
manner that we know. Fundamental changes are urgent if we are
to avoid the collision our present course will bring about.
The Environment:
The environment is suffering critical stress;
The Atmosphere 
Stratospheric ozone depletion threatens us with enhanced ultra-
violet radiation at the earth’s surface, which can be damaging or
lethal to many life forms. Air pollution near ground level, and
acid precipitation, are already causing widespread injury to hu-
mans, forests and crops.
Water Resources 
Heedless exploitation of depletable groundwater supplies endan-
gers food production and other essential human systems. Heavy
demands on the world’s surface waters have resulted in serious
shortages in some 80 countries, containing 40% of the world’s
population. Pollution of rivers, lakes and groundwater further
limits the supply.
Oceans
Destructive pressure on the oceans is severe, particularly in the
coastal regions which produce most of the world’s food ﬁsh. The
total marine catch is now at or above the estimated maximum
sustainable yield. Some ﬁsheries have already shown signs of col-
lapse. Rivers carrying heavy burdens of eroded soil into the seas
also carry industrial, municipal, agricultural, and livestock
waste—some of it toxic.
170
Documents

Soil 
Loss of soil productivity, which is causing extensive land aban-
donment, is a widespread by-product of current practices in agri-
culture and animal husbandry. Since 1945, 11% of the earth’s veg-
etated surface has been degraded—an area larger than India and
China combined—and per capita food production in many parts
of the world is decreasing.
Forests 
Tropical rain forests, as well as tropical and temperate dry forests,
are being destroyed rapidly. At present rates, some critical forest
types will be gone in a few years and most of the tropical rain for-
est will be gone before the end of the next century. With them will
go large numbers of plant and animal species.
Living Species
The irreversible loss of species, which by 2100 may reach one-
third of all species now living, is especially serious. We are losing
the potential they hold for providing medicinal and other bene-
ﬁts, and the contribution that genetic diversity of life-forms gives
to the robustness of the world’s biological systems and to the as-
tonishing beauty of the earth itself.
Much of this damage is irreversible on a scale of centuries or
permanent. Other processes appear to pose additional threats. In-
creasing levels of gases in the atmosphere from human activities,
including carbon dioxide released from fossil fuel burning and
from deforestation, may alter climate on a global scale. Predic-
tions of global warming are still uncertain—with projected effects
ranging from tolerable to very severe—but the potential risks are
very great.
Our massive tampering with the world’s interdependent
web of life—coupled with the environmental damage inﬂicted by
deforestation, species loss, and climate change—could trigger
widespread adverse effects, including unpredictable collapses of
critical biological systems whose interactions and dynamics we
only imperfectly understand.
Uncertainty over the extent of these effects cannot excuse
complacency or delay in facing the threat.
Documents
171

Population
The earth is finite. Its ability to absorb wastes and destructive
effluent is finite. Its ability to provide food and energy is finite.
Its ability to provide for growing numbers of people is finite.
And we are fast approaching many of the earth’s limits. Current
economic practices which damage the environment, in both de-
veloped and underdeveloped nations, cannot be continued
without the risk that vital global systems will be damaged be-
yond repair.
Pressures resulting from unrestrained population growth
put demands on the natural world that can overwhelm any ef-
forts to achieve a sustainable future. If we are to halt the destruc-
tion of our environment, we must accept limits to that growth. A
World Bank estimate indicates that world population will not sta-
bilize at less than 12.4 billion, while the United Nations concludes
that the eventual total could reach 14 billion, a near tripling of to-
day’s 5.4 billion. But, even at this moment, one person in five
lives in absolute poverty without enough to eat, and one in ten
suffers serious malnutrition.
No more than one or a few decades remain before the chance
to avert the threats we now confront will be lost and the
prospects for humanity immeasurably diminished.
Warning
We the undersigned, senior members of the world’s scientific
community, hereby warn all humanity of what lies ahead. A great
change in our stewardship of the earth and the life on it, is re-
quired, if vast human misery is to be avoided and our global
home on this planet is not to be irretrievably mutilated.
What we must do
Five inextricably linked areas must be addressed simultaneously:
1. We must bring environmentally damaging activities un-
der control to restore and protect the integrity of the
earth’s systems we depend on.
We must, for example, move away from fossil fuels to
more benign, inexhaustible energy sources to cut green-
house gas emissions and the pollution of our air and wa-
ter. Priority must be given to the development of energy
172
Documents

sources matched to third world needs—small scale and
relatively easy to implement.
We must halt deforestation, injury to and loss of agri-
cultural land, and the loss of terrestrial and marine plant
and animal species.
2. We must manage resources crucial to human welfare
more effectively.
We must give high priority to efficient use of energy,
water, and other materials, including expansion of conser-
vation and recycling.
3. We must stabilize population. This will be possible only if
all nations recognize that it requires improved social and
economic conditions, and the adoption of effective, vol-
untary family planning.
4. We must reduce and eventually eliminate poverty.
5. We must ensure sexual equality, and guarantee women
control over their own reproductive decisions.
The developed nations are the largest polluters in the world
today. They must greatly reduce their overconsumption, if we are
to reduce pressures on resources and the global environment. The
developed nations have the obligation to provide aid and support
to developing nations, because only the developed nations have
the ﬁnancial resources and the technical skills for these tasks.
Acting on this recognition is not altruism, but enlightened
self-interest: whether industrialized or not, we all have but one
lifeboat. No nation can escape from injury when global biological
systems are damaged. No nation can escape from conﬂicts over
increasingly scarce resources. In addition, environmental and
economic instabilities will cause mass migrations with incalcula-
ble consequences for developed and undeveloped nations alike.
Developing nations must realize that environmental damage
is one of the gravest threats they face, and that attempts to blunt
it will be overwhelmed if their populations go unchecked. The
greatest peril is to become trapped in spirals of environmental
decline, poverty, and unrest, leading to social, economic and en-
vironmental collapse.
Success in this global endeavor will require a great reduction
in violence and war. Resources now devoted to the preparation
and conduct of war—amounting to over $1 trillion annually—
will be badly needed in the new tasks and should be diverted to
the new challenges.
Documents
173

A new ethic is required—a new attitude towards discharging
our responsibility for caring for ourselves and for the earth. We
must recognize the earth’s limited capacity to provide for us. We
must recognize its fragility. We must no longer allow it to be rav-
aged. This ethic must motivate a great movement, convince reluc-
tant leaders and reluctant governments and reluctant peoples
themselves to effect the needed changes.
The scientists issuing this warning hope that our message
will reach and affect people everywhere.
We need the help of many.
We require the help of the world community of scientists—
natural, social, economic, political;
We require the help of the world’s business and industrial
leaders;
We require the help of the world’s religious leaders; and
We require the help of the world’s peoples.
We call on all to join us in this task.
National Security Study Memorandum 200
(December 10, 1974)
Subject: Implications of Worldwide Population
Growth for U.S. Security and Overseas
Interests
The “population-bomb” worries of the 1960s set off alarm bells not
only among thoughtful citizens but also at the highest levels of the
U.S. government. In early 1974, at President Nixon’s direction, the
National Security Council undertook an analysis of the impact of
global population trends on America’s national security. The aim was
to assess the impact of continued rapid growth of world population
over the coming quarter-century. The final report of nearly 200 pages,
known as NSSM 200, was submitted in December 1974 to Nixon’s
successor, President Ford; it remained a classified document until
1989. Typically for the time period, it expressed great worry about im-
pending “massive famines.” Other possible risks from population
growth abroad included chronic unemployment, food riots, sectarian
violence, revolutions, and counterrevolutionary coups. U.S. assis-
174
Documents

tance, the analysts suggested, might enable less developed countries to
lower their population growth rates. The following excerpts are from
the executive summary of the report.
World Demographic Trends
1. World population growth since World War II is quantitatively
and qualitatively different from any previous epoch in human
history. The rapid reduction in death rates, unmatched by corre-
sponding birth rate reductions, has brought total growth rates
close to 2 percent a year, compared with about 1 percent before
World War II, under 0.5 percent in 1750–1900, and far lower rates
before 1750. The effect is to double the world’s population in 35
years instead of 100 years. Almost 80 million are now being
added each year, compared with 10 million in 1900.
2. The second new feature of population trends is the sharp
differentiation between rich and poor countries. Since 1950, pop-
ulation in the former group has been growing at 0 to 1.5 percent
per year, and in the latter at 2.0 to 3.5 percent (doubling in 20 to
35 years). Some of the highest rates of increase are in areas al-
ready densely populated and with a weak resource base. . . .
Adequacy of World Food Supplies
5. Growing populations will have a serious impact on the need
for food, especially in the poorest, fastest growing LDCs. While
under normal weather conditions and assuming food production
growth in line with recent trends, total world agricultural pro-
duction could expand faster than population, there will neverthe-
less be serious problems in food distribution and ﬁnancing, mak-
ing shortages, even at today’s poor nutrition levels, probable in
many of the larger, more populous LDC regions. Even today 10 to
20 million people die each year due, directly or indirectly, to mal-
nutrition. Even more serious is the consequence of major crop
failures which are likely to occur from time to time.
6. The most serious consequence for the short and middle
term is the possibility of massive famines in certain parts of the
world, especially the poorest regions. World needs for food rise
by 2–1/2 percent or more per year (making a modest allowance
for improved diets and nutrition) at a time when readily avail-
able fertilizer and well-watered land is already largely being uti-
Documents
175

lized. Therefore, additions to food production must come mainly
from higher yields. Countries with large population growth can-
not afford constantly growing imports, but for them to raise food
output steadily by 2 to 4 percent over the next generation or two
is a formidable challenge. Capital and foreign exchange require-
ments for intensive agriculture are heavy, and are aggravated by
energy cost increases and fertilizer scarcities and price rises. The
institutional, technical, and economic problems of transforming
traditional agriculture are also very difﬁcult to overcome.
7. In addition, in some overpopulated regions, rapid popula-
tion growth presses on a fragile environment in ways that
threaten longer-term food production: through cultivation of
marginal lands, overgrazing, desertification, deforestation, and
soil erosion, with consequent destruction of land and pollution of
water, rapid siltation of reservoirs, and impairment of inland and
coastal ﬁsheries.
Minerals and Fuel
8. Rapid population growth is not in itself a major factor in pres-
sure on depletable resources (fossil fuels and other minerals),
since demand for them depends more on levels of industrial out-
put than on numbers of people. On the other hand, the world is
increasingly dependent on mineral supplies from developing
countries, and if rapid population frustrates their prospects for
economic development and social progress, the resulting instabil-
ity may undermine the conditions for expanded output and sus-
tained ﬂows of such resources.
9. There will be serious problems for some of the poorest
LDCs with rapid population growth. They will increasingly ﬁnd
it difﬁcult to pay for needed raw materials and energy. Fertilizer,
vital for their own agricultural production, will be difﬁcult to ob-
tain for the next few years. Imports for fuel and other materials
will cause grave problems which could impinge on the U.S., both
through the need to supply greater ﬁnancial support and in LDC
efforts to obtain better terms of trade through higher prices for
exports. . . .
Economic Development and Population Growth
10. Rapid population growth creates a severe drag on rates of
economic development otherwise attainable, sometimes to the
176
Documents

point of preventing any increase in per capita incomes. In addi-
tion to the overall impact on per capita incomes, rapid popula-
tion growth seriously affects a vast range of other aspects of the
quality of life important to social and economic progress in the
LDCs. . . .
15. The universal objective of increasing the world’s stan-
dard of living dictates that economic growth outpace population
growth. In many high population growth areas of the world, the
largest proportion of GNP is consumed, with only a small
amount saved. Thus, a small proportion of GNP is available for
investment—the “engine” of economic growth. Most experts
agree that, with fairly constant costs per acceptor, expenditures
on effective family planning services are generally one of the
most cost effective investments for an LDC country seeking to
improve overall welfare and per capita economic growth. We
cannot wait for overall modernization and development to pro-
duce lower fertility rates naturally since this will undoubtedly
take many decades in most developing countries, during which
time rapid population growth will tend to slow development and
widen even more the gap between rich and poor.
Political Effects of Population Factors
19. The political consequences of current population factors in the
LDCs—rapid growth, internal migration, high percentages of
young people, slow improvement in living standards, urban con-
centrations, and pressures for foreign migration—are damaging
to the internal stability and international relations of countries in
whose advancement the U.S. is interested, thus creating political
or even national security problems for the U.S. In a broader sense,
there is a major risk of severe damage to world economic, politi-
cal, and ecological systems and, as these systems begin to fail, to
our humanitarian values.
20. The pace of internal migration from countryside to over-
swollen cities is greatly intensiﬁed by rapid population growth.
Enormous burdens are placed on LDC governments for public
administration, sanitation, education, police, and other services,
and urban slum dwellers (though apparently not recent mi-
grants) may serve as a volatile, violent force which threatens po-
litical stability.
21. Adverse socio-economic conditions generated by these
and related factors may contribute to high and increasing levels
Documents
177

of child abandonment, juvenile delinquency, chronic and grow-
ing underemployment and unemployment, petty thievery, orga-
nized brigandry, food riots, separatist movements, communal
massacres, revolutionary actions and counter-revolutionary
coups. Such conditions also detract from the environment needed
to attract the foreign capital vital to increasing levels of economic
growth in these areas. If these conditions result in expropriation
of foreign interests, such action, from an economic viewpoint, is
not in the best interests of either the investing country or the host
government.
22. In international relations, population factors are crucial
in, and often determinants of, violent conflicts in developing ar-
eas. Conflicts that are regarded in primarily political terms often
have demographic roots. Recognition of these relationships ap-
pears crucial to any understanding or prevention of such hostil-
ities.
General Goals and Requirements for Dealing
with Rapid Population Growth
23. The central question for world population policy in the year
1974 is whether mankind is to remain on a track toward an ulti-
mate population of 12 to 15 billion—implying a five- to seven-
fold increase in almost all the underdeveloped world outside of
China—or whether (despite the momentum of population
growth) it can be switched over to the course of earliest feasible
population stability—implying ultimate totals of 8 to 9 billions
and not more than a three or four-fold increase in any major re-
gion.
24. What are the stakes? We do not know whether technolog-
ical developments will make it possible to feed over 8, much less
12 billion people in the 21st century. We cannot be entirely certain
that climatic changes in the coming decade will not create great
difﬁculties in feeding a growing population, especially people in
the LDCs who live under increasingly marginal and more vulner-
able conditions. There exists at least the possibility that present
developments point toward Malthusian conditions for many re-
gions of the world.
25. But even if survival for these much larger numbers is
possible, it will in all likelihood be bare survival, with all efforts
going in the good years to provide minimum nutrition, and utter
178
Documents

dependence in the bad years on emergency rescue efforts from
the less populated and richer countries of the world. In the
shorter run—between now and the year 2000—the difference be-
tween the two courses can be some perceptible material gain in
the crowded poor regions, and some improvement in the relative
distribution of intra-country per capita income between rich and
poor, as against permanent poverty and the widening of income
gaps. A much more vigorous effort to slow population growth
can also mean a very great difference between enormous
tragedies of malnutrition and starvation as against only serious
chronic conditions.
Policy Recommendations
26. There is no single approach which will “solve” the population
problem. The complex social and economic factors involved call
for a comprehensive strategy with both bilateral and multilateral
elements. At the same time actions and programs must be tai-
lored to specific countries and groups. Above all, LDCs them-
selves must play the most important role to achieve success.
27. Coordination among the bilateral donors and multilateral
organizations is vital to any effort to moderate population
growth. Each kind of effort will be needed for worldwide
results. . . .
29. While speciﬁc goals in this area are difﬁcult to state, our
aim should be for the world to achieve a replacement level of fer-
tility (a two-child family on the average) by about the year 2000.
This will require the present 2 percent growth rate to decline to
1.7 percent within a decade and to 1.1 percent by 2000. Compared
to the U.N. medium projection, this goal would result in 500 mil-
lion fewer people in 2000 and about 3 billion fewer in 2050. At-
tainment of this goal will require greatly intensiﬁed population
programs. A basis for developing national population growth
control targets to achieve this world target is contained in the
World Population Plan of Action.
30. The World Population Plan of Action is not self-enforcing
and will require vigorous efforts by interested countries, U.N.
agencies and other international bodies to make it effective. U.S.
leadership is essential. The strategy must include the following
elements and actions:
. . . Concentration on key countries. Assistance for popula-
tion moderation should give primary emphasis to the largest and
Documents
179

fastest growing developing countries where there is special U.S.
political and strategic interest. Those countries are: India,
Bangladesh, Pakistan, Nigeria, Mexico, Indonesia, Brazil, the
Philippines, Thailand, Egypt, Turkey, Ethiopia and Colombia. To-
gether, they account for 47 percent of the world’s current popula-
tion increase. . . .
For its own merits and consistent with the recommendations
of the World Population Plan of Action, priority should be given
in the general aid program to selective development policies in
sectors offering the greatest promise of increased motivation for
smaller family size. In many cases pilot programs and experi-
mental research will be needed as guidance for later efforts on a
larger scale. The preferential sectors include:
• Providing minimal levels of education, especially for
women;
• Reducing infant mortality, including through simple low-
cost health care networks;
• Expanding wage employment, especially for women;
• Developing alternatives to children as a source of old age
security;
• Increasing income of the poorest, especially in rural areas,
including providing privately owned farms;
• Education of new generations on the desirability of
smaller families. . . .
World Population Prospects: 
The 2004 Revision—Highlights
Every two years, the UN Population Division issues a new set of global
population projections to the year 2050. The projections nearly always
are considered “front-page news” by the major media. In 2002, for ex-
ample, much notice was taken of the fact that the United Nations low-
ered its estimate of midcentury population from 9.3 billion (the 2000
projection) to 8.9 billion, a decrease of 400 million. In 2004, by contrast,
the projection was lifted from 8.9 to 9.1 billion. Of the many interesting
points made in the summary below, one that stands out is the fact that
by the year 2050 the developed countries as a whole will be losing 1 mil-
lion people per year, while the developing countries will be gaining 35
million.
180
Documents

The key ﬁndings from the 2004 Revision can be summarized
as follows:
1. By July 2005, the world [had] 6.5 billion inhabitants, 380
million more than in 2000 or a gain of 76 million annually. De-
spite the declining fertility levels projected over 2005–2050, the
world population is expected to reach 9.1 billion according to the
medium variant and will still be adding 34 million persons annu-
ally by mid-century.
2. Today, 95 percent of all population growth is absorbed by
the developing world and 5 percent by the developed world. By
2050, according to the medium variant, the population of the
more developed countries as a whole would be declining slowly
by about 1 million persons a year and that of the developing
world would be adding 35 million annually, 22 million of whom
would be absorbed by the least developed countries.
3. Future population growth is highly dependent on the path
that future fertility takes. In the medium variant, fertility is pro-
jected to decline from 2.6 children per woman today to slightly
over 2 children per woman in 2050. If fertility were to remain
about half a child above the levels projected in the medium vari-
ant, world population would reach 10.6 billion by 2050. A fertility
path half a child below the medium would lead to a population
of 7.6 billion by mid-century. That is, at the world level, contin-
ued population growth until 2050 is inevitable even if the decline
of fertility accelerates.
4. Because of its low and declining rate of growth, the popu-
lation of developed countries as a whole is expected to remain
virtually unchanged between 2005 and 2050, at about 1.2 billion.
In contrast, the population of the 50 least developed countries is
projected to more than double, passing from 0.8 billion in 2005 to
1.7 billion in 2050. Growth in the rest of the developing world is
also projected to be robust, though less rapid, with its population
rising from 4.5 billion to 6.1 billion between 2005 and 2050.
5. Very rapid population growth is expected to prevail in a
number of developing countries, the majority of which are least
developed. Between 2005 and 2050, the population is projected to
at least triple in Afghanistan, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Chad,
Congo, the Democratic Republic of Congo, the Democratic Re-
public of Timor-Leste, Guinea-Bissau, Liberia, Mali, Niger and
Uganda.
6. The population of 51 countries or areas, including Ger-
many, Italy, Japan, the Baltic States and most of the successor
Documents
181

states of the former Soviet Union, is expected to be lower in 2050
than in 2005.
7. During 2005–2050, nine countries are expected to account
for half of the world’s projected population increase: India, Pak-
istan, Nigeria, the Democratic Republic of Congo, Bangladesh,
Uganda, the United States of America, Ethiopia and China, listed
according to the size of their contribution to population growth
during that period.
8. In 2000–2005, fertility at the world level stood at 2.65 chil-
dren per woman, about half the level it had in 1950–1955 (5 chil-
dren per women). In the medium variant, global fertility is pro-
jected to decline further to 2.05 children per woman by
2045–2050. Average world levels result from quite different
trends by major development group. In developed countries as a
whole fertility is currently 1.56 children per woman and is pro-
jected to increase slowly to 1.84 children per woman in
2045–2050. In the least developed countries, fertility is 5 children
per woman and is expected to drop by about half, to 2.57 children
per woman by 2045–2050. In the rest of the developing world, fer-
tility is already moderately low at 2.58 children per woman and is
expected to decline further to 1.92 children per woman by mid-
century, thus nearly converging to the fertility levels by then typ-
ical of the developed world. Realization of the fertility declines
projected is contingent on access to family planning, especially in
the least developed countries.
9. In 2000–2005, fertility remains above 5 children per
woman in 35 of the 148 developing countries, 30 of which are
least developed countries, while the pace of decline in several
countries of sub-Saharan Africa and South-central Asia has been
slower than anticipated. Overall, the countries with high fertility
account for 10 percent of the world population. In contrast, fertil-
ity has reached below-replacement levels in 23 developing coun-
tries accounting for 25 percent of the world population. This
group includes China whose fertility during 2000–2005 is esti-
mated at 1.7 children per woman.
10. Fertility levels in the 44 developed countries, which ac-
count for 19 percent of the world population, are currently very
low. All except Albania have fertility below replacement level
and 15, mostly located in Southern and Eastern Europe, have
reached levels of fertility unprecedented in human history (below
1.3 children per woman). Since 1990–1995, fertility decline has
been the rule among most developed countries. The few in-
182
Documents

creases recorded, such as those in Belgium, France, Germany, the
Netherlands and the United States, have been small.
11. Global life expectancy at birth, which is estimated to have
risen from 47 years in 1950–1955 to 65 years in 2000–2005, is ex-
pected to keep on rising to reach 75 years in 2045–2050. In the
more developed regions, the projected increase is from 76 years
today to 82 years by mid-century. Among the least developed
countries, where life expectancy today is 51 years, it is expected
to be 67 years in 2045–2050. Because many of these countries are
highly affected by the HIV/AIDS epidemic, the projected in-
crease in life expectancy is dependent on the implementation of
effective programs to prevent and treat HIV infection. In the rest
of the developing world, under similar conditions, life ex-
pectancy is projected to rise from 66 years today to 76 years by
mid-century.
12. Mortality in Eastern Europe has been increasing since the
late 1980s. In 2000–2005 life expectancy in the region, at 67.9
years, was lower than it had been in 1960–1965 (68.6 years). The
Russian Federation and the Ukraine are particularly affected by
rises in mortality resulting partly from the spread of HIV.
13. Twenty-ﬁve years into the HIV/AIDS epidemic, the im-
pact of the disease is evident in terms of increased morbidity and
mortality and slower population growth. In Southern Africa, the
region with the highest HIV/AIDS prevalence of the disease, life
expectancy has fallen from 62 years in 1990–1995 to 48 years in
2000–2005, and is projected to decrease further to 43 years over
the next decade before a slow recovery starts. As a consequence,
population growth in the region is expected to stall between 2005
and 2020. In Botswana, Lesotho and Swaziland, the population is
projected to decrease as deaths outnumber births. In most of the
other developing countries affected by the epidemic, population
growth will continue to be positive because their moderate or
high fertility more than counterbalances the rise in mortality.
14. The primary consequence of fertility decline, especially if
combined with increases in life expectancy, is population ageing,
whereby the share of older persons in a population grows rela-
tive to that of younger persons. Globally, the number of persons
aged 60 years or over is expected almost to triple, increasing from
672 million in 2005 to nearly 1.9 billion by 2050. Whereas 6 out of
every 10 of those older persons live today in developing coun-
tries, by 2050, 8 out of every 10 will do so. An even more marked
increase is expected in the number of the oldest-old (persons
Documents
183

aged 80 years or over): from 86 million in 2005 to 394 million in
2050. In developing countries, the rise will be from 42 million to
278 million, implying that by 2050 most oldest-old will live in the
developing world.
15. In developed countries, 20 percent of today’s population
is aged 60 years or over and by 2050 that proportion is projected
to be 32 percent. The elderly population in developed countries
has already surpassed the number of children (persons aged
0–14) and by 2050 there will be 2 elderly persons for every child.
In the developing world, the proportion of the population aged
60 or over is expected to rise from 8 percent in 2005 to close to 20
percent by 2050.
16. Increases in the median age, the age at which 50 percent
of the population is older and 50 percent younger than that age,
are indicative of population ageing. Today, just 11 developed
countries have a median age above 40 years. By 2050, there will
be 90 countries in that group, 46 in the developing world. Popula-
tion aging, which is becoming a pervasive reality in developed
countries, is also inevitable in the developing world and will oc-
cur faster in developing countries.
17. Countries where fertility remains high and has declined
only moderately will experience the slowest population ageing.
By 2050, about one in ﬁve countries is still projected to have a me-
dian age equal [to] or less than 30 years. The youngest popula-
tions will be found in least developed countries, 11 of which are
projected to have median ages equal to or less than 23 years in
2050, including Afghanistan, Angola, Burundi, Chad, the Demo-
cratic Republic of Congo, Equatorial Guinea, Guinea-Bissau,
Liberia, Mali, Niger, and Uganda.
18. During 2005–2050, the net number of international mi-
grants to more developed regions is projected to be 98 million or an
average of 2.2 million annually. The same number will leave the
less developed regions. For the developed world, such a level of
net migration will largely offset the expected excess of deaths over
births during 2005–2050, which amounts to a loss of 73 million
people. For the developing world, the 98 million emigrants repre-
sent scarcely less than 4 percent of expected population growth.
19. Over the period 2000–2005, 74 countries were net re-
ceivers of migrants. In 64 of these countries, the net migration
projected reinforces population growth, and in 7 countries, it re-
verses the trend of population decline (Austria, Croatia, Ger-
many, Greece, Italy, Slovakia and Slovenia). In three countries,
184
Documents

the migration slows down population decline but does not re-
verse it (Czech Republic, Hungary and the Russian Federation).
20. In terms of annual averages for the period 2005–2050, the
major net receivers of international migrants are projected to be
the United States (1.1 million annually), Germany (202,000),
Canada (200,000), the United Kingdom (130,000), Italy (120,000)
and Australia (100,000). The major countries of net emigration are
projected to be China (–327,000 annually), Mexico (–293,000), In-
dia (–241,000), the Philippines (–180,000), Indonesia (–164,000),
Pakistan (–154,000) and the Ukraine (–100,000).
Census Bureau Projects Doubling 
of Nation’s Population by 2100
Like the United Nations Population Division, the United States Census
Bureau issues long-range population projections. Before January 2000,
however, the Census Bureau had never projected U.S. population levels
to the end of the twenty-ﬁrst century. What they announced were num-
bers that raised some eyebrows! The “middle” or maximum-likelihood
forecast put U.S. population in 100 years at 571 million, or almost
twice the current population.
The nation’s resident population could more than double in this
century, according to national population projections to the year
2100 released today by the Commerce Department’s Census Bu-
reau.
According to the projections, the nation’s resident population,
273 million on July 1, 1999, is projected to reach 404 million in 2050
and 571 million in 2100. These results are based on middle-level as-
sumptions regarding population growth during the century.
“Even though childbearing levels in the United States re-
main quite close to the level needed only to replace the popula-
tion, the increasing number of potential parents and continued
migration from abroad would be sufficient to add nearly 300
million people during the next century,” said Census Bureau an-
alyst Frederick W. Hollmann. “Because the Hispanic and Asian
and Paciﬁc Islander populations in the U.S. are younger than the
nation as a whole and because they continue to receive interna-
tional migrants, these populations will become increasingly
prominent.”
Documents
185

The data also show lowest and highest alternative projec-
tions. The lowest series projects population growth to 314 million
in 2050 and then a decline to 283 million in 2100. The highest pro-
jects 553 million people in 2050 and 1.2 billion in 2100.
The projections do not take into account possible future
changes in the way people report their race and ethnicity, and,
because of the length of time covered and other uncertainties,
they are considered less reliable for the latter part of the century.
According to the middle series projections, the Hispanic
population (of any race) would triple from 31.4 million in 1999
to 98.2 million in 2050. By 2005, Hispanics may become the na-
tion’s largest minority group. The percentage of Hispanics in
the total population could rise from 12 percent in 1999 to 24 per-
cent in 2050.
The Asian and Pacific Islander population, meanwhile,
would more than triple, from 10.9 million in 1999 to 37.6 million
in 2050. Its percentage of the total population would rise from 4
percent now to 9 percent in 2050.
According to the projections, the non-Hispanic White and
African-American populations would increase more slowly than
the other groups. The non-Hispanic White population would rise
from 196.1 million in 1999 to 213.0 million in 2050, a 9 percent in-
crease. Its share of the total population would decline, however,
from 72 percent in 1999 to 53 percent in 2050.
The African-American population, according to the projec-
tions, would rise from 34.9 million in 1999 to 59.2 million in 2050,
a 70-percent increase; under this scenario, the African-American
share of the total population would increase slightly, from 13 per-
cent to 15 percent.
Between 1999 and 2050, the total number of foreign-born
would more than double, increasing from 26.0 million to 53.8 mil-
lion. The proportion of the nation’s population that is foreign-
born may rise from 10 percent in 1999 to 13 percent in 2050.
The population age 65 and over would grow from 34.6 mil-
lion in 1999 to 82.0 million in 2050, a 137-percent increase. The
projections also show an especially rapid surge in the elderly
population as the surviving “baby boomers” pass age 65; in the
year 2011, baby boomers (those born between 1946 and 1964) will
begin turning 65. Between 2011 and 2030, the number of elderly
would rise from 40.4 million (13 percent of the population) to 70.3
million (20 percent of the population).
186
Documents

The projections show that the number of children under 18
would increase from 70.2 million in 1999 to 95.7 million in 2050.
However, their share of the nation’s population would decline
slowly, falling from 26 percent in 1999 to 24 percent in 2050.
The projections are based on assumptions about future child-
bearing, mortality, and migration. The level of childbearing
among women for the middle series is assumed to remain close
to present levels, with differences by race and Hispanic origin di-
minishing over time. Mortality is assumed to decline gradually
with less variation by race and Hispanic origin than at present.
International migration is assumed to vary over time and de-
crease generally relative to the size of the population.
This is the ﬁrst time that the Census Bureau has projected the
population to 2100 and the ﬁrst time it includes information on
the foreign-born population. The projections are presented by
age, sex, race, and Hispanic origin.
World Population to 2300
There is something rather extraordinary about any forecast relating to
human behavior that extends three centuries into the future. Accu-
rate predictions can be made of astronomical events hundreds and
even thousands of years in advance of their occurrence, but of course
human beings are far more unpredictable, individually and collec-
tively, than inanimate celestial objects! Yet demographers at the
United Nations in 2003 tackled the challenge of making truly long-
Documents
187
TABLE 7.1
Total U.S. Resident Population (millions): 
Middle, Lowest, and Highest series, 1999–2100
Year
Lowest
Middle
Highest
1999
272.7
272.8
273.0
2025
308.2
337.8
380.4
2050
313.5
403.7
552.8
2075
304.0
480.5
809.2
2100
282.7
571.0
1,182.4
Source: Population Projections Program, Population Division, U.S. Census Bureau.

range population projections—300-year projections—for the first time
ever. They did it for the benefit of “environmental scientists, policy
makers and others who assess the long-term implications of demo-
graphic trends.”
Long-range population projections are reported to 2300, cover-
ing twice as long a period as ever covered in previous UN pro-
jections. These projections are not done by major area and for se-
lected large countries (China and India), as was the previous
practice, but for all countries of the world, providing greater
detail.
In these projections, world population peaks at 9.22 billion in
2075. Population therefore grows slightly beyond the level of 8.92
billion projected for 2050 in the 2002 Revision, on which these pro-
jections are based. However, after reaching its maximum, world
population declines slightly and then resumes increasing, slowly,
to reach a level of 8.97 billion by 2300, not much different from
the projected 2050 ﬁgure.
This pattern of rise, decline, and rise again results from as-
sumptions about future trends in vital rates: that, country by
country, fertility will fall below replacement level—though in
some cases not for decades—and eventually return to replace-
ment; and that, country by country, life expectancy will eventu-
ally follow a path of uninterrupted but slowing increase. With al-
ternative assumptions about fertility, long-range trends could be
quite different. With long-range total fertility 0.3 children above
replacement, projected world population in 2300 is four times as
large as the main projection; with total fertility 0.2 children below
replacement, world population in 2300 is one-quarter of the main
projection.
Regions and countries will follow similar demographic
paths in the long run, given similar assumptions for different
countries about long-range vital rate trends. However, because
initial assumptions differ, and because this gives rise to slight
variations in trends, countries and regions will not be exactly
alike, even by 2300. In fact, what are today considered more de-
veloped and less developed regions will still be demographically
distinguishable, with regard, for instance, to life expectancies and
proportions at advanced ages. In addition, regions and countries
will go through critical stages of growth—zero growth, subre-
placement fertility, a return to positive growth—at different
points in the future, giving rise to a global demographic map
188
Documents

with areas that shrink and stretch at different times in the next
three centuries.
Europe and Africa will be particularly out of phase. Europe
will hit its low point in growth in 2050, Africa not till 80 years
later, after all other major areas. From 2000 to 2100, Europe’s
share of world population is cut in half, 12.0 to 5.9 percent, while
Africa’s almost doubles, from 13.1 to 24.9 percent. While shares
of world population for major areas will rise and fall over the
following two centuries, the distribution by 2300 will resemble
that in 2100.
Smaller regions within continents exhibit divergent pat-
terns. For instance:
Three African regions—Eastern Africa, Middle Africa, and
Western Africa—will grow unusually fast in comparison to
every other region through 2100, even though total fertility will
be close to replacement by 2050.
Southern Africa is seeing a decline in life expectancy to a
lower level than anywhere else, but life expectancy will rebound,
rise quite rapidly, and overtake other African regions.
Asian regions will grow fastest to the west, slowest to the
east, but in every case with growth rates, at least up to 2100, be-
low Eastern, Middle, and Western Africa. By 2100, Asia, instead
of being four-and-a half times as populous as Africa, will be only
2.2 times as populous.
Latin America and the Caribbean is the most homogenous
major area, with most of its regions following relatively parallel
fertility and life expectancy paths.
Northern America is unusual as the only region that will not
experience negative growth, mainly due to projected migration
up to 2050. (No migration is incorporated in projections beyond
that date.)
Europe, like Asia, will experience higher growth to the west,
lower growth to the east. Eastern Europe stands out with low life
expectancy, and even in the long run does not catch up with
other regions.
Growth patterns depend on assumptions about vital rates.
Total fertility is assumed to decline, at a varying pace dictated by
country circumstances, to a below-replacement level of 1.85 chil-
dren per woman. Countries already at this level or below, and
other countries when they reach it, eventually return to replace-
ment over a period of a century and stay at replacement indeﬁ-
nitely. All countries are projected to have reached replacement
Documents
189

fertility by 2175, but past fertility trends continue to affect popu-
lation trends for another 50 years.
Life expectancy is assumed to rise continuously, with no up-
per limit, though at a slowing pace dictated by recent country
trends. By 2100, life expectancy is expected to vary across coun-
tries from 66 to 97 years, and by 2300 from 87 to 106 years. Rising
life expectancy will produce small but continuing population
growth by the end of the projections ranging from 0.03 to 0.07 per-
cent annually.
Growth patterns affect the balance between population and
land. Density, in people per square kilometer of land, will con-
tinue to be especially variable in Oceania, where by 2100 it will
range from 504 persons per sq. km. in Micronesia to 3.6 persons
per sq. km. in Australia/New Zealand. Some large countries in
South-central Asia will also be unusually dense by 2100, with In-
dia having 491 persons per sq. km., Pakistan 530 persons per sq.
km., and Bangladesh 1,997 persons per sq. km.
These populations pressing on the land will be old by cur-
rent standards. Where the world median age in 2000 is 26 years,
by 2100 it will be 44 years, and by 2300, 48 years. Before they
reach the point where those over 40 are half the population,
countries go through a period labeled here the demographic
window, when the proportion of children and youth under 15
years falls below 30 percent and the proportion of people 65
years and older is still below 15 percent. For a 30–40 year period,
the proportion of the population in between, of working age, is
particularly prominent in the population. Europe entered the de-
mographic window before 1950 and is now leaving it and enter-
ing a third age when older people are particularly prominent in
the age distribution. Much of Africa will not enter the demo-
graphic window until 2045 or later.
Beyond the demographic window, population ageing be-
comes a predominant demographic feature. Between 2100 and
2300, the proportion of world population 65 years and older will
increase by one-third (from 24 to 32 percent); the proportion 80
years and older will double (from 8.5 to 17 percent); and the pro-
portion 100 years and older will increase nine times (from 0.2 to
1.8 percent). Assuming that the retirement age worldwide in
2000 is 65 years, people retire on average only two weeks short
of their life expectancy. Assuming that retirement age stays un-
changed, by 2300 people will retire 31 years short of their life ex-
pectancy.
190
Documents

Program of Action of the 
International Conference on Population 
and Development, Cairo, 1994
Three international conferences on population have been held under
the auspices of the United Nations—at Bucharest (1974), Mexico City
(1984), and Cairo (1994). The 1994 conference was officially titled In-
ternational Conference on Population and Development, or ICPD.
More clearly than in 1974 or 1984, the Cairo conference situated pop-
ulation policymaking within a broader context of all-round human de-
velopment. Governments were urged to take the necessary steps to en-
sure the provision of reproductive health services to all their citizens,
to broaden opportunities for women, and to equalize educational op-
portunities for girls and boys. There was an implicit recognition that
high fertility rates, where they still occur, are unlikely to be reduced,
or reduced sufficiently to ease population pressures, until women
achieve a fuller measure of empowerment in their personal and social
lives. Much behind-the-scenes negotiating was needed to achieve a fi-
nal consensus on this document, with Dr. Nafis Sadik, head of the
UNFPA and secretary-general of the ICPD, playing an important me-
diating role.
Chapter 1 Preamble
. . . 1.3. The world population is currently estimated at 5.6 billion.
While the rate of growth is on the decline, absolute increments
have been increasing, currently exceeding 86 million persons per
annum. Annual population increments are likely to remain above
86 million until the year 2015.
1.4. During the remaining six years of this critical decade, the
world’s nations by their actions or inactions will choose from
among a range of alternative demographic futures. The low,
medium and high variants of the United Nations population pro-
jections for the coming 20 years range from a low of 7.1 billion
people to the medium variant of 7.5 billion and a high of 7.8 bil-
lion. The difference of 720 million people in the short span of 20
years exceeds the current population of the African continent.
Further into the future, the projections diverge even more signiﬁ-
cantly. By the year 2050, the United Nations projections range
Documents
191

from 7.9 billion to the medium variant of 9.8 billion and a high of
11.9 billion. Implementation of the goals and objectives contained
in the present 20-year Program of Action, which address[es]
many of the fundamental population, health, education and de-
velopment challenges facing the entire human community,
would result in world population growth during this period 
and beyond at levels below the United Nations medium projec-
tion. . . .
1.8. Over the past 20 years, many parts of the world have un-
dergone remarkable demographic, social, economic, environ-
mental and political change. Many countries have made substan-
tial progress in expanding access to reproductive health care and
lowering birth rates, as well as in lowering death rates and rais-
ing education and income levels, including the educational and
economic status of women. While the advances of the past two
decades in areas such as increased use of contraception, de-
creased maternal mortality, implemented sustainable develop-
ment plans and projects and enhanced educational programs
provide a basis for optimism about successful implementation of
the present Program of Action, much remains to be accom-
plished. The world as a whole has changed in ways that create
important new opportunities for addressing population and de-
velopment issues. Among the most significant are the major
shifts in attitude among the world’s people and their leaders in
regard to reproductive health, family planning and population
growth, resulting, inter alia, in the new comprehensive concept of
reproductive health, including family planning and sexual
health, as defined in the present Program of Action. A particu-
larly encouraging trend has been the strengthening of political
commitment to population-related policies and family-planning
programs by many Governments. In this regard, sustained eco-
nomic growth in the context of sustainable development will en-
hance the ability of countries to meet the pressures of expected
population growth; will facilitate the demographic transition in
countries where there is an imbalance between demographic
rates and social, economic and environmental goals; and will per-
mit the balance and integration of the population dimension into
other development-related policies.
1.9. The population and development objectives and actions
of the present Program of Action will collectively address the
critical challenges and interrelationships between population
and sustained economic growth in the context of sustainable de-
192
Documents

velopment. In order to do so, adequate mobilization of resources
at the national and international levels will be required as well
as new and additional resources to the developing countries
from all available funding mechanisms, including multilateral,
bilateral and private sources. Financial resources are also re-
quired to strengthen the capacity of national, regional, subre-
gional and international institutions to implement this Program
of Action. . . .
1.11. Intensiﬁed efforts are needed in the coming 5, 10 and 20
years, in a range of population and development activities, bear-
ing in mind the crucial contribution that early stabilization of the
world population would make towards the achievement of sus-
tainable development. The present Program of Action addresses
all those issues, and more, in a comprehensive and integrated
framework designed to improve the quality of life of the current
world population and its future generations. The recommenda-
tions for action are made in a spirit of consensus and interna-
tional cooperation, recognizing that the formulation and imple-
mentation of population-related policies is the responsibility of
each country and should take into account the economic, social
and environmental diversity of conditions in each country, with
full respect for the various religious and ethical values, cultural
backgrounds and philosophical convictions of its people, as well
as the shared but differentiated responsibilities of all the world’s
people for a common future. . . .
1.13. Many of the quantitative and qualitative goals of the
present Program of Action clearly require additional resources,
some of which could become available from a reordering of pri-
orities at the individual, national and international levels. How-
ever, none of the actions required—nor all of them combined—is
expensive in the context of either current global development or
military expenditures. A few would require little or no additional
ﬁnancial resources, in that they involve change in lifestyles, social
norms or government policies that can be largely brought about
and sustained through greater citizen action and political leader-
ship. But to meet the resource needs of those actions that do re-
quire increased expenditures over the next two decades, addi-
tional commitments will be required on the part of both
developing and developed countries. This will be particularly
difﬁcult in the case of some developing countries and some coun-
tries with economies in transition that are experiencing extreme
resource constraints.
Documents
193

Chapter 2 Principles
. . . Principle 4. Advancing gender equality and equity and the
empowerment of women, and the elimination of all kinds of vio-
lence against women, and ensuring women’s ability to control
their own fertility, are cornerstones of population- and develop-
ment-related programs. The human rights of women and the girl
child are an inalienable, integral and indivisible part of universal
human rights. The full and equal participation of women in civil,
cultural, economic, political and social life, at the national, re-
gional and international levels, and the eradication of all forms of
discrimination on grounds of sex, are priority objectives of the in-
ternational community.
Principle 5. Population-related goals and policies are integral
parts of cultural, economic and social development, the principal
aim of which is to improve the quality of life of all people.
Principle 6. Sustainable development as a means to ensure hu-
man well-being, equitably shared by all people today and in the
future, requires that the interrelationships between population, re-
sources, the environment and development should be fully recog-
nized, properly managed and brought into harmonious, dynamic
balance. To achieve sustainable development and a higher quality
of life for all people, States should reduce and eliminate unsus-
tainable patterns of production and consumption and promote
appropriate policies, including population-related policies, in or-
der to meet the needs of current generations without compromis-
ing the ability of future generations to meet their own needs. . . .
Principle 8. Everyone has the right to the enjoyment of the
highest attainable standard of physical and mental health. States
should take all appropriate measures to ensure, on a basis of
equality of men and women, universal access to health-care ser-
vices, including those related to reproductive health care, which
includes family planning and sexual health. Reproductive health-
care programs should provide the widest range of services with-
out any form of coercion. All couples and individuals have the
basic right to decide freely and responsibly the number and spac-
ing of their children and to have the information, education and
means to do so. . . .
Principle 10. Everyone has the right to education, which shall
be directed to the full development of human resources, and hu-
194
Documents

man dignity and potential, with particular attention to women
and the girl child. Education should be designed to respect hu-
man rights and fundamental freedoms, including those relating
to population and development. The best interests of the child
shall be the guiding principle of those responsible for his or her
education and guidance; that responsibility lies in the ﬁrst place
with the parents.
Chapter 3 Interrelationships between
Population, Sustained Economic Growth 
and Sustainable Development
. . . 3.14. Efforts to slow down population growth, to reduce
poverty, to achieve economic progress, to improve environmen-
tal protection, and to reduce unsustainable consumption and
production patterns are mutually reinforcing. Slower popula-
tion growth has in many countries bought more time to adjust
to future population increases. This has increased those coun-
tries’ ability to attack poverty, protect and repair the environ-
ment, and build the base for future sustainable development.
Even the difference of a single decade in the transition to stabi-
lization levels of fertility can have a considerable positive im-
pact on quality of life.
3.15. Sustained economic growth within the context of sus-
tainable development is essential to eradicate poverty. Eradica-
tion of poverty will contribute to slowing population growth and
to achieving early population stabilization. Investments in ﬁelds
important to the eradication of poverty, such as basic education,
sanitation, drinking water, housing, adequate food supply and
infrastructure for rapidly growing populations, continue to strain
already weak economies and limit development options. The un-
usually high number of young people, a consequence of high fer-
tility rates, requires that productive jobs be created for a continu-
ally growing labor force under conditions of already widespread
unemployment. The numbers of elderly requiring public support
will also increase rapidly in the future. Sustained economic
growth in the context of sustainable development will be neces-
sary to accommodate those pressures.
Documents
195

Chapter 4 Gender Equality, Equity and
Empowerment of Women
. . . 4.1. The empowerment and autonomy of women and the im-
provement of their political, social, economic and health status is
a highly important end in itself. In addition, it is essential for the
achievement of sustainable development. The full participation
and partnership of both women and men is required in produc-
tive and reproductive life, including shared responsibilities for
the care and nurturing of children and maintenance of the house-
hold. In all parts of the world, women are facing threats to their
lives, health and well-being as a result of being overburdened
with work and of their lack of power and inﬂuence. In most re-
gions of the world, women receive less formal education than
men, and at the same time, women’s own knowledge, abilities
and coping mechanisms often go unrecognized. The power rela-
tions that impede women’s attainment of healthy and fulﬁlling
lives operate at many levels of society, from the most personal to
the highly public. Achieving change requires policy and program
actions that will improve women’s access to secure livelihoods
and economic resources, alleviate their extreme responsibilities
with regard to housework, remove legal impediments to their
participation in public life, and raise social awareness through ef-
fective programs of education and mass communication. In addi-
tion, improving the status of women also enhances their deci-
sion-making capacity at all levels in all spheres of life, especially
in the area of sexuality and reproduction. This, in turn, is essen-
tial for the long-term success of population programs. Experience
shows that population and development programs are most ef-
fective when steps have simultaneously been taken to improve
the status of women. . . .
Chapter 7 Reproductive Rights and
Reproductive Health
. . . 7.12. The aim of family-planning programs must be to enable
couples and individuals to decide freely and responsibly the
number and spacing of their children and to have the information
and means to do so and to ensure informed choices and make
available a full range of safe and effective methods. The success
of population education and family-planning programs in a vari-
196
Documents

ety of settings demonstrates that informed individuals every-
where can and will act responsibly in the light of their own needs
and those of their families and communities. The principle of in-
formed free choice is essential to the long-term success of family-
planning programs. Any form of coercion has no part to play. In
every society there are many social and economic incentives and
disincentives that affect individual decisions about child-bearing
and family size. Over the past century, many Governments have
experimented with such schemes, including specific incentives
and disincentives, in order to lower or raise fertility. Most such
schemes have had only marginal impact on fertility and in some
cases have been counterproductive. Governmental goals for fam-
ily planning should be deﬁned in terms of unmet needs for infor-
mation and services. Demographic goals, while legitimately the
subject of government development strategies, should not be im-
posed on family-planning providers in the form of targets or quo-
tas for the recruitment of clients.
7.13. Over the past three decades, the increasing availability
of safer methods of modern contraception, although still in some
respects inadequate, has permitted greater opportunities for indi-
vidual choice and responsible decision-making in matters of re-
production throughout much of the world. Currently, about 55
percent of couples in developing regions use some method of
family planning. This ﬁgure represents nearly a ﬁvefold increase
since the 1960s. Family-planning programs have contributed con-
siderably to the decline in average fertility rates for developing
countries, from about six to seven children per woman in the
1960s to about three to four children at present. However, the full
range of modern family-planning methods still remains unavail-
able to at least 350 million couples worldwide, many of whom
say they want to space or prevent another pregnancy. Survey
data suggest that approximately 120 million additional women
worldwide would be currently using a modern family-planning
method if more accurate information and affordable services
were easily available, and if partners, extended families and the
community were more supportive. . . .
7.16. All countries should, over the next several years, assess
the extent of national unmet need for good-quality family-plan-
ning services and its integration in the reproductive health con-
text, paying particular attention to the most vulnerable and un-
derserved groups in the population. All countries should take
steps to meet the family-planning needs of their populations as
Documents
197

soon as possible and should, in all cases by the year 2015, seek to
provide universal access to a full range of safe and reliable fam-
ily-planning methods and to related reproductive health services
which are not against the law. The aim should be to assist couples
and individuals to achieve their reproductive goals and give
them the full opportunity to exercise the right to have children by
choice.
World Population Policies 2003
The study of world population takes on an additional dimension when
one goes beyond the facts and ﬁgures and asks how they are viewed by
the public—and by governments. Is population growth regarded as too
rapid? Too slow? Are fertility rates satisfactory? If not, have policies
been implemented to correct the problem? The United Nations periodi-
cally queries the governments of the world on these questions and then
releases its ﬁndings. Some of the main conclusions of the 2003 survey
are presented below:
1. Population Size and Growth
Continued high rates of population growth remain an issue of
policy concern for many countries of the developing world. In
2003, 54 percent of countries in the less developed regions consid-
ered their rate of population growth to be too high . . . Countries
that viewed population growth as too high encompassed most of
Africa (77 percent) and over half of the islands of Oceania (56 per-
cent). More than one-third of countries in Asia (36 percent) and
Latin America and the Caribbean (36 percent) viewed their popu-
lation growth rate as too high.
To a great extent, concerns with the detrimental conse-
quences of high population growth translate into policy inter-
ventions. Fifty-one percent of the Governments of developing
countries and 67 percent of the Governments of the least devel-
oped countries have policies aimed at reducing population
growth . . . One of the most signiﬁcant population policy devel-
opments of the second half of the 1990s is the continued rise in
the number of African Governments that report policies aimed
at reducing the rapid growth of their population: 72 percent in
198
Documents

2003, up from 60 percent in 1996, 39 percent in 1986, and 25 per-
cent in 1976.
In the developed world, a declining share of countries are
satisﬁed with their level of population growth. Only half of coun-
tries report they are satisfied with their rate of population
growth, down from 82 percent in 1986 and 71 percent in 1996 . . .
Nearly all the [developed] countries which declare their
growth rate to be unsatisfactory view them as too low. One-half
of developed countries do not have policies aimed at inﬂuencing
population growth . . . The share of developed countries that ex-
press concern with low rates of population growth has increased
rapidly to 48 percent in 2003 from 27 percent in 1996. Conse-
quently, the proportion of developed countries that have policies
aimed at raising the growth of their population has climbed from
23 percent in 1996 to 38 percent in 2003.
2. Population Age Structure
An inevitable consequence of the demographic transition and the
shift to lower fertility and mortality has been the evolution in the
age structure of world population. Many societies, especially in
the more developed regions, have already attained older popula-
tion age structures than have ever been seen in the past. Many
developing countries in the midst of the demographic transition
are experiencing rapid shifts in the relative numbers of children,
working-age population and older persons.
Once only limited to developed countries, concerns with the
consequences of population ageing have spread to many devel-
oping countries as well. As of 2003, 56 percent of reporting coun-
tries view population ageing as a major concern, and 43 percent
as a minor concern . . . Although concerns with population age-
ing are much more pronounced among developed countries,
where three-quarters of Governments consider it a major con-
cern, a number of Governments in developing countries are be-
coming concerned by this demographic phenomenon, as well.
Almost one-half of developing countries expressed major con-
cern over population ageing in 2003.
As regards the working-age population, almost three-quar-
ters (71 percent) of reporting countries viewed the size of the
population in the ages 15–59 years as a major concern . . . Devel-
oped and developing countries differ in terms of the nature of
Documents
199

the concern. Whereas developed countries are concerned that
the size of the working-age population is too small, thus creating
labor shortages, most developing countries feel that the work-
ing-age population is too large, posing problems of high unem-
ployment.
3. Fertility and Family Planning
The percentage of countries that are satisﬁed with the level of fer-
tility continues to decline . . . However, this global comparison
masks a marked difference between the more developed regions
and the less developed regions. In the more developed regions,
58 percent of countries ﬁnd their fertility levels to be too low and
none indicate that fertility is too high. The opposite is true in the
less developed regions, where 58 percent of countries indicate too
high a fertility level, whereas only 8 percent indicate too low. By
2003, only 37 percent of countries said that the present level of
fertility was satisfactory. Twice as many countries in the world
consider their fertility level too high (43 percent) as too low (20
percent).
Among the group of least developed countries, 78 percent
said fertility was too high. This latter percentage has been rising
steadily since 1976. In that year, only 31 percent of the least devel-
oped countries thought their fertility was too high. By 1986, the
percentage had risen to 54 percent, and since 1996 it has re-
mained at 78 percent.
The persistence of low fertility has become a concern for
more countries in recent years, particularly, as noted above, in the
more developed regions where fertility has fallen to 1.6 children
per woman for the period 2000–2005. In 2003, 58 percent of the
countries in the more developed regions considered fertility to be
too low, up from 21 percent in 1976. Of the 39 countries that con-
sidered fertility too low in 2003, 27 were in Europe and nine were
in Asia . . .
There is a notable correspondence between the percentage of
countries that considered fertility to be too high and those that
had implemented policies to lower it. Eighty-four countries (43
percent of the total) considered fertility to be too high, and 83
countries had policies to lower fertility . . . This represents a
200
Documents

greater convergence between Governments’ views and policies
than was previously seen. In 1976, for example, 55 countries
stated that fertility was too high, but only 40 countries had poli-
cies to lower fertility.
Of the 39 countries that considered fertility to be too low in
2003, seven had not implemented policies aimed at raising it.
These countries were: Bosnia and Herzegovina, Germany, Italy,
Norway, Portugal, Spain and Switzerland. By contrast, only ﬁve
of 84 countries that considered fertility too high had failed to
adopt fertility-reduction policies. The five countries with high
fertility but without fertility policies were geographically diverse:
Afghanistan, Djibouti, Guinea-Bissau, Paraguay and Sao Tome
and Principe.
Governments’ views and policies with regard to the use of
contraceptive methods have changed considerably during the
last quarter-century. The practice of limiting access to contracep-
tives has nearly vanished. By 2003, 93 percent of all countries
supported the provision of contraceptive methods either directly
(through Government facilities) or indirectly (through support of
nongovernmental sources) . . . In 1976, almost three-fourths of
Governments were providing such support. Direct support for
contraceptive methods is considerably more pervasive among
developing countries, where 85 percent of Governments are pro-
viding such support. Among the developed countries, less than
one-half provide contraceptives directly. This reﬂects the partial
withdrawal of the State from the provision of health and welfare
services and the growing prominence of nongovernmental orga-
nizations and the private sector in the delivery of reproductive
health services. Thirteen countries around the world provide no
support.
Adolescent fertility is a concern for Governments, particu-
larly in the less developed regions. Early childbearing entails a
risk of maternal death that is much greater than average, while
the children of young mothers have higher levels of morbidity
and mortality. In 2003, 61 percent of countries in the less devel-
oped regions and 63 percent of the least developed countries
viewed it as a major concern . . . In more developed regions, it
was a major concern for one-third of the countries and a minor
concern for 48 percent. Some 80 percent of the world’s Govern-
ments now have programs in place to address adolescent
fertility . . . , up from 60 percent in 1996.
Documents
201

United Nations Principles 
for Older Persons
Decade by decade, the world’s population is getting grayer. Issues con-
cerning the elderly will therefore require more attention in years to
come. Individuals will have to make financial and lifestyle decisions
based on longer time horizons than ever before. Pension systems will be
strained to the limit. Governments will confront extraordinary demands
on their tax revenues to fund programs for seniors. And conﬂicts among
generations over the allocation of social resources may be difficult to
avoid. The ﬁnal two documents give a sense of how the international
community has begun coming to grips with the aging issue. The UN
document excerpted below was adopted by the General Assembly on
December 16, 1991.
The General Assembly . . .
In pursuance of the International Plan of Action on Ageing,
adopted by the World Assembly on Ageing [Madrid] and en-
dorsed by the General Assembly in its resolution 37/51 of 3 De-
cember 1982,
Appreciating the tremendous diversity in the situation of
older persons, not only between countries but within countries
and between individuals, which requires a variety of policy re-
sponses,
Aware that in all countries, individuals are reaching an ad-
vanced age in greater numbers and in better health than ever
before,
Aware of the scientiﬁc research disproving many stereotypes
about inevitable and irreversible declines with age,
Convinced that in a world characterized by an increasing
number and proportion of older persons, opportunities must be
provided for willing and capable older persons to participate in
and contribute to the ongoing activities of society,
Mindful that the strains on family life in both developed and
developing countries require support for those providing care to
frail older persons,
Bearing in mind the standards already set by the Interna-
tional Plan of Action on Ageing and the conventions, recom-
mendations and resolutions of the International Labor Organi-
zation, the World Health Organization and other United
Nations entities,
202
Documents

Encourages Governments to incorporate the following prin-
ciples into their national programs whenever possible:
Independence
1. Older persons should have access to adequate food, water,
shelter, clothing and health care through the provision of income,
family and community support and self-help.
2. Older persons should have the opportunity to work or to
have access to other income-generating opportunities.
3. Older persons should be able to participate in determining
when and at what pace withdrawal from the labor force takes
place.
4. Older persons should have access to appropriate educa-
tional and training programs.
5. Older persons should be able to live in environments that
are safe and adaptable to personal preferences and changing ca-
pacities.
6. Older persons should be able to reside at home for as long
as possible.
Participation
7. Older persons should remain integrated in society, participate
actively in the formulation and implementation of policies that
directly affect their well-being and share their knowledge and
skills with younger generations.
8. Older persons should be able to seek and develop oppor-
tunities for service to the community and to serve as volunteers
in positions appropriate to their interests and capabilities.
9. Older persons should be able to form movements or asso-
ciations of older persons.
Care
10. Older persons should benefit from family and community
care and protection in accordance with each society’s system of
cultural values.
11. Older persons should have access to health care to help
them to maintain or regain the optimum level of physical, men-
tal and emotional well-being and to prevent or delay the onset of
illness.
Documents
203

12. Older persons should have access to social and legal ser-
vices to enhance their autonomy, protection and care.
13. Older persons should be able to utilize appropriate levels
of institutional care providing protection, rehabilitation and so-
cial and mental stimulation in a humane and secure environ-
ment.
14. Older persons should be able to enjoy human rights and
fundamental freedoms when residing in any shelter, care or treat-
ment facility, including full respect for their dignity, beliefs, needs
and privacy and for the right to make decisions about their care
and the quality of their lives.
Self-fulﬁllment
15. Older persons should be able to pursue opportunities for the
full development of their potential.
16. Older persons should have access to the educational, cul-
tural, spiritual and recreational resources of society.
Dignity
17. Older persons should be able to live in dignity and security
and be free of exploitation and physical or mental abuse.
18. Older persons should be treated fairly regardless of age,
gender, racial or ethnic background, disability or other status,
and be valued independently of their economic contribution.
Madrid International 
Plan of Action on Ageing, 2002
In 1982, the ﬁrst World Assembly on Ageing was held in Vienna and
resulted in adoption of an International Plan of Action on Ageing. The
second World Assembly on Ageing was convened in 2002 in Madrid.
The Plan of Action approved by the delegates was ratiﬁed on December
18, 2002, by the UN General Assembly. It is a lengthy document, list-
ing many issues, objectives, and actions to be taken. The introduction,
reproduced here, conveys all the main concerns.
1. The twentieth century saw a revolution in longevity. Aver-
age life expectancy at birth has increased by 20 years since 1950 to
204
Documents

66 years and is expected to extend a further 10 years by 2050. This
demographic triumph and the fast growth of the population in
the ﬁrst half of the twenty-ﬁrst century mean that the number of
persons over 60 will increase from about 600 million in 2000 to al-
most 2 billion in 2050 and the proportion of persons deﬁned as
older is projected to increase globally from 10 percent in 1998 to
15 percent in 2025. The increase will be greatest and most rapid in
developing countries where the older population is expected to
quadruple during the next 50 years. In Asia and Latin America,
the proportion of persons classiﬁed as older will increase from 8
to 15 percent between 1998 and 2025, although in Africa the pro-
portion is only expected to grow from 5 to 6 percent during the
period but then doubling by 2050. In sub-Saharan Africa, where
the struggle with the HIV/AIDS pandemic and with economic
and social hardship continues, the percentage will reach half that
level. In Europe and North America, between 1998 and 2025 the
proportion of persons classiﬁed as older will increase from 20 to
28 percent and 16 to 26 percent, respectively. Such a global demo-
graphic transformation has profound consequences for every as-
pect of individual, community, national and international life.
Every facet of humanity will evolve: social, economic, political,
cultural, psychological and spiritual.
2. The remarkable demographic transition under way will
result in the old and the young representing an equal share of the
world’s population by mid-century. Globally, the proportion of
persons aged 60 years and older is expected to double between
2000 and 2050, from 10 to 21 percent, whereas the proportion of
children is projected to drop by a third, from 30 to 21 percent. In
certain developed countries and countries with economies in
transition, the number of older persons already exceeds the num-
ber of children and birth rates have fallen below replacement lev-
els. In some developed countries, the number of older persons
will be more than twice that of children by 2050. In developed
countries the average of 71 men per 100 women is expected to in-
crease to 78. In the less developed regions, older women do not
outnumber older men to the same extent as in the developed re-
gions, since gender differences in life expectancy are generally
smaller. Current sex ratios in developing countries average 88
men per 100 women among those 60 and older, and are projected
to change slightly to 87 by mid-century.
3. Population ageing is poised to become a major issue in de-
veloping countries, which are projected to age swiftly in the ﬁrst
Documents
205

half of the twenty-ﬁrst century. The proportion of older persons is
expected to rise from 8 to 19 percent by 2050, while that of chil-
dren will fall from 33 to 22 percent. This demographic shift pre-
sents a major resource challenge. Though developed countries
have been able to age gradually, they face challenges resulting
from the relationship between ageing and unemployment and
sustainability of pension systems, while developing countries
face the challenge of simultaneous development and population
ageing.
4. There are other major demographic differences between
developed and developing countries. While today the over-
whelming proportion of older persons in developed countries
live in areas classiﬁed as urban, the majority of older persons in
developing countries live in rural areas. Demographic projections
suggest that, by 2025, 82 percent of the population of developed
countries will live in urban areas, while less than half of the pop-
ulation of developing countries will live there. In developing
countries, the proportion of older persons in rural areas is higher
than in urban areas. Although further study is needed on the re-
lationship between ageing and urbanization, the trends suggest
that in the future in rural areas of many developing countries
there will be a larger population of older persons.
5. Signiﬁcant differences also exist between developed and
developing countries in terms of the kinds of households in
which older persons live. In developing countries a large propor-
tion of older persons live in multigenerational households. These
differences imply that policy actions will be different in develop-
ing and developed countries.
6. The fastest growing group of the older population is the
oldest old, that is, those who are 80 old years or more. In 2000, the
oldest old numbered 70 million and their numbers are projected
to increase to more than ﬁve times that over the next 50 years.
7. Older women outnumber older men, increasingly so as
age increases. The situation of older women everywhere must be
a priority for policy action. Recognizing the differential impact of
ageing on women and men is integral to ensuring full equality
between women and men and to the development of effective
and efﬁcient measures to address the issue. It is therefore critical
to ensure the integration of a gender perspective into all policies,
programs and legislation.
8. It is essential to integrate the evolving process of global
ageing within the larger process of development. Policies on age-
206
Documents

ing deserve close examination from the developmental perspec-
tive of a broader life course and a society-wide view, taking into
account recent global initiatives and the guiding principles set
down by major United Nations conferences and summits.
9. The International Plan of Action on Ageing, 2002 calls for
changes in attitudes, policies and practices at all levels in all sec-
tors so that the enormous potential of ageing in the twenty-ﬁrst
century may be fulﬁlled. Many older persons do age with secu-
rity and dignity, and also empower themselves to participate
within their families and communities. The aim of the Interna-
tional Plan of Action is to ensure that persons everywhere are
able to age with security and dignity and to continue to partici-
pate in their societies as citizens with full rights. While recogniz-
ing that the foundation for a healthy and enriching old age is laid
early in life, the Plan is intended to be a practical tool to assist
policy makers to focus on the key priorities associated with indi-
vidual and population ageing. The common features of the na-
ture of ageing and the challenges it presents are acknowledged
and speciﬁc recommendations are designed to be adapted to the
great diversity of circumstances in each country. The Plan recog-
nizes the many different stages of development and the transi-
tions that are taking place in various regions, as well as the inter-
dependence of all countries in a globalizing world.
10. A society for all ages, which was the theme for the 1999
International Year of Older Persons, contained four dimensions:
individual lifelong development; multigenerational relation-
ships; the interrelationship between population ageing and de-
velopment; and the situation of older persons. The International
Year helped to advance awareness, research, and policy action
worldwide, including efforts to integrate the issue of ageing in all
sectors and foster opportunities integral to all phases of life.
11. The major United Nations conferences and summits and
special sessions of the General Assembly and review follow-up
processes have set goals, objectives and commitments at all levels
intended to improve the economic and social conditions of every-
one. These provide the context in which the speciﬁc contributions
and concerns of older persons must be placed. Implementing
their provisions would enable older persons to contribute fully
and benefit equally from development. There are a number of
central themes running through the International Plan of Action
on Ageing, 2002 linked to these goals, objectives, and commit-
ments, which include:
Documents
207

(a) The full realization of all human rights and funda-
mental freedoms of all older persons;
(b) The achievement of secure ageing, which involves
reafﬁrming the goal of eradicating poverty in old age and build-
ing on the United Nations Principles for Older Persons;
(c) Empowerment of older persons to fully and effec-
tively participate in the economic, political and social lives of
their societies, including through income-generating and volun-
tary work;
(d) Provision of opportunities for individual develop-
ment, self-fulﬁllment and well-being throughout life as well as in
late life, through, for example, access to lifelong learning and par-
ticipation in the community while recognizing that older persons
are not one homogenous group;
(e) Ensuring the full enjoyment of economic, social and
cultural rights, and civil and political rights of persons and the
elimination of all forms of violence and discrimination against
older persons;
(f) Commitment to gender equality among older persons
through, inter alia, elimination of gender-based discrimination;
(g) Recognition of the crucial importance of families, in-
tergenerational interdependence, solidarity and reciprocity for
social development;
(h) Provision of health care, support, and social protec-
tion for older persons, including preventive and rehabilitative
health care;
(i) Facilitating partnership between all levels of govern-
ment, civil society, the private sector, and older persons them-
selves in translating the International Plan of Action into practical
action;
(j) Harnessing of scientiﬁc research and expertise and re-
alizing the potential of technology to focus on, inter alia, the indi-
vidual, social and health implications of ageing, in particular in
developing countries;
(k) Recognition of the situation of ageing indigenous per-
sons, their unique circumstances and the need to seek means to
give them an effective voice in decisions directly affecting them.
12. The promotion and protection of all human rights and
fundamental freedoms, including the right to development, is es-
sential for the creation of an inclusive society for all ages in which
older persons participate fully and without discrimination and
on the basis of equality. Combating discrimination based on age
208
Documents

and promoting the dignity of older persons is fundamental to en-
suring the respect that older persons deserve. Promotion and
protection of all human rights and fundamental freedoms is im-
portant in order to achieve a society for all ages. In this, the recip-
rocal relationship between and among generations must be nur-
tured, emphasized, and encouraged through a comprehensive
and effective dialogue.
13. The recommendations for action are organized according
to three priority directions: older persons and development; ad-
vancing health and well-being into old age; and ensuring en-
abling and supportive environments. The extent to which the
lives of older persons are secure is strongly influenced by
progress in these three directions. The priority directions are de-
signed to guide policy formulation and implementation towards
the speciﬁc goal of successful adjustment to an ageing world, in
which success is measured in terms of social development, the
improvement for older persons in quality of life and in the sus-
tainability of the various systems, formal and informal, that un-
derpin the quality of well-being throughout the life course.
14. Mainstreaming ageing into global agendas is essential. A
concerted effort is required to move towards a wide and equitable
approach to policy integration. The task is to link ageing to other
frameworks for social and economic development and human
rights. Whereas specific policies will vary according to country
and region, population ageing is a universal force that has the
power to shape the future as much as globalization. It is essential
to recognize the ability of older persons to contribute to society by
taking the lead not only in their own betterment but also in that of
society as a whole. Forward thinking calls us to embrace the po-
tential of the ageing population as a basis for future development.
References
General Assembly, United Nations. 1991. “United Nations Principles for
Older Persons,” Resolution 46/91, adopted December 16, 1991.
Kendall, Henry. 1992. “World Scientists’ Warning to Humanity.” Cam-
bridge, MA: Union of Concerned Scientists. Accessible at http://
www.ucsusa.org/ucs/about/page.cfm?pageID=1009
Madrid International Plan of Action on Ageing. 2002. In Report of the Second
World Assembly on Ageing, Madrid, 8–12 April, 2002. New York: United
Nations.
Documents
209

Malthus, Thomas Robert. 1993 [1798]. An Essay on the Principle of Popula-
tion. Edited by Geoffrey Gilbert. New York: Oxford University Press.
National Academy of Sciences and Royal Society of London. 1992. Joint
Statement: “Population Growth, Resource Consumption, and a Sustain-
able World.”
Population Division of the Department of Economic and Social Affairs,
United Nations Secretariat. 1995. Programme of Action Adopted at the Inter-
national Conference on Population and Development, Cairo, 5–13 September
1994.
Population Division of the Department of Economic and Social Affairs,
United Nations Secretariat. 2004. World Population Policies 2003: High-
lights. New York: United Nations.
Population Division of the Department of Economic and Social Affairs,
United Nations Secretariat. 2004. World Population in 2300: Proceedings of
the United Nations Expert Meeting on World Population in 2300. New York:
United Nations.
Population Division of the Department of Economic and Social Affairs,
United Nations Secretariat. 2005. World Population Prospects: The 2004 Re-
vision: Highlights. New York: United Nations.
U.S. Bureau of the Census. 2000. “Census Bureau Projects Doubling of
Nation’s Population by 2100.” Press release, January 13, 2000.
U.S. National Security Council. 1974. National Security Study Memoran-
dum 200: Implications of Worldwide Population Growth for U.S. Security and
Overseas Interests. Washington, DC. NSC classiﬁed document (declassi-
ﬁed 7/3/89).
210
Documents

8
Directory of Organizations
M
any organizations, both public and private, have an inter-
est in population. The purpose of some is simply to collect
and disseminate accurate information—for example, the
Population Reference Bureau and the U.S. Census Bureau. Other
organizations serve an informational function but also have an
agenda they seek to promote; this would describe an agency
such as the United Nations Population Fund, or UNFPA. And ﬁ-
nally, there are organizations, such as Population Connection,
Negative Population Growth, and the Population Research In-
stitute, whose reason for being is almost entirely to advance a
cause or an agenda. When you consider all the agencies, insti-
tutes, and organizations that have a research or policy connec-
tion to population, the number reaches well into the hundreds,
if not thousands. It would be impossible to list all such organi-
zations here—and fortunately it isn’t necessary, since most of
those chosen for inclusion have, on their websites, a “links” fea-
ture that will quickly generate a large number of related web-
sites. The usual caveat applies: websites are not eternal. For var-
ious reasons they are sometimes relocated or renamed or simply
disappear.
Carrying Capacity Network (CCN)
2000 P Street, NW, Suite 310
Washington, DC 20036
(202) 296-4548
Fax: (202) 296-4609
211

carryingcapacity@covad.net
http://www.carryingcapacity.org
Carrying Capacity Network is one of a number of advocacy orga-
nizations seeking to educate the public and inﬂuence policymak-
ers in the direction of slower population growth. It focuses
squarely on U.S. population. On its board of advisors are the bio-
diversity expert Thomas Lovejoy, the alternative energy expert L.
Hunter Lovins, the Cornell population expert David Pimentel,
and other environmental activists. Among their stated goals are
“national revitalization, immigration reduction, economic sus-
tainability, and resource conservation,” but the immigration goal
seems to outrank the others. CCN subscribes to the view, often
associated with ecologist Paul Ehrlich, that citizens of the indus-
trially advanced nations have a much more damaging impact,
per capita, on the environment than those in less industrialized
nations—hence the need to slow population growth in the United
States. Given current demographic patterns, this leads CCN to
advocate, at least in the short run, a strict moratorium on further
immigration above the 100,000 rate per year.
Publications: CCN posts an “Action Alert” to its website
every month or two; these tend to relate mainly to immigration
bills proposed or pending in Congress. CCN also sells a number
of booklets (originally “Network Bulletins”) for $3 each, with ti-
tles such as “Is Immigration an Environmental Issue?” Various
articles on population, conservation, and sustainability can be
downloaded from the website.
Center for Migration Studies (CMS)
209 Flagg Place
Staten Island, NY 10304-1199
(718) 351-8800
Fax: (718) 667-4598
ofﬁces @cmsny.org
http://www.cmsny.org
Founded in 1964 and incorporated in 1969, the Center for Migra-
tion Studies (CMS) is a nonproﬁt educational institute devoted to
the study of migration. It is one of six such centers worldwide
that comprise the Federation of Centers for Migration Studies.
Scalabrini was an Italian Catholic prelate (1839–1905) who
worked with and for migrants and became known as the “apostle
of migrants.” Several religious orders devoted to the assistance of
212
Directory of Organizations

migrants have been named after him. The main but not exclusive
focus of CMS is on immigration into the United States, and this
includes the special needs of refugees. Each year CMS helps orga-
nize a legal conference on immigrant and refugee policy held in
Washington, D.C.
Publications: CMS publishes the quarterly International Migration
Review, considered to be the leading journal in the ﬁeld; it covers
all aspects of human mobility. Also published by CMS is a bi-
monthly magazine, Migration World, which is directed to those
who are “socially and pastorally involved with immigrants and
refugees,” and a number of books on migrant history and issues.
A free biannual newsletter, CMS Newsletter, reports on recent or
upcoming activities, publications, and conferences.
Centre for Development and Population Activities (CEDPA)
1400 16th Street, NW, Suite 100
Washington, DC 20036
(202) 667-1142
Fax: (202) 332-4496
cmail@cedpa.org
http://www.cedpa.org/index.html
The Centre for Development and Population Activities (CEDPA)
is dedicated to empowering and improving the lives of women
and girls worldwide. It aims to ensure that women’s priorities are
taken fully into account in policy discussions and development
planning. To that end, it partners with hundreds of women’s orga-
nizations around the world, the largest number of which are in
Africa, though it is also well represented in Central America and
the Caribbean region. Established in 1975, CEDPA has been en-
gaged for decades in capacity-building, leadership training, and
the advocacy of gender equity. Many of its alumnae played inﬂu-
ential roles in the Cairo conference of 1994 (ICPD). It has been ac-
tive in speciﬁc programs such as AIDS prevention, girls’ educa-
tion, and raising women’s political awareness. It takes a strong
interest in women’s health, especially their reproductive health.
CEDPA headquarters are in Washington, D.C., and it operates of-
fices in seven countries, including India, Nigeria, and South
Africa.
Publications: CEDPA makes available a wide range of materials in
print form and online: training manuals, special-topics booklets,
Directory of Organizations
213

newsletters, and brief reports. The offerings are most extensive in
the ﬁrst two categories. Most publications tend to be rather nar-
rowly focused. A typical booklet might be entitled “Improving
Girls’ Lives in Egypt: A Decade of Progress.”
Committee on Population
The National Academy of Sciences
500 Fifth Street, NW, W1108
Washington, DC 20001
(202) 334-3187
Fax: (202) 334-3829
http://www7.nationalacademies.org/cpop
Little noticed by the public or media—and perhaps preferring it
that way—the Committee on Population was created in 1983 by
the National Academy of Sciences (NAS), with a mandate to ap-
ply demographic science to a range of public-policy issues. There
are presently only eleven members of the Committee, all scholars
at major universities or research institutes in the United States
and abroad. The Committee has issued several inﬂuential reports
over the years on such topics as the effects of rapid population
growth, the link (if any) between population growth and eco-
nomic development, and the demographic situation of sub-Saha-
ran Africa. In recent years, it has organized panels and work-
shops on aging, fertility, health, data collection, and population
projection. At all times, the work of the Committee is supposed to
be guided by a spirit of scientific impartiality. Funding for the
Committee’s activities comes from government agencies and sev-
eral private foundations, such as the Rockefeller and the Andrew
W. Mellon Foundations.
Publications: In the past several years, the Committee has issued
around four new reports per year. Two titles from 2003 were
Cities Transformed: Demographic Change and Its Implications in the
Developing World and Offspring: Human Fertility Behavior in Biode-
mographic Perspective. The reports may be ordered online in hard
copy or PDF format, and individual PDF chapters may also be or-
dered at a discount.
Federation for American Immigration Reform (FAIR)
1666 Connecticut Avenue, NW, Suite 400
Washington, DC 20009
214
Directory of Organizations

(202) 328-7004
Fax: (202) 387-3447
info@fairus.org
http://www.fairus.org
Given the importance of immigration to current and future levels
of U.S. population, it makes sense to become acquainted with na-
tional organizations that have an interest in the issue. FAIR is not
difﬁdent about where it stands on immigration: it wants less of it.
FAIR seeks to reduce and then eliminate illegal immigration. It
would also have the United States cut legal immigration to more
“traditional” levels—it suggests 300,000 annually. A nonprofit,
nonpartisan organization with a nationwide membership of over
70,000, FAIR tries to inﬂuence public policy in various ways, run-
ning ads during political campaigns, testifying in Congress, mak-
ing its spokespersons available for interviews in the media, doing
grassroots organizing, and even litigating in court. The organiza-
tion was founded in 1978. Its national advisory board includes
former Colorado governor Richard Lamm and John Tanton,
founder of FAIR and a former president of Zero Population
Growth.
Publications: FAIR publishes a monthly newsletter called Immi-
gration Report. The more frequently updated e-zine called the
Stein Report—FAIR’s president is Dan Stein—offers current
news stories and headlines about (mainly illegal) immigration,
with an option for readers to respond online. There are links to
many other organizations with an interest in reforming/curbing
immigration. The research materials at the website include a
page called “Immigration in Your Backyard,” which offers an
opportunity to pick any state and find out how immigration is
impacting it. Bear in mind, however, that FAIR makes no pre-
tense of “giving both sides” of the issue: it is firmly opposed to
the continuation of what it calls “mass migration” into the
United States.
International Center for Migration, Ethnicity and Citizenship
(ICMEC)
65 Fifth Avenue, Room 227
New York, NY 10003
(212) 229-5399
Fax: (212) 989-0504
Directory of Organizations
215

icmec@newschool.edu
http://www.newschool.edu/icmec
The International Center for Migration, Ethnicity and Citizenship
(ICMEC) was founded in 1993 at the New School for Social Re-
search—since renamed the New School University—in New York
City. It is devoted to scholarly research on the causes of large-
scale international migration and on the most appropriate policy
responses. ICMEC provides a forum for debate and reﬂection on
migration matters by scholars, public officials, journalists, and
members of the NGO community. Although it takes a strong in-
terest in the causes of heavy migration ﬂows, such as the breakup
of multiethnic societies and the instabilities attending the end of
the Cold War, it is equally interested in the reception given new-
comers in the host countries. The Center sponsors, and often col-
laborates with others in sponsoring, seminars, roundtable discus-
sions, conferences, and symposia on policy issues related to
migration, ethnicity, and citizenship.
Publications: The Center has issued a series of working papers
that can be ordered for a small fee; most can also be downloaded.
International Organization for Migration (IOM)
17 Route des Morillons
CH-1211 Geneva 19
Switzerland
Tel: +41-22-7179111
Fax: +41-22-7986150
info@iom.int
http://www.iom.int
The mission statement of the International Organization for Mi-
gration (IOM) declares its commitment to the principle that “hu-
mane and orderly migration benefits migrants and society.”
Closely allied to the United Nations since its founding in 1951,
this intergovernmental body assists refugees and internally dis-
placed persons all over the world. By now it has helped over 12
million people, including Kurds in northern Iraq, East Timorese
refugees, and displaced Sudanese in the Darfur region. Assis-
tance can take the form of moving threatened people from their
homeland to safer places abroad, repatriating people who had
earlier ﬂed their homelands, or simply assisting people who have
lost food and shelter where they are. Headquartered in Geneva,
216
Directory of Organizations

Switzerland, the IOM has ofﬁces and operations on every conti-
nent. It gives technical assistance to governments facing migra-
tion challenges, tries to encourage economic and social develop-
ment through migration, and upholds the dignity and welfare of
migrants—of which, by one recent estimate, there are 185 million
around the world. The IOM website offers online information on
a variety of migration issues, such as trafﬁcking in migrants, mi-
grant rights, migration-relevant reports and resolutions of the
United Nations, and reference information.
Publications: The biennial World Migration Report is the IOM’s
ﬂagship publication; it aims to provide a comprehensive picture
of global migration trends. Various other books, surveys, and
studies on migration are listed on the IOM website and in their
extensive catalog (running to ﬁfty-two pages in 2005). Titles such
as Migrant Transfers as a Development Tool: The Case of Somaliland
(2003) are probably more technical than a general reader would
want or need. But others, like The Human Rights of Migrants
(2001), would interest many students of migration. The IOM also
publishes a quarterly journal, International Migration, which tack-
les both theoretical and empirical migration issues from the per-
spectives of economists, political scientists, demographers, soci-
ologists, and others. A quarterly bulletin (essentially a newsletter)
called Migration reports on current IOM activities around the
world.
International Planned Parenthood Federation (IPPF)
Regent’s College
Inner Circle, Regent’s Park
London NW1 4NS
United Kingdom
Tel +44 (0)20 7487 7900
Fax +44 (0)20 7487 7950
E-mail info@ippf.org
The International Planned Parenthood Federation (IPPF) is an
umbrella for 149 member organizations—like Planned Parent-
hood Federation of America—that operate in a total of 183 coun-
tries. It claims to be the “largest sexual and reproductive health
agency in the world.” One of the IPPF’s founders in 1952 was the
birth-control pioneer Margaret Sanger, who served as president
of the organization until 1959. Currently, the IPPF operates
within a strategic framework based on five A’s: adolescents,
Directory of Organizations
217

AIDS, abortion, access, and advocacy. It tries to secure for young
people the right to information about sexuality and reproduction;
it works to integrate HIV/AIDS prevention and treatment ser-
vices into regular reproductive health programs; it seeks to se-
cure women’s right to choose, both through lobbying for legal
protection of that right and through provision of high-quality
abortion services; it tries to ensure access to reproductive health
information and services, especially for women who are vulnera-
ble and marginalized (for example, the young and the poor); and
it lobbies and advocates for support of reproductive freedoms
around the world.
Publications: The IPPF itself issues only a few PDF documents re-
lating to topics such as HIV/AIDS and medical aspects of repro-
ductive health care. A more complete listing of e-publications,
press releases, print publications, and other tools may be found at
the website of IPPF/WHR; naturally, these deal mainly with the
Western Hemisphere Region (WHR).
National Audubon Society
700 Broadway
New York, NY 10003
(212) 979-3000
Fax: (212) 979-3188
http://www.audubon.org/
The great bird artist, John J. Audubon (1785–1851), wrote a ﬁrst-
hand account of what it was like to have the sky darkened for
hours by vast numbers of passenger pigeons ﬂying overhead. A
few decades after his death, this bird, once the most numerous in
North America, was on the verge of extinction (the last one died
in 1914). The national organization bearing Audubon’s name was
founded in 1905 with a mission to “conserve birds, other wildlife,
and their habitats.” For the last quarter-century the Audubon So-
ciety has considered human population a conservation issue, and
it has advocated for increased family planning, among other
measures, to slow the loss of critical habitats around the globe. It
participates in the “Planet” campaign to increase U.S. public
awareness of international family planning along with partners
like Save the Children, Planned Parenthood, and Population Ac-
tion International.
218
Directory of Organizations

Publications: The Society does not issue any publications that reg-
ularly focus on the population issue, but its website offers half a
dozen online topical “fact sheets” concerning population and the
environment, as well as the visually attractive sixteen-page re-
port, Population and Habitat: Making the Connection.
National Wildlife Federation (NWF)
11100 Wildlife Center Drive
Reston, VA 20190-5362
(800) 822-9919
http://www.nwf.org
Like the National Audubon Society—and unlike the Sierra
Club—the National Wildlife Federation (NWF) has opted to keep
addressing population as an environmental issue. (None of the
three organizations currently has an ofﬁcial position on immigra-
tion levels into the United States.) Founded in 1936, the NWF has
four million members and supporters. Its annual budget, in the
range of $100 million, exceeds those of Audubon and Sierra.
While population per se is not NWF’s highest-priority issue, it
does have the program category of Population and Environment.
The NWF strongly supports international family planning. It
wants the United States to fund such activities more fully and lift
the restrictions presently placed on the funding. Making the con-
nection between poverty and the overexploitation of natural re-
sources, the NWF also pushes for more generous U.S. support of
efforts to meet the Millennium Development Goals adopted at
the United Nations in 2000. (In this drive it is joined by a conser-
vation ally, the National Audubon Society.)
Publications: NWF’s rich panoply of photogenic materials, in
pamphlets, reports, calendars, and books, indirectly advances
the message that wildlife at its best is endangered by the
growth of human numbers. In addition, the Federation issues
online fact sheets relating more directly to the population issue.
These are found under the website heading Population and En-
vironment. Also posted is a set of frequently asked questions
on the subject of population and the current issue of Crowds 
& Critters, the newsletter of the Population and Environment
program.
Directory of Organizations
219

Negative Population Growth (NPG)
2861 Duke Street., Suite 36
Alexandria, VA 22314
(703) 370-9510
Fax: (703) 370-9514
npg@npg.org
http://www.npg.org
Founded in 1972, Negative Population Growth (NPG) is a mem-
bership organization of over 25,000 that calls itself “the leading
voice in the population awareness movement.” NPG is quite ex-
plicit about its long-term goal: to see the population of the United
States decline to a level of 150 to 200 million, through voluntary
incentives for smaller families and tighter immigration policies.
By tighter immigration, NPG means 100,000 to 200,000 annu-
ally—at least a million below the current rate. NPG holds that a
smaller national population would ensure less strain on ecosys-
tems, less depletion of natural resources, and a better quality of
life. Its website features a variety of NPG publications (some
rather dated), population clocks for both the United States and
the world, polling numbers for public attitudes about population,
and links to other organizations concerned with population, im-
migration, and the environment.
Publications: NPG publishes a quarterly newsletter for its mem-
bers and maintains a weekly population news listserve. Its web-
site offers a number of special reports and position papers avail-
able for downloading.
Population Action International (PAI)
1300 Nineteenth Street, NW, Second Floor
Washington, DC 20036
(202) 557-3400
Fax: (202) 728-4177
pai@popact.org
http://www.populationaction.org
Population Action International (PAI) believes that “every person
who wants reproductive health services should have access to
them.” A relatively small, privately funded organization, PAI
seeks to build public support for policies and programs that can
slow population growth, particularly in developing countries.
220
Directory of Organizations

The policies advocated by PAI are generally in line with the “pro-
gram of action” adopted by the International Conference on Pop-
ulation and Development (Cairo, 1994), such as universal access
to family planning, improved health care for women, and more
gender equality. PAI lobbies Congress both directly and indi-
rectly to enlarge U.S. funding of international population efforts;
it also interacts with the United Nations and other international
agencies on matters related to population. It arranges seminars,
brieﬁngs, and roundtables, and it maintains an informative web-
site with links to like-minded organizations and downloadable
policy briefs on various population issues. PAI was established in
1965 as the Population Crisis Committee. It is funded entirely by
foundations (Rockefeller, Packard, Pew, Rasmussen, etc.) and in-
dividuals.
Publications: PAI publishes a variety of fact sheets, occasional pa-
pers, wall charts, and books, all listed on its website.
Population Communications International (PCI)
777 United Nations Plaza—5th Floor
44th Street at 1st Avenue
New York, NY 10017
(212) 687-3366
Fax: (212) 661-4188
info@population.org
http://www.population.org
For over twenty years, Population Communications International
(PCI) has been producing country-speciﬁc soap operas, for both
radio and television, which incorporate messages of positive
decision-making in regard to sex, reproductive health, gender
roles, and family planning. The overall purpose is to change be-
havior in ways that conform to the goals established at the Cairo
conference in 1994 (International Conference on Population and
Development). China, India, Pakistan, Brazil, and Tanzania are
among the more than twenty-five countries on four continents
where PCI has worked with local partner organizations to re-
search and produce serial dramas. Local input and research are
critical in tailoring the programs to the speciﬁc cultural values of
each country. PCI also helps evaluate, systematically, the impact
of its programs. A recent ﬁve-year study found that Tanzanians
living in the areas to which a PCI radio drama was broadcast al-
Directory of Organizations
221

tered their sexual behavior in ways that were signiﬁcantly help-
ful for HIV/AIDS prevention.
Publications: PCI’s Annual Report has a great deal of information
about the mission and recent accomplishments of the organiza-
tion, and audio clips of several PCI productions can be accessed
online.
Population Connection
1400 Sixteenth Street NW, Suite 320
Washington, DC 20036
(202) 332-2200
Toll free 1-800-POP-1956
Fax: (202) 332-2302
info@populationconnection.org
http://www.populationconnection.org
Population Connection, formerly known as Zero Population
Growth (ZPG), promotes “progressive action” to achieve a sus-
tainable balance between the planet’s resources and its popula-
tion. One of the founders of ZPG in 1968 was Paul Ehrlich, au-
thor of The Population Bomb. The organization remains, despite
its re-branding in 2002, an exemplar of the traditional neo-
Malthusian stance on world population—namely, one of intense
concern about “overpopulation.” Population Connection ﬁrmly
supports the United Nations Population Fund, international
family planning, women’s right to choose, and every kind of vol-
untary effort to curb global overpopulation. It lobbies Congress
and engages in publicity campaigns. Its Legislative Action Cen-
ter allows one to ﬁnd out how each elected federal ofﬁceholder
voted on key population-related issues and to send an e-mail to
any or all of them. Population education is a major priority of
Population Connection, with extensive lesson plans and curricu-
lar materials for schools downloadable from the website. Most
such materials relate to the K-12 grade levels, but the Campus
Outreach Program also arranges presentations and workshops
on college campuses.
Publications: Issued quarterly, the reporter (formerly The ZPG Re-
porter) covers various population issues in the news. The
monthly Campus Activist Update is addressed to an audience of
college-age activists. Both publications can be downloaded from
the website.
222
Directory of Organizations

Population Council
One Dag Hammarskjold Plaza
New York, NY 10017
(212) 339-0500
Fax: (212) 755-6052
pubinfo@popcouncil.org
http://www.popcouncil.org
For more than half a century, the Population Council has funded
and conducted research on reproductive health, fertility regula-
tion, and family planning. With a worldwide staff of over 550 and
an annual budget of roughly $70 million, it is an institution of
global influence. In developing countries, it collaborates with
governments and nongovernmental organizations to enhance the
quality of family-planning programs. It sponsors research in over
fifty developing countries, in Asia, Africa, and Latin America.
Through a program of awards, fellowships, training, and collabo-
rations, it works to increase professional expertise in the develop-
ing nations. Although the Population Council sponsors and pub-
lishes research on family structure, gender relations, and other
social-demographic issues, it is probably better known to the
public for having developed the contraceptive device “Norplant”
and several modern versions of the intrauterine device (IUD). In
recent years, it has stepped into a void left by the major U.S.
pharmaceutical companies and sponsored the introduction of the
so-called abortion pill, RU 486. (The drug became available to
American women in 2000 under the brand name Mifeprex.) The
Council is also pursuing the development of other contraceptive
techniques, such as patches and implants. External funding for
the Population Council comes from governments, NGOs, corpo-
rations, individuals, and foundations. The Council was founded
in 1952 by John D. Rockefeller III.
Publications: Population Briefs, published three times a year, is a re-
search newsletter for population specialists, distributed at no
charge, with coverage of demographic and reproductive news
and updates on the achievements of Council-sponsored pro-
grams. Studies in Family Planning is a peer-reviewed quarterly
journal with articles and commentary on family-planning pro-
grams in (mainly) Africa and Asia. Population and Development Re-
view has been a leading quarterly journal of demography since
1975. Scholarly yet readable, it explores economic, political, and
sociological aspects of population, present and past.
Directory of Organizations
223

The Population Institute (PI)
107 Second Street, NE
Washington, DC 20002
(202) 544-3300
Fax: (202) 544-0068
web@populationinstitute.org
http://www.populationinstitute.org
The Population Institute (PI), established in 1969 and headed by
the peripatetic Werner Fornos until his retirement in 2005, advo-
cates and educates on the subject of population. It seeks to raise
awareness—among students, the media, and legislators—of the
need for a more sustainable pace of global population growth. PI
strongly supports U.S. assistance to international family-plan-
ning programs. Its own funding comes from foundations, corpo-
rations, and individuals, but not from the government. As part of
its effort to heighten awareness of the population issue, the Insti-
tute sponsors a variety of programs and campaigns, including its
Educate America Campaign, World Population Awareness Week,
Global Media Awards, and Future Leaders of the World Program.
The Media Awards are given out annually to journals and jour-
nalists judged to have achieved excellence in their population re-
porting. The Institute boasts a network of 100,000 volunteers who
work to support its aims.
Publications: The Population Institute publishes POPLINE, a bi-
monthly newspaper covering recent developments in the popula-
tion ﬁeld. It is distributed, at no charge, to legislators, the media,
and activists. Educators may receive POPLINE at no cost; others
pay $25. Also issued by the Institute is a 21st Century Monograph
series ($7.25 each) that focuses on the linkages between popula-
tion and literacy, food, environment, health, and women’s em-
powerment.
Population Reference Bureau (PRB)
1875 Connecticut Avenue, NW, Suite 520
Washington, DC 20009-5728
(202) 483-1100
Toll free 1-(800)-877-9881
Fax: (202) 328-3937
popref@prb.org
http://www.prb.org
224
Directory of Organizations

Founded in 1929, the Population Reference Bureau (PRB) has a
well-earned reputation for producing clear, accurate, and timely
population information, both for the United States and the rest of
the world. By describing itself as a nonproﬁt, nonadvocacy organi-
zation (emphasis added), PRB hints at one of the ways it differs
from several other groups with the word “population” in their ti-
tles: it draws no policy conclusions from the data it presents. Nor
does it do any lobbying to advance a political or social agenda. Its
concern is only with the facts and their accurate dissemination.
That lofty ideal does not prevent the PRB from being committed
to research, education, and outreach, abroad and at home. Its pro-
fessional staff monitors, and reports on, trends in population and
a range of social issues that are linked to population, such as
crime, aging, the status of minorities, and the environment. PRB
provides technical services to governments and nongovernmen-
tal organizations. It runs seminars, training courses, and brieﬁngs
to assist various audiences in understanding population issues. It
is a resource for the print and broadcast media, and its compre-
hensive library makes it a valuable resource for scholars and re-
searchers as well. PRB takes an active interest in education, mak-
ing available a wide array of curricular materials to teachers,
especially at the middle and high school levels.
Publications: PRB publishes the highly useful World Population
Data Sheet (WPDS) in wall-poster format. For every country and
region of the world the WPDS presents the most recent data on
the birthrate, death rate, life expectancy, total fertility rate, popula-
tion projections (to the years 2025 and 2050), and much more. On a
less frequent basis, PRB also has issued several other data sheets,
on topics ranging from “women of our world” to “the world’s
youth.” The quarterly Population Bulletin covers various popula-
tion-related topics in depth; they can be either U.S.-oriented or in-
ternational in scope. Population Today is the PRB newsletter. PRB
Reports on America, published occasionally, deal with important
U.S. population issues and their impact on society.
Population Research Institute (PRI)
1190 Progress Drive, Suite 2D
P.O. Box 1559
Front Royal, VA 22630
(540) 622-5240
Directory of Organizations
225

Fax: (540) 622-2728
pri@pop.org
Web: www.pop.org
The Population Research Institute (PRI) is a conservative pro-life
organization that seeks to debunk the “myth” of overpopulation,
while “defending human life” and stopping “human rights
abuses” committed in the name of family planning. It is not to be
confused with the identically named Institute at Pennsylvania
State University, which is a purely academic entity offering grad-
uate training in demography. The PRI in Virginia was founded in
1989 by Paul Marx, a Benedictine priest. It came to prominence a
few years ago by leveling accusations that the UNFPA was com-
plicit in Chinese population-policy abuses, accusations that be-
came the ostensible basis for President Bush’s cutoff of U.S. ﬁnan-
cial support to that UN agency.
Publications: The bimonthly PRI Review offers articles that are
written in op-ed style, many by PRI president Steven Mosher and
many on the evils of abortion, Chinese population policy, and
feminism. The PRI Weekly Brieﬁng is much the same.
United Nations Population Division (UNPD)
2 United Nations Plaza, Rm. DC2-1950
New York, NY 10017
(212) 963-3179
Fax (212) 963-2147
Within the United Nations’ Department of Economic and Social
Affairs, the Population Division (UNPD) has a broad charge: to
keep tabs on population developments and trends around the
world—and keep the rest of us informed. Its functions are per-
haps best described as scientific and administrative, unlike the
UNFPA (see next entry), which operates in a more practical and
policy-implementing mode. The public knows the UNPD mainly
through its various demographic publications, like its well-publi-
cized population projections. But it also renders support services
to the General Assembly and other elements of the UN system,
supports governments around the world with timely data collec-
tion and assistance in building up their own statistical capabilities,
and keeps track of global progress toward achieving the aims of
the ICPD Program of Action (Cairo, 1994). Longtime director
Joseph Chamie retired in 2004; the new director is Hania Zlotnik.
226
Directory of Organizations

Publications: This is the place to go for timely and authoritative
accounts of global demographics. Most UNPD publications are
available online as well as in hard copy. The following is just a
sampling of what the UNPD publishes periodically: World Popu-
lation Prospects: The 2004 Revision, World Population to 2300, World
Fertility Report, World Population Policies, World Contraceptive Use,
and Population and HIV/AIDS 2005 (wall chart). UNPD also man-
ages the website for POPIN, the UN population information net-
work, which is a sort of electronic clearinghouse of demographic
information from around the world.
United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA)
220 East 42nd Street
New York, NY 10017
(212) 297-5000
Fax: (212) 370-0201
hq@unfpa.org
http://www.unfpa.org
A UN agency created in 1969, the UNFPA is the world’s largest
multilateral source of funding for family-planning programs. Its
mission is to ensure that “every pregnancy is wanted, every birth
is safe, and every young person is free of HIV/AIDS.” That is its
mandate under the Program of Action adopted in 1994 at the In-
ternational Conference on Population and Development (ICPD),
held in Cairo. The UNFPA works toward the goals of lower ma-
ternal and child mortality, universal access to primary education
for children of both sexes, and universal access to reproductive
health care, especially for women. It offers technical and ﬁnancial
assistance to developing countries as they design and implement
their own national population programs. UNFPA funding comes
from contributions of governments that are separate from their
normal UN dues. The United States was a key supporter of the
UNFPA at its inception. In recent years, domestic political consid-
erations have caused that support to waver. Congress regularly
authorizes a contribution, but since 2002 the Bush administration
has held back the funds. The Netherlands currently provides
more funding than any other nation.
Publications: From 1978 onward, the annual State of World Popula-
tion has presented in-depth reports on selected population issues,
such as urbanization, adolescent health and rights, the environ-
ment, and poverty. The 2004 report was subtitled The Cairo Con-
Directory of Organizations
227

sensus at Ten: Population, Reproductive Health and the Global Effort to
End Poverty. The Annual Report of the UNFPA is a good place to
learn more about what the Fund does and where; its thirty-six
pages can be read online.
United States Agency for International Development 
(USAID)
Ronald Reagan Building
Washington, DC 20523-1000
(202) 712-0000
Fax (202) 216-3524
pinquiries@usaid.gov
www.usaid.gov
Since its creation in 1961, USAID has been the main conduit for
American technical and ﬁnancial assistance to foreign countries.
Its mission includes helping countries recover from natural dis-
asters, helping them develop out of poverty, and facilitating
their transition to democracy. In 1967, Congress specifically
mandated that AID provide funds for family-planning efforts
abroad. Two years later, President Nixon strongly endorsed U.S.
funding of such programs, and they have had steady support in
Congress ever since. Levels of funding have varied, however.
The highest AID appropriation for family planning came in 1996,
at $542 million. In all recent years President Bush has budgeted
$425 million for this program within AID. Most observers con-
sider the United States a leader in supporting international fam-
ily planning, though less so today than in the past. AID’s overall
goal for these programs is to assist couples in having the number
of children they want, with enough spacing—ideally three to
ﬁve years—to maintain the health of both mother and children.
The Agency has recently been working to integrate its programs
in family planning, child and maternal health, and HIV/AIDS
prevention.
Publications: The USAID Office of Population and Reproductive
Health has placed a few items of interest on the AID website: 
a timeline, a list of the Agency’s achievements in family plan-
ning, and FAQs. A handy listing of the restrictions Congress has
placed on USAID-funded activities is given at http://www
.usaid.gov/our_work/global_health/pop/mcpolicy.html.
228
Directory of Organizations

United States Census Bureau
International Programs Center
Washington, DC 20233-8800
Fax: (301) 457-3034
ipc@census.gov
http://www.census.gov/ipc/www
Anyone who thinks the job of the U.S. Census Bureau is limited
to counting Americans every ten years should think again. It’s
true that the Bureau has long produced population estimates for
virtually every locality in the United States, from the states and
counties to metropolitan areas and Puerto Rican municipios. (It
also produces tremendous quantities of data on U.S. income,
poverty, health, and education.) But probably of most interest to
those studying world population is the International Programs
Center, or IPC, where a wealth of demographic information on all
the world’s countries and regions can be obtained either in print
or online. Much of this information is free; the rest is available at
modest cost either from the Bureau itself (Atlanta ofﬁce) or from
the Government Printing Office in Washington. At the heart of
the IPC’s data-gathering work is something called the Interna-
tional Data Base (IDB), a computerized data bank covering de-
mographic and socioeconomic indicators for 227 countries and
areas of the world. Online, one can tap into this statistical store-
house in creative ways, such as ordering up a customized table
on infant mortality rates, male and female, in the less developed
countries from 1985 to 2005. Information is also available on fer-
tility rates, migration, marital status, family planning, literacy,
and labor force activity for most nations, and in many cases the
data extend back to 1950. There is an option for downloading the
data to one’s own computer.
Publications: The IPC issues a multitude of technical reports and
papers, many on an occasional basis, all indexed at the website.
Their main publication, however, is the Global Population Proﬁle,
which comes out biennially. The most recent is for 2002.
Worldwatch Institute
1776 Massachusetts Avenue, NW
Washington, DC 20036-1904
(202) 452-1999
Directory of Organizations
229

Fax: (202) 296-7365
worldwatch@worldwatch.org
www.worldwatch.org
Worldwatch is one of the best-known environmentalist organiza-
tions in the world. Founded in 1974 by Lester Brown and located
in the nation’s capital, its mission is to work for a society that is
“environmentally sustainable” and “socially just.” Global popu-
lation has been a focus of interest all along, but in keeping with
the new paradigm that has emerged in the past decade, World-
watch now addresses the population issue within a broader con-
text of concerns about gender equity, health, the environment,
and sustainability. Worldwatch monitors a number of global en-
vironmental “threats,” from topsoil erosion to greenhouse gases.
Its core research staff of fourteen turns out “cutting-edge analy-
sis” of these developments on a regular basis and in so readable a
form that it routinely ﬁnds its way into mainstream media out-
lets. Worldwatch is supported ﬁnancially by such foundations as
Ford, Hewlett, MacArthur, Rockefeller, and Packard.
Publications: The institute’s flagship publication is State of the
World, published annually since 1984. Each year Worldwatch
identiﬁes and analyzes in depth an issue (in 2005, global security)
of importance for a sustainable future. Another report published
annually by Worldwatch is Vital Signs, which, since 1992, has laid
out a variety of key trends for the economy and environment
both graphically and in text. Other publications include the bi-
monthly magazine World Watch, a series of Worldwatch Papers
(over 150 titles; $7 each), and a small number of environmental
books. News “briefs” and “releases” and issue “alerts” also pour
forth continuously from the Institute.
230
Directory of Organizations

9
Selected Print and
Nonprint Resources
T
his chapter offers an extensive listing of resources on world
population issues, ranging from standard reference works to
videos and websites. In a time when Internet search engines
are loaded with billions of words and trillions of data bits, one’s
ﬁrst impulse in looking for answers to a population-related ques-
tion is to go online. That is not necessarily a bad idea. Some of
the websites listed below are extraordinarily useful. But there are
many print resources, too, that can provide quick answers to
questions and sometimes much fuller explorations of issues than
will be found at the typical website. A well-stocked university or
public library ought to have most of the works listed below. Print
resources have been arranged in two categories: monographs
and yearbooks/handbooks/data sheets. In the ﬁrst category are
books that deal with population history and policy, population
debates, migration, resource limits, trends for the future, and
personal reﬂections. In the second category are works that nor-
mally are published on an annual or biennial schedule to reﬂect
the latest population data. At this writing, all the books or book-
lets listed are in print; the ISBN numbers are for paperback edi-
tions whenever that is an option.
Monographs
Barry, John M. The Great Inﬂuenza: The Epic Story of the Dead-
liest Plague in History. New York: Penguin, 2005. 560 pages.
ISBN 0-14303-448-0.
231

It is now going on a century since the inﬂuenza pandemic of 1918
killed at least 50 million people, and today only AIDS rivals the
flu as an ongoing global infectious threat (bioterrorism aside).
The story of the 1918 pandemic has been told before, and well.
What Barry adds to earlier accounts is a closer attention to U.S.
political, institutional, and personal details that help us see the
full historical significance of what happened. The flu took a
global toll, but much of the story is appropriately told through an
American lens: the disease originated at an army camp in Kansas;
it was spread to Europe by American troops (World War I); it was
U.S. government officials who insisted that the troops be sent
overseas despite warnings of the risks of disease spread; and the
U.S. medical establishment made a heroic but unsuccessful at-
tempt to contain, and decode the mystery of, the disease. There
are more succinct accounts of the 1918 pandemic than Barry’s but
none more gripping.
Borjas, George J. Heaven’s Door: Immigration Policy and the
American Economy. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press,
1999. 288 pages. ISBN 0-691-08896-9.
This book has been much praised, and deservedly so, for the clar-
ity it brings to the issue of U.S. immigration policy. Borjas, who as
a boy in the early 1960s was a refugee from Castro’s Cuba and
who now teaches public policy at Harvard’s Kennedy School of
Government, takes a clear-eyed view of the costs and beneﬁts of
immigration to various concerned parties—native-born Ameri-
cans, immigrants themselves, and those left behind in the send-
ing countries. He insists that the facts about immigration, in
themselves, tell us nothing about the direction in which we
should go with policy. We must first answer some important
questions about whose interests we rank highest and what kinds
of changes we are willing to tolerate in the slicing of the economic
pie as a result of immigration. Borjas argues that the current wave
of immigrants (around a million a year) is massive enough that
we are justiﬁed in calling this era the “Second Great Migration”
in U.S. history. What troubles Borjas and others are the declining
education levels and skills of the recent arrivals, which intensify
competition for low-skill, low-wage jobs in the United States and
thus harm the least-skilled native workers. In its current pattern,
he argues, immigration is tending to shift income away from na-
232
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

tive workers toward business owners and consumers. The kind
of immigration reform he proposes would favor the entry of
skilled workers and lower the overall annual quota of immigra-
tion to about half a million.
Bouvier, Leon F., and Jane T. Bertrand. World Population:
Challenges for the 21st Century. Santa Ana, CA: Seven Locks
Press, 1999. 214 pages. ISBN 0-929765-66-4.
The basic plan of this book is to review demographic patterns
and shifts that occurred in the late twentieth century and then
assess their probable impact on populations in the twenty-first
century. But in execution the book turns out to be a loosely orga-
nized set of reflections and speculations on population, pre-
sented in a lively, engaging prose style, and tilted toward a U.S.
readership. The authors, professors at Old Dominion and Johns
Hopkins Universities, respectively, are alert to the long-term
consequences of low fertility in the developed nations and high
fertility in the rest of the world. The most notable effect of this
fertility differential will be mounting immigration pressure on
the developed nations. (Bouvier has written on this subject be-
fore.) For the United States, the recommended policy is twofold:
first, resist the rising immigration pressures and hold the num-
bers of immigrants to more manageable, or assimilable, levels;
and second, do what it takes to ensure that those who immigrate
are given the fullest opportunity to advance themselves socially
and economically into the mainstream of American life. Encour-
aging lower birthrates in the developing countries is the other
side of the policy. The authors strongly favor generous funding
for such efforts.
Bowden, Rob. An Overcrowded World? 21st Century Debates
series. Chicago: Raintree, 2002. 64 pages. ISBN 0739848720.
This short introduction to the topic of world population might ﬁt
very well into a middle school unit on global issues. It lays out
the optimistic view that population will continue to grow at rates
that are sustainable and the pessimistic view that population is al-
ready beyond the planet’s carrying capacity. The discussion is
lively and accessible enough to convince young readers that pop-
ulation is an important issue for their futures.
Monographs
233

Brown, Lester R., Gary Gardner, and Brian Halweil. Beyond
Malthus: Nineteen Dimensions of the Population Challenge.
New York: W. W. Norton, 1999. 167 pages. ISBN 0-393-31906-7.
This study from the Worldwatch Institute echoes some themes
from two earlier Worldwatch books, Full House and Who Will Feed
China? Even though worldwide population growth has slowed, it
certainly has not become a nonissue. In the years ahead, we can ex-
pect difﬁculties with each of the following dimensions of human
well-being: grain production, freshwater supplies, biodiversity, en-
ergy, oceanic fish catches, meat production, infectious diseases,
cropland acreage, forests, climate change, materials for construc-
tion and other uses, urbanization, protected wildlife areas, and
waste disposal, as well as the more socially deﬁned issues of jobs,
housing, education, internal and international conﬂict, and income
levels. Given the long list of topics covered here, and the relatively
short length of the book, truly in-depth analysis can hardly be ex-
pected. But important questions are raised, and for those who
want to dig deeper, there are footnotes to be followed up.
Caplow, Theodore, Louis Hicks, and Ben J. Wattenberg. The First
Measured Century: An Illustrated Guide to Trends in America,
1900–2000. Washington, DC: American Enterprise Institute Press,
2001. 308 pages. ISBN 0-84474138-8.
This book presents a host of demographic, economic, and social
trends for the United States across the twentieth century using a
format of a short essay on one page and a related graph on the
other. Of the ﬁfteen chapters, at least three are directly relevant to
the study (or teaching) of U.S. population trends: “Population,”
“Family,” and “Health.” To give a sense of the breadth of cover-
age, the “Population” chapter includes the following topics: total
population, population growth rate, life expectancy, changing
age structure, centenarians, geographic distribution, urban-rural
breakdown, national origins of immigrants, proportion of for-
eign-born and minorities in the total U.S. population, and ethnic
composition of the ten largest U.S. cities. A subject index and
footnote section will be useful to many readers. One of the au-
thors, Ben J. Wattenberg of the American Enterprise Institute, has
built a reputation as an acute observer of American and world
population trends. His 1987 book The Birth Dearth was one of the
ﬁrst efforts to outline the social and political consequences of de-
clining fertility in the West.
234
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

Castles, Stephen, and Mark J. Miller. The Age of Migration:
International Population Movements in the Modern World. 3rd
ed. New York: Guilford Press, 2003. 338 pages. ISBN 0-57230-900-8.
This book, by an Australian sociologist and an American political
scientist, offers a good all-around treatment of the international
migration process, stressing the way that migration creates (or
enlarges) ethnic minorities in the countries of destination, and
thus alters both the social and political dynamic within those
countries. Other broad tendencies of recent years include the
globalization and acceleration of migration: more and more
countries are becoming involved, at higher rates of migratory
ﬂow. Also observable, say the authors, is a kind of ﬂexibility of
reasons for migrating, so that a particular ﬂow, or “chain,” that
begins for one reason (say, for political asylum) can sustain itself
for quite different reasons (economic advancement, for example,
or family reuniﬁcation). These reasons can greatly complicate the
task of governments in formulating migration policy. There is a
chapter on the history of international migration before 1945, an-
other on migration since 1945, and an interesting chapter compar-
ing the migration experiences of Germany and Australia. What
does not get much attention here (nor in most other books in this
ﬁeld) is migration within the developing world.
Cohen, Joel. How Many People Can the Earth Support?
New York: W. W. Norton & Company, 1995. 542 pages. ISBN 
0-393-31495-2.
This study of the Earth’s carrying capacity has become a modern
classic. Cohen tackles the title question with gusto but also with
the care and precision of a man schooled in the rigors of the scien-
tiﬁc method. He demonstrates that there are many ways to specu-
late about the maximum human population of our planet and
many ways to translate those speculations into hard numbers.
Cohen has examined every approach thoroughly; his book is
packed with data, graphs, analysis, and quotations. Yet he retains
a healthy skepticism about the entire exercise, as evident in his
Law of Prediction, which states: “The more conﬁdence someone
places in an unconditional prediction of what will happen in hu-
man affairs, the less conﬁdence you should place in that predic-
tion” (p. 134). The key conclusion of the book is captured in the
title of the penultimate chapter: “Entering the Zone.” It opens
with these sobering words: “The human population of the Earth
Monographs
235

now travels in the zone where a substantial fraction of scholars
have estimated upper limits on human population size” (p. 367).
Cohen’s work is unlikely to be superseded any time soon.
Cook, Noble David. Born to Die: Disease and New World
Conquest (1492–1650). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
1998. 272 pages. ISBN 0-521-62730-3.
One of the most interesting (if saddening) ways to learn about de-
mographic processes is to study historical episodes of drastic
population decline. A particularly striking case, vividly rendered
in Born to Die, is that of European contact with the indigenous
peoples of the Western Hemisphere. Europeans arrived in waves,
beginning in 1492, and made it clear wherever they went, from
the Hudson Bay to the southernmost tip of South America, that
they intended to subdue local Amerindian populations—by force
if necessary. But all too often, force was not needed because the
infectious diseases brought in by the “conquerors” effectively did
the conquering. The Aztecs, Incas, and other indigenous peoples
could not resist what they had never been exposed to: smallpox,
typhus, measles, influenza, malaria, yellow fever, and plague.
The resulting pandemics and depopulation almost defy compre-
hension. Cook knows his subject well, having written on it sev-
eral times before.
Diamond, Jared. Collapse: How Societies Choose to Fail or
Succeed. New York: Viking, 2005. 576 pages. ISBN 0-670-03337-5.
Jared Diamond, a professor of physiology at UCLA, wrote about
the rise of civilizations in his Pulitzer Prize-winning Guns, Germs,
and Steel (1996). In what might be considered a sequel, Diamond
turns his attention in Collapse to the decline—sometimes mysteri-
ous and haunting—of certain societies in the past. An overarch-
ing theme is the human capacity to ignore environmental limits,
even when doing so puts at risk the very survival of the tribe,
colony, or nation. Rapid population growth, though never the
sole factor in a societal collapse, plays a supporting role in a num-
ber of them. Chapter 10, “Malthus in Africa: Rwanda’s Geno-
cide,” is a case in point. The conventional account of the 1994
genocide in Rwanda puts the blame for mass murder on ethnic
hatreds between Hutus and Tutsis, fanned by power-hungry po-
litical extremists. Diamond looks deeper and ﬁnds a country that,
236
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

by the early 1990s, had a population density higher in some re-
gions than Bangladesh, the world’s most densely populated agri-
cultural nation. Growing land scarcity fueled widespread prop-
erty disputes and formed the backdrop for rising levels of societal
violence. Other chapters explore the demise of the Anasazi and
Maya, the prehistoric Polynesians on Easter Island, and Viking
colonists in Greenland, among others. Diamond draws some dis-
turbing parallels between past and present societies, yet reveals
himself late in the book as a “cautious optimist.”
Eberstadt, Nicholas. Prosperous Paupers and Other Population
Problems. New Brunswick, NJ: Transaction Publishers, 2000. 272
pages. ISBN 1-56000-423-1.
Eberstadt has been writing on global depopulation since 1997. In
this book he explores the full implications of a continued trend
toward lower fertility around the world, which could spell a
rapid graying of populations, signiﬁcant shifts in the population
shares of countries and continents, changes in the workforce, po-
tential crises in the support of the elderly, and a transformation in
the traditional idea of the family. Many people in the future may
have no siblings, aunts, uncles, cousins, nieces, or nephews, but
only direct ancestors and single offspring. Eberstadt likes to take
the demographic road “less traveled by”; the eleven essays in this
volume, ten of them revised or reprinted from other places, con-
stitute an alternative take on many of the major population issues
of the day. Few of them will win approval from population ac-
tivists or the “global [population] policy apparatus,” which, in
Eberstadt’s view, is reﬂexively antinatalist.
Evans, Lloyd T. Feeding the Ten Billion: Plants and Population
Growth. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1998. 247
pages. ISBN 0-521-64685-5.
The author, a distinguished plant physiologist, wrote this book in
part to update the sort of question Malthus was posing two cen-
turies ago. How will we manage to feed the population we expect
to have by the middle of the twenty-first century? (The United
Nations now expects slightly more than nine rather than ten bil-
lion people, but the question is still there.) Getting to the answer
involves a long journey through centuries of scientiﬁc discoveries
and developments. Fortunately, Evans has a knack for making sci-
Monographs
237

ence palatable. Among his conclusions: we will need to depend on
agricultural research just as much in the future as we have in the
past, and the bulk of the increased food production of the coming
half-century will need to be achieved in Asia and Africa.
Homer-Dixon, Thomas F. Environment, Scarcity, and Violence.
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2001. 272 pages. ISBN
0-691-08979-5.
Thomas Homer-Dixon, a political scientist at the University of
Toronto, fears that one version of the Malthusian nightmare—too
many people, resulting in human dislocation, distress, and even
death—may have begun to be realized in several parts of the
world. Homer-Dixon’s version links population growth to rising
pressures on renewable resources such as forests, freshwater sup-
plies, and croplands, and ultimately, in the presence of other
kinds of social and political stress, to the outbreak of violence. So-
cieties with stable governments, educated citizens, and efﬁcient
markets have often been able to overcome resource pressures
with innovations. But when those advantages are lacking, one
sees the breakdown of civil order, whether in the form of ethnic
conﬂict, urban disorders, or insurrection. Homer-Dixon’s theoriz-
ing is never crude and never without empirical support. (His ex-
amples are drawn from Mexico, Africa, and other places.) The
threats he identiﬁes appear substantial, especially in light of the
dependence half the world’s people place on local renewable re-
sources for their well-being. The book’s extensive footnotes and
bibliography will allow readers to pursue this important topic in
several directions.
Huggins, Laura E., and Hanna Skandera. Population Puzzle:
Boom or Bust? Stanford, CA: Hoover Institution Press, 2004. 425
pages. ISBN 0-8179-4532-6.
Just about every controversial or near-controversial aspect of
world population gets some coverage in this reader. Topics in-
clude basic theory (from Malthus onward), ethics, hunger, nat-
ural resources, pollution, energy, quality of life, mortality and fer-
tility trends, migration, and demographic prediction. The
selected readings are comprehensive and well-chosen. Some are a
bit dated, and most are relatively short, but that does not keep
this from being a satisfying introduction to the range of intellec-
tual and policy challenges arising from population.
238
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

Isbister, John. The Immigration Debate: Remaking America. West
Hartford, CT: Kumarian Press, 1996. 262 pages. ISBN 1-56549-053-3.
Slightly dated, this book still offers one of the best introductions to
the subject of immigration into the United States. Isbister, an econ-
omist at the University of California, Santa Cruz, addresses the
economic, political, historical, and moral aspects of immigration in
prose that is clear enough for any general reader. One issue he fo-
cuses on is whether the labor market skills of recent immigrants
have deteriorated in comparison with earlier immigrants. This is-
sue has been hotly debated by professional economists and, as the
author makes clear, remains unsettled. An interesting ﬁnal chapter
rehearses the ethical arguments both for and against an open bor-
der policy. Overall, Isbister sees more long-term rewards than
risks—though he concedes the risks—in maintaining the current
high rate of immigration into the United States.
Jain, Anrudh K. (ed). Do Population Policies Matter? Fertility
and Politics in Egypt, India, Kenya, and Mexico. New York: The
Population Council, 1998. 203 pages. ISBN 0-87834-091-2.
This volume explores in depth the political and historical con-
texts within which population policies in four countries have
been formulated, implemented, and evaluated. For anyone who
may naively have thought that a country’s transition from high to
low fertility was a simple process, these essays will prove eye-
opening. Many stakeholders have an input into the design of
population programs, be they women’s groups, NGOs, govern-
ment bureaucracies, donor countries, religious leaders, acade-
mics and other policy elites, the media, or the medical establish-
ment. The authors of these four case studies are mainly
sociologists and economists. Anrudh Jain, of the Population
Council in New York, provides an overview chapter on “popula-
tion policies that matter” and a short concluding chapter on the
future of population policies.
Lee, James Z., and Wang Feng. One Quarter of Humanity:
Malthusian Mythology and Chinese Realities, 1700–2000.
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2001. 268 pages.
ISBN 0-674-00709-3.
From as early as the eighteenth century, Western observers have
believed that Chinese demographic behavior differed from that
Monographs
239

of Europeans. One sees this, for example, in the writings of the
economists Adam Smith and Thomas Malthus. Lee and Feng’s
book makes clear that, while Malthus and others got many de-
tails wrong, their assertion of distinctive Chinese population prac-
tices was fundamentally correct. From 1700 to the present, Chi-
nese strategies for regulating population have included high
rates of abortion and female infanticide, low male rates of mar-
riage, low fertility within marriage, and high rates of adoption.
Given China’s status as the world’s most populous nation, and
given the controversy over its one-child policy, this book should
be of interest to many readers.
Livi-Bacci, Massimo. A Concise History of World Population.
3rd ed. Malden, MA: Blackwell Publishers, 2001. 251 pages. ISBN
0-631-22335-5.
This selective survey of the theory, biology, history, and policy of
world population comes from one of Europe’s leading demogra-
phers. Livi-Bacci builds an analytical framework within which
human populations are seen as making compromises between
forces of constraint and forces of choice. Constraining factors in-
clude climate, disease, limited food and energy supplies, and en-
vironmental quality; the choices for man include ﬂexible strategies
of marriage and reproduction, defenses against disease, and mi-
gration from less to more favorable locations. This conceptual
framework comes to life in chapters that explore historical
episodes of demographic expansion and decline, as well as con-
temporary examples of population dynamics. Some of the graphs
are tricky enough to challenge the uninitiated, but the main lines
of argument are clear enough even without graphs. In its discus-
sion of the current world situation, the book lingers much longer
on India and China than Africa, which serves to remind us that
Livi-Bacci has written a concise, not a complete, account of world
population. A fourth edition is planned.
Longman, Phillip. The Empty Cradle: How Falling Birthrates
Threaten World Prosperity and What to Do about It. New York:
Basic Books, 2004. 240 pages. ISBN 0-465-05050-6.
This well-written book touches upon some important policy as-
pects of the new demographic reality we face—slowing popula-
240
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

tion growth rates. One assumes it was the publisher who in-
sisted on the silly subtitle with which this volume is burdened.
Longman does offer plenty of information about the population
slowdown, but his emphasis is not so much on “world prosper-
ity” as it is on the threats to U.S. prosperity. (One chapter is de-
voted to demographic trends in China, Russia, and Europe.)
Longman is attentive to the rising cost of childrearing in the
United States, as well as the huge ﬁscal challenge Americans will
face in coming decades with growing numbers of elderly who
will be living years longer than in the past. He makes the novel
suggestion that Social Security taxes be reduced or eliminated
for couples who bear children in sufficient numbers. His ratio-
nale is that people who have children already bear the major cost
of raising to adulthood the next generation of Social Security tax-
payers, and they should not have to pay twice. He also has rec-
ommendations on how to keep the senior population healthier
and therefore less costly to the health care system. Longman, a
senior fellow at the New America Foundation, writes widely on
demographic issues.
Malthus, Thomas R. An Essay on the Principle of Population
[1798]. Edited by Geoffrey Gilbert. New York: Oxford University
Press, 1999. 172 pages. ISBN 0-19-283747-8.
This is where most population controversies got their start.
Malthus laid out the basic questions in their starkest terms: How
quickly can populations grow? How fast can food supplies be in-
creased? And what forces will constrain population within the
available stock of resources? The picture Malthus painted in 1798
was fairly grim (famine, pestilence, war) but not without hints of
a humane way out of the dilemma. He understood that hu-
mankind’s capacity for altering behavior in light of probable fu-
ture consequences makes us different from other animals. He also
understood the importance of government policies, for good or
ill, in inﬂuencing people’s reproductive choices. This essay is re-
quired reading for anyone who wants to see how the terms of the
ongoing population debate were set two centuries ago. There are
other paperback editions on the market, but this one features an
up-to-date editorial introduction, a list of suggested readings, the
original text as it appeared in 1798, a set of explanatory notes,
and a topical index.
Monographs
241

McKibben, Bill. Maybe One: A Case for Smaller Families. New
York: Plume, 1999. 254 pages. ISBN 0-452-28092-3.
A few years ago McKibben wrote a rueful book called The End of
Nature, in which he examined the irreversible impact human be-
ings are having on the natural world. There is no longer any cor-
ner of the planet so remote as to be able to escape the effects of
human activity. Nothing is truly “natural” (untainted by human-
ity) any more, including the climate. Maybe One can be seen as a
companion volume, or even a logical sequel, to the earlier book.
What, after all, could make more sense to anyone deeply commit-
ted to preserving the wondrous diversity of creation than a delib-
erate restraint on childbearing? Essentially, this is a book about
how and why an intelligent, thoughtful couple (the McKibbens)
chose to have only one child. It explores the varied reasons for
that personal decision as well as the social and economic conse-
quences to be anticipated—not all of them positive—if many
people made the same decision. Although McKibben is careful
not to insist that the one-child idea is right for everyone, he will
leave most readers convinced that the choice he and his wife
made was an honorable one and that, with the environment in its
present condition, there is a great deal to be said for it.
O Grada, Cormac. Black ‘47 and Beyond: The Great Irish Famine
in History, Economy, and Memory. Princeton, NJ: Princeton
University Press, 2000. 320 pages. ISBN 0-691-07015-6.
One cannot claim a good understanding of the dynamics of
world population, past and present, without giving some atten-
tion to the millions of lives that have, as Malthus put it, been
“mowed down by the scythe of famine.” History knows no
famine more famous, or traumatic to the nation involved, than
the Great Irish Famine of the 1840s, brought on by the failure of
the all-important potato crop. The human cost to Ireland was
one-eighth of its population dead and a huge further loss through
emigration. Much has been written about all this, including an
earlier study by O Grada, but this book offers a fresh look at
every aspect of the famine. The author compares the severity of
the Irish famine to some of the notable famines of the twentieth
century, assesses the predictability (or unpredictability) of this
famine, examines its agonizingly lengthy course, asks how ade-
quate or inadequate was the English response, and finds A. K.
242
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

Sen’s theory of famines—that they are the result of inadequate
entitlements—only partially useful in explaining the Irish cata-
strophe.
Peterson, Peter G. Gray Dawn: How the Coming Age Wave Will
Transform America—and the World. New York: Three Rivers
Press, 2000. 320 pages. ISBN 0812990692.
Almost everywhere in the world, populations on average are
growing older—markedly so in Europe and Japan. Peter Peter-
son’s book takes a hard look at the difﬁculties this “graying” of
the age structure will pose and some possible ways to mitigate
them. The main problem is that workers are choosing to leave the
labor force earlier than they used to, are living longer than they
used to, and are saving less than they need to. How, then, will
they be able to afford a long, comfortable retirement? Solutions
such as reduced pension beneﬁts to the elderly, higher ages for
receiving state pensions (like Social Security), or higher taxes on
the working generation will be, to say the least, unpopular:
Maybe unacceptable. Peterson offers a number of proposals for
dealing with the problem, for example, encouraging more saving
by workers and later retirement ages. The author is a former
chairman of Lehman Brothers.
Population. Opposing Viewpoints series. San Diego, CA:
Greenhaven Press, 2005. 186 pages. ISBN 0-7377-2952-X.
The Opposing Viewpoints series has long been a mainstay of col-
lege classrooms where discussion and debate are fostered. Stu-
dents are presented with short essays on both sides of controver-
sial issues so that they can exercise their own critical thinking and
decide for themselves which side has the stronger argument. Two
of the main issues explored in the newly released “Population”
volume are the rapid aging of people in the developed parts of
the world and the environmental costs of population growth.
Rostow, Walt W. The Great Population Spike and After:
Reflections on the 21st Century. New York: Oxford University
Press, 1998. 228 pages. ISBN 0-19-511691-7.
This book is not mainly about population, but it illustrates how
the assumptions we make about population can be fundamental
Monographs
243

to how we envision our economic future. Its author, the late Walt
Rostow, was a student of economic growth for decades. Here he
asks whether the demographic trends we see around us in the
world today, particularly the slowdown toward zero and even
negative population growth in the industrialized nations, are
moving us toward economic stagnation or whether economic
growth is destined to continue. His answers are mostly opti-
mistic. He sees no reason why revolutionary technological ad-
vances should not continue to occur, as they have been, with
some regularity, since the eighteenth century. The population-
focused reader can easily skim through Rostow’s concluding
speculations on the subject of U.S. international responsibilities in
the complicated world we are entering.
Sen, Amartya K. Development as Freedom. New York: Knopf/
Anchor, 2000. 384 pages. ISBN 0-385-72027-0.
Everything the Nobel Prize-winning economist Amartya Sen
writes on the subject of population and poverty is worth reading.
This book is not primarily about population, but two chapters
deal explicitly and lucidly with it. Chapter 7, Famines and Other
Crises, restates what Sen has been arguing for many years (see es-
pecially his 1981 book, Poverty and Famines), that famines are not
a simple matter of excess population in relation to food produc-
tion. The Malthusian perspective is simplistic, for it ignores the
fact that “the ability to acquire food has to be earned” (p. 162, em-
phasis Sen’s). Thus, it is a lack of earnings or other monetary enti-
tlements that put people at risk of hunger or starvation, and this
becomes the key not only to explaining but to preventing famine.
Chapter 9, Population, Food and Freedom, ﬁnds the global food-
production picture fairly encouraging and argues strongly
against any form of coercion in family-planning programs. Coer-
cion can be less effective than its advocates believe, ethical issues
aside. Sen is no fan of China’s one-child policy, but he strongly
admires what has been accomplished in the southern Indian state
of Kerala, in terms of lowered fertility, higher literacy, and the
empowerment of women.
Sen, Gita, Adrienne Germain, and Lincoln C. Chen (eds.).
Population Policies Reconsidered: Health, Empowerment, and
Rights. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1994. 280
pages. ISBN 0-674-69003-6.
244
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

Population policy as it was once conceived is dead. Notions of
population control, with explicit goals, targets, or quotas, have
been abandoned in most countries. At the international level, as
seen at the Cairo International Conference on Population and De-
velopment in 1994, and at the academic and intellectual level, the
new paradigm stresses women’s health and empowerment. Less
is heard about demographic issues, more about upholding hu-
man rights. Women’s perspectives are being voiced, almost for
the ﬁrst time, in discussions about population. The new approach
gets a vigorous airing in this volume of seventeen essays, written
and co-written by thirty scholars, activists, and practitioners from
various ﬁelds. All are committed to rethinking the subject of pop-
ulation. This affordable paperback puts readers on the “cutting
edge” of that effort. The prose—academically dense in places—is
punctuated with boxes, figures, and tables. One of the editors,
Gita Sen, has earned a reputation as a leading international
women’s rights activist; she co-founded and remains active in
Development Alternatives with Women for a New Era (DAWN),
a network of advocates for women’s causes in the developing
world.
Simon, Julian. The Ultimate Resource 2. Princeton, NJ: Princeton
University Press, 1998. 778 pages. ISBN 0-691-00381-5.
When Julian Simon published the earlier edition of this book (as
The Ultimate Resource) in 1981, it was met with considerable skep-
ticism by environmental activists and most academic demogra-
phers. Economists were more favorably impressed, and the busi-
ness media, for example, The Wall Street Journal and Fortune
magazine, unanimously so. That, essentially, is where things
stand two and a half decades later. Simon’s optimistic views
about the long-term impact of population on the economy and
environment—most notably, his view that natural resources are
not becoming scarcer over time—got an extensive hearing during
the 1980s and 1990s. They are not as easily dismissed today as
they once were. The “ultimate resource” in the Simon worldview
is human ingenuity, something that increases with human num-
bers. Population growth can pose short-term scarcity problems,
but over time new solutions are found, and ultimately people live
better than before. Simon delights in confounding and refuting
his “Malthusian” opponents with humor, statistics, and a crisp
prose style. The book, despite its length, is not a scholarly tome.
Monographs
245

Rather, it is a collection of thematically linked essays, many of
them keyed to provocative questions like “Are Humans Causing
Species Holocaust?” and “Do Humans Breed Like Flies?”
Teitelbaum, Michael S., and Jay Winter. A Question of Numbers:
High Migration, Low Fertility, and the Politics of National
Identity. New York: Hill and Wang, 1998. 290 pages. ISBN 
0-8090-7781-7.
This book examines how the combination of declining fertility
and rising immigration—trends that became entrenched during
the period 1965–1995—now affect not only the demography but
the very sense of national identity of the industrialized nations in
Europe and North America. The result in one country after an-
other has been, at best, heated debate and political skirmishing,
at worst, violence directed against immigrant minorities. The
book presents case studies of Germany, France, Britain, Yu-
goslavia, the former Soviet Union, Romania, Canada, and the
United States. It also takes up the issues of refuge- and asylum-
seeking migration and Islamic fundamentalism as factors affect-
ing Western attitudes toward immigrants from Muslim nations.
One cannot read this book without concluding that “population
politics” is going to be with us for a long time to come.
Tobias, Michael. World War III: Population and the Biosphere at
the End of the Millennium. New York: Continuum Publishing
Company, 1998. 296 pages. ISBN 0-8264-1085-5.
Michael Tobias has traveled the world, taking in the sights and
smells of overpopulation, overconsumption, and environmental
devastation, and this book is the result. There are chapters on
China, India, Indonesia, and Africa, in each case detailing the en-
vironmental disruption and degradation occurring in part be-
cause of expanding human numbers. The so-called developed
nations do not escape his scorn. In a chapter titled The Price of
Development, Japan, the United States, the Netherlands, and
Italy are among the nations found to have paid a terrible environ-
mental price for their material progress. Tobias is prone to slip
into rhetorical overdrive, as when he bemoans the “mindless
vandalism wreaked by humans on the scale of a planetary can-
cer” (p. 203). But he also has a keen eye for the telling detail, a
genuine passion for nature in all of its splendid—and tenuous—
246
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

diversity, and a proselytizer’s determination to open readers’
eyes to the problem and the solution, both of which are us.
Wattenberg, Ben J. Fewer: How the New Demography of
Depopulation Will Shape Our Future. Chicago: Ivan R. Dee, 2005.
256 pages. ISBN 1-56663-673-6.
In 1987, Ben Wattenberg warned, in The Birth Dearth, of an im-
pending slowdown and even shrinkage of population among the
Western nations, something he feared would produce a loss of
Western inﬂuence on the global scene. Fewer is best viewed, per-
haps, as an update of the earlier book. The data are fresh, the
charts redrawn, the core message much the same. Wattenberg, a
senior fellow at the American Enterprise Institute in Washington,
D.C., combines an abiding interest in population trends with an
unapologetically neoconservative outlook on economic and
geopolitical matters. His style can be digressive and almost glib,
but like most smart, opinionated people, he holds your interest.
(For many years Wattenberg has hosted “Think Tank,” a PBS talk
show in Washington, D.C.) A point that is likely to stick in the
reader’s mind is that the United Nations recently lowered its ex-
pectation of how low the fertility rate is headed in most countries
by mid-century from 2.1 to 1.85, that is, from replacement to sub-
replacement level! Wattenberg rightly considers this “big news”
(p. 16). Still, it is difﬁcult to share the depopulation concerns of
authors like Longman, Peterson, and Wattenberg when nearly
everyone agrees that the world is on course to add at least two
and maybe three billion people by 2050.
Weeks, John R. Population: An Introduction to Concepts and
Issues. 9th ed. Belmont, CA: Wadsworth Publishing Company,
2004. 675 pages. ISBN 0-534-62769-2.
This clear and comprehensive treatment of demography (the
study of population) sets the standard for college textbooks on
the subject. Weeks, a demographer at San Diego State University,
has a knack for expressing complex ideas in relatively straightfor-
ward (sometimes funny and folksy) ways. The graphs, tables,
and maps are well-chosen and clearly explained, and the data are
as timely as circumstances will allow. There are chapters on the
basic demographic processes—mortality, fertility, migration—as
well as on population structure and characteristics; population,
Monographs
247

development, and the environment; population policy; and de-
mographics, which is the term for practical applications of popu-
lation data in business, social, and political planning. Throughout
the text, Canada and Mexico are brought into the discussion as
nations to which the U.S. population experience can be com-
pared. Readers of the present volume are especially directed to
Chapter 2, Global Population Trends. At the ends of chapters are
Suggested Readings and Websites of Interest.
Handbooks, Yearbooks,
and Data Sheets
Haupt, Arthur, and Thomas T. Kane. The Population Reference
Bureau’s Population Handbook, 5th ed. Washington, DC:
Population Reference Bureau, 2004. 68 pages. ISBN 0-917136-12-8.
This useful little handbook features short chapters on all the stan-
dard demographic concepts and measures: age and sex composi-
tion, fertility, mortality, morbidity, nuptiality, migration, race and
ethnicity, households and families, urbanization, and population
change. Examples are given for all the main concepts, and they
are drawn from every part of the world. The contrasts can be
most instructive; for example, 55.3 percent of births in Sweden
were outside marriage in 1999, while in Greece that proportion
was only 4.0 percent (p. 20). Chapter 12, Population Change, is a
marvelous crash course in demography, all packed into seven
pages! A fairly complete glossary of technical terms is provided
in the appendix, and there is a listing of equivalent English, Span-
ish, and French demographic terms. The handbook is download-
able from the PRB website at no cost.
Population Reference Bureau. The 2005 World Population Data
Sheet. Washington, DC: Population Reference Bureau, 2005. ISSN
0085-8315.
Published annually in a wall-chart format, the World Population
Data Sheet is an extraordinary resource for anyone interested in
world population issues. For every country in the world, it gives
the essential demographic statistics: population, birth- and death
rates, rate of natural increase, infant mortality rate, total fertility
248
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

rate, percentage “young” and “old,” life expectancy, percentage
of adults with HIV/AIDS, contraceptive use, Gross National In-
come (GNI) per capita, and more. Data are also given in aggre-
gated form for the world, the more developed countries, the less
developed countries, and the various regions, for example,
Northern Africa, Eastern Africa, Middle Africa, and Southern
Africa. There is no handier source of world population informa-
tion than this data sheet.
United Nations Population Division. World Population Policies
2003. New York: United Nations. 450 pages. ISBN 9211513936.
Every two years, the United Nations issues a volume detailing
the population policies of the nearly 200 nations of the world. Its
purpose is to make clear what governments are doing, and what
their attitudes are, on the whole range of population-related vari-
ables, such as fertility, mortality, aging, migration, and spatial
distribution of people. For those interested in the policy aspects of
population, this volume is indispensable. Earlier volumes in the
series were titled National Population Policies and, before 1998,
Global Review and Inventory of Population Policies.
United Nations Population Division. World Population Prospects:
The 2004 Revision. New York: United Nations, 2005. Vol. I:
Comprehensive Tables, Vol. II: Sex and Age Distribution of the
World Population, and Vol. III: Analytical Report (all forth-
coming).
Since 1951 the United Nations’ Population Division has issued
world population projections every few years. (The intervals
have been as long as six years, as short as two.) As might be ex-
pected, these estimates are the most widely referred to of any
such attempts to forecast the world’s demographic future. Low-,
medium-, and high-fertility paths to the population of 2050 are
presented, so people may decide for themselves which forecast
seems most plausible. The media and the public generally con-
ﬁne their attention to the “medium” estimate; some specialists,
however, believe that recent declines in fertility around the world
have been so unexpectedly large that more attention should be
given to the United Nations’ low-fertility estimate. Volume I of-
fers detailed demographic projections for each country, region,
and the whole world, to the year 2050. Volume II gives age and
sex distributions for countries and regions back to 1950 and, on
Handbooks, Yearbooks, and Data Sheets
249

an estimated basis, forward to 2050 (on low-, medium-, and high-
fertility assumptions). Volume III reports some of the technical
demographic reasoning that lies behind the estimates and projec-
tions of the ﬁrst two volumes. The highlights of the 2004 revision
will be found in Chapter 7.
United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA). State of World
Population 2005: The Promise of Equality: Gender Equity,
Reproductive Health and the Millennium Development Goals.
New York: United Nations, 2005. 120 pages. ISBN 0897147502.
Each year the UNFPA issues a report highlighting what it consid-
ers the major population challenges the world faces. In 2004, the
theme was “The Cairo Consensus at Ten: Population, Reproduc-
tive Health and the Global Effort to End Poverty.” In 2003 it was
“Making 1 Billion Count: Investing in Adolescents’ Health and
Rights.” In its 2005 report, the UNFPA sought to reconnect the
ideas of reproductive freedom and health to the Millennium De-
velopment Goals (MDGs) that the United Nations adopted in
2000. The fundamental priorities and commitments of the
UNFPA are those of the international community as enunciated
at the Cairo conference (ICPD) in 1994. They are not necessarily
those of the U.S. government, which, since 2001, has often ap-
peared out of step with the rest of the world in these matters. The
amount of new information in these reports from one year to the
next is not large, but graphs, tables, and footnote references do
get updated.
U.S. Bureau of the Census. Global Population Profile: 2002.
Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office, 2004. 226
pages. ISBN 1-59610-035-4.
The International Programs Center (IPC) of the U.S. Census Bu-
reau prepares its own estimates and projections of world popula-
tion, country by country, that do not necessarily coincide with
those prepared by the United Nations. The differences are nor-
mally not large and need not be explained in detail here. The
heart of the Global Population Proﬁle consists of tables of popula-
tion data by region and country. There are tables of total popula-
tion given by decade back to 1950 and forward to 2050. Birth,
death, and natural increase rates are also given for every country
in 2002, and there is an age-group breakdown by country, for ex-
ample, number aged 0–4, 5–9, 10–14. (At older ages, the age
250
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

ranges widen, for example, 20–44, 45–64.) A special chapter ad-
dresses the AIDS pandemic in the twenty-ﬁrst century; another
looks at contraceptive prevalence in developing countries. This
publication seems designed to be as much an educational tool as
a data source book. It includes (brief) discussions of the history of
world population, the main forces determining future population
growth, trends in life expectancy, the demographic effects of mi-
gration, and much more.
U.S. Bureau of the Census. Statistical Abstract of the United
States 2004–2005: The National Data Book. Washington, DC:
U.S. Government Printing Ofﬁce, 2004–2005. 1006 pages. ISBN 0-
16-072331-0.
Issued annually by the Census Bureau since 1878 and now of-
fered in both print and CD-ROM formats, the Statistical Abstract
provides a wealth of demographic information for the United
States. Sections 1 (Population) and 2 (Vital Statistics) contain
ninety pages of detailed statistics, covering everything from the
most basic—total U.S. population by year—to the most speciﬁc, if
not arcane, such as Death Rates from Malignant Neoplasms by
Race, Sex, and Age: 1950 to 2000. Vital statistics are presented in
great detail: births, deaths, marriage, divorce, all categorized by
the appropriate qualiﬁers, such as race, age, sex, and cause. The
1,000-plus ﬁne-print pages of this volume fully justify the subti-
tle, “The National Data Book.”
Nonprint Resources
Population Websites
The Internet has become a kind of electronic almanac, offering in-
formation (and sometimes misinformation) on every topic imag-
inable. The subject of population is, for the most part, well served
by the Internet. Numerous reliable and up-to-date Internet sites
allow one to explore population issues in depth. Some are ori-
ented to the environmental aspects of population, some to the
family-planning aspects; some deal with population policy, and
some are simply places to obtain demographic data. A number of
websites offer several of these features at one location. Because so
Nonprint Resources
251

many sites provide links to other population-related websites,
the following is a selective list.
Those sites that are data-oriented generally provide not only
global population data but more detailed statistics by country,
and often for the past and the projected future as well as the pre-
sent. Some sites offer their data in multiple formats: download-
able files, wall charts, booklets, and CD-ROMs. Hardly anyone
but a professional demographer requires data on a CD-ROM, so
that particular resource is not covered here.
Alan Guttmacher Institute
http://www.agi-usa.org
This is the premier site for information on reproductive health,
including contraception, pregnancy and birth, sexually transmit-
ted diseases, and the law and public policy relating to reproduc-
tion. The Institute is often the source of news stories in the main-
stream media.
Carrying Capacity Network
http://www.carryingcapacity.org
This site invites one to think of overpopulation as a U.S. national
issue. Its policy orientation is toward the limitation of further im-
migration into the United States.
Center for Immigration Studies
http://www.cis.org
Immigration is a key part of the population picture for a number
of countries; for the United States it has become critical to present
and future population trends. This website takes a decidedly un-
enthusiastic view of immigration’s impact on the United States.
The site offers many studies of individual immigration issues
both online or in print.
Family Planning Association of India
http://fpaindia.org
This website provides an example of the vital family-planning
work being done around the world by nongovernmental organi-
zations. More examples can be reached through links at the Inter-
national Planned Parenthood Federation (IPPF) website.
252
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

The Hunger Site
http://www.thehungersite.com
The Hunger Site allows visitors to click on a button and make a
free donation of staple food every day to hungry people over-
seas. The site is commercially sponsored (and cluttered with
ads, which of course pay for the free food donations). It does
not attempt to make an analytical connection between hunger
and population, but it could provoke interesting discussions
about possible reasons for hunger. There is a link to teacher re-
sources.
International Planned Parenthood Association
http://www.ippf.org
Comparable to the Alan Guttmacher Institute in its concerns but
with more of an international and program orientation, the IPPF
is another good source of information on reproductive health.
There are links to all the member organizations that compose the
IPPF.
International Programs Center of U.S. Bureau of the Census
http://www.census.gov/ipc/www
This is perhaps the single best place to get reliable information
about world population. The IPC and its predecessor agencies
have been collecting and processing international demographic
data for over ﬁfty years. The site has a world population clock, an
international database (IDB) with current and historical data on
national populations, a feature that permits one to view and print
population pyramids for individual countries, and projections of
future population trends by Census Bureau experts.
Migration News
http://migration.ucdavis.edu/mn
Started in 1993 by Philip Martin at the University of California,
Davis, this site summarizes worldwide migration news, month
by month, and offers an archive of past issues. It also provides
links to other immigration sites. The coverage of Canadian and
rural migration issues is noteworthy.
Nonprint Resources
253

Negative Population Growth
http://www.npg.org
Negative Population Growth (NPG) has been worrying about
overpopulation for several decades. Its website currently empha-
sizes U.S. problems, such as urban sprawl and deteriorating qual-
ity of life, caused (allegedly) by too rapid population growth and
exacerbated by immigration. NPG offers a population news list-
serve and an Internet Forum Series of occasional papers at its site.
Population Communications International
http://www.population.org
Population Communications International (PCI) is an organiza-
tion that uses the media, especially TV and radio soap operas, to
deliver messages about safe and responsible sexual behavior. Its
website provides interesting, up-to-date information about this
new approach, including a multimedia section that lists several
PCI-produced programs, both video and audio, with sample
clips available for easy downloading.
Population Connection
http://www.populationconnection.org
Population Connection, the renamed old Zero Population
Growth (ZPG), is dedicated to the study—and containment—of
world population growth. It has resources for teachers, advo-
cates, campus activists, and journalists. Teachers will ﬁnd the ma-
terials quite helpful since they include classroom games, role-
playing simulations, and other learning materials (some
bilingual), as well as a quarterly newsletter for teachers. The Take
Action section highlights federal legislation of interest to those
concerned about population issues.
The Population Council
http://www.popcouncil.org
The Population Council is the world’s foremost organization de-
voted to reproductive health research. Its website provides an
overview of the worldwide research that it sponsors and con-
ducts in all areas related human reproduction. Beyond the usual
topics of contraception, abortion, sexually transmitted diseases,
and gender and family dynamics, the Population Council also
sponsors research on more social-scientiﬁc aspects of demogra-
254
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

phy, for example, aging, experimental health programs, popula-
tion and the environment, and urban health and poverty. Many
papers and reports are available for downloading at the website.
Population Institute
http://www.populationinstitute.org
At this website one may order booklets on population subjects
(for a fee) and see the most recent issue of the Institute’s bi-
monthly newsletter Popline.
Population Reference Bureau
http://www.prb.org
This site may offer the most complete and objective coverage of
population issues on the Web. It is a splendid resource for stu-
dents and teachers alike (the Educators link supplies a number of
curricular suggestions for teachers). The site offers online ver-
sions of the World Population Data Sheet and the Population Bulletin
series, as well as press releases, a demographic glossary, and var-
ious reports focused mainly on U.S. population topics. There is a
Graphics Bank of population-related charts and images suitable
for PowerPoint presentations.
Sierra Club
http://www.sierraclub.org
Although bitterly divided by internal battles over U.S. immigra-
tion policy a few years ago, the Sierra Club has not distanced it-
self from the subject of population. Its website offers, under “Our
Priority Campaigns,” reports, fact sheets, and brochures on pop-
ulation, as well as a listserve and suggestions on how to get in-
volved as an activist on population issues.
United Nations Population Fund
http://www.unfpa.org
This website gives access to online versions of the publications
of the UN Population Fund, of which there are many, including
the annual State of World Population. The strong emphasis at the
UNFPA is on the empowerment of women. That is in line with
the deliberations and Program of Action ﬁnalized at the 1994 In-
ternational Conference on Population and Development in
Cairo.
Nonprint Resources
255

United Nations Population Information Network (POPIN)
http://www.un.org/popin/
Suppose you would like to ﬁnd the latest United Nations data on
world marriage patterns, or world fertility patterns, or projec-
tions of world population to the year 2300. POPIN is the web en-
try point for UN population information, and it would be the
handiest starting point for locating such data. It also offers Cyber-
SchoolBus, with curricular materials (K–12) and suggestions on a
wide range of global issues including world hunger.
World Health Organization
http://www.who.int/whosis
The World Health Organization (WHO) Statistical Information
System site is the place to go for authoritative information on the
extent and impact of diseases worldwide (including HIV/AIDS),
mortality rates, and everything health-related. It has enormous
depth of coverage on health issues and, as a bonus, has links to
world population estimates and projections, including those of
the United Nations.
Worldwatch Institute
http://www.worldwatch.org
The Worldwatch website provides access to many of the organiza-
tion’s studies, Worldwatch Papers, and World Watch magazine arti-
cles. The well-known annual State of the World report often features
a chapter on, or related to, population trends. Two online features
are worth noting: “China Watch” has news updates and analysis of
Chinese environmental issues, and “Worldwatch University” of-
fers a variety of educational resources to college students and their
faculty. Worldwatch is one of the most respected sources of infor-
mation on population, resources, and the environment.
Videos
Many videotapes/DVDs on the topic of population are now
available. These can be ﬁne classroom supplements or jumping-
off points for group discussions and other meetings centered on
global issues. The arrival of the six-billionth inhabitant of the
planet late in 1999 stimulated interest in the production of this
kind of video, as did the convening of the International Confer-
256
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

ence on Population and Development in Cairo in 1994. Several of
the videos reviewed below take note of the bicentennial of the
publication of Malthus’s Essay on Population (1798), although only
one is devoted exclusively to Malthus and his ideas. The oldest
video reviewed is “Dodging Doomsday” (1992), which has be-
come a minor classic by now. Other videos date from 1994 or later
and are available from the source indicated.
Baby Crash: Causes and Consequences of Declining Birthrates
Date: 2002
Length: 46 minutes
Price: $149.95 (purchase, VHS or DVD-R)
Source: Films for the Humanities and Sciences
This video brings into sharp focus the many issues surrounding
the trend in industrialized countries toward unprecedented, low
fertility rates. A number of demographic experts are featured in
short comments about this phenomenon, but the real emphasis is
on young couples, married and unmarried, in Canada, Sweden,
Italy, and Japan. We get to know them by name and learn how
they think about the issue of childbearing and childrearing.
Young women in Japan, for example, are seen to enjoy “freedom
to the absolute limit” with good incomes, the comforts of their
parents’ homes, and no family responsibilities of their own. Ma-
jor attention is placed on a Swedish couple and an Italian couple:
the Swedes have two children and no easy time raising them, but
at least their government offers signiﬁcant ﬁnancial aid to them,
while the Italians, whose government offers almost nothing to
parents, are childless. A key message seems to be that women will
determine what happens next. They are walking a “ﬁne line be-
tween career ambitions and diapers,” and if denied the assistance
needed to combine the two, they will probably choose the for-
mer! Suitable for all ages from middle school up.
Crisis Control: Stemming the Spread of HIV/AIDS
Date: 2004
Length: 26 minutes
Price: $195 (purchase, VHS or DVD), $45 (rental)
Source: Bullfrog Films
This video is no. 13 in an impressive series of short ﬁlms on the
subject of how the UN Millennium Development Goals are being
met—and in some cases not met—by the global community. Pro-
Nonprint Resources
257

duced by the Television Trust for the Environment (TVE) with
funding from several European governments, international agen-
cies, and private foundations, the programs were all originally
shown on BBC World in their Life series 4. (TVE is based in Lon-
don.) This one concerns a huge imponderable in the world popu-
lation equation: AIDS. Projections of national populations all
over the world are sensitive to assumptions made about the
spread or control of this epidemic disease. The video focuses on
two countries, Ukraine and Zambia. Ukraine has a fairly low
AIDS mortality rate currently but a high rate of HIV infection,
making it a crisis waiting to happen unless preventive actions are
taken. The crisis has long since arrived in Zambia, where AIDS
has been a deadly presence for twenty years. It has created or-
phans by the hundreds of thousands; it has killed thousands of
teachers, nurses, and engineers. Until quite recently, there was lit-
tle hope of being able to afford the anti-retroviral drugs that can
hold AIDS at bay. As with “Reel to Real,” the twenty-second
video in this series (see below), there is an excellent web page
linked to “Crisis Control.” Suitable for grades 7–12 and older.
Decade of Decision
Date: 1994
Length: 14 minutes
Price: $95 (purchase), $20 (rental)
Source: Bullfrog Films
Narrated by newscaster Walter Cronkite and produced by Popu-
lation Action International, this succinct video makes the case
that the “brakes” must be put on population “momentum” dur-
ing the decade of the 1990s [now past]. It poses the population is-
sue in standard Ehrlichian terms: in the poorer parts of the world,
human numbers are increasing too rapidly; in the richer parts,
per capita consumption is rising too rapidly. The main policy em-
phasis is placed on the provision of family-planning services to
those who presently lack access to them. A study guide is avail-
able. Suitable for ages 12 to adult.
Dodging Doomsday: Life Beyond Malthus
Date: 1992
Length: 51 minutes
Price: $129.95 (purchase, VHS or DVD-R)
Source: Films for the Humanities and Sciences
258
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

This British (BBC) program features Paul Ehrlich as the persua-
sive spokesman for the “gloomsters” and Julian Simon as the
cheerful and equally convincing spokesman for the “cornucopi-
ans.” Other population experts weigh in on various aspects of
population. A genuine radical, Maria Elena Hurtado, argues that
“overpopulation” is a smokescreen for the problems created by
unequal land distribution in many countries. Two key questions
are central to this balanced and engaging video: is population
growing too big for the Earth to sustain, and is population to
blame for various social and environmental problems we cur-
rently face? It would be hard to ﬁnd another video that raises as
many population-linked issues—economic, environmental, and
political—as “Dodging Doomsday.”
Food or Famine?
Date: 1997
Length: 49 minutes each (two videos)
Price for both: $295 (purchase), $95 (rental)
Source: Filmakers Library
This two-part video tackles the issue of sustainable agriculture
within a framework of concern to feed a growing global popula-
tion. Experts seen on camera include Lester Brown of the World-
watch Institute, David Pimentel of Cornell University, Ismail Ser-
ageldin, chairman of International Agricultural Research, and
Miguel Altieri, University of California. Part 1 sets out the basic
dilemma: modern “industrial” agriculture feeds billions of
people but relies on pesticides, herbicides, and a process of plant
selection and breeding that reduces botanical diversity. The cost
of monoculture is seen not only in a loss of the natural diversity
of plants and soil organisms but also in worrisome rates of soil
erosion. Yet there are positive developments to be seen in places
such as Chile, California, and Canada, where some groups of
farmers are following more organic and sustainable methods of
agriculture with excellent results. Part 2 raises the larger issues of
global population trends, loss of cropland to urban sprawl,
degradation of existing farmlands, limits to water supply, and the
shift toward higher-protein foods, all of which give reason to be
concerned about the future. As in Part 1, the strength of the video
lies in the clear focus on important questions—and in the telling
ﬁlm footage, such as the Indian farmer who has just dynamited
the bottom of his well, already 30 meters deep, to try to reach the
Nonprint Resources
259

receding water table. While these videos raise serious Malthu-
sian-type questions about humanity’s capacity to feed our rising
numbers without doing irreparable damage to the ecology, nu-
merous examples of positive, environmentally friendly ap-
proaches are offered. Narrated by David Suzuki, this pair of
videos would be best appreciated by those of college age or older.
Future in the Cradle
Date: 1996
Length: 22 minutes
Price: $59.95 (purchase, VHS), discounts for some teachers
Source: The Video Project
This aptly titled video examines the world population issue
through the lens of the International Conference on Population
and Development (ICPD) held in 1994 in the “cradle of civiliza-
tion,” Cairo. Featured speakers include Nafis Sadik, secretary-
general of the conference, Timothy Wirth, U.S. representative to
the conference, Paul Ehrlich, the well-known Stanford environ-
mentalist, and David Brower of the Sierra Club. An interesting
aspect of the video is its attention to the domestic U.S. political
dimension of international family-planning and the significant
shift of U.S. policy in 1993 (re-shifted by Bush in 2001). The tilt of
the program is clearly toward afﬁrming the goals set at the Cairo
conference, that is, making reproductive health services more
widely available around the world, and expanding educational
and other opportunities for girls and women. Suitable for ages 14
and up.
The Grandchild Gap: The Effects of Low BirthRates
Date: 1997
Length: 56 minutes
Price: $89.95 (purchase, VHS or DVD-R)
Source: Films for the Humanities and Sciences
“The Grandchild Gap” was one of the ﬁrst population videos to
depart from the standard focus of the genre on worrisome rates
of increase in world population. This video explores instead the
emerging problem of low birthrates in Europe, a few East Asian
nations, and the United States. Ben Wattenberg, senior scholar at
the American Enterprise Institute, narrates. Also frequently on
camera are Samuel Preston, a demographer at the University of
Pennsylvania, and Andrew Cherlin, a sociologist at Johns Hop-
260
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

kins University. But equally compelling on screen are the ordi-
nary young Italians and Americans who explain why they are
choosing to delay marriage and keep their number of children
low. More poignant are the older people who express regret at
not having any grandchildren yet, or even much prospect of
grandchildren. All the relevant background statistics are pre-
sented along the way, including fertility rates and “ideal” family
size ﬁgures. (People in low-fertility countries seem uniformly to
want more children than they end up having.) One long-term eco-
nomic effect of the “birth dearth” will be the serious problem of
supporting a disproportionately large retired generation from the
work efforts of—and taxes paid by—a smaller generation. Wat-
tenberg asks whether government can do anything to solve the
problem and gets little encouragement from his experts. Much
larger tax credits for children might increase the number of chil-
dren people choose to have, or, as one expert suggests, might
simply change the timing of births. Immigration receives less at-
tention than it deserves as a possible mitigating force, at least in
the United States. This video should stimulate plenty of discus-
sion in audiences of high school age and older.
The Human Tide
Date: 1995
Length: 37 minutes
Price: $295 (purchase), $65 (rental)
Source: Filmakers Library
This video, narrated by David Suzuki for the Canadian television
series “The Nature of Things,” conveys a sense of urgency, of
time running out, on the issue of world population. That is its
strength, and it has a formidable cast of guest experts to drive
home the crisis message: Paul Ehrlich, Nafis Sadik of the UN
Population Fund, Lester Brown of Worldwatch Institute, Sharon
Camp of the Population Crisis Committee, and Stephen Lewis,
former Canadian ambassador to the United Nations. The video’s
weakness lies in its attempt to cover every single aspect of world
population; in thirty-seven minutes, that cannot be done. The is-
sue that receives the fullest treatment is birth control—the ade-
quate or inadequate access to it in various parts of the world, the
cost, the different types and how research is expanding the range
of choices, abortion, the politics of family planning (mainly a do-
mestic U.S. concern but with worldwide implications), and the
Nonprint Resources
261

need many see for the developed countries to be generous in
funding the efforts developing countries are making to rein in
their population growth. A striking fact is that in Ethiopia the
cost of a year’s supply of condoms (the best contraceptive choice
where AIDS is a serious threat) is about one-third of annual in-
come. On questions like the role of economic development in
lowering fertility, the threatened loss of species and biodiversity,
and the emerging problem of environmental refugees, this video
has less to say than many others. Suitable for high school, college,
and adult audiences.
Jam Packed
Date: 1997
Length: 29 minutes
Price: $79.95 (VHS)
Source: The Video Project
There is an MTV-like energy to this video, which is clearly aimed
at the teenage U.S. audience. It cuts back and forth among scenes
of urban sprawl, African wildlife (threatened by human overpop-
ulation), experts stressing the urgency of slowing population
growth, and candid statements by an unmarried young mother
about the life-burdening effects of her accidental pregnancy.
Much more emphasis is placed on the beneﬁts of deferring sexual
activity until marriage and on the threat to the environment from
a wasteful American lifestyle than on the family-planning needs
of less developed nations. Population Communications Interna-
tional, which produced the video, prides itself on careful pre-pro-
duction research. It undoubtedly has found that the most effec-
tive way to engage American teens in global population issues is
through the “up-close-and-personal” approach taken here. Suit-
able for ages 12 and up.
The Legacy of Malthus
Date: 1994
Length: 52 minutes
Price: $150 (purchase, VHS); $75 (rental); discount for activists
Source: Bullfrog Films
The view that poverty is not a result of overpopulation but of a
maldistribution of resources, within and among nations, informs
this unusual video. The director, Deepa Dhanraj, quotes and then
subverts the message of Malthus as well as those present-day
262
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

agencies that seem to accept the Malthusian explanation of
poverty (e.g., the Population Institute and the UNFPA). The des-
titution of nineteenth-century Scottish crofters is contrasted,
through alternating segments, with that of poor villagers in India.
In both cases, it is made clear that unequal access to the land is
the real problem. There is no narration, leaving the viewer to
draw his or her own conclusions. Marred by poor audio quality
in the copy reviewed. Suitable for ages 17 to adult.
Mothers of Malappuram
Date: 1996
Length: 10 minutes
Price: $95 (purchase, VHS), $25 (rent)
Source: Bullfrog Films
One of a six-video series called “Not the Numbers Game,” this
brief ﬁlm deals with the shift in the Indian government’s popula-
tion policy from a top-down emphasis on numbers and targets to
a greater emphasis on women’s empowerment. (The new ap-
proach conforms to the recommendations made at the ICPD con-
ference in Cairo in 1994.) Raising female literacy has been a key to
lowering fertility in Kerala, the southern Indian state featured
here. Elsewhere in India, women are assuming positions of
power in village panchayat assemblies, becoming “engines of so-
cial change.” Improved health services are another part of the pic-
ture, since lower infant mortality rates lead to lower birthrates. An
optimistic video with a clear message. Suitable for ages 15 to
adult.
Paul Ehrlich and the Population Bomb
Date: 1996
Length: 60 minutes
Price: $149.95 (purchase, VHS or DVD-R)
Source: Films for the Humanities and Sciences
No one who has worried about world population at any time
during the past thirty-five years could be unfamiliar with the
name Paul Ehrlich. This video gives Ehrlich a chance to speak at
length on the issue that has made him a sort of environmental
celebrity. It takes him from a youthful science enthusiast—his
mother recalls his early interest in butterflies—through college
and a research stint working with Eskimos around Hudson Bay,
to his lifelong partnership with wife Anne, and his long career of
Nonprint Resources
263

teaching and ecological research at Stanford University. Consid-
erable attention is paid to the sensational Population Bomb of 1968,
which earned Ehrlich a visit, and then dozens of revisits, to the
Johnny Carson Show. (In one scene, he is shown brieﬂy debating
Ben Wattenberg on that program.) There is film footage of
poverty and starvation in Africa and India, and of the contrasting
affluence of American consumers. A fair hearing is given to
Ehrlich’s arch-foe, economist Julian Simon, who has argued at
great length that life is getting better and better for most of the
Earth’s inhabitants, that it will continue to do so, and that a rising
population is part of the reason why. Ehrlich’s impatience with
Simon, economists in general, and “creationists” is unmistakable
in his salty comebacks to all of them. Suitable for high school and
older audiences.
The Pill
Date: 2003
Length: 55 minutes
Price: $24.98 (VHS purchase)
Source: PBS
This engaging video, in the PBS “American Experience” series,
tells the story of how a scientiﬁc breakthrough, the contraceptive
pill, brought profound change to women’s lives in the United
States. Before FDA approval of the pill in 1960, married couples
had few reliable—and no convenient—means of limiting their fer-
tility. Margaret Sanger, who fearlessly championed women’s re-
productive rights for decades, believed this had to change. The
video makes clear her central role in promoting the search for a
simple pill to regulate fertility. Photographs and film footage
bring to life not only Sanger, but also her friend Katharine Mc-
Cormick, the aging heiress who underwrote the research and de-
velopment costs of the pill, Gregory Pincus, the man in charge of
the research, and Dr. John Rock, the respected gynecologist who
supervised the medical trials of the pill. How the oral contracep-
tive altered sexual, social, career, and political perspectives is re-
counted by several articulate women whose lives it affected.
Viewers might want to contemplate the interesting simultaneity
of the pill’s arrival with the close of the high-fertility period
known as the baby boom. Coincidence? Suitable for high-school
ages and upward.
264
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

Population Six Billion
Date: 1999
Length: 56 minutes
Price: $129.95 (purchase, VHS or DVD-R)
Source: Films for the Humanities and Sciences
This video opens with a recitation of bad demographic news. Ris-
ing global population poses serious problems in the areas of the
environment, housing, migration, and water supplies; per capita
food production is now falling; there is an expanding pool of un-
employed workers around the world. Over 100 countries face a
doubled or tripled population by the year 2050. KoﬁAnnan, sec-
retary-general of the United Nations, warns of an overpopulated
world. But then the focus shifts to three highly speciﬁc case stud-
ies of countries that have been facing rapid population growth
and have been doing something to curb it. The three are Vietnam,
Uganda, and Mexico. In all three, scenes of misery and destitu-
tion are intercut with scenes of sex education classes or private
counseling sessions. In Vietnam, one learns that abortion is so
common—costing less than $2—that it is relied upon as a form of
birth control. (Vietnam does not offer sex education in its
schools.) In Uganda, the issue of female genital mutilation is ad-
dressed in a forceful way. In Mexico, the empowerment of
women is treated as a high priority in connection with family
planning. The tone is low-key throughout, but some material is
adult enough that the video seems inappropriate for audiences
below college level.
Reel to Real: Holding Our Ground
Date: 2004
Length: 23 minutes
Price: $195 (purchase, VHS or DVD), $45 (rental)
Source: Bullfrog Films
This video, no. 22 in the Life 4 series (see “Crisis Control” above),
focuses on the issue of reproductive health and rights—central
concerns at the International Conference on Population and De-
velopment (ICPD) held in Cairo in 1994. It looks at four coun-
tries—the Philippines, Latvia, Japan, and India—and how well
they have met the lofty goals established at the ICPD. In the
Philippines, the government has failed to deliver the kinds of re-
productive health services to women that were envisioned in
Nonprint Resources
265

1994. In part this is due to blocking actions by the Roman
Catholic Church. In Latvia, youth education on sexuality and re-
production is so inadequate that one-ﬁfth of all women aged 15
to 25 have had abortions. The ICPD commitment to adolescent
education and services is not fully met there. Japan has a per-
ilously low fertility rate, in part (it is believed) because it fails to
offer enough child care services, but progress is being made in
the private and public sectors. In India the strong preference for
sons is driving an epidemic of female-fetus abortions; so far, laws
have not had much effect in limiting the problem. Thoraya
Obaid, executive director of the UNFPA, is on camera several
times, making her points clearly and forcefully. Suitable for
grades 7–12, college, and adult.
Setting the Grass Roots on Fire: Norman Borlaug and Africa’s
Green Revolution
Date: 2000
Length: 56 minutes
Price: $295 (video), $75 (rental)
Source: Filmakers Library
Population may not be in the title of this video, but it is never far
from the center of concern, since Norman Borlaug’s motivation
throughout a long career has been to avert hunger and famine
through agricultural research. His initial plant-breeding suc-
cesses came in Mexico, as recounted in the video, but the real
proof of a historic food-production breakthrough came on the In-
dian subcontinent during the 1960s and 1970s. (Borlaug won the
Nobel Peace Prize in 1970.) At a late stage of his career—indeed
he had already retired, twice—Borlaug was asked to apply his
Green Revolution methods to Africa, a continent facing immense
and almost hopeless odds against being able to feed its growing
numbers. Partly at the urging of former President Jimmy Carter,
Borlaug accepted the challenge. The contrast seen here between
starving, cadaverous Ethiopians and happy, well-nourished chil-
dren at a later date, after the Sasakawa-Global 2000 (SG 2000)
program has been fully implemented, is moving—and convinc-
ing. The only skeptical moment permitted to intrude into this
ﬁrmly upbeat version of Borlaug’s life story is a mild confronta-
tion between the scientist and a critic who questions the environ-
mental impact of chemical fertilizers. (The response: fertilizers
266
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

can pollute waterways when they are overused, but in Africa that
is very unlikely, given the low doses applied. And in any case, is
pollution a worse problem than starvation?) Suitable for ages 14
and up.
Telling Stories, Saving Lives
Date: 2005
Length: 20 minutes
Price: no charge if $25 is donated to PCI
Source: Population Communications International (PCI)
This is an outreach and recruitment tool of Population Communi-
cations International. Beyond its self-promoting message, how-
ever, the program offers an interesting inside look at the plan-
ning, production, and theoretical underpinnings, as well as the
positive impact, of the soap operas for which PCI has become fa-
mous. PCI stresses that its stories are locally researched, written,
produced, and acted. Through both radio and television, these
programs are reaching a wide audience. Seeing itself as an agent
of change, PCI has developed partnerships with the World
Health Organization, the United Nations Population Fund, the
International Planned Parenthood Federation, and the National
Wildlife Federation, among others. Suitable for middle-school
ages to adult.
Was Malthus Right? Population and Resources in the 
21st Century
Date: 1998
Length: 27 minutes
Price: $129.95 (purchase, VHS or DVD-R), $75 (rent)
Source: Films for the Humanities and Sciences
This edition of the PBS program “Think Tank” raises a variety of
questions about the relevance of Thomas Malthus’s Essay on Pop-
ulation in a world of 6 billion rather than the 1 billion of 1798. The
roundtable discussion, hosted by Ben Wattenberg, of the Ameri-
can Enterprise Institute, a Washington, D.C., think tank, includes
Paul Demeny, a distinguished scholar at the Population Council
in New York; Max Singer, a co-founder of the Hudson Institute;
and Walter Reid, of the World Resources Council in Washington.
The exchange of ideas ranges across various topics, from the ex-
act nature of Malthus’s population theory to the debated links
Nonprint Resources
267

among population growth, resource depletion, and environmen-
tal degradation. Unlike most videos on population, this one con-
sists of nothing but unrehearsed talk around a table. The intellec-
tual level, especially by television standards, is high. Suitable for
college audiences and adults.
World in the Balance
Date: 2004
Length: 120 minutes
Price: $19.95 (purchase)
Source: Shop WGBH
This two-part program that aired on PBS stations in April 2004
gives a selective introduction to global population issues, particu-
larly (1) the divergent population trends in the developed and de-
veloping regions and (2) the question of how China will handle its
environmental challenges in coming years. The ﬁrst segment cov-
ers the divergence issue by focusing on Japan, India, and sub-Sa-
haran Africa. Japan is in trouble with a birthrate that, in spite of
cash baby bonuses offered by the government, remains alarm-
ingly low. The other two countries are, in every sense, worlds
apart from Japan. Wrenching personal stories illustrate the power-
lessness and dire health risks most Indian and Kenyan women
face when it comes to sex and childbearing. The consequences:
high birthrates, high infant death rates, and high maternal death
rates. The second program segment deals exclusively with China
and the vast environmental implications of its billion-plus popu-
lation and rapid rise to economic affluence. Little emphasis is
placed on the one-child policy; if anything, it appears to be a new
norm to which the Chinese, in cities anyway, have accommodated
themselves. As one expects from productions of Boston’s WGBH
station, this program is intelligently written, thought-provoking,
and consistently engaging. Suitable for middle schools and older.
World Population
Date: 2000
Length: 7 minutes
Price: $65
Source: The Video Project
The concept of this video is simple and stark: portray the history
of world population with dots lighting up on a world map. Each
268
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

dot represents a million people. At the starting date of A.D. 1 there
are very few dots, clustered mainly in India and China. As the
digital clock ticks away, the dots slowly multiply. The growth of
population is almost imperceptible at ﬁrst, but by the end it is vi-
sually dramatic, especially accompanied by the sound of a beat-
ing heart. Important epochs of world history, for example, India’s
Golden Age, the Mayan Empire, and the Crusades, are noted
with icons in a lower corner of the frame. (A ten-page “activity
guide” provides further details on these historical eras, as well as
discussion questions.) At the end, when population trends have
been extrapolated to the year 2030, a simple message is offered:
the quality of our environment in the future will be determined
by the decisions we make about both population and consump-
tion. Suitable for ages 12 to adult.
World War III: The Population Explosion and Our Planet
Date: 1994
Length: 50 minutes
Price: $89 (purchase)
Source: The Video Project
Written, directed, and produced by Michael Tobias and based
on a book of the same title, “World War III” is one of the most
compelling videos on the issue of global population growth and
its repercussions. It opens with some basic facts about the cur-
rent rate of population increase and where the numbers are
headed, then offers a selective country-by-country examination
of the impact, especially on poverty and the natural environ-
ment, of current trends. Kenya, India, China, and the United
States are the four countries featured. The interviews are skill-
fully conducted and consistently engaging. The film footage al-
ternates between breathtaking and wrenching. (The most suit-
able audience would probably be college-level or adult.)
Perhaps the greatest strength of the video is its avoidance of
hackneyed ideas. It raises unusually interesting questions, such
as: Will economic prosperity in China lead to reduced fertility
or just the opposite? Why did the once-falling fertility rate in
Kenya stop falling? And why does the government of that coun-
try, which officially supports family planning, not devote more
resources to it? The answers are not simple—because the ques-
tions are so probing.
Nonprint Resources
269

Contact Information for 
Video Distributors and Vendors
Bullfrog Films
P.O. Box 149
Oley, PA 19547
(800) 543-3764
E-mail: info@bullfrogﬁlms.com
Website: www.bullfrogﬁlms.com
Filmakers Library
124 East 140th Street
New York, NY 10016
(212) 808-4980
Fax: 212-808-4983
E-mail: info@ﬁlmakers.com
Website: www.ﬁlmakers.com
Films for the Humanities and Sciences
P.O. Box 2053
Princeton, NJ 08543-2053
(800) 257-5126
Fax: 609-671-0266
E-mail: custserv@ﬁlmsmediagroup.com
Website: www.ﬁlms.com
PBS Home Video
P.O. Box 279
Melbourne, FL 32902-0279
(800) 531-4727
Fax: 800-890-9043
Website: www.shoppbs.org
Population Communications International
777 United Nations Plaza—5th ﬂoor
44th Street at 1st Avenue
New York, NY 10017
(212) 687-3366
Fax: 212-661-4188
E-mail: info@population.org
Website: www.population.org
270
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

ShopWGBH.org
P.O. Box 2284
South Burlington, VT 05407
(888) 255-9231
Fax: 802-864-9846
E-mail: wgbh@ordering.com
Website: http://shop.wgbh.org
The Video Project
P.O. Box 411376
San Francisco, CA 94141-1376
(800) 475-2638
Fax: 415-241-2511
E-mail: video@videoproject.com
Website: http://www.videoproject.net
Contact Information for Video Distributors and Vendors
271


Glossary
age-specific rate
The rate of any type of demographic event (births,
deaths, etc.) calculated for a particular age group; for example, the teen
fertility rate is the rate of births to women aged 15–19.
Agricultural Revolution
The shift, ﬁrst seen in the Middle East about
10,000 years ago, from a nomadic lifestyle to a more stable, settled way
of life based on the cultivation of food crops, leading eventually to
higher rates of population growth.
antinatalist policy
An effort or program to curb population growth by
discouraging births.
baby boom
The extra-large generation of people born after World War
II; in the United States within the baby boom years are generally consid-
ered to be 1946–1964.
balancing equation
A simple equation showing the change in popula-
tion for a given year to be equal to the number of births and immigrants
minus the number of deaths and emigrants; the population change can
be either positive or negative.
birth control
Actions taken by a couple to reduce or eliminate the risk
of conception from sexual intercourse.
birthrate
The number of births in a given year per 1,000 population
(sometimes called the crude birthrate).
Cairo consensus
The acceptance by most parties interested in the pop-
ulation issue of the principle that the best way to lower population
growth rates is through efforts to (1) equalize educational and other op-
portunities for girls and women as compared with men, and (2) make
available safe, inexpensive family-planning services that allow for
choice about family size. The consensus was reached at the United Na-
tions population conference held at Cairo in 1994.
273

carrying capacity
The maximum population that could be sustained
indeﬁnitely, at a constant standard of living, in a given area.
census An ofﬁcial count of the population of a speciﬁed area (usually a
nation), often including details on age, sex, income, and marital status.
childbearing years
The age span during which women may con-
ceive and bear children; arbitrarily assumed, in the United States, to be
15 to 44.
cohort
A group within the population who share a common character-
istic, usually year of birth; for example, the oldest baby boom cohort is
the one born in 1946.
contraceptive prevalence
The proportion of women of childbearing
age (or, sometimes, of couples) who are making use of contraception to
space or limit births.
cornucopians
A term that refers to those who view population, even
rapidly growing population, as a positive thing (opposite of neo-
Malthusian).
death rate
The number of deaths in a given year per 1,000 population
(sometimes called the crude death rate).
demographic transition
An influential notion that countries begin
with high birth- and death rates, then make a transition, first in their
death rates, then in their birthrates, to lower levels of both rates. Until
birthrates decline and the transition is completed, population may grow
very rapidly.
demography
The scientific study of population; often said to have
started with Malthus.
dependency ratio
The ratio of people considered economically unpro-
ductive (under 15 and over 64) to those considered economically pro-
ductive (ages 15 to 64); a rule-of-thumb concept with obvious arbitrary
elements.
depopulation
Loss of population, typically from an excess of deaths
over births; a prospect now faced (and feared) in a growing number of
countries, especially in Europe and East Asia.
doubling time
The number of years it would take a population, grow-
ing at its current rate, to become twice as large. For example, it takes a
population growing at 3 percent annually about twenty-four years to
double. The analogous concept on the downside is “halving time,” the
number of years it would take for a country’s population to be cut in
half if it were experiencing a constant rate of depopulation.
274
Glossary

emigration
An outflow of people from their native country, seeking
permanent residence in a new country; one of the sources, along with
death, of population decrease.
family planning
Deliberate efforts by couples to change (usually re-
duce) the number of births they will have or the spacing of those births.
famine
A situation of food deprivation leading to widespread hunger
and starvation, with causes ranging from crop failure to political insta-
bility and military conﬂict.
fecundity
The physiological capacity of women (or couples, or men)
to produce children.
fertility
Actual childbearing performance, as opposed to theoretical
capability of bearing children; one of the basic demographic processes.
general fertility rate
The total number of births in a given year per
1,000 women of childbearing age.
Green Revolution
The development of high-yielding strains of wheat,
rice, and other grains, beginning in the 1960s, which led to enormous in-
creases in world food output.
HIV/AIDS
A deadly viral disease, spread mainly by sexual contact,
occurring globally but with heaviest impact in sub-Saharan Africa.
There life expectancies are falling sharply in the worst-affected countries
due to rising AIDS-related death rates.
ICPD
The acronym for International Conference on Population and
Development, the 1994 Cairo meeting, sponsored by the United Nations
and attended by nearly 200 government delegations. The ICPD reaf-
firmed and clarified the international community’s commitments re-
garding population and socioeconomic development.
immigration
The entry of foreign persons into a country with the aim
of establishing permanent residence; one of the sources, along with
births, of population increase.
infant mortality rate
The number of infants under 1 year old dying
per 1,000 live births in a given year; a key indicator of socioeconomic
well-being.
IPAT
An equation made famous by Paul Ehrlich that sees population
(P) as one of the variables having a harmful impact (I) on the environ-
ment, the others being average level of afﬂuence (A) or consumption,
and technology (T); the actual equation is I = PAT.
life expectancy
The average number of years a population can expect
to live beyond a given age (that age usually, but not necessarily, being
zero or birth).
Glossary
275

life span
The maximum age that humans can reach under optimal
conditions.
life table
A tabular display of the probability of dying at any given
age; from such a table, life expectancies can be computed.
Malthusian
Relating to the demographic or economic ideas of
Thomas Malthus (1766–1834); generally taken to mean pessimistic about
population trends; sometimes qualiﬁed by “neo-.”
marriage rate
The number of marriages occurring in a given year per
1,000 people in a country.
maternal mortality rate The number of deaths among women either
from pregnancy or childbirth complications per 100,000 live births in the
year.
Mexico City policy The executive order issued by the Reagan adminis-
tration in 1984 forbidding any U.S. aid to foreign nongovernmental
agencies that performed, counseled on, or advocated for abortions,
even in countries where abortion is legal. The policy was continued by
George H.W. Bush, rescinded by Bill Clinton, and reinstated by George
W. Bush.
migration
The movement of people across designated boundaries in
search of permanent, new places of residence; one of the basic demo-
graphic processes.
mobility
Demographically speaking, the movement of people within
or across borders.
morbidity
Illness or disease in a population; a contributor to mortality.
mortality
Deaths in a population; a key demographic process, along
with births and migration.
neo-Malthusian
A policy or attitude favoring slower population
growth through the use of various methods of birth control. (Ironically,
Malthus himself opposed contraception on moral grounds.)
net migration rate
The difference between migration into and out of a
country, expressed per 1,000 population. Currently, the United States
has a net migration rate of about 2, meaning that it gains two persons
per thousand, annually, when migration in both directions is taken into
account.
nuptiality rate
The rate at which people get married; other things be-
ing equal, a higher nuptiality rate will mean faster population growth,
and vice versa.
276
Glossary

out-of-wedlock birth rate
The rate at which births are occurring to un-
married women, usually expressed as live births per 1,000 women of
childbearing age.
population bomb
The idea, popularized by Paul Ehrlich, that the
world’s population is growing at an explosive pace, with possibly cata-
strophic consequences.
population implosion
A term that has been used to describe the ef-
fects of declining fertility rates worldwide; a few, mainly European, na-
tions are already seeing their populations begin to “implode,” and many
more will soon join them.
population momentum
The upward (or downward) pressure on pop-
ulation resulting from a large (small) number of young people soon to
enter their reproductive years; upward momentum can exist even if the
TFR is below 2.1, and downward momentum can exist even if the TFR is
above 2.1.
population policy
The set of explicit or implicit measures by which a
government attempts to achieve certain population objectives (usually
in terms of size or growth rate).
population projection
An estimation of the future size of a population
based on assumptions about fertility, mortality, and migration; demog-
raphers issue such projections periodically, but there are no guarantees
they will prove correct.
population pyramid
A graph of the age and sex characteristics of a
country’s population, its shape giving clues to the future growth, stabil-
ity, or decline of that population. A pyramidal shape, for example, indi-
cates that there are few people in the upper age brackets and many in
the lower (younger) brackets, suggesting that future population growth
will be rapid.
prevalence rate
The number of people having a disease per 1,000 of
population at risk; for example, the prevalence of AIDS in some African
countries now exceeds 150 or 15 percent of the population.
pronatalist policy
An effort or program to increase population by en-
couraging a high birthrate.
rate of natural increase
The rate at which a population increases
solely due to the excess of births over deaths (thus ignoring migration);
computed by subtracting the crude death rate from the crude birthrate.
replacement level fertility
The situation that exists when women are
bearing just enough children to sustain the current population over the
long run; in countries like the United States, this means a TFR of about 2.1.
Glossary
277

278
Glossary
sex ratio
The number of males per 100 females in the population.
total fertility rate (TFR)
An estimate of fertility based on the current
age-specific birth rates of all women in a population; complicated to
compute, it is basically the average number of children per woman.
United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA)
The main outreach arm of
the United Nations in support of family-planning programs around the
world; its initials derive from its original name (United Nations Fund
for Population Activities).
vital statistics
Data relating to births, deaths, and sometimes mar-
riage, divorce, and abortion.
zero population growth
A situation in which the births, deaths, and
migration movements in and out of a country combine to keep its popu-
lation constant from one year to the next.

Index
279
A 
Abernethy, Virginia, 59
Abortion
in Japan, 85
national policies, 49
pro-life and pro-choice
positions, 71–72
Roe v. Wade, 89
sex selection, 25
U.S. international population
policy, 27, 68–70, 71–72, 92,
119, 128
Abortion pill (mifepristone), 93,
97, 223
Adolescent fertility, 201
Afghanistan, 140
Africa
AIDS and, 16, 148
demographic indicators, 12–13
genocidal conﬂict, 95, 96,
236–237
Green Revolution, 107, 266–
267
See also speciﬁc nations
Age-speciﬁc fertility rate (ASFR),
5, 273
Age structure of population,
46–49, 205–206
aging vulnerability index, 117
book resource, 243
crude death rate and, 8–9
demographic window, 190
economic implications, 48
gender differences, 205, 206
health care issues, 65–67
International Year of Older
Persons, 207
Madrid International Plan of
Action, 204–209
national security concerns,
74–75
population pyramids, 155,
157–158
resource allocation issues, 49
statistical data and tables,
148–153
UN projections, 183–184, 190,
206
UN’s Principles for Older
Persons, 202–204
UN’s survey of national
policies, 199–200
U.S. demographic trends, 60–61
U.S. retirement issues, 61–64
video resource, 259
World Assembly on Aging, 91,
99
Agricultural Revolution, 9, 79, 273
Agriculture, 9–10
Chinese, 115–116
feeding future populations,
237–238
Green Revolution, 89, 106–107,
130, 266–267, 275
historical world population
growth and, 9, 10
improving yield, 85, 86, 88, 107,
130
livestock disease, 121–122
mechanization, 10

Agriculture (cont.)
positive effects of population
growth, 35, 108–109
U.S. national security
assessment, 175–176
AIDS pandemic. See HIV/AIDS
issues
Alan Guttmacher Institute, 23, 252
Albania, 4, 140
Algeria, 140
American Samoa, 140
Andorra, 140
Angola, 36, 140
Anguila, 140
Annan, Koﬁ, 1, 265
Antigua and Barbuda, 140
Antinatalist population policies,
21, 22–24, 273. See also Family
planning; Population policies
Argentina, 19, 140
Armenia, 99, 140
Aruba, 140
Asian and Paciﬁc Islander
population (U.S.), 186
Audubon, John J., 218–219
Australia
immigration trends, 17, 185
key demographic data (table),
140
population density, 190
pronatalist policies, 50
urbanization, 18
Austria, 4, 140, 184
Azerbaijan, 140
Aztecs, 80
B 
Baby boom, 85, 87, 186, 273
health care issues, 65–67
Social Security problems, 61–62
Bahamas, 140
Bahrain, 140
Balancing equation, 273
Bangladesh
famine, 89, 124
key demographic data (table),
140
population density, 36, 190
projected growth, 14
world population ranking, 147
Barbados, 140
Barry, John M., 231–232
Bauer, Peter, 112
Belarus, 140
Belgium, 140
Belize, 140
Benin, 140
Bermuda, 140
Bertrand, Jane T., 233
Bhutan, 140
Biodiversity, 41, 168, 171
Biographical sketches, 105–131
Birth control, deﬁned, 273. See also
Contraceptives; Family
planning
The Birth Dearth (Wattenberg), 72,
93, 131, 234, 247
Birthrate, 4–5, 13
deﬁned, 273
momentum, 45
out-of-wedlock, 277
See also Fertility
Bolivia, 140
Bongaarts, John, 105–106
Borjas, George J., 232–233
Borlaug, Norman, 85, 89, 105,
106–107, 130, 266–267
Boserup, Ester, 34–35, 108–109
Bosnia and Herzegovina, 140
Botswana, 6, 16, 140
Bouvier, Leon F., 233
Bowden, Rob, 233
Brazil, 43, 44
key demographic data (table),
140
world population ranking, 147
Brower, David, 260
Brown, Lester R., 109–110, 234,
261
280
Index

Brunei, 140
Bubonic plague, 9–10, 80, 81
Bulgaria, 4, 140
Bullfrog Films, 270
Burkina Faso, 3, 140
Burma, 140
Burundi, 19, 95, 140
Bush, George H. W., 69, 91, 128
Bush, George W., 61, 69, 70, 95,
119
critics of, 127
C 
Cairo Conference. See
International Conference on
Population and
Development
Cairo consensus, 273
Cambodia, 141
Cameroon, 141
Camp, Sharon, 261
Canada
ﬁrst census, 80
immigration trends, 17, 185
key demographic data (table),
141
population density, 36
population growth rate, 4
pronatalist policies, 50, 94
Cape Verde, 141
Caplow, Theodore, 234
Carbon dioxide emissions, 166
Carrying capacity
Cohen’s analysis, 20, 40, 110,
235
deﬁned, 274
optimum human population
and, 40–41, 96
“Warning to Humanity,” 
172
Carrying capacity, Malthusian
limits. See Ehrlich, Paul;
Environmental impacts;
Malthus, Thomas
Carrying Capacity Network
(CCN), 211–212, 252
Carson, Rachel, 33, 113
Carter, Jimmy, 91, 266
Castles, Stephen, 235
Cayman Islands, 141
Census
ancient, 79, 80
deﬁnition, 274
post-Soviet Russia, 99
Census Bureau, U.S. See U.S.
Census Bureau
Center for Immigration Studies,
252
Center for Migration Studies
(CMS), 212–213
Central African Republic, 141
Centre for Development and
Population Activities
(CEDPA), 213–214
Centro Internacional de
Mejoramiento de Mais y
Trigo (CIMMYT), 85, 107
Chad, 141
Chen, Lincoln C., 244–245
Chiapas, Mexico, 96, 116
Child and infant mortality, 8
Childbearing years, deﬁned, 274
Chile, 4, 141
China
agriculture in, 115–116
famines, 86
fertility decline, 43
gender gap in life expectancy, 8
Han Dynasty census, 80
historical population policies,
239–240
key demographic data (table),
141
migration trend, 185
“one-child” policy, 24–25, 70,
90, 115
population growth projection,
14, 146
urbanization, 19
Index
281

China (cont.)
video resource, 268, 269
world population ranking, 147
Cholera, 82–83
Chronology, 79–101
Cities, world’s largest, 19
Climate change, 96
Clinton, Bill, 69, 119, 128
Coale, Ansley, 22
Cohen, Joel, 20, 40, 110–111, 235
Cohort, deﬁned, 274
Colombia, 141
Committee on Population, 214
Comoros, 141
Comstock Act, 83
Condoms, 79, 82, 262
Congo (Brazzaville), 3, 141
Congo, Democratic Republic of
(Kinshasa), 14, 141
Contraceptive prevalence,
deﬁned, 274
Contraceptives, 32, 197
ancient Egypt, 79
antinatalist national policies, 23
condom technology, 82
cost of, 262
demographic transition and,
10–11
Depo-Provera, 94
early U.S. ban, 83, 123
economic development, 27
FDA approval, 87, 94, 97
Marie Stopes and, 129
Norplant, 94, 223
religious opposition, 84, 88
UN survey of national policies,
201
U.S. versus Europe, 57
video resources, 261–262, 264
See also Family planning
Cook Islands, 141
Cook, Noble David, 236
Cornucopians, 34, 126, 274
Costa Rica, 141
Cote d’Ivoire, 141
Croatia, 141, 184
Crude birthrate (CBR), 4–5, 13
Crude death rate, 8, 12
Cuba, 141
Cultural diversity, 41
Cyprus, 141
Czech Republic, 4, 99, 141, 185
D 
Daily, Gretchen, 40
Death rate, 8, 12
deﬁned, 274
neo-Malthusian gloom, 34
See also Mortality
Deforestation, 171
Demeny, Paul, 105, 111–112
Demographic transition, 10–11,
85, 106, 205
deﬁnition, 274
graphs, 154–156
urban transition, 19
Demography, deﬁned, 274
Demography textbook, 247–248
Denmark, 4, 141
Dependency ratio, 274
Depo-Provera, 94
Depopulation, deﬁned, 274. See
also Population slowdown
and decline
Developed nations, fertility
decline. See Fertility;
Population slowdown and
decline
Developed nations, less
developed nation
demographic trends versus.
See Less developed nations,
demographic trends versus
developed nations
Diamond, Jared, 236–237
Diseases
bubonic plague, 9–10, 80, 81
cholera, 82–83, 87
inﬂuenza, 84, 231–232
282
Index

New World conquest and, 236
polio, 86
rinderpest, 121–122
smallpox, 81, 91
tuberculosis, 83, 84, 95
yellow fever, 83
See also HIV/AIDS issues;
Plagues and epidemics
Djibouti, 141
Documents. See World
population, relevant
documents and excerpts
Dominica, 141
Dominican Republic, 141
Doubling time, 3–4, 274
E 
Earth Day, 33
Earth Policy Institute (EPI), 110
Earth Summit, 95
Earth’s carrying capacity. See
Carrying capacity
Earth’s optimum human
population, 40–41, 96. See
also Carrying capacity
Earth’s six billionth inhabitant, 1
East Germany, 90
East Timor, 141
Eberstadt, Nicholas, 112–113, 237
Economic development, 22
best contraceptive, 27
demographic correlations, 11–12
graying population and, 48
life expectancy and, 8
national population policies
and, 111
population decline
implications, 45–46
positive effects of population
growth, 45–46, 92, 108–109
program of action, 194
U.S. national security
assessment, 176–177
world program of action, 195
Ecoviolence, 116
Ecuador, 141
Education
fertility rates and, 23–24, 26
world program of action,
194–195
Egypt, 79, 141, 147
Ehrlich, Anne, 40
Ehrlich, Paul, 33–34, 38, 40, 67, 88,
96, 105, 113–114, 126, 212
video resources, 259, 260, 261,
263–264
Zero Population Growth and,
34, 88, 114, 222
El Salvador, 141
Emigration, deﬁned, 275. See also
Migration
Environmental impacts, 37–40,
246
call to international action, 167,
172–173
Earth Summit, 95
ecoviolence, 116
IPAT equation, 38–40, 113, 275
less developed versus more
developed countries, 39
Malthus and, 32–33
neo-Malthusians and, 33–34, 37
optimistic outlooks, 34–35, 245
Royal Society/National
Academy of Sciences Joint
Statement, 164–169
“Warning to Humanity,” 94,
169–174
Environmentalist organizations,
218–219
Epidemics. See Plagues and
epidemics
Equatorial Guinea, 141
Eritrea, 141
Essay on the Principle of Population
(Malthus), 31–32, 81–82, 120,
241, 267–268
bicentennial, 97
excerpts, 159–164
Index
283

Estonia, 45, 141
Ethiopia, 14, 89, 124, 141, 262
Eugenics, 83
Eugenics Protection Act, 85
Europe, fertility and population
decline, 42–43, 57, 99, 118,
189, 260–261. See also
Population slowdown and
decline
Europe, immigration trends, 17
Evans, Lloyd T., 237–238
F
Family planning
case for smaller families, 242
ﬁrst U.S. clinic, 123
International Planned
Parenthood Federation, 23,
69, 86, 92, 123, 126–127,
217–218
Iranian population policy,
90–91
Malthus and, 32
Margaret Sanger and, 84,
123–124, 217
Marie Stopes and, 84, 105, 129
marriage postponement, 32
mass media messages, 221–222,
267
Population Council and, 223
pro-life organizations, 226
Steven Sinding and, 126–127
video resources, 261–262, 264
Web resources, 252, 253
world program of action, 194,
196–198
See also Abortion;
Contraceptives
Family planning, national
policies, 23–26, 49–51, 201.
See also Population policies;
speciﬁc nations
Family planning, U.S. policy. See
U.S. population policies
Family Planning Association of
India, 252
Famines
Bangladesh, 89, 124
communist China, 86
deﬁnition, 275
Ehrlich and The Population
Bomb, 33, 113, 126
Ethiopian, 89
Great Bengal Famine, 85, 124
harsh “triage” policy, 88
Irish, 82, 242–243
Malthus on, 32, 120
North Korean, 96
Sen on, 124–125, 244
U.S. national security
assessment, 175
Faroe Islands, 141
Fecundity, 6–7, 275
Federated States of Micronesia,
143, 190
Federation for American
Immigration Reform,
214–215
Fertility, 4–7, 42
adolescent, 201
age-speciﬁc rate, 5, 273
American historically high
levels, 58
assumptions for population
growth projections, 14, 15
case for smaller families, 242
crude birth rate, 4–5
deﬁnition, 275
demographic momentum, 45,
118
demographic transition, 10–11,
106, 154–156
developed versus less
developed nations, 12–13
lowest-fertility nations, 99
nuptiality rate, 276
racial/ethnic variations, 57,
59–60
religion and, 59
284
Index

replacement-level, 7, 277
total fertility rate, 6–7
UN projections, 99
U.S. demographic trends, 55–60
U.S. policy recommendations,
179
women’s education and, 23–24,
26
See also Family planning; speciﬁc
nations
Fertility, national population
policies. See Population
policies; speciﬁc nations
Fertility, population age structure
and. See Age structure of
population
Fertility projections. See
Population projections
Fertility rates, negative trends. See
Population slowdown and
decline
Fiji, 141
Filmakers Library, 270
Films for the Humanities and
Sciences, 270
Finland, 141
Fishery depletion, 170
Fleming, Alexander, 84
Food production
The Hunger Site, 253
Malthus on, 32
prospects for future population,
237–238
U.S. national security
assessment, 175–176
video resource, 259
See also Agriculture; Famines
Ford Foundation, 112
Ford, Gerald, 68
Forest destruction, 171
Fornos, Werner, 114–115, 224
Fossil fuel resources, 176
France
aging population, 117
fertility decline, 4, 56
key demographic data (table),
141
life expectancy, 61
pronatalist policies, 21, 50
world population ranking, 147
French Guiana, 141
French Polynesia, 141
G 
Gabon, 142
Galton, Francis, 83
Gambia, 142
Gandhi, Indira, 90
Gardner, Gary, 234
Gaza, 142
Gender differences in life
expectancy, 7–8, 205, 206
Gender equality and equity, 194,
245
India’s population policy and,
263
Madrid International Plan of
Action on Ageing, 208
Mexican population policy, 265
women’s organizations,
213–214
world program of action, 90,
194, 196
General fertility rate, deﬁned, 275
Genocidal conﬂicts, 95, 96,
236–237
Georgia, 142
Germain, Adrienne, 244–245
Germany
fertility, 4, 56
immigration trends, 184, 185
key demographic data (table),
142
pronatalist policies, 90
urbanization, 19
world population ranking, 147
Ghana, 142
Gibraltar, 142
Global 2000 Report, 91
Index
285

Global climate change, 96, 98, 166,
171
Global Population Proﬁle, 250–251
Glossary, 273–278
Graying population. See Age
structure of population
Greece, 142, 184
Green Revolution, 89, 106–107,
130, 266–267, 275
Greenland, 142
Greenspan, Alan, 100
Grenada, 142
Griswold v. Connecticut, 87
Guadeloupe, 18, 142
Guam, 142
Guatemala, 142
Guernsey, 142
Guinea, 142
Guinea-Bissau, 142
Guyana, 142
H
Haiti, 142
Halweil, Brian, 234
Handbooks, yearbooks, and data
sheets, 248–251
Haupt, Arthur, 248
Health care
malaria treatment, 83
oral rehydration therapy, 87
penicillin, 84
urban versus rural, 36
U.S. issues, 65–67
vaccination, 81, 83, 84, 86, 91
See also Diseases; Family
planning
Helms, Jesse, 68
Hicks, Louis, 234
Hispanic Americans, 100, 186
fertility, 57, 59–60
Historical trends. See World
population, historical trends
HIV/AIDS issues
deﬁnition, 275
ﬁrst AIDS diagnosis, 91
implications for population
projections, 15–16, 137, 183
prevalence and mortality data,
147–148, 150
UN projections, 98
video resource, 257–258
World AIDS Day, 93
Holdren, John, 38
Homer-Dixon, Thomas, 116–117,
238
Homo sapiens, 9
Honduras, 142
Hong Kong, 142
Hoover, Edgar, 22
Huggins, Laura E., 238
Humanae Vitae, 88
Hungary, 142, 185
The Hunger Site, 253
Hurtado, Maria Elena, 259
I 
Iceland, 142
ICPD, 275. See also International
Conference on Population
and Development
Immigrants, 3
fertility of, 57, 59–60
national identity and, 246
See also Migration
Immigration, deﬁned, 275. See also
Migration
Immigration policy, U.S., 232–233,
238
India, 98, 129–130
agriculture in, 130
Great Bengal Famine, 85, 124
key demographic data (table),
142
population growth projection,
14, 146
population policies, 24, 25–26,
85, 86, 90, 98, 263, 266
urbanization, 19
286
Index

video resources, 263, 266, 268,
269
world population ranking, 147
Indonesia, 142
migration trend, 185
world population ranking, 147
Industrialized world, population
growth slowdown. See
Population slowdown and
decline
Infant mortality, 8, 13
deﬁnition, 275
Inﬂuenza, 84, 231–232
International Center for
Migration, Ethnicity and
Citizenship (ICMEC),
215–216
International Conference on
Population and
Development (ICPD), 27–28,
95–96, 127, 191
ICPD + 5 forum (1994), 97
Population Action International
policy and, 221
Program of Action, 191–198
UNFPA mandate, 227
video resource, 260
International Data Base (IDB), 3,
229
International family planning,
U.S. support for, 55, 67–72,
87, 91, 119, 227
“Mexico City” policy, 27, 69–70,
92, 98–99, 128
International family planning
policies. See Population
policies
International Migration Report,
100
International Ofﬁce of Public
Hygiene, 83
International Organization for
Migration (IOM), 216–217
International Plan of Action on
Aging, 204–209
International Planned Parenthood
Federation (IPPF), 23, 69, 86,
92, 123, 126–127, 217–218, 
253
International Programs Center
(IPC), 229, 250, 253
International Rice Research
Institute (IRRI), 86, 88, 107
International Union for the
Scientiﬁc Study of
Population, 123
International Year of Older
Persons, 207
Internet resources, 251–256
Intrauterine device (IUD), 223
IPAT equation, 38–40, 113, 275
Iran, 90–91, 142
Iraq, 142
Ireland
great famine, 82, 242–243
key demographic data (table),
142
Isbister, John, 238
Islamic government policies,
90–91
Islamic pilgrimages, 82
Israel
key demographic data (table),
142
life expectancy and infant
mortality rate, 8
Italy
contraception attitudes, 
32
fertility decline, 4, 43, 44, 56,
112
graying population, 117
immigration trends, 184, 
185
key demographic data (table),
142
population growth slowdown,
2
world population ranking, 
147
Index
287

J 
Jackson, Richard, 117
Jain, Anrudh K., 238
Jamaica, 142
Japan
abortion in, 85
early censuses, 80
fertility decline, 45, 266, 268
gender gap in life expectancy, 8
graying population, 117
key demographic data (table),
142
life expectancy, 7, 47, 61
“parasite singles” trend, 97
world population ranking, 146,
147
Jenner, Edward, 81
Jersey, 142
Johnson, Lyndon, 67, 87
Jordan, 142
K
Kane, Thomas T., 248
Kang, He, 115–116
Kazakhstan, 7, 142
Kennedy, John F., 67
Kenya, 142, 268, 269
Kiribati, 142
Kuwait, 142
Kyrgyzstan, 142
L
Lagos, Nigeria, 147
Laos, 142
Latvia, 4, 45, 99, 143, 266
Lebanon, 19, 143
Lee, James Z., 239–240
Leeuwenhoek, Anton van, 20, 80
Lesotho, 8, 16, 143
Less developed nations,
demographic trends versus
developed nations, 12–13, 39
challenges, 166–167
environmental impacts and, 39,
166
future population growth
projections, 14–15, 181–182
key demographic data, 139
life expectancy projections, 183
video resource, 268
See also Age structure of
population; Fertility;
Population slowdown and
decline; speciﬁc nations
Lewis, Stephen, 261
Liberia, 143
Libya, 19, 143
Liechtenstein, 143
Life expectancy, 7–9
assumptions for population
growth projections, 15
deﬁnition, 275
developed versus less
developed nations, 12–13
economic conditions and, 8
gender differences, 7–8, 205,
206
global trends, 60
HIV/AIDS issues, 16
projected trends, 47, 190
UN projections, 60–61, 183
See also Mortality
Life expectancy, population age
structure and, 46–47,
204–205. See also Age
structure of population
Life span, deﬁned, 276. See also
Age structure of population;
Life expectancy
Life table, 276
Lithuania, 45, 143
Livestock diseases, 122
Livi-Bacci, Massimo, 240
London, England, 19, 82
Longevity. See Life expectancy
Longman, Phillip, 50, 59, 
240–241
Lotka, Alfred, 84
288
Index

Lutz, Wolfgang, 118
Luxembourg, 143
M
Macau, 143
Macedonia, 143
Madagascar, 3, 143
Madrid International Plan of
Action on Ageing, 204–209
Malaria, 83
Malawi, 6, 19, 143
Malaysia, 143
Maldives, 143
Mali, 8, 143
Maloney, Carolyn B., 119
Malta, 143
Malthus, Thomas, 31–33, 81–82,
97, 105, 113, 119–120, 241
on American fertility, 58
Essay on the Principle of
Population, 31–32, 81–82, 97,
120, 159–164
video resource, 267–268
Malthusians, 34, 276. See also
Population “pessimists”
Man, Isle of, 143
Marie Stopes International, 69,
128
Marriage postponement, 32
Marshall Islands, 143
Martinique, 143
Mass media, family planning
messages, 221–222, 267
Maternal mortality rate, deﬁned,
276
Mauritania, 143
Mauritius, 143
Maximum estimated population
of the Earth, 2, 40, 83, 110,
172, 235. See also Carrying
capacity
Mayotte, 143
McKibben, Bill, 37, 242
Mecca, 82
Medicaid, 66–67, 72
Medicare, 65–67
Mexican Americans, 59–60
Mexico
family planning policy, 89–90
key demographic data (table),
143
migration trend, 185
population policies, 265
world population ranking, 147
Zapatista uprising, 96, 116
Mexico City, 19, 27
Mexico City policy, 27, 69–70, 92,
95, 98–99, 128, 276
Mifepristone, 93, 97, 223
Migration, 3, 16–18, 42
advocacy and research
organizations, 214–217
book resources, 235, 238
deﬁnitions, 275, 276
ﬁrst UN International Migration
Report, 100
immigrant fertility, 57
national identity and, 246
Negative Population Growth
versus, 220
net migration rate, 276
open immigration policy, 126
UN projections, 184–185, 189
U.S. demographic trends, 17,
18, 22, 185
U.S. immigration policy, 126,
232–233, 238
U.S. national security
assessment, 177
Web resources, 252, 253
Migration, urban. See
Urbanization
Migration News, 253
Millennium Development Goals,
250
Miller, Mark J., 235
Mobility, deﬁned, 276
Moldova, 143
Monaco, 18, 143
Index
289

Monographs, 231–248
Montserrat, 143
Morbidity, deﬁned, 276
Mormons, 59
Morocco, 143
Mortality, 7–9, 42
aging population trend, 46–47
deﬁnition, 276
demographic transition, 10–11,
154–156
developed versus less
developed nations, 12
economic development and, 8
historical decline, 10
infants and children, 8, 13, 275
See also Death rate; Life
expectancy
Mortality rate, maternal
(deﬁnition), 276
Mozambique, 143
Mumbai, India, 147
N
Namibia, 143
National Academy of Sciences,
164–169, 214
National Audubon Society,
218–219
National identity, 246
National security issues, U.S., 68,
72–75, 96–97
economic development and
population growth, 176–177
food supply, 175–176
policy goals and requirements,
178–179
policy recommendations,
179–180
political effects of population
factors, 177–178
resources, 176
world demographic trends, 175
“National Security Study
Memorandum 200,” 174–180
National Wildlife Federation
(NWF), 219
Nauru, 143
Negative Population Growth
(NPG), 211, 220, 254
Neo-Malthusian, deﬁned, 276. See
also Population “pessimists”
Nepal, 19, 143
Net migration rate, 276
Netherlands, 4, 36, 143
Netherlands Antilles, 143
New Caledonia, 143
New York City, 19, 147
New Zealand, 17, 143
Nicaragua, 3, 143
Niger, 3, 58, 143
Nigeria
fertility, 4, 43, 44
key demographic data (table),
144
population growth projection,
14
population pyramid, 157, 158
world population ranking, 146,
147
Nixon, Richard, 68, 88, 90, 174
Norplant, 94
North Atlantic Treaty
Organization (NATO), 74
North Korea, 96, 142
Northern Mariana Islands, 144
Norway, 144
Notestein, Frank, 85
Nuptiality rate, 276
Nursing-home care, 66
O 
Obaid, Thoraya, 98, 105, 121, 
266
Obesity, 61
Oceania
immigration trends, 17. See also
Australia; New Zealand
population density, 190
290
Index

Oceans, 170
O’Grada, Cormac, 242–243
Oman, 144
Opposing Viewpoints series, 
243
Optimum human population,
40–41, 96
Oral contraceptives, 124, 264
Oral rehydration therapy, 87
Organizations, 211–230
Osaka-Kobe, Japan, 147
Osborn, Fairﬁeld, 85
Out-of-wedlock birthrate, 277
Ozone depletion, 170
P 
Paddock, Paul, 33, 88
Paddock, William, 33, 88
Pakistan
fertility, 4
key demographic data (table),
144
migration trend, 185
population density, 190
population growth projection,
14
world population ranking, 146,
147
Palau, 144
Panama, 144
Pandemics. See Plagues and
epidemics
Papua New Guinea, 144
Paraguay, 144
“Parasite singles” in Japan, 97
PBS Home Video, 270
Penicillin, 84
Peru, 144
Peterson, Peter G., 74, 243
Philippines
fertility, 4
key demographic data (table),
144
migration trend, 185
population growth rate, 3
population policies, 265–266
Place, Francis, 123
Plagues and epidemics, 9–10, 80,
81
British Empire and, 82
inﬂuenza, 84, 231–232
international monitoring, 83
Mecca and, 82
See also Diseases; HIV/AIDS
issues
Planned Parenthood, 123
Plato, 40
Plowright, Walter, 105, 121–122
Poland, 144, 147
Policies. See Population policies
Polio, 86
Political effects of population
factors, 177–178
Population Action International
(PAI), 220–221, 258
Population Association of
America, 84
Population bomb, deﬁned, 277
The Population Bomb (Ehrlich), 33,
67, 88, 113, 126, 264
Population Communications
International (PCI), 221–222,
254, 267, 270
Population Connection, 114, 211,
254
Population Council, 86, 106, 222,
223, 254
Population density, 35–37, 190
Population growth, historical
trends. See World
population, historical trends
Population growth momentum,
45, 118, 277
Population growth trends and
projections (graphs), 153–156
Population implosion, 112, 277
Population Institute (PI), 224, 255
Population “optimists,” 34–35, 112
Boserup, 34–35, 108–109
Index
291

Population “optimists” (cont.)
Eberstadt, 112–113, 237
See also Simon, Julian;
Wattenberg, Ben
Population “pessimists,” 31–34
Fornos, 114–115, 224
Homer-Dixon, 116–117, 238
See also Ehrlich, Paul; Malthus,
Thomas
Population policies
antinatalist, 21, 22–24, 273
case studies, 238, 269
China’s “one-child” policy,
24–25, 70, 90, 115
deﬁnition, 277
depopulation worries, 44–46
economic factors, 111
global, 26–28
historical China, 239–240
Indian, 24–26, 85, 86, 90, 98, 263
Iran, 90–91
Program of Action (Cairo
Conference), 191–198
pronatalist, 20–22, 49–51, 90, 92,
93, 94, 241, 277
UN survey of, 198–201, 249
video resources, 263, 265–266
“Warning to Humanity,” 94
women’s perspectives, 245
See also U.S. population
policies; speciﬁc nations
Population projections, 97, 101,
172, 191–192
age distributions, 148–153,
183–184, 206
AIDS pandemic and, 137
deﬁnition, 277
fertility rate assumptions, 14, 15
graphs, 153–156
HIV/AIDS issues, 15–16
life expectancy, 183
migration trends and, 184–185
UN projections and revisions,
13–16, 99, 100, 136–137, 165,
187–190, 249–250
UN revisions, highlights,
180–185
urban-rural breakdown,
138–139
U.S. Census Bureau estimates,
97, 133–136, 250–251
World Bank’s pessimistic
estimate, 172
Population pyramids, 155,
157–158, 277
Population Reference Bureau
(PRB), 84, 211, 225–226,
248–249, 255
Population Research Institute
(PRI), 211, 225–226
Population slowdown and
decline, 2–4, 41–46, 57, 93, 96,
112
The Birth Dearth (Wattenberg),
72, 93, 131, 234, 247
book resources, 237, 240–241,
244
depopulation (deﬁnition), 274
depopulation worries, 44–46
economic implications, 45–46
lowest-fertility nations, 4, 99
national security concerns,
72–75
negative momentum, 118
video resources, 257, 260–261
Population statistical reference
material, 248–251
Population statistics and graphs.
See World population
statistics (tables)
Portugal, 144
Prevalence rate, 277
Print resources
demography textbook, 
247–248
handbooks, yearbooks, and
data sheets, 248–251
important documents and
excerpts, 159–209
monographs, 231–248
292
Index

See also World population,
relevant documents and
excerpts
“Program of Action” (Cairo
Conference, 1994), 191–198
Projected world population. See
Population projections
Pronatalist population policies,
20–22, 92, 93, 94, 241
deﬁnition, 277
effectiveness of, 49–51
Puerto Rico, 144
Q
Qatar, 144
Quality of life
overpopulation and, 115
positive effects of population
growth, 35
slower population growth and,
195
urbanization and, 36–37
Quebec, Canada, 50, 94
R
Racial/ethnic variations, 57, 186
Rate of natural increase, deﬁned,
277
Ravenstein, E. G., 83
Reagan, Ronald, 69, 92, 119, 128
Religion
reproductive rights and, 71, 84,
88
U.S. and European fertility
differences and, 59
Replacement-level fertility, 7, 
277
Reproductive rights, 71–72, 194,
196–198
Millennium Development
Goals, 250
religion and, 71, 84, 88
video resources, 263, 265
See also Abortion;
Contraceptives; Family
planning; Gender equality
and equity
Resource mobilization, 193
Retirement issues, aging
population and, 48, 61–64
Reunion, 144
Rinderpest, 121–122
Rockefeller, John D., III, 86, 89
Rockefeller Foundation, 83, 85,
107, 112
Roe v. Wade, 89
Roman Catholic Church, 71, 84, 88
Rome, ancient, 79
Rostow, Walt W., 243–244
Royal Society/National Academy
of Sciences Joint Statement,
164–169
RU486, 93, 97, 223
Russia
fertility decline, 4, 43, 44–45, 73
gender gap in life expectancy, 7
key demographic data (table),
144
migration trend, 185
post-Soviet census, 99
world population ranking, 147
Rwanda, 144, 236–237
S 
Sadik, Naﬁs, 93, 98, 121, 191, 260,
261
Saint Helena, 144
Saint Kitts and Nevis, 144
Saint Lucia, 144
Saint Pierre and Miquelon, 144
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines,
144
Salk, Jonas, 86
Samoa, 144
San Marino, 144
Sanger, Margaret, 84, 86, 105,
123–124, 126, 217–218, 264
Index
293

São Paulo, 19
São Tomé and Principe, 144
Saudi Arabia, 19, 144
Scientiﬁc research contributions,
168–169
Sen, Amartya, 8, 124–125, 244
Sen, Gita, 244–245
Senegal, 144
Seoul, South Korea, 147
Serbia and Montenegro, 144
Sex ratio, deﬁned, 278
Sex-selective abortion, 25
Seychelles, 144
ShopWGBH.org, 271
Sierra Club, 255
Sierra Leone, 144
Simon, Julian, 34, 35, 36, 105, 112,
125–126, 245–246
Boserup and, 109
Ehrlich and, 126, 264
immigration policy, 126
U.S. population policy and, 27
video resource, 259
Sinding, Steven W., 126–127
Singapore, 18, 93, 144
Skandera, Hanna, 238
Slovak Republic, 99, 144, 184
Slovenia, 99, 144, 184
Smallpox, 81, 91
Smith, Christopher H., 127–128
Snow, John, 82
Soap operas, 221–222, 267
Social Security
aging population and, 48, 
61–64
approaches to ﬁxing, 62–64
pronatalist incentives, 241
Soil productivity, 171
Solomon Islands, 144
Somalia, 144
South Africa, 144
South Korea, 56, 142
Spain, 56
ﬁrst census, 81
graying population, 117
key demographic data (table),
144
world population ranking, 147
Spanish inﬂuenza, 84, 231–232
Sri Lanka, 145
Statistical Abstract, 251
Statistical reference material,
248–251
Statistics and graphs, 133–158. See
also World population
statistics (tables)
Stopes, Marie, 84, 105, 128
Sudan, 145
Suriname, 145
Swaminathan, M. S., 105, 
129–130
Swaziland, 16, 145
Sweden, 145
early census, 81
population pyramid, 157, 158
pronatalist policies, 21–22, 50
Switzerland, 145
Syria, 8–9, 145
T 
Taiwan, 56, 145
Tajikstan, 145
Tanzania, 145
Taxation, 21, 63
Technology
IPAT equation, 38, 113
solving resource and
environmental problems,
168–169
See also Agriculture
Teen pregnancies, 56
Teheran Proclamation, 88
Teitelbaum, Michael S., 246
Thailand, 145
Theiler, Max, 83
Tobias, Michael, 246, 269
Togo, 145
Tokyo, 19
Tonga, 145
294
Index

Total fertility rate (TFR), 6–7
deﬁnition, 278
developed versus less
developed nations, 12
tables, 44
UN projections, 99
See also Fertility
Trinidad and Tobago, 145
Tuberculosis, 83, 95
Tunisia, 4, 145
Turkey, 99, 145
Turkmenistan, 145
Turks and Caicos Islands, 145
Turner, Ted, 96
Tuvalu, 145
U 
Uganda, 3, 8, 14, 19, 145, 265
Ukraine, 4, 45, 145, 258
migration trend, 185
world population ranking, 147
Union of Concerned Scientists,
“Warning to Humanity,” 94,
169–174
United Arab Emirates, 145
United Kingdom
early family planning clinics,
84, 129
fertility, 4, 56
ﬁrst census, 82
immigration trends, 185
key demographic data (table),
145
life expectancy, 61
urbanization, 19
world population ranking, 
147
United Nations future population
growth projections, 13–16,
97, 136–138
United Nations International
Migration Report, 100
United Nations Population
Division, 85, 226–227
global population projections,
13–16, 180–185, 249–250
World Population Policies 2003,
198–201, 249
United Nations Population Fund
(UNFPA), 23, 69–72, 88, 92,
94, 119, 211, 227–228
Chinese population policy and,
226
deﬁnition, 278
leadership changes, 98, 121
Millennium Development
Goals, 250
non-U.S. contributions, 100
website, 255
United Nations Population
Information Network
(POPIN), 255
United Nations population
projections. See Population
projections
United Nations Principles for
Older Persons, 202–204
United Nations–sponsored
conference, Cairo, 1994. See
International Conference on
Population and
Development (ICPD)
United Nations World Food
Summit, 96
United Nations world population
policies survey (2003),
198–201
Urbanization, 18–19, 82, 101
projected metropolitan
populations, 146–147, 
149
projected trends, 138–139
squatter settlements, 36
standard of living and, 36–37
urban transition, 19
Uruguay, 18, 145
U.S. Agency for International
Development (USAID), 23,
67, 71, 87, 127, 228
Index
295

U.S. Census Bureau, 211, 229
Global Population Proﬁle,
250–251
International Programs Center,
229, 250, 253
population projections, 97,
185–187, 250
Statistical Abstract, 251
Web resources, 253
world population estimates
(table), 133–136
U.S. demographic trends and
issues, 55–77
aging population, 60–61
book resources, 234
Census Bureau projections, 97
crude death rate, 8–9
earliest U.S. census, 81
fertility rates, 44, 55–60
gender gap in life expectancy, 8
historically high fertility, 58
immigration, 17, 18, 22, 185
key demographic data (table),
145
Medicare and Medicaid, 65–67
national security concerns, 68,
72–74
obesity and, 61
population growth projection,
14, 22, 146
racial/ethnic variations, 57,
59–60, 186
total fertility rate, 7
U.S. status as exemplar nation,
75–76
world population ranking, 147
See also Age structure of
population
U.S. Food and Drug
Administration (FDA), 87, 94
U.S. population policies, 23
anti-abortion politics, 27, 68–72,
92, 119, 127–128
court decisions, 87
criticism of, 127
early ban on contraceptive
devices, 83, 123
immigration, 126, 232–233, 238
international family planning
support, 55, 67–72, 87, 91,
119, 227
“Mexico City” policy, 27, 69–70,
92, 98–99, 128, 276
national security concerns, 68,
72–75, 96–97, 178–180
“National Security Study
Memorandum 200,” 174–180
recommendations in national
security context, 179–180
video resource, 269
Utah, 59
Uzbekistan, 145
V 
Vaccines, 81, 83, 84, 86, 91, 122
Vanuatu, 145
Venezuela, 145
The Video Project, 271
Videos and DVDs, 256–269
distributor/vendor
information, 270–271
Vienna Declaration and
Programme of Action, 95
Vietnam, 145, 147, 265
Virgin Islands, 145
Vital statistics, deﬁned, 278
Vogt, William, 85
W 
Wallis and Futuna, 145
“Warning to Humanity,” 94,
169–174
Washington, George, 81
Water resources, 170
Wattenberg, Ben, 72–73, 93, 112,
131, 234, 247, 260, 264
Websites, 251–256
Weeks, John, 37, 247–248
296
Index

West Bank, 145
Western Sahara, 145
William the Conqueror, 80
Winter, Jay, 246
Wirth, Timothy, 260
Women’s organizations, 213–214
Women’s rights. See Gender
equality and equity;
Reproductive rights
World Assembly on Aging, 91, 99,
202, 204–209
World Bank, 39, 172
World Health Organization
(WHO), 85, 91, 95
World population, estimated
maximum, 2, 40, 83, 110, 172,
235
World population, future growth
projections. See Population
projections
World population, historical
trends, 9–11
agricultural revolution, 9, 79,
273
book resource, 240
chronology, 79–101
Earth’s six billionth inhabitant,
1
total number of humans ever
born, 11
video resource, 268–269
World population, optimum,
40–41, 96
World population, present, 11–13
World population, relevant
documents and excerpts, 159
Essay on the Principle of
Population (Malthus),
159–164
Madrid International Plan of
Action on Ageing, 204–209
“National Security Study
Memorandum 200,” 174–180
Program of Action (Cairo
Conference, 1994), 191–198
Royal Society/National
Academy of Sciences Joint
Statement, 164–169
UN long-range projections,
187–190
UN survey of national policies,
198–201
United Nations Principles for
Older Persons, 202–204
UN’s 2004 global population
projection, 180–185
U.S. Census Bureau long-range
projections, 185–187
“Warning to Humanity,”
169–174
World Population Day, 93
World Population Plan of Action,
90, 179
World Population Policies 2003,
198–201, 249
World population statistical
reference material, 248–251
World population statistics
(graphs), 153–158
World population statistics
(tables), 133–158
age distribution, 150–152
HIV/AIDS, 150
key demographic data, regions
and countries, 139–145
long-range projections, 136–137
projected metropolitan
populations, 149
urban-rural breakdown,
136–137
U.S. Census Bureau estimates
(1950-2050), 133–136
world population ranking, 147
World’s carrying capacity. See
Carrying capacity
World’s largest cities, 19
World’s optimum population,
40–41, 96
Worldwatch Institute, 90, 109–110,
229–230, 234, 255
Index
297

Y 
Y6B, 1
Yamada, Masahiro, 97
Yellow fever, 83
Yemen, 3, 145
Z 
Zambia, 8, 145, 258
Zapatista uprising, 96, 116
Zero Population Growth (ZPG),
34, 88, 114, 222
Zero population growth, deﬁned,
278
Zimbabwe, 16, 145
298
Index

About the Author
Geoffrey Gilbert is professor of economics at Hobart and
William Smith Colleges, Geneva, New York, where he teaches
courses on population, poverty, and microeconomics. A former
chairman of his department, Gilbert now holds an endowed
chair at HWS. He is the author of World Poverty: A Reference
Handbook (ABC-CLIO, 2004) and editor of the Oxford edition of
Malthus’s Essay on Population.

