
Writing Effectively  
in Print and on the Web

PRACTICAL GUIDES FOR LIBRARIANS 
 About the Series
This innovative series written and edited for librarians by librarians provides authori-
tative, practical information and guidance on a wide spectrum of library processes and 
operations. 
Books in the series are focused, describing practical and innovative solutions to a problem 
facing today’s librarian and delivering step-by-step guidance for planning, creating, im-
plementing, managing, and evaluating a wide range of services and programs. 
The books are aimed at beginning and intermediate librarians needing basic instruction/
guidance in a specific subject and at experienced librarians who need to gain knowledge 
in a new area or guidance in implementing a new program/service.
 About the Series Editor
The Practical Guides for Librarians series was conceived by and is edited by M. Sandra 
Wood, MLS, MBA, AHIP, FMLA, Librarian Emerita, Penn State University Libraries.  
M. Sandra Wood was a librarian at the George T. Harrell Library, The Milton S. Her-
shey Medical Center, College of Medicine, Pennsylvania State University, Hershey, PA, 
for over 35 years, specializing in reference, educational, and database services. Ms. Wood 
worked for several years as a Development Editor for Neal-Schuman Publishers. 
Ms. Wood received an MLS from Indiana University and an MBA from the University 
of Maryland. She is a Fellow of the Medical Library Association and served as a member 
of MLA’s Board of Directors from 1991 to 1995. Ms. Wood is founding and current edi-
tor of Medical Reference Services Quarterly, now in its 35th volume. She also was founding 
editor of the Journal of Consumer Health on the Internet and the Journal of Electronic Re-
sources in Medical Libraries and served as editor/co-editor of both journals through 2011.
Titles in the Series
1.  How to Teach: A Practical Guide for Librarians by Beverley E. Crane
2.  Implementing an Inclusive Staffing Model for Today’s Reference Services by Julia K. Nims, 
Paula Storm, and Robert Stevens
3.  Managing Digital Audiovisual Resources: A Practical Guide for Librarians by Matthew 
C. Mariner
4.  Outsourcing Technology: A Practical Guide for Librarians by Robin Hastings
5.  Making the Library Accessible for All: A Practical Guide for Librarians by Jane Vincent

  6.  Discovering and Using Historical Geographic Resources on the Web: A Practical Guide for 
Librarians by Eva H. Dodsworth and L. W. Laliberté
  7.  Digitization and Digital Archiving: A Practical Guide for Librarians by Elizabeth R. 
Leggett
  8.  Makerspaces: A Practical Guide for Librarians by John J. Burke
  9.  Implementing Web-Scale Discovery Services: A Practical Guide for Librarians by JoLinda 
Thompson
10.  Using iPhones and iPads: A Practical Guide for Librarians by Matthew Connolly and 
Tony Cosgrave
11.  Usability Testing: A Practical Guide for Librarians by Rebecca Blakiston
12.  Mobile Devices: A Practical Guide for Librarians by Ben Rawlins
13.  Going Beyond Loaning Books to Loaning Technologies: A Practical Guide for Librarians 
by Janelle Sander, Lori S. Mestre, and Eric Kurt
14.  Children’s Services Today: A Practical Guide for Librarians by Jeanette Larson
15.  Genealogy: A Practical Guide for Librarians by Katherine Pennavaria
16.  Collection Evaluation in Academic Libraries: A Practical Guide for Librarians by Karen 
C. Kohn
17.  Creating Online Tutorials: A Practical Guide for Librarians by Hannah Gascho Rempel 
and Maribeth Slebodnik
18.  Using Google Earth in Libraries: A Practical Guide for Librarians by Eva Dodsworth 
and Andrew Nicholson
19.  Integrating the Web into Everyday Library Services: A Practical Guide for Librarians  by 
Elizabeth R. Leggett
20.  Infographics: A Practical Guide for Librarians by Beverley E. Crane
21.  Meeting Community Needs: A Practical Guide for Librarians by Pamela H. MacKellar
22.  3D Printing: A Practical Guide for Librarians by Sara Russell Gonzalez and Denise 
Beaubien Bennett
23.  Patron-Driven Acquisitions in Academic and Special Libraries: A Practical Guide for 
Librarians by Steven Carrico, Michelle Leonard, and Erin Gallagher
24.  Collaborative Grant-Seeking: A Practical Guide for Librarians by Bess G. de Farber
25.  Story-Time Success: A Practical Guide for Librarians by Katie Fitzgerald
26.  Teaching Google Scholar: A Practical Guide for Librarians by Paige Alfonzo
27.  Teen Services Today: A Practical Guide for Librarians by Sara K. Joiner & Geri Swanzy
28.  Data Management: A Practical Guide for Librarians by Margaret E. Henderson
29.  Online Teaching and Learning: A Practical Guide for Librarians by Beverley E. Crane
30.  Writing Effectively in Print and on the Web: A Practical Guide for Librarians by Rebecca 
Blakiston


Writing Effectively  
in Print and on the Web
A Practical Guide  
for Librarians
Rebecca Blakiston
PRACTICAL GUIDES FOR LIBRARIANS, NO. 30
R OW M A N  &  LI T T LEF I ELD
Lanham • Boulder • New York • London

Published by Rowman & Littlefield 
A wholly owned subsidiary of The Rowman & Littlefield Publishing Group, Inc.
4501 Forbes Boulevard, Suite 200, Lanham, Maryland 20706
www.rowman.com
Unit A, Whitacre Mews, 26-34 Stannary Street, London SE11 4AB
Copyright © 2017 by Rowman & Littlefield
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced in any form or by any electronic 
or mechanical means, including information storage and retrieval systems, without written 
permission from the publisher, except by a reviewer who may quote passages in a review.
British Library Cataloguing in Publication Information Available
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data Available
978-1-4422-7885-1 (pbk : alk. paper)
978-1-4422-7886-8 (electronic)
™  The paper used in this publication meets the minimum requirements of American 
National Standard for Information Sciences—Permanence of Paper for Printed Library 
Materials, ANSI/NISO Z39.48-1992.
Printed in the United States of America

To Gibberz Doodle Bean, aka “The Gibbs,”
who brought so much joy to our lives.
She’s barking at angels now.


▲  i x
Contents
List of Tables	
xi
Preface	
xiii
Acknowledgments	
xv
CHAPTER   1    Why Good Writing Matters	
1
CHAPTER   2    Knowing Your Readers	
11
CHAPTER   3    Defining Your Message and Purpose	
21
CHAPTER   4    Keeping It Simple	
29
CHAPTER   5    Using Authentic and Active Voice	
41
CHAPTER   6    Writing Titles and Headings	
53
CHAPTER   7    Using Lists and Tables	
69
CHAPTER   8    Writing Information and Instructions	
77
CHAPTER   9    Writing Forms	
89
CHAPTER 10    Writing for the Web	
101
CHAPTER 11    Writing for Emails and Other Messaging Systems	
113
CHAPTER 12    Implementing Voice and Tone	
125
CHAPTER 13    Formatting Your Content	
135
CHAPTER 14    Refining Your Process	
143
Index	
155
About the Author	
161


▲  x i
List of Tables
Table 3.1.	
Placement of Call to Action	
26
Table 3.2.	
Ways to Order Content	
27
Table 4.1.	
Strong Words Replacing Adverb Phrases	
32
Table 4.2.	
Simplified Phrases and Words	
37
Table 4.3.	
Simplified Sentences	
38
Table 5.1.	
Revisions to Reflect Human, Conversational Style	
44
Table 5.2.	
Revisions to Reflect Active Voice and  
Simpler Language	
	
	
 49
Table 6.1.	
Revisions to Make Titles More Meaningful, Succinct,  
and Action-Oriented	
	
	
 59
Table 6.2.	
Revisions to More Useful Headings	
64
Table 6.3.	
Revisions to Improve Consistency	
67
Table 7.1.	
Example of a Table for Comparing Numbers	
74
Table 7.2.	
Example of a Table for Related Content	
74
Table 8.1.	
Signs Revised to Be Less Negative	
80
Table 8.2.	
Revised Headings for Instructions	
87
Table 9.1.	
Simplified Field Labels	
92
Table 9.2.	
Improved Survey Invitations	
98
Table 9.3.	
Form Titles Revised to Action Phrases	
98

x i i  ▲  L I S T  O F  T A B L E S
Table 10.1.	 Examples of Trigger Words	
104
Table 10.2.	 Examples of Calls to Action 	
105
Table 10.3.	 Revised, Simplified Homepage Copy 	
105
Table 10.4.	 Revised Link Labels	
109
Table 11.1.	 Ambiguous Subject Lines Revised to Be  
More Descriptive	
	
	
114
Table 11.2.	 Subject Lines Revised to Be Brief Yet Meaningful	
115
Table 11.3.	 Revised Links in Email Messages	
120
Table 12.1.	 Content Revised to Reflect Approachable Voice	
127
Table 12.2.	 Content Revised to Tell a Story	
131
Table 12.3.	 Examples of Voice and Tone Guidelines	
132
Table 14.1.	 Prompts for Testing Content with Real People	
150

▲  x i i i
Preface
Writing plays a role in almost everything we do. It’s how we document our knowledge, 
share our stories, and ask our communities for help. It’s a tool to teach, influence, and 
persuade those around us. And in today’s digital age, we’re all publishers, sharing content 
with the world at the push of a button (literally). From webpages, to signage, to emails—
writing is fundamental to our everyday lives. 
Sadly, there’s a lot of mediocre content out there: policy-driven websites with moun-
tains of text, building signs that don’t actually tell you what you need to know, convoluted 
emails that leave you wondering , What was the point of that? Today’s reader is bombarded 
with endless streams of information and simply doesn’t have time to sift through and 
make sense of it all.
Let’s do our part to end the madness. Writing Effectively in Print and on the Web: A 
Practical Guide for Librarians encourages you to put your readers at the heart of all your 
content, ensuring that it is engaging, relevant, and useful. You’ll learn techniques to write 
with clarity, precision, and purpose, which will serve you well in both your professional 
and your personal life.
I truly enjoyed writing this book. I’ve always enjoyed nonfiction writing—studying 
English in college and taking pride in my analytical essays and argumentative papers. 
When my career path led me to focus on user experience, I quickly learned the power 
of the written word in the context of service and product design. At the University of 
Arizona Libraries, I’ve led our website content efforts for the past five years—creating 
an editorial style guide, voice and tone standards, and comprehensive training for all web 
content writers in the library. When I organized the User Experience Certificate for 
Library Juice Academy, I included courses on both writing for the web and content strat-
egy. As my role evolved at the University of Arizona, I recognized the massive content 
challenges ahead and hired a full-time content strategist. Now with us for three years, 
our content strategist focuses on creating and sustaining quality written content on the 
website and beyond.
	 There are, of course, many books on the craft of writing. There are the classics 
like Elements of Style by William Strunk and E. B. White and Writing Well by William 
Zinsser. You can also find shelves of books on business writing, plain-language writing, 
technical writing, and professional writing. And today you can find books that speak 
directly to writing for the digital age, two of my favorites being Letting Go of the Words: 

x i v   ▲  P R E F A C E
Writing Web Content That Works, by Janice (Ginny) Redish, and Everybody Writes: Your 
Go-To Guide to Creating Ridiculously Good Content, by Ann Handley. 
But there still aren’t many books focused on user-centered writing within the context 
of educational institutions such as libraries. Writing Effectively in Print and on the Web: A 
Practical Guide for Librarians places us in the world of the library, an often content-rich, 
process-driven, jargon-filled world. As librarians, we carry with us unique struggles. We 
lack time and resources. We tend to have numerous content authors across the organiza-
tion. We must balance our altruistic mission of sharing knowledge with our duty to make 
readers’ lives easier, creating content that is substantive, yet concise.
This book is geared toward librarians but is useful for anyone who desires to become 
a better writer. It’s written for people with no editorial background, but it also contains 
information for the more adept writers looking for advice and inspiration on how to 
approach their work. 
I have organized the book into chapters that allow for easy skimming. While I en-
courage you to read the book in its entirety, it’s not necessary to do so, or to read the 
chapters in order. If you’re starting a new writing project, however, I do recommend you 
read chapters 2 and 3 before diving into the rest.
In chapter 1, you’ll discover the power of good writing. In chapters 2 and 3, you’ll 
identify the audience and the purpose of your content, foundational steps for any writing 
project. In chapters 4 and 5, you’ll master the basic principles of good writing: keeping it 
simple, purposeful, active, and authentic. Next, in chapters 6 and 7, you will experiment 
with different elements to better structure your content, including titles, headings, lists, 
and tables. Then in chapters 8–11, you’ll learn techniques for unique writing challenges 
such as instructions, forms, webpages, and emails. 
We’ll have a bit of fun in chapter 12, where you’ll consider ways to incorporate per-
sonality and emotion into your writing through voice and tone. With writing techniques 
in hand, in chapter 13 you’ll find out how better formatting decisions will allow your 
content to shine. In chapter 14 we’ll put it all together, exploring the process of writing 
and ways to continue honing your craft.
There is no one way to write, but there is a better way to write. This book is as ad-
vertised: a practical guide filled with real-life examples along with methods you can put 
into practice immediately. My hope is that it will arm you with the tools to convey in-
formation with the greatest possible clarity. I’d love for you to put this on your bookshelf 
and refer to it often.
I want all of us to sharpen, tighten, and energize our writing—and have fun doing it. 
I wrote this book over the course of a year, so I apologize for its length. I empathize with 
Ben Franklin, who once wrote, “I have already made this paper too long, for which I must 
crave pardon, not having now time to make it shorter” (1760: 82).
 Reference
Franklin, Benjamin. 1760. New Experiments and Observations on Electricity. Made at Philadelphia in 
America. By Benjamin Franklin, Esq; and communicated in several letters to Peter Collinson, Esq; 
of London, F.R.S. Part I. 2003 electronic reproduction. Farmington Hills, MI: Thomson Gale.

▲  x v
Acknowledgments
Taking on a second book was kind of crazy, and taking on a book about writing was even 
crazier. I didn’t know it when I signed up, but writing about writing is one of the hardest 
things to do. So I want to thank everyone who made it possible for me to get through 
this, emerging on the other side with my sanity intact and with a book I’m actually pretty 
proud of.
First, thanks to the staff of Rowman & Littlefield. Sandy Wood, we’ve both had a 
rough go lately, but you’re the best editor I could imagine working with. And Charles 
Harmon, I appreciate your continued support and encouragement more than you know.
Thank you to authors before me who provided guidance and inspiration. Ginny 
Redish, your seminal book on web writing was my first introduction to the field and got 
me hooked. I am eternally grateful that you agreed to come to Tucson a few years back 
to share your passion and expertise. Ann Handley, your book on writing good content 
had me literally clapping and laughing out loud. I want everyone to read your book and 
commit it to memory. And to every other author cited—thank you for sharing your 
knowledge with the world. 
Back in library land, thanks to Nicole Capdarest-Arest for loving the written word 
as much (if not more) than I do, and for cocreating and teaching the web writing course 
for Library Juice Academy. And a huge shout-out to like-minded colleagues near and 
far: Suzanne Chapman, Heidi Steiner Burkhardt, Anne Haines, Conny Liegl, Nadaleen 
Tempelman-Kluit, Kim Vassiliadis, Emily Daly, Jill Heinze, Rachel Vacek, Beth Filar 
Williams, Erin White, Stephanie Hartman, Kristian Serrano, Joe Marquez, SuHui Ho, 
Michael Schofield, Amanda Goodman, and Courtney Greene McDonald. I’m impressed 
by your continued advocacy for the user experience, and together we’re slowly but surely 
fostering a culture of user-centered design (and content) in libraries worldwide.
Thank you to my web-design and user-experience colleagues who inspire me daily 
and put up with my book-writing nonsense, which seems to never end. Shoshana 
Mayden, you’re making sustainable, consistent, user-driven content a reality across the 
library. And you still have time to provide me with editorial help—I can’t thank you 
enough! Ginger Bidwell, you work tirelessly to affect the lives of students, faculty, and 
staff, taking on any challenge that comes your way—and I’m forever appreciative. Taylor 
Sturges, your commitment to continued improvement of the library is evident, and your 

x vi  ▲  A C K N O W L E D G M E N T S
positive spirit lifts the team in ways I bet you don’t even realize. Rui Qi, you are a fantas-
tic addition to our team, bringing creativity and dedication to your work—I’m so excited 
to see what great things we can do. Cameron Wiles, in short time you’ve dived into our 
websites and improved all kinds of content—your commitment to sentence-case titles 
and parallel construction confirms that you chose the right job! Donovan Pete, I’m so 
glad you’ve recently joined our team and look forward to seeing how you improve design 
in libraries now and in the future.
Huge appreciation also goes to the dev team—Mike Hagedon, Will Simpson, and 
Jeffrey Turman—my partners in design + dev crime. You question assumptions, continu-
ally improve your process, and connect every line of code to how it might affect humans 
on the other end. You truly care about the user experience, and that’s pretty awesome. I 
couldn’t ask for a better team to collaborate with every day.
Thanks to my former colleagues who have moved on to greener pastures but whose 
contributions live on. Beau Smith, you were an exceptional employee, relentlessly dedi-
cated to improving the user experience through research and testing. You’re going to go 
far and I can’t wait to collaborate in the future. Andrew See, you were integral to the 
website steering group, and I’m so glad we converted you to the one-space-after-periods 
rule. I’m sure you’re doing great things with our neighbors to the far north. Bonnie Jean 
Michalski, you cared about content as much as any of us and shared in my love of a good 
idiom. I wish you happiness and success and look forward to catching up when you next 
visit Tucson. 
And thank you to others in the library who made this book possible. Jeremy Frumkin, 
I appreciate your support as I hammered through fourteen chapters and your flexibility 
as I organized my often-scattered work schedule. Thanks to everyone who provided ex-
amples that are sprinkled throughout the book, including Shelly Black, Michael Brewer, 
and Kylie Rogers. And eternal gratitude goes to my colleagues who listened to my tirades, 
empathized with my struggles, and encouraged me to persist and move forward: Yvonne 
Mery, Niamh Wallace, Teresa Hazen, Elizabeth Kline, Annabelle Nuñez, Cheryl Cuillier, 
Travis Teetor, and Shannon Jones.
On a personal note, I express deep appreciation to my family for their continued 
encouragement: Mom, Dad, Jessica, Nick, and Gwen. And even Annabelle, Henry, and 
Chips—you might not be able to articulate your support, but your presence brings great 
joy to my life and makes everything just a little bit better. 
Last but not least, thanks to Scott Ware, my supportive and loving husband. Scott, in 
the relatively short course of writing this book, we went through significant life events: 
our wedding and honeymoon, Gibby’s lymphoma and euthanasia, your hospitalization 
and two surgeries, and an exploding ceiling fan. Throughout it all, your love, patience, 
and good humor kept us both going. You bring such peace and happiness to my life, and 
I couldn’t imagine doing what I do without you by my side. You’re the best.

▲  1
C H A P T E R  1
Why Good  
Writing Matters
L
IBRARIANS CONSTANTLY USE THE WRITTEN word to share ideas, yet too little 
attention is paid to the craft of good writing. Does your audience understand what 
you are trying to communicate, or do your words fall short? In this chapter, you’ll 
learn why good writing matters to the success of your library as well as your own profes-
sional growth and reputation.
 Writing for Users
Everyone Is a Publisher
As more content is curated and consumed digitally, it is incredibly easy to publish content 
to the world. Anyone who can get online can become a publisher, sharing information 
on webpages, by email, and through social media. It is rare to find a librarian who doesn’t 
regularly communicate with users in some digital form. 
Creating content for print has also become commonplace, no matter your profes-
sional position. Graphic programs and templates allow people with no design background 
to create professional-looking signs, brochures, posters, and flyers. This responsibility is 
often spread across units within larger libraries, rarely restricted to a marketing depart-
ment or requiring a review process.
IN THIS CHAPTER
P
P How writing affects the user experience
P
P How writing contributes to success in the workplace
P
P How people read in the digital age
P
P How you can become a better writer

2   ▲  C H A P T E R  1
Indeed, everyone is now a publisher. Today’s environment provides endless opportu-
nities for librarians to share their messages and influence the user experience.
Write for the In-Person Experience
You can find written communication throughout library buildings, primarily through 
print and digital signage. Look around your library. You likely have instructional content 
on your walls, such as how to:
•	 Return a book
•	 Pick up a hold
•	 Use a self-checkout machine
•	 Access compact shelving
•	 Sign up for a computer
•	 Book a study room
•	 Print from a computer station
•	 Use a scanner
Most libraries also have signage about building rules. These signs explain your poli-
cies and code of conduct, letting visitors know what they can and cannot do. This might 
include content about:
•	 Quiet sections or floors
•	 Cell phone use
•	 Food and drink
•	 Smoking, pets, and weapons
Service desks are likely signposted. In addition to the name of the desk, you might 
have content related to services provided. For example:
•	 Borrow laptops here
•	 Book study rooms here
•	 Ring bell for service
•	 Computer rules and regulations
•	 No meeting rooms currently available
Directional signage is commonplace, especially in larger libraries. It can tell visitors 
where to find things and how to navigate within particular floors or sections. Such sig-
nage may include:
•	 Sections (e.g., reading room, staff offices)
•	 Collections (e.g., children’s literature, newspapers)
•	 Call number signs at the end of shelving
•	 Signs pointing to restrooms, emergency exits, and stairs
•	 Floor maps and directories
Your library probably raises awareness of its offerings through promotional material 
on posters, digital signs, flyers, and brochures. This content may highlight:

W H Y  G O O D  W R I T I N G  M A T T E R S   ▲  3
•	 New services
•	 Services for particular audiences
•	 Services offered in a certain area (e.g., circulation, homework help)
•	 Upcoming events
•	 Current exhibits
•	 Donations and fundraising
Creative, curated content is also a mainstay in libraries and museums. If you have 
exhibits and other displays, you likely also have associated content such as:
•	 Exhibit overviews (on posters, flyers, etc.)
•	 Placards describing exhibit content
•	 Brochures about exhibits
In a single visit, a library user might encounter dozens of messages about where to 
go, what to do, what not to do, and how to do something. This content can make or break 
the visitor’s experience and feelings toward the library.
In addition to content for building visitors, there is print content out there in the 
world. Librarians are rarely confined to their offices, often leaving the library building to 
interact directly with users where they work, study, and research. If you are teaching an 
instruction session, you might provide handouts, written assignments, or other supple-
mental content. If you are delivering an orientation or tour, you might have brochures, 
floor directories, bookmarks, or tip sheets.
Consider your own library. What content do users experience as they visit your build-
ings? If a librarian is visiting them at their place of work or study, what content do they 
get to take home with them? Is it content you’re proud of? Does it represent your library 
in the best possible light?
Write for the Digital Experience
Libraries increasingly communicate with users through the web, so the quality of content 
in your digital space is critical. Your website content may include:
•	 Informational webpages (e.g., policies, procedures, hours, frequently asked ques-
tions)
•	 Task-based webpages (e.g., reserve a meeting room, chat with a librarian, make a 
donation)
•	 Forms (e.g., request an article, contact us)
You might have web presence beyond your basic website. Libraries often use third-party 
tools to create and/or host their content, such as:
•	 LibGuides for research guides
•	 ContentDM for digital collections
•	 Omeka for online exhibits
•	 Adobe Captivate and Articulate Storyline for tutorials
•	 YouTube and Vimeo for videos
•	 PowerPoint and SlideShare for slide decks 

4   ▲  C H A P T E R  1
You may push out content to users directly. Consider content created for:
•	 Online newsletters
•	 Email notifications
•	 Facebook
•	 Twitter
•	 Instagram
You also likely have direct conversations with your users through email, chat, text, and 
social media.
Libraries of all kinds have a digital presence overflowing with written content. The 
online landscape keeps evolving, providing new opportunities to curate and expose con-
tent to the world. While exciting, it can become overwhelming. Are you using the online 
environment wisely to share your messages and engage your users?
 Writing for Colleagues
Writing is an essential part of your professional career. You obviously want to provide 
useful content for end users, but you also need to pay attention to content you send col-
leagues, supervisors, administrators, stakeholders, and your broader library network.
EVERYONE COMPLAINS ABOUT EMAILS
Do you feel like you get too many work emails? Most people do. A research study 
found the majority of email traffic worldwide now comes from business email, 
accounting for over 100 billion daily (Radicati, 2013). Librarians spend count-
less work hours sending, receiving, and responding to emails. It has become the 
primary way we communicate with our colleagues, supervisors, and employees. 
Emails have transformed working life. Write better, more thoughtful emails and 
encourage others to do the same, and you will increase efficiency, reduce email 
overload, and improve your overall working life.
Manage Work
Written communication is key to sharing and receiving information in order to get your 
work done. Email and shared documents are the primary mechanisms for two-way and 
group communication. In addition, web-based productivity, project management, and 
ticketing tools can help facilitate structured communication among co-workers. Popular 
options include Trello, Slack, Asana, and Redmine. Such tools might be part of your daily 
routine and help you manage communications among team members or across different 
parts of the organization. Content to help manage your work may include:
•	 Project outlines and timelines
•	 Checklists

W H Y  G O O D  W R I T I N G  M A T T E R S   ▲  5
•	 Project definitions, including goals and scope
•	 Detailed responsibilities and expectations
•	 Meeting agendas and minutes
•	 Task and progress tracking
•	 Solicited feedback and responses
•	 Decisions and changes made
Effective written communication can make projects run smoother and more efficiently, 
create an environment for sound decision making, and ensure that feedback is given and 
received freely and without conflict. Structured, practical, consistent written communica-
tion makes for a happier, more productive, and more energizing place to work. 
Communicate Work
Another large part of work life is providing updates on your work to colleagues and 
administrators. If you are a project manager, you might deliver monthly email updates 
on your progress. If you are a department head, you might compile annual reports that 
summarize your recent successes. As an individual librarian, you may write content for 
your performance review where you’re asked to explain your work and its impact to your 
community.
You might use slide decks, intranet pages, or print or digital documents to deliver 
your message. The quality of the content will affect your colleagues’ impressions of your 
work. This can subsequently affect your overall reputation as a professional, helping or 
harming your future opportunities within the organization.
Document Policies and Procedures
If you are in a role that involves training or providing support for staff, you have written 
materials that employees are expected to use. This includes content created for training 
new staff as well as functional content used to get things done. For example:
•	 Policies (e.g., working from home, lunch breaks)
•	 Procedures and how-to instructions (e.g., time reporting, email setup)
•	 Request forms (e.g., travel, leave, funding, IT support)
•	 Other forms (e.g., insurance, reimbursement)
Too often, content like this is not just dry and boring; it is cumbersome and difficult for 
staff to understand. If staff don’t understand rules or processes they are expected to fol-
low, it not only adds additional staff time to respond to questions but can also put their 
jobs on the line. To ensure understandability, review every documented policy, procedure, 
and form staff are required to use as part of their jobs. Each document should be clear, 
succinct, and leave no room for ambiguity.
Serve the Profession
If you are active in professional organizations, such as the American Library Association, 
you use written communication for everything from documenting meeting minutes to 
recruiting members to write blog posts and newsletters. This type of information can 

6   ▲  C H A P T E R  1
overwhelm a librarian’s email inbox as content comes through multiple listservs and 
channels. Making thoughtful content decisions on behalf of the association will help you 
stand out from the clutter and get your message across. People will be more likely to read 
your message, making it more likely to get the response you want. This can also help you 
build your professional reputation.
 Writing Good Content Matters
It Matters to Users
Librarians love content. After all, one of their primary missions is to provide content 
that is meaningful, useful, and relevant. And yet, the written content that overburdened, 
time-constrained librarians curate is too often put together without considering the 
reader and without taking the time to do it right. 
Curators can put up an amazing exhibit of content, but if the explanatory content 
written on note cards is difficult to interpret, the exhibit loses meaning. Digital collec-
tions can be outstanding, but if the descriptions that welcome users to the collection 
don’t speak in their language, they might leave immediately. You can have a near-perfect 
navigation system on your website, but then fail when it comes to the actual content—can 
users find the answers to their questions? Can they decipher the words on the page? Can 
they skim the headings and get the gist of what the webpage is all about? 
The written content you provide plays an essential role in defining your library as an 
organization. Content can affect each part of the user journey, from the first impression 
a visitor has when she enters your building and reads a digital sign, to the interaction she 
later has on your website, to the email she reads a week later. Users have high expecta-
tions when it comes to their experience. They don’t have much time to decipher content 
and they want to quickly complete tasks and find answers to their questions. They also 
want to feel a sense of belonging, be treated respectfully, and be inspired to discover new 
knowledge. Written content provides an enormous opportunity to connect with your 
users, make them feel welcome, and leave a positive lasting impression.
It Matters to Colleagues
Too often, even less thought is put into written communication with colleagues. Cryptic 
email responses are sent haphazardly, reports are put together without thoughtful head-
ings and structure, and meeting minutes go on for five pages without any articulated next 
steps or outcomes. The writer is then surprised to learn that her supervisor misunderstood 
the purpose of her email, her colleague wasn’t aware of the current status of a project, or 
her employee didn’t realize he was supposed to send her feedback.
How many times have you seen an email and immediately disregarded it as unim-
portant or irrelevant? Do you think the writer would have thought it was relevant to you? 
Have you ever found out after disregarding something that you were in fact supposed 
to do something? Librarians receive a vast amount of content daily, and it can be hard 
to pull out what is relevant and worthwhile. Too often, requests for feedback or other 
calls to action are hidden within a large body of content that readers are skimming over. 
Composing your content thoughtfully will ensure that important messages don’t get lost. 
You’ll also be building better relationships with your colleagues by respecting their time. 

W H Y  G O O D  W R I T I N G  M A T T E R S   ▲  7
Everybody has different styles and strengths when it comes to writing. Upon quick 
reflection, you might be able to identify the people you work with that have the most 
problematic written communication. Why?
•	 Are their sentences or paragraphs too long? 
•	 Do they send out content that seems irrelevant to the audience? 
•	 Do they overcomplicate things, making them difficult to decipher or take action 
upon? 
•	 Is their content vague or without clear purpose? 
•	 Do they use passive voice?
•	 Do they use jargon or formal language that makes the message hard to decipher?
On the other end of the spectrum, you probably have colleagues who are excellent com-
municators. What is it that makes them stand out? Pay attention to their approaches:
•	 Are they using subject lines more effectively? 
•	 Are they structuring their documents with headings?
•	 Do they use tables and bullets to make content more easily digestible?
•	 Do they make it clear when they want feedback or some other action? 
•	 Are their sentences concise and direct?
•	 Do they get to the point more quickly than others?
Start studying the communications you receive from colleagues. Take notice of what 
works well for you as a reader and what fails. One of the best ways to become a better 
writer is to study what you read.
 Writing for Digital and Print
Reading in the Digital Age
The prevalence of reading on a computer screen has affected reading behavior over the 
past couple of decades. It’s long been realized that readers tend to scan online content, 
reading perhaps 20 percent of a webpage (Nielsen, 2008). But this habit is no longer 
limited to online content. In fact, reading on-screen is fostering a “snippet” approach to 
the written word in general, where readers primarily skim content and spend much less 
time in deep concentration (Baron, 2015).
As librarians are fully aware, there is an ongoing debate of the benefits and pref-
erences for e-books versus print books. People argue that readers will tend to skim an 
e-book whereas they will slowly read and more fully process information in a print book. 
This is partially true, but the environment is a moving target. The line between print and 
digital is now fuzzy. A Kindle, for example, mimics the look of print—it doesn’t have 
the glare that a traditional computer screen will have, nor does it have the distractions of 
other devices (e.g., notifications, Internet). Digital signs are physical objects with no user 
interaction. Most print pieces were born digital. Many publications are both printed and 
placed online. 
While there are continued studies on slow or deep reading, focused attention, and the 
brain, it cannot be denied that as a writer, you should expect to have your readers’ attention  

8   ▲  C H A P T E R  1
only for a short period of time. In the digital and information age, readers are rarely 
concentrating on your content for more than a few moments. To make an impact and 
get your messages across, it’s more important than ever to write with the reader in mind.
Differences in Digital and Print Structure
Digital and print content differs in its functionality. In the digital environment, you can 
create a sophisticated structure. The web allows you to use tools with semantic meaning, 
including hierarchical headings, tiers of navigation, and HTML tags (such as <strong>). 
The web is interactive and can include links between content, expandable content, and 
functionality such as hover and drag-and-drop. These possibilities will influence how you 
approach the organization of your web content. Something produced solely in print has 
none of these capabilities. The only interaction a user might have with print is turning a 
page (book), flipping it over (flyer), or opening it up (brochure).
That said, writing well is writing well. It is equally important in print as it is on 
the web. Writing in plain language and ensuring your written content is organized and 
understandable, as well as being engaging and compelling, are important whatever the 
format.
 Learning to Write Well
Writing Is a Craft, Not an Art
Some people are better writers than others, but people aren’t born good writers. It takes 
effort. Better writing comes with intentional practice, critique, reflection, and revision. As 
Zinsser explains, “Writing is a craft, not an art. . . . If your job is to write every day, you 
learn to do it like any other job” (2006: 4).
Better writing also comes by paying attention to your surroundings. As you go about 
your day, notice where language is used in your environment. Read junk mail, terms of 
use agreements, billboards, signs, and brochures. What works and what doesn’t, and why? 
What makes you confused? What makes you lose trust in an organization? What makes 
you happy? What makes you feel informed and empowered? Spend time critiquing con-
tent in your daily life, and you’ll pick up new ideas, tricks, and inspiration for your own 
work.
There Is No Right Way
Writing is not an exact science. There is no right way to write, and there are few hard-
and-fast rules when it comes to writing, especially in an informal context. While this 
book points out some better ways to write, it doesn’t claim to know all the answers 
and certainly doesn’t claim you must follow certain rules all of the time. Rules are made 
to be broken, and the English language is a constantly evolving system. You will write 
differently from your parents, your colleagues, and your friends. And that’s a good thing. 
Writing is a deeply personal, human behavior and reflects who you are as an individual.
Your writing process might also differ from others, and that’s normal. Zinsser under-
stood that different approaches aren’t just to be expected; they are inevitable. He writes, 
“Some people write by day, others by night. Some people need silence, others turn on 
the radio. Some write by hand, some by computer, some by talking into a tape recorder. 

W H Y  G O O D  W R I T I N G  M A T T E R S   ▲  9
Some people write their first draft in one long burst and then revise; others can’t write 
the second paragraph until they have fiddled endlessly with the first” (2006: 5). Discover 
what process works well for you. Embrace your writing strengths and work tirelessly to 
improve your writing weaknesses. Dedicate time to improving your craft. Whatever you 
do, remain open to critique and new approaches to writing as you learn and grow as a 
professional.
 Key Points
Good writing builds stronger, more effective relationships with your users and your col-
leagues. It reflects your library’s identity and your personal brand, and is a core part of the 
user experience. Remember:
•	 Good writing saves your users time.
•	 Good writing improves your work life.
•	 The digital environment makes good writing as important as ever.
•	 There is no right way to write.
If you are committed to writing well, you have to pay attention to your audience. Next, 
you will find out how to get to know your readers.
 References
Baron, Naomi. 2015. “The Plague of tl;dr.” The Chronicle Review, February 9. http://chronicle.com/
article/The-Plague-of-tl-dr/151635.
Nielsen, Jakob. 2008. “How Little Do Users Read?” Nielsen Norman Group. May 6. www. 
nngroup.com/articles/how-little-do-users-read.
Radicati, Sara, ed. 2013. “Email Statistics Report, 2013-2017.” The Radicati Group, Inc. 
April 
1. 
www.radicati.com/wp/wp-content/uploads/2013/04/Email-Statistics- 
Report-2013-2017-Executive-Summary.pdf.
Zinsser, William. 2006. On Writing Well: The Classic Guide to Writing Nonfiction. New York: Harper 
& Row.


▲  1 1
C H A P T E R  2
Knowing Your Readers
T
HE FIRST STEP TO BETTER WRITING is empathizing with your readers. In this 
chapter, you will discover how to get to know your readers, why it’s so important, 
and how to consider them in everything you write.
 Knowing Your Readers Matters
Readers Are the Whole Point
Unless you are writing a personal journal, you probably intend for somebody to read 
your content. You translate your thoughts into words and write them down, and then it 
becomes another person’s job to read and understand those words. The value of writing is 
not in the author’s own personal enjoyment (although that’s a plus). The value is that that 
somebody is able to read it, get something out of it, and do something with it. Stephen 
King writes, “The reader must always be your main concern; without Constant Reader, 
you are just a voice quacking in the void” (2000: 124).
Why spend the time writing something if no one is going to want to read it? Adopt 
a user-centered approach. It will help you evaluate your writing with a more critical eye, 
and you will ultimately write better, more compelling, and more useful content.
Readers Will Understand Your Writing
You have intention behind your writing, and you want your readers to understand your 
message. You have a much better chance of this happening if you have a strong sense of 
IN THIS CHAPTER
P
P Why it’s important to know your readers
P
P How to get to know your readers
P
P How to write with the reader in mind

1 2  ▲  C H A P T E R  2
who your readers are and where they are coming from. Ross and Nilsen explain, “Your 
readers will have to interpret your text, and their interpretation will be colored by many 
factors, including their relationship to you, their roles, their skill at reading, their knowl-
edge of the topic at hand, their previous experiences, expectations, and biases, and their 
goals in reading the text” (2013: 63–64). Paying attention to these factors will help you 
make better content decisions. By understanding the characteristics and perspectives of 
your audience, you are more likely to:
•	 Frame content within the appropriate context
•	 Choose words that make sense to your readers
•	 Anticipate and answer your readers’ questions
•	 Avoid or explain any jargon
Combined, these practices will produce better, more understandable content. You are 
more likely to meet your own goals and the goals of your readers. 
WRITING FOR HUMANS
Another advantage to keeping your readers in mind is that you are more likely to 
address them directly, as you would actual people. In future chapters, you’ll learn 
the benefits of using active voice and conversational language. Empathizing with 
your readers and writing to them directly will guarantee more conversational, hu-
man-centered language.
You Will Better Represent Your Library (or Yourself)
Libraries have long valued customer service. Significant resources are spent on training 
frontline staff to be friendly, knowledgeable, and respectful. Meeting and exceeding cus-
tomer expectations is a great way to build a strong community of users that trust you, 
support you, and see the value in the services you provide. Poorly constructed content 
that doesn’t consider the audience works against your customer service mission. It will 
annoy your readers and reduce their confidence in your abilities, damaging your library’s 
reputation.
Even if you are writing content for internal use only, customer service plays a role. 
Respect the time of your colleagues. Not paying attention to their needs and expectations 
can harm your professional reputation.
 Identifying Your Audience
Your Current Audience
Before you define your message and structure your content, think about the end user: the 
website visitor, the patron reading his or her email notice, the student trying to navigate 
signage in the library building, or the colleague trying to interpret your email. Who is on 
the other end of your content? 

K N O W I N G  Y O U R  R E A D E R S   ▲  1 3
For public, external communications, it’s useful to identify your primary audi-
ence. If you have a marketing or communications office, you may already have defined 
audiences for particular messages and communication channels. If you have a user- 
experience department, you may have a similar list of audiences associated with differ-
ent webpages or other touch points. In an academic library, you might identify first-year 
students, teaching assistants, and PhD candidates as your main audience segments. In a 
museum, perhaps your main audiences are out-of-town visitors, researchers, and school 
groups.
It can be helpful to create personas, if your library doesn’t already have some. Personas 
are fictional characters that represent your audience. When implemented well, you can 
bring personas into conversations and decision making to ensure you are always keeping 
the user in mind. At the University of Arizona Libraries, primary personas include:
•	 Cheyenne, a first-year undergraduate student
•	 Emily, a graduate student and teaching assistant
•	 Rahul, a second-year medical student
•	 Brandon, a PhD candidate
•	 Renee, a faculty member
You can also identify secondary audiences. These are important audience segments with 
distinct characteristics, but represent a smaller population. At the University of Arizona 
Libraries, secondary personas include:
•	 Elle, a library employee who staffs the service desk
•	 Craig, a community member who uses library computers
•	 Donald, a retiree who attends library exhibits and events
If you work in a library, you likely provide content to a similar, diverse group of au-
dience segments. Imagine how your content and messaging might change based on the 
audience you intend to reach. If your library hasn’t yet identified its audience, it is time to 
do so. And do so intentionally, explicitly, and based on user research.
TIPS FOR PERSONAS
Personas are most useful when you base them on actual user research, such as focus 
groups, user interviews, surveys, and analytics data. As you put together personas, 
make them as realistic as possible: give them names, use unique photos of people 
rather than generic stock photos, and build in actual quotes from your research. 
Also be sure to include diversity of gender, age, and ethnicity.
With your personas established, identify ways to incorporate them into your 
project workflows. Consider them whenever you are creating new content or a new 
service. Bring them up in conversations and let them guide your decision making 
as you’re writing content for a brochure, planning a social media strategy, or put-
ting together a marketing plan for a library service.

1 4  ▲  C H A P T E R  2
Your Potential Audience
You can identify who currently reads your content, but what about who you want reading 
your content? Is there a target market you haven’t captured yet, such as potential donors, 
legislators, or community officials? Maybe there is an untapped audience you would love 
to reach. Could better content get you there?
Again, a marketing and communications office would probably have an opinion on 
this topic. It would also be worthwhile to check in with your development officer, director, 
and strategic planners who might be discussing future directions for your library. You may 
find value in creating additional personas that represent potential, aspirational audience 
segments, such as:
•	 Arch, a potential donor
•	 Mika, a campus administrator
•	 Cameron, a student governance leader
While you certainly want to focus on your current audience, don’t forget about the un-
tapped potential audience. Thoughtful, focused content can be a powerful and influential 
tool for reaching those audiences.
 Getting to Know Your Readers
Have Empathy
It’s important not just to think about your readers, but also to empathize with them. An 
empathetic mind-set is key to user-centered writing. What motivates your readers? What 
do they struggle with? What are their gaps in knowledge? What would make their lives 
easier or more enjoyable? Why should they care about what you are writing? What’s in 
it for them?
It is your job as a writer to genuinely care about the person on the other end. Practice 
what Ann Handley calls “pathological empathy.” She writes, “Empathy for the customer 
experience should be at the root of all your content, because having a sense of the people 
you are writing for and a deep understanding of their problems is key to honing your 
skill.” The most highly skilled content writers are those who observe their users’ behaviors, 
empathize with their challenges, and try to make their lives better. Handley goes on to 
say, “What matters . . . is creating useful content that solves customer problems, shoulders 
their burdens, eases their pain, enriches their lives” (2014: 47). 
The idea of enriching readers’ lives might sound ambitious if you are just writing 
email responses to customer complaints, but it does speak to the power of good writing. 
You could write generic, policy-driven responses, or you could write empathetic, hu-
man-centered responses. Avoid such cold language as “You are being charged $60 and 
it is uncontestable. Review section 2.1 of the replacement book policy and pay as soon 
as possible.” Instead, try something more like, “I’m sorry to hear about your car being 
broken into. I’m sure the last thing you want to worry about is library books. Sadly, we 
will need to charge you the cost of the books, but let’s talk more about payment options 
and see what we can work out together.” Empathetic responses could demonstrate you 
understand why they are upset, feel their pain, and want to make things right. It’s possible 

K N O W I N G  Y O U R  R E A D E R S   ▲  1 5
that even a short email to a customer could, in fact, make their lives a bit better. Don’t 
underestimate the power of thoughtful writing.
Observe
To better understand your readers, start by observing their behavior. Become an an-
thropologist of sorts, conducting ethnographic research out in the field. Observe how 
your readers talk, act, and interact with others. Actively listen to how they describe their 
successes and challenges. Take mental note of their values and priorities as they make 
decisions. When you want to know more, ask them questions with a genuine curiosity to 
learn, understand, and empathize.
Conduct User Research
If you’re serious about getting to know your readers, explore more formal research meth-
ods. Conduct surveys to get data on demographics, library use, customer feedback, and 
priorities. Use web analytics tools to see what web content is most popular and how users 
get to it. Organize focus groups and user interviews to uncover what language people use 
to describe library services and resources.
As a starting point, compile data that already exists. While libraries serve a diverse 
audience, you will find common themes. What previous experiences have your readers 
had with libraries? What is their education level? What do they care about? What keeps 
them up at night? Notice any gaps in your knowledge, and take the time to fill them in 
using a variety of methods.
For internal communications, there are a number of things you can do to better un-
derstand your colleagues, administrators, and stakeholders. Take a look at job descriptions 
and CVs to see what background knowledge and experiences people bring to the table. 
Explore historical documents to see how things have been communicated successfully (or 
not) in the past. Review any standards of conduct and expectations for communications. 
Ask your colleagues what methods of communication work best for them. Clarify their 
needs and expectations. For those colleagues you have the most trouble communicating 
with, take the time to practice empathy, listen to their concerns, and get to know them 
on a deeper level.
Identify Your Readers’ Levels of Knowledge
Consider the reading level of your audience. Perhaps you can find local data through 
your community’s literacy agencies or published reports. If not, keep in mind that 18 
percent of adults (age 16–65) in the United States are at or below the lowest level on the 
literacy scale (U.S. Department of Education, 2012). This means a significant portion of 
the population is very limited in reading comprehension. You want to avoid complex sen-
tence structures or vocabulary above the level of your average reader. Especially in public 
libraries, simple, plain language is your best bet. In fact, plain language is good practice in 
general, and will be discussed further in chapter 4.
You’ll also want to find out what terminology your readers are familiar with. The most 
misunderstood library terms in usability studies include catalog, periodical, and reference 
(Kupersmith, 2012). But is this the case regardless of your audience? Perhaps long- 
standing faculty members or advanced researchers are more familiar with these terms. 

1 6  ▲  C H A P T E R  2
But be careful—if you have a broad audience, even familiar terms may have different 
meanings for different people. Think of the term database. Librarians think of databases 
as subscription-based online portals of articles, books, and other information resources. 
Software engineers usually think of databases as complex, back-end data systems. Ad-
ministrative assistants could well think of databases as tables of budget data managed 
within Microsoft Access. And database is just the beginning. Other common library 
terms that can be misinterpreted include digital collections, digital scholarship, and electronic 
resources. Do your research and question your assumptions to find out what terminology 
works best for your audience.
For internal communications, you may have an entirely different set of acceptable 
vocabulary. Librarians may not bat an eye at metadata standards, ingestion of digital col-
lections, or Boolean operators. But this may not be the case for all library employees. And 
is it acceptable to use the acronyms ILS and OER, or do you need to spell out integrated 
library system and open educational resources? A little bit of user research can tell you, and 
will prevent any confusion when you send that email, deliver that report, or present that 
slideshow.
Beyond terminology, take the time to explore your readers’ understanding of broader 
concepts. Even if they don’t know the term document delivery, perhaps they are familiar 
with the service of requesting articles. Maybe they don’t know the term express retrieval, 
but they understand that the library will pull books and place them on the hold shelf. On 
the other hand, some concepts could be entirely mysterious to them. Perhaps it’s not just 
the term subject guide that is unfamiliar, but so is the entire notion of a research guide on 
a particular topic.
Again, your internal audience will have different levels of knowledge than your ex-
ternal audience. Librarians might understand the concept of link resolvers for accessing 
content, or mapping catalog metadata into a discovery tool, whereas your average library 
visitor would not be able to easily conceptualize either of these things.
So when identifying the knowledge level of your audience, ask the following:
•	 What is their reading level? 
•	 What is their background knowledge and experience?
•	 What terminology are they familiar with? 
•	 What acronyms need to be spelled out?
•	 What concepts are they familiar with?
Knowing what your readers already know or don’t know will help you focus your writing. 
It will allow you to remove unnecessary or redundant content while expanding upon or 
simplifying something that might be a new topic for most readers.
Identify Your Readers’ Goals
With an understanding of who you are writing for, you can then determine their goals—
the utility of your content. What’s in it for them? Ask:
•	 What do your readers need?
•	 What do they expect?
•	 What do they want to learn?
•	 What do they want to experience?

K N O W I N G  Y O U R  R E A D E R S   ▲  1 7
•	 How do they want to feel?
•	 What do they want to do?
Your content can serve a variety of user goals. In chapter 3 you will learn more about 
defining content goals and purpose, but it’s important to start thinking about them at the 
outset as you analyze your audience. How does your content help your readers? Perhaps 
it helps them:
•	 Complete a task
•	 Solve a problem
•	 Make a decision
•	 Save time
•	 Get inspired
•	 Be entertained
•	 Learn something new
Identify Your Readers’ Challenges and Motivations
To write with your audience in mind, become familiar with their challenges and motiva-
tions. For example, imagine you are writing a webpage about book delivery for an online 
student audience. You know that they tend to be returning students who work full time and 
do their coursework in the evenings and weekends. So in general, your readers are going to:
•	 Have demanding schedules, juggling school, work, and personal commitments
•	 Be highly motivated to be successful in their coursework to improve their profes-
sional opportunities
With this in mind, you can make it clear on the webpage that this book delivery service 
will address some of their challenges: it will save them time and effort. You can address 
their motivations, too: it will make them more successful in their class projects. Framing 
your content this way will make it more relevant and meaningful to your readers.
Identify Your Readers’ Context
A reader sitting down to enjoy an article on a topic that is important to her is in a differ-
ent frame of mind than someone who is trying to quickly read a terms of use statement 
on a website. Think about your reader’s environment and mental state. Think about her 
context. Ask:
•	 How is she finding it? 
∘∘Did she actively seek out the content?
∘∘Did the content unexpectedly show up in her mail or email?
•	 What brought her to that point? 
∘∘Is this her first attempt to find the answer to her question? 
∘∘How motivated is she to read it?
•	 What does she want to do next?
∘∘Does she want to save or share your content?
∘∘Is there a task or call to action this content will help her with?

1 8  ▲  C H A P T E R  2
•	 What is her mood and frame of mind? 
∘∘Is she frustrated or relaxed?
∘∘Is she under time constraints?
∘∘What is her level of patience?
•	 If it’s digital content, what device is she using to access it? 
∘∘Is it a handheld, laptop, or desktop computer?
∘∘Is it a touchscreen device?
•	 What might distract her away from your content?
∘∘Is she reading this on her lunch break?
∘∘Is she on the bus or in a work meeting?
•	 How does this content fit into other aspects of her life?
∘∘Is reading your content part of her regular routine?
∘∘Does your content compete with similar content?
•	 How will she approach your content?
∘∘Will she read it all in one sitting, or come back to it later?
∘∘Will she read it word-for-word, or skim it to find the information she needs?
These are a lot of questions, but they are important. By understanding your readers’ 
context, you can frame your message in the most effective way.
 Things All Readers Have in Common
Readers Are Busy
While getting to know your own particular audience is important, you can make some 
pretty safe assumptions. For one, they are in a rush and easily distracted. And even if 
they are not, writing with the busy reader in mind will only improve your writing. It will 
encourage you to focus and simplify your message. As Natalie Canavor writes, “Write 
for the overscheduled, information-loaded, low attention span, impatient, and skeptical 
audience—which is all of them” (2016: 8). 
Readers Are Self-Interested
You can also count on your readers to care about their own interests. It’s a natural human 
trait: humans want to know “what’s in it for me,” often referred to as the WIIFM princi-
ple in business writing. Always be sure to speak to your readers’ motivations and interests. 
 Key Points
Good writing starts with a good understanding of your audience. Remember:
•	 Practice empathy, keeping your readers in the forefront of your mind.
•	 Test your assumptions and get to know your readers in a variety of ways.
•	 Pay attention to your readers’ knowledge, goals, and context.
•	 No matter your audience, it’s good practice to write for the busy, self-interested 
reader.

K N O W I N G  Y O U R  R E A D E R S   ▲  1 9
Now that you have a sense of who you’re writing for, it’s time to think about the message 
and purpose of your writing. In chapter 3, you’ll identify your content goals, structure, 
voice, and tone.
 References
Canavor, Natalie. 2016. Business Writing Today: A Practical Guide. Los Angeles: Sage Publications.
Handley, Ann. 2014. Everybody Writes: Your Go-To Guide for Creating Ridiculously Good Content. 
Hoboken, NJ: Wiley.
King, Stephen. 2000. On Writing: A Memoir of the Craft. New York: Scribner.
Kupersmith, John. 2012. “Library Terms That Users Understand.” LAUC-B and Library Staff 
Research. eScholarship. University of California. https://escholarship.org/uc/item/3qq499w7. 
Ross, Catherine, and Kirsti Nilsen. 2013. Communicating Professionally. 3rd ed. Chicago: Ne-
al-Schuman.
U.S. Department of Education, National Center for Education Statistics. 2012. Literacy, Numer-
acy, and Problem Solving in Technology-Rich Environments among U.S. Adults: Results from 
the Program for the International Assessment of Adult Competencies 2012. http://nces.ed.gov/
pubs2014/2014008.pdf.


▲  2 1
C H A P T E R  3
Defining Your Message  
and Purpose
M
OST HARD-TO-UNDERSTAND WRITING lacks a clear purpose or structure. 
This is why it is important to consider your message and purpose at the outset. 
In this chapter, you will determine the purpose of what you are writing, taking 
into account the readers’ goals and expectations as well as what you would like readers to 
actually do with the information provided. You will then bring structure to your written 
content, prioritizing the most essential messages and organizing it in a way that makes 
sense to the reader.
 Identifying User Needs and Goals
Writing for the user experience is key. Understand your audience, or your writing is 
doomed for failure. How to get to know your readers is covered in chapter 2. Let’s assume 
at this point that you have a firm grasp of your readers’ needs, expectations, and habits. 
Now you are at the point of putting pen to paper (or fingers to keyboard). How do you 
use this information to create better content?
How People Really Read
Most of the time, readers are skimming your content rather than reading it word for 
word. It’s true that as much thought as you put into the selection and placement of each 
IN THIS CHAPTER
P
P How to balance user goals with organizational goals
P
P How to define the purpose of your writing, including any call(s) to action
P
P Ways to prioritize and structure your writing based on your message

2 2  ▲  C H A P T E R  3
word on a page, most of your readers aren’t going to be consuming it in this traditional, 
linear fashion. Even in a full-length book format, such as this, there is a good chance that 
you, as the reader, are doing more skimming than reading. Am I right?
Readers skim. This has long been an accepted fact for digital content: 28 percent of 
words on a webpage get read by the page visitor, and probably less than that (Nielsen, 
2008). Even in academic settings, students and faculty alike are now used to “minimal-
ist” reading, the “power browse,” or the “snippet” approach to digital text (Baron, 2015). 
There is ongoing research related to the difference in consumption of digital and print 
media, but one study found that there was no significant difference between the levels 
of comprehension for print and digital presentation of content (Sun, Shieh, and Huang, 
2013). The line between digital and print is becoming fuzzier. With the introduction of 
electronic readers aimed to look more like print, such as the Kindle, and the constant evo-
lution of technology for reading and interacting with text, it is a pretty safe assumption 
that readers are often skimming your content regardless of format.
So whether it is an email, a flyer, or a webpage, it’s rare for somebody to sit down 
and read the content continuously, word for word, line by line. (An exception to this is 
fiction or creative writing, which is a whole different topic requiring a whole different 
approach. This book doesn’t intend to cover that topic—there are many other books, and 
more appropriate authors, to write on that topic.)
What Readers Want
It goes without saying that readers want content to be understandable and easy to nav-
igate, but what else do they want? The way you go about writing should vary greatly 
depending on your readers’ mind-sets, intentions, and expectations.
Some types of writing are for entertainment. Perhaps you have a staff-curated blog 
that teaches readers about interesting items in your collection. Maybe you have reviews 
of books or documentaries, or compelling stories about members of your community. A 
good way to frame user needs is through personas, as discussed in chapter 2. To frame the 
expectations of your reader for this type of content, you might say, “Donald wants to: (1) 
be entertained, (2) get inspired, and (3) discover something new.”
More common scenarios in libraries are when the user wants to learn something. 
Maybe you are writing a brochure on library services for students. In this case, you might 
say, “Cheyenne wants to: (1) know how many books she can check out, (2) find out the 
locations of the different libraries, and (3) discover what technology she can borrow from 
the library.” 
By identifying your user needs and articulating them, you will have an outline of what 
content you need to cover. Be careful to limit the number of user goals you are trying to 
meet in just a single piece of content. If you find yourself with a list of a dozen or more 
goals, consider more than one content approach (e.g., multiple webpages, a news story 
and a webpage, both text and video). You also will need to prioritize what comes when, 
which is discussed later in this chapter.
As you think through the intention of your content, frame it in the eyes of your read-
ers, appealing to their goals and mind-sets. As Ann Handley explains, “Reframe the idea 
to relate it to your readers. Why does it matter to them? What is in it for them? Why 
should they care? What’s the clear lesson or message you want them to take away? What 
value do you offer them? What questions might they have? What advice or help can you 
provide?” (2014: 28).

D E F I N I N G  Y O U R  M E S S A G E  A N D  P U R P O S E   ▲  2 3
 Identifying Organizational Purpose and Goals
Sometimes, the user needs will clearly align with your organizational goals, but not al-
ways. What are your personal or organizational goals, and how do they fit in with the 
context of your users’ goals? Oftentimes, you want to do something for your readers in 
order to reach a related organizational goal. For instance, your intention could be to:
•	 Inform readers of your circulation policies so that they don’t get late fees.
•	 Entertain readers so that they like the library and support it down the road.
•	 Tell your story so that readers can advocate for the library within the community.
There are a variety of things your writing could be intended to do. What are your goals 
and purpose? Do you intend to:
•	 Inform?
•	 Entertain?
•	 Provoke?
•	 Entice?
•	 Excite?
•	 Convince?
•	 Persuade?
Perhaps you want to actually sell something to your users, such as library-published 
books or a fee-based service (e.g., journal publishing, 3D printing). Or maybe you want 
to get buy-in for something your library is doing. In times of limited budgets and staff-
ing, it is as important as ever to have a community supporting the work that you do. 
Or maybe you are trying to get someone to try a new service or attend an upcoming 
event—even if it’s a free service or opportunity, you still have to convince them it is 
worth their time and effort. In all of these cases, you need to ask yourself, “What’s in 
it for them?” You need to make sure your content addresses this question directly to be 
most effective. 
Similar to your user needs and goals, you don’t want to have a lot of organizational 
goals here. The more goals you identify, the harder it is to convey your content in a way 
that is understandable to the reader. Your most important goals can get lost in a sea of 
content. So don’t try to do too much. Focusing is key.
Also important is to make sure your content goals align with the broader strategic 
goals of your library. For example, if you are hosting a lecture on a topic of strategic im-
portance to the library, present the content in a way that reflects this. In promotional ma-
terials, the basic content would just be, “Will Simpson presents on the Future of Scholarly 
Publishing, Main Library, Thursday, April 30.” This type of content has no voice or real 
message behind it. To better align the messaging with the broader strategic goal of your 
library, you could instead write, “Join the library as we lead discussions on the future of 
scholarly publishing. Hear invited guest Will Simpson. . . .” Pay attention to these types 
of opportunities to communicate your strategic goals and directions as a library in your 
public-facing content.

2 4  ▲  C H A P T E R  3
 Defining Your Primary Messages and Calls to Action
Define Your Primary Messages
Your primary messages are the core points you are trying to make in your content. Brain-
storm a list of messages based on your user and organizational goals. Then ruthlessly 
refine your list until you’re left with only the essentials. In many cases, this will be just one 
or two things. For example, your primary messages for a webpage on e-books could be:
•	 Use this search box to find all e-books in the library.
•	 Alternatively, go to a specific e-book provider to browse their collection by topic.
If you are creating a brochure for Friends of the Library, your primary messages could 
be:
•	 The library does amazing things for the community.
•	 It only costs $50 to become an annual friend and get all sorts of benefits.
Define Your Calls to Action
In web design, a “call to action” is the thing you want the user to do next. This concept 
can apply to writing in any format. If you intend for the reader to do something with the 
information, you have a call to action. Do you want the reader to respond in some way, 
take a next step, or complete some other action? Calls to action might be:
•	 Search for e-books.
•	 Become a Friend of the Library.
•	 Request a book through interlibrary loan.
•	 Request the library purchase a book.
•	 Sign up for the library newsletter.
•	 Like the library on Facebook.
On webpages and in emails, there is usually some call to action. As you think about 
how to structure your content, the call to action is perhaps the most important consider-
ation of all. In fact, if there is not a call to action, you may want to reconsider the goals 
of the content and if the content is even necessary. 
UNDERLYING GOAL: BUILDING RELATIONSHIPS
An underlying but important goal of your writing should be to cultivate relation-
ships. This could mean you are building continued support from donors by being 
transparent in how you are spending endowment funds, or building trust with your 
new employees through authentic and personalized messages. The voice and tone 
of your writing plays a big role in fostering relationships over the long term, which 
you’ll learn more about in chapter 12.

D E F I N I N G  Y O U R  M E S S A G E  A N D  P U R P O S E   ▲  2 5
The call to action answers the reader’s question: what now? Even if the answer is 
something boring like “go back to the other document,” that should be clear. If you don’t 
have a call to action in mind, again go back to thinking of the user. What might he or she 
want to do next? See related content? Read more? Contact a person? Make a comment? 
By thinking through what the reader might want to do next, you might realize that there 
is actually a call to action you hadn’t yet considered.
IS THERE ALWAYS A CALL TO ACTION?
Not always. Especially in content that libraries provide, sometimes the purpose 
is for the reader to absorb the information and then move on to something else. 
Perhaps the goal is for the person to simply read and understand the content, 
but by doing this they will then do something outside in the world. They will be 
armed with newfound knowledge and will be able to put it to good use. Perhaps 
you have an informational webpage about scholarly publishing or copyright. A call 
to action could be to contact a librarian or to sign a petition or make some kind 
of request, but it could also simply be for them to become more informed and use 
the information in their future studies or research. This is okay, and while it is not 
a traditional call to action, it is still something that you, as a writer, need to think 
about as you write and structure your content. Just always consider: what do you 
want them to learn, and then what do you want them to do?
 Prioritizing and Structuring Content
Step Back
Now that you have a good understanding of your users’ and organization’s goals, as well 
as your primary messages and any calls to action, you should have some sense of what 
content is required. What is the breadth and depth of content needed to accomplish these 
goals? You may realize at this point that what you thought would be a simple webpage 
should actually be more than that: several webpages, a news story, and a blog post. On the 
other hand, you may find that while you had initially intended something to be an entire 
section on your website, it could be a shorter-lived news story instead.
Put Key Messages First
With goals and messages in hand, it is time to prioritize your content. Of everything, 
what is most important? If your primary purpose is to convince or persuade the reader, 
then your key message is likely explaining what is in it for them. Why should they care? 
In high school or even college-level English composition classes, you may have 
been taught the traditional essay structure: introduction, body, conclusion. This narrative, 
chronological approach forces the reader to get all the way to the end before learning 
the main point. Many writing instructors have gotten away from this format because 
it doesn’t work well in the real world. It doesn’t appeal to the browsing and skimming  

2 6  ▲  C H A P T E R  3
nature of today’s busy reader. Think about such documents as a grant application, a project 
report, or a project update. Do you want to hear the entire background and history before 
the “meat” of the thing? No, you want to hear about the update first. You want what is 
most important and relevant, and you want it now.
In journalism, writers are taught to organize their writing in the form of an “inverted 
pyramid.” This means their primary messages come first, since many readers skim the 
headlines and first sentences of news and other informational content. This also applies 
to much of our writing as librarians. Whether it is in an email, on a webpage, or in a 
document, your most important message should come first, almost always.
The title is often where the key message—or at least part of it—should go, whether 
it is the title of a brochure, the title of a webpage, or the subject line of an email. If you 
can break down the content to one key message, what would it be? Make sure that your 
message is speaking in the language of your audience. How will this content help them 
reach their goals? Key, actionable messages are reflected in titles such as:
•	 Search for e-Books
•	 Become a Friend of the Library
•	 Apply for a Study Room
More complete messages, reflected in the body or headers of the content, could be along 
the lines of:
•	 Search for e-books in one easy search box.
•	 Become a Friend of the Library and help us be the best we can be.
•	 Apply for a long-term study room and get the quiet space you need.
As Ginny Redish explains in her influential book on web writing, Letting Go of the Words, 
“Whatever your key message is, put it first. Put it in the headline (the bite) and elaborate 
it quickly in the beginning of the text (the snack)” (2012: 136).
Put Calls to Action in Obvious Places
When you have a call to action, this should be apparent to the reader from skimming 
the text. An all-too-common mistake in writing is to place a call to action deep within a 
paragraph, forcing the reader to skim through a lot of text to find the link they are look-
ing for. As demonstrated table 3.1, simply placing the call to action at the beginning of a 
sentence can make it more prominent to the user and indicate its importance.
Table 3.1.    Placement of Call to Action
LESS OBVIOUS CALL TO ACTION
MORE PROMINENT CALL TO ACTION 
Our archive has unique collections from the 
southwest, borderlands, and the university. The 
best way to browse our collections is to see our 
collections by subject.
Collections by subject are the best way to browse 
our archive’s unique collections from the 
southwest, borderlands, and the university.

D E F I N I N G  Y O U R  M E S S A G E  A N D  P U R P O S E   ▲  2 7
Create an Overall Structure
In future chapters, you will learn some of the tools for organizing and structuring your 
content, such as headings, links, and bulleted lists. For now, just think about how you 
might structure your content based on priority. As mentioned earlier, you should probably 
put the most important information first, and supplemental information last.
What order and structure will help you best communicate your primary messages? 
Ginny Redish (2012) suggests you break up your content into discrete topics and subtop-
ics. You can break these topics up by time or sequence, task, people, type of information, 
or questions people ask. See table 3.2 for possible ways to order different types of content.
Table 3.2.    Ways to Order Content
TYPE OF CONTENT
POSSIBLE WAY TO ORDER
Instructions
Chronologically
Search options
By task (e.g., search for an article, a book, or a film)
Circulation privileges
By audience type (e.g., student, faculty member, community member)
List of databases
Alphabetically
Form
By type of information 
Frequently asked questions
By order users might ask them
Ross and Nilsen provide even more ordering options—by spatial sequence, attributes 
of comparison, or pro and con (2013). If you are writing about study rooms, ordering by 
each floor could work well. If you are writing a report comparing database options, you 
might organize your content by first comparing cost, then content, then usability of the 
different products. If you are preparing a report outlining a new travel policy, readers 
might appreciate reading a list of benefits first followed by a list of drawbacks.
CAUTION ON ORGANIZING BY AUDIENCE
When breaking up your content by audience, be careful that you aren’t excluding 
anyone. If you have a website section “For Faculty” and “For Graduate Students,” 
but you don’t have a section “For Undergraduate Students,” your undergraduate 
students may feel left out and unwelcome.
Again, remember your audience. How would they approach this content? Thinking 
about the content from their perspective can help guide your organization. When in 
doubt, try one approach, gather feedback, and evaluate if your approach works well or if 
you need to adjust it. (Learn more about evaluating and revising content in chapter 14.)
As you think about overall structure, also identify opportunities to layer information. 
Rather than providing all information in a single email, webpage, or document, can you 

2 8  ▲  C H A P T E R  3
link out to details in some areas, or have details collapsed, with the option to expand? 
On a website, you can have brief descriptions of your databases displayed along with a 
clickable icon that allows users to see more details. In a document, you can link out to 
associated documents rather than quoting them in full, or use footnotes or endnotes if 
there is information useful to some, but not all, of your readers. Layering information 
in this way makes content less overwhelming and more focused, as well as giving users 
control over their own experience.
 Key Points
Identifying your goals and the goals of your readers, and then structuring content to 
meet those goals, is core to the writing process. How you apply these steps in your own 
writing will vary based on the context. An email to a colleague will obviously require less 
analysis than a ten-page report you plan to deliver next month to the library advisory 
board. Whatever the scale, though, these concepts set a foundation for useful content. 
Remember:
•	 Let user and organizational needs guide your primary messages.
•	 Put the most important content front and center.
•	 Prioritize and structure content based on its purpose.
Now that you have identified your messages and goals, it is time to get to work on 
the particulars of effective content. In the next chapter, you will learn ways to simplify 
your writing.
References
Baron, Naomi. 2015. “The Plague of tl;dr.” The Chronicle Review, February 9. http://chronicle.com/
article/The-Plague-of-tl-dr/151635.
Handley, Ann. 2014. Everybody Writes. Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons.
Nielsen, Jakob. 2008. “How Little Do Users Read?” Nielsen Norman Group. May 6. www. 
nngroup.com/articles/how-little-do-users-read.
Redish, Janice (Ginny). 2012. Letting Go of the Words: Writing Web Content that Works. 2nd ed. 
Waltham, MA: Morgan Kaufmann. 
Ross, Catherine, and Kirsti Nilsen. Communicating Professionally. 3rd ed. Chicago: Neal-Schuman, 
2013.
Szu-Yuan Sun, Chich-Jen Shieh, and Kai-Ping Huang. 2013. “A Research on Comprehension 
Differences between Print and Screen Reading.” South African Journal of Economic and Man-
agement Sciences 16, no. 5: 87–101.

▲  2 9
C H A P T E R  4
Keeping It Simple
W
HILE CHALLENGING, clarity in your writing is essential. People are more 
likely to read the content and process your message. In this chapter, you will 
learn why writing in plain, succinct language is so important, and how to go 
about doing it.
 Brevity Matters
Strengthen Your Message
A classic guide, The Elements of Style, provided a foundational rule for writers: omit need-
less words. The authors proclaim, “A sentence should contain no unnecessary words, a 
paragraph no unnecessary sentences, for the same reason that a drawing should have no 
unnecessary lines and a machine no unnecessary parts” (Strunk and White, 1999: 25).
Redundancies, jargon, and complex constructions all contribute to cluttered content, 
the “disease” of American writing (Zinsser, 2006: 6). Highlight and strengthen your mes-
sage by stripping down your writing to its cleanest, most vital components.
Save the Time of the Reader
With librarianship comes a culture of educating users. Sadly, this well-meaning approach 
supports a tendency to overshare information, leading to cumbersome, text-heavy con-
tent that frustrates readers. At odds with this culture is one of Ranganathan’s five laws of 
library science: save the time of the reader. Librarians need to strike a balance between 
IN THIS CHAPTER
P
P Why brevity is important
P
P How to simplify paragraphs, sentences, phrases, and words
P
P Which words and phrases to avoid

3 0  ▲  C H A P T E R  4
providing substantive content while also keeping it understandable and efficient. Respect 
your readers’ time and cognitive load through crisp, purposeful language.
Use Plain Language
Plain language, or plain English, refers to content that people can easily read, understand, 
and use (Horton and Quesenbery, 2013). Since the 1990s, the U.S. government has man-
dated that governmental communications follow plain language guidelines. The philoso-
phy is that citizens deserve clear communications from their government. They should be 
able to find what they need, understand what they find, and use what they find to meet 
their needs (PlainLanguage.gov, 2015). So plain language is not only good practice but 
also the law if you are working in a library supported by government funding.
Simplify, Don’t Dumb Down
When you tell others you want to simplify things, they might assert you are just “dumb-
ing things down.” But writing well is not about dumbing it down. It’s about considering, 
respecting, and having empathy for the reader. As Ann Handley writes, “No one will ever 
complain that you’ve made things too simple to understand. Of course, simple does not 
equal dumbed down. . . . Assume the reader knows nothing. But don’t assume the reader is 
stupid.” (2014: 72). 
It Is Worth the Effort
Writing in a simple, understandable format can be challenging. Ironically, it takes more 
thought, organization, and revision to write something succinct than it does to write a 
couple of paragraphs that say the same thing. But it’s worth the effort. Allocate extra 
time to your next writing project. And even if you can’t tackle all your existing content 
anytime soon, Kimble insists that you can at least get started and “pick off some of the 
prime offenders” (2012: 27). 
WRITING AND THINKING
Writing is a mental activity, so focused thought leads to focused writing. If you are 
feeling cluttered mentally, it will be reflected on the page. Practice self-awareness, 
mindfulness, and reflection. If your writing is sloppy, you might need to step back 
and regain your concentration. Meditate, exercise, or do something else that helps 
you focus your energy and train of thought.
 Simplifying Paragraphs
Keep Paragraphs Short
White space is easier on the eyes and makes content easier to skim and digest, so aim for 
short paragraphs. Zinsser explains that “short paragraphs put air around what you write 

K E E P I N G  I T  S I M P L E   ▲  3 1
and make it look inviting, whereas a long chunk of type can discourage a reader from even 
starting to read” (2006: 78). Natalie Canavor echoes this sentiment, arguing that shorter 
paragraphs are more likely to gain your readers’ interest, keep your readers with you, and 
make the content easier to grasp (2016).
Canavor advocates for three to five sentences per paragraph (2016), and Handley 
takes it further and recommends no more than three sentences or six lines (2014). And 
unless you’re writing a book or scholarly article, it’s usually okay to have a paragraph with 
just one sentence. (In this chapter, there is an average of 3.3 sentences per paragraph.)
Hide Less Relevant Content
As you organize your content, consider having supplementary content hidden at first. This 
can be a useful way to keep paragraphs simple and to the point, giving the reader control 
if they desire to read more. You can accomplish this in print using footnotes, endnotes, or 
asterisks, or digitally using an expand-or-collapse option.
While useful, this technique can be done well and can be done poorly. Keep in mind 
your users’ goals and behaviors as well as your voice and tone. Key messages need to be 
prominent. Using footnotes and endnotes may come across as too formal. If you have an 
asterisk on a brochure, that’s fine, but make sure the asterisk is actually defined some-
where. Seeing an asterisk but no definition of what it means is a frustrating experience for 
the reader. So if you use this technique, be thoughtful and strategic about it.
 Simplifying Sentences
Keep Sentences Short
Sentences need to be easily digestible. Natalie Canavor (2016) recommends an average of 
fourteen to eighteen words per sentence (with some shorter and some longer). Ann Han-
dley (2014) recommends no more than twenty-five words in a sentence. (In this chapter, 
the average number of words per sentences is 12.4.) 
The words within your sentences make a difference, so pay attention to the com-
plexity of the words and how they work together. Read your sentences out loud to see if 
they are hard to follow. If you find yourself questioning whether a sentence is too long, 
it probably is.
Break apart complex content. Notice if you have explanatory details set off by pa-
rentheses or dashes. Are the details necessary, or are they superfluous? If you can’t make 
a long sentence shorter without losing meaning, make it more than one sentence. If you 
BE INTENTIONAL WITH PARAGRAPH BREAKS
While you should keep paragraphs to just a few sentences, be purposeful about it. 
Don’t break up content arbitrarily just to follow the short-paragraph rule. Para-
graphs serve to create a logical structure and should help readers understand the 
flow and purpose of the content.

3 2  ▲  C H A P T E R  4
have a significant message placed in parentheses mid-sentence, take it out and put it in 
another sentence. In cases where you can’t avoid writing a long sentence, at least make 
sure it’s under control from beginning to end and that readers can easily follow along 
(Zinsser, 2006).
Remove Unnecessary Adverbs
Watch out for adverbs that serve no value. Unless your adverb changes the meaning of 
the sentence, see if you can do without it. Try to use better verbs or adjectives to convey 
the same message in a bold, succinct way.
Not only can adverbs make sentences longer than they should be, but they can also 
make your writing passive or redundant. Stephen King is pretty passionate about this 
point, contending not only that “the adverb is not your friend” (2000: 124) but also that 
“the road to hell is paved with adverbs, and I will shout it from the rooftops” (2000: 125). 
He is being facetious, of course, but it is a strong word of caution. While adverbs can serve 
a purpose, they are overused. Table 4.1 has some basic examples of how a single word can 
better convey a message than an adverb phrase.
Table 4.1.    Strong Words Replacing Adverb Phrases
ORIGINAL ADVERB PHRASE
REVISED
Very small
Tiny 
Very large
Huge
Extremely sad
Devastated
Argue strongly
Insist
Decrease significantly
Dwindle
Grow exponentially
Skyrocket
Remove Meaningless Modifiers
Be careful about other words and phrases that intend to provide context or detail, but 
ultimately serve no purpose. You will often see meaningless modifiers at the beginning of 
sentences. Take, for example:
•	 Please note. . . .
•	 It should be noted that. . . .
•	 It is interesting to note that. . . .
•	 It is suggested that. . . .
•	 I should point out that. . . .
•	 The fact that. . . .
•	 You will find that. . . .
Most of the time, you can simply remove these modifiers. Including them on occasion to 
help with the flow of your content is fine, but be cautious of using these when they don’t 
add meaning. Be especially cautious if you find yourself using a lot of them.

K E E P I N G  I T  S I M P L E   ▲  3 3
There are also small, one- or two-word modifiers that serve little purpose. Examples 
of needless modifiers include sort of, a bit, rather, somewhat, and quite. These carry some 
meaning, but not much. They can also hurt your voice, since they make you sound timid 
or unsure of yourself. If you see these qualifiers in a sentence, ask yourself if they contrib-
ute meaning. If they don’t, remove them.
Remove Redundant Adjectives
Often, adjectives are also overused or used poorly. For example, consider the sentence: 
“The library’s strategic plan is innovative, creative, and forward-thinking.” Rather than 
listing three comparable adjectives, pick your favorite one that best reflects what you are 
trying to say. Or better yet, find words that capture the spirit of the lot, giving you some-
thing like, “The library’s strategic plan is breaking new ground.” This revision creates a 
bolder sentence. It cuts to the chase and removes redundancies.
Too often, writers get stuck on the power of three and insist on using three adjectives 
to describe something. If you find yourself trying to add one more adjective, stop for a 
moment and reconsider. Is another adjective really needed? What words best describe the 
message you are trying to get across?
Remove Pointless Imperatives
When writing directional content, watch out for unnecessary imperatives at the begin-
ning of your sentences. These usually serve no purpose and distract from your intention. 
For example:
•	 Please go to the information desk. . . .
•	 Be sure to fill out the online form. . . .
•	 You may want to contact us with questions. . . .
•	 Don’t forget to renew your print card. . . .
These can be better written as just:
•	 Go to the information desk.
•	 Fill out the online form.
•	 Contact us with questions.
•	 Renew your print card.
Remove Boring Transitions
While often useful and sometimes essential to creating flow between content, transitions 
are often overused. Unless writing a long-form document and the relationship between 
content is unclear, you can probably do without these at the beginning of a sentence:
•	 Also
•	 In addition
•	 Additionally
•	 Furthermore
•	 Along similar lines

3 4  ▲  C H A P T E R  4
•	 At the same time
•	 As such
That said, transitions can be useful to alert the reader you are switching gears. If a tran-
sition is necessary to alter your tone or change the reader’s orientation, by all means use 
one. But try to pick more meaningful transition language. If you are changing moods or 
perspectives, try words such as:
•	 But
•	 Yet
•	 Still
•	 That said 
If you are changing orientations, use words like:
•	 Now
•	 Later 
•	 After
•	 Earlier
Replace Extraneous Prepositions
Watch out for overuse of prepositions—those words that place other words in a time, 
place, or context. Prepositions, including of, to, in, and by, can lead to wordy sentences 
when you have too many of them (Canavor, 2016). Rather than writing, “Our librarians 
in the technology unit can advise you how to use 3D printing to the maximum degree,” 
try, “Our technology unit’s librarians can advise you how to best use 3D printing.” And 
Kimble recommends taking special aim at multiword prepositions, such as prior to, with 
regard to, and in connection with (2012: 9). It’s best to avoid these altogether.
Remove Phony Niceties
Librarians are a polite bunch, which often means using please, thank you, and sorry all 
over the place. Nine times out of ten, these friendly words serve little purpose. Use them 
thoughtfully and when you actually mean it. Don’t arbitrarily put them at the beginning 
and ends of your sentences. For example, you can remove the niceties from the following 
sentences:
•	 Please return your books to the book drop during open hours. Thank you.
•	 Please return this item as soon as possible to avoid the replacement fee.
•	 The main branch will be closed today for a special event. Thank you.
•	 We’re sorry for the trouble, but we ask that you please don’t let others use your 
library card. 
When these niceties are appropriate is when you recognize that you are frustrating your 
users or they enhance your voice and tone. These words can convey that you care and are 
genuinely thankful to them or apologetic about something. For example:

K E E P I N G  I T  S I M P L E   ▲  3 5
•	 We are experiencing intermittent problems accessing MyAccount and are working 
on a solution. Thank you for your patience.
•	 The library will close at 5 p.m. due to the holiday. We are sorry for the inconve-
nience.
 Simplifying Phrases and Words
Choose the Right Words
Be deliberate in your word choice. Short, familiar words are usually your best bet. Longer, 
less conventional words can annoy your readers and even make them skeptical. There are 
a lot of words in the English language, but Natalie Canavor recommends, “Use the one- 
and two-syllable words as much as you can and consciously use the longer words when 
you need them because a shorter word won’t work or you want the effect” (2016: 69).
Avoid or Explain Jargon
Beware of library speak and other jargon—terminology your readers won’t understand or 
appreciate. You run the risk of not just sounding too formal, but also sounding preten-
tious, unapproachable, or phony. If your audience includes nonnative speakers, they will 
have an especially hard time understanding any jargon.
In the cases where it is appropriate to use jargon, do so thoughtfully for a specific 
purpose. For example, you might be educating users on a topic as part of an instructional 
webpage or tutorial. 
You might be surprised to discover the breadth of terms unfamiliar to average library 
users. John Kupersmith compiled data found in fifty-one usability studies and confirmed 
that terminology is frequently the culprit (Kupersmith, 2012). Common library terms to 
watch out for include:
•	 Catalog, OPAC, databases, database providers, discovery tools
•	 Call numbers, SuDocs, accession numbers
•	 Circulation, circulating, noncirculating, loan period
•	 Collections, digital collections, special collections
•	 E-audio, e-journals, e-resources, electronic resources
•	 Information commons, learning commons
•	 Information literacy, information fluency
•	 Interlibrary loan, document delivery, recall
•	 Link resolvers, OpenURL
•	 Metadata, subject headings, facets
•	 Periodicals, serials, monographs
•	 Reference, reference assistance, reference resources
•	 Repository, institutional repository, digital preservation
•	 Scholarly communication, digital scholarship, alternative publishing
•	 Open access, open educational resources
•	 Search expressions, Boolean operators, wildcards, truncation
•	 Subject guides, course guides, research guides, pathfinders

3 6  ▲  C H A P T E R  4
Avoid Buzzwords and Other Silly Words
Buzzwords, corporate speak, and fancy vocabulary can be equally problematic. Buzzwords 
are overused, carry little meaning, and tend to sound pretty silly. Corporate speak and 
highbrow vocabulary is annoying to read and sounds less human. Try to stay clear of such 
words as:
•	 Affiliates
•	 Considerations
•	 Hereby, therein, wherefore
•	 Implementation
•	 Incentivize
•	 Innovative, innovate, innovation
•	 Learnings
•	 Leverage, optimize, maximize
•	 Milieu 
•	 Solutions (when referring to things like “printing solutions”)
•	 Strategic, strategize, strategy
•	 Synergy, synergize, synergies
Use Concise, Specific Words
Leave no room for ambiguity. The reader should not have to pause to question what 
something means, so follow the sixteenth rule in The Elements of Style: use definite, specific, 
concrete language. As you select each word on the page, “prefer the specific to the general, 
the definite to the vague, the concrete to the abstract” (Strunk and White, 1999: 30). 
Watch out for commonly used library words that carry little meaning, such as services 
and resources. Instead, convey clarity with words like study rooms and books. 
Many popular words and phrases can be replaced with a simpler variation, as shown 
in table 4.2. These revisions don’t hinder meaning; they just make the content easier to 
digest. Some credit for this list goes to Ann Handley, who has her own excellent list of 
overused words and their simplified equivalents (2014: 103–4). If you like this kind of 
thing, you can even download a thirty-five-page list of alternative words produced by the 
United Kingdom government (Plain English Campaign, 2016). 
Avoid Repetition
Canavor (2016) warns against placing similarly constructed words near each other, par-
ticularly words ending in -ion, -ing, -ity, and -ed. It’s irritating to read the sentence “The 
creation of the administration office is due to the reorganization” or “We are questioning 
the reasoning behind the choosing of this software.” To prevent this issue, include no 
more than one -ion, one -ing, one -ity, and one -ed word per sentence. Using active voice 
and present tense will help, too.
Along the same lines, watch out for too many words ending in -ly or -y, indicating 
you have too many adverbs and/or adjectives. And be careful not to include more than 
one by in a sentence, as in “The presentation by the speaker received rave reviews by the 
audience.” Or too many instances of the, and, or or. In fact, any time you have too many 
instances of any word, you may have a readability problem. 

K E E P I N G  I T  S I M P L E   ▲  3 7
 Test the Readability of Your Content
A great way to test the understandability of your content is to have people read it and 
provide feedback. Start by reading it aloud to yourself—does it make sense? Then ask 
people in your audience to read it and convey back to you what they thought it meant. 
Ask them specific questions to find out if your messages came through as intended.
While the human reading experience is the only authentic measure of readability, 
there is also technology and math to help. You evaluate the readability of your content by 
using one of several readability scales. Flesch-Kincaid readability testing, first developed 
in the 1970s, looks at word length, sentence length, and number of syllables. The lower 
your score on the Flesch Reading Ease test, the less readable your writing is. Other estab-
lished readability indexes include the automated readability index (ARI), Gunning-Fog 
index, SMOG index, Fry readability formula, and Coleman-Liau index. 
Microsoft Word, perhaps the most common text editor in the world, comes with a 
built-in readability test. You can also use free web-based tools, such as readability-score.
Table 4.2.    Simplified Phrases and Words
ORIGINAL
REVISED
Utilize, leverage
Use
To ensure
For
In order to
To
With the possible exception of
Except for
Whenever, at which time
When
At this point in time, immediately
Now, today
At the same time
Meanwhile
Continues to be
Remains, is
Remainder of time
Rest of time
There are times when
Sometimes, at times
At the end of the day
Ultimately
Numerous, a number of
Many, several, some
Lengthy
Long
The majority of
Most
Initial
First
Referred to as
Called
The reason why is that
Because
In spite of
Despite
In spite of the fact that, despite the fact that
Although, though
Ways by which
Ways

3 8  ▲  C H A P T E R  4
com, and free downloads, such as Readability™ for iTunes and Google Chrome, to evalu-
ate content. Or if you are a do-it-yourselfer, you can always calculate your scores manually.
When writing for a general audience, you want to aim for a grade level of 7 or 8 
across the different scales. A score of 10–12 is roughly the reading level on completion of 
high school, so this is acceptable if you are writing for a college-level audience. But keep 
in mind that the average American reads at a seventh-grade level (Canavor, 2016: 67). 
To give you an idea of what this looks like, this book chapter scores a grade of about 
7.3 on Flesch-Kincaid, 10.3 on Gunning-Fog, and 13.4 on Coleman-Liau. It is expected 
that content will score differently depending on the index, since what is being measured is 
different. For example, the score is higher for Coleman-Liau than it is for Flesch-Kincaid 
because it evaluates on characters instead of syllables per word. To lower a Coleman-Liau 
score, you’d need to reduce the number of words with a high number of characters. 
So while they aren’t the only way to evaluate your content, get in the habit of check-
ing readability scores. If you score grade level 12 or higher, try simplifying your content, 
reducing the number of syllables, characters, and words per sentence. 
 Cut, Cut, and Cut Again
Even when you think your writing is clear, you can probably cut more. Pay attention to 
tiny words and superfluous details. There is almost always something else that can be 
removed.
As you continue to simplify, remember your content goals. Every paragraph, sentence, 
and word—every morsel of content—should serve a purpose. If any part of it doesn’t meet 
either your goals or your users’ goals, it’s probably safe to go ahead and remove it.
For inspiration, see the examples in table 4.3. These are sentences that have been 
revised from their original versions. They could probably be simplified even further.
Table 4.3.    Simplified Sentences
ORIGINAL SENTENCE
REVISED SENTENCE
The branch library closed for a full renovation starting 
Monday, October 15, 2015, and the renovation is expected 
to be completed in December 2017.
The branch library is closed for renovation from October 15, 
2015, until December 2017.
Due to the severe weather conditions in the surrounding 
area, all units of the New York Public Library will be CLOSED 
today, Wednesday February 10, 2016.
Due to severe weather, all of NYPL will be closed today, 
Wednesday, February 10, 2016.
Whenever possible, the library will provide a version with 
English captions to ensure ADA compliance. 
When possible, we provide a version with English captions 
for ADA compliance.
Questions and comments regarding interlibrary loan 
policies and procedures may be directed to ill@email.edu.
Contact us about interlibrary loan at ill@email.edu.
The Espresso Book Machine (EBM) is an on-demand book 
maker that will print and bind your book in minutes. The 
EBM will provide you with a library-quality paperback copy.
We can print and bind your book in minutes with our 
Espresso Book Machine. This on-demand book maker 
creates a library-quality paperback.
There are certain types of materials that only circulate for a 
specific period of time.
Some materials can only be borrowed for a specific period 
of time.

K E E P I N G  I T  S I M P L E   ▲  3 9
 Key Points
Writing concisely respects your readers’ time and ensures your message is front and center. 
Remember:
•	 Keep paragraphs and sentences succinct.
•	 Choose words that are unambiguous and easy to understand.
•	 Make sure every word on the page serves a purpose.
•	 You can almost always cut a bit more.
Now that you’ve learned techniques for keeping things simple, it is time to expand upon 
language choice. In the next chapter, you’ll learn how to use an active, conversational style 
in all your writing.
 References
Canavor, Natalie. 2016. Business Writing Today: A Practical Guide. 2nd ed. Thousand Oaks, CA: 
Sage.
Handley, Ann. 2014. Everybody Writes: Your Go-To Guide for Creating Ridiculously Good Content. 
Hoboken, NJ: Wiley.
Horton, Sarah, and Whitney Quesenbery. 2013. A Web for Everyone. Brooklyn, NY: Rosenfeld 
Media. 
Kimble, Joseph. 2012. Writing for Dollars, Writing to Please: The Case for Plain Language in Business, 
Government, and Law. Durham, NC: Carolina Academic Press.
King, Stephen. 2000. On Writing. New York: Scribner.
Kupersmith, John. 2012. “Library Terms That Users Understand.” LAUC-B and Library Staff Re-
search. https://escholarship.org/uc/item/3qq499w7.
Plain English Campaign. 2016. “The A–Z of Alternative Words.” Plain English Campaign: Fight-
ing for Crystal-Clear Communication since 1979. Accessed May 25. http://plainenglish. 
co.uk/free-guides.html.
PlainLanguage.gov. 2015. “Federal Plain Language Guidelines.” PlainLanguage.gov. Accessed 
May 20. www.plainlanguage.gov/howto/guidelines/FederalPLGuidelines/index.cfm.
Strunk Jr., William, and E. B. White. 1999. The Elements of Style. 4th ed. New York: Macmillan.
Zinsser, William. 2006. On Writing Well: The Classic Guide to Writing Nonfiction. 30th Anniversary 
ed. New York: Harper & Row.


▲  4 1
C H A P T E R  5
Using Authentic  
and Active Voice
Y
OUR WRITING SHOULD BE GENUINE and believable. To best reach your read-
ers, use conversational style, strong nouns, and active verbs. In this chapter, learn 
how an authentic and active voice makes your writing more accessible, under-
standable, and relatable to your readers.
 Writing Like You Talk
Write Authentically
Librarians are service-oriented and want to please their customers. Being friendly and 
accessible in your writing helps you reach this goal. As you would in person, try to convey 
a friendly, helpful, honest voice in your writing.
For your content to sound natural, it’s a good rule of thumb to write like you talk. If 
someone understands your message spoken out loud, they will probably understand your 
message written out. Zinsser writes:
It’s true that the spoken language is looser than the written language, [but] the growing 
acceptance of the split infinitive, or of the preposition at the end of a sentence, proves 
that formal syntax can’t hold the fort forever against a speaker’s more comfortable way of 
getting the same thing said—and it shouldn’t. I think a sentence is a fine thing to put a 
preposition at the end of. (2006: 40) 
IN THIS CHAPTER
P
P Why you should write like you talk
P
P Why active is almost always better than passive voice
P
P How to select nouns and verbs that strengthen your sentences

4 2  ▲  C H A P T E R  5
Writing in this natural style will make you sound authentic—more like yourself. This 
helps you build trust with your readers, making them more willing to listen to what you 
have to say. 
Think about your most complex, challenging content: terms of service, policies, pro-
cedures, and legalese. This type of content often sounds like a robot created it. But is it 
possible to take even the most challenging content and make it human and believable? 
Difficult, yes. But absolutely possible.
BUT I RAMBLE ON WHEN I TALK
A word of caution that you might not benefit from literally writing the way you 
speak. Perhaps you’re a real talker, and in day-to-day conversations you use long, 
rambling sentences rather than complete sentences. Sometimes a spoken sentence 
will consist of multiple tangents and details, with few pauses or punctuation. Of 
course, you want to avoid this problem in your writing. As mentioned in chapter 4, 
you should keep sentences short. You can certainly set off content with parentheses 
or dashes, but as a general rule, try to have no more than one set of parentheses—
or dashes—in a single sentence. Rather than writing exactly how you talk, make 
sure that when your content is read out loud, it sounds like a real person talking. It 
should sound like something you would be proud to say aloud in front of a room 
of people.
Use Words You Use in Real Life
Pay attention to your vocabulary. In real life, would you say, “Let us utilize our strategic 
partners to achieve shared vision?” Unless you are an administrator speaking to a room of 
other administrators, you probably would not. In everyday conversation, it’s doubtful you 
would call people your “strategic partners,” but you would call them your colleagues. You 
also might not use the term shared vision, but you may regularly talk about your goals. So 
you are more likely to say something like “Let’s get together with our colleagues to better 
reach our goals.” Notice this simple change in vocabulary gives the words a different per-
sonality, while keeping the essence of the message the same. The second example sounds 
more human and believable, and is more likely to resonate with your readers.
Each word carries meaning, and choosing the right words isn’t always easy. But it’s 
often easier than you think. In fact, Stephen King advises writers to “use the first word 
that comes to your mind, if it is appropriate and colorful. If you hesitate and cogitate, you 
will come up with another word—of course you will, there’s always another word—but 
it probably won’t be as good as your first one, or as close to what you really mean” (2000: 
118). If a word made sense when you first wrote it on the page, try leaving it there. Don’t 
spend precious minutes fussing through the thesaurus to ultimately find a word that 
sounds flashier but less authentic.
Don’t misunderstand—the thesaurus is a great tool. So is the dictionary. They can 
provide you with inspiration as well as an expanded vocabulary. But if you, as the writer, 
have to look something up in a dictionary, it’s probably not the best word to get your 

U S I N G  A U T H E N T I C  A N D  A C T I V E  V O I C E   ▲  4 3
intended message across. You don’t want your readers to have to pause to look something 
up. If you’re stuck on a particular word, a better option than Merriam-Webster is to sim-
ply ask a colleague (or a potential reader), “Does this sentence make sense?” or, “Can you 
think of a word that would work a bit better?”
Jargon was covered in the last chapter, but it also comes into play as you attempt 
to write like you talk. In daily conversations with colleagues, you incorporate jargon: 
department acronyms, project team names, and library speak. But you wouldn’t use the 
same terms when talking with library patrons. So when you aren’t sure if something is 
jargon, ask yourself if it’s a term you use in real life with your audience. If you are writing 
a webpage for a student audience, is it a term you would use when talking with an actual 
student at the reference desk? If you are writing slides for a presentation to your library 
board, are they words you would use when speaking with a board member over coffee? 
What level of explanation would you use in a conversation with an audience member, if 
jargon is unavoidable? The same level of explanation applies in your writing.
Read Out Loud
Since writing the way you speak makes content more understandable, it’s good practice 
to read your content out loud. How does it sound? Can you imagine saying it directly 
to a member of your audience? Does it sound natural? First, read it out loud to yourself. 
Make edits, and then read it out loud to a colleague. Make more edits, and then take it 
to the streets.
Content guru Steph Hay recommends using the “Mom Test” to measure the quality 
of your writing. Is your content something you would read out loud to your mom? Do you 
sound like yourself? Would your mom understand what you’re talking about? Think of 
someone in your life who knows you well and who you trust to give you candid feedback. 
You can actually pick up the phone and call this person. It could be your actual mom, a 
trusted relative, or a close friend. See what this person has to say about your content. If 
the person you pick is like many moms, she won’t hesitate to point out your mistakes and 
encourage you to make improvements where needed (2012). If the Mom Test doesn’t 
work for you, read your content out loud to an actual member of your audience. But pick 
someone who will be completely honest with you, like your mom would.
Write as a Conversation
In most cases, use conversational language to better connect with your readers. If you are 
creating a sign, imagine talking with your building visitors. If you are writing an article 
for your newsletter, imagine talking with your subscribers. If you write as if you are talking 
to them directly, they are more likely to feel a connection with you, and your message is 
more likely to resonate.
It’s generally okay to use first and second person. It better connects your content with 
the intended audience by placing them within it. In most writing, address the readers 
as you and your organization as us or we. Say things like “You can help us improve the 
library” and “We are here to help.” Beware of calling readers “customers,” “patrons,” or 
“clients.” Speaking in third person sounds less authentic and puts a barrier between you 
and your audience.
On websites and other interactive mediums, it is especially important to treat your 
content as a conversation. Think of your web content as a conversation initiated by the 

4 4  ▲  C H A P T E R  5
site visitor (Redish, 2012). As the writer, it is your job to satisfy that conversation by an-
swering visitors’ questions and allowing them to reach their goals. 
Adjusting your content to read like a conversation will make your writing more direct 
and digestible. Table 5.1 shows examples of how to rewrite sentences to reflect a conver-
sational style, using first and second person and speaking directly to readers as if you were 
sitting across the table from them.
 Relaxing and Having Fun with It
Loosen Up
The English language is incredibly complex, and you can find hundreds of books on 
proper syntax and composition. Some fundamental understanding of grammar is without 
a doubt important: follow a style guide if you have one, avoid typos, and make sure you 
don’t have grammatical errors that confuse your meaning. Get an excellent editor, espe-
cially if you are writing for publication. But remember that what is considered correct 
usage and acceptable grammar is a moving target. 
Zinsser writes, “Usage has no fixed boundaries. Language is a fabric that changes 
from one week to another” (2006: 38). This means that in much of your daily writing, 
there are few hard-and-fast rules. Because of the fluidity of rules in the English language, 
you can get away with being a bit risky in your writing. It’s important to fix typos and 
significant errors, but you’re not in a high school English class. If you do break a rule, the 
worst thing that can happen is you have to make an edit later. Focus on the clarity of your 
content, not the grammar.
Table 5.1.    Revisions to Reflect Human, Conversational Style
ORIGINAL SENTENCE
REVISED SENTENCE
Librarians are here to help.
We’re here to help.
Customers are advised . . .
We advise you . . .
Dissertation Room applicants must be PhD candidates to 
apply.
You must be a PhD candidate to apply for a Dissertation 
Room.
For patron convenience, there are many locations to renew 
library cards.
Renew your library card at one of our many locations.
Library cards can be renewed . . .
You can renew your library card . . .
Group account permissions are now active in the 
departmental Box folders.
We have activated group account permissions in the 
departmental Box folders.
There are many strategies one can employ to minimize 
issues of cheating and plagiarism for online assessments, 
but there are times when instructors need solutions that 
help them monitor students’ online work.
There are many ways to minimize cheating and plagiarism, 
but sometimes you need solutions that help you monitor 
students’ online work.
The increased utilization of mobile devices for content 
consumption places demands on publishers to be more 
adept at engaging on mobile devices.
Almost everyone now uses mobile devices to access 
content, placing demands on publishers to make their 
content mobile-friendly.

U S I N G  A U T H E N T I C  A N D  A C T I V E  V O I C E   ▲  4 5
Let go of presenting yourself as an über-professional. It’s okay to be a bit casual 
in tone, since you are trying to convey information to your readers as if they were your 
friends, family members, or colleagues. Handley and Chapman encourage writers to 
“worry more about creating remarkable content; worry less about being professional” 
(2012: 38). Professionalism is a good thing, but when you try hard to appear professional, 
it’s easy to fall into the trap of buzzwords and jargon. You become less believable and lose 
your readers before they reach the second paragraph. Of course, there are different levels 
of formality. For public-facing content, your defined voice should guide how casual you 
can be using specific guidelines, lists of terminology, and examples (see chapter 12).
Use Punctuation Wisely
Punctuation within and at the end of sentences helps establish the flow and flavor of 
your content. Use appropriate punctuation to break up your text and express your mood, 
but watch out for elements in your writing that make you appear stodgy or long-winded. 
For example, the semicolon can make you sound old fashioned and serious. Zinsser 
went as far as to say, “There is a 19th-century mustiness that hangs over the semicolon” 
(2006: 72). Certainly the semicolon serves a purpose, but overuse can harm your voice 
and make you seem less human, so use it with discretion.
Dashes are usually more approachable than semicolons and parentheses. Take the 
sentence: “You can enter the building after 9 p.m.; just remember your library card” ver-
sus “You can enter the building after 9 p.m.—just remember your library card.” Either is 
acceptable, but the second has a slightly different tone. When you are tempted to use a 
semicolon or put something in parentheses, try a dash and see what it looks like.
Parentheses are also a good tool for setting some content apart from the rest, but 
when used frequently they can make content seem disjointed and bureaucratic. They 
often force the reader to switch gears midsentence, or several times within a paragraph. 
Avoid writing multiple sentences or thoughts within a single set of parentheses, or using 
them as a way to add unnecessary, tangentially related content. Here are some examples 
of when using parentheses stiffens the tone and makes content harder to understand:
•	 For me, the key thing would be how it authenticates, and then how one could view 
results on the back end (for an entire class, for everyone taking the assessments, 
etc., so that one could understand where students have difficulties, etc.—whether 
or not one could build in remediation).
•	 Of course, if we say this, we actually have to do it (which means really pushing for 
faculty to be engaged and present, to always work with them on related assign-
ments, etc.). I do not support us just saying yes to face-to-face instruction without 
looking for things in return (for the benefit of the students and also so that we can 
be more efficient and effective in our work). 
Better examples of using parentheses that provide useful detail and actually improve the 
tone are as follows:
•	 If you’d like to check this out and give me feedback (on design and content), please 
do. 
•	 Supplies (notebooks, pens) are available on the fifth floor.

4 6  ▲  C H A P T E R  5
While some punctuation marks can make your content appear formal, others can 
make you seem overly cheerful, silly, or excited. Take the exclamation point. It serves 
a useful purpose and can add fun and candor to your writing, but when overused—or 
used poorly—it can be problematic. You shouldn’t use more than one exclamation point 
in a paragraph. And you certainly shouldn’t have two sentences back-to-back ending in 
an exclamation point. A good use of an exclamation point might be, “Win $1,000 just 
for writing a research paper!” A poor use might be, “The library is open until midnight! 
Book a study room online!” Similarly, watch out for multiple exclamation points in a row, 
or even worse, the question mark–exclamation mark combination (!!???!!). This particular 
usage can freak out readers before they’ve even read the content. So unless that’s what 
you’re going for, it’s best you avoid it.
Emoticons are punctuation for the digital age and are used frequently to express one’s 
mood, especially in casual conversations over email and text. Like the exclamation point, 
these can be useful to indicate emotion, but annoying when overused or used inappro-
priately. 
Use Contractions, Fragments, and Conjunctions
It’s acceptable (and better) to regularly use contractions. It’s usually better to say, “You 
don’t have to register” rather than “You do not have to register” and “We won’t share your 
information” rather than “We will not share your information.” The use of contractions in 
the right spots helps you sound human. That said, you don’t want to only use contractions 
or you might appear to be unprofessional and lose trust. There can be a fine line between 
a casual tone and an unprofessional one.
Complete sentences aren’t always necessary, either, and fragments play a useful role. 
They can help with succinctness and make it easier for readers to scan through informa-
tional content. It’s also okay to begin sentences with conjunctions, such as and, but, so, and 
because. In fact, while there is a widespread belief that this is grammatically incorrect, as 
many as 10 percent of sentences begin with conjunctions (Whitman, 2014). And nobody 
is complaining.
Maybe Use Slang and Colloquialisms
Consider how slang and colloquialisms fit into your overall voice. You probably want to 
steer clear of slang, such as dude and LOLZ, for the most part, unless your defined voice 
is exceptionally casual. But some colloquialisms could be okay in the right context. For 
example, it could be okay to call students “Wildcats” if that’s your school’s mascot, or 
say, “What’s happening?” on the landing page of your human resources account system. 
Maybe even words such as awesomeness, and epic fail are appropriate in some contexts, 
such as social media. Just be sure to consider any nonnative speakers in your audience—
you don’t want them to be thoroughly confused by your word choice. Again, go back to 
your audience, your messaging, and your voice and tone to determine how casual or witty 
you should be (see chapters 2, 3, and 12). 
Have Fun
If you’re relaxed and comfortable letting go of the rules a little, you’ll find writing natu-
rally more enjoyable. It shouldn’t be a stressful process. Writing is an incredible, human 

U S I N G  A U T H E N T I C  A N D  A C T I V E  V O I C E   ▲  4 7
talent and can be a lot of fun. Your readers will notice if you care about the content and 
are having a good time writing it, and will be more likely to stick around. As Handley 
and Chapman explain, “Your point of view should have an element of fun. And what’s 
more, you should be having fun doing it. If you aren’t having fun creating content, you’re 
doing it wrong” (2012: 38–39).
 Using Active Voice
Active Voice Is Best
If you have studied the craft of writing, you’ve probably learned that active voice is the 
way to go. It’s taught in practically every writing course and mentioned in every book on 
writing. It’s the fourteenth rule in the Elements of Style (Strunk and White, 1999). Zinsser 
tells writers to “use active verbs unless there is no comfortable way to get around using 
a passive verb. The difference between an active-verb style and a passive-verb style—in 
clarity and vigor—is the difference between life and death for a writer” (2006: 67).
Active sentences are easier to read and understand. They are bolder. They help you cut 
to the chase and remove the fluff. Passive voice, on the other hand, makes your meaning 
vague and harder to follow.
Write in Active Voice
Active voice, at its core, means your sentences have a noun and an active verb. The subject 
of your sentence is doing something itself, rather than something passively being done to 
it. You can quickly identify a sentence that uses active voice once you identify the subject 
and the verb. For example:
•	 You can obtain additional information on our website. (You is the subject, and 
obtain is the verb.)
•	 The director told the curators that the exhibit would run through the summer. (The 
director is the subject, and told is the verb.)
The good news is active sentences are easy to write. They tend to be what people write 
(and what they say) naturally. If you find yourself floundering over a sentence that just 
doesn’t feel right, step back and notice if you are falling into a weaker, passive voice. 
USE PRESENT TENSE
It’s easier to use active, direct voice when you are writing in present tense. Obvi-
ously, you can’t write in present tense all the time since sometimes you’ll be talking 
about the past or the future. But when in doubt—and when you have the option—
favor present tense. Let the current goings-on drive the sentence. For instance, 
“We are compelled to close the building at midnight due to safety concerns” is 
better than “Safety concerns put us in the position of being compelled to close the 
building at midnight.” 

4 8  ▲  C H A P T E R  5
Avoid Passive Voice
When the subject of the sentence isn’t actively doing anything, you have a passive sen-
tence. Passive sentences make the writer appear timid and safe. To the reader, they sound 
boring and bureaucratic. Stephen King writes, “Two pages of the passive voice—just 
about any business document ever written, in other words, not to mention reams of bad 
fiction—make me want to scream. It’s weak, it’s circuitous, and it’s frequently tortuous, 
as well” (2000: 123).
A clear indicator that you have a passive sentence is when the writer unnecessarily 
uses some form of the verb to be, such as am, is, are, were, being, or been. Earlier, you read 
two active sentences. Now notice the use of the verb in the same sentences rewritten in 
the passive voice:
•	 Additional information can be obtained on our website.
•	 Curators were told by the director that the exhibit would run through the summer.
Notice the tone of the sentences has changed now that the subjects aren’t actively doing 
anything. It sounds dry and stuffy. Policy and procedure content tends to be filled with 
this type of passive language. You might see sentences similar to:
•	 The form is to be filled out by applicants in person at the office.
•	 Fines may be paid by patrons online.
You can easily reword these passive sentences to be active:
•	 Applicants should fill out the form at the office.
•	 Patrons can pay for fines online.
Or, bringing in conversational language, you can make these even better as:
•	 Fill out the form at the office.
•	 Pay for fines online.
In table 5.2, you’ll find more examples of passive sentences revised to use active, as well 
as simpler, language. 
USING PASSIVE VOICE TO BE DIPLOMATIC
Passive voice is occasionally appropriate. Because it allows you to not give credit 
for an action, it can be a tool for writing diplomatically when you’re facing a heated 
issue. Don’t use passive voice to skirt around issues when it’s better to be direct, but 
do use it to spare feelings and approach serious conversations in a respectful way. 
It can help you avoid placing direct blame or passing judgment before you know 
all the facts. For instance, you might want to say, “All of the reports were submit-
ted late,” rather than, “All of you submitted your reports late.” Knowing when to 
use passive voice to engage in respectful dialogue is a learned skill that can help 
improve your professional relationships.

U S I N G  A U T H E N T I C  A N D  A C T I V E  V O I C E   ▲  4 9
 Picking Nouns and Verbs Wisely
Use Strong Nouns
While verbs indicate the action in sentence, nouns represent the things doing the action. 
In informal, conversational writing, the primary noun is often you or I, so you won’t have 
to think much about it. But when you start writing about other things, you have lots of 
options. 
It’s best when the noun in your sentence is a person, place, or thing. This sounds 
obvious, but in a lot of difficult-to-read sentences, the noun can be hard to make out. A 
lot of times, especially in business and academic writing, people use what Zinsser calls 
“concept nouns” (2006: 75). They are abstract and intangible. Think of the main noun in 
this sentence: “The traditional culture of the organization leads to an inability to move 
forward quickly on technological initiatives.” The primary noun—the one doing the 
action—is “the traditional culture of the organization.” This is problematic because it is 
a concept rather than a thing. It’s not really the culture that is causing the situation; it’s 
the people within the culture. What the writer is really trying to say is, “Staff members 
are traditional, making it hard to move forward quickly on technological initiatives.” By 
changing from a concept noun to a concrete noun, the sentence becomes much easier to 
understand. It also sounds more human. Other examples of concept nouns (which often 
include prepositions) are:
•	 The environment
•	 The context of the situation
•	 The collective thinking by the community
•	 The discussion
•	 The process in the department
•	 The recommendations to the committee
Table 5.2.    Revisions to Reflect Active Voice and Simpler Language
PASSIVE
ACTIVE
Eligibility will be verified.
We’ll verify your eligibility.
Print cards can only be reloaded with the same value that is 
listed on the front of the ticket. 
You can only reload print cards with the value listed on the 
front of the ticket.
A number of improvements have been made to the system 
in order to reduce the number of duplications in search 
results.
We made improvements to reduce the number of 
duplications in search results.
These statistics have been gathered from various sources, 
and therefore original source of data or date published may 
not be available.
We gathered these statistics from various sources, so 
original sources may not be available.
Software must be installed on a personal computer.
Install software on your personal computer.
After conducting interviews of faculty, students, and 
administrators, the collective knowledge gathered was 
used to develop requirements for an RFP.
We collected knowledge through interviews of faculty, 
students, and administrators to develop requirements for 
an RFP.

5 0  ▲  C H A P T E R  5
These terms certainly make sense in some contexts, but if you are tempted to use them 
as the primary noun in a sentence—as the thing doing the action—pause and reconsider. 
Is there a less abstract noun that could take its place if you reword the sentence slightly? 
Are there people involved who aren’t mentioned in the sentence? If you are writing on a 
topic that involves people, be sure to mention people. If you are talking about a particular 
service, resource, or report, mention it. Strong nouns include:
•	 Staff members 
•	 Students and faculty 
•	 The committee
•	 Campus administrators
•	 The service
•	 The database
•	 The report
As you select nouns, remember to avoid jargon, buzzwords, and corporate speak. 
Maybe instead of “technological initiatives” you could say, “tech-focused projects.” And 
instead of “anticipated professional development activity” you could say, “travel plans.” 
Choose concise nouns that your readers understand and that best represent the message 
you’re trying to get across.
Avoid Several Nouns in a Row
Passive phrases and sentences often involve several nouns in a row, which are difficult for 
readers to digest. You’ll often see these as titles on webpages, subject lines on emails, and 
names of reports. Take for example:
•	 Instruction Consultation Request Form
•	 Submissions for Workforce Planning Requests File
•	 Associate Librarian Retention Review
You can write these same concepts more effectively by breaking apart the nouns and using 
active verbs:
•	 Request an Instruction Consultation
•	 Submit Your Requests to the Workforce Planning File
•	 Review the Associate Librarian for Retention
Paying attention to lengthy noun phrases and restructuring them like this increases un-
derstanding while reducing the cognitive load of your readers.
Use Strong Verbs
Select active, strong verbs. As mentioned in chapter 4, a well-selected verb can often 
make adverbs and adjectives unnecessary. A strong verb can also replace longer phrases 
that carry similar meaning. For example, “We came upon a photograph in the archive” 
could be replaced with “We discovered a photograph in the archive.” The meaning stays 
the same, but the word discovered makes the sentence stronger.

U S I N G  A U T H E N T I C  A N D  A C T I V E  V O I C E   ▲  5 1
Beware of the dull verbs have, get, and made, and try replacing them with stronger 
ones. For instance, instead of “let’s have a meeting,” just say, “Let’s meet.” And instead of 
“We are going to get new furniture for the conference room,” try “We are purchasing new 
furniture for the conference room.” 
And avoid hiding the action in nouns instead of verbs by tacking on variations on the 
word is. So rather than writing “We are in support of,” just write, “We support.” Rather 
than “I am hesitant to,” just write, “I hesitate to.” And be careful of similar roundabout 
language that dilutes the verb. Replace “We will get started on” with “We will start,” “She 
made the announcement” with “She announced,” and “Make the decision” with “Decide.” 
You get the idea.
Also, try replacing multiple verbs with one substantive verb. So instead of “Reg-
ularly support and position workers so they can perform better in the future,” you could 
write, “Regularly mentor workers so they can excel in the future.” Updating the verbs 
changed the meaning slightly, but kept the same intention while sharpening up the 
sentence.
Selecting strong, active verbs is especially important if you are using the verbs to di-
rect readers to do something. If you are writing an email to webinar registrants, you might 
say, “To access this webinar, attendees must get the latest software.” In this instance, you 
should use a stronger verb that is more reflective of what the attendees will need to do. 
A better, more active sentence is “To access this webinar, attendees must download the 
latest software.” Even better is to address the attendees directly, treating the content as a 
conversation: “To access this webinar, download the latest software.” The implied subject 
is the reader. The active verb is download.
 Key Points
Use authentic, active, conversational language. It’s easier on the reader and will strengthen 
your content. Remember:
•	 Writing like you talk will help you sound human.
•	 It’s not English class, so it’s okay to break the rules a little.
•	 Active voice is best.
•	 Strong nouns and strong verbs make for the strongest sentences.
You’ve now considered the best approaches when it comes to style and word choice. In 
the next chapter, you’ll dive into some particular components for structuring your writing: 
titles and headings.
 References
Handley, Ann, and C. C. Chapman. 2012. Content Rules. 2nd ed. Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & 
Sons.
Hay, Steph. 2012. “Being Real Builds Trust.” A List Apart. August 28. http://alistapart.com/ 
article/being-real-builds-trust.
King, Stephen. 2000. On Writing. New York: Scribner.
Redish, Janice (Ginny). 2012. Letting Go of the Words: Writing Web Content That Works. San Fran-
cisco: Morgan Kaufmann.

5 2  ▲  C H A P T E R  5
Strunk Jr., William, and E. B. White. 1999. The Elements of Style. 4th ed. New York: Macmillan.
Whitman, Neal. 2014. “Grammar Girl: Can I Start a Sentence with a Conjunction?” May 29. 
www.quickanddirtytips.com/education/grammar/can-i-start-a-sentence-with-a-conjunction.
Zinsser, William. 2006. On Writing Well: The Classic Guide to Writing Nonfiction. New York: Harper 
& Row.

▲  5 3
C H A P T E R  6
Writing Titles  
and Headings
Q
UALITY TITLES AND HEADINGS set the foundation for useful content. A title 
provides an entryway to your writing and can quickly engage or bore your reader. 
Headings form a content outline and can give it a logical, navigable structure. In 
this chapter, learn how useful titles and headings, along with the power of parallelism and 
consistency, strengthen your content and make it easier to follow.
 Pick a Good Title
Titles Matter
Good titles are critical. They get your reader’s attention (or don’t). They can start you off 
on the right track or doom you for failure. They give readers a first impression, setting the 
stage and creating expectations for subsequent content. So make sure every title you write 
makes sense to your readers and does your content justice.
Most content you write has some kind of title. It’s usually the first thing your readers 
see and it briefly describes the content that follows. Your title could be a:
•	 Document title (e.g., report, handout, manual)
•	 Webpage title
IN THIS CHAPTER
P
P How to craft user-centered, meaningful, succinct titles
P
P How to create thoughtful headings that give structure to your content
P
P How to use parallelism to improve consistency and make your content easier 
to process

5 4  ▲  C H A P T E R  6
•	 Email subject line
•	 Blog post or news story headline
•	 Title slide of a presentation
•	 Article, book chapter, or book title
•	 Front page of a brochure
•	 Headline on a flyer, poster, or digital sign
•	 Name of an event or exhibit
•	 Name of a committee or taskforce
Whether or not you would call all of these examples “titles” or put them in title case, 
they serve the same purpose. The front page of a brochure has brief wording describing 
what’s inside, such as “Information for Donors.” Other print materials tend to have some-
thing similar describing the rest of the content, such as a flyer titled “Change in Hours” 
or a class handout titled “Advanced Searching Exercise.” If you are naming an event, ex-
hibit, committee, or taskforce, it will likely end up as a title in some form in the future—
whether it’s on a webpage, a news story, or a print program. In all cases, the qualities of a 
good title are the same: meaningful, succinct, and taking into account the reader’s context.
TITLE CASE VERSUS SENTENCE CASE
What level of capitalization should you use in titles and headings? Title case 
means capitalizing the first letter of all significant words, as in “Information for 
Online Students.” If using sentence case, you only capitalize the first letter of the 
first word, as in “Information for online students.” Titles tend to be written in title 
case (hence the name, “title case”), but it’s acceptable to use sentence case in some 
circumstances. Sentence case is more informal, approachable, and easier to read. 
It’s customary to use sentence case for emails, signage, and on the web. If writing 
a more formal piece, such as a professional presentation, official report, or journal 
publication, title case is more appropriate.
If you are using sentence case for headings, use it for associated titles, too. 
Although headings are often sentence case even if titles are title case. Whatever 
you do, be consistent. All titles should be either title case or sentence case, and all 
headings should be either title case or sentence case.
Consider Your Readers’ Context
Think about your audience and what likely brought them in front of your content. How 
did they find it? What is their frame of mind? What is important to them? Why should 
they care about what you have to say? In most cases, the title of your content will be the 
first thing they see and will be the deciding factor as to whether or not they continue 
reading. The title can also make a difference as to whether they find or notice your content 
in the first place. 
If you expect readers to find your content through a search, use their search terms in 
your title. This is obviously relevant for web content, but is also relevant for documents in 

W R I T I N G  T I T L E S  A N D  H E A D I N G S   ▲  5 5
a shared storage space, emails, and any other case where content is stored in a searchable 
system, either now or in the future.
Consider your reader’s frame of mind. If you know your readers are in a hurry, keep 
your title brief and make it crystal clear why they should care. If your readers are stressed 
out, perhaps your title can help ease their mind. If your readers are bored, perhaps your 
title can give them something to get interested in and excited about.
Especially if you are competing for your readers’ attention, take into account what 
motivates them. What keeps them up at night? What would make their lives easier? They 
aren’t required to care about what you have to say, so think about how your message will 
best resonate with them. Test your assumption that the content you’re writing is, in fact, 
relevant to their lives. If it is, then see if you can come up with a title that assures them 
it’s worth reading more.
Use Words Your Readers Use
Titles should be approachable and quick to understand. When possible, avoid jargon. In 
body content, you can describe any words your readers might not know, but titles need to 
be succinct, making it hard to both use jargon and explain it in the same breath. 
A poor example of a title on an old library webpage is “Patron-Driven Acquisition 
(Also Known as On-Demand Information Delivery).” This is not one, but two specialized 
terms. The title includes both because the name of the service had recently changed, but 
it was still a new concept that most users outside the library world hadn’t heard of. While 
“Patron-Driven Acquisition” and “On-Demand Information Delivery” are both adequate 
names for the service, interpreting their true meaning requires guessing on the part of the 
reader. A better title would be “Getting Books at Your Request.” This title explains what 
the service is rather than what it’s called. People are more likely to keep reading since the 
title speaks to them directly and tells them why they should care. Then, within the con-
tent of the webpage, the official title of the service can be used and explained.
This same rule applies to promotional materials. Imagine a brochure that has on the 
front page “Interlibrary Loan, Document Delivery, and Express Retrieval Services.” As a vis-
itor not familiar with these terms, would you be likely to pick it up? Now imagine if the front 
page was instead to say, “Get Books and Articles You Need, When You Need Them.” The 
second version speaks to readers directly using plain language and lets them know why they 
might want to keep reading. This change in language makes the brochures more approach-
able and visitors are more likely to pause and take a chance at reading the rest of the content.
Make It Meaningful
Strive for clarity, specificity, and authenticity. Your title should reflect the content it rep-
resents. There should be no ambiguity and no surprises when the reader gets past the title 
to the crux of your content.
While you may want it to be enticing, don’t write a catchy title that grabs readers’ 
attention but doesn’t live up to the hype. The last thing you want to do is disappoint your 
readers and lose their trust. So avoid exaggerations such as:
•	 Ace Your Assignments with Five Simple Research Steps
•	 How Our New Makerspace Is Changing Up the Rules Forever
•	 Take This Two-Minute Survey and Make a Better Library Future

5 6  ▲  C H A P T E R  6
These titles contain empty promises. Your research steps might be simple, but they alone 
can’t promise students they’ll ace an assignment. And your makerspace could be contrib-
uting to innovation, but it’s hardly changing the rules forever. And maybe survey results 
could be used to make some strategic decisions, but gosh it’s hard to make a survey that 
only takes two minutes, and is it really going to make that big of a difference to the future 
of the library?
Avoid hyperbole that makes you seem inauthentic. When hyperbole is used haphaz-
ardly, your readers will soon lose their trust in you as an organization or a professional. 
Better, more realistic, and still-compelling titles are:
•	 Five Simple Steps to Improve Your Research Assignments
•	 How Our New Makerspace Helps Reinvent What Libraries Can Do
•	 Take This Short Survey and Guide the Future of the Library 
You also want to avoid ambiguous titles that tell the reader little if anything about the 
content within. For example, be careful about writing such vague email subject lines as:
•	 Update
•	 Meeting
•	 Recap
•	 Award
•	 Interesting Article
More meaningful titles save the time of the reader while setting up an expectation of the 
content. For example:
•	 Update on Strategic Planning
•	 Department Meeting Cancelled
•	 Recap of Web Designer Interviews
•	 ACRL/IS Innovation Award—Call for Nominations!
•	 Article on Service Design in Libraries
These titles have enough specificity to make them meaningful. This will help the readers 
not just at the time but also in the future if they need to locate historical information.
Reflect Any Call to Action
Are you asking the reader to do something? Too often, it is not clear from the title. If the 
goal is for the reader to proceed with some action, your title should include an active verb. 
Take, for example, these possible email subject lines or titles of forms:
•	 Scholarship Application
•	 Feedback Form
•	 ACRL/IS Mentoring Program
It isn’t clear from these titles if what follows is just information or if the reader can actu-
ally do something. Better titles that reflect the role of the reader would be:

W R I T I N G  T I T L E S  A N D  H E A D I N G S   ▲  5 7
•	 Apply for a Scholarship
•	 Send Me Feedback
•	 Join the ACRL/IS Mentoring Program
By starting out with a verb rather than a noun, you make it clear to the reader that a 
response or course of action is both possible and expected.
Keep It Succinct
Succinctness is important in all writing, but especially with titles. A verbose title is im-
mediately off-putting. When writing a title, include only essential elements. Every word 
and punctuation mark should serve a purpose.
As mentioned in chapter 5, it’s bad practice to use too many nouns in a row. These 
cause cognitive overload and are difficult to understand on first pass. Sadly, titles are of-
ten culprits of the too-many-nouns-in-a-row syndrome. An example of a title suffering 
from this syndrome: “University of Arizona Libraries Travel and Professional Activities 
Review and Revision Taskforce Charge.” This type of document is hard to title because it 
inherently includes a taskforce with a really long name. You probably can’t avoid including 
it. Ideally you could come up with a more succinct name for the taskforce, such as “Task-
force on Professional Development,” but if you’re stuck with a longer name, try breaking 
up the nouns. And if it’s an internal document, you probably don’t need to spell out the 
full name of your library. The title becomes slightly more understandable as: “Charge for 
the Travel and Professional Activities Review and Revision Taskforce.” But think of the 
possibilities if the taskforce had a more succinct name. You could then have a title as nice 
as, “Charge for the Taskforce on Professional Development.” Are you more likely to read 
something with this concise name? Probably. It is more approachable and understandable.
You should be able to read a title aloud in one breath and remember it after reading it 
once. If you have to pause to breathe while reading it, if you can’t repeat it aloud without 
reading it again, or if it takes up more than a single line in a document, it’s probably too 
long. Try to keep your title to ten words or less, and use short words with fewer syllables. 
If you’re struggling to keep it short, review some of the techniques from chapter 4. There 
is almost always another word you can omit.
Break Up the Title If Needed
Being succinct is often easier said than done, especially if you’re working on content that 
has a lengthy official name. It can be hard to find the balance between meaningfulness 
and succinctness. Sometimes, breaking apart the title using a colon or subtitle is a good 
approach when you have no other options.
In the earlier webpage example revised to, “Getting Books at Your Request,” you 
might get pushback from stakeholders that it’s important to include the official name of 
the service in the title. This could be important to the users who learned the name of the 
service as well as important to promoting the service as part of a larger marketing plan. 
This is where you need to balance user goals and organizational goals. In this case, an 
alternative could be to include both. They could be combined into a longer title, broken 
apart with a colon, or broken into a title and subtitle: 
•	 Getting Books at Your Request through On-Demand Information Delivery
•	 Getting Books at Your Request: On-Demand Information Delivery

5 8  ▲  C H A P T E R  6
•	 On-Demand Information Delivery (title) Getting Books at Your Request (subti-
tle)
Depending on the format, space, and technical limitations, any of these could be reason-
able possibilities. 
A more extreme example is a press release title such as, “Notices of Funding Oppor-
tunities: First Round of Funding for FY 2016 National Leadership Grants for Libraries 
and Laura Bush 21st Century Librarian Program.” Boy, that’s a doozy. But just being the 
content writer, you obviously can’t change the official name of the grants, and it’s import-
ant to mention the relevant year and that the funding opportunities are now available. 
You already tried to break it up somewhat by using a colon, but it still creates two full 
lines of text on your webpage. And it won’t even fit in your email subject line. So what 
do you do? You can first merge some wording, “Notices of Funding Opportunity” and 
“First Round of Funding,” into one message: “First Round of Funding Now Available.” 
Then your best option might be to break it up into a title and subtitle. So something like:
•	 First Round of Funding Now Available (Title)
•	 National Leadership Grants for Libraries and Laura Bush 21st Century Library 
Program (Subtitle)
This is a bit better, but still a mouthful. Since this is actually trying to cover two different 
funding opportunities, you could take it further and see if it’s possible to break them out. 
Perhaps the title of the announcement becomes, “First Round of Funding Now Avail-
able for FY 2016” and you create two headings within the body of the press release—one 
for the National Leadership Grants and one for the Laura Bush 21st Century Library 
Program. In addition to making the title easier to process, it has the advantage of adding 
structure to the content with headings.
Bring It All Together
In table 6.1, see examples of real titles and recommended revisions. The changes aim to 
make the content more meaningful, adding detail where needed to make it clear what 
content lies within and what is expected (if anything) of the reader. At the same time, the 
goal is to be succinct, where every word serves a purpose. If words ran together or caused 
confusion, they were broken apart into manageable chunks. Notice how much easier it is 
to process the titles in the right column.
 Pick Good Headings
Headings Matter
Headings serve a number of purposes. Readers often skim through them to understand 
what the content is all about as well as to find specific pieces of information. In a digital 
form, they might navigate through them with a screen reader. Whatever the context, 
thoughtful headings help your readers:
•	 Get a sense of the overall content 
•	 Identify what content is included

W R I T I N G  T I T L E S  A N D  H E A D I N G S   ▲  5 9
•	 Understand how the content is organized
•	 Find the content most relevant to them
Not all content requires headings, but any content extending past a few paragraphs could 
benefit from them. And lengthy documentation, such as a handbook, is cumbersome 
without them. Can you imagine reading this book if its chapters didn’t have section head-
ings to break up the content? How often have you skimmed through a book like this one 
to get a sense of the content or find a particular piece of information?
The rules that apply to titles also apply to headings. When you craft your headings, 
make them relevant to your readers and use active, conversational voice when possible. 
Make them meaningful yet succinct, and pay attention to how they flow from one section 
to the next.
Table 6.1.    Revisions to Make Titles More Meaningful, Succinct, and Action-Oriented
TYPE OF TITLE
ORIGINAL TITLE
REVISED TITLE
Email subject line
Annual Faculty Survey: Opportunities for 
University-Level Service via Participation in 
Shared Governance
Volunteer to Participate in Faculty Shared 
Governance
Document title
University of Arizona Libraries Travel and 
Professional Activities Review and Revision 
Taskforce Charge
Charge for the Taskforce on Professional 
Development
Online form
In-Depth Research Consultation Online Request 
Form
Request a Research Consultation
Press release
Now Available—Introducing Our New Spatial 
Data Discovery Portal
Explore Our New Spatial Data Portal
Blog post
Website Navigation Updates and Improvements 
Based on User Research Conducted
New Website Navigation Based on Your Input
HEADINGS IMPROVE ACCESSIBILITY
In the digital world, headings have semantic meaning: they are for structuring 
content and giving it hierarchy. So make sure you use them for this purpose. Screen 
readers allow visually impaired users to identify headings, access a list of all the 
headings within content, or jump to content by heading. In documents and slides, 
headings can appear as a functional menu. This makes it much easier for users to 
navigate, so it’s important to identify headings as actual headings and treat them 
as structural components to your content. In HTML, this means using the <h1> 
to <h6> tags. In Microsoft Word and Powerpoint, it means using the built-in 
heading styles. 
Use Headings to Organize Your Content
Headings are a key component of structuring your content, so they work best when 
crafted with a logical order in mind. How you order them depends on how you expect 
people to access, read, and navigate the content.

6 0  ▲  C H A P T E R  6
A common practice is to place headings in order of importance, from most to least 
important. This mirrors the inverted pyramid style discussed in chapter 3. It works well 
for informational content, such as news stories and information about services. What do 
your readers want to know most often to least often? One example could be on a webpage 
about your equipment lending service. With a title of “Borrow Technology,” you might 
then have headers:
•	 Laptop (most common)
•	 Tablet (somewhat common)
•	 Camera (less common)
•	 Voice Recorder (least common)
Another option is to order things chronologically—the same order in which they 
would take place in time. This works well for directions that reflect steps in a process or 
system, such as tutorials, research guides, how-to manuals, and training documents. In the 
case of a research guide, you could organize headers as:
•	 Select Your Research Topic
•	 Narrow Your Research Topic
•	 Search for Sources on Your Topic
•	 Incorporate Sources into a Research Assignment
This ordering is logical since you anticipate that researchers will select their topic, then 
narrow it, then search for sources, and finally incorporate those sources into their assign-
ments. 
Chronological—and at times reverse chronological—ordering also works well if 
you’re dealing with things that have a clear association with time, such as case studies, 
historical data, news stories, or event listings. For instance, your headers could be, “Up-
coming Exhibitions,” then “Current Exhibitions,” then “Past Exhibitions.”
One last obvious option is to organize headings alphabetically. As with all options, 
this only makes sense if readers will approach your content this way. Only use A–Z or-
dering if you anticipate readers will be looking for their content alphabetically or there 
is simply no other logical way to order things (i.e., there is no priority order nor element 
of time). For instance, a list of journal titles, databases, library departments, or disciplines 
may work well in an alphabetical order. For example, you may order library departments 
in your directory as:
•	 Administration
•	 Circulation Department
•	 Research and Learning Department
•	 Special Collections
However you choose to order your headings, make sure it’s putting the reader experience 
first, focusing on how readers are most likely to approach, navigate, and interact with 
your content.

W R I T I N G  T I T L E S  A N D  H E A D I N G S   ▲  6 1
Use Strong Verbs in Headings
As covered in chapter 5, using strong, active verbs is good practice in general. Headings 
are no exception. Using verbs in your headings contributes to conversational style and 
forms a stronger connection with your reader.
If your content leads readers to take some course of action, active verbs in the imper-
ative work especially well. For example:
•	 Submit a Request
•	 Check the Status of a Request 
•	 Cancel a Request
Active verbs are also appropriate for instructional and how-to content. Perhaps you 
have a training manual that would benefit from headings like:
•	 Register for an Account
•	 Confirm Your Email Address
•	 Customize Your Profile
In this book, many of the headings start with imperative verbs. Take a look at the first 
section in this chapter, titled “Pick a Good Title.” In that section, the majority of headings 
start with active verbs in the imperative, including:
•	 Consider
•	 Use
•	 Make
•	 Reflect
Because this is a practical guide that teaches readers how to do something, it’s a natural fit 
to use imperative verbs in the headings. But this practice is useful even when the reader 
isn’t necessarily doing something as tangible. For example, “Learn How to Self-Publish” is 
a more intriguing title than the more passive “Self-Publishing Information.” And “Share 
Your Research” speaks directly to the reader, as opposed to “Research-Sharing Opportu-
nities.” If you find yourself writing a noun as a heading, see if there is an opportunity to 
add a verb that would make it more active, direct, and compelling. 
If imperative verbs don’t seem appropriate for your content, gerunds (verbs ending in 
-ing) are a good alternative. They allow you to sound active without sounding bossy. For 
instance, if you have a “Friends of the Library” webpage, you may have headings such as:
•	 Donating to the Library
•	 Attending Fundraising Events
•	 Volunteering
•	 Getting in Touch
Gerunds aren’t as direct as the imperative, but they get the same message across while 
avoiding coming off as pushy. They are still a better option than a more passive, noun-
based heading, such as “Donations to the Library” and “Fundraising Events.”

6 2  ▲  C H A P T E R  6
Use the Five Ws and One H (Sometimes)
For informational content, a logical heading structure may revolve around your readers’ 
most common questions: who, what, where, when, why, and how? This is especially true 
for content describing library services and events. For example, if you have a 3D printing 
service, appropriate headings on your website could be:
•	 About 3D Printing (what and why)
•	 Who Can Use It (who)
•	 How Much It Costs (how)
•	 How to Submit a Request (how, when, and where)
In this case, some of the headings actually include the words who and how. This works 
sometimes, but the questions are often reflected without them, especially in event or 
exhibit descriptions. For instance, a poster about an event may include such headings as:
•	 The Program (what and why)
•	 The Speakers (who)
•	 Location and Date (where and when)
•	 RSVP (how)
In both the above examples, it’s unnecessary to use verbs. You could try to squeeze 
them in and end up with such headings as “Learn about the Program,” “Meet the Speak-
ers,” and “Find Out the Location and Date.” This isn’t bad, and sounds more conversa-
tional, but it makes the headings longer and doesn’t add significant meaning. Succinctness 
is key, so it’s best to remove the unnecessary words.
Use Questions as Headings (Sometimes)
For some content, organizing by question works well. Again, it goes back to the readers’ 
goals and context. If they have questions that need to be answered in a particular se-
quence, a conversational question-and-answer format could do the trick. This isn’t unlike 
the Five Ws and One H idea, but it’s writing the headings out as actual questions.
If you are writing content about your room-booking service, for example, rather than 
having passive headings like “Reservation Policies” and “Locations,” you can use headings 
like:
•	 What Rooms Are Available?
•	 Who Can Reserve One?
•	 For How Long?
Another good example might be on a page about a library award:
•	 How Do I Apply?
•	 What Are the Rules?
•	 How Are Applications Evaluated?
•	 When Am I Notified If I’m a Winner?

W R I T I N G  T I T L E S  A N D  H E A D I N G S   ▲  6 3
These headings work well because they are succinct, easy to understand, and follow a 
logical order based on the primary needs of the audience.
Be cautious when using questions as headings, though, as they are easy to do poorly. 
If you are putting together a webpage about visiting your reading room, for example, you 
might be tempted to structure headings such as: 
•	 What Do I Have to Bring to the Reading Room with Me When I Visit?
•	 Do I Need Money for the Lockers?
•	 What Are Your Policies Related to Food in the Reading Room?
•	 Am I Allowed to Bring My Laptop into the Reading Room?
These quickly become verbose and unwieldy, and don’t sound like the sort of questions 
visitors would actually ask. Rather than using questions in this case, a better option might 
be:
•	 What to Bring
•	 What Not to Bring 
There are debates among user-experience experts about whether frequently asked 
questions are good practice. Generally speaking, like many things, they can be done well 
and they can be done poorly. So try to avoid these common problems:
•	 Writing too many questions
•	 Using too many words in your questions
•	 Putting the questions in no particular order
•	 Basing the questions on the organization’s assumptions, not the readers’ actual 
needs
•	 Using question-and-answer format all the time, even when it isn’t appropriate
Bring It All Together
Writing and ordering headings to best meet the needs of your readers takes practice and 
patience. And there is a careful balance in capturing meaning and conversational style 
while also being succinct. Take a look at the examples in table 6.2, where headings are 
revised to be more useful and understandable. Imagine how these headings could both 
help readers understand the breadth of content in front of them as well as guide them to 
information they need.
 Be Consistent
Use the Power of Parallelism
There is a simple technique that can make an incredible impact on the quality of your 
writing: parallel construction. This technique aligns your messaging and makes your con-
tent easier for readers to process. Parallelism is important across all your content, but is 
essential when it comes to content readers are likely to skim in a sequence, such as titles, 
headings, and lists.

6 4  ▲  C H A P T E R  6
Make Your Titles Consistent
Readers will often skim through several related titles in a row, whether they are browsing 
menus on your website or looking through documents in a folder. Imagine you have a 
drop-down menu on your website that includes the titles: 
•	 Improve Your Research Skills
•	 Finding Sources in Your Discipline
•	 Grant Funding Searching
These titles are fine in some respects (they are concise and include useful verbs), but they 
don’t follow the same grammatical structure. They jump from the imperative verb improve 
to the gerund finding. And then they end with three nouns in a row: “Grant Funding 
Searching.” The reader’s brain has to switch perspectives twice to process what’s being 
said. Take a look at this revision, where each title now begins with a gerund:
•	 Improving your research skills
•	 Finding sources in your discipline
•	 Searching for Grant Funding
With one small change, this list became much easier to process on first try. Yet it’s 
still not quite right. There is inconsistent use of title case and sentence case. Title case is 
used in “Searching for Grant Funding,” (since the first letters in Grant and Funding are 
both capitalized), but sentence case is used in the other two titles (where only the first 
letter of the first word is capitalized). These titles also might benefit from a stronger, im-
perative verb rather than a gerund. A final revision that embraces directness, consistency, 
and parallelism is:
•	 Improve Your Research Skills
•	 Find Sources in Your Discipline
•	 Search for Grant Funding
Table 6.2.    Revisions to More Useful Headings
TITLE OF CONTENT
ORIGINAL HEADINGS
REVISED HEADINGS
Information for Students
•  Study Rooms and Spaces
•  Technology Lending Service
•  Research Assignment Assistance
•  Writing Assistance
•  Find a Place to Study
•  Get the Technology You Need
•  Do Better on Your Assignments
•  Sharpen Your Writing Skills
Write and Cite
•  Citation Management Tools
•  Citation Guide
•  Guide to Avoiding Plagiarism
•  Organize Your Sources
•  Cite Your Sources
•  Avoid Plagiarism
Computer Lab
•  Computer Access
•  Locations of Computers
•  Printing Service
•  Who Can Use the Computers?
•  Where Are the Computers?
•  How Can I Print?

W R I T I N G  T I T L E S  A N D  H E A D I N G S   ▲  6 5
Make Your Headings Consistent
Headings are often read in sequence—even more so than titles—and especially by readers 
skimming through to find what they need. So your headings ought to align in tense, style, 
and structure. Imagine skimming these headings on a webpage:
•	 Study Room Application
•	 Learn about Our Collaborative Learning Space
•	 Reserving the Library Instruction Room
Again, these headings aren’t terrible—they reflect meaning—but they could be better. The 
first one is a noun, the second uses an imperative verb, and the third uses a gerund. Much 
better, structurally consistent headings (that reflect the same content) are:
•	 Apply for a Study Room
•	 Learn about Our Collaborative Learning Space
•	 Reserve the Library Instruction Room
When reading the revised headings, your brain doesn’t have to switch tenses or perspec-
tives. Meaning is clearer and reading or skimming is less onerous. 
Make Items in Lists Consistent
Lists are another place where parallelism (or lack of it) has big impact. Readers often skim 
lists of content, whether a list of bullets or a numbered list. Especially in lengthier lists, 
parallelism goes a long way to saving the time of the reader. 
Imagine you are visiting a website for the first time to learn more about a tool for 
measuring library data and impact. You are considering purchasing it for your team. Fol-
lowing the heading “Why Choose Our Product?” you see this list:
•	 It is really easy to setup.
•	 It is fully integrated with analytics.
•	 Magical Retroactive Analysis
•	 Set up an account and get access to reports.
•	 Find Key Business Insights in a Few Clicks.
•	 Helpful insights will be found in our reports
•	 Your analytics reports are complete
•	 Data you can trust
•	 Save time, energy, and make yourself look like a hero by using our reports.
This tool might be just what your team needs, but this list is fraught with problems. There 
are some complete sentences (“It is really easy to set up”), some fragments (“Data you can 
trust”), and some standalone nouns (“Retroactive Analysis”). Punctuation is inconsistent, 
with some sentences ending in periods and some not. Sentence case is used some of the 
time and title case other times, and it’s not clear whether it’s intentional or a mistake. 
Some pieces speak directly to the reader (“Set up an account”), while others use passive 
voice (“Helpful insights will be found”). And there is no particular order to the list. It 
is almost as if different people wrote each bullet point. As the reader, you very well may 

6 6  ▲  C H A P T E R  6
have lost trust in the product at this point. At minimum, you are probably confused about 
what the product actually does and are frustrated in the lack of clarity this list provides. 
Try reading this alternate list. Again, imagine it follows the header “Why Choose 
Our Product?”
•	 Easy account setup
•	 Full integration with analytics
•	 Retroactive analysis
•	 Complete, insightful reports
•	 Trustworthy data
By combining redundant messages, improving consistency, reordering, and applying par-
allelism, this list just became a whole lot easier to understand.
So when writing lists of content, make sure you are thoughtful and consistent. This 
goes for bulleted lists and numbered lists as well as series of content following a colon. 
If one instance is a complete sentence, they should all be complete sentences. If one is a 
fragment, they should all be fragments. They should all be written in the same tense, from 
the same perspective. When you read them out loud, there should be a seamless, logical 
flow from one to the next. 
If you find yourself stumbling over a relatively short list of content, check for a lack 
of parallelism. It is likely the culprit. More on effective use of lists will be covered in 
chapter 7.
Embrace Consistency
Aim for consistency within sentences, across paragraphs, and across the breadth of your 
content to improve reader understanding and experience. If you are using present tense, 
stick with it. Verb tenses should not change unless you are intentionally transitioning to 
another perspective. Similarly, voice should stay consistent across all your content, and 
tone should only change for a deliberate purpose. If you are writing in a conversational 
style using we and you, keep it going. Avoid switching your style or perspective mid-
stream. It confuses readers and breaks flow.
Even within individual sentences, pay attention to parallel construction. Avoid the 
common grammatical problem of “false series.” These occur when you break the flow by 
switching perspectives in the midst of a list of things. For example, don’t say, “I will join 
the committee, the taskforce, and update my service documentation.” You are joining the 
committee and joining the taskforce, but then you switch to updating the documentation. 
Alternatively, you can say, “I will join the committee and the taskforce then update my 
service documentation.” If a list of things in a sentence doesn’t sound quite right, check 
if you have a false series.
Consistency with word usage is also important. If you are writing a tutorial on using 
the library catalog, you might want to use journal or periodical, but don’t use them inter-
changeably unless it’s absolutely clear what you’re referring to. Readers can get confused 
if you refer to things differently when you are talking about the same thing. 
Consistency in your writing will improve your reputation as someone who is reliable, 
understandable, and direct. Pay attention to consistency from the highest level down to 
the smallest details. Answer the questions:

W R I T I N G  T I T L E S  A N D  H E A D I N G S   ▲  6 7
•	 Do you use title case or sentence case in titles? What about headings?
•	 Do items in your list include punctuation or not?
•	 Are items in your list fragments or complete thoughts?
•	 Do you use ampersands (&) or spell out and? 
•	 Do you use first and second person?
•	 Are you writing in present, past, or future tense?
See table 6.3 for more examples of improving consistency within titles, headings, lists, 
and sentences.
 Key Points
Thoughtful titles and headers, along with consistency at all levels, strengthen your con-
tent. People are more likely to read and understand it on the first try. Remember:
•	 Your title provides your readers with the first impression of your content, so make 
it count.
•	 Headings are key to organizing your content and making it accessible.
•	 Parallelism is a great tool for improving your content’s readability and approach-
ability.
•	 Consistency is key.
Titles and headings lay the foundation for clarity in meaning and structure, but what 
about the core of the content? In the next chapter, you’ll learn the fundamentals of using 
lists and tables appropriately, simplifying the complex by formatting body content in the 
most usable way.
Table 6.3.    Revisions to Improve Consistency
TYPE OF CONTENT
ORIGINAL
REVISED
Titles
•  Research by Subject
•  Course Guides
•  Tutorials and guides
•  Sharing your research
•  Research by Subject
•  Research by Course
•  Improve Your Research Skills
•  Share Your Research
Headings
•  Writing Literature Reviews
•  Copyright Guide
•  Write and Cite
•  Write a Literature Review
•  Learn about Copyright
•  Write and Cite
List
•  Click here to search for Books and Media.
•  CD and DVDs
•  Finding theses and dissertations
•  Journals and Magazines
•  Books and media
•  CDs and DVDs
•  Theses and dissertations
•  Journals and magazines
Sentences
You should contact the archivist. Patrons can 
call her anytime.
You should contact the archivist. Call her 
anytime. 
Sentence
Fill out the online survey, the print form, and 
email your supervisor.
Fill out the online survey and the print form, 
and then email your supervisor.


▲  6 9
C H A P T E R  7
Using Lists and Tables
O
NE OF THE BIGGEST COMPLAINTS you’ll hear from readers is, “It’s too much 
text! I don’t want to read that!” It’s true that walls of words can be intimidating, 
especially if you are in a hurry and don’t have time to read something word-
for-word. In addition to keeping it simple and reducing the length of your sentences 
and paragraphs, take advantage of tools that break apart your content and make it more 
approachable: bulleted lists, numbered lists, and tables. In this chapter, you’ll learn when 
to use each tool and for what purpose, and common pitfalls to avoid. 
 Bulleted Lists
Use Bullets to Create White Space and Allow Skimming
When readers complain about “walls of words,” they often make the obvious suggestion: 
use bullets to break apart the content. So if your content seems long, consider using bul-
lets. This is one of the things bullets do best: they create white space and make content 
more approachable.
Lists are easy to skim and scan, so they work especially well when you expect readers 
to browse through your content. Perhaps they want an overall sense of the content or they 
are looking for a particular item of interest. Bullets are excellent tools for writing:
IN THIS CHAPTER
P
P How to effectively use bulleted lists
P
P When to use numbered lists and for what purpose
P
P How to use tables to best present related content

7 0  ▲  C H A P T E R  7
•	 Features of a service, tool, or resource
•	 Policies
•	 Lists of examples (like this one)
Use Bullets for Series
If you have a series of more than two items you want to communicate, bullets might 
be a good way to present them. This is especially true on a webpage where skimming is 
expected. Rather than writing a long sentence with a list of everything, as in “All of our 
libraries have computers, printers, scanners, and technology help,” write the items out in 
bullets, as in “All of our libraries have:
•	 Computers
•	 Printers
•	 Scanners
•	 Technology help
If you find yourself using the word including, such as, or for example in a sentence, fol-
lowed by a series of items, you probably have a candidate for a bulleted list. Other series 
of related content could include:
•	 Qualifications in a job posting
•	 Duties in a job description
•	 Types of materials in a collection
•	 Project updates
•	 Changes to a service or resource
Use Bullets for Lists of Options
If you are presenting a number of options or alternatives, a bulleted list is your best bet. 
Readers can easily get a sense of how many options there are and find a specific item 
they might be interested in (Redish, 2012). A list is much more approachable than several 
long, compound sentences. For example, you might use bullets to list out:
•	 Library locations
•	 Types of databases
•	 Collection areas or specialties
•	 Software options
•	 Ways to contact the library
Keep Bulleted Items Short
Items in bulleted lists should generally be individual sentences or sentence fragments. 
Using two shorter sentences is acceptable, but once you get to three sentences you are 
no longer making the bullet useful. Don’t make paragraphs with bullets. This defeats the 
purpose of the bullets—you may as well just indent the paragraph. If bullets make your 
content more readable than paragraphs, even when the content is the same, you may 

U S I N G  L I S T S  A N D  T A B L E S   ▲  7 1
need to change your formatting. Adjusting line height and space between paragraphs 
and headings, as well as breaking things up with useful headings, can make content more 
readable and is more appropriate than trying to use bullets to achieve the same result. (See 
chapter 13 for more on formatting.)
Use Consistency in Bullets
Remember the power of parallelism discussed in chapter 6, and make sure items in bul-
lets are parallel. Start each item with the same element of speech and avoid mixing full 
sentences with fragments.
Perhaps you want to communicate about how your team has improved an advanced 
search feature within a tool you maintain. You might list out the product improvements, 
such as:
•	 Added a tool tip to identify the icon upon hover
•	 Search data is now maintained due to an enhancement
•	 Improvements to the list of content types in advanced search
This content can be edited slightly to make it parallel:
•	 Added a tool tip to identify the icon upon hover
•	 Made an enhancement so that search data is now maintained 
•	 Improved the list of content types displayed in advanced search
Notice that the second iteration is much easier to read quickly and comprehend, though 
the meaning remains the same.
Bullets can be short sentences or fragments and can use title case, sentence case, or 
lowercase. Whatever you decide, be consistent. If there is punctuation at the end of one 
bullet, make sure there is punctuation for the rest, as well.
Avoid Repetition in Bullets
Try to avoid starting bullets with the same words. This repetition is unnecessary and can 
make content harder to read. For example, if you are writing about visiting your reading 
room, you could write:
•	 Remember to bring change for the lockers.
•	 Remember to bring a sweater (it gets cold in the reading room).
•	 Remember to be quiet (other people are studying).
These all start with “Remember to.” To simplify, you could simply introduce the bullets 
with “Remember to” followed by:
•	 Bring change for the lockers.
•	 Bring a sweater (it gets cold in the reading room).
•	 Be quiet (other people are studying).

7 2  ▲  C H A P T E R  7
 Numbered Lists
Use Numbers for Instructions and Steps in a Process
Numbers imply a sequence of things—most often, a set of instructions or list of steps. If 
a reader’s goal is to find out how to do something, they may skim your content to look 
for a numbered list, anticipating that this is how instructions will be presented. Using 
numbered lists (rather than bullets) makes it clear to readers you are writing things out 
in a particular order. It allows them to quickly see how many steps there are and locate 
their place within the sequence. It also makes it more likely they will complete all of the 
steps correctly and in order (Redish, 2012). 
If you write out instructions in sentence form, you can end up with complex para-
graphs of content and the dreaded wall of words. Even a basic example that teaches 
readers how to browse films in foreign languages can be complex: “First go to the catalog. 
Then type * in the ‘Any Field’ search box. Select ‘Video/Film’ in the ‘Format’ drop-down 
menu. Finally, select the language in the ‘Language’ drop-down menu, and then click 
‘Search.’” Notice how much easier it becomes to follow this when written out as steps in 
a process:
1.	 Type * in the “Any Field” search box.
2.	 Select “Video/Film” in the “Format” drop-down menu.
3.	 Select the language in the “Language” drop-down menu.
4.	 Click “Search.”
If your readers are asking a “How do I . . . ?” question, you should probably use a num-
bered list to explain the answer (assuming it takes more than one step). If you find your-
self using transitions such as then or next several times, you also probably have something 
that would work as a numbered list. The list also gives you the advantage of not having to 
use repetitive transition words, since the numbers take care of transitioning for you. You 
will have a much easier time writing instructions using numbered lists, and readers will 
have a much easier time following your instructions.
Use Numbers to Indicate Order
Another good use of numbered lists is to present things in a sequential order. Perhaps you 
want to indicate in what order the main outcomes of a project will happen, as in:
1.	 Creation of a project plan
2.	 Validation of the plan with stakeholders
3.	 Implementation of the plan
4.	 Evaluation of the plan
The numbers imply an order to the events. This use of numbers works well for outlining 
dependent tasks, steps toward a goal, or a progression of activities.
Use Numbers to Indicate Priority
You can also use numbers to indicate level of priority or importance. This is most com-
mon in such cases as “top ten” lists. Library examples might be your top three reasons 

U S I N G  L I S T S  A N D  T A B L E S   ▲  7 3
for visiting the library, top five study tips, or top ten books recommended by library staff. 
These work well independently, but can cause confusion if you place them near other 
numbered lists. So be cautious when using numbers for different purposes within the 
same piece of content. 
Don’t Use Numbers Arbitrarily
Writers often use numbered lists when they’d be better off using bulleted lists. If you use 
numbers, readers may interpret the list on first glance to be a list of steps in a process or 
list of things in some sort of order. If the list of things has no particular, intentional order, 
a bulleted list is the best option.
For example, if you are listing things you can do with a new tool, you might write:
1.	 Manage references and citations
2.	 Annotate articles
3.	 Add and organize papers
4.	 Share and collaborate with peers
On first glance, this can be interpreted as a list of actions you would take in order. In 
reality, users of the tool could do any or all of these things in whatever order they like. 
Writing these out in bullets makes this more apparent:
•	 Manage references and citations
•	 Annotate articles
•	 Add and organize papers
•	 Share and collaborate with peers
USING ROMAN NUMERALS AND A, B, C
Variations on the numbered list are the Roman Numerical list (I, II, III, IV) and 
the Alphabetical List (A, B, C). These are often used to create an outline of con-
tent, and are useful options if your readers would benefit from the structure these 
provide. For example, in a lengthy document you can point to “section B” or “item 
VIII” more easily than “the eighteenth bullet.”
Be thoughtful as you use these, though. While they don’t imply steps in a 
process or priority order as directly as numbered lists do, they can imply an order 
of importance. For instance, if writing a job description and listing duties as A, B, 
and C, the candidates might assume that the most important duty is A, the second 
is B, and the third is C.
 Tables
Use Tables for Numerical Data
The most obvious content to put in a table is numerical data (see table 7.1). If you are 
presenting service costs, a budget, or staff salaries, a table is going to be the best way to 
display the content. It helps you compare numbers at a glance. 

7 4  ▲  C H A P T E R  7
Use Tables to Indicate Relationships
Tables are also great tools for presenting non-numerical data that has a relationship. In 
their basic form, tables are essentially a set of “if, then” sentences. The title of the first 
column can be read as the “if,” and subsequent columns as the “then(s)” (Redish, 2012). 
Tables can help users understand trends and relationships between content and find 
quicker answers to their questions. It’s often much easier to understand a table of content 
than the same content written in pure text format.
If you find yourself writing several sentences using similar language, you might have 
a candidate for a table. For example, “Undergraduates can check out seventy-five books 
for three weeks at a time. Graduate students can check out two hundred books for three 
months at a time. Faculty members can check out 250 books for six months at a time.” 
This content is better presented as a table, as in table 7.2.
Table 7.1.    Example of a Table for Comparing Numbers
OPERATING BUDGET
EVENT BUDGET
User Experience Department
$3,560
$450
Research and Learning Department
$2,000
$780
Access Services Department
$2,500
$800
Table 7.2.    Example of a Table for Related Content
NUMBER OF BOOKS  
YOU CAN BORROW
HOW LONG YOU CAN 
BORROW THEM FOR
Undergraduate students
  75
three weeks
Graduate students
200
three months
Faculty members
250
six months
If the answer to a reader’s question is “It depends,” you also may have a candidate 
for a table (Redish, 2012). For example, questions such as “What are your hours?” and 
“How much does printing cost?” may both share the answer “Well, it depends,” because 
it depends on the library branch or the type of printing service. Examples of “it depends” 
and other related content appropriate for tables include:
•	 Library borrowing privileges by type of user
•	 Library branches and their associated hours
•	 Printing services and their associated fees
•	 Librarians and their phone numbers, office numbers, and specialties

U S I N G  L I S T S  A N D  T A B L E S   ▲  7 5
Use Clear Column and Row Titles
Tables should have column titles, row titles, or both. These give structure to the table 
and make it clear what content is being presented. As you come up with appropriate 
titles, put the readers’ questions at the forefront of your mind. What question(s) do your 
readers have that the table can help answer? What language would they use? In table 7.1, 
the column titles are “Operating Budget” and “Events Budget.” The row titles are “User 
Experience,” “Research and Learning,” and “Access Services.” These were labeled as such 
in anticipation of readers asking such questions as, “What is the operating budget for the 
Access Services Department?” and “What is the events budget for the User Experience 
Department?” This assumes the readers are familiar with these types of budgets and the 
names of these departments.
In table 7.2, the row titles indicate the type of library user, and the column titles 
indicate the borrowing privileges. These were also labeled with the readers’ questions in 
mind, anticipating such questions as, “How many books can a faculty member borrow?” 
and “How long can undergraduates borrow books for?”
BE CAREFUL IF USING LAYOUT TABLES ON THE WEB
Especially in the early days of the web, people would use tables to create presenta-
tion layouts for their content. The content itself wouldn’t be appropriate for a table, 
but it would be an easy way to present content in rows and columns, perhaps giv-
ing it more visual appeal, making it more interesting, or improving readability over 
just paragraphs of text. With the advent of CSS, tables are no longer appropriate 
to use for this purpose. CSS provides cleaner code and a reduced chance of acces-
sibility issues for those people using screen readers or navigating with a keyboard  
(WebAIM, 2013). Tables on the web should primarily be used for presenting 
related content, not for formatting a page. If you need to use tables for layout, pay 
close attention to the order of your content and table markup to ensure accessi-
bility.
FIGURES, GRAPHS, AND CHARTS
Other great tools for breaking apart and structuring content are figures. These can 
be in the form of graphs and charts, such as bar graphs, Venn diagrams, pie charts, 
and line charts. They are great tools for visualizing data and relationships. If you’re 
dealing with something complex, providing the content in a more visual way can 
make it more approachable and understandable. If you are presenting complicated 
numerical data, using these tools (and using them well) can ensure readers’ under-
standing. 

7 6  ▲  C H A P T E R  7
 Key Points
When used well, lists and tables are great tools for bringing structure and clarity to your 
writing. Remember:
•	 Use bullets to present items, series, and options.
•	 Use numbered lists to present instructions, sequences, or priorities.
•	 Use tables to present related content.
You now have a set of tools to use across all types of content for improved clarity and 
structure. In the next chapter, you’ll learn how to best write a particular type of content: 
information and instructions.
 References
Redish, Janice. 2012. Letting Go of the Words: Writing Web Content That Works. San Francisco: 
Morgan Kaufmann.
WebAIM. 2013. “Creating Accessible Tables.” WebAIM. October 25. http://webaim.org/ 
techniques/tables.

▲  7 7
C H A P T E R  8
Writing Information  
and Instructions
P
ERHAPS A MAJORITY OF THE CONTENT you write is information and instruc-
tions. For your external customers, it could be a sign in your building, policies on 
a webpage, or a how-to worksheet. Within your working environment, it could be 
a report, an email update, or a training document. Information and instructions aren’t 
always the most exciting things to write or to read. But in this chapter, you will find out 
how even the beefiest and most boring content—such as policies—can become more 
readable, understandable, and perhaps even a bit of fun.
 Writing Brochures and Flyers
Librarians often use print collateral to promote services and events. You tend to find racks 
of brochures in library lobbies along with flyers posted on walls, windows, and bulletin 
boards. These print pieces can be an effective way to educate and inform visitors, but 
require some thought to implement effectively.
Focus on Your Message
As discussed in chapter 3, you need to define your primary messages, and those messages 
should be front and center. If your readers only get through the first few lines (which is a 
IN THIS CHAPTER
P
P How to write brochures, flyers, and signs
P
P How to write policy and other difficult content
P
P How to write and format instructions
P
P When to avoid instructions and remove unnecessary instructions

7 8  ▲  C H A P T E R  8
definite possibility), they should have an understanding of your main point. Try to keep 
brochures to just a few main messages, and flyers or posters to just one single message. 
Don’t allow your important messages to get lost in a sea of content.
As discussed in chapter 6, use a title that is meaningful to the reader. When your 
visitors are walking by, there is a good chance that the title is the only thing they will see. 
The title will help them determine whether the content is relevant or useful. If you have 
a brochure about your new print-on-demand book maker, try giving it an action phrase 
title, such as “Self-Publish a Book” or “Print a Book in Minutes.” This speaks more di-
rectly to the readers’ motivations than a passive, more ambiguous title of “Espresso Book 
Machine.”
You are especially limited in space, so removing unnecessary content is a requirement. 
Review chapter 4 and see what words, sentences, or paragraphs can be removed without 
losing meaning.
Make It Fun
Brochures in a rack and flyers on a bulletin board are unique in that they depend on the 
reader stopping in their tracks to pay attention. Understanding your readers’ motivations 
will ensure your content does what it sets out to do. Especially if your goal is to motivate 
readers to take some course of action (e.g., attend an event, try a new library service), 
experiment with making the content fun and exciting.
For example, if you have an author lecture series coming up, try coming up with a 
title that will get the attention of passersby. The title “Explore the Unknown Universe 
with Local Authors” is more likely to grab attention than “Local Science Fiction Authors 
Lecture Series.”
Avoid Common Pitfalls
It’s easy to create verbose brochures and flyers because you want to have robust content 
and make sure you answer all your readers’ questions. It’s easy to title something the 
name of a library service because that is what you know it as. It’s easy to use passive voice 
to try and sound more academic and less direct. But all of these are common pitfalls of 
brochures and flyers that make them harder for visitors to read. To avoid these pitfalls:
•	 Have a meaningful, user-centered title.
•	 Stick to your primary messages.
•	 Use action phrases for headings.
•	 Avoid passive voice.
•	 Avoid putting too many nouns in a row.
•	 Keep sentences and paragraphs super short.
•	 Make content engaging and fun.
 Writing Signage
Libraries, especially those that have large, multi-story buildings, tend to have a significant 
number of signs, some printed and some digital. Directional signs assist visitors in navi-
gating the building. Promotional signs aim to raise awareness of a library service, event, 

W R I T I N G  I N F O R M A T I O N  A N D  I N S T R U C T I O N S   ▲  7 9
or initiative. Other signs inform visitors of something relevant, such as the name of a 
service desk, policies, or instructions on how to do something. All of these signs play an 
important role in the experience of the building visitor.
Unfortunately, libraries have a tradition of creating signage that is inconsistent, con-
fusing, and negative. Great progress has been made in recent years as more libraries are 
paying attention to the user experience, but there are still instances of poor signage in 
most library buildings (Stempler and Polger, 2013).
Focus on the Purpose
The first step to creating a useful sign is identifying its purpose. Think about both your 
visitors’ and your organizational goals. What do building visitors want to do? What do 
they need to know? What do you want them to know about? Perhaps visitors need to 
be able to navigate through the stacks, so you create directional signs that identify call 
number ranges and names of collections. Visitors also need to know how to find specific 
books, so you create signs that provide instructions on how to read call numbers. Maybe 
your library has a new book-scanning service, so you also create promotional signs that 
explain how the new service can save people time and effort.
Whatever the purpose, keep your content focused. Remember, you have your readers’ 
attention for only a short amount of time. Make it count.
Avoid Negative Language
As with most educational institutions, library buildings are places where you’re not al-
lowed to do certain things. While most libraries strive to be welcoming environments, 
they need to balance that with the need to keep their collections and technology intact, 
as well as to keep their spaces conducive to study and reflection.
It’s quite likely that your library has at least a sign or two that tells visitors what they 
are not supposed to do: “No food or drink” and “Don’t reshelve books” are common ex-
amples. Some less common, almost absurd examples include, “Do not chew on the head-
phone cords” and “No balloons” (Brandon, 2013). Often, these types of signs include all 
caps, red font, underlines, and/or exclamation points. While these policies exist for good 
reason, there are better ways to communicate. Using negative language can be patronizing 
and hurt your relationship with your visitors. As Leah White rightfully points out, “Such 
negative signage insults our patrons instead of guiding them or communicating policies 
in a positive and efficient manner” (2010: 23). You would rarely go to a commercial busi-
ness and be bombarded with the negative or passive aggressive signage you may find in a 
library. To make your policy-driven signage more approachable:
•	 Write like you talk, not like a terms of service agreement.
•	 Say “please” or “thank you” (but usually not both) if you are telling visitors things 
they’re not allowed to do.
•	 Don’t use all caps, red font, underlining, or exclamation points.
•	 Explain (concisely) why the policy is in place.
•	 Give your visitors an alternative option (if there is one).
•	 When possible, tell your visitors what they can do, not what they can’t do.
Some examples of revised signage can be found in table 8.1.

8 0  ▲  C H A P T E R  8
Similarly, you might have signs that let visitors know a service or tool is currently un-
available. Perhaps your checkout machines are broken or your computer lab is full. Rather 
than writing institutional-looking “Out of order” or “Filled to capacity” signs, see if you 
can’t bring a friendly, human voice to it. 
For example, when the restaurant chain Chipotle ran out of an ingredient, they had 
a sign that said: “Sorry, no carnitas. Due to supply constraints, we are currently unable to 
serve our pork. Trust us, we’re just as disappointed as you, and as soon as we get it back 
we’ll let the world know.” The most important message gets top billing, but it doesn’t stop 
there. This sign explains the situation, is sympathetic, and lets the customer know what 
to expect. Similarly, Chipotle has a sign they place on their soda machines when they are 
out of order that states, “This soda machine is out of order. All that it currently delivers 
is heartache and pain, and possibly wet shoes.” As these examples demonstrate, Chipotle 
consistently uses a lighthearted, fun, personable voice in their signage.
There are lessons to be learned from signs in the commercial world. Pay attention to 
signs you see when you visit a business, especially those ones you find especially helpful 
or interesting. When your study rooms are filled to capacity, perhaps your sign should say 
more than, “No rooms available.” It could say, “Sorry, no rooms available right now. We 
wish we had more. Feel free to put your name on the waiting list and relax in our lobby 
in the meantime.”
Format for Readability
Paying attention to readability is especially important with signage, as you are dealing 
with readers in a unique context: on the move. They can view signs from different angles 
and distances, and often have minimal time to take in any content being presented.
One rule of thumb is to left align any paragraph text on your signs. Never justify 
signage text. The even spacing between words and consistent alignment improves read-
ability and quickens comprehension. This same rule exists for other content, and will be 
discussed in more detail in chapter 13, but centering text is especially prominent and 
problematic on signage. This habit should be removed from common practice.
One advantage of the signage format is you can use different sized fonts and get 
creative with spacing and graphical elements. Be sure to use a large font for the primary 
message(s) on your sign. Secondary messages can be typed in a smaller font. Use num-
bered and bulleted lists appropriately, as explained in chapter 7. Signs are especially prone 
Table 8.1.    Signs Revised to Be Less Negative
ORIGINAL SIGN
REVISED SIGN
ATTENTION: No food or drink in computer lab. 
Thank you.
Please enjoy food or drink on the first floor only. 
Help us keep the computer lab clean. 
Quiet area! No talking.
This is a quiet area. Please keep talking to a 
whisper.
Cell phones are PROHIBITED.
Please silence your phones. You can take calls in 
the library lobby.
PLEASE do not reshelve books.
Leave books on cart for us to track and shelve.

W R I T I N G  I N F O R M A T I O N  A N D  I N S T R U C T I O N S   ▲  8 1
to skimming by passersby, so take full advantage of tools that create white space and make 
content easier to scan.
Place Signs Thoughtfully
The placement of signs is incredibly important. Directional signs ought to be at the stop 
points where visitors need to make a decision on where to go next. Other informational 
signs ought to be placed at the relevant point of need for the visitor. Promotional signs 
ought to be at the places visitors might stop and pay attention. All signs need to be placed 
somewhere they are readable from a reasonable distance where you’d expect visitors to 
be located.
Avoid bombarding visitors with too many signs. The same way that website visitors 
get “ad blindness” on websites with too many advertisements, building visitors can get 
signage blindness when there is too much of it. Place signs strategically so that visitors 
will notice them.
And test the placement of your signs. Observe visitors navigating your building and 
see how well the signage is (or isn’t) working. Use usability testing methods to test how 
well signs assist visitors in wayfinding throughout your physical space. 
Avoid Common Pitfalls
Signs can be challenging to create. Even with the best of intentions, librarians can create 
signs that talk down to users, lack clarity, and are ripe with passive voice. To avoid these 
common pitfalls:
•	 Treat signs as a conversation with your visitors (use you and we).
•	 Place signs at the appropriate place in the building.
•	 Be direct, focused, succinct, and unambiguous.
•	 Pay attention to your voice and tone, and avoid sounding paternalistic.
 Writing Policies, Terms, and Conditions
Consider the Reader
Policies can be the most challenging to write with the user in mind. Usually, little thought 
is given to how a user will interpret library policies. It’s common to hear a librarian say, 
“Well, our patrons probably won’t read this, but at least we can point to it if something 
goes wrong.” While it is good to have something in place for when something goes 
wrong, this a pretty silly approach to content. If you are putting something up on your 
website or posting something on your wall, it should be something you expect and hope 
that your users will read. If you keep the policies succinct and well organized, there is a 
good chance users will at least skim them and get the gist of what you are trying to say. 
And it can serve the library’s interests by actually avoiding the problem of “something 
going wrong” down the road.
To write policies well, you need to consider the expectations and motivations of your 
readers. Write with their interests in mind, not your own.

8 2  ▲  C H A P T E R  8
Prioritize
In poorly written policy documentation, there tends to be a mishmash of content in no 
particular order. Included alongside each other are often:
•	 Information people really should know—the most important stuff
•	 Warnings about bad things that people probably won’t do, but it’s part of the policy 
and needs to be included anyway
•	 Details people don’t care about right now, but might care about at some point later 
on
•	 Other details people don’t really care about, and never will
For example, imagine you are writing policies related to your 3D printing service. 
There are a lot of details, and you need to figure out how to structure them. What are 
people going to really care about? When it comes to services, people usually care about:
•	 Time
•	 Money
•	 Outcomes
•	 Expectations
So people are going to want to know that 3D print jobs cost money, and how much. 
They want to know that it will take a day or two to process. They also want to know what 
to expect: that they will get an email when their job is complete and ready for pickup. 
People care less about things like legal requirements, copyright specifications, and 
fiddly details. This doesn’t mean this content isn’t important or shouldn’t be included, just 
that it should be less of a priority and placed under the more relevant, important content. 
Readers care less (or not at all) about:
•	 Legalese that doesn’t affect them in any real way (e.g., “3D printers may only be 
used for lawful purposes”)
DON’T RELY ON TERMS OF SERVICE
How often have you accepted terms and conditions on a website without reading 
them? Even though these terms often affect users’ privacy and intellectual property 
rights, the sad fact is that few people take the time to read them before clicking 
the “accept” button. It’s not surprising, given their complexity. Researchers who 
analyzed terms of service agreements from different websites found they average 
a reading level of a college sophomore and can take hours to read, or years if you 
are to read all of the terms for every website you visit (Fiesler and Bruckman, 
2014). So clearly, these terms are not written with the intention that users will 
actually read them. They are written to satisfy the legal requirements. So if you 
want someone to read or understand something, don’t put it only in a terms of 
service agreement. Even if they are well written, people have gotten in the habit 
of ignoring them completely.

W R I T I N G  I N F O R M A T I O N  A N D  I N S T R U C T I O N S   ▲  8 3
•	 Warnings about things they would never do (e.g., “No one is permitted to create 
dangerous or obscene material”) 
•	 Things not relevant to them at this point (e.g., “Items not picked up in thirty days 
are recycled”)
So as you structure your policies and agreements, put what readers want and need to 
know first. Everything else is secondary.
Use Second Person and Active Voice
One of the most infuriating things about policy documentation and terms and conditions 
statements is their overuse of third person and the passive voice. All too often, the reader 
is referred to in third person as something like the patron, candidate, or registrant. Some-
times, there is such prominent use of the passive voice that there is no clear indication of 
who does what, making the content even more difficult to follow. For example, take this 
statement: 
Complete service terms and conditions will be provided following application. Program 
participation may be terminated at any time. Enrollees have thirty days from the date en-
rolled to receive a full refund. After thirty days, enrollees will be reimbursed the pro rata 
share of any amount paid for any portion of the program period subject to cancellation. 
What a doozy. As a reader, each sentence is hard to follow and the paragraph as a whole 
is exhausting to read. But by simply switching the point of view and speaking directly to 
the reader, notice how much more readable it becomes: 
After you apply, we’ll send you our complete service terms and conditions. We may ter-
minate your participation in the program at any time. You have thirty days from the date 
you enroll to receive a full refund. After thirty days, you will be reimbursed the pro rata 
share of any amount paid for any portion of the program period subject to cancellation.
Simplify and Write Like a Human
Try reading policy statements and terms of agreements out loud. Even in the above revi-
sion, there are still notable problems. The last sentence remains overly complicated: “You 
will be reimbursed the pro rata share of any amount paid for any portion of the program 
period subject to cancellation.” This sentence sounds more like a robot is saying it than a 
human. The main message this sentence is trying to get across is that enrollees will receive 
a pro-rated reimbursement if they cancel after thirty days. A much simpler way to express 
this would be, “If you cancel after thirty days, you will receive a pro-rated reimbursement.”
Legal information is especially hard to write like a human, but it can be done with a 
bit of time and effort. For example, you may ask users to check a box confirming they have 
read a copyright statement at the bottom of your interlibrary loan form. It may read as:
The individual requesting materials via this electronic interlibrary loan form agrees to 
follow copyright law of the United States of America and to only use requested materials 
for individual, private study, scholarship, or research, or in accordance with federal fair 
use guidelines as available for electronic viewing. The individual must understand that 
requested materials used for teaching and instruction must be restricted to currently 

8 4  ▲  C H A P T E R  8
enrolled students within the relevant course web page authenticated as such through 
mechanisms such as the course management system authentication system or other 
password-protected websites.
Removing unnecessary words, writing in plain language, and switching to first person 
make this cumbersome statement much easier to understand:
I agree to follow U.S. copyright law and to only use the requested materials for private 
study, scholarship, or research, or in accordance with fair use guidelines. I understand 
that materials used for instruction must be restricted to currently enrolled students (e.g., 
password-protected course website).
Avoid Common Pitfalls
Policies and terms are complicated and hard to write. But there are things you can do to 
make this type of content more approachable:
•	 Focus on your users’ challenges and motivations, not your own.
•	 Put the most important, essential messages first.
•	 Use numbered lists and bullets to improve readers’ ability to scan.
•	 Avoid library jargon, legalese, and policy-speak.
•	 Write like you talk and replace passive voice with active, direct voice.
 Writing Instructions
When Instructions Are Not Needed
Educating users is important, but too often instructions are written when they aren’t 
needed. For example, instructions are often placed at the beginning of a form or survey, 
saying things such as “Fill out the form below” or “Fill in the required fields on this 
form.” This instruction is unnecessary. The best forms and surveys require minimal, if any, 
instructions to fill them out. Users are familiar with forms and assume they need to fill 
out the fields, and indicating on the form fields themselves about what is required should 
be sufficient (more on writing forms in chapter 9).
Similarly, you shouldn’t need a webpage with instructions on how to find something 
or do something on your website. If you do, there is probably something wrong with your 
website. Understandable, usable navigation should make many instructions irrelevant. For 
example, imagine you have a service called Express Documents that allows users to re-
quest scans of book chapters and articles. Website visitors interested in making a request 
find your webpage about Express Documents and it reads:
1.	 On the library main page, click on “Document Delivery” under the “Services” 
menu.
2.	 On the next page, click on “Log On to the Express Documents Request Form.”
3.	 On the following page, enter your authentication number and click on the “Log 
On” button.
4.	 Next, fill out the request form with the required fields and click “Submit.”

W R I T I N G  I N F O R M A T I O N  A N D  I N S T R U C T I O N S   ▲  8 5
This example is the epitome of unnecessary instructions. At this point, users have already 
reached the page about Express Documents on the website. They don’t need or want in-
structions on how to get to the request form; they just want to get to the request form. A 
better user experience would not list out instructions, but would just link the user directly 
to the form with an action phrase such as “Request a document scan.” What the user 
does next is at the point of need—they follow an intuitive navigation path, fill out a form, 
and click a submit button. The last thing you want to do is ask your user to have a set of 
instructions in one hand while they are trying to navigate your website.
In Steve Krug’s groundbreaking yet commonsensical book on web usability, he agrees 
that instructions are a common source of unnecessary words. He goes so far as to state, 
“Instructions must die” (2014: 51). So rather than cluttering up your webpages with in-
structions—which users are unlikely to read anyway—try to tackle the root cause of the 
issue: an unintuitive interface, navigation, labels, or content. In other words, make your 
website as easy to use as possible whereby users can quickly find information and com-
plete relevant tasks. In most cases, instructions shouldn’t be necessary.
When Instructions Are Needed
All that said, instructions obviously have an appropriate time and place. If you need to 
teach your users or colleagues something, you will provide them with instructions. 
If you work in a public library, you likely host skills-based classes. You might teach 
patrons about computer privacy, job searching and resume building, and genealogical 
research. These classes may involve related web resources, handouts, and slide decks, all of 
which contain instructional content created for your students’ one-time or ongoing use.
In an academic library, you might deliver information literacy instruction. This in-
struction may require you to create webpages, worksheets, and tutorials filled with how-to 
content. Perhaps you are teaching students how to read call numbers, find a streaming 
film, or recall a book that is checked out. Or you might be teaching them more critical 
conceptual skills, such as how to narrow a research topic, analyze results in a database, or 
incorporate sources into a research paper.
Back in the office, you may find yourself giving instructions to employees as part of 
their training. You might create a training manual, handout, or online lesson. Perhaps you 
are teaching them how to set up email rules in Outlook, find relevant documentation, or 
fill out a timesheet. Or maybe you are teaching them something more complicated like 
how to conduct a reference interview, manage volunteers, or conduct performance reviews. 
Needless to say, instructions have their right time and place. You will have to write 
them, and your readers will benefit if you write them well.
Use Numbered Lists
In chapter 7, you learned that numbered lists are great for presenting step-by-step in-
structions. You also learned the power of parallelism. As you write instructions in a num-
bered list, use a parallel grammatical structure by starting each item with an imperative 
verb that speaks directly to the reader. For example:
1.	 Place the book on the scanner bed.
2.	 Turn on the machine.
3.	 Press the “Scan” button.

8 6  ▲  C H A P T E R  8
If you have more complex instructions where some steps include sub-steps or other 
details, you can expand to a multi-level list. For example, instructions on appointing 
somebody to a committee could read as:
1.	 Send an email call for faculty volunteers.
2.	 Give people one week to respond to the email.
a.	 Aim for at least two volunteers.
b.	 If you receive no volunteers and it’s the last day, recruit individuals to volunteer.
c.	 If needed, extend the call for up to three days.
3.	 From the list of volunteers, appoint a faculty member to the committee.
a.	 Base your appointment on the established criteria.
b.	 If you still have no volunteers and the deadline passes, you may appoint a fac-
ulty member who didn’t volunteer.
4.	 Notify any volunteers who were not appointed.
5.	 Notify the volunteer who was appointed.
6.	 Notify all faculty members of the appointment.
If your instructions require more than two levels of structure, consider using headings or 
other structural elements to break things apart rather than trying to put everything in 
just one numbered list.
Use Structure and Headings
Instructional content is often more complicated than a list of steps and requires more 
structure. Many libraries create interactive tutorials that allow for robust, interactive 
content spanning multiple topics and learning outcomes. You also might create a con-
tent-rich guide broken apart into multiple sections, pages, or chapters. This entire book is 
a practical guide, and so could be considered a complex set of instructions.
Whatever you’re dealing with, be sure to organize your instructions in a way that 
makes sense to the end user. Consider if users will want to skip from one section to the 
next or if they need to follow the content in order as written, because this can influence 
what you call things and how you organize. If you have a list of chapters or other form 
of navigation, use titles and headings that are meaningful, as discussed in chapter 6. If 
working in an online environment, make sure buttons and links are obviously clickable, 
and the words on navigation elements resonate with whoever is reading them.
Use headings to break apart more complex instructions, preferably action phrases 
that begin with imperatives and gerunds (Redish, 2014). Make sure headings use parallel 
grammatical structure. Avoid using lengthy questions (e.g., “Is it possible to renew a book 
after it was already past due?”) or numerous redundant headings that begin with the same 
words (e.g., “How do I . . . ?” “How to . . . ”). Write more effective headings by using action 
phrases, using parallelism, and omitting needless words, as demonstrated in table 8.2.
Be Clear and Consistent
Use unambiguous verbs. If your instructions are asking users to do something online, 
you will likely be repeatedly using the verbs click or select. Be sure to use just one of these 
options for consistency’s sake and so the user won’t wonder if they mean different things. 
If you decide to indicate certain elements with quotations, bold, or italics, do this consis-

W R I T I N G  I N F O R M A T I O N  A N D  I N S T R U C T I O N S   ▲  8 7
tently throughout the set of instructions. If you end a step with or without punctuation, 
do the same for the rest of the steps. If you have similar instructions elsewhere, be sure 
there is consistency across instructions, too.
Avoid Common Pitfalls
Educational content provides a public good and makes for better citizens, students, and 
employees. But it is easy to do poorly. To avoid creating ineffective instructions:
•	 Keep content consistent, parallel, and organized.
•	 Write in the readers’ language and explain any jargon.
•	 Focus on your core purpose and remove any unnecessary content.
•	 Test content out with readers to make sure it works as intended.
 Writing Memos and Reports
Formal memos and reports are often victims of bureaucratic and passive language. Even 
when writing for an internal library audience, take care to write in a way that is approach-
able. Assume that all your readers—including employees—are pressed for time and need 
to quickly absorb the information.
In a report on open access initiatives, for instance, you might find a sentence like “The 
Libraries provide programmatic education and advocacy related to open access and pub-
lishing to the campus through events, online tools and materials, and, where appropriate, 
by working with faculty and instructors to embed appropriate learning objectives into 
curricula or programs.” This sentence is dry, complex, and hard to digest. Rather than a 
long compound sentence, the message can be conveyed in bullet points. The same general 
message can be written as:
We provide open access and publishing information to campus through:
•	 Events
•	 Online tools and content
•	 Working with instructors on their curriculum (where appropriate)
Table 8.2.    Revised Headings for Instructions
ORIGINAL HEADINGS
REVISED HEADINGS
How to renew a book
How to pay a late fee
Renew a book
Pay a late fee
How do I narrow a topic to something more 
manageable?
How do I search most effectively?
Narrowing your topic
Searching effectively
Tips as you start your search
Using subject terms effectively
Getting the full text of the article 
Citations
Start your search
Use subject terms
Get the article
Cite the article

8 8  ▲  C H A P T E R  8
Reports and memos tend to be boring, and it can be tempting to get careless with 
your writing in this context. But you will be more successful if you follow the same prac-
tices you would when writing to an external audience. When writing such a document, 
be sure to:
•	 Focus on your core messages and remove anything unnecessary.
•	 Use a meaningful, parallel heading structure to break apart content and allow for 
skimming.
•	 Choose active voice over passive voice.
•	 Use bulleted or numbered lists and tables to break apart and present content in a 
more digestible way.
 Key Points
Strive to create user-centered information and crystal clear instructions. Remember:
•	 Write brochures and flyers that are fun and easy to skim.
•	 Be purposeful in writing and placement of library signage.
•	 Write everything with the reader in mind, even policies.
•	 Only write instructions when they are necessary.
•	 Keep information and instructions organized, concise, consistent, and unambigu-
ous.
Informational content is most of what librarians push out to readers. It tends to be one-
way: you write the content, and the user reads the content. In the next chapter, it’s time to 
move on to another type of writing, one that involves interaction with the reader: forms.
 References
Brandon, John. 2013. “9 Very Specific Rules from Real Libraries.” Mental Floss, February 10. 
http://mentalfloss.com/article/48843/9-very-specific-rules-real-libraries. 
Fiesler, Casey, and Amy Bruckman. 2014. “Copyright Terms in Online Creative Communities.” 
CHI’14 Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems, pp. 2551–56. ACM Dig-
ital Library. http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?doid=2559206.2581294.
Krug, Steve. 2014. Don’t Make Me Think, Revisited: A Common Sense Approach to Web Usability. New 
York: Pearson Education.
Redish, Janice. 2012. Letting Go of the Words: Writing Web Content That Works. San Francisco: 
Morgan Kaufmann.
Stempler, Amy, and Mark Polger. 2013. “Do You See the Signs? Evaluating Language, Branding, 
and Design in a Library Signage Audit.” Public Services Quarterly 9, no. 2: 121–35. doi:10.10
80/15228959.2013.785881.
White, Leah. 2010. “Better None Than Bad: When It Comes to Signage, Nix the Negative.” 
American Libraries, August 12. https://americanlibrariesmagazine.org/2010/07/12/signage-
better-none-than-bad.

▲  8 9
C H A P T E R  9
Writing Forms
S
OMETIMES YOU WRITE TO GATHER information from readers, and a common 
way to do this is through forms. You prompt readers with fill-in-the blank questions 
along with options for them to select, perhaps using check boxes, radio buttons, or 
drop-downs. On the web, forms are prolific and necessary for many of the most meaning-
ful tasks and interactions. Forms are notoriously annoying and nobody likes filling them 
out, so writing in this context has particular challenges. In this chapter, you’ll learn how 
to make forms easier for readers to understand and less stressful for them to complete.
 Establishing Goals and Purpose
Define Your Users and Their Goals
Because forms serve a function, they often stand between users and their goals. Yet they 
are often cumbersome—fraught with complicated instructions, help text, and unneces-
sary fields. Luke Wroblewski (2008) argues that one of the biggest problems with forms 
is they are designed from the “inside out” rather than the “outside in.” In other words, 
people create forms because the organization needs (or wants) to gather information from 
their customers. But by turning it around and looking at user goals and expectations, your 
entire approach may change. 
So, as with other content, start by thinking about the people on the other end. Put 
your organization’s need aside for a moment. Who are the people who are actually filling 
out your form, and why? What is the context that landed them on the form in the first 
place?
IN THIS CHAPTER
P
P How to structure forms with the reader in mind 
P
P How to write unambiguous questions and field labels
P
P How to make forms more intuitive and approachable

9 0  ▲  C H A P T E R  9
Most of the forms library users fill out are functional in nature—they get users closer 
to completing particular tasks. Library users depend on forms for crucial interactions, 
such as:
•	 Signing up for library cards
•	 Requesting or ordering materials
•	 Registering for a service
•	 Paying late fees
•	 Contacting the library
Since such forms are necessary to meet their goals, users might be willing to spend a little 
more time on them (up to a point). You have other forms that are less critical to users’ 
goals, and their patience for lengthy forms is much less, such as:
•	 Providing feedback on a service
•	 Registering for events
•	 Making donations
•	 Subscribing to newsletters
Jarrett and Gaffney (2008) describe the following types of form users: readers, rush-
ers, and refusers. It’s possible that you’re dealing with “readers” who will take the time to 
read associated content and instructions prior to filling out the form. This is often the case 
when the stakes are high, such as funding requests, performance evaluations, and perhaps 
the crucial interactions listed earlier. It’s more likely, though, that your users are “rush-
ers” who want to quickly complete the transaction and won’t spend time reading nearby 
content. This is often the case for feedback forms and membership renewals. Sadly, you 
may have some “refusers” among your audience. These are users who get easily frustrated 
with forms and actually refuse to fill them out—it is not worth their effort. This means 
any reward they might get for completing the form does not make up for the time and 
energy it would take to complete it.
Identifying your users, their goals, and their frame of mind will allow you to build the 
most effective forms. It will help you:
•	 Avoid jargon or ambiguity
•	 Remove anything that isn’t relevant
•	 Ask the right questions at the right time
By designing forms with users in mind, you will get more accurate responses and higher 
completion rates.
Define Your Goals and Scope
Defining your own goals in creating the form is another important step. It will keep you 
focused and encourage you to only include what’s necessary. You want users to fill out 
your form accurately. When building a functional, task-driven form, think about what 
information is pertinent to the task. Try filling in the blanks: “We need to know _____ 
in order to _____.” The second part of this statement is your goal. For example:

W R I T I N G  F O R M S   ▲  9 1
•	 We need to know the complete title and author(s) of the book in order to retrieve 
the correct book for the student.
•	 We need to know the size of the poster in order to print the correct size and charge 
the correct fee.
•	 We need the donor’s address in order to send him or her a thank-you letter.
If you are writing a survey, you can use the same technique to clarify your goals and 
purpose. Everything within the survey should get you closer to your goals. Perhaps you 
have a goal to:
•	 Better understand why people use your website
•	 Find out about librarians’ professional development activities
•	 Gather feedback on your strategic plan
Every question puts more work on your users and can reduce completion rates, so be 
wary of adding questions that don’t serve a specific purpose. You want results that provide 
valuable, actionable data. Every question should matter.
Having clearly articulated goals for both those filling out the form and those analyz-
ing its results sets a foundation for effective form content and structure. So try outlining 
such goals before starting work on a form—it will save you time and keep you focused.
 Keeping It Simple
No one enjoys filling out forms, so your main goal in creating a form is to make it as quick 
and painless as possible (Wroblewski, 2008). You can do this by removing anything un-
necessary, keeping the content simple and on point.
Avoid Introductions and Instructions
Users generally skim over introductory statements (especially lengthy ones) and go 
straight to filling out the form. But this is okay, because when done well, most forms re-
quire little or no introduction. The title of the form should make its purpose obvious. The 
words describing the input fields should make it clear what the respondent is supposed 
to do. 
Avoid beginning a form with unnecessary, obvious instructions such as:
•	 Fill out this form as completely as possible. Thank you.
•	 Please provide your information using the form below, and then click “Submit.”
•	 To participate, please complete the following questionnaire.
•	 Use this form to [repeat title of the form].
Also avoid including instructions that talk down to users. These types of directions seem 
to assume your readers have never filled out a form before:
•	 Fill out all fields correctly.
•	 Fill out this form completely and accurately.
•	 Please print legibly.

9 2  ▲  C H A P T E R  9
•	 When you are ready to go to the next page, click the “Next” button.
•	 Once you have completed all of the information, press “Submit” to submit your 
application.
If instructions are necessary, see if it’s possible to put them within the form itself—at 
the point of need. If you have information that people really should know before filling 
out the form, consider having it on its own page to give it prominence. This method is 
often used in research studies, where privacy or legal information is listed on its own page 
before users agree to start the survey.
Avoid Redundancies and Remove the Unnecessary
Forms are prone to including redundant content. You’ll often find introductory text that 
replicates the title of the form. Perhaps you have a form titled “Email a Librarian” that 
then asks, “Would you like to email a librarian?” Similarly, you might have a form called 
“Request an Article” that starts out with “Use this form to request an article.” Pay atten-
tion to such redundancies and remove them. As explained above, the title of the form is 
often all you need.
You can also try to simplify wording on your labels and questions, using the same 
techniques discussed in chapter 4. See table 9.1 for examples of simplifying labels and 
questions without losing meaning.
Table 9.1.    Simplified Field Labels
ORIGINAL LABEL
REVISED LABEL
Email address
Email
Street address
Address
Which of our library locations do you visit most 
often? Select one of the following options.
Which of these libraries do you visit most often?
Where is your favorite place in the library? Why 
is it your favorite place? Please explain.
Where is your favorite place in the library and 
why?
Keep It Relevant
It is remarkable how many forms include questions or fields that aren’t really needed. 
Wroblewski insists that you should put every question you are asking people to the test, 
since “people need to parse every question you ask them, formulate their response to that 
question, and then enter their response into the space you have provided. The best way to 
speed up that process is not to ask the question at all” (2008: 22). 
Forms that have been around for a while often contain legacy questions that are no 
longer applicable. Don’t irritate new library users by asking for their fax number or mail-
ing address in order for them to sign up. If these fields are no longer necessary (or never 
were), it’s time to remove them. 
You can also hide content that isn’t relevant to some users. On the web, conditional 
logic in forms can help with this. For instance, let’s say you have a form for users to re-
quest digital copies of articles. Librarians want to know when articles are being requested 

W R I T I N G  F O R M S   ▲  9 3
by instructors for use in their courses. The form could have a field that asks, “Is this for a 
course you are teaching?” followed by other questions: “If so, what is the course?” “Have 
you taught the course before?” and “Would you like to discuss your course with a librar-
ian?” For those users who are not requesting articles for a course, these subsequent ques-
tions are irrelevant. So you should use conditional logic so that the subsequent questions 
are only exposed if a user answer “yes” to the initial question.
Similarly, you might have content that only a segment of your audience is interested 
in. Perhaps your interlibrary loan form includes an “additional details” section that only 
advanced users would fill out (fields such as “DOI” and “ISBN”). To avoid displaying 
irrelevant fields to the rest of your users, you can collapse that section of the form, only 
expanding it for those who deem it relevant for them.
 Making It Easy
Be Consistent
Ensure that you are consistent in content, formatting, and voice. If you use colons after a 
field label, use colons after all field labels. If you use asterisks to indicate required fields, 
use them consistently in placement and styling throughout the form. If your field labels 
are justified left on the first page, make sure they are justified left on subsequent pages. If 
you use sentence case in one field label, use sentence case in all field labels. Don’t switch 
between active and passive voice, or casual and formal tone. Consistency will allow users 
to digest the content more easily. They’ll be less likely to make mistakes or get frustrated.
HOW SHORT SHOULD A FORM BE?
As with most content, succinctness should be a goal. But there is no magic number 
of fields or questions. It depends heavily on the users’ goals and motivations. For 
users, the benefits of completing the form need to outweigh the effort they are 
putting into it.
ALIGN FIELDS TO ALLOW FOR SCANNING
Use clean and consistent alignment to best allow readers to scan through a form 
and see what’s expected. Use consistent layout across your forms and provide clear 
scan lines. Try to align field labels so that you can look over them without moving 
your eyes back and forth across the page.
Use Conventions
Forms are prolific, so there are many form conventions that your readers will be familiar 
with. There are common patterns used across the web especially.

9 4  ▲  C H A P T E R  9
One convention is how to indicate which fields are required and which fields are 
optional. People tend to assume an asterisk means “required,” so marking required fields 
with an asterisk is your best bet. Be sure to include a legend that indicates what the as-
terisk means, and don’t confuse users by using an asterisk to mean something other than 
“required” (such as “for staff use only”).
When you ask a reader to select from a set of options, you have a choice between 
check boxes or radio buttons. Use check boxes if users can select more than one option 
and radio buttons if they need to select just one option. This is a standard convention and 
allows you to avoid unnecessary instructions as “Check all that apply” or “Select just one 
of the options below.”
If you need an address, break it apart into fields: street address, city, state, and zip 
code (in that order). Don’t ask readers to put their address in one large text entry field, or 
muddle up their thinking by asking for zip code before city and state.
If you need readers to select a date within a web form, use a calendar. This is much 
easier for users than asking users to select the month, then day, then year within drop-
downs. It also makes it harder for them to input the wrong date.
Start paying attention to forms as you fill them out in your daily life. Conventions 
continue to evolve—especially on the web and on handheld devices—so it’s important to 
keep up with the latest practices and changing user expectations.
Avoid Ambiguity
Watch out for ambiguity in field labels. On an article request form, don’t just say “Title” 
but specify, “Article title” or “Journal title.” On an award application form, rather than a 
vague label of “Status,” try asking, “How are you affiliated with the university?” Ambiguity 
not only is bothersome to the user who notices it, but also can bias or even invalidate 
your responses. Ensure that your questions mean the same exact thing from one reader 
to the next.
Make It Accessible
Make sure that people using keyboard navigation (rather than a mouse) as well as people 
using screen readers can use your web forms. Users should be able to navigate from one 
input field to the next with a keyboard. Field labels need to be semantically marked up as 
field labels and should help text clearly associated with particular fields. Don’t rely solely 
on physical relationship to other elements on the webpage—for screen readers, semantic 
meaning is essential.
Pay attention to the design of your input fields. In print, make sure they are long 
enough for a person with reasonable type size to fill in without going outside the field or 
having to squish letters together. This is especially true with email addresses that can be 
thirty or more characters long.
Provide Help Text
While some instructions aren’t necessary, some are helpful, especially in more compli-
cated forms with uncommon fields. Microcopy refers to snippets of relevant information. 
On forms, microcopy is often used as help text underneath or within input fields. Use 
help text for things like:

W R I T I N G  F O R M S   ▲  9 5
•	 Character requirements for a password (e.g., “five or more characters”)
•	 Formatting requirements for a phone number (e.g., “520-555-5555”)
•	 Advice on how to fill out the information (e.g., “Find your passcode on the bottom 
right of your library card.”)
•	 Explanation of why the question is being asked (e.g., “This data is required by the 
university.”)
•	 Examples of appropriate responses (e.g., “Examples: geography, medicine, history”)
At the same time, don’t clutter your forms with unnecessary help text. You shouldn’t 
need to provide an example email address, for instance, because email addresses are pro-
lific. Write help text only when it provides users with relevant information that will help 
them fill out the form accurately.
Be Inclusive
Be careful you aren’t excluding anyone who might be filling out your form. If you are 
asking people to select a gender identity, don’t limit them to “male” or “female”—include 
a “no response” option. If you are doing a campus survey and include a department 
drop-down, make sure you include every possibility. If it’s impossible to include every 
possibility, have an “Other” or “Not applicable” option, and put it last in the drop-down. 
Respondents will feel excluded if their identity is not represented, and may leave a survey 
if they feel they are not part of the audience or can’t answer a question accurately. 
MOVING AWAY FROM CAPTCHA
For security reasons, web forms sometimes include a CAPTCHA: a colorful im-
age with letters in it that you have to decipher and reproduce. The purpose is to 
ensure the person filling out the form is an actual human, not a robot. But many 
times, actual humans can’t understand the thing and have to go through several 
attempts before getting it right. Fortunately, the days of CAPTCHA are nearing 
an end. Newer technology, such as Drupal’s Honeypot module, will make CAPT-
CHA a thing of the past. So when possible, use a technology that keeps your forms 
secure but doesn’t aggravate your users.
Make Error Messages Useful
In a web form, if someone fills out a field incorrectly or fails to fill out a required field, 
make the corresponding error messages clear. Users shouldn’t be faced with puzzling or 
incomplete messages, leading them to troubleshoot the errors themselves. 
If you are asking users to create a password and you have password requirements, 
make sure your error message makes it clear why the password is not valid. Don’t simply 
write, “Your entry does not comply with the password policy.” Rather, explain the details: 
“Your password must be at least eight characters long and contain at least one number.”

9 6  ▲  C H A P T E R  9
Make the Next Steps Clear
In print, make it clear where the individual is supposed to mail or turn in the form (e.g. 
“When finished, place this form in the comment box at the information desk.”). On the 
web, pay attention to the “Submit” button at the end of the form. Rather than labeling 
it simply “Submit,” try giving it a specific, meaningful title that reflects the action. For 
example:
•	 Place your order
•	 Activate your account
•	 RSVP now
Once the respondent turns in the print form or submits the web form, he or she 
should know what to expect next. On a print form, this information could be at the end 
of the form or at the point at which they turn it in. On the web, this information should 
be on the confirmation page after the submission. However the information is presented, 
make it clear to the respondents:
•	 What you will do with their form information
•	 When (and if) they should expect a response
•	 What they should do if they have questions or concerns
For example, on a form people use to suggest new books for the library, the confirmation 
message could say: “We will carefully consider your request and email you our decision 
within two days. If you have questions in the meantime, call us at 555-5555.”
 Keeping It Organized
Create Sections with Headings
On longer forms, break content into purposeful sections and sequence those sections in 
a logical way. If organizing a form into sections, use meaningful headings. For example, 
your first heading could say, “Tell us about yourself,” and the second, “Tell us about 
your request.” The same way that headings allow readers to scan (as covered in chapter 
6), headings in forms allow readers to know what to expect. This will also allow users 
to make sure they have all the required information up front before starting to fill out 
the form.
Put Related Content Together
As you think about sequence, remember that users expect certain fields to come first or 
last, and certain fields to be near each other. For example, the following fields are usually 
found in proximity, in this order:
•	 First name
•	 Last name
•	 Email address

W R I T I N G  F O R M S   ▲  9 7
Users will tend to expect personal information to be grouped together either at the begin-
ning or end of the form. They’ll also expect questions related to the particular service or 
topic to be together. If you have terms and conditions, they’ll expect it to come last, and 
usually in the form of a box they are required to select. 
Form structure varies and it all depends on context, but you should be able to iden-
tify some natural groupings. And if you have a complex, multi-page survey, your ques-
tions may build on previous questions. However you decide to structure your forms, be 
thoughtful in how you sequence content so that it has a logical, intuitive flow.
Consider Multiple Pages
While most forms fit nicely on a single page, others have an unavoidable level of com-
plexity. In print, the number of pages matters less because users have access to all the 
pages at once. But on the web, having multiple pages means hiding content on subsequent 
pages. Sometimes this is appropriate, and sometimes it’s not.
To make this decision, consider how your users will approach the form. Do they need 
to see the information in one place because there is a relationship between questions, and 
they might find value in viewing previous (or upcoming) questions? Is it important for 
readers to know up front exactly what information is expected? In that case, one long 
webpage could be better than a multi-page form. On the other hand, if there are three 
distinct sections or a sequence of distinct steps, and users won’t need to see information 
from differing sections, splitting it up could be the better approach. This is especially true 
in lengthy surveys.
If you create a web form spanning multiple pages, users will want to know how far 
along they are in the process. You can indicate this in a variety of ways, such as:
•	 Progress bars indicating percentage complete
•	 Titles or headings indicating which step you are on and total number of steps
•	 Box navigation indicating where you are in the process
•	 “Next” buttons with meaningful titles (e.g., “Proceed to page 2 of 3”)
So if you do choose to have a multi-page form, just make sure users understand what they 
are committing to by filling it out, and make sure they get indicators of their progress.
 Making It Approachable
Invite People to Participate
While people need to fill out some forms in order to get a benefit (e.g., help from a li-
brarian), surveys are usually optional. So you need to be extra conscientious in how you 
write surveys—and how you invite people to take them.
As you recruit participants, make a compelling case. Make it clear how the survey will 
benefit them. Perhaps your survey will:
•	 Provide valuable information to other library professionals
•	 Improve a library service they use regularly
•	 Make the community a better place to live

9 8  ▲  C H A P T E R  9
You might convince them it’s a valuable survey, but people want to know if it’s worth 
their time and effort. So be honest about how long it will take someone to fill out the 
form. Something with great value that only takes a few minutes is much more likely to 
be filled out than a twenty-minute survey with an unclear purpose (another reason to try 
and keep surveys short).
Use direct, active, and natural voice to better connect with your audience. Put your 
primary message first. Rather than saying, “On behalf of the library, I am requesting your 
participation in a data-collection effort,” say something like, “We’d love for you to partic-
ipate in our survey.” If the invitation sounds complicated, readers will assume the survey 
itself is complicated and be less likely to fill it out. See table 9.2 for examples of improved 
language used to invite people to take surveys.
Table 9.2.    Improved Survey Invitations
ORIGINAL SENTENCE
REVISED SENTENCE
This important data-collection effort is being 
undertaken to update the database.
We are doing this survey to improve our 
database.
The participation of community members across 
the county will ensure that all information 
contained in the system is accurate.
Your participation will ensure our information is 
up-to-date.
The city has authorized the Early Literacy 
Program, run by volunteers and administrators, 
to be made available to people in our 
community.
We’re asking people in our community to fill out 
this survey so we can improve literacy among 
our youth.
Give It a Good Title
Use the title of a form to reflect its purpose. A well-articulated title can remove the need 
for descriptive or introductory text (which readers are likely to skip over anyway). For 
example, a description above a form that says, “Please fill out the form below to register 
for a field trip,” is redundant if the title carries the same information: “Register for a Field 
Trip.”
See table 9.3 for examples of improved titles of forms. Too often, form titles are 
several complicated nouns in a row, ending with the word form. Removing the word form 
(which is unnecessary) and translating the title into an action phrase will make it more 
approachable and direct.
Table 9.3.  Form Titles Revised to Action Phrases
ORIGINAL TITLE
REVISED TITLE
Donation Submission Form
Donate to the Library
Reference Consultation Request Form
Ask a Librarian
Librarian Consultation Request Form
Request a Consultation with a Librarian
Profile Information Update Form
Manage Your Profile
Teacher Workshop Registration Request
Register for a Teacher Workshop

W R I T I N G  F O R M S   ▲  9 9
Surveys are a bit different, because they don’t tend to initiate a task or interaction, 
but you can follow similar guidelines. The word survey isn’t needed in the title and action 
phrases (beginning with strong verbs) still work well. For example, “Staff Professional 
Travel Planning Survey” is less effective as a title than “Share Your Professional Travel 
Plans.” Remember that titles of surveys are especially important because they can con-
vince participants to take them (or not). For surveys, consider starting with imperatives 
such as:
•	 Tell us . . . 
•	 Share . . . 
•	 Give us feedback on . . . 
•	 Help us improve . . . 
Treat It as a Conversation
Writing in general works best as a natural conversational style, but this is especially true 
when it comes to forms, since you are actually asking your users to respond to questions 
and participate in the conversation. Most of the time, it’s best to keep your field labels 
succinct—and you can do so with common labels such as “Name,” “Date,” and “Phone 
number.” But if there is a chance of ambiguity, a well-phrased question can make your 
intention crystal clear, avoiding confusion among your users.
Try to use language you would use in real life conversation. Consider a form to report 
a stolen library card. Rather than the field label “Issuing library,” a more natural (and 
unambiguous) label would be, “What library gave you the card?” If a person is filling 
out their personal information, try using the label “Your name” rather than “Incumbent,” 
“Affected party” or “Member name.” If you have an open-ended input field for general 
comments, try simply using “Tell us more” rather than “Use the space below to provide 
detailed commentary and suggestions.”
A good way to test the understandability of your writing is by reading it out loud. 
If you’re building a form, find a nearby colleague and try reading the form out loud as 
dialogue, asking your colleague to respond to the questions. Do the questions flow easily 
and make sense? Is your colleague able to quickly interpret the questions and respond? 
Does it sound like a conversation between a friendly librarian and library visitor, or does 
it sound more like an interrogation? Approaching forms as natural conversations will go 
a long way to improving the user experience.
 Key Points
Forms don’t have to be so annoying. Strive for forms that are easy for readers to under-
stand and complete. You’ll get more accurate data, higher completion rates, and more 
confident end users. Remember:
•	 Only include what is necessary.
•	 Use a logical sequence and put instructions at the point of need.
•	 Follow conventions (there are lots of them).
•	 Make it action-oriented, direct, and unambiguous.

1 00  ▲  C H A P T E R  9
Forms are two-way conversations, and when written well, can build a relationship with 
your reader and lead to better interactions. This chapter has covered both print forms and 
web forms. Next up, we’ll focus on the web in general and how to write intentionally with 
your web visitors in mind.
 References
Jarrett, Caroline, and Gerry Gaffney. 2008. Forms That Work: Designing Web Forms for Usability. San 
Francisco: Morgan Kaufmann.
Wroblewski, Luke. 2008. Web Form Design: Filling in the Blanks. Brooklyn, NY: Rosenfeld Media.

▲  1 0 1
C H A P T E R  1 0
Writing for the Web
W
RITING FOR THE WEB IS A BIG, complex topic, and authors have written en-
tire books on it. Most of the techniques outlined in this book are as relevant 
for the web as they are for print, but the web has enough unique attributes 
that it deserves special attention. In this chapter, you’ll learn how people interact with 
web content and how to use this to your advantage.
 Reading on the Web
People Want Information
People visit a particular website in order to achieve their goals. They want to either find 
information (gain knowledge) or complete a task (get something done). While the visual 
design of the website is important, it is the content that they care about most. This is 
undoubtedly true for library websites. Visitors don’t tend to come to your library website 
for the joy of navigating or to see the latest homepage design. Rather, they want the 
information—the content. And they want it to be easy to find and easy to understand 
(Redish, 2012).
People Scan and Skim
When people are in a hurry, they will scan and skim content whether it is in print or on 
the web. But on the web, scanning and skimming is the default. Users are often busy and 
IN THIS CHAPTER
P
P How people read on the web (and why it’s different from print)
P
P How to write meaningful labels and improve website navigation
P
P How to use the online format to optimize the structure of your content

1 02  ▲  C H A P T E R  1 0
on a mission to get a particular question answered or task completed. They aren’t inter-
ested in anything that isn’t essential to what they are trying to do. As a web user yourself, 
this probably isn’t surprising to hear. Even when on their final destination page, most 
users will skim and scan before they read.
Eye tracking studies have shown that users tend to scan website prose in an F-shaped 
pattern, focusing on words at the top left side of the page and then scanning for headings 
and keywords on the left side of the page (Nielsen, 2006). Users tend to pay the most 
attention to information at the top of the page, and tend to read at most 28 percent of 
the words on a page (Nielsen, 2013). This makes the words you use in your titles and 
headings especially important on the web—many times, the only thing users will read is 
titles and headings.
Write as a Conversation
As Janice Redish explains, good web writing is like a conversation (2012). People come 
to your website with a question and you answer it. Unlike other mediums, the web is 
interactive. Your web content talks directly to your site visitor, who then responds by in-
teracting with links, filling out forms, and so on. As you write web content, think of the 
person calling you on the phone and asking you about the topic. Respond to him or her 
as if you were responding to an actual person on the phone.
If you pay attention to webpages and how content is written, you’ll notice that most 
good web content is written in a conversational style. It’s active voice. It’s talking directly 
to the web user. It uses you to address you as the web user and we or us to talk about the 
organization. 
Break Grammar Rules
In other sections of this book, you’ve been encouraged to relax and pay more attention to 
meaning and understanding than to grammatical details. On the web, this is even more 
important.
To improve the user experience, feel free to let go of a few rules. It’s worth breaking a 
grammar rule if it improves fast comprehension (Loranger, 2014). On the web, it’s fine to:
•	 Use sentence fragments
•	 Use numerical format for all numbers (not just ten and above)
•	 Have paragraphs containing just one or two sentences
NOT ALL PEOPLE ARE THE SAME
As with all content, think about your audience. Who visits your website? What 
are they trying to do? What is the context in which they are trying to do it? Pay 
attention to your users. Listen to how they describe things. Empathize with their 
mind-set and think in their vocabulary as you identify what questions they have 
when they visit your website. Not all audiences are the same, and you need to craft 
your writing around the people you are writing for.

W R I T I N G  F O R  T H E  W E B   ▲  1 0 3
 Focusing on Tasks and Essential Messages
Identify Primary Tasks
Whether building an entire website or a single webpage, try to identify the primary tasks 
of your audience. These can be written out as tasks or as questions. What are people trying 
to do on your website? In a public library setting, primary tasks might be:
•	 Searching for books, e-books, or films
•	 Finding library hours
•	 Registering for programs
You can also consider tasks as questions or information needs—what questions will your 
web content answer? On an academic website, these might be:
•	 How long can I check out a book?
•	 How can I submit a request for a book you don’t have?
•	 Do you have laptops available for checkout and for how long?
By understanding the primary tasks and questions of your audience, you will better be 
able to prioritize content and write it in a way that makes sense.
CAN I USE ASTERISKS IN WEB WRITING?
As you try to focus on essential messages, you may be tempted to use asterisks to 
refer to supplemental content. But asterisks don’t work well on the web. It’s easy 
(usually) for your eyes to find the end of a print document where the asterisk is 
defined. The web doesn’t have a similar visual “end” and often requires scrolling or 
navigating to a different page. When you are in the web environment, do not use 
asterisks. There is better technology (an advantage of the web), so you should be 
able to expand content or link out to definitions if needed.
Identify Trigger Words
Users trying to answer a question or complete a task will scan your content for keywords 
that will trigger them into clicking. Jared Spool (2004) calls these “trigger words.” By 
including common trigger words, users are more likely to find the link that will get them 
closer to their goal. They are also more likely to find your content when they use those 
words in a search, so including trigger words in your content improves search engine 
optimization (SEO).
See table 10.1 for examples of trigger words for common library tasks. You can dis-
cover your users’ trigger words through focus groups, user interviews, and by reviewing 
any search log data. It’s helpful to be a librarian here, because this process is much like the 
process you would go through to identify concepts and keywords within a research topic.

1 04  ▲  C H A P T E R  1 0
Remember the Inverted Pyramid
The inverted pyramid was covered in chapter 3, but keep this technique in mind as 
you write individual webpages. Put the most important content first. For example, on a 
webpage about e-books, the most important message could be: e-books are available to 
download and here’s how to find them. A secondary message could be: people can keep 
them for three weeks and renew them if there is no hold. The final message could be: you 
must have a current library card.
What questions would your users ask first? What is most important to their goals? 
What might they need to know next? And what will only a certain segment be interested 
in knowing? Most of the time, this is how you should order your webpage content.
Make Calls to Action Clear
Webpages are often stepping points to further action. Users often need to do something 
else to reach their goals. That next step is called a “call to action.” What is the next step 
someone might need to take after reaching your webpage? Do they need to select a link 
to get to more information, or complete a form, or download a document? Identifying 
any call(s) to action at the outset will help you ensure these are made clear to the users 
through meaningful links, buttons, or other content. Be careful to make sure important 
calls to action are prominent and aren’t hidden in paragraphs of text. Table 10.2 lists some 
examples of call(s) to actions on particular library webpages.
Table 10.1.    Examples of Trigger Words
USER TASK
TRIGGER WORD(S)
Do you have e-books I can download?
e-books
How can I get a library card? Can I apply online?
library card, application, apply
Can I rent a laptop from the library?
laptops, rent, rentals, borrow
CONTENT FIRST
Web design is an ever-evolving field, but a concept that’s gained traction in recent 
years is a “content first” approach. This means that the most important thing to 
users is content. Content is what answers their questions and solves their problems, 
and so content should drive your design. No more lorem ipsum—or dummy con-
tent—in place of actual content. By dropping real content into a design, you get 
a much better sense of what the final output will be. When good, user-centered 
content is the priority, the design will not distract from it; it will highlight it.

W R I T I N G  F O R  T H E  W E B   ▲  1 0 5
Avoid Fluff
Steve Krug (2014) wants to eliminate “happy talk” on websites—self-congratulatory fluff 
that contains little to no value to users. You’ll often find happy talk on homepages, where 
organizations introduce themselves, sometimes providing a welcome message, mission, 
or vision statement. You’ll also find it on individual webpages, where there is content 
introducing you to the rest of the content.
Similar to forms, there is rarely a need for an introduction. You shouldn’t need to 
introduce your homepage or any webpage. A meaningful title, along with meaningful 
headings for skimming, should be sufficient. Users don’t want to read, “Welcome to this 
library website!” They also don’t want to read your mission statement. While there may 
be good reason to put your mission and vision statement, along with your strategic plan, 
up on your website for a particular segment of your audience, there is no need for it to 
be on the homepage. This type of fluff is unnecessary and adds minimal value. Table 10.3 
has two examples of webpage fluff revised down to be more useful, succinct, and likely 
to be read.
Table 10.3.    Revised, Simplified Homepage Copy
ORIGINAL 
REVISED
This homepage of the library website provides 
access to the tools you’ll need to find print, 
electronic, and multimedia resources in our 
library collections and on the web.
Find print, electronic, and multimedia resources.
The University Library Special Collections 
maintains collections of rare books and unique 
archival materials that make possible in-
depth research on selected topics. The scope 
and diversity of Special Collections make it 
an important resource for the international 
academic community. Established in 1958 
to house materials on the region, Special 
Collections now includes rare books, manuscript 
collections, photographs, and other materials in 
a wide variety of subject areas.
We offer access to rare and unique materials for 
scholars, researchers, and the public.
Table 10.2.    Examples of Calls to Action
WEBPAGE
CALL(S) TO ACTION
Study rooms
Reserve a study room
Event page
RSVP for event
Borrowing information
Get a library card
Library account
Renew a book
Update your profile

1 06  ▲  C H A P T E R  1 0
Keep Your Homepage Simple
The homepage is prime real estate, so everyone wants a spot for their thing. In an ac-
ademic library setting, you might have twenty stakeholders with different priorities. 
Instruction librarians want it easy for professors to request instruction and for students 
to find research guides. Circulation staff want it easy to get to your account and renew 
books. Reference librarians want databases front and center, as well as a prominent spot 
for chat and email reference services. The marketing director wants news and events items 
as prime real estate.
If you don’t have the primary tasks of your users identified, it can be challenging to 
prioritize content, or to turn down a stakeholder’s request to have their things on the 
homepage. Even with the best intentions, your homepage can end up trying to accom-
plish too much, allowing your most important content to get lost. For the sake of your 
users, try to keep your homepage focused. Identify what the majority of your users want 
and need, and put that content in the forefront. Make it clear to stakeholders that not 
everything can be on the homepage, nor would you want it to be.
Balance Organizational Goals and User Goals
Websites serve many purposes and can help you reach organizational goals such as 
increased donations, increased attendance at events, and increased knowledge of your 
services and resources. That said, you need to be careful to balance your organizational 
goals with your users’ goals. Don’t let the goals of your organization trump the needs of 
your users. This can be a careful balance, and these goals can live together harmoniously. 
But focus on user goals first. For example, assuming your users’ primary tasks relate to 
conducting research and finding materials, don’t let the marketing department convince 
you that news and events information should have more homepage prominence than your 
search and discovery tools.
WRITE LIKE A HUMAN, NOT A ROBOT
Library websites are often filled with passive, policy-driven language that is hard 
to understand. Take this information about study rooms: “Rooms may be left un-
occupied for up to sixty minutes without surrendering the room. Do not leave the 
library with your room key. You must place the room key in the hold basket at the 
Information Desk if you leave the library for even a few minutes. Failure to comply 
with this library policy may result in privileges being revoked.” Reword this with 
the reader in mind, and you’ll sound much more human and approachable: “It’s 
okay if you need to leave; just don’t take the room key with you—place it in the 
basket at the front desk. And be sure to come back within sixty minutes to keep 
your room.”

W R I T I N G  F O R  T H E  W E B   ▲  1 0 7
 Writing Links, Buttons, and Navigation Labels
Make Labels Meaningful
Users tend to visit more than just a single webpage—they will begin on one page of your 
website, then navigate around to the information they need. They might click through 
menus, links, or buttons to get where they need to go. 
WRITING ALT TEXT
If you use images on a web page, make sure you have associated, meaningful ALT 
text for people using screen readers. Some designers and content strategists rec-
ommend that before even putting an image up on a webpage, write the ALT text 
for it. This will help you realize why the image is there in the first place—what 
purpose does it serve?
DON’T PEOPLE JUST SEARCH?
Some people argue that the navigation and information architecture of your 
website isn’t all that important, because users tend to just search for what they are 
looking for, maybe in Google or maybe using your site search. Many users don’t 
ever use your navigation. While it is true that some users are pure searchers who 
never touch navigation, there are many that do. And even if no one actually uses it 
(which is unlikely), it serves other useful purposes. It gives users a sense of your or-
ganization and what you are all about. It exposes related content that users might 
find relevant. It tells users where they are within the structure of the website so 
they won’t feel lost. So pay close attention to your navigation. How you organize, 
structure, and label your webpages has significant impact on the user experience.
Clear, user-centered labels within your global menus as well as on links and buttons 
will make clear connections between content. It will make it easier for users to find the 
right path to answer their questions or complete their desired tasks. Jakob Nielsen refers 
to “information scent,” where users select their navigation path based on cues, expecting 
a particular outcome. If your content has good information scent, users will be confident 
that they are headed in the right direction based on the links they are following. If it has 
poor information scent, users will likely be scrambling to figure out where to go next. 
They will find themselves hunting, or “foraging,” for what they need with little confidence 
in ever finding it (Nielsen, 2003; Nielsen, 2004).
You likely have a primary, global navigation menu on your website. Menu labels make 
or break website navigation, so as you write these menus, try to keep them user-centered, 
parallel, succinct, and in a meaningful order. Focus on the task of your users and avoid 
jargon.

1 08  ▲  C H A P T E R  1 0
You also have links and buttons throughout your website, often within or adjacent to 
body text. As much as possible, use meaningful words that independently represent where 
these links will take you. Avoid labeling links simply “learn more” or “find out more.” 
Without context, these have almost no meaning, causing poor information scent and 
bad accessibility (Sherwin, 2015). Even if surrounding text gives the link some meaning, 
“many users don’t actually read the adjacent content and treat links as standalone items” 
(Pernice, 2014). By adding meaning to the link label, you’ll not only make scanning con-
tent easier for everybody but also make it accessible to people using screen readers (who 
often scan through content to find links). 
To make your labels most meaningful, use words that reflect where users will end up 
once they make the selection. Users should never be surprised by where a link takes them. 
The label should ideally match the name of the subsequent webpage, or should at least 
reflect the same content. Especially if you’re linking people to a web form, try using the 
same wording as what you have on the title of the form so that users recognize they are 
in the correct, expected place. If the link says, “apply for an internship,” users will expect 
the subsequent page to be an application for an internship.
Link labels can vary in length and grammatical style. They can be simple nouns, such 
as:
•	 To see what else is going on in the library, see Library News.
•	 Our computer lab has printers and scanners.
They can also be standalone phrases or full sentences, such as:
•	 How to set up your preferences
•	 Renewing books and films
•	 See our strategic plan.
While phrases and sentences are a good option, you do want to be careful to not overdo 
it, having long sentences that are hard to scan. Longer sentences can be particularly 
problematic on handheld devices, where they might take up two lines, causing readability 
problems. 
Perhaps most commonly, especially when associated with tasks—links can be action 
phrases. These are often full (though short) imperative sentences:
•	 Reserve a room
•	 Check room availability
•	 Apply for a locker
•	 Subscribe to newsletter
Remove the Unnecessary
It should be obvious when something is a link or a button, so there is no need to use 
words like, here, click here, or use this link to. . . . If a link looks like a link, you don’t need 
to call it out—people know how links work and understand that a click or tap action will 
take them somewhere else. 
Similarly, you don’t usually need to include the words website or webpage. Users expect 
that they will be taken to a webpage unless you tell them otherwise. That said, if the link 

W R I T I N G  F O R  T H E  W E B   ▲  1 0 9
goes to something else, such as a PDF file or other download, this can be worth indicat-
ing somehow (e.g., “Employment Application [PDF]”). See table 10.4 for examples of links 
revised to be more meaningful and succinct.
Table 10.4.    Revised Link Labels
ORIGINAL LINK
REVISED LINK
The November/December Newsletter is now 
available!
The November/December Newsletter is now 
available!
Mentor applicants, please use this form.
Mentees, please use this form.
Apply to be a mentor.
Apply to be a mentee.
Click here and here to read recent reviews of the 
exhibition.
Read recent reviews:
•  Library Exhibit Is Thought Provoking 
•  Family Friendly Exhibition Is Worth Dealing with 
the Parking
See our room availability web page for details on 
current availability.
See room availability.
If you are unable to find the book, click here to 
go to Interlibrary Loan.
If you are unable to find the book, use 
Interlibrary Loan.
Use this link to log into the registration system.
Log into the registration system.
LINKS ARE EVERYWHERE
While this chapter is covering writing for the web, links can obviously be found 
beyond the web—in emails, documents, and presentations. No matter where you 
are putting links, the same rules apply.
 Writing URLs
While some users won’t see or pay attention to URLs, others will. And you might need 
to use URLs in print publicity or on digital signage. So try to keep them meaningful, 
short, and reflective of your website structure. The name of the URL should reflect the 
webpage it takes you to.
You’ve all seen those URLs you dread to type. Things like: https://www. 
professionalassociationexample.org/template.cfm?template=/WDApps/Committee/ 
appointingofficer/mycommittees. Imagine if all a reader has is a print version of a URL, 
such as in a list of references at the end of a book chapter, or that you need to put this 
URL on a poster. Lengthy and complex URLs are tedious and the readers are pretty 
much guaranteed to make mistakes when they try to type it.
When you have control over your URLs, keep them succinct. Don’t include upper 
case, symbols, or punctuation. And use dashes (-) instead of underscores (_), since under-
scores can get lost if the URL is underlined.

1 10  ▲  C H A P T E R  1 0
 Writing for Search Results
When you search in Google—or any other search engine—you retrieve a list of results 
that includes webpage titles followed by descriptions. The descriptions are called “meta 
descriptions” and describe the content of each webpage.
When users don’t like to navigate your website, or when they can’t find what they 
are looking for by navigating it, they will search. As mentioned earlier, to make sure your 
webpages come up in search results, include trigger words in your content. But also pay 
close attention to the title of your pages and their meta descriptions, so that it is obvious 
what each webpage is all about and which webpages will get users closer to their goals.
Suppose a user searches your website for “lockers.” In the results, the user sees a web-
page titled “Lockers.” A poor example of a meta description is “Lockers are approximately 
17.25" deep, 9.25" wide, and 22.5" high. Library materials stored in the locker must be 
checked out. Food and drink are not allowed.” A decent example of a meta description 
is: “The Main Library has 130 student fee-funded lockers available for currently enrolled 
students. They are located on the third floor.” Both of these descriptions are useful in 
some ways, but they are also a bit verbose, overly detailed, and were just pulled from 
the content of the actual webpage (the default when you don’t specifically write a meta 
description). A better, more succinct and active description is “Store your research mate-
rials in an assigned locker at the Main Library.” Be meaningful and concise, because the 
intention is for the user to understand what the page is about and how it will get them 
closer to reaching their goal.
 Using Smart Structure
Layer Information
A nice feature of the web is you can easily layer information, hiding less relevant content 
until the point of need. This can be achieved through an interaction design technique 
called “progressive disclosure”—presenting only the content that’s absolutely essential at 
that moment.
One way to do this is by offering a snippet of content about a topic along with an 
option to see more. This is a helpful technique for both drawing users in and for keeping 
your webpages focused and succinct. You’ll often see this technique used for news and 
event content on library homepages.
Beyond the homepage, you’ll also have pathway pages that are similar to a table 
of contents for a section of your website (Redish, 2012). They include links and often 
descriptions associated with those links. Users scan and select an option. A variation on 
pathway pages are research guides where librarians provide links to a variety of resources 
on a topic—usually resources that exist outside of the library website. Whatever the case, 
the descriptions of the options should include just enough information to let users decide 
if they want to make a selection.
So as you write snippets that lead to further content, keep in mind that you want to 
focus on what’s important to your audience—what information will help them decide on 
whether the subsequent content or resource will be useful to their goals? For descriptions 
of databases, for example, you may want to include the type of content (e.g., scholarly 
articles, films, e-books) and the date range covered, but not a whole lot more.

W R I T I N G  F O R  T H E  W E B   ▲  1 1 1
Organize with the User in Mind
With primary tasks identified, a natural structure to the page might fall into place. For 
example, on a page about borrowing e-book readers from the library, you could have ques-
tion headings written in logical sequence, in the order people would logically ask them:
•	 Who can borrow one?
•	 For how long?
•	 How can I check one out?
Alternatively, you might want to organize your content by time or sequence—this works 
well for processes. Or perhaps your content differs by audience, in which case you could 
break apart by audience type. This works well for borrowing information. However you 
choose to organize, do so with the user in mind.
Use Headings
On the web, headings have semantic meaning. Heading 1, or H1, should be hierarchically 
one level down from your title. Then sub-headings under H1 should be H2, subheadings 
under H2 should be H3, and so on.
As discussed in chapter 6, try writing headings as action phrases. Remember the 
power of parallelism, especially as many of your users will simply scan the headings on 
your webpage. Ginny Redish recommends two ways to write active headings on web-
pages: with gerunds (the form that ends in -ing) or with imperatives (the “do this” verb 
form). You can also use short questions for headings (Redish, 2012).
Use Bulleted Lists, Numbered Lists, and Tables
As described in chapter 7, you can use lists and tables to make content easier for users 
to scan and digest. Remember that tables work well for “if X, then Y” content. On your 
library website, try using tables for pricing information and circulation rules. Try using 
bullets for listing features of a particular service or tool. And try numbered lists for 
how-to guides and explaining a process.
WEB TOOLS FOR LAYERING INFORMATION
You can use a number of user interface tools for collapsing and expanding web 
content, such as sidebar menus, drop-down menus, panels, tabs, popups, and 
overlays. You can allow users to expose content by selecting radio buttons, moving 
sliders, checking boxes, or interacting with dials. You can also hide content until 
the user scrolls to expose it. To clean up text-heavy clutter, try using meaningful 
icons instead of the written word. Experiment. Get creative and use a variety of 
tools to layer information.

1 12  ▲  C H A P T E R  1 0
 Key Points
Writing for the web comes with its own challenges and opportunities. Remember:
•	 People aren’t patient when they read on the web and have a particular goal in mind, 
so it’s as important as ever to get to the point.
•	 Take advantage of technology to layer information, give the user control, and put 
content at the relevant time and place.
•	 Relax. It’s the web.
The web is usually what people think of when they think of digital content, but you 
also write digital content as you interact with your colleagues, stakeholders, and end 
users. In the next chapter, you’ll learn how to write better content for emails and other 
messaging systems.
 References
Krug, Steve. 2014. Don’t Make Me Think Revisited: A Common-Sense Approach to Web and Mobile 
Usability. San Francisco: New Riders.
Loranger, Hoa. 2014. “Break Grammar Rules on Websites for Clarity.” Nielsen Norman Group. 
March 23. www.nngroup.com/articles/break-grammar-rules.
Nielsen, Jakob. 2003. “Information Foraging: Why Google Makes People Leave Your Site Faster.” 
Nielsen Norman Group. June 30. www.nngroup.com/articles/information-scent.
———. 2004. “Deceivingly Strong Information Scent Costs Sales.” Nielsen Norman Group. Au-
gust 2. www.nngroup.com/articles/wrong-information-scent-costs-sales.
———. 2006. “F-Shaped Pattern for Reading Web Content.” Nielsen Norman Group. April 17. 
www.nngroup.com/articles/f-shaped-pattern-reading-web-content.
———. 2013. “Website Reading: It (Sometimes) Does Happen.” Nielsen Norman Group. June 24. 
www.nngroup.com/articles/website-reading.
Pernice, Kara. 2014. “A Link Is a Promise.” Nielsen Norman Group. December 14. www.nngroup.
com/articles/link-promise.
Redish, Janice. 2012. Letting Go of the Words: Writing Web Content That Works. San Francisco: 
Morgan Kaufmann.
Sherwin, Katie. 2015. “‘Learn More’ Links: You Can Do Better.” Nielsen Norman Group. Decem-
ber 13. www.nngroup.com/articles/learn-more-links.
Spool, Jared. 2004. “The Right Trigger Words.” UIE. November 15. https://articles.uie.com/ 
trigger_words.
BULLETS ALONE DON’T PROVIDE STRUCTURE
With good intentions, people often put bullets on a webpage, hoping this will 
make things easier to scan. But a list of ten or fifteen bullet points—in no logical 
order—is almost as difficult to scan as ten paragraphs. If you find yourself listing 
out a bunch of bullets, see if you can simplify content, group content, and break 
content apart more with headings.

▲  1 1 3
C H A P T E R  1 1
Writing for Emails and  
Other Messaging Systems
Due to the prevalence of connectivity in daily life, digital, text-based interactions are a 
primary means of communication. It’s common to have substantive conversations with 
colleagues through the written word, and threads over email and other messaging systems 
often take the place of in-person, spoken communication. So it’s increasingly important 
to write well if you want to get any work done. In this chapter, learn how to best distribute 
information and have conversations through online systems, making your intentions clear 
and recipients aware of how to respond or act.
 Why Email Matters
Even with today’s abundance of tools for online messaging, email remains the most ubiq-
uitous form of communication within organizations and businesses worldwide. Email 
is used daily to communicate with colleagues, supervisors, and subordinates, as well as 
clients, stakeholders, and end users. Good emails improve efficiencies, build relationships, 
and influence reputations.
IN THIS CHAPTER
P
P How to write effective email subject lines and pre-headers
P
P What to include and stay away from in the body of an email
P
P How to incorporate links, attachments, and any calls to action in an email
P
P How to best write for chat, text, and other messaging systems

1 14  ▲  C H A P T E R  1 1
 Writing Meaningful Email Subject Lines and Pre-Headers
Be Descriptive
Inbox overload is routine, and while some people might feel obligated to read emails you 
send them, most people have a choice. A strong opener is important in most forms of 
writing, but it’s especially important in the world of email. So especially for those peo-
ple you are trying to reach who don’t have to open your email, it’s important to think, 
“WWYO” or, “What would you open?” (Handley, 2014: 219).
Rather than read emails as they come in chronologically, people tend to skim over 
the subject lines, pre-headers, and sender information to identify which ones are most 
important or relevant at the moment. For each email, they quickly decide whether to read 
it, ignore it, file it to deal with later, or delete it. And deleting is often the most tempting 
of the options.
Your subject line is your first line of defense. So craft each subject line in a way that 
makes it clear what the email is all about and why the reader should care. Use the same 
practices you would use for writing a title, as covered in chapter 6. Be descriptive enough 
so your readers can make an informed decision on whether or not to open it (Nielsen, 
2014), and in business writing, make sure your subject lines are as self-explanatory as 
possible (Canavor and Meirowitz, 2010).
Your colleagues and patrons should know what to expect when they open your email. 
See table 11.1 for examples of subject lines revised to be more descriptive.
Table 11.1.    Ambiguous Subject Lines Revised to Be More Descriptive
ORIGINAL SUBJECT LINE
REVISED SUBJECT LINE
Meeting
Web redesign mtg minutes from 11/5
FWD: Article
Article about mental models
Update
Update on annual review process
Announcement
Announcement about upcoming retirement
Question
Interested in carpooling?
In addition to subject lines, pay attention to pre-headers (sometimes called “preview 
texts” or “snippet texts”). As people skim through their inboxes, they’ll often see the 
subject line followed by the pre-header—a short summary line. Exactly what recipients 
see depends on their email client, but assume the pre-header is another piece of data 
that helps them determine whether or not to open an email. The default pre-header is 
the first line of text in the body of the email message. Especially if you are doing email 
marketing, pay attention to what appears in the pre-header, and consider customizing it 
(using HTML) to make it most useful and meaningful. Think of it as an extension of 
your subject line, and aim for forty to fifty characters to ensure it gets shown in full on 
most devices (Neely, 2015).

W R I T I N G  F O R  E M A I L S  A N D  O T H E R  M E S S A G I N G  S Y S T E M S   ▲  1 1 5
Make Subject Lines Brief
Aim for brevity. Subject lines should be six to ten words according to some studies (Han-
dley, 2014), and no more than forty characters (Nielsen, 2014). Put the most important 
keywords at the beginning of the subject line, since some email clients will cut it off. 
And even if the subject line isn’t cut off, many readers will only skim the first few words 
(Nielsen, 2014).
Use your limited space wisely. Be loose with your grammar, use abbreviations (if they 
are widely accepted), and feel free to omit articles (e.g. the, an, a) or other needless words. 
If you are sending out information on behalf of the library, and the library is obvious in 
the sender information, don’t worry about including it in the subject line. See table 11.2 
for examples of subject lines revised to be both meaningful and succinct.
INCLUDE KEYWORDS FOR FINDABILITY
In addition to helping recipients know the relevancy of the email, descriptive 
subject lines make emails easier to track down later on. Just like the titles of doc-
uments and webpages, use keywords that accurately describe the content within—
keywords you can imagine people using to search for a particular email.
Table 11.2.    Subject Lines Revised to Be Brief Yet Meaningful
ORIGINAL SUBJECT LINE
REVISED SUBJECT LINE
Expert Search Services and Consultations on 
Research Strategies and Information Resources 
(89 characters, 11 words)
Providing In-Depth Research Help (32 
characters, 4 words)
Tucson Public Library Announcement—Meet 
the New Library Director (53 characters, 8 
words)
Meet Heidi Wiles—New Library Director (39 
characters, 6 words)
Make It Personal
Libraries send emails to patrons to notify them of pertinent information, such as when 
materials are due. Ann Handley mentions that you are much more likely to get an 
email opened if you use the person’s first name in the subject line (2014). For example, 
“Notice of Material Being Due” is much less compelling than “Your Book Is Almost 
Due, Shoshana.” That said, some readers are wary when they see their name in a subject 
line, so do this carefully and in a way that builds trust rather than causes skepticism. If 
you make it personal, be sure to use only the first name, capitalize only the first letter 
of the name (never put it in all caps), and put it after the more meaningful content 
(Nielsen, 2014). 

1 16  ▲  C H A P T E R  1 1
Use Common Acronyms
In work life, there are some commonly used acronyms that can help improve email effi-
ciency. These are most often used in subject lines. Just be sure that others in your organi-
zation are familiar with them before using. For example:
•	 EOM = end of message (used at the end of a subject line to indicate there is no 
body content in an email). Example: “Out Sick Today EOM.”
•	 FYI = for your information (used in subject lines or the body of an email to let 
readers know it is informational only—no response is expected). Example: “FYI—
Coffee Shop Closing Early at 3 p.m.”
•	 NWR = not work related (to let readers know it is a personal, rather than business, 
communication). Example: “NWR: School Fundraiser.”
 Keeping Emails Focused and Direct
Make Recipient(s) Clear
You’ll generally start an email with a salutation, such as Dear, Hi, Hello, or Hey, followed 
by the name of the recipient(s). Use the salutation to help set the tone (see chapter 12) 
and to make it clear who you intend to read the email. Once you have more than three 
people on an email, it can be overwhelming to write out all their names. But when 
emailing a larger group of people, try to make it clear who is included. Perhaps you can 
say, “Dear ALA colleagues,” “Hi Discovery Oversight Group,” or “Greetings Mentoring 
Committee.” This allows the reader to understand the audience and context of your mes-
sage. If you are copying secondary audiences on the email, you can make this clear, too. 
For example, “Hello Search Committee (plus Glenda from HR).”
After an initial email, continuing to write out recipients’ information is redundant 
and can add unnecessary clutter. But if there are multiple people on the email thread and 
you are seeking some response or action, make it clear who you want to hear back from. 
For example, “I’d love to get feedback from all committee members” or “Bonnie Jean, as 
the chair of the task force, let me know how you’d like to proceed.”
NOT INCLUDING A SALUTATION
It is common to see emails that lack a salutation and simply address the person 
(or people) by first name. This has the benefit of reducing unnecessary words, but 
can also set an unfriendly tone in certain contexts. Be careful to not sound abrupt 
or hurried (unless that is your intention). If you are addressing a supervisor, for in-
stance, using a salutation of Dear or Hello is more appropriate, at least for an initial 
email. If the conversation continues over the course of several messages, it’s com-
mon after a time to remove the salutation. Follow social and organizational cues 
to make the best judgment call. And when in doubt, a salutation will never hurt.

W R I T I N G  F O R  E M A I L S  A N D  O T H E R  M E S S A G I N G  S Y S T E M S   ▲  1 1 7
Focus on Essential Messages
As a general guideline, try to have a single, clear purpose for each email. You’ll find it’s 
pretty easy and common to break this rule, and sometimes you can get away with it. Just 
be careful about putting too many messages in a single email, especially if they aren’t re-
lated. Keep it focused and succinct, and make sure the first sentence indicates what you 
want the reader to know and/or what you want the reader to do. People are in a hurry 
when they are going through email and are often using their smartphone or other hand-
held device, so emails work best when they have an immediate purpose. People will “read 
quickly and distractedly—if you ask two questions in the same email, often you’ll get a 
response to only one. Buried points and subtleties will also be overlooked” (Canavor and 
Meirowitz, 2010: 94).
WHAT IF I HAVE A LOT OF INFORMATION TO SHARE?
If you need to send something content heavy over email, try attaching it in a docu-
ment rather than putting all the content within the body of the email. Formatting 
complex documents in email isn’t ideal, and emails should always be short. Send 
bulky material as an attachment or link out to the document elsewhere, and treat 
the body of the email like a cover letter for the supplemental, content-rich material 
(Canavor and Meirowitz, 2010).
Make Intentions Clear
Do you want or expect a response to your email, or for the reader(s) to take some other 
action? If so, make that absolutely clear. Put it as either an imperative phrase (e.g., “Send 
me your feedback”) or a question (e.g., “What is your timeline for . . . ?”). And if you have 
a deadline by which you need a response, make that clear, too. 
Calls to action should be prominent at the beginning and/or end of your email, not 
in the middle and not hidden in a long paragraph. If you have a relatively simple message, 
try having a descriptive subject line and then putting the call to action first thing in the 
body of the email. For instance, you could have a subject line that reads, “Survey on Up-
coming Travel Plans,” and a first sentence in the body of the email that reads, “All library 
staff, please fill out this brief survey by the end of the week.” Additional details about the 
survey—such as who is organizing it and how they plan to use the results—can follow.
FORWARD EMAILS WISELY
When you forward an email, make it clear why you are forwarding it. Simply 
forwarding something along without any context can frustrate the reader. Write a 
brief, meaningful sentence or two that explains why you are forwarding it. Avoid 
just writing, “FYI” or “Sharing FYI.” Try something more like, “FYI—some inter-
esting news from the state legislature we should all be aware of.”

1 18  ▲  C H A P T E R  1 1
Sometimes, you’ll need a bit more context beyond the subject line, and putting the 
call to action before the context won’t make sense. In that case, put the context informa-
tion first and the call to action last. For example, an email could read: “We are organizing 
a book sale and need volunteers in the coming weeks to organize, price, sort, and shelve 
books. We also need volunteers to staff the book sale on Saturday, June 19th. If you are 
interested in helping out, contact Ginger at (520) 555-7972.” In this case, it wouldn’t 
make sense to put the contact information first. The context is necessary for the contact 
information (the call to action) to make sense.
USE MEANINGFUL CAPITALIZATION
In work emails and documents, you will often find noun phrases capitalized as 
if they were proper nouns, when they really don’t need to be capitalized. And as 
mentioned in chapter 6, capitalization worsens readability and should be used 
sparingly. If you are tempted to use title case, ask yourself, “Why?” Most of the 
time, you don’t need to capitalize the names of documents, job titles, or form titles. 
Find out more about capitalization in chapter 13.
Use Active, Conversational Voice
When writing emails, you are literally having a conversation with your reader, so there is 
rarely an excuse for using passive voice. Take, for example: 
Dear workshop leader,
Workshop leaders are requested to submit their PPT presentation or other import-
ant materials for distribution to workshop attendees in print format. 
This reads awkwardly because the writer is both using passive voice (“are requested”) and 
using third person (“workshop leaders”) to refer to the recipients. Whenever possible, 
address your recipients directly: 
Dear workshop leader, 
Please submit your PPT presentation or other important materials so we can print 
and distribute them to workshop attendees.
As with all written communication, active, conversational voice is easiest for readers to 
digest. And this approach suits the email format beautifully, since it’s intended for two-
way (or multi-way) conversation. 
Emails tend to be more informal than other forms of communication, so relax your 
style a bit. There is less of a need to be formal in tone, so avoid using phrases like “Please 
be advised that . . .” or “It is recommended that. . . .” Stick with more direct language, 
such as “Keep in mind that . . .” or, “I recommend that. . . .” Remember that direct, active 
phrases strengthen your message.

W R I T I N G  F O R  E M A I L S  A N D  O T H E R  M E S S A G I N G  S Y S T E M S   ▲  1 1 9
Organize
Organizing is simple when you have just a couple of sentences, but emails are often more 
complex than that. If you have more than two paragraphs of content, strategize on how to 
best organize it. When not much thought is put into organization, you can end up with 
redundancies or scattered content in no particular order, allowing your primary message 
or call to action to get lost. Take advantage of headings, lists, and tables as you would in 
other forms of writing (see chapters 6 and 7) to break up content and allow for skimming. 
 Writing Useful Email Sender Information
Customize Sender Details
Most email clients allow you to associate details with an email address, such as a name 
and profile image. When someone receives an email, he or she can see the name along 
with any other sender details associated with that particular email address. Be sure sender 
details associated with your personal, professional, and organizational email accounts are 
accurate and useful. If you have multiple email addresses associated with your library, 
make sure each one has a meaningful name. For instance, ask@library.com could have 
the name “Ask a Librarian,” and circadm@library.com could have the name “Library 
Circulation Department.”
Sign Your Name
It’s customary to “sign” your name at the end of an email. You can close with lines such 
as “Thanks/Thank you,” “All the best,” “Talk to you soon,” or “I look forward to hearing 
from you.” You can then choose to write your full name, your first name only, or just your 
initials. Your decision can affect the tone and provide a different level of information, so 
choose in a way that best reflects the goals of your message and your relationship with 
the recipient(s).
FOLLOW ORGANIZATIONAL NORMS
All work environments are different, so be sure to observe and reflect upon the cul-
ture of your own organization. Learn what is appropriate in email communication 
as far as tone, frequency, and topics covered. And adjust your approach based on 
your audience. Get feedback on emails you write, give others feedback on theirs, 
and try to foster a culture of effective online communication where email messages 
are appreciated as useful, not dismissed as a waste of time.
Include Signature Lines
Your email client can automatically add a signature line to the end of your emails, ac-
cording to settings you customize. Signature lines should include useful information 
about who you are: your full name, title, organization, email address, and phone number. 

1 20  ▲  C H A P T E R  1 1
But don’t overdo it. A seven-line signature can be overwhelming. A good example of a 
signature line is:
Niamh Mayden
Undergraduate Services Librarian
University of Arizona Libraries
mayden@email.com
(520) 555-4934
A poorer, less focused example is:
Niamh Mayden, MLIS 2012
Undergraduate Services Librarian and Outreach College Coordinator
Chair, Committee on the Future of Publishing
Faculty Fellow Award Winner, 2016
University of Arizona
1510 E University Boulevard, Building #55
Tucson, Arizona 85712
mayden@email.com
Phone: (520) 555-4934
Fax: (520) 555-1501
It’s generally not necessary to include your street address, fax number, or accolades. Stick 
to what is most important and useful for your audience. Feel free to customize your sig-
nature line by audience. For example, your signature line when communicating with other 
library professionals across the country might be different from when you communicate 
with clients or customers.
 Including Links and Attachments in Emails
Presenting Links
Links were covered in the previous chapter in the context of writing for the web, but 
emails also contain links. The vast majority of email clients now support HTML emails, 
so treat your email content as you would your web content, allowing readers to scan 
content, navigate, and identify calls to action. See table 11.3 for examples of links within 
emails, revised to be more useful and accessible.
Unlike the web, you may want to occasionally spell out the URLs in your emails 
when it seems important for readers to understand exactly where a link is taking them. 
Table 11.3.    Revised Links in Email Messages
ORIGINAL EMAIL MESSAGE
REVISED EMAIL MESSAGE
I encourage you to read these posts here, and to 
share your ideas in your departments.
I encourage you to read these posts and to share 
your ideas in your departments.
See the attached call for proposals for full details 
and apply at http://ose.az.gov/faculty-staff/apply-
funding/ by March 15. 
See the attached call for proposals for details 
and apply on the OSE website by March 15.

W R I T I N G  F O R  E M A I L S  A N D  O T H E R  M E S S A G I N G  S Y S T E M S   ▲  1 2 1
This is partly because of the prevalence of email spam where people have been taught not 
to trust links in emails for fear they aren’t what they appear to be. Another factor is that 
links in emails aren’t always to webpages, especially in the work environment. You might 
link your colleagues to documents in shared drives or forms on an intranet site, and you 
want your recipients to understand where you are taking them.
But URLs are still clunky and can clutter up your content, so this should be a last re-
sort. Try first to just put context within the link title itself, such as see the festival website or 
my draft in Dropbox. If you are writing directly to colleagues, they will trust that you aren’t 
linking them to something sinister. And if you are writing to your library users broadly, 
they should trust you based on your official email address and consistent dependability.
PROVIDE LINKS TO FILES, NOT JUST DIRECTIONS
In business emails, people occasionally tell you how to find a document rather than 
linking you to it directly. While it can be useful to include directions (depending 
on your audience), it is always helpful to include a direct link. So rather than 
writing, “The budget planning template can now be found in the Administrative 
Documents folder in a sub-folder names ‘Budget Planning FY17,’” write: “Find 
the budget planning template in Administrative Documents > Budget Planning 
FY17.” Recipients are much more likely to go to the document if you give them 
a direct link.
Describe Any Email Attachments
If you attach files to an email, make it clear in the body of the email that you’ve done so. 
And name the attachments something meaningful. Ambiguously titled attachments such 
as “upload” or “image” require the reader to look through the email to discover what the 
file is all about. This often isn’t a big deal as it all depends on context, but do be thoughtful 
and intentional about it, especially if your audience is less familiar with the topic you are 
writing about.
A common email frustration is when the email subject line is vague (e.g., “Media 
Release”), the body is equally vague “FYI,” and there is an attachment whose title is vague 
or redundant (e.g., “Media Release”). Recipients have to think, What is this about? Is it 
relevant to me at all? Is it important? Don’t make your readers open an attachment with 
no notion of what content is inside. The curious might open it, but many will ignore it 
because it doesn’t appear relevant. And if readers go to the trouble of opening the attach-
ment and it turns out to be irrelevant, you’ve just lost some of their trust.
 Using Email Marketing
Email is often used for marketing and promotions, where you aim to draw people to your 
library services, resources, and events. Some libraries use mass emails, sometimes called 
“email blasts,” to promote events, share information, and solicit donations. These emails 
are mostly informational, so the techniques outlined in chapter 8 apply here. You’ll also 

1 22  ▲  C H A P T E R  1 1
want to read chapter 12 to find out how you can bring in voice and tone into your mar-
keting materials.
One of the best ways to make email marketing effective is to segment your audience. 
This allows you to make your messaging more relevant to the reader. For example, retired 
community members might be more interested in upcoming book sales, whereas parents 
of younger children might be more interested in new storytime offerings. Customizing 
and personalizing content will make your messages more focused and impactful.
One important writing convention related to email marketing is how you let recipi-
ents unsubscribe. While you might not want people to unsubscribe, making it clear how 
to do so will build trust with your readers. Follow the convention of putting this informa-
tion at the bottom of the email and use the word unsubscribe. Be sure to write a meaning-
ful link, such as “Unsubscribe from this email list,” rather than “To unsubscribe, click here.” 
 Chatting, Texting, and Other Messaging
Email is the classic form of online communication that has stood the test of time, but it’s 
only one of many tools you probably use in daily life. You may use project management 
tools such as Asana, Trello, or Basecamp that allow you to track work and communicate 
across large teams. You also may be active within social media channels, such as Facebook, 
Twitter, and LinkedIn—all of which include their own private and group messaging 
systems. Whatever tool you are using, communicating via the written word in real time 
comes with its own nuances and challenges. 
Chat or Text with Patrons
Many libraries offer a chat or text service, where the written word substitutes an in-person 
interaction. Unlike email, these conversations happen in real time, making it challenging 
since you don’t get much time to think about how to organize and focus your content. 
But there are some things you can do to improve your writing in this fast-paced format:
•	 Use fragments and don’t worry about capitalization and punctuation; just focus on 
getting your meaning across. 
•	 Be honest, building trust with your users.
•	 Be friendly and approachable, using language you would use in person to avoid 
sounding rehearsed.
•	 Be quick and responsive, but not to the point of sloppiness.
Chat and text tend to be less formal than other types of communication. So feel free to 
say things like “Sorry, I’m slammed right now. Hang in there and I’ll be with you in just 
a minute.” This sounds more human and authentic than something like “Please hold for a 
few minutes. I will be able to assist you momentarily. I apologize for the inconvenience.”
You may also use text to distribute information to individuals, perhaps notifying users 
when their interlibrary loan materials arrive, their books are late, or their accounts are 
expiring. These one-way texts can be a bit more formal than quick text responses might 
be, but should still be succinct. And if setting up text notifications for users, be sure to 
allow them to opt in or out, and give them an alternate option (such as email).

W R I T I N G  F O R  E M A I L S  A N D  O T H E R  M E S S A G I N G  S Y S T E M S   ▲  1 2 3
Chat or Text with Colleagues
You might have an instant messaging option at work, such as Skype for Business, that 
allows you to have real-time conversations with colleagues. You also may have communi-
cation tools (such as HipChat) that include a real-time chat feature. And you might even 
work in an environment where texting colleagues on their personal lines is commonplace. 
These can be great options when you want to ask quick questions or have short conver-
sations. Use chat or text when you:
•	 Have a simple question
•	 Need a response quickly
•	 Don’t need the conversation documented
Chat and text are inherently more casual than email. Tracking history is more difficult 
than email and is best used for short, informal conversations rather than for making im-
portant decisions or providing critical feedback. 
Texting especially has a brief, often abrupt style by default. It is easy to sound rude 
when you are being short with words. So use text wisely. Texting your boss that you are 
late for a meeting is probably fine, but texting her that you are past due on your project 
report may be a bad move. Texting rarely fosters relationship building, and the shortness 
of text messages makes them difficult to relay context or deeper meaning.
Communicate in Forums
You also may have access to discussion forums with multiple participants. These tools of-
ten include advanced options such as creating specialized sub-forums, tagging individuals 
or groups, uploading or embedding files, and syncing with other productivity programs. 
Such forums are common in communities of practice as well as online or hybrid learning 
environments. So you might find yourself communicating in a Moodle forum with class-
mates, communicating with project teams in Slack, or communicating with likeminded 
professionals in a LinkedIn interest group. When using these types of forums, try:
•	 Focusing on one essential message per post
•	 Tagging specific people or groups if you want a response
•	 Using a meaningful title for your post (similar to an email subject line)
 Key Points
Email has a bad rap, but you probably still use it daily to distribute information and get 
things done. Use email and other messaging tools thoughtfully to better communicate 
with end users and colleagues. Remember:
•	 Write good, self-explanatory subject lines, because people dislike emails and don’t 
have to read them. 
•	 Make your intentions and expectations clear, including any calls to action.
•	 Keep all messages focused and direct.

1 24  ▲  C H A P T E R  1 1
Most of the book so far has covered how to write for clarity. But there is more to 
writing than clarity—there is also creativity and personality. When writing to an external 
audience especially, you want to engage and inspire them, not just provide them with raw 
information. In the next chapter, you’ll learn how to incorporate voice and tone across 
your messaging, and have a bit of fun doing it.
 References
Canavor, Natalie, and Claire Meirowitz. 2010. The Truth about the New Rules of Business Writing. 
Upper Saddle River, NJ: FT Press.
Handley, Ann. 2014. Everybody Writes: Your Go-To Guide for Creating Ridiculously Good Content. 
Hoboken, NJ: Wiley.
Neely, Pam. 2015. “How to Write Better Preheader Text in Your Next Email Marketing Cam-
paign.” Campaign Monitor (blog). August 12. www.campaignmonitor.com/blog/email- 
marketing/2015/08/improve-email-open-rates-with-preheader-text.
Nielsen Norman Group. 2014. “Email Subject Lines: 5 Tips to Attract Readers.” Nielsen Norman 
Group. May 4. www.nngroup.com/articles/email-subject-lines.

▲  1 2 5
C H A P T E R  1 2
Implementing Voice  
and Tone
I
N ADDITION TO SHARING INFORMATION with your readers, your writing can stim-
ulate their imaginations, stir up their emotions, and inspire their thinking. Writing 
allows the reader to get to know your personality and style—as an individual or as 
an organization. What are the values you live by? What keeps you up at night? Are you 
casual and quirky, or polished and academic? In this chapter, learn how to implement a 
personal and organizational brand that is meaningful, compelling, and unique to you.
 Finding a Balance
Commit to Clarity
By now, you recognize the importance of clarity in writing. And after focusing on the 
power of plain language, you may be skeptical about bringing in a dose of creativity. How 
can you write in a way that is vivid and memorable when your focus is on keeping things 
as brief and articulate as possible?
Creativity should never undermine clarity, so your goal is to find that sweet spot. 
Unproductive adjectives, adverbs, and modifiers are bad. But compelling adjectives and 
adverbs can add flavor and actually enhance clarity in your writing. You can (and should) 
get imaginative. Just be intentional about it and do it only when it serves a purpose.
IN THIS CHAPTER
P
P How to achieve balance between creativity and clarity
P
P How to bring your voice to life across channels
P
P When and how to adjust your tone for a situation

1 26  ▲  C H A P T E R  1 2
Be Engaging
Without sacrificing clarity, try adding graphic language to paint mental images for your 
readers, spark their imaginations, and bring your point home. Natalie Canavor recom-
mends you “engage the senses” (2016: 72) by thinking of terms that reflect things you see, 
hear, feel, and smell. Try using not just active verbs, but also graphic verbs that bring ideas 
to life. You could just articulate the facts: “Our reading room has lots of windows, comfy 
furniture, and an outside view.” Not bad, but something a bit more descriptive allows 
readers to imagine themselves in the space: “Our reading lounge is surrounded by large 
windows and drenched in natural light. Sink into our sofas and gaze out at the lush green 
countryside while relaxing with your favorite book.” Notice the senses—readers can feel 
the sofas and see the view through the windows.
Selecting descriptive, vivid words enhances your writing and brings your voice to life. 
Also try writing stories, placing content in a human context, and using (clear!) analogies 
to achieve the same goal.
Be Empathetic
As you work to refine content and cut unnecessary words, beware of oversimplifying 
things to a point where voice becomes nonexistent. In the better cases, oversimplified 
content can come off as abrupt. In the worst cases, it can lead to trouble and misunder-
standing, especially in the workplace. So while you should strive for clarity, you should 
also show respect, empathy, courtesy, and appreciation for your readers. In an email to an 
employee who you supervise, for instance, you will do better spending a few extra words 
to indicate your appreciation for their hard work. So rather than saying simply “The re-
port is due Friday at noon,” you could say, “As you know, the report is due Friday at noon. 
I appreciate all your hard work on this, and let me know if you need any guidance in the 
meantime.”
BE CAUTIOUS WITH IDIOMS
As you get more creative with your writing, you’ll be tempted to use idioms—
words and phrases not to be taken literally. These should be used sparingly, espe-
cially if your audience includes nonnative speakers. Common idioms include “in a 
nutshell,” “jump on the bandwagon,” and “best of both worlds.” Idioms can be fun, 
but you can see why a nonnative speaker might be confused by them.
USING HUMOR IN WRITING
Everyone loves to laugh, but be cautious when using humor in your writing. Be 
sure you have a really good sense of your audience so that something intended 
to be funny isn’t interpreted as offensive or judgmental. Irony and sarcasm are 
especially problematic. Comedy is a tough craft to learn, so test out any humorous 
moments in your writing with some readers to gauge their reactions before putting 
them out there to the world.

I M P L E M E N T I N G  V O I C E  A N D  T O N E   ▲  1 2 7
 Implementing Your Personal, Professional Voice
Your Voice Is an Asset
Simply put, your voice is who you are. It reflects your personality and point of view, and 
is what makes your writing unique. A strong, approachable, sincere voice helps you con-
vey ideas, build trust, influence others, and get things done. Being intentional about your 
written communication style will lead to deeper relationships with your colleagues as well 
as job advancement and career growth.
You might write a dozen emails in a day, but don’t underestimate their importance. 
Natalie Canavor suggests you “use every [email] message to present yourself in the way 
you want to be seen. In fact, because email is so important to the everyday business flow 
in nearly every organization, it’s a stellar chance to continuously showcase yourself and 
impress others” (2016: 13–14). See table 12.1 for examples of how a slight adjustment in 
voice can alter how you feel about a particular email message.
Table 12.1.    Content Revised to Reflect Approachable Voice
ORIGINAL CONTENT
REVISED CONTENT
QUESTIONS? Ask me.
Please be in touch if you have any questions.
Apply before the deadline!!
Apply by Friday, June 3rd, for first consideration.
The decision to consistently post salary ranges 
on all job postings was driven by your feedback 
via the survey.
Thanks to everyone for providing thoughtful 
input via the survey! Because of your feedback, 
we will now post salary ranges on all job 
postings.
Define and Refine Your Current Voice
You already have a voice behind your writing, whether you’re aware of it or not. Every 
message you write conveys subtle emotions and insight into your personality, for better or 
worse. Reflect upon your current voice and strive to build and improve on it.
How would your supervisor or colleagues describe your writing? For example, would 
they say you appear “confident” (usually a good thing) or “overconfident,” which can be 
interpreted as aggressive or pushy? Start to define your voice by listing out adjectives you 
imagine others would use to characterize your writing style. Everyone has blind spots, so 
ask some trusted colleagues to contribute to and provide feedback on your list.
Next, refine your unique voice by writing “[adjective], but not [adjective].” The “X, not 
Y” method is recommended by Kate Kiefer Lee, content curator at MailChimp (2012a), 
and also advocated by Halvorson and Rach in Content Strategy for the Web (2012). Pull 
out the positive descriptors from your list that you want to build upon, and then contrast 
them with the things you don’t want to be. For example:
•	 Direct, but not rude
•	 Decisive, but not stubborn
•	 Thoughtful, but not tentative
•	 Fun, but not childish

1 28  ▲  C H A P T E R  1 2
•	 Casual, but not unprofessional
•	 Courteous, but not a pushover
Once you’ve defined your ideal voice, find a handful of things you’ve previously 
written to see how well they meet the criteria. And then spend a little extra time on up-
coming, important communications to best reflect your defined voice—perhaps a grant 
proposal, cover letter, or performance evaluation.
Be Original and Compelling
Content often gets lost in a sea of information, so a fresh and unexpected voice helps 
you stand out from the crowd. Reflect your authentic self in your writing. Perhaps you 
are calm under pressure, and you demonstrate this with the graceful way you present in 
front of large audiences or facilitate difficult conversations. Or perhaps you are quirky and 
lighthearted, and it shows in the way you provide comic relief during long meetings or 
tangent to personal anecdotes during project updates. Whatever the case, own it. Embrace 
your individual personality and reflect it in your writing style. As long as it doesn’t hinder 
your communication, it tells your story. It makes you memorable and distinctly you.
Keep this in mind when you apply for a job, promotion, or award. Your cover letter 
is a chance to express your unique voice and story, and it can set you apart from other 
applicants. The days of academic, formal letters are slowly coming to an end, as employers 
seek people with creativity, enthusiasm, and individuality.
USING EMOTICONS AND EMOJI
Since facial expressions and body language don’t exist in the written word, we have 
emoticons and emoji. These can express happiness, confusion, anger, and even love. 
Whether or not to use these symbols in your written communications is a personal 
decision. They can make you more personable and approachable, but could on the 
other hand make you seem less professional, especially in some contexts. A good 
rule of thumb is to use emoticons or emoji in personal, informal writing, but avoid 
them in more professional or business communications.
 Implementing Your Library’s Voice
Your Library’s Voice Is an Asset
Your library’s voice reflects the personality of the organization and the people within it. A 
unique, approachable, authentic voice will distinguish your library from the competition. 
It will also inspire trust and confidence in your readers, and build relationships with them 
over time.

I M P L E M E N T I N G  V O I C E  A N D  T O N E   ▲  1 2 9
Define and Refine Your Current Voice
Your voice should reflect your organizational identity. As a library organization, what are 
you passionate about? What is your vision for the future? What is the bigger story you 
are trying to tell about who you are and what you do? Ideally, your content at all levels 
should consistently reflect that larger organizational identity and message.
KNOW YOUR MISSION, BUT FOCUS ON YOUR READERS
While your content should reflect your library’s goals, be sure to focus on the reader, 
not the library. Readers don’t want to learn what the library is all about, just why 
the library should matter to them. They wonder, “How can the library help me?” 
not, “Tell me all about the library!”
So how do you identify and document your library’s voice? Some libraries have a 
defined brand already, and this is a good stepping stone to having a defined voice. De-
fining a unique voice is challenging, but is also a good opportunity for self-reflection and 
reinvention. Facilitating dialogue across your organization on this topic can lead to better 
articulation of your library’s identity, values, and vision.
To be successful, your voice has to be supported by your library’s leadership. Margot 
Bloomstein (2012) suggests a card-sorting exercise with your top administrators. For this 
activity:
1.	 List out a few dozen adjectives on note cards. This can be anything from friendly 
and innovative to traditional and wise. If you already have an established brand, 
include terms that reflect that brand.
2.	 Ask administrators to place the cards into one of three categories: “who we are,” 
“who we’d like to be,” and “who we’re not.” Allow them to add new adjectives that 
aren’t yet captured.
3.	 As a group, discuss and analyze what was placed where and why.
At the end of the session, you should have a good sense of the messaging your adminis-
trators would like to see. To get a more complete picture, conduct a similar exercise with 
members of your actual audience, using the three categories: “the library is,” “the library 
should be,” and “the library is not.” Then pull all the data together and draft guidelines 
for your voice and tone based on what you are and what you aspire to be. As mentioned 
earlier, the format “X, but not Y” works well. For example:
•	 Reassuring, but not paternalistic 
•	 Inspiring, but not cheerleady
•	 Academic, but not highbrow
•	 Fun, but not funny
•	 Carefree, but not careless

1 30  ▲  C H A P T E R  1 2
Be Original and Compelling
Get creative as you write about your library’s unique collections, services, and people. Use 
graphic language that inspires the senses and keeps readers invested in what you have to say. 
Perhaps you are promoting your film databases during the summer months. Rather than a 
Facebook post simply saying, “Film databases available on library website,” try something 
more descriptive like “Access thousands of movies at your fingertips! When it’s too hot to 
be outside, stream a foreign, classic, or documentary film in the comfort of your own home.”
Experiment, also, with adding a bit of mystery to your content. Imagine describing the 
storage room where you keep rare books, and one of your goals is to build support for their 
long-term preservation. Intrigue your readers with content such as: “Our steel-enclosed vault 
can withstand the force of a bulldozer. At a crisp 50 degrees Fahrenheit, we keep it cool, dry, 
and sterile. The only sound in this isolated, closed vault is the faint buzz of our dehumidifier. It 
might not be a place to spend a romantic evening, but it’s a perfect home for our rare materials, 
such as our handwritten manuscripts, rare books, and aging photographs. These materials will 
stand the test of time as long as we keep them in these highly controlled conditions.”
WHAT ARE SOME COMPANIES THAT HAVE A DISTINCT VOICE?
You don’t have to look hard to find some great examples of voice and tone in the 
world of digital marketing. For example:
•	 MailChimp, an email marketing company, is recognized for its fun and 
consistent brand identity, in part because it has put its entire voice and tone 
guidelines publicly on the web. In these detailed guidelines, it is clear that 
the focus is always on the reader of the content, essential to successful writ-
ing. (Rocket Science Group, 2016)
•	 Warby Parker, a company that sells eyeglasses, is recognized as being con-
sistently friendly, casual, and sophisticated. (Lee, 2012b)
•	 Gogo In-flight Internet is fun, conversational, and cool. (Leibtag, 2013: 
190)
For more examples, follow the work of content experts such as Kate Kiefer Lee 
and Ahava Leibtag.
WRITING ENGAGING JOB POSTINGS
A good job posting entices the best, most competitive applicants. Write original 
job postings that stand out, speaking directly to candidates and bringing them 
into your story. You’re more likely to get someone’s attention by writing, “We are 
seeking an enthusiastic entry-level librarian to join our creative, forward-thinking 
team” rather than “We are seeking a qualified librarian for this position.” Consider 
using strong, active verbs such as collaborate and experiment, and strong nouns 
such as creativity and dedication. Minimize the use of buzzwords like synergy and 
strategic investments.

I M P L E M E N T I N G  V O I C E  A N D  T O N E   ▲  1 3 1
Tell Stories
Seek out and share stories that include human issues and emotions. Storytelling is espe-
cially powerful when you’re encouraging people to donate money or volunteer time. For 
example, a donor may have a story about how your archive brought his family history to 
life and deepened his relationship with his parents. Or perhaps there is a researcher who 
used materials to move forward a project that’s improving the lives of young entrepre-
neurs around the globe.
Even in small doses, storytelling can add character to your content and engage your 
readers. See table 12.2 for ideas on how to take something basic and bring it to life with 
a story.
Table 12.2.    Content Revised to Tell a Story
ORIGINAL CONTENT
REVISED CONTENT
Write an essay for the chance to win $1,000.
Take a $1,000 vacation after hitting the books all 
semester. All you have to do is write an essay.
The program supports graduate students both 
financially and through library work experience. 
See the video for student interviews.
The program has supported dozens of graduate 
students, who not only receive financial 
support during their studies but also have 
the opportunity to gain real-world experience 
working in the library. In this video interview, 
alums share how Kate’s gift made their studies 
easier and gave them practical experience 
needed in their future careers.
Implement across Channels
Ideally, your library’s voice should be reflected in all content written by library staff and 
shared with the world. This probably includes a myriad of employees writing webpages, 
Facebook posts, job advertisements, event invitations, signage, and email notices, to name 
a few.
Implementing a consistent voice across a library (especially a large one) is no small 
task. To start, document voice standards and guidelines. In this documentation, define 
your voice and examples of how to apply it. Include:
•	 At least three sets of adjectives in the form of “X, but not Y”
•	 Examples of messaging that doesn’t fit the voice along with revised messaging that 
fits the voice well
•	 A list of terminology to use and not use (see table 12.3)
It’s also helpful to write up a set of content principles. Such principles can set a founda-
tion for the way people will approach any writing project. For example:
•	 It’s all about the user, so use second person (you) more than first person (we).
•	 Make the user feel smart.
•	 Less is more.

1 32  ▲  C H A P T E R  1 2
With voice guidelines in place, you can then conduct training sessions, establish 
editing workflows, and develop methods of accountability. You might need a handful of 
trained reviewers to provide feedback on new content, or regular meetings with content 
creators to ensure your voice is remaining consistent. Your marketing or user-experience 
unit would likely play a key role in overseeing such a process.
Table 12.3.    Examples of Voice and Tone Guidelines
DON’T USE
INSTEAD USE
Awesome
Amazing
Hey
Hello
Sincerely
All the best
Don’t forget to
Try not to
Never
Be careful to not
CLARITY FIRST
While it serves you well to bring a unique, fun voice to your library, be careful to 
not get carried away. Storytelling and analogies can be great fun, but don’t sacrifice 
clarity for wittiness.
 Adapt Your Tone
While your voice should remain consistent, your tone can (and should) change based on 
the context. For instance, content promoting a literary award might be more cheerful 
than content on library fines or a code of conduct. You can still be concise and helpful 
(your voice), but your tone will differ (more or less serious, more or less funny). As Kate 
Kiefer Lee points out, “Our voice makes us unique, and our tone makes us sound like 
humans” (2012a). Use tone to express empathy with users and their situations.
So while your personal, professional voice might be fun, sometimes you’ll need to 
tone down the “fun.” In an email recognizing a colleague you might say, “Congrats—you 
are a rock star!” but in a rejection letter you might say, “Sadly, we aren’t able to offer you 
the position at this time. We had a blast getting to know you and appreciate all the time 
you spent with us. We wish you the best of luck in your search.” It’s not appropriate to 
use exclamation points or hyperbole in a rejection letter, though it could be perfectly ap-
propriate in a congratulatory letter. In this example, the voice hasn’t changed—it comes 
from the same unique perspective—but the tone has changed.
How do you determine tone? Consider your reader(s), your relationship to your read-
er(s), and the topic at hand. If you are writing an email and know the readers, consider 
their personalities and how they might receive your message. For example, maybe it’s okay 
to be opinionated and decisive if it is what your readers need and anticipate. Your rela-
tionship to the readers also plays a role—your tone when writing to a close friend ought 
to differ from that used to write to someone you’ve never met before.

I M P L E M E N T I N G  V O I C E  A N D  T O N E   ▲  1 3 3
Finally, consider the topic of discussion and the goal of your message. If it is a serious 
goal (such as getting the person to apologize for a mistake), the tone should match that 
intention. If it is a lighthearted topic, such as inviting people to a scavenger hunt at your 
library, an upbeat tone could fit the bill.
 Getting Creative and Keeping It Interesting
Explore Word Choice
There is no single right way to say something, and the English language provides immea-
surable options for the resourceful writer. Allow your thesaurus to become your close, 
personal friend. For inspiration, read and study a variety of writing styles, from science 
fiction to political journalism. Expand your vocabulary, get creative, and experiment with 
word choice and ordering. Tinker, adjust, and adapt.
Pay Attention to Rhythm
A bunch of similarly constructed sentences in a row will bore your readers, so mix it 
up. Read aloud and recognize the sound and rhythm of the written word. Alternate the 
length and structure of your sentences so they carry different weight. Keep it interesting. 
Don’t let your readers zone out to the hum of a monotonous writing style.
Take Some Risk
There are mechanics to writing, and you’ll benefit from understanding rules of grammar 
and usage. But these rules are fluid and change over time, so feel free to take a bit of risk. 
If you think your readers will be receptive, throw in a bit of slang, wittiness, or gentle 
humor and see how they respond. Try switching things up, perhaps by turning nouns into 
verbs (e.g., “Let’s lunch”) or using less conventional structures, like a sentence containing 
just one noun or one verb. Also experiment in your approaches to the writing process, 
breaking away from your normal routine to inspire new ideas and ways of thinking.
DELIVERING BAD NEWS
Communicating bad news through the written word is a hard thing to do, and 
requires special attention to tone. Be straightforward, making sure nothing is am-
biguous. Provide context for the news, such as why a particular decision was made. 
And be sure to show compassion for those affected by the news, whether it is the 
reader or others. If you can and it’s appropriate, include additional information or 
guidance the reader might find helpful. For example, if you are telling an applicant 
they did not receive a job offer, you can share other related opportunities they may 
want to consider. If you are telling a library patron they owe money in replacement 
book costs, you can let them know about flexible payment plans or other alternate 
options.

1 34  ▲  C H A P T E R  1 2
Taking risks can pay off in a big way by engaging new audiences and making more 
memorable impressions. And in today’s digital world, you can usually go in and edit 
something when it doesn’t work out. So you can relax, learn from your experience, and 
just do things differently the next time. Most importantly, have fun with it.
 Key Points
Voice and tone bring life to your content. Remember:
•	 Clarity is a priority, but creativity is good, too.
•	 Build upon your unique voice to engage readers and build relationships.
•	 Experiment and have fun with it.
Now that you know the fundamentals of writing well, it’s time to talk details in 
putting it all together. In the next chapter, you’ll learn some tricks related to formatting 
and design.
 References
Bloomstein, Margot. 2012. Content Strategy at Work: Real-World Stories to Strengthen Every Inter-
active Project. Amsterdam: Morgan Kaufmann. 
Canavor, Natalie. 2016. Business Writing Today: A Practical Guide. Los Angeles: Sage Publications.
Halvorson, Kristina, and Melissa Rach. 2012. Content Strategy for the Web. 2nd ed. Berkeley, CA: 
New Riders.
Lee, Kate Kiefer. 2012a. “Tone and Voice: Showing Your Users That You Care.” UX Magazine, 
September 17. http://uxmag.com/articles/tone-and-voice-showing-your-users-that-you-care. 
———. 2012b. “Warby Parker’s Honest Brand Voice.” Forbes, September 19. www.forbes.com/
sites/katelee/2012/09/19/warby-parkers-honest-brand-voice.
Leibtag, Ahava. 2013. The Digital Crown: Winning at Content on the Web. Waltham, MA: Morgan 
Kaufmann. 
Rocket Science Group. 2016. “Voice and Tone.” Accessed July 23. http://voiceandtone.com.

▲  1 3 5
C H A P T E R  1 3
Formatting  
Your Content
E
VEN THE BEST-WRITTEN CONTENT can fail if it’s poorly designed on the page. 
In this chapter, you’ll learn how to best display words on a page (or screen) by 
using space effectively, selecting fonts carefully, and making sensible formatting 
decisions.
 Making Content Accessible
Use Semantic Markup
Titles and headings, as discussed in chapter 6, play critical roles in both setting the stage 
for your message and organizing your content. And they shouldn’t just look like titles and 
headings, they should be marked up as such, whether it is through HTML (e.g., <title>, 
<h1>, <h2>) or through built-in styles available in most text-editing programs. Semantic 
markup of titles and headings is especially helpful for visually impaired people accessing 
your content through screen reader programs such as JAWS (Freedom Scientific).
All major word processing and presentation software programs allow you to use se-
mantic heading structure. They provide you with default title and heading styles, but let 
you customize them to whatever styles you like, whether it’s by modifying styles in your 
toolbar in Microsoft Word or formatting master slides in Keynote for Mac. And if you 
IN THIS CHAPTER
P
P How to make written content accessible to people of all abilities 
P
P How to use white, negative space to your advantage
P
P How to select readable, scannable fonts
P
P When to use (and not use) all caps, underlines, italics, and bold

1 36  ▲  C H A P T E R  1 3
convert to PDF format, you can translate the marked-up headings into “bookmarks,” a 
comparable option.
Readers can then view outlines of clickable headings or bookmarks alongside your 
documents, similar to navigation menus on websites or tables of contents in books. These 
outlines allow readers to easily review a document’s structure and navigate to different 
sections. Readers will especially appreciate this detail if they are working their way 
through long-form documents or handbooks.
While semantic markup is most relevant for titles and headings, it’s also useful 
for attaching other meaning to words, such as emphasis (<em> or <strong>) or quote 
(<blockquote>). Explore your editor and use semantic styles to make sure any meaning 
you want conveyed to readers is marked up properly.
Use Color Contrast
Font and background color play a key role in legibility of content. Black text on a white 
background is a safe bet, but if you’re creating a slideshow, flyer, or website, you’ll likely 
want to get a bit more creative.
Fortunately, color contrast analyzers are freely available online through such sites as 
WebAIM (2016) and Paciello Group (2016). If you’re writing for digital presentation, 
be sure to check body content as well as titles, headings, buttons, and links. And keep in 
mind that the presentation of colors can differ across operating systems, browsers, devices, 
and monitors. So even if something appears to have good contrast on your screen, it may 
not be as distinctive for all readers. Using a tool to check for color contrast is your best bet.
Format for Color-Blind Readers
About 5–8 percent of men have some form of color deficiency and cannot distinguish 
red or green (Redish, 2012). As you select font colors, background colors, and graphics, 
consider this population and avoid attributing meaning to colors, especially with shades 
of red and green. To see what your content or images look like for people who are color 
blind, run a simulation—there are many simulators available freely on the web.
USING BACKGROUND COLORS IN EMAIL
Background colors and graphics in email are problematic. Not only do they reduce 
legibility for the intended recipients and sometimes not even display properly 
on their screens, but also the background often transfers over when people then 
respond to or forward the message. And if their default font color doesn’t match 
that of the original message (which is usually the case), it can become even harder 
to read. Imagine forwarding an article to a colleague along with a note about why 
she should read it, but that note comes out as blue font on a purple background—
which is incredibly hard to read. Avoid this problem by sticking with the default 
white background on all email messages. (This includes marketing email blasts and 
newsletters. Even if it looks pretty when sent out, it could be problematic when 
forwarded.)

F O R M A T T I N G  Y O U R  C O N T E N T   ▲  1 3 7
Strive for AAA Conformance
The World Wide Web Consortium, more commonly known as W3C, develops web stan-
dards for accessibility. W3C is behind the detailed Web Content Accessibility Guidelines 
(WCAG), which explain how to make web content accessible to people with disabilities. 
The guidelines are organized under four principles: perceivable, operable, understandable, 
and robust (Henry, 2012). A Triple-A, or AAA, level of conformance means your content 
meets all criteria for accessibility.
Needless to say, you should strive for your content to meet the AAA level. That said, 
this high level of conformance restricts your design options and can be tough to achieve 
(for example, you can’t use color to draw attention to links), so AA might be sufficient. 
Explore the WCAG 2.0 requirements and techniques at www.w3.org/WAI/WCAG20/
quickref. Know your audience, conduct testing, and when in doubt, favor accessibility over 
flashy design.
 Using Space Well
Use White Space
White space is the empty space between and around content. White space is an active 
part of any design, so use it and place it deliberately. Not only does it make your work 
readable and easier to comprehend (Handley, 2014; Fadeyev, 2009), but it also frames text 
and makes divisions and sections more clear (Ross and Nilsen, 2013). It also indicates 
relationships and hierarchy between pieces of content.
Put Space between Content
Avoid the dreaded wall of text by sprinkling white space intentionally throughout your 
content. Use short paragraphs organized under meaningful headings (see chapters 4 and 
6). When it makes sense, include tables, graphics, and bulleted and numbered lists (see 
chapter 7).
Be generous with the amount of space between lines, called leading (rhymes with 
sledding) in the field of typography. Ensure you have plenty of spacing not just between 
one body line and the next, but also between paragraphs and between items in bulleted 
or numbered lists.
Include plenty of padding within your table rows and columns so that text is never 
squished next to the borders inside a table cell. If you are using charts or graphics, make 
sure there is a good amount of buffer surrounding them. Avoid having wrapper text ap-
pear tightly next to a graphical element. Every element will benefit from a bit of breath-
ing room. 
Put Space around Content
Use white space to frame your content, too. When writing letters and reports on tra-
ditional 8.5 × 11-inch paper, leave generous margins of 1.25 inches (Ross and Nilsen, 
2013). When designing a webpage, don’t have text take up the full width of the computer 
screen. Make it easy for readers’ eyes to go from one line to the next without losing their 
place.

1 38  ▲  C H A P T E R  1 3
 Selecting Fonts
Use No More Than Three Fonts
Your best bet is to pick one good font in a readable size and stick with it, especially if you 
are just writing an email message or simple report. Two and occasionally three fonts are 
acceptable when designing something a bit more complex, like a website or brochure. But 
once you get past three fonts your message is almost guaranteed to appear unprofessional 
or chaotic. 
Use Serif and Sans-Serif Fonts
Serifs are small counterstrokes at the ends of the main strokes in an individual letter. 
Times New Roman, Garamound, and Georgia are serif fonts, because they have coun-
terstrokes. Calibri, Arial, Helvetica, and Verdana are sans-serif, because they don’t have 
counterstrokes.
You have a choice between serif and sans-serif fonts, and what’s best can depend on 
whether you are creating content for a digital medium (like a website) or for print (like 
a poster). What’s best also depends on whether it’s for paragraph-style content or just 
short snippets of text, like headings and titles. As a general rule, when producing content 
for digital presentation, use sans-serif fonts for body text and serif fonts for titles and 
headings. For high-resolution print documents, use serif fonts for body text and sans-serif 
fonts for titles and headings (Ross and Nilsen, 2013). This is not a hard-and-fast rule, but 
it is a useful guideline.
Pay Attention to Letter Spacing
When you select a font, pay attention to the space between letters and between words. In 
typography, this is called letter-spacing, character spacing, or tracking (not to be confused 
with kerning, which applies to spacing between a particular pair of characters). Fonts 
with poor letter-spacing tend to be more tightly connected, causing readability issues. If 
you find a font you like but the words appear cramped, you can always use letter-spacing 
to customize to your liking. You can also use tracking for particular purposes, such as 
headings written in all caps that appear dense by default and would benefit from a bit of 
extra spacing.
Select a Standard Font Size
Ensure the size of your font doesn’t hinder readability. For your body text in documents 
and emails, 12pt is standard for most fonts. You can go down to 10pt for certain fonts 
(like Verdana), but avoid going any lower than that. On the web, it’s much more compli-
cated, given the ability for font sizes to respond to devices and browser sizes, but you can 
assume the equivalent of 12pt is 16 pixels (Pamental, 2014).
Pick an Appropriate Font Color
Aim for consistent font color(s) that look crisp against your chosen background. If you’re 
working on a plain white (or off-white) background, dark grays, blues, and browns tend 

F O R M A T T I N G  Y O U R  C O N T E N T   ▲  1 3 9
to be easy to read. Reds, yellows, oranges, and light colors are much harder to read. If you 
have colorful graphics or imagery in the background, you might be challenged to find a 
font color that works well. Again, use a color contrast checker to make sure your content 
is accessible.
You might be tempted to highlight particular words using different colors, but try 
to avoid using more than one font color within your body content. On the web, this can 
make words look like links when they’re not. Some colors can be hard on the eyes and 
reduce legibility, and color-blind readers may not notice the colors at all. Unless you’re a 
skilled designer, the safest approach is to use the same font color for both headings and 
body content, and avoid using color to try and convey meaning.
Also be cautious of using colors that carry some connotation. The color red—often 
innocently used for emphasis—will infer a sense of seriousness or urgency even if that 
isn’t the intention. And people often assume the color blue indicates a link (Fadeyev, 
2009). So rather than using font color to draw attention, try using bold.
 Aligning Content
In most cases, left align your content: flush left, ragged (rag) right. It is the most read-
able alignment because it provides uniform letter and word spacing, minimizes awkward 
hyphenation of words, and provides the eye with a common starting point for each line.
Justification of text is one alternate option where each line adjusts to a uniform 
length, giving you straight edges on both the left and right side of your content. While it 
may create a clean, symmetrical presentation, justified text causes readability issues due to 
the uneven character spacing. You also often end up with a plethora of hyphenated words. 
Never use justified text on the web, since it’s a flexible, fluid environment that doesn’t 
like the constraints of justification (Cousins, 2013). The only time where you may want 
to justify text is for important, formal, printed documents—perhaps your strategic plan 
brochure or code of conduct poster where it’s important that you convey an official tone.
Centered text should also be used with discretion, as people have a hard time reading 
it. It’s ragged left and ragged right, and forces readers’ eyes to zigzag throughout a para-
graph of content, continuously searching for the start of the next line (Redish, 2012). This 
EMPHASIS
People often try to emphasize a particular piece of content through some combi-
nation of bold, italics, exclamation points, all caps, and bright colors. It’s common 
to see “IMPORTANT!!” or “PLEASE NOTE” in bright red on webpages or in 
training handbooks. Avoid falling into this trap. Not only can this method hinder 
your content’s readability and accessibility, but it can hurt your credibility as well. 
This type of messaging looks less professional and can appear as if you’re shouting 
at or talking down to your readers. There are usually better options. Try using just 
bold, or ordering content more thoughtfully, or cutting things down to your es-
sential messages, or using an alternate option to bring focus to a piece of content 
such as sidebars and callouts.

1 40  ▲  C H A P T E R  1 3
is much more tiring for the eyes than left-aligned text. The only times centered text works 
is when it is a title, a heading, or just a few words. But even in these cases be cautious. 
Menu items in web navigation, column headings in tables, and short lines of text within 
tables are easier to skim and scan when lined up on the left.
Right alignment of text (flush right, ragged left) is similarly problematic, forcing the 
reader’s eye to move even more to find the start of the next line. Right alignment should 
be a rare occurrence, only used for small blocks of text or artistic elements (Cousins, 
2013).
 Using Capital Letters, Italics, Underline, and Bold
Avoid All Caps
You should rarely, if ever, use ALL CAPS in your writing. Capitalized letters take up 
more space, slow reading speed, are boring, are harder to read, and make it seem like 
you’re shouting (Redish, 2012).
You might be tempted to use all caps to bring emphasis to just a word or two, for 
example in a form label “Your name (REQUIRED)” or in calling out new information, 
as in “UPDATE.” You also might want to use all caps to indicate sections within your 
content or to call attention to your email subject line. Avoid this urge. Instead, try:
•	 Using conventions (e.g., an asterisk for a required form field)
•	 Using sidebars or call-outs to draw attention to updates or important information
•	 Using bold to emphasize particular words
•	 Formatting headings using bold, color, and/or a larger font size
•	 Writing useful headings and having a clear structure to the content 
•	 Putting the most important content first
•	 Using powerful language that stands on its own (no emphasis required)
In other words, there is usually an alternative to all caps. The only time it’s acceptable 
to use all caps is as a design decision for your titles and headings, and even then only if 
you keep your titles and headings to just a few words. For instance, the short title “RE-
QUEST ITEMS” is readable, but the longer title “REQUEST BOOKS, ARTICLES, 
DISSERTATIONS, AND MEDIA ITEMS” is much harder on the eyes. And some 
argue that even in titles and headings, using all caps is never a good choice (Redish, 2012).
Use Title Capitalization Sparingly
Title capitalization has its time and place, but as talked about in chapter 6, it can make 
things a bit harder to read and should only be used when useful or necessary. You might 
be tempted to use title capitalization for any “official” term, but usually these aren’t true 
proper nouns and capitalization isn’t necessary. For instance, it’s perfectly fine to use 
sentence case for:
•	 Job titles (e.g., dean of the library, graphic designer)
•	 Library services (e.g., interlibrary loan, technology lending)

F O R M A T T I N G  Y O U R  C O N T E N T   ▲  1 4 1
•	 Processes and policies (e.g., performance review cycle, professional development 
policy)
•	 Projects and initiatives (e.g., signage project, digital collections revamp)
•	 Groups of people (e.g., web team, subject librarians)
•	 Buildings or places (e.g., library, fifth floor)
•	 Buzz words (e.g., content marketing)
That said, it is best to use title capitalization for true proper nouns, such as your university 
name, library name, and officially named spaces or tools:
•	 University of Arizona
•	 University of Arizona Libraries
•	 Russo Quiet Study Room
•	 Guide on the Side
Creating a style guide or editorial standards that identify which common words to treat 
as titles and which to put in sentence case will improve overall readability and consistency.
Avoid Underlines
Underlining also causes readability and usability issues. Since the beginning of the web, 
people have been taught that underlined words are links. So on the web, the only thing 
ever underlined should be links. If something is underlined and it isn’t a link, users will 
certainly assume that it is (Canavor, 2016; Redish, 2012).
Even when writing for print, be cautious about underlining. Bold or italics are usually 
a better choice, because words become harder to read when underlined. And there is a 
good chance your print document will be digitized, since few things exist in only print 
format these days. Unless you need to underline something for a very clear reason—such 
as formatting within a citation—it’s best to just avoid it.
Use Italics Sparingly
Italics, similar to bold, are often used for emphasis. But as most things, they can be 
overused or used inappropriately. Italics make things harder to read, and so italicizing a 
sentence of text, or even worse—a paragraph of text—can make it significantly harder to 
read (Redish, 2012). So when using italics, use it only for a word or two, and only when 
it serves a clear purpose.
ONE SPACE AFTER PUNCTUATION OR TWO?
Back in the day of typewriters, people were taught to put two spaces after a period 
or other punctuation. Some people continue this tradition, but it is no longer use-
ful for readability and can actually distract the reader. It’s also a common inconsis-
tency. Keep it simple by always using just one space after punctuation.

1 42  ▲  C H A P T E R  1 3
 Key Points
You can have the best content in the world but will frustrate your readers if you fail to 
pay attention to formatting. Remember:
•	 Your content should be accessible to people of all abilities.
•	 White space is your friend and gives your content breathing room.
•	 Standard fonts, left alignment, and sentence case are best.
There is just one chapter to go. In the next and final chapter, you’ll learn tips to im-
prove your writing process from start to finish.
 References
Canavor, Natalie. 2016. Business Writing Today: A Practical Guide. Los Angeles: Sage Publications
Cousins, Carrie. 2013. “The Importance of Designing for Readability.” Design Shack. July 22. 
https://designshack.net/articles/mobile/the-importance-of-designing-for-readability.
Fadeyev, Dmitry. 2009. “10 Useful Usability Findings and Guidelines.” Smashing Magazine. 
September 24. www.smashingmagazine.com/2009/09/10-useful-usability-findings-and- 
guidelines.
Handley, Ann. 2014. Everybody Writes: Your Go-To Guide for Creating Ridiculously Good Content. 
Hoboken, NJ: Wiley.
Henry, Shawn Lawton. 2012. “Web Content Accessibility Guidelines (WCAG) Overview.” Last 
updated October 2. www.w3.org/WAI/intro/wcag.
Paciello Group. 2016. “Colour Contrast Analyser.” Accessed July 15. www.paciellogroup.com/
resources/contrastanalyser.
Pamental, Jason. 2014. “A More Modern Scale for Web Typography.” Typecast by Monotype. 
January 15. http://typecast.com/blog/a-more-modern-scale-for-web-typography.
Redish, Janice. 2012. Letting Go of the Words: Writing Web Content That Works. San Francisco: 
Morgan Kaufmann.
Ross, Catherine Sheldrick, and Kirsti Nilsen. 2013. Communicating Professionally: A How-to-Do-It 
Manual for Librarians. 3rd ed. Chicago: Neal-Schuman.
WebAIM. 2016. “Color Contrast Checker.” http://webaim.org/resources/contrastchecker.

▲  1 4 3
C H A P T E R  1 4
Refining Your Process
Throughout this book, you’ve learned techniques to improve your writing, but there is no 
one right way to write. Explore different approaches and processes to find what suits you 
best. Adjust, adapt, experiment, and seek out ways to continually improve your writing 
over time. In this chapter, you’ll learn how to put everything together and think through 
the entire process of writing.
 Dedicating Time and Energy
Take It Seriously
Writing can be a lot of fun. But writing in a way that is clear, focused, and engaging 
isn’t easy to do. More often than not, it’s time-consuming and stressful. You may stare at 
a blank screen and fear you’ll never be able to come up with the right words. You may 
spend twenty minutes struggling over a couple of words that just don’t sound right. You 
may get frustrated and delete the whole thing and start over. Writing well is hard, and 
if you really want to improve your writing, commit to taking it seriously and taking the 
time to do it right.
Set Time Aside
Learning to write well takes time and patience. Don’t expect to master the craft of writing 
by just reading a book or two. And don’t expect to become a better writer with just a little 
bit of practice. It takes a lot of practice. Intentional, daily practice.
IN THIS CHAPTER
P
P How to plan out the writing process
P
P How to review, revise, and continually improve your writing
P
P How to improve the quality of writing throughout your organization

1 44  ▲  C H A P T E R  1 4
So if you’re serious about becoming a better writer, set some time aside. This could be 
just a half hour at the end of every work day to read and rewrite sloppy content you wrote 
in the past. Or a four-hour block one Friday a month to reflect on your recent writing 
successes and challenges. Put it on your calendar so that you stick to it. You don’t have all 
the time in the world, but you should be able to squeeze in just a bit of time—scheduled, 
focused, uninterrupted time dedicated to improving your craft.
Set Goals
Come up with some practical, measurable goals for yourself or your library. The pure act 
of documenting goals will keep you motivated and more likely to follow through. These 
goals will be most useful if they both improve the experience for your readers as well as 
give you practice improving your writing. For example, you could aim to:
•	 Remove all jargon from building signage
•	 Cut your website content in half
•	 Improve your email response rate by 50 percent
After establishing goals, give yourself a deadline or—for more complex goals—a timeline 
that includes significant milestones toward the goal. When you succeed in a goal or sig-
nificant milestone, recognize and celebrate that success.
Be Patient
Writing can be frustrating. There’s a lot to think about: make sure your writing is simple 
but not choppy, compelling but not complex, and unambiguous but stripped down to the 
essentials. Achieving this can be a real struggle, and it’s often a matter of finding balance 
between all the things you’re taught.
Be patient and kind to yourself. Don’t get stressed out when you hit writer’s block or 
can’t seem to find the right words. Even the most highly trained and experienced writers 
still share in these struggles. Writing is always going to take time and effort. Get through 
it by practicing patience, flexibility, and persistence.
COME BACK TO IT
Occasionally, you’ll find yourself going crazy over a single sentence (or paragraph). 
You keep rewording it, but can never get it quite right. If you find yourself in this 
type of situation and you’re getting worked up over it, just put the content aside 
for a bit and come back to it later. Even if it’s just for a few minutes. It’s often 
easier to evaluate and improve upon a sentence after looking at it with fresh eyes.
Practice
The only sure way to improve your writing is through practice. Commit to a continued, 
intentional writing practice. And seek out opportunities to exercise and fine tune your 

R E F I N I N G  Y O U R  P R O C E S S   ▲  1 4 5
writing skills. If a colleague is writing an important report, offer to edit it. If you don’t 
understand an email message the first time you read it, try to make sense of it through a 
rewrite. If you receive a letter from the electric company that seems overly complex, try 
revising it with the audience in mind. It takes effort, but jumping on these opportunities 
as part of your daily routine will make you a better, more conscientious writer over time.
 Planning (Up to a Point)
Know Your Readers
As discussed in chapter 2, you should know your audience and write with your audience 
in mind. Don’t begin writing without at least a vague understanding of who will be in-
terpreting your message. For smaller projects, try writing this out at the top of your draft 
as a constant reminder of who you are writing for. For larger projects, create a planning 
document that includes a detailed description of your audience, perhaps even breaking 
them into primary and secondary audience segments.
Define Your Message(s) and Purpose
As discussed in chapter 3, a fundamental step to any writing project is defining your goals. 
This includes both your readers’ and your organizational or personal goals. Having these 
goals in mind will keep you grounded and focused. They will also help you best organize 
your content.
Again, for smaller projects you can experiment with putting this information at the 
top of your draft. For larger projects, try documenting a plan that explicitly identifies the:
•	 Primary message(s)
•	 Readers’ goals and motivations
•	 Organizational (or personal) goals
•	 Calls to action
The articulation of these elements will keep you focused and on message.
Outline Your Ideas
With your readers and goals in mind, you’ll probably find it helpful to then outline your 
ideas. An outline will help you organize your thoughts. Try experimenting with a variety 
of formats to see what works best for you:
•	 A rough sketch of your primary messages in priority order
•	 A list of content chunks that seem like they might go together
•	 A visual mind map that gathers and connects your thoughts
•	 A structured outline of titles and headings
Whatever the case, a drafty outline of the entire content tends to be a better starting 
point than trying to jump in and write everything out in a linear fashion (at least for 
larger projects).

1 46  ▲  C H A P T E R  1 4
Get Something on a Page
Whether it’s an outline or a written stream of consciousness, getting something down on 
a page is the first step, and is often the hardest part. Ann Handley (2014) calls it “The 
Ugly First Draft,” or TUFD. It can be sloppy, childish, and even nonsensical much of 
the time. But that’s okay, because it’s just the beginning. You’ll be rewriting it, probably 
many times.
Be Flexible
Writing is an iterative process, not a linear one, so you can only plan so much. Don’t be 
tied to a set outline or plan. As you begin to put content on the page, you’ll often find 
that your original plan won’t work out so well. For example, the original outline for this 
book was thirteen chapters; it’s now fourteen. More than half of the chapter titles are not 
what were listed in the original outline. Some chapters expanded in scope and length, and 
some became more focused.
As Zinsser writes, “Don’t ever become the prisoner of a preconceived plan. Writing 
is no respecter of blueprints” (2006: 53). The writing process is full of surprises and you 
can’t anticipate how things will go, so stay flexible and adapt to what you discover along 
the way.
 Revising Your Writing
Revise Everything
Professional writers don’t have magical powers allowing them to write perfectly on first 
try. In fact, experienced writers rarely write something just once. Canavor argues that no 
matter who the writer, “the first version is usually awful” (2016: 66). But the first thing 
you write is always just the first draft. Expect to edit it. As Zinsser explains, “Rewriting is 
the essence of writing. . . . Professional writers rewrite their sentences repeatedly and then 
rewrite what they have rewritten” (2006: 4). Professionals do it and you should do it, too. 
Rewrite every email message, every brochure, and every conference proposal. Reread it, 
and then edit it. Then do it again. And again. Until you have it just right.
Reach Out to Others
Another set of eyes is always useful. Identify a trusted colleague with an editing back-
ground, a passion for writing well, an attention to detail, and/or a knack for telling you 
like it is. When you invite someone to give you feedback, make it clear what you’re asking 
for. Feedback on your grammar is far different from feedback on the substance of the 
content itself, and you may want different people to give you different types of feedback. 
Read It Aloud
As discussed in chapter 5, your writing should flow as naturally as the spoken word. So 
read it aloud. Notice what sounds authentic and approachable, and what sounds mechan-
ical and impersonal. Ask:

R E F I N I N G  Y O U R  P R O C E S S   ▲  1 4 7
•	 Does it sound like something you’d say in person?
•	 Is there a nice rhythm to the sentences (or do they sound choppy or long-winded)?
•	 Do you have transitions where they’re useful to help with the flow?
It’s an incredibly basic technique, but reading your writing aloud is a quick, easy way to 
discover what’s working well and what still needs some work.
Review for Substance and Clarity
The substance and clarity of your content is key. Keeping your audience and goals in 
mind, ask:
•	 Is the content timely and relevant?
•	 Is there an obvious focus?
•	 Is the primary message clear?
•	 Are any calls to action clear?
•	 Is anything ambiguous?
•	 Is anything unnecessary?
•	 Are you using common patterns and conventions?
•	 Does the content address readers’ motivations?
•	 Does the content reflect organizational or personal goals?
Be ruthless in your critique. Rewrite words and sentences until they are crystal clear. Cut 
words, strip down sentences, and remove anything that doesn’t serve a function. Replace 
adverbs with stronger verbs, jargon with plain language, and passive sentences with active 
ones. Replace wordy instructions with numbered lists, run-on sentences with bulleted 
lists, and sets of “if, then” statements with tables. Keep tinkering. There is almost always 
another thing to improve on.
Review for Voice and Tone
Review your content to ensure it consistently reflects your defined voice (see chapter 12). 
Then evaluate if the tone aligns with the situation. 
If you’re getting creative with your language, seek an outside perspective to make 
sure you’re on the mark. To evaluate your voice, try conducting an exercise where you ask 
readers to circle descriptive words based on their experience. Use adjectives both within 
PRINT IT OUT
When writing something in long-form, like a report or article, try printing it out 
to review it in a different medium. You absorb text in print differently than text on 
a screen, so it’s likely you’ll see things jump out at you that you didn’t previously 
notice. Bring some pens to mark up your print copy, crossing things out and mov-
ing things around. Try using standard copyediting marks (such as carets [^] for 
inserts) for consistency, so that you’ll understand your meaning later on.

1 48  ▲  C H A P T E R  1 4
and outside of your defined voice and see what rises to the top. Is the content fun? Bor-
ing? Cheesy?
If you’re dealing with a sticky situation, you’ll want to make sure you get the tone 
just right. This can be hard to judge on your own, so try to find a person or two willing to 
give you feedback, focusing on how content makes them feel. It’s worth the extra effort 
to ensure you don’t unintentionally damage a relationship.
KEEP AN OPEN MIND
It can be hard to receive criticism, but as you solicit feedback, be sure to listen to 
it closely, take it seriously, and avoid becoming defensive. Try to be objective about 
your own writing and keep an open mind to others’ suggestions.
Review for Audience
Remember your intended audience, including their motivations and challenges. Make 
sure you are speaking in language that resonates and is relevant to their world. Don’t use 
jargon your audience doesn’t understand or content not applicable to their goals. When 
in doubt, track down someone from your actual audience who can look over your writing 
and provide you with feedback.
Review for Flow and Structure
Your content should have an obvious, logical structure that allows people to both read it 
and navigate through it seamlessly. Ask:
•	 Is the most important content first?
•	 Does the ordering make sense?
•	 Are the headings parallel?
•	 Are transitions used well?
•	 Is there rhythm from one section to the next?
•	 Is there a good mix of sentence structure?
•	 Are bulleted and numbered lists used appropriately?
For longer documents with a good number of headings, review the headings from top to 
bottom and make sure they have a coherent flow. If your content is within a larger context 
(such as a website), review it with that larger context in mind.
PERFECT THE OPENER
Your opening few lines set the stage for the rest of your content, so spend the time 
and effort to get them just right. Zinsser advises, “I urge you not to count on the 
reader to stick around. Readers want to know—very soon—what’s in it for them” 
(2016: 55).

R E F I N I N G  Y O U R  P R O C E S S   ▲  1 4 9
Review for Spelling and Grammar
Errors in spelling and grammar are unprofessional, and can distract and confuse your 
readers. Use automated spelling and grammar checks in your editing program, and get 
further support with free tools such as Grammarly and the Hemingway App. But re-
member, such tools don’t catch all subtle mistakes and can occasionally “correct” things 
for you erroneously. Human editors are still the most effective, so ask someone to proof 
your work, especially if you’re prone to typos and grammatical errors.
Take a Breather
When you’ve revised as much as you can for now, walk away. Let your writing sit for a 
few hours or even a day or week or more, depending on its importance. Come back to it 
with fresh eyes. Without exception, you will notice something you want to change when 
you look at it again.
PROFESSIONAL EDITING
Getting everything right is no small feat, and you might not have skilled writers 
at your beck and call. You can also become so immersed in your own writing that 
it’s hard to stay objective. So for your most important writing, consider hiring a 
professional editor. As Stephen King says, “To write is human, to edit is divine” 
(2000: 13).
THERE’S NO TIME!
No doubt, time is a commodity. So in many instances you simply won’t have time 
for detailed review and revisions. That’s okay. If you are on a short deadline, con-
sider the smallest thing you can do to improve upon your writing, even if it’s just 
reading your email aloud once or twice. If you have an extra minute, try to remove 
any unnecessary, fiddly words. Or try improving upon your title or subject line. 
Even minimal changes can have a big impact to the reader. 
The revision process for larger content projects will always require significant 
time. But as most things, revisions will become quicker and easier with practice. 
Effort and persistence will pay off.
 Evaluating Your Writing
Identify Success Measures
Ideally, you want to know whether or not your content was successful in meeting your 
goals. To do this, try exploring possible measures. For digital content, look at analytics 
data, such as referral paths, conversion rates, and bounce rates. Track how long it takes 

1 50  ▲  C H A P T E R  1 4
someone to read over content and make a decision or complete a call to action. If you 
are curious what content is most relevant, use heat mapping or eye tracking to discover 
where people focus their attention on a webpage. If you are revising content, experiment 
with pre- and post-assessment to see the impact of your change.
By setting up metrics for content, you can identify areas of strength and opportunities 
for improvement. You can also use this data to demonstrate the value of good content.
Conduct Usability Testing
Usability testing is a way to evaluate a product’s usability by observing actual people try-
ing to use it. Good content is core to a product’s usability, so try applying usability testing 
methods to evaluate how well your content is working.
If your content is on a webpage, you can test its effectiveness by asking participants 
to find an answer to a question or complete a task on your website. All you have to do is 
incorporate a task that aligns to the content on the webpage. Be sure to ask participants to 
think aloud and share their impressions, either as they go (the “thinking aloud” method) 
or after the fact (“retrospective review” method) (Blakiston, 2014). 
Content outside of websites can be tested using similar methods. For instance, you 
can test content within brochures by prompting participants to find answers to particular 
questions within them. See table 14.1 for more examples of how to test different types of 
content using different types of prompts. 
Table 14.1.    Prompts for Testing Content with Real People
TYPE OF CONTENT
EXAMPLE OF PROMPT
Event registration form
Register for the event using this form.
Steps for setting up an account
Follow these written instructions to set up your 
account.
News story
Read this article and summarize for me what 
you learned.
Directional signs
Try to locate the children’s books based only on 
the signage in the building.
Once the participant completes the activity, it’s helpful to dive deeper into his or her 
experience. This additional qualitative data will help you identify problematic content and 
provide you with ideas for improvement. Consider asking participants such questions as:
•	 How easy or difficult was it to understand?
•	 How much of it would you say you read?
•	 What words stood out to you?
•	 If you were to paraphrase the purpose of this content, what would you say?
•	 What did you learn that you didn’t know before?
Use what you learn to identify areas for improvement.

R E F I N I N G  Y O U R  P R O C E S S   ▲  1 5 1
Interview Your Readers
Another method to evaluate content is to simply talk to your readers and gather their 
impressions. As you frame your questions, be careful they are neutral and don’t lead re-
spondents in any particular direction. For example, don’t say, “Isn’t that funny the way we 
wrote that?” Rather, say, “What do you think about the way we wrote that?” Some other 
useful, open-ended questions are:
•	 What do you think about the content?
•	 How did it make you feel?
•	 What did you learn from it?
•	 What did you like about it? 
•	 What did you not like about it?
Again, use what you find out to identify the content’s strengths and weaknesses; then 
make improvements.
 Refining Your Craft
Focus on Clarity of Thought
It can be challenging to write in plain language if your thoughts are scattered, since writ-
ing is an emotional process driven by what’s going on in your brain. Focus your thoughts, 
and focused writing will follow. Practice mindfulness. Remove distractions from your 
environment. Identify quiet, calm places (both physically and mentally) where you can 
do your best writing.
Improve Your Vocabulary and Grammar
Expand your vocabulary through deep reading, listening, and a drive to keep learning. If 
you hear a new word, look it up. A greater breadth of vocabulary will allow you to express 
your thoughts in an infinite number of ways.
This book didn’t talk much about grammar (there are many other books for that), 
and it’s a moving target as language continues to evolve. But that doesn’t mean it’s not 
important. If you don’t already have it, acquire a basic, rudimentary understanding of 
grammar so that you can write meaningful content. Once the basics are in place, consider 
ramping up your knowledge. It will make you a better reader, writer, and communicator. 
And when a proofreader fixes your grammatical error, be sure to learn from it and avoid 
it the next time.
Read and Observe
Become a better reader and you will become a better writer. Read deeply and analyze 
what you’re reading. Good writing can inspire you, and bad writing can help you avoid 
similar mistakes. You don’t have to read a novel a week, but you should dedicate focused 
time on a regular basis to sit back and read something—anything—whether it is your 
favorite cooking blog, a popular entertainment magazine, or the latest bestseller.

1 52  ▲  C H A P T E R  1 4
Also be curious about the world around you, observing content of all types you en-
counter throughout the day, from restaurant menus to parking garage signage. If you notice 
a piece of content you don’t like, analyze it to identify its pitfalls. Does it have too many 
adverbs? Is it ripe with passive voice? Is it trying to convey too many messages? Is it format-
ted poorly? Once you’ve identified what’s wrong with it, imagine how you might rewrite it.
As colleagues work on their own writing projects, offer to provide feedback or play 
the role of editor. Seek out others who are passionate about the written word and team 
up to improve content together. Get comfortable reviewing and providing feedback to 
other writers, as well as soliciting feedback for your own work.
 Spreading the Word
You Can’t Do This Alone
There is a good chance that you are not the only voice behind your organization. You 
might have marketers responsible for news stories and social media, graphic designers 
responsible for signage and brochures, subject librarians responsible for web content, and 
public services staff responsible for email and text notices. How on earth can you imple-
ment a consistent approach to writing across your organization when there are so many 
players? It’s not easy, but there are some things you can do.
To start, identify colleagues who also value good content. Form a group of like-
minded writers committed to improving communication both inside and outside the 
library. Strategize about how you can work together to improve the clarity, consistency, 
and overall quality of writing across the organization.
Create a Style Guide
Advocate for a detailed style guide for all your public-facing content. This will encour-
age consistency across communication channels, no matter the author. Your style guide 
should include audience definitions, voice and tone examples, and terminology prefer-
ences. It can also include such rules as:
•	 Use conversational language.
•	 Use active voice.
•	 Put essential messages first.
•	 Explain any jargon.
•	 Avoid acronyms.
Your style guide can also ensure consistency of formatting with such rules as:
•	 Use sentence case for headings.
•	 Avoid all caps and underlines.
•	 Use lowercase for job titles.
•	 Use title case for department names.
If you work in a university or corporate setting, your parent organization may already 
have a style guide. So be sure to identify any existing standards (often managed through 
marketing) and work them into a guide specific to your library setting.

R E F I N I N G  Y O U R  P R O C E S S   ▲  1 5 3
Conduct Training Sessions
Establish a training program for all employees who write public-facing content. Train-
ing sessions can cover the topics in this book along with voice, tone, and style decisions 
specific to your library.
If a dozen content providers write for your website, create a training program specif-
ically on writing for the web. If all your subject librarians create LibGuides, put together 
workshops on writing instructional and descriptive content specifically for research guides.
Develop a Content Strategy
To sustain quality content over time, you need to manage the entire lifecycle of content 
throughout your organization, from first draft to publication to deletion. This is where 
the discipline of content strategy comes in. A thoughtful content strategy will allow you 
to establish roles and responsibilities, governance structures, standards, workflows, and 
methods of accountability. Halvorson and Rach’s Content Strategy for the Web (2012) is a 
brilliant overview, and you can also read case studies on how the University of Arizona 
Libraries has made headway in this area (Blakiston, 2013; Blakiston and Mayden, 2015). 
Indeed, knowing how to write succinct, meaningful content is wonderful, and this book 
has given you advice on how to do just that. But it is only the beginning—now you need 
to go out in the world, continue to build up your skills, and spread the love for good 
writing throughout the library profession.
 Key Points
Improving your writing takes effort. Continue to expand your toolbox and refine your 
craft over time. Remember:
•	 Writing well is hard work, so take it seriously (up to a point).
•	 Some planning up front will make things easier later on.
•	 Writing is a craft. Hone your craft.
 References
Blakiston, Rebecca. 2013. “Developing a Content Strategy for an Academic Library Website.” 
Journal of Electronic Resources Librarianship 25, no. 3: 175–91.
———. 2014. Usability Testing: A Practical Guide for Librarians. Lanham, MD: Rowman & Lit-
tlefield.
Blakiston, Rebecca, and Shoshana Mayden. 2015. “How We Hired a Content Strategist (and Why 
You Should Too).” Journal of Web Librarianship 9, no. 4: 193–215.
Canavor, Natalie. 2016. Business Writing Today: A Practical Guide. 2nd ed. Thousand Oaks, CA: 
Sage.
Halvorson, Kristina, and Melissa Rach. 2012. Content Strategy for the Web. 2nd ed. San Francisco: 
New Riders. 
Handley, Ann. 2014. Everybody Writes: Your Go-To Guide for Creating Ridiculously Good Content. 
Hoboken, NJ: Wiley.
King, Stephen. 2000. On Writing: A Memoir of the Craft. New York: Scribner.
Zinsser, William. 2006. On Writing Well: The Classic Guide to Writing Nonfiction. New York: Harper 
& Row.


▲  1 5 5
Index
accessibility, 59, 75, 94, 107–8, 135–39. See also screen 
readers; readability
acronyms, 16, 43, 116, 152
active verbs, 50–51, 56–57, 61
active voice, 41, 47–49, 83, 98, 102, 118
adjectives, 32–33, 36, 50, 125
adverbs, 32, 36, 50, 125, 147
all caps, 79, 115, 138–40, 152. See also capitalization
ALT text, 107. See also accessibility
ambiguity, 36; emails, 114, 121; forms, 90, 94, 99; 
policies, 5, 42; signage, 78, 81; titles, 55–56, 78; verbs, 
86
analogies, 126, 132
analytics. See web analytics
ARI. See automated readability index
asterisks, 31, 93–94, 103, 140. See also footnotes and 
endnotes
audience, 11–18, 43, 46, 54–5, 102–3, 120, 122, 145, 148. 
See also donors; faculty; personas; students
authenticity, 41–42, 51, 56, 128, 146–47
automated readability index, 37
Baron, Naomi, 7, 22
Blakiston, Rebecca, 150, 153
blogs, 5, 22, 25, 54, 59
Bloomstein, Margot, 129, 
bolding text, 86–87, 139, 140, 141. See also emphasis; 
italicizing text
Brandon, John, 79
brochures, 77–78; text alignment in, 139; asterisks in, 31; 
fonts, 138; examples of, 2–3, 22, 24–55; testing with 
readers, 150; titles of, 26, 53–54
Bruckman, Amy, 82
bulleted lists, 65–66, 70–73, 73, 87, 112, 127
buzzwords, 36, 45, 50, 130
calls to action: defining, 17, 24–25; placement of, 26; 
reflecting in emails, 117–18; reflecting in titles, 56–57; 
reflecting in webpages, 104–5
Canavor, Natalie, 18, 31, 34–36, 38, 114, 117, 126–27, 
141, 146
capitalization, 54, 118, 140–41. See also all caps
CAPTCHA, 95
centered text. See text alignment
Chapman, C.C., 45, 47
charts. See figures
chat, 122–23
check boxes, 89, 94, 111. See also forms; radio buttons
Coleman-Liau index, 37–38
colloquialisms, 46. See also idioms
colons, 57–58, 66, 93
color contrast, 136. See also accessibility
communication channels, 5–6, 13, 131–32, 152
compound sentences, 70, 87
concept nouns, 49
conjunctions, 46
consistency, 54, 64–67, 71, 86–87, 93, 129, 131, 152. See 
also parallelism
content first, 104
content strategy, 169
contractions, 46
conventions, 93–94, 122, 140, 147
copyediting. See editing
Cousins, Carrie, 139–140

1 56  ▲  I N D E X
cover letters, 117, 128
creativity, 3, 80, 125, 128, 130, 133–134
dashes, 31, 42, 45, 109
deep reading, 7, 151
dictionary, 42–43
discussion forums, 123
donors, 14, 24, 54, 91, 131. See also audience
drop–downs, 64, 89, 94–95, 111. See also forms; menus
e-books, 7
editing, 43–44, 146, 149, 152
emails, 4, 114, 115, 120; background colors, 136; email 
marketing, 114, 121–22; pre–headers, 114; signature 
lines, 119–20; subject lines, 26, 50, 56, 58-59, 114–18, 
121, 123, 140
emoji, 128
emoticons, 46, 128
empathy, 11–12, 14–15, 18, 102, 126, 132
emphasis, 136, 139–40. See also bolding text; italicizing 
text
endnotes. See footnotes and endnotes
English as a second language. See nonnative speakers
error messages, 95
eye tracking, 102, 150
exclamation points, 46, 79, 132, 139
exhibits, 3, 6, 54, 60, 62 
Facebook. See social media 
faculty, 13, 15, 22, 27, 74. See also audience
Fadeyev, Dmitry, 137, 139
false series, 66
FAQs. See frequently asked questions
field labels, 92–94, 99. See also forms
Fiesler, Casey, 82
figures, 75
first drafts, 162
first person, 43–44, 67, 84, 131
Flesch-Kincaid, 37–38
flow, 32, 45, 59, 66, 147–48
flyers, 1–3, 54, 77–78, 136. See also brochures
focus groups. See user research
fonts, 79–80, 136, 138–39
footnotes and endnotes, 28, 31. See also asterisks
formatting, 135–42. See also accessibility; capitalization; 
fonts; text alignment; white space
forms, 89–100, 98. See also check boxes; field labels; help 
text; radio buttons
fragments, 46, 122
frequently asked questions, 3, 27, 63
Fry readability formula, 37
fun, 44–47, 78, 80, 127, 129–130, 132, 134, 143. See also 
humor
future tense. See tense
Gaffney, Gerry, 90
gerunds, 61, 64–65, 86, 111. See also headings; 
imperatives
goals. See message and purpose
graduate students. See students
grammar, 44, 102, 115, 133, 149, 151. See also 
punctuation; prepositions
Grammarly, 149
graphs. See figures
Gunning-Fog index, 37–38
Halvorson, Kristina, 127, 153
handheld devices, 18, 94, 108, 117
Handley, Ann, xiv, xv, 14, 22, 30–31, 36, 45, 47, 114–15, 
137, 146
happy talk, 105
Hay, Steph, 43
headings, 58–65, 64, 87, 111, 135–36. See also organizing
heat mapping, 150. See also eye tracking
help text, 94–95. See also forms
Hemingway App, 149
Henry, Shawn Lawton, 137
homepages, 105–6, 110
Horton, Sarah, 30
HTML, 8, 59, 114, 120, 135–136
Huang, Kair-Ping, 22
humor, 126, 129, 133. See also fun
hyperbole, 55–56
hyperlinks. See links
hyphenation, 139. See also dashes
idioms, 126. See also colloquialisms 
imperatives, 33, 61, 64–65, 85–86, 99, 108, 111, 117. See 
also gerunds
input fields, 91, 94, 99. See also forms
instructions, 2-3, 61, 79, 84–87, 91-92, 94. See also 
numbered lists
inverted pyramid, 26, 60, 104
irony, 126
italicizing text, 86, 139, 141. See also bolding text; 
emphasis

I N D E X   ▲  1 5 7
jargon, 35; avoiding, 45, 50, 55, 90, 107; removing, 
29, 144, 147, 148; explaining, 43, 87, 152. See also 
terminology
Jarrett, Caroline, 90
JAWS. See screen readers
job postings, 70, 73, 130–131
justified text. See text alignment
key messages, 24, 77–78, 145. See also message and 
purpose
keywords, 102–103, 115. See also trigger words
Kimble, Joseph, 30, 34
Kindle, 7, 22
King, Stephen, 11, 32, 48, 149
Krug, Steve, 85, 105
Kupersmith, John, 15, 35
labels, 85, 92–93, 94, 99
layering, 27–28, 110–112
leading, 137
Lee, Kate Kiefer, 127, 130, 132
legalese, 42, 82–84, 92
Leibtag, Ahava, 130
letter spacing, 138
LibGuides, 3, 153
library speak. See jargon
links, 107–9, 120–21
lists, 63, 65–67, 69–73, 111, 137, 147. See also bulleted 
lists; numbered lists
literacy. See reading levels
Loranger, Hoa, 102
lowercase, 71, 152
Mayden, Shoshana, 153
measuring effectiveness, 149–151
meeting minutes, 5–6
Meirowitz, Claire, 114, 117
memos, 87–89
menus, 59, 64, 107, 111, 136, 140. See also labels; 
navigation
message and purpose, 21–28, 38, 145, 147; emails, 
117–118; forms, 89–91; reader goals, 16–17, 21–22; 
signs, 79; titles, 56–57; websites, 101, 103–106, 110. 
See also organizational identity
microcopy, 94–95
Microsoft Powerpoint, 59. See also slide decks
Microsoft Word, 37, 59, 135
minimalist reading, 22. See also skimming
mobile. See handheld devices
modifiers, 32–33
Mom Test, 43
navigation, 60, 78–79, 84–86, 94, 97, 107–108, 136, 140. 
See also labels; menus
Neely, Pam, 114
negative language, 79–80
Nielsen Norman Group, 115
Nielsen, Jakob, 7, 22, 102, 107, 114–115
Nilsen, Kirsti, 12, 27, 137–138
nonnative speakers, 35, 46, 126
nouns, 49-51; active voice, 47; headings, 61, 65; link 
labels, 108-9; noun phrases, 50, 57, 78, 98, 118; strong 
nouns, 49–50, 130
numbered lists, 65–66, 72–73, 85, 127, 147. See also 
bulleted lists; instructions; lists
observations, 15, 152
openers, 114, 148
organizational identity, 129. See also voice; message and 
purpose
organizing, 25–28, 58–60, 145; emails, 119; forms, 
96–97; instructions, 86; websites, 107, 111. See also 
headings; prioritizing
outlining, 145
oversimplifying, 18, 126
Pamental, Jason, 138
paragraphs, 29–31. See also sentences
parallelism, 63–67, 71, 85–88, 107, 111, 148. See also 
consistency; lists
parentheses, 31–32, 42, 45
passive voice, 7, 32, 47–50, 65, 78, 83, 87–88, 93, 106, 
118, 147, 152. See also active voice
past tense. See tense
periods, 65, 141
Pernice, Kara, 108
personality. See voice
personas, 13–14, 22. See also audience; user research
plain language, 8, 15, 30, 36, 55
Polger, Mark, 79
policies, 5, 77, 79, 81–84, 106
posters, 1–3, 54, 62, 78, 109, 138, 139. See also flyers
prepositions, 34, 41, 49
present tense. See tense
prioritizing, 25–28, 31, 82–83. See also organizing
professionalism, 45–46, 48

1 58  ▲  I N D E X
progressive disclosure, 110
proofreading. See revisions
punctuation, 45–46; colons, 57–58, 66, 93; exclamation 
points, 46, 79, 132, 139; periods, 65, 141; spacing 
after, 141
purpose. See message and purpose
Quesenbery, Whitney, 30
question marks, 46
Rach, Melissa, 127, 153
radio buttons, 89, 94, 111. See also check boxes; forms
Radicati, Sara, 4
Ranganathan, S. R., 29
read aloud, 37, 43, 57, 83, 133, 146–47, 149
readability, 37–38, 80, 139. See also accessibility; plain 
language 
readability indexes, 37–38
reading levels, 15–16, 38, 82. See also audience; readability
Redish, Janice (Ginny), xiv, xv, 26–27, 44, 70, 72, 74, 86, 
101–102, 110–111, 136, 139–141 
redundancies, 29, 33, 71, 92, 119
relationship building, 6, 24, 48, 79, 100, 113, 127–128, 
148
repetition, 36, 71
reports, 87–88
reputation, 5–6, 12, 66, 113
revisions, 8–9, 30, 146–49
rhythm, 133, 147–48
Ross, Catherine, 12, 27, 137–38
sarcasm, 126
salutations, 116
scanning. See skimming
screen readers, 58–59, 75, 94, 107–8
search engine optimization, 103
second person, 43–44, 67, 83, 131
semantic meaning, 8, 59, 94, 111, 135–136. See also 
accessibility
semicolons, 45
sentence case, 54, 64–65, 71, 93, 140–142. See also 
capitalization; lowercase; title case
sentences, 29–34, 36–37. See also paragraphs
SEO. See search engine optimization
Sherwin, Katie, 108
Shieh, Chich-Jen, 22
signage, 2, 12, 54, 78–80, 81, 109, 131, 144, 150, 152
signature lines, 119–120. See also email
simplifying, 29–39, 37, 71, 83–84, 92, 105. See also 
oversimplifying
skimming, 7, 21–22, 25–26, 65, 69–70, 101–102
slang, 46, 133
slide decks, 3, 5, 43, 54, 59, 85, 135–136. See also 
Microsoft Powerpoint
slow reading, 7
SMOG index, 37
SMS. See texting
social media, 1, 4, 13, 46, 122, 130–131, 152
spelling, 165
Spool, Jared, 103
Stempler, Amy, 97
storytelling, 22, 126, 128–32
structuring. See organizing
Strunk, William, Jr., xiii, 29, 36, 47
students, 12–13, 17, 22, 27, 43, 74. See also audience
style guides, 44, 141, 152
subject lines, 26, 50, 56, 58-59, 114–18, 121, 123, 140. 
See also emails; forms
Sun, Szu-Yuan, 22
surveys, 56, 84, 91–92, 95, 97–99, 117
table of contents, 110, 136
tables, 73, 74, 75–76, 88, 111, 119, 137, 140, 147
tense, 36, 47, 65–67
terminology, 15–16, 42–43, 55, 151. See also jargon
terms of service, 81–83
testing content, 81, 150
text alignment, 80, 93, 139–140
texting, 122–123
thesaurus, 42, 133
third person, 43, 83, 118
titles, 26, 53–59, 63–64; formatting, 135–136, 138, 140; 
forms, 98–99; subtitles, 57–58; tables, 75; webpages, 
102
title case, 54, 64–65, 67, 71, 118, 152. See also 
capitalization; sentence case
tone, 45-46, 132–133, 147–148. See also voice
transitions, 33–34, 72, 147–148
trigger words, 103–104, 110. See also keywords
tutorials, 3, 35, 60, 66, 85–86
Twitter. See social media 
typography, 137–138. See also fonts
typos, 44, 149
undergraduate students. See students
underlining text, 79, 109, 135, 140–141, 152

I N D E X   ▲  1 5 9
URLs, 109, 120–121
usability, 15, 35, 81, 85, 141, 150
user experience, 2–4, 6, 9, 14, 21, 63, 79, 85, 99, 102, 107, 
132, 144
user journeys, 6
user research, 13, 15, 150–151. See also audience;  
personas
verbs: active verbs, 47, 130; graphic verbs, 136; strong 
verbs, 50–51, 61, 99, 130; unambiguous verbs, 86–87
vocabulary. See terminology
voice, 23–24, 34, 46, 80–81, 93, 127–32, 147–48, 152. See 
also tone
web analytics, 15, 149–150
web forms. See forms
what’s in it for me (WIIFM), 18
White, E. B., xiii, 29, 36, 47
White, Leah, 79
white space, 30, 69, 81, 137, 142 
Whitman, Neal, 46
word choice, 35–37
writer’s block, 144
Wroblewski, Luke, 89, 91–92
Zinsser, William, xiii, 8–9, 29–30, 32, 41, 44–45, 47, 49, 
146, 148


▲  1 6 1
About the Author
Rebecca Blakiston is a user-experience librarian at the University of Arizona Libraries. 
As of 2016, she leads a web team dedicated to improving the user experience through 
better content, design, and architecture. For six years prior to that, she provided oversight, 
management, and strategic planning for the library website as website product manager.
In 2013, she organized the certificate program in user experience for Library Juice 
Academy, including courses on usability testing, writing for the web, and content strategy. 
In 2014, she published her first book, Usability Testing: A Practical Guide for Librarians. 
Her advocacy and leadership is recognized nationally—she was accepted into the Amer-
ican Library Association Leadership Institute in 2014 and recognized as a Library Journal 
mover and shaker in 2016.
She has presented and published extensively on user research, content strategy, and 
writing with users in mind. She strives for clarity in writing and believes in the power of 
the written word to improve the human experience.


